Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No. 66286-LK

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
(FY 2013-FY 2016)
FOR THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
April 17, 2012

Sri Lanka and Maldives Country Management Unit
South Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
South Asia Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The Last Country Assistance Strategy for Sri Lanka [Report No: 43471-LK] was discussed by the
Board on June 5, 2008
Currency & Equivalents
Currency Unit = Sri Lanka Rupees (Rs)
US$ 1= Rs.128 (as of April 16, 2012)
Fiscal Year
January 1 – December 31
Abbreviations & Acronyms
AAA
ADB
BB
BOP
CAS
CASCR
CBSL
CDD
CPIA
CPS
DCS
DPL
ESCAP
ESW
EU
FDI
FY
GDP
GNI
GPOBA
IBRD
ICT
IDA
IDF
IDPs
IFC
IFRS
IMF
LEN
LLRC
M&E
MDG
MIC

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Bank Budget
Balance of Payments
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Central Bank of Sri Lanka
Community Driven Development
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Partnership Strategy
Department of Census and Statistics
Development Policy Lending
Economic and Social Commission for the
Asia/Pacific
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Year
Gross Domestic Product
Gross National Income
Global Partnership on Output Based Aid
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Information Communication Technology
International Development Authority
Institutional Development Fund
Internally Displaced Persons
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Reporting Standards
International Monetary Fund
Lending
Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goal
Middle Income Country

Vice President
Country Director/Country Manager
Task Team Leader (TTL)

MoFP
MSME
MPs
NDP
NIPP
NLTA
OECD
ORAF
PADGO
PER
PFM
PIU
PPPs

Ministry of Finance & Planning
Micro Small Medium Enterprises
Members of Parliament
National Development Planning
Netherlands IFC Partnership Program
Non-Lending Technical Assistance
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Operations Risk Assessment Framework
Portfolio Approach to Distributed Generation Opportunity
Public Expenditure Review
Public Financial Management
Project Implementation Unit
Public Private Partnerships

RDA
ROSC
RE
SMEs
SOEs
SWAP
SPN
TA

Road Development Authority
Report on Standards and Codes
Recipient Executed
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
State Owned Enterprises
Sector Wide Approach
Supervision
Technical Assistance

TF
UN
UNDP
UNHCR
USD
VAT
WB
WBG
WDI
YOY

Trust Fund
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
The United Nations Refugee Agency
United States Dollars
Value Added Tax
World Bank
World Bank Group
World Development Indicators
Year on Year

IBRD/IDA
Isabel M Guerrero
Diarietou Gaye
Susan Razzaz
Andrea Merrick (co-TTL)

IFC
Karin Finkelston
Thomas Davenport/
Adam Sack
Junko Oikawa

Acknowledgements
This Country Partnership Strategy was prepared under the guidance of Diarietou Gaye, World
Bank Country Director, and Adam Sack, IFC Country Manager. The core team included Victor
Navaranjan Antonypillai, Lalima Maskey, Andrea Merrick, Junko Oikawa, Dilinika Peiris,
Doina Petrescu, Susan Razzaz, Sandya Salgado, Luis Alvaro Sanchez, Alema Siddiky, Pavol
Vajda, Anna Wellenstein, and Hafiz Zainudeen. The preparation of this CPS involved
contributions from many units of the World Bank Group including the entire Country Team,
Country Sector Coordinators, the World Bank’s Country Management Unit, and the IFC. The
World Bank Group is grateful to the Government of Sri Lanka, particularly the Department of
National Planning at the Ministry of Finance and Planning, for its active participation
throughout the process.

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................. i
I.
COUNTRY CONTEXT ......................................................................................................... 1
A.
Political and Social Context .......................................................................................... 2
B.
Economic Context and Recent Economic Developments ............................................ 4
C.
Economic Outlook ........................................................................................................ 6
II. COUNTRY VISION, ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES ........................................ 7
A.
Doubling Per Capita Income through Investment ........................................................ 7
B.
Shifting the Structure of the Economy.......................................................................... 9
C.
Improved Living Standards and Social Inclusion ....................................................... 10
III. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY ................................................... 12
A.
Lessons from the CAS Completion Report ................................................................ 12
B.
Findings from the Stakeholder Survey and Consultations .......................................... 13
C.
Assessment of the Current Portfolio ........................................................................... 14
D.
Principles and Rules of Engagement .......................................................................... 15
E.
Country Partnership Strategy Areas of Focus ............................................................. 18
F.
Implementing the Country Partnership Strategy......................................................... 24
i. Financing Parameters .................................................................................................. 24
ii. Instruments ................................................................................................................. 25
iii. Monitoring and Evaluation ....................................................................................... 26
iv. Complementarities with Activities of Other Development Partners ......................... 26
IV. RISKS AND RISK MANAGEMENT ................................................................................. 27
A. Risks Related to the Implementation Environment ................................................... 27
B. Risks Related to the Program..................................................................................... 29
ANNEXES .................................................................................................................................... 31
Annex 1: Results Matrix ....................................................................................................... 31
Annex 2: CAS Completion Report ....................................................................................... 44
Annex 3: Sri Lanka At A Glance .......................................................................................... 81
Annex 4: Selected Indicators of World Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ...... 83
Annex 5: Sri Lanka IFC Investment Operations Program .................................................... 84
Annex 6: Sri Lanka Social Indicators ................................................................................... 85
Annex 7: Key Economic Indicators ...................................................................................... 86
Annex 8: Key Exposure Indicators ....................................................................................... 88
Annex 9: IDA Operations Portfolio ...................................................................................... 89
Annex 10: Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio .............................................. 90
Annex 11: Summary of Development Partner Activities ..................................................... 91
Annex 12: Sri Lanka Statistical Assessment ........................................................................ 92
Annex 13: Summary of Non-Lending Services .................................................................... 96
Annex 14: Summary of Recipient-Executed Trust Funds .................................................... 97
Annex 15: Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) Process ...................................................... 98

Annex 16: Summary of Consultations ................................................................................ 100
Annex 17: Client Survey and Communications................................................................. 111
Annex 18: Gender Issues in Sri Lanka ............................................................................... 115
Annex 18: IDA/IBRD Program Summary .......................................................................... 121
TABLES

Table 1 : Key Macroeconomic Indicators ....................................................................................... 5
BOXES

Box 1: Summary of Ongoing and Proposed IDA and IBRD Portfolio......................................... 25

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.

The Sri Lankan country context has evolved considerably since the FY09-12
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was prepared. The 26-year conflict ended in May
2009 and resettlement of Internally Displaced Persons and demining are now largely
complete. Sri Lanka is transitioning to middle income country status. The
macroeconomic situation has improved. Sri Lanka can now focus on long-term strategic
and structural development challenges. Key challenges include realigning public
spending and policy with the needs of a middle income country, ensuring opportunities
for all Sri Lankans to benefit from economic growth, ensuring appropriate resource
allocations for the various tiers of Government, addressing the opportunities and impacts
of the demographic transition, and enhancing the role of the private sector including
provision of appropriate incentives for increasing productivity and exports.

ii.

The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13-16 is designed to assist the
Government of Sri Lanka to address the long term strategic and structural
development challenges, while using the existing portfolio to support ongoing efforts
to restore livelihoods of Internally Displaced Persons and others affected by the
conflict. The World Bank Group’s relationship with the Government has strengthened
with increased dialogue and support on the middle income country agenda. In
recognition of its growth and economic stability, Sri Lanka has access to IBRD financing
as of FY12, allowing for significantly increased financial support during the coming
years.

iii.

Recognizing the need for sustained effort following the end of the conflict, the 2011
World Development Report on Conflict, Security and Development provides
valuable insights for this CPS. Many of the principles of engagement proposed by the
World Development Report are relevant for Sri Lanka: delivering early results to build
public trust and confidence, strengthening institutions in a phased approach, focusing on
social accountability, enhancing political and economic inclusion and applying
community managed/driven approaches. Many of these principles, including community
managed/driven approaches, were central in the FY09-12 CAS. This CPS continues to
encompass these principles.

iv.

This CPS provides support to address the challenges for achieving the
Government’s vision as laid out in the “Mahinda Chintana, Vision for the Future”.
For each of the three central goals of the Government’s vision, the CPS lays out the key
areas of engagement in which World Bank Group support can most effectively address
the identified challenges. These areas of engagement were developed through a process
of eighteen thematic consultations with the Sri Lankan Government, private sector, civil
society, development partners and other stakeholders. Addressing these challenges will
require a set of structural and behavioral changes in line with the new middle income
status of Sri Lanka.

i

v.

The first goal of the Mahinda Chintana -- to increase per capita income to US$ 4,000
by 2016 -- will require sustained high economic growth (8 percent per year), driven
by a high investment rate. Of the targeted investment rate (33-35 percent of GDP per
year), 6-7 percent of GDP per year is expected to come from public investment with the
remainder coming from the private sector. While public sector investment targets were
achieved in 2010 and 2011, it will be difficult to sustain these levels in the absence of
increased fiscal space. On the private sector investment side, the level reached 22 percent
and 23 percent in 2010 and 2011 falling short of the targets. Reversing this trend will
require concerted efforts to improve the investment climate.

vi.

The second goal is shifting towards a more knowledge-based, globally integrated
and competitive, environmentally friendly, internally integrated and increasingly
urban economy. Sri Lanka has a solid base for achieving this goal, with a well educated
population and a wealth of environmental assets. Challenges going forward include
providing systems and incentives to build an appropriately skilled labor force,
establishing economic policies that encourage competitiveness, stronger efforts on
environmental sustainability and adaptation to climate change, and modernizing
infrastructure systems to integrate the disparate parts of the country and meet the needs of
the increasingly urban population.

vii.

The third goal is ensuring improvement in living standards and social inclusion.
With its long history of attention to access to basic services, Sri Lanka excels for its
income level on most social indicators, with the exception of malnutrition. As Sri Lanka
becomes a middle income country, new challenges are emerging (e.g. a rapidly aging
population) and improving the quality of services will be a major issue. While increasing
the quality of services, an important challenge will be to ensure that benefits are equitably
shared across all segments of the population and to prioritize social inclusion and ethnic
reconciliation. Successful achievement of this goal will require continuation of
Government efforts to resettle Internally Displaced Persons, to invest in the conflictaffected areas of the North and East, and to engage with the political opposition.

viii.

The proposed FY13-16 CPS builds on the successful engagement under the FY09-12
CAS and deepens the World Bank Group’s support to Sri Lanka in addressing its
emerging middle-income country agenda. It is designed to be flexible, focusing on a
small number of large projects. Further, country systems will be used to the extent
possible.
Moving toward increased harmonization with country systems and
coordination with other development partners will be especially important in sector wide
approaches. This engagement will be supported by International Development
Association (IDA) and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
resources, using a full range of lending and non-lending instruments. The International
Finance Corporation (IFC) will continue to play a key role in providing investment and
advisory services to the private sector.

ix.

The CPS focuses on three areas:. These are: (i) facilitating sustained private and public
investment; (ii) supporting the structural shifts in the economy; and (iii) improving living
standards and social inclusion.
ii

x.

In the area of sustained private and public investment, the World Bank Group will
support the Government effort to improve the investment climate, strengthen
governance and reduce the inefficiencies of the public sector. The IFC plans to
catalyze private investment through directly investing in important projects in key
sectors. The World Bank will also support the Government’s efforts to maintain a high
level of public investment and improved efficiency of public expenditures and financial
management and procurement practices in line with international standards, using both
knowledge (e.g. Public Expenditure Review and Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability Assessment) and lending products (e.g. a development policy loan for
investment policy and governance reforms and an investment loan for legal and judicial
reforms). The World Bank will also advise Government on ways to improve the
efficiency of key State Owned Enterprises (SOEs).

xi.

In supporting a structural shift in the economy, the World Bank Group will deepen
its assistance to the knowledge based economy with investments in skills, research
and innovation. In addition, support to the development of infrastructure needed for
sustainable urban development and better linkages within Sri Lanka will be enhanced.

xii.

Finally, the World Bank Group will continue to support improvements in living
standards and social inclusion in order to ensure the benefits of rapid growth and
higher quality services are broadly shared. Activities in this area already include three
ongoing livelihood projects in the conflict-affected North and East regions of the country
which includes restoration of basic infrastructures, housing construction, and cash for
work as well as support for starting new businesses. During the CPS period, the program
will further include: (i) support to the national health sector program with a focus on
supporting emerging service delivery demands resulting from Sri Lanka’s aging
population, such as work on non-communicable diseases; (ii) inter-sectoral efforts to
address malnutrition, economic integration of women and a range of other activities to
further support the needs of women, youth and the disabled; (iii) analytical work on
allocation of resources and benefits received by various groups; and (iv) IFC’s support
for inclusive growth.

xiii.

The CPS includes an indicative pipeline of projects for financing. Reviews will be
held annually to monitor CPS implementation and ensure continued alignment of
the CPS with the evolving country needs. The program will be supported by
approximately US$ 577 million (SDR 374.2 million) in funding under the remainder of
IDA 16. The program will also be supported by a total of approximately US$ 450
million in IBRD financing over the period FY13-FY14. The Government has expressed
interest in a significantly larger amount of IBRD financing for the outer years of the CPS,
which would depend on the macroeconomic environment in Sri Lanka as well as the
overall demand for IBRD resources from other clients, IBRD financial capacity and
global economic developments. A Progress Report will be prepared in FY14 at which
time any necessary revisions to the program, including the lending plans, will be
discussed.

iii

xiv.

Increased attention will be paid to results in all sectors. The choice of lending
instrument will depend on the specific needs. Alongside specific investment loans,
instruments are expected to include Development Policy Loans and Program-For-Results
financing, as client demand and other conditions permit. Analytical work will also focus
on results by helping to identify the driving forces and key constraints that need to be
addressed through policies and investments.

xv.

This CPS includes a careful assessment of key risks in the program, and steps to
manage such risks. The first set of risks is related to the implementation environment
and is reflective of Sri Lanka’s specific development challenges. These include: (i)
external shocks emanating from Euro Area crisis; (ii) macroeconomic and fiscal risks;
and (iii) natural disasters. The second set of risks is related to the design of the program
itself. These include portfolio risks related to governance, procurement and financial
management and risks related to government capacity to manage the increased volume of
lending. The CPS presents ways to mitigate these challenges. Moreover, the flexible
approach of this CPS will allow adjustment in the program in line with evolving
Government priorities and country needs, within the broad direction for engagement
outlined in this CPS.

iv

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

1.
The Sri Lankan country context has evolved considerably since the FY09-12
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was prepared. The 26-year conflict ended in May 2009
and resettlement of Internally Displaced Persons and demining are now largely complete. The
attainment of peace bolstered economic performance. The Sri Lankan economy grew at 8 percent
average per year since the end of the conflict. Inflation is relatively low at about 6 percent in
2011, down from 22.6 percent in 2008. Public debt and deficit have been gradually brought
down and Sri Lanka is transitioning to middle income country status.1
2.
Sri Lanka can now focus on long-term strategic and structural development
challenges. Key challenges include realigning public spending and policy with the needs of a
middle income country, ensuring opportunities for all Sri Lankans to benefit from economic
growth, ensuring appropriate resource allocations for the various tiers of Government, addressing
the opportunities and impacts of the demographic transition, and enhancing the role of the
private sector including provision of appropriate incentives for increasing productivity and
export.
3.
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13-16 is designed to assist the
Government of Sri Lanka to address these long term strategic and structural challenges,
while using the existing portfolio to support efforts to restore livelihoods in the parts of the
country most affected by the conflict. The World Bank Group’s relationship with the
Government has strengthened with increased dialogue and support on the middle income country
agenda. In recognition of its growth and economic stability, Sri Lanka has access to IBRD
financing as of FY12, allowing for significantly increased financial support during the coming
years.
4.
Recognizing the need for sustained efforts following the end of the conflict, the 2011
World Development Report on Conflict, Security and Development provides valuable
insights for this CPS. Many of the principles of engagement proposed by the World
Development Report are relevant for Sri Lanka: delivering early results to public trust and
confidence, strengthening institutions in a phased approach, focusing on social accountability,
enhancing political and economic inclusion and working with structures at the local level to
identify priorities and deliver programs. Many of these principles were central in the FY09-12
CAS. This CPS continues to encompass these principles and adopts a pragmatic approach to
address immediate and medium-term challenges towards strengthening basic institutional
functions towards providing shared growth, security, justice and jobs. As such, it is
strengthening institutions including the Auditor General and judiciary, enhancing the
transparency and communication between Parliament and civil society, utilizing third party
monitoring of projects, and emphasizing equitable allocation of resources and public service
provision across the country to ensure that all Sri Lankans benefit.

1

GNI per capita was US$ 2,290 in 2010 and about US$ 2,350 in 2011.

1

A.

Political and Social Context

5.
The current Government has strong political support. President Rajapaksa was first
elected in 2005. Following a concerted military campaign, the Government defeated the
separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in May 2009. Mr. Rajapaksa was re-elected in 2010
with a strong majority. Subsequent parliamentary, provincial and local elections have also
brought strong support for the President’s United People’s Freedom Alliance. At the national
level, the opposition now holds less than one third of Parliamentary seats.
6.
Resettlement of internally displaced persons and demining have been major focuses
of the past two years. About 277,000 people were displaced within the country during the
conflict. The vast majority have been resettled, though about 14,000 individuals still remain in
welfare centers and camps2. Many have returned to areas that were destroyed during the conflict
and major efforts are ongoing to reestablish public services and infrastructure as well as to
rebuild housing and re-establish income generating activities. Many development partners,
including the World Bank, have supported the Government in the resettlement effort.
7.
Broad social and economic inclusion has been occurring slowly and further progress
is still required. A long lasting solution to the ethnic problem and setting up effective means of
addressing grievances of minority communities is vital for sustained peace. President Rajapaksa
appointed the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission and mechanisms have been put in
place to implement key recommendations of the Commission. This process is closely monitored
by the Government with support of key bilateral partners.
8.
Sri Lanka is on track to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals. UNDP
has identified Sri Lanka as an early achiever on 10 of the 21 indicators, including those related to
universal primary education and gender equality. Sri Lanka is also expected to meet the goals of
maternal health and HIV/AIDs. However, Sri Lanka is making slower progress on the goals
related to malnutrition and child mortality. Indicators are mixed on the environment: while Sri
Lanka is an early achiever on indicators of protected area, ozone depleting substance
consumption, safe drinking water and basic sanitation, it has stagnated or is slipping backwards
on forest cover and CO2 emissions.3
9.
Sri Lanka compares favorably with other countries in its income band in terms of
gender equality. Sri Lanka ranks 72nd out of 169 countries on the UN Gender Inequality Index.4
On the OECD’s Social Institutions and Gender Index, Sri Lanka scores highest among all South
Asian countries.5 The main gender challenges relate to women’s access to employment
opportunities and women’s nutritional status. Only 32.3 percent of females aged 15 or older
2

Data from UNHCR estimates.
Paths to 2015: MDG Priorities in Asia and the Pacific (2010/2011) by UNDP, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific (ESCAP) and ADB.
4
The Gender Inequality Index is a composite measure of reproductive health (maternal mortality ratio and adolescent fertility
rate); women’s empowerment (share of parliamentary seats held by women; and female secondary and tertiary educational
attainment rates); and labor participation (share of women in the labor force). United Nations 2008.
5
The OECD index looks at family law, civil liberties, physical integrity (including violence against women), son preference and
ownership rights.
3

2

participate in the labor force.6 Poor nutritional status of women is particularly severe in estate
areas: the percentage of women with low body mass index is nearly 48 percent in estate areas,
compared to 23 percent of rural areas, and just 12 percent in urban areas. Poor nutritional status
of women reduces the woman’s own quality of life as well as her earning capacity and the health
of her children. (See Annex 18: Gender Issues in Sri Lanka.)
10.
Sri Lanka’s changing demographics – the aging and urbanization of the population
– is having dramatic impacts on education and health as well as the economy. By 2036,
more than 22 percent of the population will be over 60 and there will be 61 dependents per 100
adults. Unless labor force and employment rates increase, a very small number of employed
persons will need to provide for a very large number of non-working persons – straining the
budgets of families and Government. As the population becomes older and has a higher income,
the types of public services required will change. The education system will need to give
increasing emphasis on computer, English and higher level cognitive skills. The health system
will need to focus more on non-communicable diseases.7 Social protection for the elderly will
need to be enhanced. Increasing urbanization will require investments in mass transit and
expanded water and sewage networks.
11.
Unemployment rates have fallen since the end of the conflict. As of second quarter of
2011, unemployment was only 4.2 percent. Unemployment rates are higher among youth,
women and the more educated: the unemployment rate was 7.6 percent among those 25-29 years
old, 7.0 percent among women, and 7.8 percent among those with A-Level education and
above.8 More than half (about 55 percent) of the employed population works as a paid
employee9, although even among this group, a large share is in the informal sector.10
12.
Poverty rates have fallen from 15 percent of the population in 2006/7 to 9 percent in
2009/10.11 The most dramatic decline has been in the estate sector (from 32 percent to 11
percent) following a major wage increase at the beginning of 2010. Remaining concentrations of
poverty are not limited to a single part of the country: the four districts with the highest poverty
rates are Batticaloa (20 percent) in the east, Jaffna (16 percent) in the north, Moneragala 15
percent in the south-east and Badulla (13 percent) in the south-east.12 Inequality of consumption
declined between 2006/7 and 2009/10, with the Gini index falling from 0.40 to 0.36 and the
quintile ratio falling from 6.7 to 5.7.
6

Female labor force participation is highest (50.2 percent) among those aged 40-44 years as of second quarter 2011. Female
labor force participation rates would be somewhat higher if the large number of Sri Lankan women working outside the country
(primarily as housekeepers) were included.
7
Non-communicable diseases are those diseases that are not transmissible from one person to another, including a wide array of
health conditions such as injuries, mental health problems, disabilities, cardio-vascular diseases, endocrine disorders such as
diabetes mellitus, non-infectious respiratory diseases such as asthma, degenerative diseases of old age, and cancers.
8
The Advanced Level General Certificate of Education, commonly referred to as an A-level, is a qualification offered by
education institutions in Sri Lanka and other Commonwealth Countries. A-levels are studied over a two-year period and are
recognized as the standard for assessing the suitability of applicants for academic courses in universities.
9
The remainder work as entrepreneurs or unpaid family workers.
10
The figures in this paragraph are from the Department of Census and Statistics Bulletin of Labor Force Statistics for 2011Q2.
11
These numbers are based on the national poverty line. Poverty rates are calculated separately for urban, rural and estate
(plantation) sectors. World Bank estimates using international poverty lines find that as of 2007, 7 percent of Sri Lankans were
below the US$ 1.25 line and 29 percent of Sri Lankans were below the US$ 2.00 line.
12
The 2009/10 survey did not include the Mannar, Kilinochchi and Mullaithivu Districts. The poverty rate in Colombo is under
4 percent.

3

B.

Economic Context and Recent Economic Developments

13.
The Sri Lankan economy grew at a vigorous 8.3 percent during 2011, largely due to
the post-conflict rebound. Sri Lanka was able to maintain relatively strong growth of about 5
percent per year even during the war, though growth dropped to 3.5 percent in 2009 during the
last stage of the conflict, which coincided with the international economic crisis. The postconflict rebound has helped all sectors, both on the supply side and the demand side.
Agricultural land in conflict-affected areas could once again be cultivated; double shifts in
manufacturing became possible as workers no longer had to worry about security restrictions.
Domestic consumers’ and investors’ confidence revived, and services related to tourism picked
up as tourist arrivals surged since the end of the war.
14.
Sri Lanka has been experiencing an increase in the trade deficit, estimated to be
about 17 percent of GDP in 2011. Goods exports declined as a share of GDP from 30 percent
in 2001 to 18 percent by 2011. Sri Lanka’s low share of GDP from exports is not an outlier in the
world perspective, but as an economy with a relatively small domestic population, with a
favorable geographic location as a trade hub and close proximity to fast growing markets, Sri
Lanka’s exports are below potential. Although exports have increased, they have not kept pace
with the surge in imports. Increased imports reflected a rapid rise in consumer imports, tied to
the rising income of the population; increased investment goods imports to support infrastructure
development; and an increasing bill for intermediate goods imports due to higher commodity
prices, notably oil.
15.
The trade deficit has been financed largely by remittances (about 9 percent of GDP
in 2011) and to a lesser extent by tourism receipts (1.5 percent of GDP in 2011). In 2010 the
trade deficit was comfortably financed by remittances and tourism. However, despite strong
remittances and tourism, the large increase in the trade deficit resulted in a more than doubling of
the current account deficit and a rapid decline in foreign reserves in 2011. In February of 2012,
the authorities introduced a package of measures to rein in the current account deficit, stem the
reserve loss, bolster fiscal performance and increase the sustainability of growth. These
measures included monetary and credit policy tightening, petroleum and electricity price
increases, a petroleum tax increase and the abolishment of the rupee trading band to allow the
exchange rate to adjust more flexibly. At the same time, the authorities increased the kerosene
coupons available to the poorest in order to mitigate the adverse impact on that group.
16.
The public debt and deficit have been gradually brought down. Public debt is
estimated at 79 percent of GDP as of December 2011, compared to nearly 91 percent of GDP in
2005.13 The fiscal deficit excluding grants reached 10.4 percent of GDP in 2009, but the
authorities made significant stabilization efforts under the IMF program since then to gradually
reduce it to an estimated 6.9 percent of GDP in 2011.14 The debt sustainability analysis
performed by the IMF in 2010 found the public debt to be sustainable and projects it to decline to

13
14

Domestic public debt is currently about 44 percent of GDP.
Reduced fiscal deficit was accomplished in large part through higher receipts from import duties, VAT and excise taxes.

4

64 percent of GDP by 2015, assuming 6.5 to 7 percent annual growth, 6 to 7 percent nominal
interest rates and continuous fiscal stabilization efforts.
17.
Inflation remains low. Having reached 22.6 percent (annual average) in 2008, inflation
has fallen to about 6.0 percent in 2011. Monetary policy has been accommodative since the start
of the global economic crisis.15 Strong credit expansion since 2009 has helped stimulate
domestic demand. After falling by 5.8 percent in 2009, credit to the private sector increased by
24.9 percent in 2010 and about 33 percent in 2011 year-on-year. In its recent report, the Fitch
ratings agency has warned that such fast credit growth, if maintained, and fast rising asset prices
may be putting the financial system at risk.16 To address such concerns, the Central Bank of Sri
Lanka recently raised policy interest rates.17 This move is expected to reduce growth in private
sector credit and domestic demand and reduce emerging risks to the financial sector.

Table 1 : Key Macroeconomic Indicators
As a percent of GDP
National Accounts
Real GDP growth
Total investment
Private sector investment
Public sector investment
Monetary
CPI
Public debt
External Account
Current account balance
Trade balance
FDI
Remittances
Gross International Reserves of
CBSL in months of imports
Fiscal
Fiscal revenues
Primary current expenditure
Interest expenditure
Capital expenditure
Fiscal balance excluding grants

2008

2009

2010

2011 Est

2012 F

2013 F

2014 F

2015 F

2016 F

6.0
25.3
19.3
6.0

3.5
23.7
17.3
6.4

8.0
27.8
22.0
5.8

8.3
29.3
23.3
6.0

6.8
32.9
26.9
6.0

7.7
29.5
23.7
5.8

7.0
29.3
23.6
5.8

7.0
29.1
23.4
5.7

7.0
31.3
25.3
6.0

22.6
81.4

3.4
86.1

5.9
81.9

6.0
78.8

6.0
75.4

6.0
71.1

6.0
67.6

6.0
64.2

6.0
60.7

(9.5)
(14.7)
1.7
7.2

(0.5)
(7.4)
0.9
7.9

(2.9)
(10.5)
0.9
8.3

(7.0)
(17.0)
1.7
9.1

(3.2)
(14.9)
2.4
9.7

(2.7)
(15.4)
2.1
10.3

(2.8)
(16.3)
1.2
11.1

(3.0)
(17.6)
1.1
12.0

(2.1)
(18.6)
1.3
13.4

1.4

5.7

5.7

3.4

15.6
16.9
4.8
5.7
(7.7)

15.0
18.2
6.4
6.7
(10.4)

14.9
16.7
6.3
6.4
(8.2)

15.7
16.3
5.4
6.0
(6.9)

16.0
16.0
5.2
6.2
(6.4)

16.2
15.4
5.0
6.0
(5.5)

16.3
15.0
4.8
6.0
(5.0)

16.3
14.7
4.6
6.0
(4.6)

16.5
14.8
4.7
6.0
(4.3)

IMF and World Bank Group staff estimates

18.
Sri Lanka entered into a US$ 2.6 billion IMF Stand-By-Arrangement in July 2009.
The program aims to put Sri Lanka on a sustainable growth path, rebuild foreign exchange
reserves, strengthen the fiscal position, bring down inflation and strengthen the financial
system. In April, 2012, the Executive Board of the IMF completed the seventh review of Sri
Lanka’s economic performance and disbursed SDR 275.6 million (about US$ 426.8 million)
brining total disbursements under the arrangement to about US$ 2.13 billion. In addition, the
Executive Board approved an extension of the arrangement period to July 23, 2012, to allow
time for the completion of the eighth and final review.
15

Policy rates were lowered by a cumulative 350 basis points from November 2008 to January 2011 simulating credit demand.
Fitch Asia-Pacific Sovereign Outlook, December 23, 2011.
17
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka raised policy interest rates by 50 basis points in February 2012.
16

5

C.

Economic Outlook

19.
The Government’s strategy aims at eight percent annual real growth over the
medium term. Whereas the recent growth has been achieved in large part due to the one-time
benefits of the end of the conflict, sustaining strong growth will require continued efforts to
increase investment and raise productivity. To date, both domestic private investment and FDI
have been well below desired levels: domestic private investment was 20.1 percent of GDP and
FDI was 0.9 percent of GDP in 2010.18 Improvements in the investment climate will be essential
to achieving sustained growth, and investor confidence is expected to continue to depend heavily
on predictability of the policy environment. In addition to high investment ratios, total factor
productivity increases will be crucial, particularly as the share of the population of working age
declines. Increases in productivity will depend in large part on opening up the economy, a
higher exposure to global knowledge and innovation, and general progress in the efficiency of
production processes.19
20.
Over the CPS period, both exports and imports of goods are expected to grow
rapidly. As imports will start from a higher base, the merchandise trade deficit is expected to
widen and remittances will continue to be a major source of financing. Imports are expected to
increase in investment goods and intermediate goods as the economy rebuilds following the
conflict, as well as in consumer goods, as an increasingly wealthy population demands a wider
range of imported products. There are several potential areas for increased exports, including
expanding labor intensive production (e.g. garments) as China moves out of these markets. The
risks of declining export demand if the economies of Europe and the U.S. remain sluggish could
be mitigated by completion of the trade agreement with India and expansion of exports to other
fast growing developing countries.20 A simpler trade regime has the potential to improve the
trade balance. Continued exchange rate flexibility will also be important to maintain macro
stability (including rebuilding international reserves) and to maintain competitiveness. The
Central Bank’s announcement in February 2012 that it will reduce intervention in the foreign
exchange market is a positive sign.
21.
Sri Lanka’s fiscal balance and debt situation is expected to continue to improve,
assuming continued efforts to enhance revenues, reign in expenditures and strengthen debt
management. The medium term fiscal framework relies heavily on revenue growth. There
is considerable room for revenue growth, given that current levels (about 16 percent of GDP in
2011) are low by international standards and compared to levels achieved in the 1980s (about 23
percent of GDP). Important reforms were enacted last year, simplifying the tax regime and
broadening the base, in an effort to increase revenues. Persistent inefficiencies in tax collection
and widespread tax evasion, however, have meant that revenues have been slow to rise. Progress

18

The official numbers for 2011 are not yet publically available.
Recent analytical work finds that the two main constraints to labor productivity in Sri Lanka are: (i) low competition with
foreign firms (i.e. insufficient incentives to produce efficiently) and (ii) low share of investment financed externally (i.e.
insufficient exposure to state-of-the art global knowledge). See Dutz and O’Connell (2011), “The Business Environment,
Productivity and Innovation in Sri Lanka: An Empirical Exploration”
20
Sri Lanka relies heavily on European demand for its merchandise exports as well as service exports (tourism). Thirty five
percent of goods exports go to Europe and 37 percent of tourist arrivals come from Europe.
19

6

is expected going forward as the tax administration is modernized.21 Expenditures are expected
to remain flat as a share of GDP despite pressure to increase public investment on infrastructure
and to increase the remuneration of civil servants. Continued efforts to increase efficiency of
public spending, including improving value-for-money from public procurement and
management reforms in SOEs, will be essential. Government plans to improve the flow of
reliable and timely information on budgets and outcomes are expected to improve the quality of
budgetary decision making and confidence in sound policy making. Interest payments on public
debt continue to absorb more than a third of recurrent expenditure.22 Despite its improved
sovereign credit rating, Sri Lanka is vulnerable to increased costs of borrowing because overall
debt remains high.23
22.
Inflation is expected to remain moderate over the CPS period.24 The increased cost
of imports (due to a weaker rupee) is expected to be offset by lower domestic food prices (thanks
to increased production). Risks to inflation remain, however, if investment does not increase fast
enough to avoid an overheating of the economy.

II.

COUNTRY VISION, ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES

23.
The Mahinda Chintana Vision for the Future lays out the Government’s vision for
development over the period of 2010 to 2016. The Mahinda Chintana describes three goals.
The first is the doubling of per capita income between 2009 and 2016 to be achieved through
sustained high economic growth, driven by a high investment rate. Second is the shifting of the
structure of the economy to be more knowledge-based, globally integrated and competitive,
environmentally friendly, internally integrated and increasingly urban. And third is ensuring
improved living standards and social inclusion.
A.

Doubling Per Capita Income through Investment

24.
The Government’s Vision, lays out a consistent set of macroeconomic goals. In
particular, the Mahinda Chintana seeks to double per capita income, to about US$ 4,000 between
2009 and 2016. Accomplishing this will require about 8 percent GDP growth, which would in
turn require investment of 33-35 percent of GDP per year.25 The Government plans include
public investment of 6-7 percent of GDP, as the maximum affordable given the fiscal and debt
situation. The remaining investment would need to come from the private sector.
21

An ongoing project financed by the Asian Development Bank is computerizing tax records and collection procedures.
Interest expenditure accounts for a one third of total recurrent expenditure. Yield rates on government short to medium term
securities having risen considerable since the third quarter of 2011.
23
Costs of borrowing could rise if improvements in the sovereign credit rating were reversed or if international credit markets
contracted as a result of ongoing problems in Europe.
24
In the near term, inflation could increase. The Government raised retail prices of gasoline, diesel and kerosene by 9 percent, 38
percent and 49 percent respectively in February 2012. In addition, electricity fuel surcharges were also raised between 15-40
percent in February (to take into account increased cost of thermal power generation) while transport fares in the privatized bus
companies were also increased by 20 percent. These one-time increases in energy prices are expected to result in increases in
food and other products over the coming months.
25
Achieving this level of per capita income by 2016 is consistent with assumptions for annual population growth of 1 percent,
annual inflation of 2 percent and an annual appreciation of the rupee against the dollar of 1.6 %.
22

7

25.
While the growth target was met for 2010 and 2011, as a result of the post conflict
rebound, sustaining this growth will require a substantial increase in investment. Public
investment came close to the target in 2010 and 2011, at 5.8 and 6.0 percent of GDP
respectively.26 The main challenge in this regard will be sustaining the high rate of public
investment over the medium term given the tight fiscal space. The Mahinda Chintana proposes
to bring the fiscal deficit to 5 percent of GDP by 2013 and maintain it at that level over the
medium term. This goal is achievable but will require significant effort on both revenues and
expenditures. At about 16 percent of GDP in 2011, revenues are low by international standards
and well below the 23 percent Sri Lanka had in the 1980s.27 The budget for 2011 simplified and
reduced taxes and broadened the base, in the hopes that this will boost receipts. Further tax
regulation changes could enhance incentives for productive investment and reduce distortions.
In addition, increased efficiency in tax collection and improved efforts to address the tax evasion
are needed if revenues are to reach the targeted levels for 2012 and beyond. While revenues
have been low, expenditures have been high (about 22 percent of GDP in 2011) due to the high
level of investments in post war reconstruction and infrastructure modernization, transfers to
loss-making State Owned Enterprises, a large wage bill and high interest payments on debt. The
Mahinda Chintana identifies several important governance-related opportunities to increase
efficiency of public spending. These include establishing a clear system for assessing costs and
benefits of investments, reforming management and improving efficiency of State Owned
Enterprises28 and improving the flow of budget information. Improvements in efficiency will
also require continued efforts to improve financial management and procurement practices and to
improve alignment of available resources of provincial and local authorities with the mandates
they have been given. Sri Lanka’s ability to borrow to finance public investment has improved
since the end of the war thanks to increased creditworthiness, as reflected in sovereign credit
ratings. Nevertheless, borrowing costs could increase if there are problems in the international
financial markets (e.g. related to the Eurozone crisis) or if credit ratings are not maintained.
26.
Private investment has fallen far short of the amount needed to sustain growth.
With private investment at 22 percent of GDP in 2010, total investment reached only 26 percent
of GDP – far below the required 33-35 percent. Foreign Direct Investment has also been
disappointing. Foreign Direct Investment is not only important for increasing total investment
but also as a key source of global knowledge and technology. Achieving the private investment
target will require concerted efforts to improve the investment climate. The World Bank
Group’s Doing Business Indicators have identified areas of weakness including enforcing
contracts, paying taxes, registering property, and obtaining construction permits. An interagency
committee has been following up on reforms in these areas with the aim of achieving a 30th place
ranking in Doing Business. A recently conducted survey of Sri Lankan businesses indicates that
26

Pubic investment numbers provided are capital investment numbers as reported by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.
This decline is mainly attributed to the gradual removal of export related taxes, which was a significant source of revenue until
the end of the 1980s.
28
Off budget financing activities are relatively low and loss-making state enterprises are financed mostly by direct transfers from
the budget. The bulk of state-owned enterprise debt is from Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Ceylon Electricity Board. Efforts
are ongoing to try to help these enterprises break even. However, these enterprises and the country public finances will remain
vulnerable unless Sri Lanka implements a price-setting mechanism that allows the full recovery of input prices. The recent
revisions in energy prices are a positive move in this direction. The banking system poses modest contingent liabilities to the
government, with adequate capitalization ratios and improving nonperforming loans. The Mahinda Chintana states that all SOEs
will develop corporate mandates, all Board members will enter into performance contracts, and all SOE activities will be
disclosed to the public by adopting a sound reporting system based on international best practices.
27

8

the biggest obstacles faced are access to finance, taxes, unfair advantages of the informal
sector,29the formal/informal sector dichotomy, electricity, labor force skill mismatches, and
access to land.
B.

Shifting the Structure of the Economy

27.
Sri Lanka has a generally well educated population for its income level, but faces
challenges in becoming a knowledge-based economy. Sri Lanka does well in terms of access
to education and completion rates.30 At the same time, however, employers complain that they
are unable to find workers with the needed skills – especially information technology, English
language, and soft skills (e.g. problem-solving skills, good communication and ability to work in
teams). Although efforts have been made to introduce these skills into the curriculum, the
emphasis on testing factual knowledge in the assessment system has meant that few resources are
spent on the new skill curriculum. Moreover, addressing the knowledge-economy will require
creation of a dynamic system in which curriculum focuses on higher level cognitive skills and a
feedback mechanism to adjust to changes in the needs of the labor market. In addition, in light
of the long-lasting impacts on both cognitive and non-cognitive skills, early childhood education
needs attention. Keeping up with technology will be a particular challenge: information and
communications technology adoption is identified as a weakness in both the Global
Competitiveness Index31 and the Global Innovation Index. According to the Telecom
Regulatory Commission, internet use at 12 percent of the population in 2010 is below the
average for countries at Sri Lanka’s income level.
28.
The Mahinda Chintana aims to increase Sri Lanka’s integration into the global
economy and make it competitive internationally. Historically, Sri Lanka has been well
connected internationally, making use of its excellent climate and strategic geographic position
between the west and the east, and was considered the most open economy in South Asia. Over
the past decade however, Sri Lanka has become less competitive, with the exports declining from
39 percent of GDP in 2000 to 17 percent in 2011. Although the high-end apparel sector has
performed well and the number of tourist arrivals has increased dramatically since the end of the
conflict,32 several challenges remain. The tourist industry competes with other destinations that
offer very high value for money. High tech exports represented less than one percent of
manufacturing exports in 2010.33 Sri Lanka’s high exchange rate has hurt export
competitiveness, particularly as the currencies of several nearby countries have devalued in the
past year.34 The agricultural export sector (including tea, historically a main export) operates
well below potential due to low productivity; and complex, frequently changing, anti-export
trade and pricing policies. In terms of the Logistics Performance Index, Sri Lanka ranks below
29
The formal or registered companies are perceived to be adversely affected by the informal or unregistered companies since
they are not required to obtain various regulatory approvals and can evade taxes and also avoid maintaining accounts.
30
Primary completion rates are above 97 percent and secondary school enrollment is over 85 percent.
31
The Global Competitiveness Index measures the speed with which an economy adopts existing technologies to enhance the
productivity of its industries, with specific emphasis on its capacity to fully use ICT in daily activities and production processes
for increased efficiency and competitiveness.
32
Tourism receipts increased from US$ 380 million in 2008 to US$ 576 million in 2010 to about US$ 800 million in 2011.
33
World Development Indicators.
34
Unfolding events in Europe caused a retreat out of developing countries and into “safe haven” U.S. assets. As a result,
currencies of Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, and others around the world depreciated sharply against the dollar.

9

the regional average, reflecting poorly developed railways and congested access to major ports,
as well as problems in customs clearance times, logistical competence, and the ability to track
shipments. The Government strategy aims to reverse these negative trends and make Sri Lankan
exports highly competitive.
29.
Sri Lanka has a wealth of environmental assets, boasting the highest biodiversity
per square kilometer in Asia. During the conflict, the slow pace of economic development
meant that degradation was slower than it otherwise might have been. Mahinda Chintana goals
for 2016 include raising forest coverage from 23 percent to 35 percent of the land area. Despite
official recognition of the importance of protecting environmental assets, the country’s
performance on environmental sustainability has not been fully satisfactory. In fact, Sri Lanka
risks losing many of its assets and biodiversity, as demonstrated by a recent survey that found
that 33 percent of fauna and 61 percent of flora are threatened. Thirty five percent of old growth
forest cover has been lost since 1990 – among the highest in the region – further increasing the
challenge of meeting Government targets. Moreover, environmental neglect can directly and
indirectly impact economic performance, and the rate and sustainability of long term growth.
30.
For generations, Sri Lanka’s population has been more internally mobile than most
countries, on account of the extensive network of roads, buses and railways and relatively
compact geographic territory.35 During the war, much of this infrastructure was damaged and
attention was not given to modernizing or even maintaining the infrastructure. Today, road
travel within the country is very slow with average speed of only 26 kilometers an hour. A
massive effort is currently underway to bridge the infrastructure gap, using domestic budget as
well as support from the multilateral and bilateral community. The country’s first expressway
opened in 2011, halving travel time from Colombo to Galle. Nevertheless, challenges remain.
More needs to be done to understand and enhance the economic connections across the country
to take advantage of forward and backward linkages in supply chains and of distinct comparative
advantages of different parts of the country.36
C.

Improved Living Standards and Social Inclusion

31.
Mahinda Chintana aims to ensure that all social groups benefit from the growth
envisaged above. With a long history of attention to access to basic services, Sri Lanka excels
for its income level on most social indicators. This includes life expectancy, education, births
attended by a skilled professional, access to improved water source, and other key indicators.
32.
Although Sri Lanka excels in most social indicators, malnutrition is a striking
exception. About 22 percent of Sri Lankan children under 5 are underweight, as against the 14
percent expected for Sri Lanka’s income level. That malnutrition has persisted even as the GDP
per capita has increased reflects the complexity of the problem. Tackling malnutrition will
require a combination of actions involving healthcare, food security, water and sanitation,
attitudes and behaviors.
35
As of 2010, there were 1.7 km of road per km2 and 97 percent of villages are reached by the road network. As of 2000, 86
percent of the roads were paved.
36
Based on current trends of urbanization and policies that support private vehicle ownership over mass transit, congestion rates
are expected to increase dramatically over the coming decade. By 2031 travel speed is expected to decline to 19 kilometers an
hour, with rush hour in Colombo District falling to below 9 kilometers per hour.

10

33.
As Sri Lanka becomes a middle income country, new challenges emerge related to
the interrelated phenomenon of increased wealth, changing age structure of the population
and increasing urbanization. As the population becomes wealthier, citizens expect a higher
quality and wider range of services and lower waiting times. The type of services needed also
evolves with the changing diseases and the aging of the population: the health system, for
example, must build capacity to address non-communicable diseases associated with a wealthier,
more urban lifestyle (e.g. chronic conditions like diabetes and traffic accidents) and with an older
population (e.g. geriatric care).37 The social security system needs to be made sustainable. And
the population density associated with urbanization requires improved network services (e.g.
mass transit and water and sewerage networks).
34.
While increasing the quality of public services is an essential priority, it must be
achieved in a manner that is fair to all citizens. Whereas post-conflict resettlement and
reconstruction necessitates a focus on investments in the conflict-affected areas of the north and
east, service quality modernization necessitates a national approach. As noted earlier in this
document, pockets of poverty exist in various parts of the country. The challenge for service
quality modernization will be to establish consistent, countrywide standards to support needs
based resource allocations.
35.
Similarly, social inclusion is a high priority in the Mahinda Chintana, including
addressing issues of youth unemployment, equal employment opportunities for women,
safety nets for the poor and vulnerable, economic opportunities for the disabled and the
aspirations of Sri Lanka as a multi-ethnic and multi-lingual country. As in all countries,
social inclusion is a challenge that requires continuous effort and the Government is taking steps
in this direction. The challenges going forward include advancing on the ethnic reconciliation
agenda and implementing key recommendations of the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation
Commission. The World Bank will assist the Government to increase social inclusion through
analytical and advisory work, as well as through specific operations and as a cross-cutting theme
overall in the portfolio.
36.
The Mahinda Chintana emphasizes the importance of women in Sri Lankan society.
The Ministry of Labor is currently in the process of preparing a strategy to encourage women’s
employment opportunities. In the past women working abroad as maids has been the largest
source of remittances, but there have been several cases of major physical and psychological
abuse reported. The Ministry of Foreign Employment Promotion and Welfare has shifted its
emphasis and is now providing training programs and encouraging women to seek skilled jobs.
Regarding women’s nutritional status, the Government has introduced a nutritional supplement
program for mothers and infants, which is well-targeted.

37
Sri Lanka has the oldest population age composition outside of the Eastern European transition economies. In two decades Sri
Lanka’s age profile will be similar to that of Europe and Japan today, but with much lower income to support the large number of
elderly dependents.

11

III.
A.

WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
Lessons from the CAS Completion Report38

37.
The design of CAS FY09-12 reflected country reality at the time it was written.
Appropriately, the CAS FY09-12 focused on maintaining basic services in the midst of conflict,
with strong attention to the conflict-affected north and east and other lagging regions and strong
use of Community Driven Development (CDD) approaches. Over the course of the CAS FY0912, Sri Lanka’s context changed and the program appropriately adapted to those changes. Of the
15 lending operations that were planned in the CAS, five were dropped and two transformed.
Meanwhile, four new projects were added and additional financing was provided for three
projects. Of the 12 Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA) that were planned in the CAS, three
were dropped and two refocused. Meanwhile, four new AAA tasks were added.
38.
In many ways, the World Bank was successful in responding to the changing
priorities. The lending program responded to urgent needs – including resettlement and floods,
while still focusing on the conflict and lagging regions. In other ways, however, the World Bank
did not fully keep up with the changing issues. Authorities have noted that the World Bank was
overly focused on what the Government views as a ‘low income country agenda’, and could have
moved support to the emerging middle income country agenda, with which the Government has
less experience.
39.
The AAA program was small, and in some cases lacked a clear purpose and
audience. Dialogue on policy issues was underdeveloped in most sectors. This was due to two
factors. First, counterparts were primarily focused on engaging the World Bank in infrastructure,
rather than policy issues. Second, the World Bank did not keep up with core AAA products
needed to monitor the evolving situation (e.g. analysis of public expenditures, public financial
management and poverty).
40.
Engagement in education and health was more successful than in other areas. This
success was due to several factors: (i) the substantive focus was well-aligned with Government
priorities; (ii) interaction was sustained through a combination of lending and AAA used to
inform the dialogue; (iii) sector-wide, results-based approaches were introduced including
support for strategic planning, monitoring and results-based disbursement; and (iv) interactions
at both national and sub-national levels.
41.
The strategy of channeling resources through the banking system and of
strengthening the alignment between IFC advisory services and investments worked well.
Sri Lanka possesses a sound banking system, which both the IFC and the World Bank used
effectively to channel resources, for instance, to engage the private sector in sustainable energy
generation and in transferring resources to SMEs during the economic slowdown. The lesson is
that anchoring support on strong local institutions helps by-pass local capacity constraints. In
addition, in line with global guidelines, IFC’s work on the ground stressed the alignment
between advisory and investment activities. For instance, in projects such as support to the

38

The full CAS Completion Report is provided in Annex 2.

12

Dialog telecommunications company, the advisory intervention broadened the range of benefits
and beneficiaries that are being supported.
42.
The last CAS committed to the use of a Conflict Filter to improve the peace and
conflict sensitivity of operations. It was meant to help task teams better understand the
operating environment at both national and local levels, as well as possible drivers of the conflict
through deeper analysis on institutions, stakeholders and benefits-sharing. The Conflict Filter
analyses have been conducted for all new projects in the current CAS period. The Filter was
revised during the CAS period to map it to the new Operational Risk Assessment Framework
(ORAF), which was introduced across the World Bank.
43.
It takes longer-than-anticipated time for private sector investment to pick up in
post-conflict markets. Expectations for a rapid pick-up in private investments after the conflict
ended proved to be optimistic. The corporate/private sector may not have felt comfortable to
make investments until peace was firmly cemented, including an easing of tensions with the
international community, and seeing how the new Government would rebuild the ground for the
private investment. On the latter, the signals of the Government regarding its commitment to a
positive investment climate for the private sector have been perceived as mixed by potential
investors. The lesson that emerges is that in post-conflict countries stronger and unambiguous
messages are needed to motivate a strong engagement of the private sector. Going forward
continued attention to the quality of the broad business environment is needed to enhance the
opportunities for the private sector support in the country.
B.

Findings from the Stakeholder Survey and Consultations39

44.
Stakeholder surveys were conducted during the CPS preparation process to
complement the World Bank’s self-assessed CAS FY09-12 Completion Report. A
quantitative Client Survey captured views of 300 respondents. The survey findings support
several of the conclusions from the CAS Completion Report. Although respondents perceived
the World Bank to be more effective than it was when the survey was last conducted in 2007,
respondents feel that the World Bank’s focus has not been sufficiently aligned with Sri Lanka’s
current development priorities, notably middle income country issues. Respondents also
indicated a need for an increase in the provision of knowledge and advice.
45.
In addition to the quantitative Stakeholder Survey, in-depth interviews were
conducted by an independent research company with key decision makers, government
officials, private sector representatives and civil society leaders. The interviews reinforced
the conclusions from the quantitative survey. The World Bank is seen as an organization able to
catalyze transformational change in Sri Lanka, through combined knowledge and financial
resources. Respondents perceive the World Bank to be extremely rigorous in its processes – a
quality that some see as beneficial, while others felt is overly cumbersome. Respondents feel
that in recent years, the World Bank has focused its attention on financing rather than knowledge
and could play a more proactive, visible role in Sri Lanka’s transformation.
39

A more detailed description of the consultations is provided as Annex 16. A more detailed description of the stakeholder
surveys is provided as Annex 17.

13

46.
Consultations were held throughout the CPS preparation process. A total of 18
consultations were conducted, involving more than 400 participants including development
partners, youth, gender and environmental activists, the private sector, Members of Parliament,
and officials from central, provincial and local government. The consultations contributed to the
diagnosis of Sri Lanka’s development challenges and provided an opportunity to obtain feedback
as the strategy’s objectives, areas of focus, principles and rules of engagement emerged.
Recurring issues raised in the consultations include: the need to reorient publically provided
infrastructure and services to the needs of an urbanizing, middle income country; the
institutional and financial needs of local and provincial government to allow them to fulfill their
mandates; the need for increased clarity and consistency of policy vis-à-vis the private sector; the
need for continued attention to poverty and inequality; the role the World Bank is expected to
play in wide dissemination of knowledge; and the importance of World Bank coordination with
other development partners.
C.

Assessment of the Current Portfolio

47.
The portfolio is generally healthy with no major problems. The current World Bank
portfolio consists primarily of International Development Association (IDA) funded projects: the
first International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan was presented to the
Board in March, 2012. As of March 31, 2012, the portfolio consisted of 14 projects with a total
commitment of US$ 1.068 billion40 and a disbursement ratio of 17.9 percent (compared to 15.8
for South Asia as a whole and 14.9 for the World Bank as a whole.) Sri Lanka has a high
percentage of projects at risk41 (21 percent), however measures are being taken to address these
projects as reflected by the high proactivity index of 100 percent.42
48.
The latest portfolio review held in October 2011 identified scope for further
improvements in several areas including procurement43 and monitoring and evaluation44.
The overall financial management performance of the Sri Lanka portfolio is satisfactory and the
fiduciary risk after mitigation is rated as “moderate” for the majority of projects. Risk in some
projects have been rated as “high” and “substantial” based on the nature and complexity of
implementation arrangements, weak implementation capacities of implementing agencies and
due to their reliance on aspects of the country financial management systems that are still weak.
With the intention of the Government of Sri Lanka to promote the use of country financial
management systems to the maximum extent, continued efforts are required to strengthen these
systems.
40

The first IBRD loan, the US$ 213 million Metro Colombo Urban Development project, will bring the portfolio to 14 projects.
A project is considered “at risk” if it is not meeting its development objectives. It is the sum of actual problem projects and
potential problem projects. A project is considered a problem project if implementation progress or the development objective is
rated unsatisfactory in the latest project implementation status report. Disbursement ratio is defined as the ratio of disbursements
during the fiscal year to the undisbursed balance at the beginning of the fiscal year. (Only investment operations are included in
the calculation.) The net disconnect is defined as the difference between ratings given by the Internal Evaluation Group and
those given by the Regions.
42
The proactivity index gives the percentage of projects rated as actual problem projects 12 months earlier than have been
upgraded, restructured, suspended, closed or partially (20 percent or more of commitments) or fully canceled.
43
With regard to procurement of the 13 projects, 5 were satisfactory, 8 were marginally satisfactory and 2 were marginally
unsatisfactory.
44
Of the 13 projects, 10 were satisfactory, 4 marginally satisfactory and 1 marginally unsatisfactory.
41

14

49.
The World Bank Group program made significant use of trust fund resources
during the FY 09-12 CAS period, supporting both analytical work and technical assistance.
Trust funds have supported activities in a range of areas, from technical assistance on Public
Private Partnerships for infrastructure development, to avian influenza preparedness, to
renewable energy. Trust funds have significantly bolstered post-conflict and reconstruction
efforts, including considerable Australian support for the cash-for-work component of the
Emergency Northern Recovery Project and the Japan Social Development Fund support for
nutrition in the Northern Province. They have also afforded meaningful support for the
Government’s efforts to reform its main safety net program, Samurdhi, as well as for undertaking
critical post-disaster needs assessments and expanding access to finance for poor women.
Commitments from trust fund resources over the FY09-12 CAS period have amounted to US$
42.2 million, over 39 World Bank operations. IFC's private sector development support benefited
from donor support, including Norway for the Sri Lanka Development Facility, and The
Netherlands-IFC Partnership Program and DevCO for the South Asia Infrastructure Facility.
Global Environment Facility-backed PADGO (Portfolio Approach to Distributed Generation
Opportunity) is also supported by Japanese and Irish funds. Recently, the European Union and
IFC have strengthened their partnership, and the first such initiative has launched to benefit four
post-conflict districts.
50.
A performance review of the eight ongoing recipient-executed trust-funded activities
(see Annex 14) identified several areas for increased attention. Among the issues identified
are delays in effectiveness and implementation, lack of attention to results monitoring and
evaluation, and high transaction costs for both the Recipient and the World Bank. A specific risk
associated with the trust fund portfolio has been the limited institutional capacity of recipient
institutions and the over-burdening of implementing agencies with the administration and
management of small stand-alone trust funds. This has sometimes resulted in lack of compliance
with fiduciary requirements, as in the case of the small post-conflict grants.
51.
IFC’s portfolio is generally performing well and weathering the global economic
challenges well. Two underperforming investments are being monitored closely. IFC’s ability
to advise Government agencies on structuring and tendering projects and to fund infrastructure is
constrained by limitations in the rules and competitive bidding process currently in place.
D.

Principles and Rules of Engagement

52.
Reflecting on the dialogue with the Government counterparts, consultations with
stakeholders, and the CAS FY09-12 Completion Report, the World Bank Group has
agreed on several principles and rules of engagement to guide the new CPS.
53.
Focus will be placed on the middle income country agenda. For many years, Sri
Lanka has served as an international role model in terms of access to basic services. As Sri
Lanka moves into middle income country status, a new set of issues has emerged. Such issues
include the fiscal and social impacts of the demographic transition, the Government’s role as
facilitator/regulator of the private sector as well as direct provider of services, and alignment of
roles and resources of provincial and local authorities. Building on the World Bank’s
15

comparative advantage in analytical work and as an institution working in a wide range of
middle income countries, the World Bank will increase its efforts to identify the various options
taken by other countries in the transition, to connect Sri Lankan practitioners with their
counterparts from other countries.
54.
The 2011 World Development Report (WDR) on Conflict, Security and
Development provides valuable insights and lessons for this CPS. Sri Lanka emerged from
26 years of conflict in 2009; however it is important to note that it is not a standard post-conflict,
fragile country that experienced a substantial breakdown in institutions. Even during the
conflict, the public sector continued to function, providing increasingly better services, fostered
substantial economic growth and the poverty conditions improved. Nevertheless, many of the
principles of engagement proposed by the WDR are relevant for Sri Lanka: enhancing political
and economic inclusion, delivering early results to build public trust and confidence, focusing on
social accountability tools, applying community-driven approaches, and strengthening
institutions in a phased approach. This CPS, as well as the past CAS, encompasses these
principles. For example, under the last CAS and continuing during this CPS, the World Bank
has supported the Government's rapid effort to resettle families dislocated by the conflict. This
resettlement has helped build confidence in Sri Lanka going forward. On-going projects in the
portfolio will continue to support building livelihoods and social capital among the resettled
communities through a CDM approach. The CPS addresses social accountability through
support to Parliamentary oversight committees, works with and strengthens all tiers of
Government, and emphasizes broadly shared benefits of growth.
55.
The CPS is designed to be flexible. The present document includes an indicative
pipeline, which will be modified and supplemented during the CPS period. The World Bank
Group will use the CPS Progress Report to review alignment of the project /AAA portfolio with
evolving country needs and Government priorities and to modify program accordingly.
56.
Increased attention will be paid to results in all sectors. Building on successful
approaches in the education and health sectors, the World Bank will move toward increasing
emphasis on results in all sectors. AAA will be used to identify the driving forces and key
constraints to inform projects design. Results will also be emphasized in the formation of teams:
it is anticipated that teams will increasingly need to include staff from more than one sector, and
often including both the World Bank and IFC. Recognizing the difficulties inherent in this work,
the Country Management Unit will play an active role in defining tasks around results and
providing appropriate incentives and accountability.
57.
The Government systems will be used whenever possible and strengthened. Over the
upcoming CPS period, increased use of country systems is expected as capacity is built in line
ministries and provincial and local governments. Where separate the World Bank systems need
to be maintained, efforts will be made to reconcile the systems and build capacity. In financial
management, the World Bank will agree with the Government on steps to increase the use of
country financial management systems during the CPS period. Support to the strengthening of
public audit to enhance the scope and coverage of public audits and to strengthen value added
audit services will continue. Re-engaging in activities to strengthen Parliamentary oversight of
public funds is also expected during the CPS period. In procurement, the recent portfolio review
16

and procurement assessment have identified scope for improvement. During the CPS period,
fiduciary reviews will be conducted with an emphasis on improving the capacity to implement
procurement in accordance with the national procurement legislation. The World Bank is also
working toward mainstreaming project implementation in existing agencies, and move away
from stand-alone Project Management Units, consistent with Government’s Management
Circular 33. For example, in the recently approved Metro Colombo Urban Development Project,
while a stand-alone Project Management Unit has been established, its mandate is limited to
fiduciary issues and it is comprised of civil service staff temporarily released from their normal
duties and paid salaries based on a regulated scale.
58.
The pipeline will focus on a small number of large projects. Given that the
Government is engaged in a major effort to modernize infrastructure and institutions, human
capacity in Government agencies is being stretched by high transaction costs. Similarly, World
Bank resources for both analytical work and lending will be stretched given the flat budget
environment to support increasing lending. Under this CPS, lending will be through few, larger
operations. This allows efficiency in delivery and focus on identified priorities of the
Government.
59.
Lending activities and dialogue will involve all relevant tiers of Government. This
approach builds on the successes of the previous CAS in supporting capacity building at local,
provincial and central levels in projects including North and East Local Services Improvement,
Higher Education for the Twenty First Century, Provincial Roads, and the Health Sector
Development Project.
60.
Safeguards provide opportunities to support the Mahinda Chintana vision. For
example, the World Bank will seek opportunities for projects to actively contribute to the
Mahinda Chintana goal “to promote sustainable development in close liaison with the land, fauna
and flora and to bestow our natural heritage to our future generation.” This approach will
include efforts to maximize the environmental benefits of projects and to protect investments
through integrated disaster risk management. Similar efforts will be made on other safeguards as
well.
61.
Analytical and advisory activities will be used strategically to support the CPS areas
of focus. All potential AAAs will have clearly defined purpose and audience. AAA will be used
to inform planned lending activities, to support dialogue in key policy areas where no lending
activities have been planned and to fill gaps in the World Bank Group’s own knowledge, and
due diligence.
62.
Increased attention will be paid to communication. In addition to requesting the
World Bank to provide more analytical work, respondents in the Stakeholder Surveys requested
the World Bank to play a more visible and active role in broad knowledge dissemination and
stimulating public debate on development issues. Going forward, consistent with the Access to
Information Policy, the World Bank will increase the attention paid to dissemination of the
messages of analytical work to a wide audience including Government counterparts, Parliament,
think tanks and others. Increased attention will also be paid to communication with the media.

17

Greater emphasis will be placed on translating materials into Sinhala and Tamil and
communicating with the Sinhala and Tamil media. (See Annex 17 on communication.)
E.

Country Partnership Strategy Areas of Focus

63.
This Country Partnership Strategy provides support to address the challenges for
achieving the three main goals of the Government’s Mahinda Chintana Vision for the
Future. For each of the three central goals of the Government’s vision, the CPS lays out
the key areas of engagement in which the World Bank Group support can most effectively
address the challenges identified in the Section II of this document. In particular, the CPS
focuses on specific topics of the World Bank comparative advantage, with an emphasis on the
middle income country agenda, the role of the private sector, and institutional and policy issues,
and ensuring broadly shared benefits of growth. The CPS is organized as follows:
Area 1: Facilitating sustained private and public investment
A: Improving the investment climate
B: Increasing fiscal space and the efficiency of public spending
Area 2: Supporting structural shifts in the economy
A: Supporting the shift to a knowledge-based economy
B: Boosting international integration and competitiveness
C: Supporting the internal integration of the economy
Area 3: Improving living standards and social inclusion
A: Increasing quality of services
B: Reducing the prevalence of malnutrition
C: Expanding social inclusion and equitable access
64.
IFC’s focus areas during FY 13-16 will be fully aligned with the CPS and will be
consistent with IFC’s Regional Strategy in South Asia, which emphasizes: i) Inclusive
Growth; ii) Climate Change; and iii) Regional/Global Integration. While all of the three
pillars support Area 1 of this CPS, the inclusive growth emphasis focuses on making an impact
on the base of the pyramid, low income households through access to finance, infrastructure,
social services and markets. This focus especially supports the outcomes set in the Areas 2 and 3
of the CPS described. The climate change emphasis supports renewable energy (hydro, solar,
biomass, and wind), energy efficiency, and agricultural and irrigation efficiency activities, which
are expected to result in reduced carbon footprints. This focus is aligned with Area 2. Finally, to
promote integration, IFC supports South-South investments, knowledge transfer, improvements
in the investment climate, and trade and logistics. This focus is in line with Areas 1 and 2 of the
CPS.
Area 1: Facilitating sustained private and public investment
65.
The first CPS area, facilitating sustained private and public investment, provides
support to the Mahinda Chintana goal of doubling per capita income through sustained

18

growth. The main challenges to achieving this goal relate to increasing private investment and
making public investment sustainable.
Area 1A: Improving the investment climate
66.
The World Bank Group will support the Government’s efforts to improving the
investment climate.45 The Government has requested financial assistance to support regulatory
aspects of investment climate reforms. Potential areas for engagement include improving the
business environment, enhancing investor confidence, and business-related legal and judicial
reforms. The requested assistance is likely to include a multi-sector Development Policy Loan
and an Investment Loan supporting the legal and judicial sector.
67.
An enterprise perception survey of Sri Lankan firms was conducted in 2011 to
gauge the constraints hindering the performance of firms. The findings of the survey
revealed that the major constraints encountered by firms are access to finance, informal practices
by firms, electricity and tax rates. The World Bank Group will continue to provide support to
the Doing Business Committee (convened by the Central Bank and chaired by the Minister of
Economic Development) as it facilitates the implementation of priority reforms. In particular,
trust fund resources will be sought to connect relevant agencies to their counterparts in countries
that have worked on similar reforms through a South-South Knowledge Exchange and other
mechanisms. Trust fund resources will also be sought to provide support to development of the
capital market for financial sector deepening and improving access. Ongoing projects include
the Small and Medium Enterprise Development Facility (improving access to finance for Small
and Medium Enterprises affected by the global financial crisis), the Sustainable Tourism Project
(supporting environmentally and socially sound investments in tourism) and the Warehouse
Receipts Trust Fund (providing farmers with access to storage and collateral needed for access to
finance).
68.
The World Bank will continue its support to the increased adoption of International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and International Audit Standards in the private
sector. Well defined standards and practices in Financial Reporting and Auditing in enhancing
the quality of corporate governance and ability of the country to attract foreign investments will
be critical. Following up on the recommendations of the Report on the Observation of Standards
and Codes for Accounting and Auditing (ROSC A&A) diagnostic carried out by the World Bank
(2004), support is being provided to the Institute of Chartered Accountants Sri Lanka through an
Institutional Development Fund grant for enabling the adoption of International Financial
Reporting Standards to small and medium enterprises and State Owned Enterprises as well as for
improving the quality of audit practices. Support will be provided to oversight institutions like
the Sri Lanka Accounting and Auditing Standards Monitoring Board that will help to improve
the transparency and accountability in the private sector. Considering the changes and
improvements that have happened internally and externally since the last ROSC A&A Report for
Sri Lanka; an update of the diagnostic is planned to facilitate targeted support to emerging areas
relating to the strengthening of corporate governance and financial management in the private
sector.
45

Improvements in the investment climate will not only help increase total investment but also encourage foreign direct
investment – a key source for global knowledge and technology.

19

69.
Through its investment and advisory products, IFC will seek to promote private
sector investment and work with the World Bank and the Government on the related
agenda. To help Sri Lanka maintain strong economic outlook despite expected slow growth in
the global economy in at least the initial part of the CPS period, it is critical to improve the
investment climate by facilitating Government efforts on the comprehensive framework and fair
rules to enable increased participation by the private sector. Complementing the World Bank’s
support for legal and judicial reform, IFC plans to support the supply side by promoting
transparency in the private sector and helping to clarify the private sector’s role, which can
increase investor comfort level. In addition to supporting Doing Business, IFC will look for
opportunities to improve regulations that constrain the financial sector, tourism and agribusiness.
IFC will also seek to catalyze investments through directly investing in important projects in key
economic sectors including the financial sector, tourism, agribusiness and infrastructure. IFC’s
advisory program will expand its support for firm level capacity building in priority sectors.
Capacity building in the financial sector will facilitate increased access to financial services for
micro, small and medium enterprises as well as promoting low carbon growth. In the tourism
and agribusiness sectors, IFC will also combine investment and a range of advisory activities –
promoting sustainable practices, supply chain strengthening, particularly for small and medium
enterprises, and regulatory improvement. To promote competitive and sustainable business
practices, all IFC investments will provide assessment and advice on environmental and social
standards and require IFC’s Performance Standard to be met. IFC also provides a corporate
governance analysis of clients as a part of a new investment due diligence and will explore
possibilities of providing more programmatic corporate governance assistance.
Area 1B: Increasing fiscal space and the efficiency of public spending
70.
The World Bank will support the Government’s efforts to maintain the high levels
of public investment in a sustainable manner. As a first step, the World Bank will provide
analytical support in the form of a Public Expenditure Review (PER), which will examine budget
allocations across sectors, contingent liability issues related to State Owned Enterprises, the
extent to which revenue policies are achieving their objectives, and a Public Expenditure and
Financial Accountability report (PEFA) that will examine the performance of budget formulation
and execution process and which will benchmark Sri Lanka against other middle income
countries. AAA will also be provided to outline alternative financing arrangements for public
infrastructure and services (including Public Private Partnerships) and the pros and cons of the
various options. An existing activity, “Building Media and Civil Society Capacity for Budget
Transparency” is supported by the Social Development Civil Society Trust Fund. A proposed
Development Policy Loan is expected to include aspects of public financial management,
building on the engagement begun during the CAS FY09-12 and including increasing efficiency
of public spending in line ministries and State Owned Enterprises, as well as aspects of the
investment climate (as described in paragraph69).
71.
Following up the public private partnership workshop organized by the World
Bank Group in December 2010, IFC is prepared to continue to collaborate with the World
Bank and Government partners to further develop a competitive Public Private
Partnership framework in Sri Lanka. This would include supporting the Government in
20

structuring specific PPP projects and bidding these on a transparent, competitive basis in line
with international best practice. This would help free up public sector resources and ensure that
Sri Lanka benefits from private sector efficiency and cutting-edge practices.

Area 2: Supporting structural shifts in the economy

72.
The second CPS area supports the Mahinda Chintana goal of shifting the economy
to be more knowledge-based, globally integrated and competitive, internally integrated,
increasingly urban and environmentally friendly.
Area 2A: Supporting the shift to a knowledge-based economy
73.
The World Bank will support the Government’s efforts to shift toward a knowledgebased economy.46 In addition to the ongoing lending activities on Higher Education for the
Twenty First Century, the E-Sri Lanka project, and the Trust Fund for Information and
Communications Technology Regulatory Capacity Building, two additional lending activities
have been requested. The proposed skills development project aims to enhance the relevance of
training programs for the needs of the labor market. AAA task on skills development and another
specifically examining skills training for women are ongoing and will support preparation of this
project. The proposed innovation and research project aims to encourage private sector
innovation and technology adoption. AAA on middle income approaches to innovation and
technology adoption will be conducted in advance of project design. IFC seeks to continue to
provide support in this area through capacity building for financial institutions and skills training
in partnership with companies to strengthen the performance of SMEs. IFC will continue to
introduce innovative products to improve funding flows to Sri Lanka, such as a diversifiedpayments loan committed in FY12. These products can help lower the cost of financing for
financial institutions and their customers, thus boosting competitiveness.
Area 2B: Boosting international integration and competitiveness
74.
The World Bank Group will support Sri Lanka’s international integration and
competitiveness through AAA activities. These activities include an analysis of policy options
for improving the trade balance and an analysis of Sri Lanka’s potential to become an
international hub for naval, aviation and commercial services. IFC will seek opportunities to
support South-South investments into and from Sri Lanka and help catalyze foreign investments.
Area 2C: Supporting the internal integration of the economy
75.
The World Bank Group will support the Government’s efforts to enhance Sri
Lanka’s urban areas and support internal integration. A proposed project would provide a
package of investments which would support economic connectivity and provide infrastructure
services appropriate for rapidly growing secondary cities. Analytical work to better understand
46

Sustained long term growth will require increases in productivity as well as increased investment. Education is important not
only for direct increases in productivity but also as a prerequisite for innovation and technology adoption.

21

economic drivers and connectivity with the national economy will be conducted to help inform
project design. In addition, IFC is currently preparing an economic development project to be
funded by the European Union, complementing the World Bank’s support for in-country
integration. The project, also supporting Area 3, is designed to focus on four conflict affected
districts of Mannar and Vavuniya in the north and Batticaloa and Ampara in the east, improving
the business environment, local employment and micro and small enterprise development.
76.
The Mahinda Chintana advocates for an environmentally friendly economy. The
World Bank will continue to engage in this area, seeking opportunities to support the mutually
reinforcing aspects of economic growth and environmental sustainability as well as ensuring
compliance to environment-related safeguards. Although no new financial assistance has been
requested, the World Bank would be prepared to provide financial support if needed in this
sector. The ongoing AAA on Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Management looks to strengthen Sri
Lanka’s early warning system and the capacity of Government to assess risks, integrate disaster
risk reduction into the planning process and prepare post-disaster assessments. The World Bank
will continue to strengthen the institutional framework for environmental and socially sound
investments especially in the East, including training eco-tourism guides and matching grants for
reduction in carbon emissions. Building on its sustainable energy risk sharing facilities and
direct financing for wind power generation, IFC will support projects that address climate change
issues, such as renewable energy, cleaner production and energy efficiency.

Area 3: Improved living standards and social inclusion
77.
The third CPS area is to support the Mahinda Chintana goal of improved living
standards and social inclusion and equitable access.
Area 3A: Increasing quality of services
78.
The World Bank will support increasing the quality of services. A national health
sector program, currently under preparation, will improve the quality of services provided
throughout the country and modernize the Government managed health system. The loan will
specifically address the health care quality improvements required to address non-communicable
diseases and will support modernizing the health system. The loan will be complemented by
already ongoing AAA on the role of the private sector in health care in Sri Lanka and the
recently concluded AAA on chronic and non-communicable diseases. The program is expected
to be presented to the Board in FY13 and have disbursements linked to key results. In addition,
the Government has requested financial support for the transportation sector and for urban
infrastructure (including water systems and solid waste management). Analytical work on
options for internal transport is ongoing. Early childhood education will be assessed and
reviewed through AAA in preparation for a lending operation. Ongoing activities include support
to education and transportation and improved local service delivery in the conflict-affected North
and East.

22

Area 3B: Reducing the prevalence of malnutrition
79.
The World Bank will aim to support reducing the prevalence of malnutrition, a key
human development area in which Sri Lanka lags behind its peers. In addition to the
nutrition component of the health program, new multi-sector AAA work will be carried out and
will build on existing analysis to identify policies for addressing malnutrition, including links to
water supply and hygiene. Further engagement in the form of technical assistance or lending
may be developed based on the analysis. In the meantime, the trust fund activity “Local Level
Nutritional Intervention for the Northern Province” fosters changes to improve nutrition
outcomes in resettled populations of the Northern Province.47
Area 3C: Expanding social inclusion and equitable access
80.
Support for equitable access to public services and social inclusion includes
activities specifically focused on conflict-affected areas as well as activities which address
these issues at the national level. Activities focused on conflict-affected areas include; the
Community Livelihoods in Conflict Affected Areas project, the Emergency Northern Recovery
project, and the trust fund supported North and East Pilot Water, Sanitation and Hygiene project
for post conflict resettlements. As the focus shifts from post-conflict reconstruction to an
emphasis on equitable access and social inclusion across the entire country, new activities will
seek to analyze and address inequities using a more systemic and sustainable approach.
Activities which address equitable access and social inclusion at a national level include: (i) the
Second Community Development project; (ii) a Poverty and Inequality Assessment; (iii) a trust
fund on economic integration of vulnerable groups; (iv) a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis on
the potential effects of various policy options on employment of women; (v) technical assistance
to the Ministry of Labor on their gender strategy; (vi) technical assistance on the Government’s
social protection strategy and Samurdhi program; (vii) vocational training for the disabled; (viii)
pilot approaches to sustainable, affordable sanitation services to under-served low-income
groups; and (ix) work with youth organizations to support their involvement in development
issues.
81.
IFC will seek to help improve living standards and social inclusion especially
through support for access to finance, infrastructure, agribusiness and farmers
(particularly in post-conflict northern and eastern regions), and micro, small and medium
enterprises. Mindful of the post-conflict and transition state of the country, IFC has been
increasingly supporting some of these areas in Sri Lanka in recent years and will build on those
experiences to enhance the reach and impact for inclusive growth. For example, microfinance
projects have been promoting women’s financial inclusion and an agri-business advisory project,
supported by a multi-donor Global Index Insurance Facility, is building on pilots in other
developing countries and helping create a weather-index based crop insurance to support
farmers. The new economic development initiative mentioned in paragraph 76 is also expected
to contribute to social inclusion. Geographically, IFC will seek to support regions outside of
generally more affluent Western and Southern Provinces.

47

This activity is supported by the Japan Social Development Fund.

23

F.

Implementing the Country Partnership Strategy
i. Financing Parameters

82.
Sri Lanka became an IDA-IBRD blend country as of FY12, eligible for IDA16
resources and IBRD lending. This marks Sri Lanka’s re-access to IBRD resources for the first
time since blend status was lost in 1986. An indicative lending program for IDA and IBRD
combined for the first two years of the CPS is US$500 million in FY13 and US$527 in FY14.
Sri Lanka’s eligibility for IDA will likely end at the end of the IDA16 cycle. The Government is
interested in IBRD lending of up to US$500 million annually during FY15 and FY16, which
would, however, depend on the macroeconomic environment in Sri Lanka, overall demand for
IBRD resources from other clients, IBRD financial capacity and global economic developments.
It is foreseen that IBRD financing will be used primarily for investment projects supporting
regional economic development, urban infrastructure, encouraging innovation and technology
adoption, and improving the skills of the labor force. Lending plans will be reviewed at the time
of the CPS Progress Report.
83.
Assuming growth prospects remain strong and macroeconomic balances and overall
creditworthiness continue to improve, it is expected that IDA resources will be phased out
during the CPS period through a managed transition to IBRD-only status. The indicative
country envelope for IDA16, covering FY12-14, is SDR 458.1 million (about US$ 688
million).48 This represents an increase of about 30 percent over its IDA 15 envelope, mainly due
to increased IDA resources in the IDA 16 replenishment as well as improvements in Sri Lanka’s
country performance.49 In FY12, the first year of IDA16 which preceded this CPS period, the
IDA allocation amounted to SDR 162 million (about US$ 249.8 million).50 The same year saw
the introduction of IBRD financing for the Metro Colombo Urban Development Project. Given
that Sri Lanka has obtained access to IBRD resources, and its per capita income has exceeded the
IDA income cutoff for more than three consecutive years,51 the country is expected to graduate
from IDA through a managed transition as IBRD resources are phased in. During the transition
to the IBRD-only status, IDA resources would continue to play on important role to support
governance reforms and to address the critical needs in the social sectors. In addition, the World
Bank could work with the authorities to explore the additional flexibility for more front/backloading of IDA resources across the years in FY12-14 to help ensure a stable level of overall
financing. Box 1, below, summarizes the ongoing and proposed IDA and IBRD portfolio.

48

IDA envelope beyond the first year of the IDA16 period is indicative and could change depending on: (i) total IDA resources
available, (ii) the country’s performance rating, (iii) the number of IDA eligible countries, and (iv) the performance and
assistance terms of other IDA-eligible countries. Also, IDA allocations are provided in SDRs, and the US dollar equivalent
amount for IDA 16 is based on replenishment rate of 1SDR=US$1.50233, but the exchange rate for each IDA operation depends
on the applicable prevailing rate at the time of approval. Furthermore, about 97 percent of the IDA resource is available as IDA
credits on blend terms, while the remaining 3 percent is available on hard terms that can only be accessed by blend countries but
has lower concessionality.
49
IDA resources are allocated through a performance based allocation system that provides higher allocations to countries with
better performances in delivering results at the same income level, other things equal.
50
The actual commitment of IDA resources in FY12 was US$ 111, with the expectation that the unused FY12 allocation would
be committed in FY13.
51
The GNI per capita of Sri Lanka has exceeded the IDA operational income cutoff since 2004 but the country did not become
credit-worthy for IBRD lending until 2011. In FY12, the corresponding IDA cutoff is a 2010 GNI per capita of US$ 1,175 while
the figure for Sri Lanka is US$ 2,290.

24

Box 1: Summary of Ongoing and Proposed IDA and IBRD Portfolio
Ongoing
Dam Safety and Water Resources Planning (FY08)
Public Sector Capacity Building (FY08)
Sustainable Tourism Development (FY10)
Higher Education for the Twenty First Century (FY10)
Provincial Roads (FY10)
North East Local Services Improvement (FY10)
Emergency Northern Recovery (FY10)
Second Community Development and Livelihood Improvement (Gemi Diriya) (FY10)
Small and Medium Enterprise Development Facility (FY11)
Community Livelihoods in Conflict Affected Areas (Reawakening) (FY11)
Road Sector Assistance (FY11)
Transforming the School Education System as a Foundation of a Knowledge Hub (FY12)
E-Sri Lanka (FY12)
Metro Colombo Urban Development (FY12)
Indicative FY13 and FY14 lending
Second Health Sector Development (FY13, $200 million IDA)
Regional Growth Pole/Economic Development (FY13, $50 million IDA and $250 million
IBRD)
Skills Development (FY14, $100 million IBRD)
Urban Infrastructure/Transport (FY14, $227 million IDA, $100 million IBRD)
Investment Policy Reform (FY14, $100 million IDA)
Tentative FY15 and FY16 lending
Private Innovation and Technology Adoption (FY15)
Legal and Judicial Reform (FY15)
Water and Sanitation (FY15)
Solid Waste Management (FY16)
Early Childhood Education (FY16)
Note: FY13 and FY14 total IDA lending is expected to be $577 million. FY13 and FY14 total
IBRD lending is expected to be $450 million.

ii. Instruments
84.
In order to address the shift in focus toward support for the evolving middle income
country agenda, the range of instruments will expand. As there is increasing demand from
Government for information on how other countries have addressed the transition to middle
income country status, the demand for AAA has increased. Also, with an increasing need for
policy actions (in addition to investments in hardware), the demand for policy lending has
increased as well. And, as institutional capacity to focus on results increases, the demand for
results-linked disbursements has increased. It is therefore anticipated that a wider range of
instruments will be used,52 including Development Policy Loans and Program-for-Results
52

A delegation from the Government of Sri Lanka visited the World Bank Group in Washington in July 2011 and met with the
World Bank Treasury Department, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency and representatives of other parts of the World
Bank Group. In addition, staff of the Treasury Department of the World Bank conducted a workshop in Colombo to familiarize
Government counterparts with IBRD.

25

financing, with the appropriate instrument for each specific project to be determined during
project preparation.
The new CPS aims to better coordinate and integrate Trust Funds in the portfolio,
in line with the World Bank’s policy to modernize Trust Funds through operational
simplification and strategic alignment. This would include: (i) aligning Trust Fund
management to the way the World Bank products are defined, managed and reported; (ii) using
the same control and quality assurance framework for trust funds that are used for IBRD and
IDA resources; (iii) using a strengthened approach to better define the results and risk
management of Trust Funds. More specifically, going forward we aim to not only include Trust
Funds in the CPS, but also to: (i) integrate Trust Funds into the results framework of the CPS by
tracking results in the CPS from all funding sources; (ii) include Trust Funds in the portfolio
reviews in order to examine alignment with the CPS; and (iii) track similar portfolio indicators
for Trust Funds, such as riskiness, disbursements and performance. New Trust Fund tasks will
be carefully selected to focus only on key strategic goals and not to overload the Government
and the task teams.
85.

86.
IFC intends to continue to actively provide both investment and advisory services.
Over the coming CPS period, IFC will design programmatic solutions instead of individual
products and one-off projects.
iii. Monitoring and Evaluation
87.
Monitoring and evaluation will be especially important given the CPS’s flexibility
and the shift in focus toward the middle income country agenda. Strategic reviews will be
held annually to monitor CPS implementation and ensure continued alignment of the CPS with
the evolving country needs. A CASPR will be prepared in FY14 at which time any necessary
revisions including the results matrix will be discussed.
88.
Pilot use of third party monitoring will be evaluated and scaled up if found useful.
Currently, third party monitoring is being conducted for the Road Sector Assistance Project53 to
involve users and stakeholders in the monitoring process and to strengthen the capacity of the
Road Development Authority to make benefit monitoring an integral part of road sector. Over
the coming CPS period, the World Bank hopes to expand the existing pilot to other projects. As
part of the planned engagement with youth, it is hoped that the youth networks will take an
active role in monitoring the impact of the CPS as a whole with particular emphasis on activities
that are of direct relevance to youth.
iv. Complementarities with Activities of Other Development Partners
89.
The development partner landscape in Sri Lanka continues to evolve. While the
World Bank has traditionally been one of the ‘big three’ development partners in Sri Lanka,
together with Japan and the Asian Development Bank, China and India have emerged as the
largest contributors, primarily through export credits. With Sri Lanka’s transition to MIC status,
53

The ongoing pilot is being conducted with support from the Demand for Good Governance window of the Social Development
Civil Society Trust Fund.

26

the Government has broadened its options for foreign financing for public investment, through a
blend of concessional and non-concessional external assistance. Capital market financing is also
increasingly being tapped with issuance of long-term sovereign bonds. Sri Lanka continues to
benefit from a number of grants from multilateral and bilateral development partners.
Development partners’ respective areas of support are highlighted in Annex 11.
90.
In line with the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, both development partners
and the Government have strengthened efforts to coordinate and harmonize foreign
assistance. Among the mechanisms in place in this regard are: (i) the Development Partners
Forum; (ii) the Development Partners Committee supported by a Secretariat and sector-based
working groups.
91.
Development Partners Forum. The Development Partners Forum is a broad
information-sharing and coordination mechanism, in which Development Partners share
respective assistance strategies, programs and new initiatives. The World Bank is one of the six
foreign aid missions that form the Development Partner Committee, mandated by the larger
Development Partners Forum to manage the interaction with the Government on behalf of the
development partners. The Development Partner Committee comprises of three multilateral World Bank, UN Resident Coordinator, Asian Development Bank, and three bilateral missions
selected on an annual basis by the Bilateral Donor Group.54 The Chair of the Development
Partners Forum also chairs the Development Partners Committee.
92.
During the CPS period the World Bank Group will continue to be an active member
of the development partner community, coordinating with relevant working groups and
reaching out to new development partners. IFC is a member of the Development Partner
Forum Private Sector Development working group, chaired by USAID.
IV. RISKS AND RISK MANAGEMENT
93.
This CPS includes a careful assessment of key risks in the program, and steps to
manage such risk. The World Bank Group program in Sri Lanka faces two types of risks in
implementation of the Country Partnership Strategy. The first set of risks is related to the
implementation environment and is reflective of Sri Lanka’s specific development challenges.
The second set of risks is related to the design of the program itself.
A. Risks Related to the Implementation Environment
94.
External shocks could impact the macroeconomic framework. The main external risk
is that key trading partners, lenders and financers would be unable to sustain expected levels of
engagement. Sri Lanka is vulnerable to Euro area debt problems and weakening growth in
several large emerging economies. Sri Lanka relies heavily on European demand for its
merchandise exports as well as service exports.55 A deepening of the Euro Area crisis would

54
For 2012, the three bilateral Development Partners on the Committee are AusAID, Japan International Cooperation Agency
and USAID.
55
Thirty five percent of goods exports go to Europe and 37 percent of tourist arrivals come from Europe.

27

lead to weaker exports and capital flows.56 Sri Lanka is also vulnerable to disruption in imports
of petroleum products, most of which come from Iran. The risk of reduced demand for exports
can be mitigated by increased focus of trade with growing economies of East and South Asia.
95.
There are also macroeconomic risks originating from within Sri Lanka. Increased
international competitiveness leading to a reduced trade deficit is essential for macroeconomic
stability. Without an increase in exports, remittances or FDI, Sri Lanka will be unable to finance
the investment and intermediate imports required for growth. To that end, an exchange rate that
is both market-driven and reasonably stable will be essential. To the extent the exchange rate
volatility witnessed in February and March 2012 (when the Central Bank curtailed its
intervention) reflects a short-lived process of finding equilibrium following the Central Bank’s
reduced intervention, it is a positive sign, though one that requires close monitoring.
96.
Expenditure pressures may slow down the progress on reducing the fiscal deficit.
Continued efforts will also be required to ensure progress in reducing the fiscal deficit and debt.
Strong effort on tax administration can mitigate the risk of slower than anticipated progress on
fiscal deficits. Analysis of State Owned Enterprises (including that being performed by the
World Bank) will help identify the extent of risk associated with contingent liabilities. Although
Sri Lanka’s cost of borrowing has declined thanks to improvements in the sovereign credit
ratings, costs could increase if there are problems in the international financial markets or if Sri
Lanka’s credit ratings are not maintained. Investment and productivity increases are essential for
the achievement of sustained growth. Both rely heavily on further improvements in the
investment climate and predictability of the policy environment. Lapses on either issue would
result in lower than expected growth. Inflation is expected to remain low over the CPS period.
This scenario is subject to risk, however, if the economy were to overheat. Finally, rapid credit
growth achieved in the past year could be a foreshadowing of an increase in non-performing
loans and potentially serious issues in the financial sector, ultimately raising the risks of high
contingent fiscal liabilities. The Government is a significant stakeholder in a number of private
commercial banks. There is a risk that the Government’s ownership and position on the Board
of Directors may influence the decisions of the banks’ management for non-commercial
purposes.
97.
Macroeconomic risks will be monitored throughout the CPS period. The World
Bank produces monthly and semi-annual macroeconomic monitoring notes, and has initiated an
analysis of potential impacts of a Eurozone crisis. In addition, the CPS program includes a
growth analysis report, a fiscal issues note, a Public Expenditure Review/ PEFA, analysis of the
judicial system, as well as dialogue on public financial management and investment climate
reforms. All of these activities will be shared with Government in an effort to agree on a set of
measures to mitigate the associated macroeconomic risks.

56

Since mid-2009 significant investment flows from Europe has found its way into assets in the country particularly through
successive GoSL Eurobond issues, investments into the Colombo Bourse and investments into GoSL treasury bills and treasury
bonds. The recent Global Economic Prospects report estimates exposure to Sri Lankan assets by European banks at close to 10
percent of country’s GDP or US$ 5.5 billion. This presents a significant vulnerability in face of a sudden withdrawal of
investments as the exposure amounts to near entirety of country’s gross official reserves as of end 2011. However, such risks are
mitigated by the fact the much of these investments are medium to long term in nature. The spreads on Sri Lanka Eurobonds in
secondary markets trading has been rising since end 2011. The current spreads of 461 basis points is the highest in 20 months.

28

98.
Continued efforts will also be required to ensure social inclusiveness and political
openness as well as economic integration of conflict affected areas and to make sure that
the benefits of growth are widely and equitably shared. A process for implementation of
recommendations of the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation Commission will be important.
The World Bank Group is providing support including ongoing projects to help internally
displaced persons resettle and reestablish livelihoods. Analytical work on inclusive growth,
labor and poverty will also support dialogue and actions in these areas.
99.
Sri Lanka is vulnerable to natural disasters and extreme weather events, including
floods, droughts, and cyclones. In addition to the immediate impact of destroyed assets, natural
disasters and extreme weather events can affect economic growth by diverting the development
funds for emergency response, relief and recovery efforts and by affecting the income generating
activities of the population. The CPS program includes a trust funded activity, “Strengthening
the Disaster Management System and Mainstreaming Climate Change Mitigation in Urban
Development”, which supports the Government of Sri Lanka’s efforts to address these risks.
B. Risks Related to the Program
100. The World Bank’s portfolio faces risks related to governance, procurement and
financial management. Recent assessments on these topics concluded that Sri Lanka has made
efforts toward reforming and developing its systems, while suggesting areas for further
modernization. Portfolio related governance risks will be addressed through project and sector
specific mitigation measures, including through Governance, Accountability and AntiCorruption Action Plans (GAAP). The proposed AAA to improve SOEs management and
effectiveness, the DPL to improve the overall investment climate, as well as the proposed
Judicial Reform Project to support legal and regulatory reforms will also contribute to enhancing
the dialogue on governance related issues. Fiduciary risks will be mitigated by continued support
to the Auditor General Department for enhancing the scope and coverage of public audits as well
as to strengthen value added audit services, and support to the Institute of Chartered Accountants
of Sri Lanka for enabling the adoption of IFRS to State Owned Enterprises and small and
medium enterprises, as well as for improving the quality of audit practices. In addition, the
World Bank expects to build on support provided during the FY09-12 CAS to the Parliamentary
committees for budget oversight to strengthen their oversight functions. In addition, fiduciary
assessments will be performed at a sector level in advance of any proposed Program-For-Results
operation.
101. Program implementation also faces risks related to Government capacity to manage
the increased volume of lending. Although Government agencies have skilled professional
staff, the massive public investment program will put strains on staff. The risk that capacity
within Government will be insufficient, given the increased level of engagement in addition to
the Government’s existing investment program, is mitigated by the World Bank minimizing
transaction costs by moving toward use of country systems for financial management, and
proactively restructuring projects. A related risk is that Government priorities may change over
the course of the CPS period. This risk will be minimized by taking a flexible approach, with the
CPS used to set the broad direction for engagement in line with the Government’s own strategy

29

and to identify the program for the first two and a half years. The CPS Progress Report will
provide opportunities to realign and modify the program accordingly.
102. In addition to the risks above, there are two sets of key risks faced by IFC. The first
is a program risk due primarily to IFC’s catalytic role that appropriate partners may not be found
for the planned initiatives. This risk should be mitigated by lessons learned from IFC’s past
experience in Sri Lanka and its growing network of partners. The second is the risk from the
expected increased weighting to the financial sector in IFC's investment portfolio, which will be
above 50 percent for much of the CPS period. Sri Lanka has a relatively sound banking system
overall, and the exposure is therefore not an immediate concern. However, IFC will actively
seek to build a diversified portfolio, will diversify within the financial sector across different
types of financial institutions, and, through advisory services, will strengthen its portfolio
financial institutions, where necessary.

30

ANNEXES
Annex 1: Results Matrix
NOTE: Consistent with the flexible approach of the Country Partnership Strategy,
outcomes and indicators will be further refined and clarified at the time of the Progress Report.

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)

World Bank Group Program

AREA OF ENGAGEMENT 1. PRIVATE AND PUBLIC INVESTMENT
1.1 Improving the investment
climate.
Government Goals and Indicators:

Increasing Foreign Direct
Investment.

Improving the investment
climate as measured in Doing
Business

Access to finance
(especially non-bank) is
inadequate; contract
enforcement is very
slow, procedures for
registering property and
obtaining construction
permits are
cumbersome.

Improved investment
environment as measured
by:

Microfinance
institutions have
difficulty attracting
deposits (to be used for
lending to
microenterprises) due
to lack of clear
regulation.

Time taken to obtain a
construction permit.
Baseline: 217 days
Target: 180 days

Time taken to register a
property.
Baseline: 83 days
Target: 50 days

Time taken to enforce a
contract.
Baseline: 1318 days (in 2012)
Target:300 days (in 2014)

Completion and
dissemination of
“Making Private
Investment Attractive”
study.
ROSC A&A Update
Baseline: not performed
Target: performed.
Twinning arrangements
established with relevant
agencies in Malaysia and
Thailand construction
permits process.
Baseline: 0
Target: 2

Improved access to finance
as measured by:
Volume of lending to SMEs
by the SMEDef Project

Increased number of
staff trained in SME

Ongoing lending

Warehouse Receipts Project
(Recipient-executed TF)

Small and Medium Enterprise
Development Facility project

IFC investment and advisory
services for NTB and NDB
commercial banks to support
SMEs/

IFC investment in LR Global
Private Equity Fund (which
provides financing for SMEs)
Planned lending

Investment Policy Reform
Operation

Legal and Judicial Reform

IFC’s possible investments in
the financial sector, tourism
agribusiness and infrastructure

IFC’s capacity building
support for two commercial
banks for SME finance.

IFC’s advisory support for

31

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)
through the 8 participating
banks.
Baseline: 0
Target:$28 million

1.2 Increasing fiscal space and
increased efficiency of public
spending.
Government Goals and Indicators:

Reducing the fiscal deficit to 5%
of GDP by 2013 and
maintaining it at that level
thereafter.

Reducing current expenditure as
a share of GDP.

There is immense scope
for efficiency gains in
public expenditure
management by
reducing waste and
improving
performance.
Public audit bill is
outdated. Government
has stated its intention

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)
lending in licensed
commercial/specialized
banks.
Baseline: 0
Target: 400 (through the
SMEDeF project).

World Bank Group Program

Secured Transaction Registry
and Payment System

Number of farmers accessing
credit from the Warehouse
Receipts Financing system.
Baseline: 0.
Target: 20,000.

Warehouses offering
receipts established and
operational.
Baseline: 0
Target:3

Enhanced accountability
and transparency in the use
of public funds as measured
by:

Auditor General’s
Department strengthened
as measured by:

Ongoing and Planned AAA/TF

Making private investment
attractive (ongoing)

South-South Knowledge
Exchange: Middle income
country experiences with
investment climate reforms
(initial focus on construction
permits)

Improving the non-bank
financial sector (e.g. capital
markets)

ICT Regulatory Capacity
Building (ongoing, TF)

Stregthening the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of Sri
Lanka (IDF TF)
Ongoing lending

Public Sector Capacity
Building Project

Technical staff trained
and using recommended
practices

Planned lending

Investment Policy Reform
Operation

Financial audits by Auditor
General Department in
compliance with International
Standard Supreme Audit
Institute framework

Baseline – 40% staff
trained

Ongoing and Planned AAA/TF

Resource allocation and
revenue generation for growth

32

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)




Increasing revenue as a share of
GDP.
Improved flow of budget
information including reliable
and timely information on
budgets and outcomes.

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

to have get a new audit
bill passed through
Parliament.
Restricted fiscal space
limits public
investment and broad
revenue efforts are
needed to increase
revenues.

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)
Baseline: 0 (2012)
Target: Auditor General
Department states in the
AGD’s annual report that all
audits (approx 1000 audits) are
in compliance with the ISSAI.

Increased value added services
provided by the Auditor
General’s Department
Performance audits reported to
Parliament
Baseline: 0
Target: At least 10 per year

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)

World Bank Group Program

Target – 100% staff



Resource allocation and
revenue generation for
growth (PER/PEFA)
studies completed and
disseminated.
Timely legislative
scrutiny of audit reports





(PER/PEFA)
Alternative financing for
public goods
Issues note on SOEs (ongoing)
Issues note on fiscal policy
(ongoing)
Strengthening the
Parliamentary budget
oversight committees (planned
TF)
Financial Management reports
on health and education
sectors. (ongoing)

Baseline: Committee on
Public Enterprises
(COPE) made its first
report to Parliament after
18 months; Committee
on Public Accounts
(COPA) did not report to
Parliament in its first 20
months
Target: Reports COPE
and COPA report to
Parliament at least
annually

33

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)

World Bank Group Program

AREA OF ENGAGEMENT 2. STRUCTURAL SHIFTS IN THE ECONOMY
2.1 Shifting the structure of the
economy to be more knowledgebased.




Knowledge based economy
defined as one that applies
global knowledge to all
economic activities as opposed
to select areas.

Skills and education
system not well aligned
with the needs of the
labor market leading to
a mismatch between the
skills of the labor force
and those required for a
knowledge-based
economy.

IT/ITES industry generates
US$1 billion per year by 2016.
Baseline: US$310 million in
2011.
Computer literacy.
Baseline: 35% of population
Target: 70% of population by
2016.

Current ICT work force
expected to increase to 186,000
in 2016 from 50,000 in 2010.



Increased computer literacy



Introduction of new demand
driven skills development
programmes that enhance
employability.

Progress made in aligning
skills with job market
demand as measured by:
Enrollment in job-oriented
Advanced Technological
Institutes.
Baseline: 8,500 (end of 2011)
Target: 12,500 (by 2015).

Higher education and
training programs need
to be incorporated
within a National
Qualification
Framework which
enables horizontal and

Quality of higher education
programs enhanced as
measured by:

Level indicators and
award types defined for
the higher education
sector.
Skills development
strategy articulated and
agreed upon by relevant
agencies

Ongoing lending

Higher Education for the
Twenty First Century Project

E- Sri Lanka Project

IFC investment and linkages
advisory for Dialog
telecommunications company

IFC investment in Suntel

Planned lending
Analytical tasks (listed at

Skills development project
right) completed and

Innovation and technology
disseminated.
adaption project
Beneficiaries of public
telecenters.
Baseline: 35,000 (2012)
Target: 40,000

Ongoing and Planned AAA/TF

Middle income country
approaches to encouraging
private sector innovation and
technology adoption

Skills development strategy
for Sri Lanka

Higher education programs
that are classified and operate
within a National
Qualification Framework.
Baseline: framework being

34

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

vertical mobility
between the education
and training systems
and provides
information to
employers on learning
and skills outcomes.

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)

World Bank Group Program

Number of matching
grants for upgrading
hotels (e.g. green
certification and
homestays) provided by
World Bank.
Baseline: 0
Target: 200 grants
provided.

Ongoing lending

Sustainable Tourism
Development project

IFC asset-backed loan to CBC

IFC's GTFP support to Union
Bank

IFC investment in Fitch Sri
Lanka

prepared.
Target: 15 universities and
Advanced Technological
Institutions operate within the
National Qualification
Framework

Computer literacy low.
Lack of local language
content in the internet
is a constraint for the
majority of citizens.

2.2 Supporting international
integration and competitiveness.
Government Goals and Indicators:

Exports to grow at twice the rate
of real GDP.

High spending tourism to grow
in order to generate fourfold
expansion in tourist earnings.

An efficient system to actively
harness innovations and

Low level of innovation
in both private and
public sectors.
National expenditure
on research and
development is very
low.
Exports not keeping
pace with imports
In the tourism industry,
lack of professionally
trained staff is a
constraint to the
tourism industry,
especially outside of
Colombo.

Enhanced efficiency of the
tourism sector as measured
by:
Number of professionally
trained hotel staff
Target: 500 trained (through
World Bank project).
Community participation in
tourism in tourism projects

Planned lending

IFC’s possible innovative

35

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

technologies that increase hightech value added exports and
production for domestic
markets.

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)

and development zones.
Target: 4 consultative
workshops held

World Bank Group Program



investment in the financial
sector.
IFC’s possible South-South
investments to/from Sri Lanka

Ongoing and Planned AAA/TF

Policy options for improving
the trade balance (ongoing)

Improving the feasibility the
naval, aviation and
commercial hubs

2.3 Supporting internal integration
and increasing urbanization.
Government Goals and Indicators:

The share of rural employment
to decline from about two-thirds
to half.

The share of urban population to
increase from a quarter to a
third.

Sri Lanka is to have wellplanned, economically
productive, environmentally
sustainable, culturally vibrant,
safe, and well-linked network of
cities and towns

Economic linkages
between rural and
urban areas and among
Provinces need to be
built.

Increased internal
integration as measured by:

Ongoing lending

Provincial Roads Project

Metro Colombo Urban
Development Project

IFC investment and advisory
service for NTB and CBC, to
develop sustainable energy
finance capacity

IFC investment for Senok
wind power generation

Travel time on UV1.
Baseline: 100 minutes (2009)
Target: 80 minutes (2013)

As a result of the 26year conflict, transport
networks for people,
goods and services
have eroded.
Networked services are
needed for the
urbanizing population.
Flooding, traffic
congestion and
environmental
degradation are

Environmentally sustainable
urban areas as measured
by:
Reduction in the area under
risk of flooding (50 year return
period) in the Metro Colombo

Delivery of an Integrated
Flood Management
System.
Baseline: no system is in
place.

Planned lending

Regional
Growthpole/Economic
Development Project

IFC advisory program for local
economic development in
post-conflict districts of
Mannar, Vavuniya in the

36

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

resulting. The impact
is reduction in the
quality of life and
environmental
sustainability. Natural
disasters and climate
change exacerbate
these impacts.

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)
project area. Baseline:
5.5km2
Target: 3km2.

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)

World Bank Group Program

North and Batticaloa and
Target: functioning
Ampara in the East.
system at Sri Lanka Land
Reclamation and
Ongoing and Planned AAA/TF
Development

Competitiveness and
Development Models for
Corporation
Districts, Secondary and
Emerging Cities
Staff of relevant

Options for internal transport
(ongoing)
government agencies

Strengthening Disaster Risk
trained to carry out
Management system and
disaster risk assessments
mainstream disaster risk
and post-disaster needs
reduction and climate change
assessments.
and adaption into urban
Baseline: 0
development(ongoing, TF)
Target: 35.

AREA OF ENGAGEMENT 3. LIVING STANDARDS AND SOCIAL INCLUSION.
3.1 Increasing quality of services.




Introduced measures to increase
quality and motivation of
existing service providers.
Ensure service providers are
client oriented such as ensuring
public health services are patient

As a middle income
country, new and
higher quality types of
services need to be
developed.
The quality of water
supply is declining due
to the increasing and
competing demands on
water resources.

Improved student learning
outcomes based on quality
education services as
measured by:
A system of national
assessments of learning
outcomes for program
development in primary and
secondary education (Core
Sector Indicator).

Ongoing lending

Transforming the School
Education System Project

Road Sector Assistance
Project

North East Local Services
Cognitive tests and
Improvement Project
determinants of

Dam Safety and Water
outcomes for English,
Resources Planning
Sinhalese, and Tamil and

IFC advisory services for
mathematics for primary

37

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

oriented and in line with
changing economic and
demographic needs.

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

Provincial and Local
Authorities lack
adequate capacity and
resources to deliver
services and local
infrastructure.

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)
Baseline: Sequence of national
assessments of learning
outcomes in primary and
secondary education planned
(2011).
Target: Two national
assessments of learning
outcomes in English,
Sinhalese and Tamil, and
mathematics for primary
education (grade 4) completed
by 2013. Two national
assessments of learning
outcomes in English,
mathematics and science for
secondary education (grade 8)
completed by 2014.
Program for School
Improvement Completed.
Baseline: Program for School
Improvement (covering
planning, implementation and
management) developed.
Target: Program for School
Improvement completed in at
least 70 percent of education
zones.

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)
education (grade 4)
developed. Cognitive
tests and determinants of
outcomes for English,
mathematics and science
for secondary education
(grade 8) developed.
School management
teams and school
development committees
trained for the
implementation of the
Program for School
Improvement.
Baseline: 0
Targets: 40 % of the 93
MOE zones
Baseline survey on
health care quality in
public and private sector
facilities conducted in
2012. Endline survey on
quality of health care
conducted in 2016.

Number of districts with

World Bank Group Program






Global Insurance Index Fund
Sanasa Insurance
IFC advisory service for
performance-based grant
initiative Sanasa Development
Bank
IFC advisory performancebased grant initiative Lanka
Orix Micro Finance Company
IFC investment in Asiri
Hospital

Planned Lending:

Second Health Sector
Development Project

Infrastructure/Transport
Project

Water Supply and Sanitation
Project

Waste Management Project

Primary Education For The Sri
Lanka Education Sector
Development Framework
Program (recipient-executed
TF)
Ongoing and Planned AAA/TF

Private health sector review
(ongoing)

Options for Modern Health
Care Management (planned)

Health results innovation trust

38

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)

Health services improved as
measured by:

a functioning NCD
Rehabilitation Center

Number of men and women
screened for diabetes and
hypertension.
Baseline: to be measured in
2012.
Target: increase of 25%

Baseline: 3 out of 26
districts

Percentage of health facilities
with a functioning 24-hour
Emergency Treatment Unit.
Baseline: 22 % of health
facilities (2011)
Target:75% of health facilities

Target:13 out of 26
districts (50% of
districts)

World Bank Group Program




fund TA for piloting Resultsbased financing (ongoing)
Adolescent Reproductive
Health Assessment (ongoing)
Assessment of Water Supply
and Sanitation at provincial
level (ongoing TF)

Private health sector
review prepared and
disseminated. (Includes
baseline survey on health
care quality in the public
and private sectors.)

Improved local service
delivery as measured by:
Local Authorities in the North
and East deliver services and
local infrastructure in a
responsive and accountable
manner.
Baseline: Estimated citizen

Local Authorities in the
North and East provide
information needed for
accountability as
measured by the number

39

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)
satisfaction near 20% in 2011.
(Survey results should be
available soon.)
Target: 80% % citizen
satisfaction by 2015.
Improved quality and
sustainability of
infrastructure as measured
by:
Road network in poor or bad
condition.
Baseline: 38% in 2011
Target: 35% in 2014

Improved safety of dams as
measured by:
Number of large dams with
unacceptable risk index.
Baseline: 14 (2011)
Target: 0 (2013)

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)

World Bank Group Program

of Local Authorities
submitting annual audits.
Baseline: 30 (2011)
Target: 60 (2014)

Increased attention to
maintenance as measured
by:
Routine and periodic
maintenance funding
allocated annually.
Baseline: 8.3 LKR
billion (2011)
Target: 6.6 LKR billion
(2014)

Long term sustainable
National Plan for
operation and
maintenance of large
dams is in place.
Baseline: No
arrangements for
operation and

40

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

3.2 Reducing prevalence of
malnutrition







Eradication of hunger and
hard-core poverty
Reducing malnutrition rate of
children from a third to 12-15
percent.
Increasing access to clean
water in urban areas from 65 to
90 percent.
Strengthening nutritional
surveillance of pregnant
mothers , infants and preschool
children (less than 5 years of
age)

3.3 Increasing social inclusion and
equity of access


Ensuring accessibility
especially for vulnerable
groups with equitable access
for social services and safety
nets in place.

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

Malnutrition found
across all segments of
the population and
remains much higher in
Sri Lanka than in other
countries of similar
income level.
Malnutrition has
multiple causes
including beliefs about
proper diet, hygiene
habits and access to
clean water as well as
affordability of food.

Communities affected
by the war have lower
human and physical
capital than
communities in other
parts of the country.
Displaced communities
need assistance
resettling in their own

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)

Reduced prevalence of
malnutrition as measured
by:
Under-five underweight rate
among population in identified
areas.
Baseline: Areas to be
identified and baseline rate
measured during project
preparation.
Target: Rate reduced by 5
percentage points.

Enhanced inclusion and
improved access to services
among disadvantaged
groups as measured by:
Conflict and flood affected
households restore their
livelihoods (including
agricultural production) and
build capacity for sustainable

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)
maintenance currently
exists.
Target: Plan in place.
Districts implementing
multi-sector nutrition
intervention.
Baseline: 0
Target: 6

World Bank Group Program

Ongoing and Planned AAA/TF

Local Level Nutrition
Interventions for the Northern
Province (ongoing, TF)

Malnutrition: Causes and
Policy Responses

Multi-sector plan to
address under-nutrition
with focus the period
conception to 24 months
developed by MOH
(2013)

Ongoing lending

Community Livelihoods in
Conflict Affected Areas
Project (Reawakening)

Emergency Northern Recovery
Project

Second Community
Development and Livelihood
Improvement Project (Gemi
Diriya)

41

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

Issues and
Obstacles

land.
Management of safety
net has insufficient
capacity and
information to
effectively target the
poor and disabled.

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)


social and economic
reintegration as measured by:
Beneficiaries of Community
Livelihoods in Conflict
Affected Areas Project whose
incomes increase by at least
30% between 2008 and end of
2012.
Baseline: 148,000 (2011)
Target: 213,000 households
(2013)

Household access to domestic
sanitation in Greater Colombo
(GPOBA TF)

Planned lending

IFC’s possible investments in
access to finance, SMEs, agrisector, and infrastructure

Displaced families returned to
their communities and
recommenced their livelihood
through the Emergency
Northern Recovery Project.
Baseline: 0
Target: 140,000 families.

The National Water Supply
and Drainage Board uses
GPOBA approach to urban
sanitation.
Baseline: 0 cities using
approach
Target: 2 cities using approach

World Bank Group Program

The National Water
Supply and Drainage
Board adopts the
GPOBA approach to
deliver affordable urban
sanitation service.

Ongoing and Planned AAA/TF

Youth integration (TF)

Improving monitoring and
evaluation of Samurdhi safety
net program (ongoing, TF)

Vocational Training and
Financial Support for Disabled
Persons - Dirisawiya (planned
TF)

North and East Pilot WASH
for Post Conflict
Resettlements (ongoing, TF)

Employment program for
youth (TF)

Improving Gender Equity in
the Sri Lankan Labor Markets
(TF)

Assessment of Water Supply
and Sanitation at provincial
level (ongoing TF)

Poverty Assessment

42

Country Development Goals (as
described in the Mahinda
Chintana Vision for the Future)

CPS Outcomes & Results
Indicators
Issues and
Obstacles

(to be achieved by June
2016, unless otherwise
stated)
Improved coverage of safety
net system as measured by:
Disabled persons receive
safety net allowance through
the project.
Baseline: 0
Target: 2,500

Milestones
(to be achieved by
June 2014, unless
otherwise stated)

World Bank Group Program

Improved accountability
of safety net program as
measured by:

Samurdhi (safety net)
Management
Information System.
Baseline: Samurdhi
program currently using
manual MIS.
Target: Electronic
system is in place, linked
to central administration.
Review of disability
assistance program.
Baseline: review not
completed.
Target: review
completed.

Note: Baseline data is the most recent year.

43

Annex 2: CAS Completion Report

CAS COMPLETION REPORT

Country: Sri Lanka
CAS Coverage:
Date of Progress Report:

FY2009-2012
June 10, 2011

I.

Executive Summary

1.

The World Bank Group’s FY09-12 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Sri Lanka was
discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on June 5, 2008. The CAS, prepared against the
backdrop of a protracted civil conflict, centered attention on the conflict-afflicted areas of the
Northeast and the poor areas of the South. When the conflict ended in May 2009, the World Bank
Group strengthened this strategic focus, adding priority support for the resettlement of internal
refuges, the reconstruction of infrastructure and the improvement of livelihood opportunities in
afflicted areas. During this CAS period Sri Lanka transitioned from a Low to a Middle-Income
Country (MIC) and was declared creditworthy for IBRD financing in December 2010. A CAS
Progress Report in June 2011 adjusted the program to take account of implementation and the
country’s emerging priorities. It also drew the implications of these developments for Sri Lanka’s
CAS program moving forward.

2.

This Completion Report finds that WBG made a positive contribution to the delivery of
development outcomes in the lagging regions of the country including former conflict areas
by improving access services, advancing reconstruction of housing and productive
infrastructure, and involving the communities in these processes. The World Bank helped
with the monitoring of the resettlement of displaced persons program and informing the
international community of the progress made. The contribution in health and education was
likewise significant nationwide, as has been the work on mainstreaming ICT practices in
government and the private sector and improving the road network. The IFC’s alignment of its
advisory and investment activities and the coordination with the World Bank helped deliver in
areas such as renewable energy and ICT. In some areas, such as improving public expenditure
practices, supporting SOE reform and developing formal PPP frameworks, CAS delivery fell
below expectations.

3.

This joint World Bank-IFC report is based on an extensive review of the World Bank
project documents, analytical work and evaluations of specific programs undertaken by
IBRD, IFC, Government, and other external partners during the CAS period. It is also
informed by interviews with several Government officials (from ministries and other public
sector institutions), relevant civil society representatives, external partners and World Bank staff.

44

II.

Progress towards Long-Term Development Goals

4.

The country made good progress towards the development objectives set under the
Government Strategy Mahinda Chintana’s vision for Sri Lanka (2007). The achievements
include resumption of rapid economic growth, reduction in poverty levels, infrastructure
upgrading, and continued gains in health and education. Since the end of the conflict the
Government has carried out a rapid resettlement of displaced persons and taken actions to
improve economic opportunities in the afflicted zones. The end of the conflict and the rapid pace
of recent economic growth open the opportunity for institutional reforms in line with the
ambitions of the government to transform Sri Lanka into a full-fledged middle income economy.

5.

Brisk economic growth has taken the country to middle-income status. The 2008/2009 global
crisis slowed but did not stop the path of rapid economic growth. A drop in external revenues
induced an economic contraction during the last quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009.
Skilled macroeconomic management supported by an IMF program (20-month Stand-By
Arrangement amounting to US$2.6 billion57) and the end of conflict contributed to a rapid
recovery and the economy grew at 3.5 percent in 2009. The rate of economic growth increased to
8 percent in 2010 and the estimate for 2011 is 8 percent as well. The income per-capita of the
country is over US$2,400.

6.

The quality of the macroeconomic environment has improved. Economic growth and a
process of fiscal consolidation that includes revenue and expenditure measures have reduced the
ratio of the fiscal deficit and of the public debt to GDP. A 2009 IMF –World Bank Debt
sustainability analysis found the risk of debt distress to be moderate. But, there are concerns
about over-heating from demand pressures and the rapid expansion of credit to the private sector
that may be pressuring the stability of the financial sector.

7.

The end of the conflict and an ambitious public investment program are contributing to an
improved attractiveness of the business environment, but full impact has yet to be achieved.
Sri Lanka’s ranking according to the Global Competitive Index58 improved rapidly going from a
position of 77 in 2008-2009 to 52 in 2011-2012. Rankings improved across the board, with
significant gains made regarding infrastructure, macroeconomics, basic health and education, and
security.59 The improvements in infrastructure have been the result of the Government’s emphasis
on reconstruction; public investment has increased from around 4 percent in 2006 to reach 7
percent of GDP in 2011. Private investment a percentage of GDP, however, does not show an
increasing trend and FDI remained low during the period. In the meantime, remittances have
grown in importance and now represent half of the value of exports. The increase in remittances
has coincided with a drop in the share of exports in GDP that has fallen from 30 percent in 2006
to 22 percent in 2011, reflecting a slowdown in the economies of several important trade partners
in Europe and North America during and following the crisis, a loss of competitiveness due to an
appreciating real effective exchange rate, and a negative shift in Sri Lanka’s terms of trade.

57

November, 2009.
The GCI, produced annually by the World Economic Forum, ranks countries along a wide range of factors that affect
competitiveness.
59
According to Doing Business (DB) indicators, progress in improving the regulatory framework for business has been
more limited. However, the DB indicators consider a narrower set of variables. According to the Logistics
Performance Index, produced by the World Bank, the progress between 2007 and 2010 has been uneven. Updated
analytical work on competiveness and growth is needed to provide a consolidated view.
58

45

8.

A process of internal reconciliation is underway. The resettlement of displaced persons is
almost completed and reconstruction in the conflict-affected areas is underway. Economic
activity is recovering, especially the Eastern province where the process of reconstruction has
been going for a longer period of time. A Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission
commenced its work in August 2010 and has issued final recommendations on the reduction of
high security zones, release of ex-combatants, resolution of land disputes and disarming of
paramilitary groups. Still, the relationship with some members of the international community
remains tense, particularly as it refers to the accountability for actions during the war.

9.

Sri Lanka is likely to reach all of the MDGs, except for the environment. Sri Lanka has
continued delivering outstanding basic social outcomes far above those of countries with similar
levels of income. Poverty incidence continues to decline. Excluding the conflict-affected North
and East, the poverty headcount ratio fell from about 15.2 percent in 2006/2007 to about 8.9
percent in 2009/10. This rapid decline reflects broad reductions across much of the country
including in urban, rural and plantation areas. In education, major progress was made in
increasing access, enhancing quality and improving governance of basic and secondary education
as well as setting the basis for an overhaul of higher and vocational education. The primary
completion rate is over 97 percent, and the survival rate to the end of basic education (age 14) is
over 91 percent. Sri Lanka has made considerable progress in putting in place a National Policy
Framework for University, Technical and Vocational Education. Implementation of this
framework is commencing. Less attention has been placed on pre-school education, where access
remains low. Life expectancy is comparable to that of upper middle-income countries, with the
emerging challenge centered on addressing communicable deceases. HIV/AIDS incidence is very
low. Relatively high levels of child malnutrition in rural and urban areas reportedly are mostly
related to cultural practices and not responsive to increases in incomes.

10.

Progress has been slower regarding implementation of the environment agenda. Sri Lanka
was the first country in Asia to prepare in 1992 a National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP),
which has been updated periodically with the latest update, “Caring for the Environment: A Path
to Sustainable Development 2008-2012” prepared in 2008. In addition, “Haritha (Green) Lanka”
program has been published by the Ministry of Environment in 2010, as an output of the National
Council for Sustainable Development.” The Mahinda Chintana identifies precise targets in all
environment fronts. Still, on results the country appears to lag behind many of its peers. The
overall approach to environmental management has been a combination of environmental policies
and strategies, such as regulation and the establishment of a dialogue with the private sector in
order to strike the right balance between economic development and environmental protection.
However, actual steps taken to resolve environmental and natural resource issues have been
weak. Therefore, on most measures of environmental stewardship Sri Lanka’s performance
remains disappointing. The only MDG the country is unlikely to achieve is MDG 7 on ensuring
environmental sustainability by 2015.

III.
11.

Design and Relevance
The four pillars of the World Bank Group’s FY09-12 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Sri
Lanka were aligned with selected aspects of the government strategy Mahinda Chintana’s vision
for Sri Lanka (2007). They were also relevant to the challenges that the country faced. The
emphasis of the first pillar was on bringing services and opportunities to the lagging regions of
the country and rehabilitating the areas affected by the conflict. The second pillar focused on
improving the foundations for sustained economic growth. The third pillar maintained the World
Bank’s involvement in health and education, areas with a strong track record of cooperation. The

46

fourth pillar sought to support the strong emphasis on the environment found in the government
strategy.
12.

The CAS, in addition, stressed two crosscutting themes. First, a key-driving theme of the CAS
was addressing the challenges of the conflict-affected areas and more generally the challenge of
generating opportunities in the lagging regions of the country. With the end of the conflict the
government further prioritized this objective and the WBG increased its support for it. The
attention to the lagging areas was mainstreamed into several operations that included housing
reconstruction, rural development, irrigation repair, micro-finance, community development,
rebuilding of infrastructure and service delivery. Second, the CAS design emphasized
Transparency and Accountability as a thematic issue and focused its program on (i) supporting
core governance institutions; (ii) strengthening sectoral governance in sectors where the World
Bank is engaged; and (iii) fostering increased demand for good governance. In the difficult
implementation environment of conflict, the CAS introduced a conflict filter to guide both the
selection of activities to engage as well as to guide implementation.

13.

During implementation and towards the end of the CAS, as reflected in the CAS Progress Report,
the WBG began to broaden the scope of engagement to cover priority areas of the evolving
government strategy, with attention to urban development, a holistic view of infrastructure, social
security and growth.

IV.

Results delivered with the support of the CAS program

14.

This section reviews the contribution of the CAS program to the delivery of results following on
the commitments made under the original CAS and the revisions introduced by the CAS Progress
Report. This review examines, in addition, the rationale behind revisions introduced in the
Progress Report introduced.
Strategic Objective 1: Expanding Economic opportunities in Lagging Regions. Inclusive
and Equitable Economic Development.

15.

Support for expanding economic opportunities in lagging regions centered on (a) promoting
rural development and (b) improving access to infrastructure and services in the conflict areas.
The relevance of these objectives was grounded on (i) the wide income discrepancies between the
Western region, where the capital Colombo is located, and the rest of the country and (ii) the fact
that 90 percent of the poor live in rural areas. The World Bank examined the challenges the
country faced to redress these discrepancies in the widely disseminated Growth Potential in
Lagging Regions (Connecting People to Prosperity Study) (FY08). A strong delivery of results
was aided by several projects under implementation at the beginning of the CAS and the approval
of new operations that included support for the resettlement of refuges as the conflict ended,
support for infrastructure reconstruction, and rapid response to emergency situations such as the
flooding of late 2010. A nationwide decline in poverty incidence suggests that the welfare of the
lagging areas is increasing and that regional disparities have not widened. 60

60
Urban poverty incidence dropped from 6.7percent in 2006/2007 to 5.3 percent in 2009/2010. Rural poverty
incidence dropped from 15.5percent in 2006/2007 to 9.4percent in 2009/2010. The drop in poverty incidence in the
areas under tea estates was significant going from 32percent to 11.4percent during the same period.

47

Outcome 1.1: Supporting Integrated Rural Development
16.

Implementation of the WBG delivered significant positive outcomes regarding
electrification, roads, and irrigation in the poor regions of the South and the conflictaffected areas of the Northeast. The Agricultural Commercialization (FY2009) Report studied
value chains for key products and presented recommendations for raising their productivity; these
recommendations remain valid and could be the basis for future engagement on rural
development by the World Bank or other donors. However, the foreseen Agricultural Research
and Productivity Improvement Project was not delivered, possibly because the limited success of
a previous engagement. 61 The original CAS included, under this strategic objective, results on
improving the level of nutrition in children, which the Progress Report eliminated because of
delays in launching the supporting instrument. Only in January 2011, a Trust Fund was approved
to focus on nutrition interventions in the Northern Region, with results due in the next strategy. 62

17.

The WBG contributed both to a greater availability of electricity in rural areas and to an
increase in energy supply from renewable sources. The IFC and the World Bank contributed
towards increasing the supply of renewable energy. The World Bank has done so through the
Renewable Energy for Rural Economic Development Project and the IFC through a special
program called PADGO or Portfolio Approach to Distributed Generation Opportunity. With the
support of the World Bank project 139,241 new rural households have access to electricity as of
November15, 2011. In addition, the amount of renewable energy supplied to the national grid
from small and medium generation plants has expanded to reach 174.2 MW 63. The IFCsupported, innovative risk sharing facility with two commercial banks, in combination with
advisory services, is supporting small hydro and wind power projects with total installed
generation capacity of 65.4MW thus far, enabling 72,000 MT GHG emissions yearly. IFC has
also provided direct financing for wind power generation. The World Bank and IFC support for
Sri Lanka’s renewable energy sector is having a transformational impact through increased
private sector participation in generation.

18.

Availability of drinking water in rural areas has expanded. The share of rural households
with access to an improved water source reached at 74 percent in 2011 up from 71 percent in
2008. 64The World Bank contributed partially to this increased availability of improved water
through the Second Community Water Project that has recently been completed and that provided
around 384,100 people in rural areas with access to improved water sources and about 92,000
new piped household water connections as of the end of 2010. The satisfaction of the
beneficiaries of this project was 88percent as per surveys under project. The project ICR rated the
achievement of development outcomes as moderately satisfactory, and noted that both the initial
and revised designs had set unrealizable goals regarding the number of people that could be
covered with the resources available under the project.

61

The achievement of development outcomes under for the Sri Lanka Land Titling and Related Services Project was
rated as moderately unsatisfactory. See corresponding ICR March 2007. A key recurrent concern remains the role that
land titling is to play in a rural development strategy.
62
Nutrition is discussed further ahead under the Health section outcome 3.2 and paragraph 43.
63
November 15,2011
64
There remains a wide discrepancy between rural and urban areas in the availability of pipe borne water supply;
approximately 75percent of the urban population having access while only 14percent of the rural population does. In
sanitation, it is estimated that 85.7percent of the population has access to adequate sanitation, with no major urban rural
disparities.

48

19.

Efforts are on going to improve the irrigation system and reduce the risk from dam failure,
but implementation is behind schedule. Sri Lanka possesses an extended irrigation system, part
of which is one of the oldest in the world and is in dire need of repair in order to raise agricultural
productivity and reduce risks from inundations. The Dam Safety and Water Resources Planning
Project (FY08) focuses on establishing long-term sustainable arrangements for operation and
maintenance of large dams and on improving water resources planning. Initial implementation
was slow to pick-up and heavy rains during 2010 further delayed progress. The CAS Progress
Report consequently downgraded initial expectations about progress; today, implementation is
picking up and already two out of 32 larger dams are considered not to pose a major risk for the
population Irrigation repair components included under various World Bank projects are
beginning to deliver results, as reported in paragraph 23. Several projects planned in the water
sector could not be delivered: Irrigation Maintenance and Water Resource Management Project;
Community Water and Poverty Alleviation in Plantation Districts Project; and Provincial Water
Supply Project.

20.

IFC has been supporting increasing the financial inclusion amongst the poor. IFC also
provided capacity building support to micro, small and medium enterprises in five lagging
districts in the South with the Business Edge toolkit as well as helped partnered financial
institutions to offer financing to MSMEs. These support helped improve rural entrepreneurs’
know-how and access to finance.

Outcome 1.2: Improving Access to Public Services and Infrastructure in the North and East
21.

An ambitious resettlement of displaced persons advanced rapidly after the conflict ended.
When the conflict ended the government placed a high priority on reconstruction so as to enable
the rapid return of displaced persons to their place of origin. The support of the World Bank for
these efforts came through an operation that tracked the resettlement process by focusing on key
performance indicators and, in addition, financed the repair and improvement of infrastructure in
afflicted areas. 65 Tracking of resettlement targets and informing the international community of
the progress achieved was timely and relevant at the time when the country under was
considerable scrutiny. As it turned out, resettlement was undertaken rapidly despite the
substantive preparatory work that was required, including mine removal in the areas of
resettlement. As of October 31,2011, 187,533 IDPs returned home exceeding the target of
100,000 introduced by the CAS Progress Report. By the same date, employment equivalent to
1,653,000 person-days had been generated, above the target of 1,070,000. The World Bank
project continues to work on providing solid opportunities for the returnees. Considerable
progress has already been made to reach the targets under the project. For instance, the target
(7,600 Has) for farm and high land recuperated is close to being reached. The designs are ready
for 600 sub-projects costing around US$60 million that would finance roads, water supply,
irrigation and other infrastructure.

22.

The World Bank program contributed to increasing the stock of available housing in
conflict affected areas of Sri Lanka. Two World Bank projects contributed to the reconstruction
of housing destroyed during the conflict: Puttalam Housing and North East Housing
Reconstruction, which has received additional financing. This support has led to the
reconstruction of 52,193 houses as of November 28, 2011, with 532 villages receiving basic
infrastructure improvements—the additional financing is refurbishing infrastructure in 217
villages more. These results exceed the milestones set under the CAS and come close to the

65

The Emergency Northern Recovery Project (FY2010)

49

target set by the CAS Progress report.66 The housing projects have emphasized the involvement
and participation of the potential beneficiaries and their communities with the expectation that the
capacity acquired and lessons learned can serve the country and the government in reducing the
remaining housing gap.

23.

24.

The CAS program has contributed to improved access to infrastructure services in the
zones that experienced conflict. The share of rural population with access to basic
infrastructure facilities in the heavily affected communities of the North and East reached at 15
percent in 2011, up from 9 percent in 2008. The World Bank supported this achievement through
the Community Livelihoods in Conflict-Affected Areas Project. As the conflict ended, the project
received additional financing in 2009 to scaling up the resettlement process by scaling-up support
for village development and irrigation. A third additional financing (2011) was designed to
respond to the impact of severe rains in November and December 2010, exacerbated by further
flooding in January/February 2011, which affected the livelihood of around half a million people.
67
In addition, the North East Local Services Improvement Project (FY10) supports construction
and rehabilitation of rural roads and drainage systems. The full impact of this project will be
realized during the next CAS period.
A Community Driven Development (CDD) approach has been an effective instrument for
improving service delivery in the targeted regions where poverty is prevalent. Two projects
68
have focused primarily on involving communities in service delivery. First, in the northeastern
regions, the Community Livelihoods in Conflict-Affected Areas Project is utilizing a CDD
approach with around 1,506 Community Based Organizations involved in project implementation
and monitoring and evaluation at the village level. This project has contributed to improving the
access of the rural population of the Northeastern regions to services and markets as reported in
the paragraph 23. Second, the Integrated Community Development and Livelihood Improvement
APL that is covering the Southern regions of the country followed a more ambitious CDD
approach. The ICR for the first operation under this APL project rated delivery of outcomes as
satisfactory; IEG in turn, rated it highly satisfactory and noted the quality of the targeting and the
high impact on incomes and employment of the interventions. Notably the project has been the
executed by a semi-autonomous foundation. The second leg of the APL (FY10), referred to
locally as the Gemi Diriya (GD) Project, reportedly faced implementation difficulties69 due to an
emerging lack of Government ownership over the conceptual framework of the project including
the role played by the independent Gemi Diriya Foundation. The Government and the World
Bank have reached agreements on future implementation arrangements, which will integrate the
project structures within government structures but maintain community involvement in project
implementation.

66

The North East Housing Reconstruction Project, as of May 2011, was close to meeting its target of number of 29,079
houses reconstructed with 27,000 completed. The Puttalam Housing Project, as of May 2011, had met 86percent of the
target for construction of houses. However, the project required an extension, approved in June 2011, due to the slower
pace of implementation of the infrastructure component that was designed to cover roads, water and sanitation.
67
The project has remained focused on twelve districts in the Eastern and Northern provinces and adjoining areas and
is assisting in improving the livelihood opportunities of 136,000 households in 1,000 villages and to rehabilitate seven
major irrigation schemes benefiting over 35,000 farmers. Already 90 percent of the target households have benefited
from various income generating schemes and 19,200 ha of land have been rehabilitated and brought under cultivation.
Around 1,506 Community Base Organizations are actively engaged in reconstruction activities.
68
A CDD approach has been mainstreamed to several other projects as well.
69
ISR dated November 30, 2011.

50

Strategic Objective 2: Improving the Investment Climate and Competitiveness. Accelerate
and Sustain Economic Growth.
25.

The Government’s strategy to accelerate growth to a steady annual eight percent per year
called for placing great emphasis on closing the infrastructure gap within a vision of Sri
Lanka as hub or magnet in the South Asia region. In addition, the Government strategy
foresaw creating conditions for a dynamic private sector to emerge and take the lead in growth
and job creation. Along these lines, the implementation of the national roads agenda has advanced
satisfactorily, under the leadership of the Government and with the support of the development
partners, including the World Bank. The World Bank Group contributed to creating conditions
for a more dynamic private sector to emerge in the areas of its limited engagement: easing the
conditions for opening up a business, finance, and ICT development. The CAS Progress Report
revised the results framework regarding the transparency and effectiveness of budgetary practices
to account for the limited traction in advancing this agenda. With hindsight, the limited support
that the WBG provided towards improving the business environment for private enterprise and
for improving budgetary practices was due in part to a lack of supporting analytical work to guide
the dialogue with government and perhaps, as well, to divergent views, between the Government
and the WBG, on how to achieve the goals set out in the national strategy. In addition, the
messages sent by the government have been ambiguous. On the one hand, the recently established
Strategic Investment Law helps fast-track approved projects/investors to reduce red tape. On the
other hand, the Under-performing Enterprises and Underutilized Assets Act has raised concerns
among potential investors. Towards the end of the CAS, the World Bank has been working on
improving its competitiveness diagnostic and understanding the challenges of improving
budgetary practices in order to step up the dialogue with the government in these areas.

Outcome 2.1: Improving Infrastructure Provision
26.

The CAS program contributed to improving road interconnections across the country, with
the central government responsible for the national road network; and, as established in the
Article 13th of the Constitution, provincial and local governments taking the lead in
secondary and tertiary roads. The World Bank, jointly with other development partners has
been supporting up-grading national and provincial roads.

27.

Substantive results have been achieved in upgrading of the national road network. On the
institutional front, the capacity of the Road Authority has been strengthened, as has been the
financing of the Road Maintenance Trust Fund that increased from $13 million in 2005 to $64
million in 2010. The quality of the national road network has improved with a reduction in the
International Road Roughness Index and a decline in the Network Vehicle Operating Costs. The
World Bank support has come through the Road Sector Assistance Project (FY06) that has
received additional financing. Under the project a total of 618 km of national roads have been
upgraded and the Road Roughness index under the project is far below the national average. A
component on rural roads has contributed to 154 KMs of repaired roads, with a reduction of 60
percent in travel time on these roads, far above the 4 percent target set in the initial project
design.70 The Provincial Roads Project (FY10), consistent with supporting conflict affected areas
and poor areas, is working to improve road conditions in three provinces in the North, East and
South. This project is commencing implementation.

70

Additional information is provided in the July 12, 2011 ISR for Road Assistance Project.

51

28.

Recently, the World Bank work is refocusing its support on infrastructure. A project has
been negotiated71 to support program of work on urban and water issues in the metro Colombo
region, signaling a welcome shift in the World Bank agenda towards helping with emerging
urban challenges. This will be the first IBRD operation in the country when approved.

29.

IFC has also been supporting improvements in infrastructure. IFC contributions comprised:
direct and indirect support for scaling up renewable energy; portfolio support for two major
communications companies (Dialog and Suntel); South Asia Gateway Terminals investment,
which was completed during the CAS period; as well as efforts to try to facilitate the
development of a PPP project. On this, WB, WBI, and IFC jointly held a workshop on PPPs in
Colombo in December 2010 and continue follow-up dialogues with the Government. The scope
for PPP work by the WBG has been limited by the Government’s preference for bi-lateral
solutions to the construction of large infrastructure projects, such as ports.

Outcome 2.2: Improving the Business Environment for Stronger Entrepreneurship and a KnowledgeBased Economy
30.

The World Bank and IFC’s regulatory support for improving the business environment
was selective with a focus on facilitating entry through a reduction in the costs of opening
up a business. According to the 2012 Doing Business Report (DBR) Sri Lanka ranks second in
South Asia on the quality of the business environment. The efforts supported by the WBG to
facilitate business creation reduced by half the number of days needed to open a business. IFCWB Doing Business Reform Technical Assistance and IFC advisory support in selected
municipalities provided the necessary support to achieve this result. The Ministry of Economic
Development has recently launched an initiative to improve the quality of Sri Lanka’s business
environment ranking over the next two years, beginning with tax reform, as the global DBR
ranking for Sri Lanka at 82 in 2012 is dissonant with the notable achievements in other areas such
as education and health.

31.

The World Bank and the IFC’s successful support for ICT development and technologyenabling innovation were part of a broader effort to bolster private sector competitiveness,
expand electronic government services and reach out to communities in rural and remote
areas. The World Bank’s e-Sri Lanka Development Project, has established over 600 tele-centers
throughout the country, linking over 70,000 users monthly, half of whom are women. The project
has trained 35,000 private sector participants to incorporate ICT into their businesses and is
helping to improve government efficiency and transparency by introducing ICT in government
agencies and taking public services online. These results are helping reduce the regulatory burden
for businesses and individuals.72 Additional finance for this project, has been approved (FY12)
and , aims to (a) consolidating high impact activities including e-applications, common platforms
and service delivery points; and (b) addressing constrains to expansion by bridging gaps in
infrastructure, training, technical standards, regulations and legislation. The project is one of the
most comprehensive ICT initiatives by the World Bank which is now under implementation.

32.

Towards the end of the CAS two World Bank projects were approved in support of the
development of the private sector with emphasis on small and medium enterprises (SMEs).
The Sustainable Tourism Development Project (FY2010) is designed to strengthen the
71

Metro Colombo Project expected Board Date March 15, 2012.
The contribution of this project extends beyond the indicators included in the CAS. See November 3, 2011 ISR for
the e-Lanka Development Project.
72

52

institutional framework for the tourism sector in order to facilitate environmentally and socially
sounds investments, with particular attention to the East of Sri Lanka. Specifically, the project
supports drastically reducing the connection time between Colombo and the East, training human
resources for tourism, and the development of SME sector. The progress towards the
development outcomes under this project has been substantial, already exceeding in some cases
201473end of project target. The project complements IFC’s advisory work for sustainable
tourism (including supplier medium, small and micro Enterprises capacity building) and southsouth capacity building for SMEs. The Crisis Response Small and Medium Enterprises
Development Facility Project (FY10) built on the success of the Renewable Energy for Rural
Development Loan, an operation with a large financial intermediation component, and
complemented credit lines provided by other international organizations and the government. In
addition, the World Bank Group has provided assistance for the development of the non-banking
sector through TA funded by the FIRST initiative. This support included technical assistance to
the Securities Exchange Commission to amending the SEC Act to enable demutualization of
Colombo Stock Exchange (Support has also been provided for insurance supervision.) In
addition, at the end of the last calendar year, the World Bank produced a Financial Sector Policy
Note that takes stock of the progress and challenges in the financial sector against the backdrop of
the 2007 FSAP.
33.

The IFC has supported SMEs and micro enterprises by facilitating access to finance, skills,
capacity, and training opportunities. Enhancing its financing for Dialog, IFC provided
linkages advisory support to build MSME capacity and trained over 5000 participants to date and
helped increase revenues. IFC is also helping strengthen technology-based financial infrastructure
through, for example, the establishment of Secured Collateral Registry. With the use of the
Performance Based Grant Initiative, IFC encouraged the expansion of microfinance services
provided by LOLC Micro Credit and SANASA Development Bank to urban and rural lower
income segments. Focusing on the post-conflict and less developed regions, IFC’s support helped
these microloan providers to increase aggregate new loans by over 266,000 in the amount of
US$275million in a year and a half to Dec 2011. It is noteworthy to point out that Sri Lanka has
one of the most advanced micro-credit sectors in the region.

Outcome 2.3: Improving the Strategic Relevance and Transparency of Public Spending
34.

Overall, the progress made during the CAS in improving public expenditure practices was
limited. To begin, the expectations regarding results from World Bank engagement under the
original CAS document were modest and targeted towards selected objectives, reflecting a de
facto limited engagement. Moreover, the CAS Progress Report eliminated several of the expected
outcomes in procurement, PPP and SOEs.

35.

The Public Sector Capacity Building Project (FY08) has been slow to deliver results. The
project was designed to enhance the effectiveness and productivity of the Department of Census
and Statistics (DCS) and the Auditor General’s Department (AGD), but a slow and difficult
implementation has meant that the project will not be completed on time. The DCS component
has been marred by procurement difficulties and has been cancelled. But, significant progress has
73

Since the end of the internal conflict tourism has picked exceeding the expectations for the end of 2014 set under the
Bank project. Tourism receipts went from US$ 320 millions at the end of 2008 to US$ 580 million September, 2011.
The target for the end of the project was US$400 million. During the same period, occupancy rates went from
44percent to 72percent, still below the 90 percent target at the end of the project. However, during the same period, the
occupancy in the East (where the project is operating) went from 21.6percent to 68percent above the end of 2014 target
of 45percent. Notably, streamlining licensing procedures has reduced the number of days in registration from 147 to 30,
again below the target of 75 days.

53

been made at AGD with an improved external audit function that has reduced the time lag in
submitting the national budget audit to parliament (now 8 months, when it was 2 to 4 years in
early 2008.) In addition, public audit coverage has extended from 50 percent of the public sector
in 2008 to 100 percent as of May 2011.

36.

The CAS Progress Report eliminated several results where the dialogue between the
government and the WBG was making limited headway. The World Bank support for SOE
reform did not materialize after early-on analytical work was completed; however, the IMF
program is focusing on reducing the losses of the SOE sector to help buttress the fiscal stand of
the public sector and open space to finance a more aggressive public investment program in line
with the objectives of government. The Progress Report eliminated reference to establishment of
a framework for PPPs. Although the Government has not established a formal framework for
PPP, it has engaged international partners in the construction of infrastructure arrangements that
in the view of the government are PPP-like arrangements. Expected outcomes on improving
budgetary practices were also scaled backed in the Progress Report. The information available
suggests limited progress was made during the CAS period in improving public expenditure
practices. On public procurement, after disbanding the National Procurement Agency, a new
Project Implementation Unit at the Ministry of Finance and Planning is tracking procurement, but
no indicators are available to judge that this is an improved arrangement. Regarding, Public
Financial Management, a unified treasury remains in place, but commitment control remains a
challenge. The Government would benefit from a thorough stocktaking, such as through a PEFA,
to set a baseline to track the impact of policy actions to improve the quality of fiscal governance
in the future.
Strategic Objective 3: Improving the Quality of Services and Accountability. Provision of
High Quality, Relevant and Cost Effective Public Services, Including in Conflict-Affected
Areas

37.

Sri Lanka has traditionally posted a strong performance in health, education and social
assistance achieving levels similar to those of countries with higher levels of income. The
CAS program under this objective was built on a long-standing relationship between the WBG
and the country to continue its support for stronger health and education outcomes and
commenced assistance to improve the national social assistance program. The World Bank
support for primary education and health is being done in cooperation with the provincial and
local governments through SWAP operations, which have been well received and set the basis for
more ambitious results-based approaches in the future within the framework of strengthening
local governments. Work under this strategic objective has benefited from grant financing,
especially on the area of social protection. The grants have proven effective in assisting the
government in defining the scope and direction of the policy agenda in social assistance.

Outcome 3.1: Improving Quality, Relevance and Governance of Education
38.

Access, quality and retention rates in basic education improved during this CAS. School
survival rates through grade nine increased from 78 percent in June 30, 2005 to 91 percent in June
30, 2011 and the proportion of primary school students attaining competence in mathematics
increased from 67 percent to 82 percent during the same period. 74Access to basic education and
secondary education was improved through the activation of school attendance committees,
74

Strengthening Mathematics Education in Sri Lanka—July 2011 Report No. 43 South East Asia: Human
Development Sector Discussion Papers Series

54

expansion of basic facilities such as classrooms, water and sanitation, school health and nutrition
programs for poor children, and special and non-formal education. The improvement of the
quality of education was achieved through curriculum modernization, teacher development and
delivery of textbooks on time. In additional, the school-based management approach was
expanded from 16 zones (17 percent of all zones) to all zones in the country. The support has
been provided through the Education Sector Development Project, which was completed in June
2011. The recently completed ICR (dated December 19, 2011) rates the project as satisfactory on
all aspects, with moderate risks to development outcomes. The ICR highlights the usefulness of
the SWAP approach in the context of decentralization and the major contributions resulting from
that increasing community and parental involvement.
39.

The CAS contributed to improved educational outcomes in undergraduate education and
enhanced multi-ethnic awareness early on in the learning process. The IT achievement scores
of undergraduates have risen from 49 percent in 2005 to 56 percent in 2008, the year the targeted
intervention, Institutional Block Grants, was completed. The achievement of development
outcomes under the Improving Relevance and Quality of Undergraduate Education Project was
ranked as satisfactory by the team and as moderately satisfactory by IEG, who recognized the
achievement of highly relevant development objectives but questioned on the lack of evidence for
the efficient use of project resources. The project contributed to implementing IT learning and
English improvement learning programs in all universities. The school curriculum promotes
bilingual education and includes civics as a subject. Multi-ethnic and multicultural curriculum
review committees are over-seeing the design and delivery in the areas of civics, history and
English. 75

40.

Support for education was further strengthened during the second half of the CAS. The
Higher Education for Twenty First Century (FY10) Project aims to enhance the capacity of the
higher education system. The design of the project benefited from analytical work such as Towers
of Learning: Higher Education Report (FY09) that has been widely disseminated and consulted.
Already, progress has been made in the development of a national qualifications framework and
legislation has been approved to enable registration, quality assurance and accreditation of state
and non-state higher education in line with the Higher Education Development Strategy of the
government. Observers in the country and abroad consider this a major institutional achievement
in Sri Lanka. In addition, the Transforming School Education as the Foundation of a Knowledge
Hub Project (FY12) seeks to further enhance the quality of primary and secondary education as
the foundation for the knowledge-based economic and social development of the country.
Building on previous efforts that have increased the completion rate at grade nine, this project
proposes to improve the completion rate at grade 11 and the national assessments of learning
outcome for key subjects. It also aims to strengthen governance and delivery of education
services.76

Outcome 3.2: Improving Health and Social Protection Services
41.

The significant progress that Sri Lanka has made in health translates into a high level of life
expectancy (75 years) that compares well with indicators from higher middle-income
countries. The long life expectancy and the dropping fertility rates have meant that Sri-Lanka is
75
The Promotion of Social Cohesion through Education in Sri Lanka September 2011 Report No. 46 South East Asia:
Human Development Sector Discussion Papers Series
76
The analytical basis was provided by “Transforming Education in Sri Lanka: From Cut Stones to Polished Jewels.”
World Bank.

55

experiencing a rapid demographic transition (mainly characterized by an ageing population. The
World Bank’s study Demographic Transition (FY08) study examined the consequences of this in
detail and which it’s contributing now to a rich national dialogue on its implication for
development opportunities in all sectors of the economy.
42.

The World Bank worked directly with the nine provinces of Sri Lanka, as well as the
central Ministry of Health to deliver a stronger national primary health network. A sign of
increased administrative planning and monitoring capacity at the provincial level is that all
districts are now using a logical framework and reporting regularly on performance, while when
in 2006 only 26.9 percent did so. The contribution of the World Bank has been through the
Health Sector Development Project and Additional Financing, whose development outcomes
have been rated as moderately satisfactory by the management77. This rating reflects initially
over-ambitious objectives and immeasurable indicators chosen at project preparation, and the
transfer of significant project resources for the tsunami relief operation; but, delivery on the
revised objectives / indicators was satisfactory. The project has contributed to a reduction in
infant and maternal mortality as well as to a lower disparity in these indicators across regions. In
addition, the project contributed to improved administrative output indicators, including for
increased utilization of lower level hospitals and improvements in screening services for selected
non communicable diseases (NCD), and better emergency health care through newly established
emergency treatment units. The project also made a substantial contribution (especially through
its additional financing) to the post-conflict reconstruction of health facilities in the Northern and
Eastern provinces.

43.

The World Bank is supporting government’s efforts to address the challenges of noncommunicable diseases and malnutrition. The World Bank’s analytical work has focused on
the health challenges arising from increased burden incidence of non-communicable diseases,
made more severe with the aging of the population, as noted in the corresponding World Bank
prepared Study of the Aging (FY08). The Government has issued a National Action Plan for
prevention of NCDs which includes a national surveillance system, whose design has benefited
from the Health Delivery System Review and Non-Communicable Diseases Strategy (FY10.) The
IFC in turn has invested in an additional private hospital while the portfolio hospital project, rated
mostly successful in its most recent development outcome, was completed in September 2011.
The World Bank mobilized trust funds78 to design community-based nutrition interventions.
Further trust funds were received from the Japan Social Development Fund to finance a project
on improving nutrition outcomes among vulnerable population groups in the Northern Province,
using the community based design. This project has successfully introduced community based
nutrition interventions linking the service providers with the community to improve nutrition
outcomes.

44.

The World Bank began to support selected aspects of Social Assistance reform with trust
fund financing. First, the IDF grant Improving the Monitoring and Evaluation of the Samurdhi
Safety Net Program is financing the development and testing of a comprehensive Management
Information System (MIS) for the Samurdhi Food Stamp and Cash Transfer Program, Sri Lanka's
largest transfer program. The IDF grant will be used to design and pilot the new MIS in three
selected locations. The Government of Sri Lanka has committed funds to replicate the system in
three additional locations. It is expected that the experiences of the six locations, upon evaluation,
will form the basis for the scaling up of the MIS across all other locations across the country
where the program operates. Second, the Rapid Social Response Multi Donor Trust Funded
77
78

The ICR (ICR- 1842) produced by the team in July 21,2011is not yet been reviewed by IEG.
The Trust is Funded is from Government of Australia.

56

Strengthening Targeting, Monitoring and Evaluation of Safety Nets in Sri Lanka is financing the
scaling up and evaluation of an improved targeting and MIS system that is being developed for
the Samurdhi safety net program.
Outcome 3.3: Strengthening Environmental Protection
45.

The WBG delivery of results regarding environmental protection has been mixed. Highly
positive results were achieved on renewable energy, but efforts to support preservation of the
biodiversity of the country fell through, when the government’s priorities changed.

46.

The IFC and the World Bank work on renewable energy is contributing to an improved
environment, specifically through WBG contributions to reduction in greenhouse emissions.
As has been noted, both the World Bank and the IFC have provided effective support to an
renewable energy effectiveness initiative that has not only helped connect people in rural areas to
electricity but also increase the supply of electricity while abating energy emissions. The
Renewable Energy for Rural Economic Development Project has contributed an estimated 1.75
million tons of carbon abatement based on projects commissioned to date. The IFC supported
projects have also contributed in this regard, as reported in paragraph 17.

47.

The IFC has been actively involved in the environment sector. IFC has been committed to
ensuring that all current and future clients meet Environment Performance Standards. IFC’s
Advisory Services have been working with SMEs on upgrading environment protection. SME
Hotel operators are being assisted with achieving operational efficiencies (such as energy
efficiency practices, quality standards) and obtaining the US green Building Council’s Green
Building Certification.

48.

The CAS objective centered on the preservation of the country’s rich bio-diversity could not
be delivered. The activities foreseen under the CAS included attention to management of the
elephant human conflict and the rationalization of tourism flows to the national parks. Following
on preliminary analytical work and in line with the national strategy, the Ecosystems
Conservation and Management Project reached the negotiation stage, at which point the
government proposed substantial changes to the design that would have substantially altered the
original development objectives. As a result, the project preparation was stopped which has
meant a postponement of the intended World Bank work through the project and affected the
delivery of intended results during this CAS.

V.

World Bank Group Performance

49.

A large share of commitments and disbursements went towards the rehabilitation of the
conflict-affected areas. The World Bank committed a total of US$1016.5 million of IDA and
IBRD79 resources and has disbursed US$579.4 millions during the CAS period, as of January 31,
2012. The undisbursed balance increased from US$483.0 million at the beginning of the CAS to
reach US$582.8 million by January 31, 2012. In FY09 at the beginning of the CAS, 13 projects
were under implementation of which three focused on conflict-related areas, as of January 2012
five out of 13 projects did. Out of the total disbursements during the CAS period around
33percent went to conflict areas and 63percent went to both infrastructure and conflict areas.

79

This includes US$213 million of IBRD resources for the Metro Colombo Project expected to go to Board in March
15, 2012.

57

50.

Delivery of projects differed from the planned program. As detailed in Table 2 comparing
planned IDA/IBRD Lending Program for FY09-12 and actual deliveries, five of the 15 proposed
lending activities, were dropped. Four Additional Finance operations were approved.80 Table 3
shows that of the 12 AAA activities in the original CAS, three were dropped and two refocused.
As of September 2011, four projects, three AF operations and four AAA activities, which had not
been foreseen in the CAS, were added, along with additional technical assistance support that had
not been envisioned in the CAS. IFC’s program has also adapted to respond to emerging needs
and opportunities over the course of the CAS period.

51.

Various reasons stood behind the difference between planned and actual delivery of
projects. First, the space opened by cancelled projects provided opportunities to finance conflict
affected areas and infrastructure (roads) through additional financing, which has become a
significant lending instrument during this CAS period, in terms of project performance, costeffectiveness and in enabling the World Bank to swiftly respond to unforeseen or emergency
needs, such as for post-conflict reconstruction or in response to the 2010/2011 floods. Second,
cancelled projects reflected shifts in the preferences of government (environment), failure to
make traction around a common vision that could be supported (agricultural competitiveness) or
an overestimation of the pace at which an agenda could be developed (water.)

52.

Portfolio performance has remained steady and compares well with the performance of the
region. The disbursement ratio was 33 percent for FY11 and 13.4 percent in FY12 as of January
31, 2012. The percentage of projects at risk is 17 percent as of December 31, 2011, reflecting in
part the relatively small number of projects in the portfolio. One project in the portfolio, the
Second Community Development and Livelihood Project, is currently classified as a problem
project with unsatisfactory ratings. The commitments at risk amount to 36 percent. A Portfolio
Review in October, 2011 concluded that overall the portfolio is generally healthy and identified
no major problems. The recommendations include strengthening procurement and further
integrating PIUs into the implementing agencies.81 All projects completed during the CAS have
been rated as either satisfactory or moderately satisfactory. The pro-activity is 100 percent.

53.

The current portfolio to implement and deliver results early in the next CPS period is quite
concentrated. As of end-January 2012, the active IDA portfolio in Sri Lanka consists of 13
projects with a net commitment value of US$ 1,074.1 million. The share of undisbursed resources
available for both conflict areas and infrastructure amounts to 61 percent as of January 2012.
Two education projects that have been approved recently account for 23 percent of the total
undisbursed balance as of January 2012. Recent approvals and additional financing are shifting
alignment towards growth and competitiveness issues (SME financing, tourism, higher education,
and e-Sri Lanka) and thus responding to concerns of the government about the concentration of
the World Bank agenda on IDA priorities.

54.

The satisfactory performance of SWAP operations has set a solid basis for results-based
approaches and for working with the provinces. The design of some of the operations under
the present CAS tested or piloted interesting approaches to delivering results—such as CDD, housing self-construction, etc. The broader long-term impact of these initiatives will depend on
how the government incorporates them into its own regular programs. Two SWAPs, one in health
80

One came from the previous CAS. Two were road projects. Another supported the impact of the 2010 rains on the
conflict-affected areas.
81
As of November 2011, the share of commitments are risk in Sri Lanka (15percent) compared to the South Asia
countries was only higher tan India (12percent) and Bangladesh (9percent) and Afghanistan (14percent.) The
disbursement ratio at midyear compared to 6.6 percent for India, 8.3 percent for Afghanistan and 7.7 percent for
Pakistan.

58

and one in education, successfully tested a different implementation approach. The SWAP
instrument allowed the World Bank to work with the provinces in advancing national policies
within the framework of implementing the decentralization mandate. For future lending, a
programmatic approach is a better alternative as oppose to isolated smaller projects as reflected in
a programmatic budget of the government.
55.

While some of AAA has been of good quality and effective, it has been narrowly focused
with gaps in core products and limited alignment with the larger government priorities.
The quality of some AAA, such as the work on health and education, is contributing to the
national dialogue and had an impact either on policies or project designs. In certain areas the
impact has been more limited, such as in agriculture and environment. In agriculture, this is
because of divergent views between the government and the World Bank. In environment, the
failure to agree on the content of the proposed project has delayed impact even though the issues
raised by the World Bank’s analytical work are judged relevant by the sector government. There
are two concerns with the AAA agenda that was developed and implemented during this CAS.
First, gaps in traditional products such as Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), poverty
assessment, Public Expenditure Reviews, and Public Financial Management impaired the
capacity of the World Bank to engage in core areas of its competence. Second, the AAA was not
aligned with the broad concerns of government and specifically with the ambitious transformation
agenda of the current administration. The AAA program was not relevant for the government and
weakened the World Bank as an interlocutor as the government sought to further develop and
implement its vision. This is being reversed at the end of the CAS with the preparation of
strategic notes on several themes that are top priorities to government.

56.

The World Bank launched efforts to reach broader audiences through more forceful
dissemination efforts. The World Bank has been extending its outreach effort by responding to
the dynamic dialogue on development carried out in the local press, including that in the two
native languages, which plays an important role in shaping public opinion. The local press has its
own dynamics apart from the English press. The World Bank has begun to publish the Executive
Summary of new AAA in Singhalese and Tamil in a first effort to breach this gap. This is a
welcome step towards developing a more accurate view of the World Bank’s work in the country.
In addition, the World Bank has involved local research institutions and think tanks in the
preparation of key pieces of analytical work.

57.

IFC’s advisory services have also been supporting SMEs, providing technical assistance to
financial institutions and maximizing linkages in tourism, ICT and agriculture. IFC’s
completed sustainable tourism advisory project facilitated 555 SME contracts and US$1.12
million in collective sales revenues for participatory MSMEs in FY08-11. In response to the
growing interest in PPPs, IFC, in collaboration with the World Bank and World Bank Institute
(WBI), held a well-received workshop in Colombo on the topic for government and the private
sector.

58.

IFC has increased the number of new commitments and sought to diversify its portfolio
during this CAS period. Annual commitments will have averaged around US$45 million during
FY09-11. New commitment volumes in Sri Lanka had peaked at US$175 million in FY08, in the
wake of two large transactions. Since FY09 through December CY2011, IFC has invested a total
of US$238 million (including $19 million mobilized from external partners) in 20 projects.
These encompassed diverse sectors, such as renewable energy (including its first direct
investment in wind power), healthcare and the financial market (including Global Trade Finance
Program (GTFP) trade finance facilities and IFC’s first direct investment in a private equity
fund). As of November 2011, IFC’s committed portfolio of US$198 million (not including a

59

mobilized amount) consisted of ICT companies promoting enhanced communication access,
financial institutions supporting SMEs and sustainable energy, a credit rating agency, hospitals,
and a Sri Lankan hotel operator active in the region. The portfolio is generally performing well.
IFC’s investment and/or advisory support for the financial sector has focused on developing local
banks’ capacity to provide trade financing, renewable energy financing, SME- and agri-finance,
and household access to finance. IFC has been providing locally-scarce financial instruments,
such as risk capital, trade finance guarantees, and risk sharing facilities. Risk sharing facilities,
structured with a first-loss partial guarantee from the Global Environment Facility (GEF), are
helping two leading national banks develop know-how in financing private sustainable energy
projects. IFC is also supporting leading private hospitals to help meet the country’s growing
demand for healthcare.
59.

Trust Fund (TF) resources have supported key CAS initiatives, but the TF portfolio is
dispersed adding to the costs of coordination. The commitments available from TF sources
amounted to US$ 42.175 million in 39 operations. Eight operations over US$1 million each,
accounted for 75 percent of the total. TF resources have served various purposes. Several have
complemented World Bank operations, such as the Northern Emergency Project, and Energy for
Rural Development. Other TF operations are filling gaps, such as nutrition in the Northern region
and access to finance in the Southern region. Others are serving to scout reform options, as in the
on-going work on social assistance that is financed from several trusts funds. Likewise IFC’s
private sector development support benefited from donor support, including Norway for the Sri
Lanka Development Facility, and NIPP82 and DevCo83 for the South Asia Infrastructure Facility.
The latest Country Portfolio Review (November, 2011) noted that there are delays between the
approval and effectiveness of trust funds, with high transaction costs for all. In addition, TF
activity was not evenly integrated into the results framework of the CAS.

60.

Government’s access to international finance and the emergence of new partnerships with
major regional powers changed significantly the financing opportunities for the country
during the implementation of this CAS. First, the government has issued 2 (10-years) US$ 1
billion rounds of bonds in the international markets. This instrument was not available in the past,
but is now, as the country’s paper is rated as BB-. Second, the emergence of China and India as
the dominant bi-lateral partners has enabled the government to start undertaking ambitious
infrastructure projects. Third, the weight of traditional Overseas Development Assistance (ODA),
as defined by the OECD, has been decreasing since 2005, when support came in to help the
country in the aftermath of the Tsunami. The architecture of the development community has yet
to adjust to this emerging reality. The mixed IDA/IBRD status will provide the opportunity to
develop a new CPS consistent with the middle-income status of the country and shift from an
exclusive IDA focus that the government deem incomplete.

VI.

Ratings
Results

61.

The CAS Completion Report rates the achievement of results, as amended by the CAS
Progress Report, as moderately satisfactory. The program achieved good progress toward most
major expected outcomes, with some slight shortcomings. Under the first pillar, the program
82

The Netherlands-IFC Partnership Program.
The Infrastructure Development Collaboration Partnership Fund, an untied facility established by IFC and the United
Kingdom’s Department for International Development and supported by the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency.
83

60

supported a rapid resettlement of displaced persons; it contributed towards increasing access to
electricity and water in rural and conflict areas and the supply of housing available for
resettlement; and, through a CDD approach, has helped in engaging marginalized communities in
their own development. In addition, it played the important function of signaling to the
international community the progress made in resettling displaced persons.
62.

Under pillar 2, the program, working with other development partners and under the
leadership of the government, contributed to road rehabilitation. The contribution of the
program towards improving access to ITC services by the public and small and medium
enterprises and a better interface between the public and private sectors is notable and has been
widely acknowledged within the World Bank and by external observers. Progress under the
tourism project is likewise notable. The contribution of the WBG to improving the business
environment helped reduce the number of days to open a business, but engagement on PPP and
SOE reform did not materialize as originally expected and the Progress Report had to scale down
the expectations about results. The contribution of the program to the institutional improvement
of the budgetary framework was limited as acknowledged by the Progress Report.

63.

Under pillar 3, the CAS delivered strong results in education and in health in line with
expectations. The impact on education has gone beyond delivering outcomes as the analytical
work has had an impact on the national discourse on higher education and contributed to the
introduction of reforms that have opened greater scope for the private sector in the delivery of
education services while setting in place an accountability framework for both public and private
institutions to ensure adherence to quality standards. The health program contributed to
improving local sector institutions and indirectly to improved health outcomes nationwide. The
analytical work on health is contributing to a dialogue on future adjustments to the health system
to address the rising challenges of non-communicable deceases and the aging of the population.
On-going social assistance work, with the support of trust funds, is providing inputs for the
government as it examines options to improve the effectiveness of the current extensive system of
social assistance.

64.

The agenda on the environment, under pillar 4, made a contribution to increasing the
supply of generation capacity from renewable sources at a pilot scale setting the basis for a
larger contribution towards closing the energy gap as the economy expands. These
interventions have abated carbon emissions. The remaining environment agenda was derailed
when the foreseen project was stopped at the point of negotiation, due to a change in
government’s priorities, despite considerable efforts that included prior analytical work and
extensive dialogue.

65.

Regarding the crosscutting CAS agenda, the delivery of results in support of conflictaffected areas was strong. Achievements on the transparency and accountability agenda were
mixed, with progress on demand-side of governance through the work involving communities in
their own development and the institutional improvements in health and education. However,
results on core governance (under the second pillar) felt short of the initial expectations, with the
Progress Report eliminating most of the results that appeared in the original CAS.
WBG Performance

66.

The CAS Completion Report rates the performance of the World Bank and the IFC as
moderately satisfactory. The design the program was relevant and made a contribution to the
achievement outcomes by responding to government priorities and country needs. In responding
to emerging priorities and needs (post-conflict) the World Bank exhibited flexibility, as noted by

61

the Progress Report. The management of the World Bank’s portfolio, which compares favorably
with the region, provided a steady flow of resources and contributed to the delivery of resources.
However, in a few cases delays in project implementation made it necessary to revise the original
targets set under the CAS. Quality AAA in education and health contributed to a national policy
dialogue and project design; however, lack of timely AAA in the critical areas of growth and
governance limited the World Bank’s ability to engage the government fully in areas that the
CAS had identified as a priority. This is being remedied now at the end of the CAS through the
on-going production of policy notes to advance the dialogue in the preparation of the forthcoming
CPS. These efforts are an important first step in addressing the skepticism of the government
regarding the role of the World Bank as a source of policy advice. That skepticism has arisen in
part from the presumption that the World Bank does not respond to local realities and rather
resorts to general remedies.
67.

The CAS Progress Report was prepared relatively late during the CAS due to the vacuum
created by the delay in appointing a new World Bank Country Director. At the end of the
CAS, the portfolio was heavily concentrated in a few areas of engagement: reconstruction of
conflict-afflicted areas and roads. However, the WGB is beginning to give more attention to
growth and competitiveness issues, both in AAA and lending, especially with the availability of
IBRD resources.

68.

The IFC maintained a limited but targeted engagement and its work complemented the
World Bank in areas like finance, IT, and renewable energy, contributing to strong results
delivery. The IFC continued solidifying its presence and PSD engagement in Sri Lanka and has
led the program in several areas helping to build local capacity to address financial inclusion,
enterprise development, and climate change. The IFC complemented well advisory services and
investment activities. IFC, like the World Bank made limited traction in advancing the PPP and
the deregulation agendas.

VII.

Lessons and recommendations

69.

The forthcoming CPS is being prepared in an environment very different from that in
which the previous CAS was prepared. Internal armed conflict has ended; economic growth is
fast and the mandate of the government is strong. The government seeks a rapid transformation of
the economy within a very specific vision of the country in the region and the world. The
challenge for the government is to develop the concrete steps, policies and investments to reach
this vision. The World Bank needs to support government in responding to these challenges. The
experience during the implementation of this CAS provides several lessons that are relevant for
the design and implementation of the next strategy.
Strategy Design and Implementation

70.

Flexibility in both design and implementation of a strategy is necessary to deliver a
program in an uncertain and evolving environment. This CAS strategy ended up with a
flexible implementation to accommodate emerging developments and shifts in policy stance. As a
result, the lending program differed from the original plan and the Progress Report revising the
results framework. Even if now no major upheavals are expected, it is advisable to embed
flexibility into the design of the next CAS. In a transitional context like Sri Lanka, it would help
to adopt an exploratory stance, where a combination of AAA, dialogue and pilot engagements is
used to explore the likelihood of successful engagement as areas of potential engagement open

62

up. A Progress Report strategically timed and hopefully at an earlier point in time than during this
CAS can be used to further tighten the areas of engagement during implementation.
71.

72.

73.

74.

Delivery is likely to be more effective in areas where the World Bank supports the revealed
priorities of the government on the ground. The government’s commitment to infrastructure,
resettlement, IT, education and health provided a solid ground for World Bank engagement.
However, the CAS committed to deliver results in areas where either the government had not
articulated a precise agenda. Consistent with a flexible stance, the next strategy may want to the
limit its commitments to areas where solid programs are in place for delivery and to adjust the
program as new agreements come into place. It may also engage the government in development
of a monitoring instrument to track progress in national goals such as the reduction in regional
disparities.
The World Bank responded to the priorities of the government but could have been better
prepared to respond to emerging priorities such as economic growth. The WBG responded
appropriately to the priority that was given to rehabilitating conflict-affected zones and, more
broadly, to help reduce regional disparities. In doing so, it concentrated a large share of its
portfolio towards this objective. The downside has been a limited attention to other relevant
issues of the development agenda, such as economic growth and public sector capacity building.
The challenge moving forward will be to balance the response to the emerging priorities of a
middle-income country with the reconstruction needs that remain. Since reducing regional
disparities will remain of concern, the WBG can, first, support mainstreaming the lessons from
past interventions, for instance, by focusing its support on budget programs through instruments
such as P4R or sector DPLs. And, second, it can look for complementarities between social
inclusion and strengthening the productive capacity of provinces within the context of
diversification and competitiveness. Moving to a growth and competitiveness agenda need not
mean abandoning inclusion and reconciliation.
IFC
The strategy of channeling resources through the banking system and of strengthening the
alignment between IFC advisory services and investments worked well. Sri Lanka possesses
a sound banking system, which both the IFC and the World Bank used effectively to channel
resources, for instance, to engage the private sector in sustainable energy generation and in
transferring resources to SMEs during the economic slowdown. The lesson is that anchoring
support on strong local institutions helps by-pass local capacity constraints. In addition, in line
with global guidelines, IFC work on the ground stressed the alignment between advisory and
investment activities. For instance, in projects such as Dialog, the advisory intervention
broadened the range of benefit/beneficiaries that are being supported.
It takes a longer-than-anticipated time for private sector investment to pick up in postconflict markets. Expectations for a rapid pick-up in private investments after the conflict ended
proved to be overly optimistic. The corporate/private sector may not have felt comfortable to
make investments until peace was firmly cemented, including an easing of tensions with the
international community, and how the new Government would rebuild the ground for the private
investment. On the latter, the signals of the Government regarding its commitment to a positive
investment climate for the private sector have been perceived as mixed by potential investors.
The lesson that emerges is that in post-conflict countries stronger and unambiguous messages are
needed to motivate a strong engagement of the private sector. Going forward continued attention
to the quality of the broad business environment is needed to enhance the opportunities for the
private sector support in the country.

63

Projects
75.

Appropriate design and timely implementation of programs and projects is required for the
effective delivery of results. Regarding design, two issues stand out during this CAS. The first is
the importance of designing relevant and realistic results frameworks for projects and for the
CAS. Several ICRs (health and water) illustrated how unrealistic results designs harm the
perception of achievements, even when these achievements have been substantial. Likewise, the
CAS Progress Report found it necessary to scale back initial expectations about results in part due
to the progress in project implementation. Regarding implementation, the negative impact of
delays on the reputation of the World Bank is of significance. The latest Portfolio Review
(October, 2011) identifies procurement weaknesses and limited integration of PIU units into the
public administration as factors that need attention. It also pointed out to the need to balance the
contribution of trust funds in advancing programs, with the high transactions costs for trust fund
approval and implementation. The second pertains to the selection of instruments suitable for the
specific conditions of the country and the sectors. Here, the SWAPs in health and education were
suited to support strengthening service delivery at the local level. Likewise the design in support
of resettlement combined attention to meeting national commitments, with support for
rehabilitation in the conflict areas.
AAA

76.

77.

Quality AAA can contribute to the national dialogue on policy and better ground the
dialogue with the government. The effective dissemination of quality analytical work on
education has had a positive impact on policy reform and policy design. Similarly, other
analytical work on demography and health is contributing to policy dialogue nationwide. Going
forward, it is advisable that the WBG fills the AAA gaps regarding growth and public sector
management to be in a better position to engage the government on a dialogue around the options
to unbundle and implement its vision of rapid and sustained growth. In doing so, the WBG should
rely on evidenced-based arguments and by focusing on options rather than definite prescriptions.
Outreach efforts to the broader constituencies are a powerful instrument to increase the
understanding of the issues and the reform options. With a literate population, an active press
and strong civil society organizations, dissemination is a powerful tool for contributing to the
national debate on development choices. In broadening the outreach, the WBG though needs to
continue to go beyond English to the two national languages. The dialogue in the local languages
dominates the policy discussion, with substantial variation in content and tone. The World Bank
has already commenced by publishing the executive summary in the two languages. Further
efforts at outreach would be consistent with shift in strategy that is ahead.

64

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1: EXPANDING ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES IN LAGGING REGIONS. INCLUSIVE AND EQUITABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CAS Outcome 1.1: Supporting Integrated Rural Development
 40 percent increase in rural
households electrified by off
grid electrification. (90,000
households as of 2008)

 Achieved: 139,241 households as of 15-11-2011, a 54.7 percent
increase over the baseline of 90,000 in 2008.

 Share of rural households with
access to improved water
source reach 74 percent (71
percent as of 2008)

 Achieved: 74 percent as per the Progress Report

 Share of rural roads (in nine
pilot Pradeshe Sabahs) in
‘good’ or ‘fair’ condition reach
64 percent (47 percent as of
2008)
 Share of underweight estate
sector children under age 5
reduce to 34.9 percent (from
44.1 percent in 2000)

Note: The World Bank contributed through the Second Community
Water Supply and Sanitation Project that linked 348,100 persons in
rural areas with improved sources of water. (ICR June 2011.)

 Indicator eliminated by the CPR
Implementation of the supporting project was slower than expected.

 Indicator eliminated by the CPR
The indicator was eliminated due to the delays in launching supporting
instrument.

Completed or Ongoing :
 Rural Electrification and Renewable
Energy Development Project –
renamed Renewable Energy for
Rural Economic Development
Project (Completed)
 IFC advisory and investment support
for electric power (Ongoing)
 Second Community Water Supply
and Sanitation Project (Completed)
 Integrated Community Development
– renamed Second Community
Development and Livelihood
Improvement Project (Gemi Diriya)
(Ongoing)
 Infrastructure Assessment (AAA)
(Ongoing)
 National and Provincial Road
projects – note that national roads are
supported under Road Sector
Assistance Project and its Additional
Financing (New National Roads
Project proposed in CAS was

The rural areas are now better
connected to the markets. The
alignment of the CAS support
for rural development with the
government’s commitment to
reducing regional disparities
helped deliver positive results
especially in electricity and
water, with the delivery in rural
roads lagging, but picking-up.
The increased availability of
energy in rural areas
emphasizing the use of
renewable sources as well as
channelling the support through
the local financial sector and
involving the private agents
teaches that it is possible to be
combine innovation in delivery
with attention to the poorest
regions of the country
A challenge going forward for
rural development will be to

65

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators
 Increase share of CDD projects
that involve functional
collaboration across ethnic
groups.

Status and evaluation summary

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome

 Achieved: Increase of about 15 percent as per of the Progress
Report

Note: Under the Community Livelihoods in Conflict Areas Project
1,506 Community Based Organizations have been either revived or
created and are operating satisfactorily in subproject
implementation and O&M at village level, exceeding already the
target of 600 at the end of the project in 2013. (Source: ISR-Nov2011 )








converted into AF for Road Sector
Assistance Project) (Ongoing)
Road Sector Second Additional
Financing (Ongoing)
Dam Safety and Water Resources
Planning Project (Ongoing)
Lagging Regions – renamed
Connecting People to Prosperity
(AAA) (Completed)
IFC advisory for MSME capacity
building in 5 lagging districts in the
South (Completion expected June
2012)
IFC advisory for SME linkages and
Business Edge MSME training (incl.
in the North) (Completed)

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS
complement the investments in
infrastructure with attention to
marketing and technological
change through rebuilding the
extension services. The AAA is
available to support these
efforts.

The use of a CDD approach to
rural development has been
effective and considered as best
practice. The challenge going
forward will be to address the
concerns of the government
regarding the sustainability of
the initiatives and the alignment
with government programs in a
way that preserves the
achievements of the past and
retains its commitment to
broaden its impact nationally.

CAS Outcome 1.2: Improving Access to Public Services and Infrastructure in the North and East
 Share of rural population with
access to basic infrastructure
facilities in North and East to
reach 15 percent (9 percent as

 Achieved: 15 percent as per the Progress Report (Note: Internal
Team Calculation. Community Livelihoods in Conflict Areas
Project)

Completed or Ongoing:
 Puttalam Housing Project
(Completed)

The internal conflict destroyed
infrastructure and housing and
displaced people. The CAS
program was effective in

66

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

of 2008)
 Share of destroyed residential
houses in North and East
rehabilitated to reach 37
percent. (Baseline corrected:
10 percent as of 2008; Target
to be revised: to 18 percent;

 100,000 Internally Displaced
Persons returned to their place
of origin.

 1, 070,000 person-days of
employment generated for
returnees.
 119,200 hectares cultivated
after irrigation rehabilitation.
(New Indicator; Achievement
expected by end of CAS period:
300 hectares cultivated as of
2011.)

 Achieved: 17.3 percent 28-11-2011
Note on the calculation: 300,000 was the stock of damaged housing as
of June 2008. Under the North-East Housing Reconstruction Program
48,049 housing had been constructed (28-11-2011) and under the
Puttalam Housing Project 4,144 (20-09-11) for a total of 52, 193 units.

 New Indicator; Achieved: 187,533 IDPs returned as of 31-10-2011,
exceeding the target set by the CPR and the supporting project
(Emergency Northern Recovery ISR.)

 New Indicator; Achieved: 1,713,603 person-days of employment
generated as of 31-10-2011, exceeding the target set by the CPR
and the supporting project (Emergency Northern Recovery ISR.)

 Achieved. Farm area has increased by 19,200 ha due to increased
supply of water resulting from irrigation rehabilitation.
03/11/2011(Community Livelihoods in Afflicted Areas Project
ISR.) The final objective under this project is 213,000 ha for
December 2013. While the original target was too ambitious, the
revised target in the Progress Reports seems low.)

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

 Tsunami Emergency Reconstruction
Program (Completed)
 Community Livelihoods in Conflict
Affected Areas Project
(Reawakening Project) (Ongoing)
 North East Housing Reconstruction
Program and Additional Financing
(Completed)
 Integrated Rural Development –
renamed North East Local Services
Improvement Project (Ongoing)
 Provincial Road Project (Ongoing)
 Impact Evaluation of Gama Naguma
(TA) (Completed)
 Emergency Northern Recovery
Project (Ongoing)

helping the government address
these challenges. The positive
results (foremost the rapid
resettlement of refugees) reflect
government commitment,
World Bank and other donors’
rapid response and an increased
allocation of (IDA) resources
towards these objectives.

 Community Livelihoods in Conflict
Affected Areas Project Additional
Finance (Ongoing)

This experience exemplifies the
importance of the a flexible
approach that responds to
emerging developments,.
The challenge ahead will be
aligning continued support for
increasing economic
opportunities in conflict
affected areas with he
government growth strategy
that emphasizes strong growth
poles throughout the island.
These two goals are quite
compatible.

67

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

(Note: Other projects also focus enabling land for cultivation in the
conflict affected areas. For instance, under the Emergency Northern
Recovery Project, around 6,000 HAs have been made available for
around 28,000 resettled persons.)
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2: IMPROVING THE INVESTMENT CLIMATE AND COMPETITIVENESS. ACCELERATE AND SUSTAIN ECONOMIC GROWTH
CAS Outcome 2.1: Improving Infrastructure Provision
 Reduction in International Road
Roughness Index to 8.4
(Average IRRI for Sri Lanka
equal to 9.5 in 2005)

 Achieved: Average IRRI for Sri Lanka equal to 6.2 as of 2010
(Source: PAD for Second Additional Financing (credit) for the
Road Sector Assistance Project, March 15, 2011)

 4 percent decline in Average
Network Vehicle Operating
Costs (23.8 in 2005)



 Reduction in road network in
poor or bad condition to 35
percent (52 percent in 2005)
Target revised by PR : 37
percent by end of CAS period)

Likely to be Achieved: 38 percent in 2010. The target under the Roads
Sector Project for 2011 is 37. Road performance information for 2011
is not yet available. (Source: PAD for Second Additional Financing
(credit) for the Road Sector Assistance Project, March 15, 2011)

Achieved: 14.6 in 2010, a reduction of 39 percent, (Source: PAD
for Second Additional Financing (credit) for the Road Sector
Assistance Project, March 15, 2011)

Completed or Ongoing:
 Road Sector Assistance Project
(Ongoing)
 Second Community Water Supply
and Sanitation Project (Completed)
 National and Provincial Road Sector
Projects (Ongoing)
 Infrastructure Assessment (AAA)
(Ongoing)
 TA for Regulatory Agencies (IDF
grant for telecom sector)
(Completed)
 IFC completed portfolio investment
in South Asia Gateway Terminals
(port) (Completed)
 IFC portfolio investments in Dialog
and Suntel (ICT) (Ongoing)

Redressing the infrastructure
gap has been a top government
priority that has received the
support of the donor
community. Major institutional
gains have been made and
results delivered. A key lesson
learned here is the importance
of the government leadership in
coordinating the contribution of
traditional donors.
The challenge ahead lies in
shifting the focus from
infrastructure to logistics with
the view to develop efficiency
corridors that improve the
integration of the domestic
economy and link it with the
external markets.

68

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

CAS Outcome 2.2: Improving the Business Environment for Stronger Entrepreneurship and a Knowledge-Based Economy
 Share of commercial lending for
SMEs from World Bank
increased by 10 percent.

 Achieved: Share of commercial lending for SMEs has increased by
15 percent as per CAS Progress Report.
Note: World Bank support for lending to the SME sector has come
through the Small and Medium Enterprise Development Facility
Project approved in FY11. As of 01-12-2011, 209 loans had been
processed and 46 approved, with 75 percent more than three-year
maturity. The total amount of resources made available had reached
US$4.4 million. (ISR—April-2011)

 20 e-government services
established and used by private
sector (Baseline: zero as of
2008)

 Time to start up a business
reduced by 25 percent (70 days
as of 2008)

 Achieved: 130 e-government informational services offered 03-112011 (ISR –e-Sri Lanka Project.)
(Note: Contribution of the e-Sri Lanka Project and parallel IFC efforts
go far beyond the above indicator. See, ISR 03-11-2011.)

 Achieved: 35 days as per the 2012 Doing Business report, a 50
percent reduction.

Completed or Ongoing:
 SME Development Facility Project
(Ongoing)
 IFC GTFP support for SMEs
(Ongoing)
 IFC investment and advisory for
MSME finance (Ongoing)
 IFC Dialog investment capacity
building for MSMEs via SME
Toolkit and ICT (Ongoing)
 IFC advisory on Corporate
Governance in the Financial and
Corporate sectors (Ongoing)
 IFC study and software development
support for Secured Collateral
Registry and Payment System
(Completed)
 Transition to IAS32, IAS39 and
IFRS7 (TA funded by FIRST)
(Completed)
 Amending SEC Act to enable
demutualization of Colombo Stock
Exchange (TA funded by FIRST)
(Completed)

WBG support for improving the
business environment was
effective but limited, especially
given the importance the
government assigns to rapid
economic growth. The
intervention to support IT
development in government and
the private sector has been very
effective and is a good example
of a well targeted operation that
responds to the strategic priority
of the government.
Channelling resources through
the financial sector worked well
both for the IFC and the World
Bank and helped by-pass local
capacity constraints.
.Arguably the lack of up-to-date
analytical work affected the
capacity of the WBG to engage
more effectively around the
growth agenda. A strong lesson
that emerges is the need to be

69

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

 Insurance Supervision support (TA
funded by FIRST) (Completed)
 E-Sri Lanka Project (Ongoing)
 Private Sector Development in
Tourism Resources Project –
renamed Sustainable Tourism
Development Project (Ongoing)
 IFC advisory for sustainable tourism
(incl. supplier MSME capacity
building) (Completed)
 IFC-WB support to Doing Business
reform (TA) (Ongoing)
 IFC portfolio investment in John
Keels (Ongoing)
 IFC advisory for investment climate
reforms in one municipality
(Completed)
 Growth, Outsourcing and Jobs
(AAA) – refocused (Ongoing)
 IFC investment support for banks
(Ongoing)
 IFC investments in microfinance and
equity funds supporting SMEs
(Ongoing)
 IFC advisory program for MSMEs
via investment linkages and Business
Edge (Completed)
 IFC Access to Finance (risk
management, agri-finance insurance)
(Ongoing)

ready with supporting
background work when a
strategy focus changes as in this
case from a strict IDA focus to
a middle income agenda. This
AAA gap was being redressed
by the end of the CAS period.

70

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

CAS Outcome 2.3: Improving the Strategic Relevance and Transparency of Public Spending
 Share of budget expenditures
classified as ‘other’ in the
MTEF reduced to 5 percent (30
percent in 2006)
 Quasi-fiscal losses of SOEs
reduced to less than 0.5 percent
of GDP (2 percent in 2006)
 Improved public procurement,
public financial management
and parliamentary oversight
over public spending

 Achieved: As of 2011, no budget expenditures are categorized as
‘other’—CAS Progress Report

Completed or Ongoing:



 Target eliminated by the CAS Progress Report.
World Bank support for SOE did not materialize after an early on
analytical work was completed due to lack of government’s demand.


Partial Progress. No noted progress in either public financial
management or public procurement, but some progress has been
made in improving parliamentary oversight over public spending:
(a) external auditing has widened to 100 percent of the public
sector now, when it was 50 percent in 2008, and (b) the Audit
Agency is in time with the annual audit plan rather than 2 to 4
years late in 2008..(ISR Public Administration Project.)




Public Sector Capacity Building
Project (Ongoing)
IDF Grant for COPE/COPA
(Completed)
Debt Management (TA)
(Completed)
Infrastructure Assessment
(AAA) (Ongoing)

The limited impact of the
program supporting the
strategic relevance and the
transparency of public spending
was partly the result of low
government interest, lack of
supporting analytical work and
the difficulties with
implementing the Public Sector
Capacity Building Project, with
the exception of the support to
the office of the Auditor
General that has worked well.
Efforts are underway to build a
program that can help Sri Lanka
strengthen its country systems
and develop effective results
oriented budget programs. It is
advisable that this area become
a priority in the next strategy.

71

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3: IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF SERVICES AND ACCOUNTABILITY. PROVISION OF HIGH QUALITY, RELEVANT AND COST
EFFECTIVE PUBLIC SERVICES, INCLUDING IN CONFLICT-AFFECTED AREAS
CAS Outcome 3.1: Improving Quality, Relevance and Governance of Education
 School survival rates through
grade 9 increased from 79
percent to 85 percent.

 Achieved: 91 percent in 2010 as of 06/30/2011

 Proportion of primary school
students attaining competence in
mathematics increased from 67
percent t o 71 percent

 Achieved: 82 percent as of 06/30/11

 School based management
increased from 16 zones (17
percent of zones) to at least 46
zones (50 percent of zones).

 Achieved: The Program for School Improvement; which allows
local communities to play a role in school management was piloted
tested and extended to all zones in the country by 12/31/2011.

 Higher education development
strategy completed and notified.

 Achieved

 IT achievement scores of
undergraduates rise from 49
percent in 2005 to 60 percent in
2008. English language
achievement scores of
undergraduates rise from 59
percent (as of 2005) to 67

 Achieved: 56 percent as of 2008 (the end of project figure was
measured in 2008 when the targeted interventions, Institutional
Block Grants was completed)See ICR for Improving Relevance and
Quality of Undergraduate Education12/31/2008
 Achieved: 69 percent as of 2008. See ICR for Improving Relevance

Completed or Ongoing:
 Education Sector Development
Project (Completed)
 Increasing Relevance and Quality of
Undergraduate Education Project
(Completed)
 Higher Education for the 21st
Century Project (Ongoing)
 Impact evaluation of school based
management (TA) (Ongoing)
 Higher Education Study (AAA)
(Completed)
 General Education Project – renamed
Transforming School Education as
the Foundation for a Knowledge Hub
Project (Ongoing)

The supporting environment in
education contains all of the key
elements for successful
cooperation. Strong institutions
in education have steered the
delivery of strong results over a
long period of time. The
analytical work of the World
Bank in education was amply
discussed and disseminated.
The government has undertaken
important institutional reform in
tertiary education. The World
Bank has worked with regions
in improving results at the local
level. All expected outcomes
under the CAS were delivered.
One lesson for cooperation in
other sectors is to take a long
term perspective to build solid
results overtime. Another lesson
that emerges is the importance
of SWAPs and results-based
instruments to implement

72

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators
percent in 2008

 Promote a multi-ethnic and
multicultural society through the
school curriculum.

Status and evaluation summary

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome

and Quality of Undergraduate Education 12/31/2008

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS
program that have a strong
regional focus.

 Achieved School curriculum promotes bilingual education and
includes civics as a subject, in 2011

CAS Outcome 3.2: Improving Health and Social Protection Services
 Percentage of districts with
MMR of 46.9/100,000 or lower
equal to 80 percent

 Partially achieved: 77 percent of districts as reported by the CAS
Progress Report.
Note: The ICR for the Heath Sector Delivery Project reports 70
percent for 12/31/2010 and 68percent for 12/31/2009)

 Number of women more than 35
years screened for cervical
cancer increased by 25 percent
(57,639 screened in 2007)

 Coverage of HH receiving
Samurdhi benefits reduced from
47 percent to 40 percent while
the share of Samurdhi

 Achieved: 122,130 women screened, an increase of 112 percent, 1as
per the CAS Progress Report
Note: the ICR for Heath Sector Delivery Project reports an increase
of 200 percent between 2008 and 2010 in the percentage of women
screened for cervical cancer.

 Achievement expected by end of CAS period. 30 percent of HH
receive benefits, with 13.2 percent of beneficiaries in the East and
4.1 percent in the North, based on most recently available data as of
2011.

Completed or Ongoing:
 Health Sector Development Project
and Additional Financing
(Completed)
 National HIV/AIDS Project
(Completed)
 Health Delivery System Review and
Non-Communicable Diseases
Strategy (AAA) (Completed)
 Study on Private Sector in Health
(AAA) (Ongoing)
 IFC investments in hospitals
(Ongoing)
 IDF to improve targeting and
administration of Samurdhi
(Ongoing)
 Towards a Social Protection system

The country has sustained the
improving trend in health
indicators, such as maternal and
infant mortality. The
contribution of the World Bank
has come in supporting
improved managerial practices
at the local level. The analytical
work of the World Bank has
pointed out the challenges of
the demographic transition and
non-communicable diseases. As
in the case of education,
SWAPs and results-based
instruments seem quite
appropriate to help implement
programs that have a strong
regional focus. Going forward

73

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators
beneficiaries in the East
increases from 11.7 percent to
15 percent, and in the North
from 3.5 percent to 5 percent

Status and evaluation summary

 Achieved: 90,000. (Source: CAS Progress Report)

 30 percent increase in the
coverage of the Employment
Promotion and Creation
Program (baseline 3.000 per
year)
 30 percent increase in social
care centers for vulnerable
groups (baseline 27 centers in
2008)

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome





 Achieved: 44 centers in 2011, an increase of 63 percent (Source:
CAS Progress Report)




for the poor (programmatic TA)
(Completed)
Income Support to Disabled and
Elderly Project (Global Food Crisis
Rapid Response Program) (Ongoing)
JSDF Proposal Development Fund
(Completed)
Post Disaster Safety Net Project.
(Global Food Crisis Rapid Response
Program) (Completed)
Implementation and evaluation of
Samurdhi targeting (TA)
Demographic transition (AAA)
(Ongoing)

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS
the challenge will be how to
address the changes in demand
for health services that come
with an aging population.

CAS Outcome 3.3: Strengthening Environmental Protection
 25 percent reduction in time for
processing environmental
approvals (180 days today for
EIAs and 45 days for EPLs)
Target revised by the CAS PR:
to 15 percent reduction in time.

 20 percent of GOSL policies

 No progress as per the CAS Progress Report

Completed or ongoing:
 Sri Lanka Country Environmental
Analysis –Natural Resources,
Environment and Development
(AAA) (Completed)
 Environmental impacts of coal power
generation (AAA) – refocused
(Completed)
 IFC advisory for energy efficiency in

World Bank work on
environment was impaired by
the fact that the Ecosystems
Conservation and Management
Project did not materialize
during this CAS period, owing
to changed government
priorities. Given that the project
was designed and developed

74

Table 1. Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation
Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators
and programs will be subject to
Strategic Environmental
Assessments (none today)
 40 percent increase in
international tourist visitation to
protected areas and forest
reserves (Currently 50,000
international tourists per
annum)
 Reducing the human/elephant
conflict; annual number of
human deaths from wild
elephants reduced by 25 percent
(75 deaths in 2006); number of
wild elephants killed reduced by
25 percent (160 killed in 2006)

Status and evaluation summary

 Achieved: 20 percent. (Source: CAS Progress Report)

 Target eliminated by the CAS Progress Report
Supporting program did not materialize.

 Target eliminated by the CAS Progress Report
Supporting program did not materialize

Lending and non-lending activities
that contributed to the outcome
the tea industry (Completed)
 IFC investment and advisory for
sustainable energy projects via
PADGO (Portfolio Approach to
Distributed Generation Opportunity)
risk sharing facilities and direct
support. (Ongoing)
 Nature Based Tourism and Human
Elephant Conflict (AAA)
(Completed)

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS
jointly with sector government
officials, these events point to
the type of risks that can arise
today in Sri Lanka. Efforts
should be made to mitigate
these risks without
compromising an open
approach to cooperation.
To the contrary the progress
with increasing the supply of
renewable energy and abating
carbon emissions has been quite
effective, even if at a pliot level.
The experience provides a
valuable experience for Sri
Lanka and for other countries.

75

Table 2: Sri Lanka Planned and Delivered Operations—FY09-FY12 CAS
Fiscal
Year

CAS Planned Project

Planned
Amount

Status

Approved
Amount
(US$m)

(US$m)
FY09

Integrated Community Development –
Gama Naguma/Lagging Regions
(renamed Second Community
Development and Livelihood
Improvement Project)
Provincial Road (East and
Sabagaragamuwa) Development
(renamed Provincial Road Project)

75

150

Approved in FY10*

Approved in FY10*

Additional Actual
Projects
Health Sector
Development Additional
Financing

FY10

Integrated Rural Development— Gama
Naguma/ Lagging Regions for East

50

24

Road Sector Assistance
Project – Additional
Finance (programmed
for FY08; approved
FY09)

98.1

TOTAL FY09

122.1

Actual

50

(renamed North & East Local Services
Improvement Project)
Higher Education

40

Environmental Resource Management

20

40
Dropped

(renamed Ecosystems Conservation and
Management Project)
Private Sector Development in Tourism
Resources (renamed Sustainable
Tourism Development project)

15

18

76

National and Provincial (Western and
Uva) Road Development

115

Dropped
(AF for Road Sector
Assistance Project, FY09
ongoing)

Second Community Development and
Livelihood Improvement Project

Shifted from FY09

75

Provincial Road Project

Shifted from FY09

105

Additional Actual
Projects

FY11

Emergency Northern
Recovery Project

65

Community Livelihoods
in Conflict Affected
Areas – Additional
Finance

12

TOTAL FY10

365

National and Provincial (North Central
and North Western) Road Development

100

Dropped

Irrigation Maintenance and Water

50

Dropped

Community Water Supply & Poverty
Alleviation in Plantation Districts

40

Dropped

Agriculture Research and Productivity
Improvements (renamed Agricultural
Competitiveness Project)

35

Dropped

(converted into 2nd AF
for Road Sector
Assistance Project,
FY11)

Additional Actual
Projects
SME Development
Facility Project

57.4

Road Sector Assistance
Project – 2nd Additional
Finance

100

77

Community Livelihoods
in Conflict Affected
Areas – 2nd Additional
Finance (flood
response)

FY12

48

TOTAL FY11*

205.4

50

Actual

100**

Health Sector Development

35

Slipped to FY13

Water Supply in the Northern Easter and
Sabaragamuwa Province

75

Dropped

National and Provincial (North Central
and Northern Road Development)

50

Dropped

General Education
(renamed Transforming School
Education as the Foundation for a
Knowledge Hub)

(converted into 2nd AF
for Road Sector
Assistance Project,
FY11)
Additional Actual
Projects

Metro Colombo
Integrated Urban
Development Project
E-Sri Lanka

TOTAL FY12**

213**

11

324

Note:
*Project moved to FY 10 and lending amount is shown under FY10.
** Indicative.

78

Table 3 : Summary of Planned and Delivery Non-lending Services FY09-12
Product*,**

Completion
FY

ESW

TA

Programmatic Area: Supporting the Mahinda Chintana goal of doubling per capita income / sustained economic
growth
‘Completions
Growth Potential in Lagging Regions

2009



Cost of No Reform

2009



Towers of Learning: Higher Education Report

2009



Environmentally Sustainable Power Development

2010



Knowledge Economy Report**

2010

Nature-Based Tourism & Human Elephant Conflict

2010



Valuation of Environmental Services

2010



Agricultural Policy Options

2010



Benchmarking of procurement system

2010



Transport Policy Note

2012



Post FSAP, Crisis Management, Financial Safety Net and Lender of Last Resort

2012





Underway
Support for Post-Crisis PPP framework development in Sri Lanka**

2012



Infrastructure Assessment

2012



Impact of the current trade policies on the agricultural incentive framework
(Promoting broad based agricultural growth in Sri Lanka: Policy and investment
priorities)

2012



Strategic Development Framework Eastern Province**

2012



Pre-feasibility assessment of the conditions of degradation of the Sigiriya Frescoes in
Sri Lanka**

2012



Procurement policy note

2012



Use of Country Financial Management System

2012



Financial Sector Policy Note *

2012



79

Product*,**

Completion
FY

ESW

Investment Climate Assessment Policy Note

2012



Fiscal Policy Note

2012



2020 Raising the Game: Growth Report

2012



Competitive Skills for a MIC

2011



TA

Supporting the Mahinda Chintana goal of a high quality of life for all its people/ public service provision in the
middle income country context
Completions
Lagging Regions Phase 2

2010



Health Services Delivery in Sri Lanka

2010



Social Protection TA

2010

Excellence in General Education

2011



Sri Lanka Development Partners Coordination**

2011





Underway
Private Health Sector Assessment*

2013

Strengthening Samurdhi Targeting Systems**

2012

Demographic Transition Study*

2012

Disaster Reduction and Recovery in Sri Lanka**

2012

Environmental Assessment System

2011

Implementing the Sri Lanka Conflict Filter**

2012



Assessment of the Secondary Cities of Sri Lanka *

2012



Tackling Persistent Gender Issues*

2012



Urban Policy Notes

2012








NOTE: This Table updates the information presented in the CAS Progress Report.
* AAA not foreseen in FY09-12 CAS.
** TA not foreseen in FY09-12 CAS.

80

Annex 3: Sri Lanka At A Glance

2/25/11

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2009
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Sri
Lanka

South
Asia

Lowermiddleincome

20.3
1,990
40.4

1,568
1,082
1,697

3,811
2,316
8,825

1.0
0.6

1.5
2.2

1.2
1.5

..
15
74
13
21
90
91
101
101
102

..
30
64
55
41
87
61
108
110
105

..
41
68
43
25
87
80
107
109
105

Development diamond*

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 2003-09
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

GNI
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 2003-09)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Literacy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

Sri Lanka
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1989

1999

2008

2009

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formation/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

7.0
21.7
27.3
12.2
18.9

15.7
27.3
35.5
19.5
23.5

40.7
27.6
24.8
13.9
14.8

42.0
24.5
21.4
18.0
20.2

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

-5.2
2.2
74.2
18.2
..
..

-3.6
1.4
62.6
11.1
..
..

-9.5
0.9
38.3
9.3
..
..

-0.5
0.8
41.0
10.1
31.6
94.5

1989-99

1999-09

2008

2009

2009-13

5.3
4.3
7.4

5.3
4.3
..

6.0
5.2
..

3.5
2.8
..

7.2
..
..

Economic ratios*

Trade

Domestic
savings

Capital
formation

Indebtedness
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

Sri Lanka
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
1989

1999

2008

2009

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

25.6
26.8
15.3
47.6

20.7
27.3
16.4
52.0

13.4
29.4
18.0
57.2

12.6
29.7
18.1
57.7

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and services

77.3
10.5
36.8

71.5
9.0
43.3

70.0
16.2
38.5

64.3
17.6
27.9

1989-99

1999-09

2008

2009

2.0
7.0
8.3
5.7

2.4
5.2
4.3
6.0

7.5
5.9
4.9
5.6

3.2
4.2
3.3
3.3

4.9
20.1
6.4
8.4

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services

Growth of capital and GDP (%)
10
8
6
4
2
0
04

05

06

GCF

07

08

09

GDP

Note: 2009 data are preliminary estimates.
This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

81

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1989
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1999

2008

2009

Inflation (%)
25

11.6
10.9

4.7
4.2

22.6
16.3

3.4
5.7

20
15
10

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

5
0

24.0
1.4
-8.6

18.4
-0.4
-6.9

15.6
-1.3
-7.0

15.1
-3.1
-9.8

1989

1999

2008

2009

1,558
379
86
490
2,282
..
..
..

4,610
620
374
2,425
5,979
661
500
1,565

8,111
1,272
583
3,469
14,091
1,138
3,368
3,048

7,085
1,185
505
3,274
10,207
987
2,167
2,451

16
26
64

92
86
107

140
153
91

138
155
89

1989

1999

2008

2009

1,904
2,621
-717

5,578
6,799
-1,221

10,115
15,694
-5,579

8,977
11,708
-2,731

Net income
Net current transfers

-163
519

-254
913

-972
2,666

-487
3,004

Current account balance

-360

-562

-3,885

-214

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

396
-36

299
263

2,778
1,107

3,491
-3,277

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

254
36.1

1,639
70.6

5,467
108.3

5,578
114.9

1989

1999

2008

2009

5,181
82
702

9,800
20
1,651

15,611
0
2,381

17,208
0
2,487

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

422
12
7

757
8
27

1,231
0
74

1,418
0
73

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

195
298
-48
20
0

112
151
-83
176
0

520
268
163
752
-488

497
603
638
404
-382

20
59
6
53
12
41

56
49
21
28
14
14

279
95
55
40
19
21

99
147
56
91
17
74

04

05

06

07

08

GDP deflator

09

CPI

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Tea
Other agricultural goods and unclassified expor
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
15,000

10,000

5,000

0
03

Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

04

05

06

Exports

07

08

09

Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

Current account balance to GDP (%)
0
03

04

05

06

07

08

09

-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-12

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.

Composition of 2009 debt (US$ mill.)

1873

2487

721

2685

3388

6054

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

2/25/11

82

Annex 4: Selected Indicators of World Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2009

2010

2011

2012

13
4.8
7.7
3.3
7.7
3.3
24.6

16
3.7
6.3
2.7
6.3
2.7
48.3

15
3.6
13.3
7.9
20.0
16.5
33.5

13
3.2
15.4
8.5
23.1
36.8
13.5

Since FY 80

Last Five FYs

82
2,302.5

4
140.2

31.6

25.0

35.5

5.7

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the World Bank's country
portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development
objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the World Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

83

Annex 5: Sri Lanka IFC Investment Operations Program

* As of March 13,2012
2009

2010

2011

2012*

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants

51

74

31

83

IFC's Own Accounts only

38

69

30

83

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
COLLECTIVE INVESTMENT VEHICLES

34

ELECTRIC POWER
FINANCE & INSURANCE

19

13

0

100

52

54

100

100

100

100

100

46

4

100

71

54

18

100

100

100

100

HEALTH CARE
Total

29

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
Guarantee
Loan
Total

29

78

84

Annex 6: Sri Lanka Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2004-10

South
Asia

Lowermiddleincome

16.2
1.4
18.0
2.9

18.2
1.0
16.4
2.2

20.9
1.0
15.1
2.3

1,567.7
1.5
29.8
2.8

3,810.8
1.2
40.9
2.5

..
..
..

26.1
16.3
29.5

15.2
6.7
15.7

..
..
..

..
..
..

370
22
..

690
65
..

2,240
273
..

1,107
135
..

2,321
130
..

32.5
8.3
41.1

32.5
8.7
41.5

40.3
6.9
47.8

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

1.6
..
..

1.8
..
..

1.3
2.9
..

2.1
4.1
..

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female

..
..
..

..
..
..

95
95
95

86
88
83

87
88
86

Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

..
..
..

73
93
69

90
98
88

87
95
83

87
95
81

Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)

20
70
..

87
93
..

96
97
22

75
72
43

79
79
24

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female

69
66
72

69
66
73

75
72
78

64
63
66

68
66
70

31
37

23
27

14
17

55
71

43
58

200
152
..
..

182
122
73
94

190
77
39
99

242
169
290
47

201
136
230
67

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)
Food price index (2000=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Share of income or consumption
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)

Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.

02/03/12

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

85

Annex 7: Key Economic Indicators
Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product
Agriculture

a

2007
100
12

Actual
2008
2009
100
13

100
13

2010
100
13

Estimate
2011
100
14

2012
100
15

Projected
2013
2014
100
15

2015

100
15

100
16

Industry

30

29

30

29

28

27

26

26

25

Services

58

57

58

58

58

58

59

59

59

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

82
25
5
20

86
25
6
19

82
24
6
17

81
28
6
22

81
29
6
23

79
33
6
27

82
30
6
24

83
29
6
24

84
29
6
23

b

29
39

25
39

21
28

22
31

24
35

26
37

27
39

28
41

30
43

18

14

18

19

19

21

18

17

16

23

18

24

25

27

30

28

28

27

32351

40715

42068

49552

57210

61423

70585

80058

89036

1570

1770

1960

2300

2570

2880

3230

3570

3990

6.0
3.1

3.5
10.0

8.0
7.5

7.7
6.8

6.8
6.6

7.7
7.3

7.0
6.5

7.0
6.4

2.6
2.7
0.0

7.0
7.4
8.7

7.7
6.9
7.6

6.8
3.4
2.7

6.6
11.0
12.0

5.9
6.8
6.9

5.9
6.8
7.0

Exports (GNFS)
Imports (GNFS)

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings

c

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 82 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
6.8
Gross Domestic Income
5.8

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 82 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
5.7
4.9
Total consumption
3.4
6.8
Private consumption
2.9
6.5
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
b

9415
7640

10115
8111

8977
7085

10775
8307

13348
10487

16393
13060

19265
15382

22655
18132

26660
21391

12768
11296
-3353
2311
-1400

15694
14091
-5579
2666
-3885

11708
10207
-2731
3004
-214

15282
13512
-4507
3660
-1419

22163
20230
-8815
4574
-4005

24283
22190
-7890
6583
-1960

28532
26277
-9267
7879
-1927

33620
31190
-10966
9435
-2221

39688
37070
-13028
11302
-2657

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

548
672
304
368
851

691
252
271
-19
1835

384
840
605
235
2455

435
1796
1297
499
1027

1000
-142
1245
-1386
3150

1500
-2017
995
-3012
2945

1500
1172
357
815
1086

1000
2760
-121
2882
1684

1000
3262
-516
3778
2360

c

-671

1107

-3465

-1839

-3

-468

-1830

-3224

-3964

-10.4

-13.7

-6.5

-9.1

-15.4

-12.8

-13.1

-13.7

-14.6

1.0
..
-1.5
-2.4

2.6
..
0.3
6.3

-17.3
..
-10.6
-14.8

7.6
..
-1.8
14.9

32.5
..
36.0
35.6

16.2
..
17.7
14.6

16.3
..
17.9
15.9

16.4
..
18.1
16.0

16.5
..
18.2
16.1

Exports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
b

Imports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

Change in reserves

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR82 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

86

Indicator

2007

Actual
2008
2009

2010

Estimate
2011

2012

Projected
2013
2014

2015

d

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)
Current revenues
16.6
Current expenditures
17.4
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
-0.8
Capital expenditure
6.1
Foreign financing
3.7
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR82 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)

e

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d
e.

15.6
16.9
-1.3
5.7
0.6

15.0
18.2
-3.2
6.7
5.3

14.9
16.7
-1.8
6.4
4.7

15.7
16.3
-0.6
6.0
2.6

16.0
16.0
0.1
6.2
2.0

16.2
15.4
0.8
6.0
0.3

16.3
15.0
1.2
6.0
0.5

16.3
14.7
1.5
6.0
0.2

41.8
19.8
124.6

37.5
10.6
34.2

40.5
18.4
-149.1

40.2
14.9
97.6

43.3
24.5
177.1

49.8
31.0
121.7

49.2
13.4
100.2

49.2
13.4
78.2

49.2
13.4
66.4

200.5
213.1
94.1

207.5
250.1
83.0

219.2
212.6
103.1

238.9
244.9
97.6

240.8
253.9
94.8

243.9
258.8
94.3

247.1
264.3
93.5

250.3
270.4
92.6

253.6
276.8
91.6

100.4

117.8

119.7

123.0

123.0

124.0

125.0

126.0

127.0

15.8
14.0

22.6
16.3

3.4
5.9

6.7
7.3

6.7
7.2

6.0
6.7

6.0
6.7

6.0
6.0

6.0
6.0

GDP at market prices
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

87

Annex 8: Key Exposure Indicators

Actual
Indicator

2007

Total debt outstanding and

2008

Projected

Estimated
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

14369

15615

17213

20452

21534

21766

21414

20504

19125

1158

356

1145

2334

1099

232

-352

-911

-1379

837

1231

1417

1445

1480

2032

1958

2102

2235

TDO/XGS

116.2

120.1

138.6

134.4

112.0

95.5

79.5

64.4

50.8

TDO/GDP

44.4

38.4

40.9

41.3

37.6

34.1

29.7

25.6

21.5

6.8

9.5

11.4

9.5

7.7

8.9

7.3

6.6

5.9

67.8

68.0

64.5

60.6

62.0

65.0

67.4

70.0

72.8

a

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)

a

Net disbursements (US$m)
Total debt service (TDS)
a

(US$m)

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
b

TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.3

0.4

0.5

26.2

27.5

26.7

25.4

28.2

22.4

46.5

48.8

26.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0

0

0

0

0

36

c

DS (%)

IBRD DS/XGS
d

IBRD TDO (US$m)

112

232

400

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2357

2381

2487

2531

2632

2716

2756

2752

2713

Loans

27

136

85

93

79

79 n.a

n.a

n.a

Equity and quasi-equity /e

30

39

24

18

15

18 n.a

n.a

n.a

0

0

0

0

0

0 n.a

n.a

n.a

d

IDA TDO (US$m)
IFC (US$m)

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity (including both loan and equity types)

88

Annex 9: IDA Operations Portfolio

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 3/29/2012

Closed Projects

104

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

488.93
0.00
973.42
480.08
1,462.36
480.08

Total Undisbursed (Active)

793.10

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

1.37

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

794.46

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P086411
P113036
P087145
P086747
P081771
P118870
P122735
P107847
P121328
P113709
P113488
P093132
P113402
P097329
Overall Result

LK - Road Sector AssistancS
LK: N&E Local Services ImS
LK: 2nd Comm Devt & LivelMU
LK: Community Livelihoods S
LK: E-Sri Lanka DevelopmeS
LK: Emergency Northern R S
LK: Metro Colombo Urban D#
LK: Provincial Roads ProjecS
LK: SME Development Fac S
LK: Sustainable Tourism DeS
LK: Transforming School Ed#
LK:Dam Safety & Water ReS
LK:Higher Educ. for Twenty S
SL: Public Sector Capacity MU

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S
S
MU
S
S
S
#
MS
S
MS
#
S
S
S

2006
2010
2010
2004
2005
2010
2012
2010
2011
2010
2012
2008
2010
2008

IBRD

IDA

298.1
50
75
124.7
64
65
213

213

105
57.4
18
100
65.3277
40
22.6
1085.1277

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

116.9558
31.66799
41.64753
53.99892
10.29228679 13.8022
23.82835
213
69.55786
29.45749
18.44142
99.64409
43.21821
33.85628
7.329915 4.019057
17.62220179 793.0952

-81.56415 17.08835
3.3705245
-9.142432 -9.14243
10.375577 0.085576
8.2871218

38.359401
3.516244
12.28609
-96.20452 8.031493

89

Annex 10: Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio

Sri Lanka
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 2/29/2012
(In USD Millions)

Committed
**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

0.00

0.00

20.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.74
12.94
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
50.00
0.00

13.82
0.00
2.71
0.06
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.61
4.48
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00

2.30

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2.30

0.00

0.00
1.69
1.69
1.42
31.40

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
17.03

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
70.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
1.42
18.02

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
8.44

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

2010
2003/
2008/
2011/
2009
2004
2000
2008
2011
2007/
2011/
2008/
2011
2011
2011
2001

Asiri Hospital

20.00

0.00

0.00

CBC
CBCSL
Dialog
Fitch Srilanka
John Keells Hold
LR Global PEF

65.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
50.00
0.00

13.82
0
2.71
0.06
0.00
10.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
135.00

2004/ 2007/
2009/ 2010/
2012

2009/ 2010/
2012
2009/ 2010/

NDB SriLanka

NTB SriLanka
Senok WindEnergy
Senok WindResour
Suntel
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding
**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

90

Annex 11: Summary of Development Partner Activities

X

X

Austria
Belgium

X

X

X

X

X

Brazil

X

Canada / CIDA
China

X

URBAN DEVELOPMENT

X

DISASTER PREPAREDNESS /
HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE

BALANCED REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT

X

FINANCIAL & FISCAL SECTOR

HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
PUBLIC SECTOR

X

PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT

EDUCATION & VOCATIONAL
TRAINING

X

ENVIRONMENT

AGRICULTURE, LIVESTOCK,
IRRIGATION

X

JUDICIAL AND LEGAL

WATER AND SANITATION

X

SOCIAL PROTECTION

HEALTH

X

TOURISM

POWER AND ENERGY

RAILWAY

X

PORT AND AVIATION

ADB
Australia /
AusAID

ROADS / BRIDGES

Development Partners

Sector/Thematic Areas

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Colombo Plan
Commonwealth
Denmark

X

X

Egypt
EU Delegation /
ECHO

X
X

X

Finland
France

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Germany /GiZ
Hungary
India
Indonesia

X

X

Iran
Israel
Italy

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

Japan / JICA

X

Korea / KOICA

X

Kuweit Fund
Malaysia
Netherlands
Norway

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X

OPEC Fund
Pakistan
Russia
SAARC
Saudi Fund

X
X
X
X

Singapore
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

X

X
X

X
X

Thailand
United Kingdom

X

X

X

X
X

X

United Nations

X

USA/USAID
World Bank
IDA/IBRD

X

World Bank IFC

X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X

X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

91

Annex 12: Sri Lanka Statistical Assessment
Sri Lanka – Statistical Systems Review
and Suggestions for Further Strengthening of Statistical Capacity
Introduction
1.
Over the past decade – since the turn of the millennium Sri Lanka has made considerable progress
-- transitioning from a low income country to a middle income country and seeing an end to the 30-year
long armed conflict – which was the biggest impediment to country’s development. Indeed, post-conflict
Sri Lanka presents considerable opportunities for investors – both domestic and foreigners to embark on
wealth generating endeavors as well as for the policy makers to embark on crucial policy reforms that
could truly unleash country’s full potential. It is at this juncture, crucial consideration of the adequacy of
the country’s statistical systems to meet both these requirements comes into play. This note analyses the
current position of the national statistical systems and how best it could be geared to face challenges of a
new Sri Lanka.
Overview of the Current Statistical Systems.
2.
Currently in Sri Lanka a number of institutions are engaged in the compilation of statistical data.
On the real sector, the department of Census and Statistics (DCS) is the sole authority responsible for the
preparation of National Accounts data, demographic and population data, labor force data, price indices,
HIES and the poverty estimates. Earlier, prior to 2007, the Statistics Division of the Central Bank of Sri
Lanka (CBSL) also prepared national accounts data in parallel with DCS84 but since that year this
function has been solely assumed by the DCS85. The CBSL also maintains a fully fledged statistical
division, and it continues to prepare data on provincial level GDP, district level price indices and many
other statistics particularly on the monetary, banking & finance sectors and the BoP. The main source of
fiscal data in the country is the Ministry of Finance and Treasury – which in turn relies on a number of
agencies – such as the Inland Revenue Department, the Customs Department and the Excise Department
to provide with data. The Customs Department is the main agency for the external trade data while
several other agencies86 also provides various external sector related data.
3.
A Statistical Master Plan (SMP) for the country87 was developed in mid 2006 and this provided a
basis for the STATCAP project of the bank (see box for a description of the project). The SMP
underscored the importance of developing an appropriate statistical system (conforming to international
standards) commensurate with needs of a middle income country. In addition, the SMP also laid focus on
upgrading IT facilities, upgrading of skills of staff and moving towards a more efficient system of data
gathering, coordination and data dissemination. One of the more important anticipations of the SMP was
to establish a National Data Committee (NDC) – comprising officials from the Ministry of Finance88,
CBSL, DCS and the independent research institution – the Institute of Policy Studies (IPS) to spearhead
the activities of the SMP and chart its way forward. Unfortunately, the NDC did not get established until
2010 – a time the DCS was contemplating shelving the SMP and move towards an Official Statistics Plan
(OSP).
84

With some discrepancies – particularly in National Accounts data observed for many years.
Nevertheless, the CBSL has been entrusted with the task of preparing forecasts for the medium term macro framework – for
which the DCS lacks sufficient capacity.
86
Such as the CBSL, the Bureau of Foreign employment and the Board of Investment (BoI)
87
Titled the Reform and Strengthening of the Sri Lanka Statistical System: A “Statistical Master Plan”, Department of Census
and Statistics.
88
The Deputy Secretary to the Treasury (DST) functions as the Chairman of the NDC.
85

92

4.
The OSP is a five year plan that is expected to consolidate upon SMP and the experiences
following the SMP. Ordinarily, OSP’s focus on a number of things including: (a) principles of official
statistics (b) monitoring of evaluation; (c) statistical infrastructure ; (d) data quality assurance and (e)
publication and dissemination. The DCS expects to embark on an OSP by first identifying the exact data
requirements of the country through a comprehensive needs assessment identifying which agency will
provide which information89 and in what frequency. In essence, the proposed OSP will define multiple
responsibilities for the collection and compilation of statistical data.
BOX: The World Bank Statistical Capacity Building (STATCAP) Project
The Sri Lanka Public Sector Capacity Building Project was approved by the Board in mid
2008 and became effective on September 5, 2008. The project was geared to enhance the
effectiveness, efficiency and productivity of two key public sector agencies, Department of
Census and Statistics (DCS) and Auditor General’s Department (AGD) through an investment
package that included organizational strengthening, capacity building, information
management, communication improvements, physical and information technology (IT)
infrastructure, and Information and Communication Technology (ICT) support. A total of US$
22.65Mn was allocated for the project – of which US$ 12.05Mn was for the DCS component
and US$ 10.55Mn for the AGD component.
The project has most recently been rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory for Project
Development Objective (PDO) and Implementation Progress (IP), primarily due to delays in
the construction of the building for the DCS. However the PDO and IP under Part 2 (AGD
component) of the Project have been consistently rated as Satisfactory. As a result, the team
concurred in late 2011 to cancel all undisbursed balances under the DCS component and
extend the project closing date (earlier set for 31 December 2011) by one year to support
remaining work only under the AGD component.

The Supply and Demand Consideration: National Level Statistics
5.
With the country making a transition to middle income status and considerable opportunities
opening up after the end of the war, the need for credible and timely data for investment analysis, project
appraisals and measurement of policy efficacy have been increasingly felt. At present, Sri Lanka has a
statistical system that appears fairly adequate for a low income country. Its statistical capacity score -- as
estimated by the World Bank in 2011, was 78 percent compared to an average for all IDA countries of 62
percent. Over the years various statistical agencies have systematically improved data coverage,
periodicity and timeliness of data90 with several of these agencies (in particular DCS and CBSL) having
advance release calendar which informs of the release of various data in advance91. By and large the
CBSL functions as the defacto statistical repository with data from many different institutions (including
DCS and CBSL itself) being compiled and published on a regular basis. The CBSL flagship weekly
economic indicator (WEI) and the monthly economic indicator (MEI) serve as the two most
comprehensive statistical dissemination vehicles which provide regular updates of key economic data.
89

Or assume responsibility for that piece of information.
For example, headline inflation numbers are announced by the last day of the month – compared to the 1-month lag earlier.
91
Adherence to the advance release calendars has also been very consistent. .
90

93

6.
Notwithstanding the significant strides made in improving the coverage and timeliness of
statistical data a few shortcomings still underlie the supply side:
i.
Firstly, several aggregate level statistics lacks sufficient timeliness. The DCS – who assumes the
primary responsibility for preparing national accounts, still does not produce within year (or
interim) aggregate demand data92 – which is a considerable shortcoming. There is a clear need to
see this data at least on a semi-annual (or if possible, quarterly) basis. In addition, several other
macroeconomic indicators also lack sufficient timeliness. Monetary aggregates prepared by
CBSL have a 3-month time lag93 while those of fiscal, external trade, wages and industrial
production also comes with a 3-month lag. Key banking sector indicators comes with at least a 6month lag.
ii.
There have also been issues obtaining sufficient granular level information needed for analysis.
Record level data from the DCS HH surveys and LFS are not readily accessible94. Potential users
are first released a minimal 5percent sample – from which they have to build a case for the use of
the data. The ‘proposal’ would then be evaluated by the DCS after which the full sample may be
released subject to the discretion of the DCS. The CBSL also collects several high frequency data
which is normally not published for various reasons. For example, central bank intervention in the
currency markets and gross official reserve (GOR) figures are compiled on a daily basis – but are
published after a 3-month lag! The most likely reason for this is to prevent any adverse reactions
by market players during times of volatility95. However, not having data in sufficient frequency
and granularity also creates uncertainty – which could lead to unnecessary speculation and bring
about instability in the markets. There is a clear need for statistical data to be more accessible and
usable particularly through the vantage point of the private sector. A systematic move towards an
‘open-data’ policy would benefit the country immensely.
iii.
At present, Sri Lanka subscribes to the IMF's General Data Dissemination System (GDDS).
However, as a MIC needing to sustain high rates of investments the country may want to move
onto Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). With the momentum gained in recent times in
developing the statistical system this could very well be an achievable medium-term goal. A
major focus in the transition would be to improve data timeliness, frequency96 whilst also catering
to demands for more high-frequency, real time economic data.
The main constraints faced by the National Statistical System and its use by the users.
7.
Several capacity limitations still underlie the NSS in the country. One of the foremost constraints
faced by the DCS – the main statistical agency in the country is the lack of a permanent abode to house its
various units currently scattered in different parts of Colombo. To address this need the STATCAP
project earmarked a sum of US$ 6.8Mn to establish a permanent office for the DCS97 – amounting to 57
percent of the total allocation under the DCS component (see box). However, due to various factors the
project got delayed and with the cancellation of the remaining credit under the component the DCS now
envisages to complete the building with GoSL funds and have it completed by 2014. Until such time a
permanent office is established the DCS will not be expected to reach its full potential efficiency.
8.
Coordination among various statistical agencies in the management of the national statistical
system could also be improved. Despite the progress made, the consensus is that existing coordination
among various statistical agencies could be further improved particular through vehicles such as the
92

Both nominal and real
Before being published
94
Even with a configuration that hides the identity of the unit.
95
Such as time of significant foreign outflows or one-time transactions which could be perceived wrongly.
96
Particularly on National Accounts as discussed earlier.
97
Under the ‘works’ component.
93

94

newly established NDC. The DCS currently has around 600 staff98 in decentralized offices, with several
staff seconded to other line Ministries. At times certain ‘conflict of interest’ is witnessed when these staff
are requested to attend to Ministry work in addition to DCS work. In parallel to statistical agencies
improving coordination there is also a need for various donors supporting the development of statistical
systems in the country to also optimize coordination among themselves so that the necessary support is
provided sans duplication and overlap.
9.
On the user side, despite the significant improvement in data availability, coverage and
periodicity the country still lacks a formal agency (government or private) that could provide formal data
services to the clients99. As a result, for those who cannot afford expensive data solution from off-shore
providers, considerable time and effort is spent on collecting data which at times undermines efficiency
and timeliness of analysis/appraisals and research100. Secondly, it is also clear that among various users
the data awareness remains considerably weak – as many users are not fully aware of what type of data is
available and their sources. This usually results in country missing out on very critical analysis at times
and also an element of ‘wastage’ on the part of the sources who spend resources gathering information –
which for most part remains ‘invisible’.
10.
The proposed OSP would greatly address the ‘invisibility’ aspect by compiling a formal list of
data items to be gathered and identifying the associated responsibility so that ‘what’ type of data is
available would no longer be relegated to guess work. More importantly by having a continues
monitoring and feedback process the NSS would also be in a position to continually ‘upgrade’ itself both
in terms of data span101 as well as portability.
Prognosis and Recommendation to the CPS.
11.
Through a review of the NSS and its related issues the team is of the view, that the country
currently has an adequate platform of statistical systems to support results based management. However,
the underlying issues looked at above also indicate a clear need for the bank engagement beyond the
current STATCAP project to continue support the statistical system in the country. The salient
recommendations to the CPS team in connection include:
i.
To examine means of providing support for the development of the OSP which would be a crucial
landmark in the development of NSS in the country.
ii.
To continue support the DCS in terms of necessary capacity building excluding any physical
works. In particular, support towards continues staff training and ICT enhancement could be
thought of provided they are carefully planned and outcomes monitored. In particular, country’s
newly acquired MIC status may also mean that it transforms from a GDDS to a SDDS which the
World Bank102 could support.
iii.
To support the establishment of independent data solution providers103 (either public or private) to
facilitate data provision to companies and the public sector. These providers will specialize in
management of data (from various sources) and providing client services based on specific
formats and requirements. The providers should also ensure adequate data quality assurance
whilst also taking responsibility to update relevant data when necessary.

98

Around 700 staff is in Colombo based offices. Total number of staff at DCS around 1,300.
Much akin to for example data services provided by organizations such as CEIC – for which the World Bank is also a
subscriber.
100
This is also compounded by several user complaints that awareness of data availability and who has it
101
i.e. bringing in new feeds of data when demanded
102
In collaboration with the IMF
103
Much akin to services such as the CEIC
99

95

Annex 13: Summary of Non­Lending Services
As of 3/13/2012

Product

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$000)

Audiencea

Recent Completions
Environment Policy Note

FY12

66.6

Government

Urban Policy Note

FY12

27.9

Government

Investment Climate Assessment Policy Note

FY12

36.8

Government

Transport Policy Note

FY12

34.3

Donor

Fiscal Policy Note

FY12

35.6

Government

Use of Country Systems (Use of Country Financial Management Systems)

FY12

69.4

Government

Procurement Policy Note ( Public Procurement Review)

FY12

90.2

Government

Impact of current trade and price policies on the agriculture incentive framework
(Promoting Broad Based Agriculture Growth in Sri Lanka - Policy and Investment
Priorities)

FY12

262

Public Dissemination

Infrastructure Assessment

FY12

161.5

World Bank

Sri Lanka Development Partners

FY12

127.0

Donors

Post FSAP, Crisis Management, Financial Safety Net & Lender of Last Resort

FY12

208.6

Government

FY13

150.0

Government

Demographic Transition Study

FY12

153.7

Public Dissemination

Financial Sector Policy Note

FY12

83.4

Implementing the Sri Lanka Conflict Filter

FY12

135.7

"How-to "Guidance

Sri Lanka - Strengthening Samurdhi Targeting Systems

FY12

75.0

"How-to "Guidance

Sri Lanka - Disaster Reduction and Recovery in Sri Lanka

FY12

93.3

Government

Gender Analysis of Sri Lanka

FY13

47.1

Government

Underway
2020 Raising the Game: Middle Income Age

Government

Planned
Options for Optimizing Internal Transport

FY13

Competitiveness and Development Models for Districts, Secondary and Emerging Cities

FY13

Analysis of Policy Options for Improving the Trade Balance

FY13

Improving the Feasibility of the Naval, Commercial and Aviation Hubs

FY14

Making Private Investment Attractive

FY13

Sharing Middle Income Country Experiences with Investment Climate Reforms

FY13

Improving the Non-Bank Financial Sector

FY13

Resource Allocation and Revenue Generation for Growth: Experiences from Other
Middle Income Countries and Options for Sri Lanka

FY13

Options for Modern Health Care Management

FY13

Alternative Financing for Public Goods

FY14

Middle income country approaches to encouraging private sector innovation and
technology adoption

FY13

Skill Development Strategy for Sri Lanka
Youth Integration

FY13

Malnutrition: Causes and Policy Responses

FY14

Knowledge Generation in Education (TF)

FY14

Poverty Assessment

tbd

Improving Gender Equity in Labor Markets (TF)

FY13

a. Government, donor, World Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

96

Annex 14: Summary of Recipient­Executed Trust Funds
Trust
Fund #

TF010773
TF051074
TF051248

TF058303

TF094299

TF094313

TF096422

TF097171

Trust Fund Name

SRI LANKA - NORTH EAST WASH FOR
C ONFLIC T AFFEC TED REGIONS
NORWAY 5TH DIMENSION - SRI LANKA
GEF2-SRILANKA:RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR
RURAL EC ONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
EFFEC TIVE, SAFE AND SUSTAINABLE
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANC E AND
DEVELOPMENT C OOPERATION OF
AGENC IES IN SRI LANKA: MAINSTRE
AMING C ONFLIC T
SRI LANKA - IDF GRANT FOR
INFORMATION AND C OMMUNIC ATIONS
TEC HNOLOGY REGULATORY C APAC ITY
BUILDING PROJEC T
IMPROVING MONITORING AND
EVALUATION OF SAMURDHI SAFETY NET
PROGRAM
SRI LANKA - AUSTRALIA C O-TF FOR
EMERGENC Y NORTHERN REC OVERY
PROJEC T (C HILD FUND)
ROUND 1: SRI LANKA-LOC AL LEVEL
NUTRITION INTERVENTIONS FOR THE
NORTHERN PROVINC E

Project
#

Project Name

Grant Sign Program
Source
Date

Donor Name

11/29/2011

PFSA

1/12/2004

DS

Australian Agency for
International
Development (AusAID)
Norway - Ministry of
Foreign Affairs

7/12/2002

GEFIA

MULTIPLE DONORS

Effective, Save, Sustainable
C ooperation

8/23/2007

DGF

MULTIPLE DONORS

P116377

Sri Lanka IC T Regulatory
C apacity Buildi

6/16/2009

IDF

IBRD 1818 H Street, NW

P115525

LK: Improving M&E of
Samurdhi

7/10/2009

IDF

P118870

LK: Emergency Northern
Recovery Project

8/13/2010

FS-C O

IBRD 1818 H Street, NW
Australian Agency for
International
Development (AusAID)

P121571

LK: Local Level Nutrition
Interventions

1/31/2011

JSDF

Japan - Ministry of
Finance

P126697

LK: N&E WASH For Post
C onflict Resettle

P077761

LK:Renewable Energy for
Rural Econ. Dev.

P105082

Planned

LK: AUS AID SUPPORT FOR PRIMARY
EDUCATION FOR THE SRI LANKA EDUCATION
SECTOR DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK AND
PROGRAM

P113488

Sri Lanka - Transforming the
School Education System as
the Foundation of a
Knowledge Hub

TF098602

DIRISAWIYA

P123632

DIRISAWIYA

12/31/2014

TF

Australian Agency for
International
Development (AusAID)

GFRP

IBRD

97

Annex 15: Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) Process
1.

The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) has been a two track process. (See figure below.) The
first track involved a thorough review of the Sri Lankan vision for development and the current situation
with regard to each aspect of the vision. The second track involved a thorough review of the World Bank
Group’s engagement over the Country Assistance Strategy FY09-12 (CAS FY09-12) period.

2.

Country Vision. The Government’s vision is laid out in the document “Mahinda Chintana
Vision for the Future” prepared by the Department of National Planning, Ministry of Finance and
Planning in 2010.

3.
Diagnosis of Achievements and Challenges. The diagnosis of achievements and challenges is
based on a wide variety of sources. The Annual Reports of the Ministry of Finance and Planning and of
the Central Bank of Sri Lanka were essential inputs, as was the “Global Partnership in Development”
report of the External Resources Department of the Ministry of Finance and Planning. The CPS
consultations conducted by sector colleagues were used as an opportunity to hear from Government,
private sector, civil society and development partners about the current situation and the challenges
related to several themes. (See below for more details on the consultations.) Finally, issues notes were
prepared by sector colleagues as part of the FY12 work program. The purpose of these notes was to take
stock of selected issues, fill specific knowledge gaps and explore opportunities for engagement.104 The
notes included:
 Agriculture
 Environment
 Transport
 Urban
 Water supply and sanitation
 Investment climate
 Financial sector
 Fiscal
 Public procurement
104

Issues notes were not prepared in areas where recent analytical work was available, such as education and health.

98





Public financial management
Gender
National statistical systems

4.
Assessment of the Appropriate Role for the World Bank Group. The review of World Bank
Group engagement took several forms. A portfolio review (jointly organized by the Department of
Project Management and Monitoring of the Ministry of Finance and Planning and the World Bank)
October 24-25, 2011, provided an opportunity to reflect on each project and the portfolio as a whole. The
Client Survey provided insight into how the World Bank’s work is perceived by stakeholders. The
quantitative Client Survey was supplemented with a qualitative Client Survey which provided more indepth perceptions through structured interviews. Reflections on the existing and appropriate future role
of the World Bank Group were discussed at meetings held September 14, 2011 in Washington and
October 20-21, 2011 in Habarana, as well as in various staff meetings. The Completion Report for the
FY09-12 CAS evaluated the performance of the program and the World Bank and is included as an annex
in the present document.
5.
Dialogue and Consultations. Dialogue and consultations were held throughout the past year.
Counterparts in the Department of National Planning and External Resources Department of the Ministry
of Finance and Planning worked closely with the World Bank team throughout the entire process. An
extensive consultation process, involving Government counterparts, private sector, and civil society and
development partners was also conducted throughout the process. The consultations provided essential
inputs into the diagnosis of achievements and challenges as well as providing feedback on the preliminary
drafts of the CPSfor FY13-16. A total of 18 consultations were organized, some focusing on a specific
theme, others organized for a specific group of stakeholders.
6.
World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy. The World Bank Group Country
Partnership Strategy, described in the present document, is based on all of the above elements.

99

Annex 16: Summary of Consultations
Consultation process
1.
A total of 18 consultations involving more than 400 participants were carried out amongst a wide
cross section of Sri Lankan society as part of the preparation of this CPS.105 The participants at the
consultations represented government ministers, opposition members of parliament, central and
provincial government officials, Local government representatives, a plethora of NGO’s covering a wide
section including youth, gender, environment, advocacy and governance, representatives from Chambers
of Commerce from the Northern, Eastern and southern province, Academics, think tanks, key members
from large conglomerates, bankers and other representatives from the financial sectors and also bilateral
and multi lateral donor and UN agencies. The process of consultation served a dual purpose by both
allowing Sri Lankans to have an input into the country’s development agenda and by allowing the World
Bank Group to further clarify its role in helping the Government of Sri Lanka achieve the results
identified by the development policy framework of the government, in selected areas of comparative
advantage where it could best contribute.
2.
The consultations were carried out from September to March, with early consultations being
broader in scope and narrowing down as the CPS took shape over the preparation period. A total of nine
consultations were broadly thematic and focused on the education, health, urban, environment, private
sector, financial sector, SME’s, and transport sectors. The balance were broader and cross cutting in scope
involving consultations with parliamentarians, the general public, the donor community, media personnel,
and youth.
3.
Although a majority of the consultations were in Colombo, consultations with youth and SME’s
took place in the northern, eastern, central and southern provinces. Theses consultations were an
opportunity to capture geographic area specific, gender specific and national policy level challenges. The
purpose of involving youth who are and have been beneficiaries of many World Bank supported projects
and operations, from the conceptual stage of the Country Partnership Strategy, was to actively engage
them as key stakeholders in World Bank operations in Sri Lanka from the very outset. The youth
participating at the consultations represented young men and women from academic, civil society,
government and private sectors.
4.
In order to ensure a structured discussion all participants were provided along with their
invitations a two page introductory note that described the CPS process, the reason for consulting with
that particular group, the key areas that the particular consultation would focus on, and a detailed agenda.
All consultations began with brief introduction followed by a short presentation by a member of the CPS
preparation team on the CPS process. The participants were informed from the outset that none of their
comments would be individually attributed to them and that therefore they could be as candid as they
wished. Simultaneous translation in Sinhala, Tamil and English was also provided at all consultations that
took place out of Colombo. All consultations were well attended and a common complaint echoed by
participants was that the two hour stipulated time limit was insufficient.
5.
The following is an attempt to extract some of the important issues captured owing to the
difficulty in presenting all the ideas and comments received. The summary is presented thematically for
easy reference.

105

A comprehensive list of participants is available on request.

100

Health Sector consultation
6.
A health sector dialogue was held on the 30th of September, 2011 at the Galle Face Hotel.
Participants included the Secretary of Health, Provincial Directors of Health Services from Western and
Sabaragamuwa provinces, other government representatives, and private sector health service providers,
Vice Chancellors, University Professors, representatives from the colleges of medical specialties,
representatives from think tanks and a representative from the NGO sector.
7.
Gaps in clinical quality of care provided in both public and private health facilities were
discussed. The necessity for the establishment of national accreditation systems, an independent quality
assurance body, introduction of death audits, finalizing of a national essential drug policy to prevent
excessive control by market forces to protect the majority of the population were highlighted. It was felt
that improving access to the full package of care at the province level would better address geographical
equity in Sri Lanka. Further the development of a National Health Development Plan (NHDP) for the
health sector was identified as an important step in addressing geographical equity and overall health
sector development. With the changing disease trends, ageing pattern and peoples’ health seeking
behavior there was also an urgent need to reorient the health service delivery model to better provide long
term, integrated care (different experts need to work together for managing the patient) and specialized
elderly care. The existing quality of data and the new improvements needed for better data quality were
also discussed in detail. Participants also felt that a stronger focus should be placed on better utilization
of health information for planning and budgeting purposes, with the existing health information system
being modernized (i.e., automated) to increase the reliance on the system data as seen in developed
countries.
8.
The audience stressed that the World Bank should facilitate knowledge dissemination on private
public partnerships specifically for the health sector, to introduce cross country learning by sharing best
practices in areas where improvements are required in the health sector, and assist with studies concerning
private health services models that could be applied to Sri Lanka.
Urban sector consultations
9.
On the 22nd of September, 2011 a brainstorming meeting was held with a number of public and
private sector representatives and World Bank staff to share early ideas on the vision for the future
development of Metro Colombo, at the World Bank Colombo Country office.
10.
The main conclusion of the discussion on the City Vision was that the visioning exercise should
be included in the development of the City Development Strategy. The city’s vision should be a synthetic
statement balancing the seemingly opposing challenges of managing environmental, social and economic
sustainability with modernization, along with history together with development.
11.
To ensure this delicate balance, the vision of Colombo Metropolitan Area should be based on a
series of inputs, that when integrated, provide a comprehensive picture of the city's present state of affairs
along with the proposed next steps.
12.
On the 4th of October 2011, a full day consultative work shop was held at Hotel Renuka with the
participation of government official, academics, participants from the donor community, and members
from the private sector and World Bank Staff.
13.
There was consensus that the current statistical definition of urban areas based on administrative
criteria (i.e. urban areas are defined by the administrative boundaries of Municipal Councils and Urban
Councils) is inadequate to capture urbanization trends on the ground with a new definition of urban areas

101

based on population/economic criteria needing to be developed. Urban sprawl was described as resulting
from inefficient city management, which is in turn due to confusion about administrative authority and
boundaries. There was also consensus that the traditional scope of urban services needed to be broadened
to include social services. Limited capacity at local level is the main constraint for improved the delivery
of urban infrastructure & services. Finance was a major constraint with participants discussing the need to
move to a new model of municipal finance. Cluster-based systems of service delivery should be
encouraged to improve efficiency and reduce costs in services provision at local level. Improving the
competitiveness of secondary cities requires exploiting the unique character of each city. Growth will
occur when cities are dynamic and vibrant and offer high quality services.
Environment Sector Consultation
14.
On the 13th of January, 2012 a consultation with environmentalists, academics, members of the
private sector and World Bank staff was held at the DFFCC bank conference room.
15.
The critical environmental issues that would need to be addressed in order to ensure
environmental sustainability of Sri Lanka's rapid development program included urban environmental
issues such as flood management, solid waste management, the quality of urban environment, air
pollution, water and sanitation. The fragmentation of the concept of “Environment” into various agencies
(and Ministries), some of which do not have a mandate to protect/conserve/manage the Environment; the
lack of coordination amongst the various institutions responsible for environmental management, the lack
of clarity of institutional mandates, weak institutional capacity and infrastructure to monitor/assess the
various environmental issues in development projects; the non-integration of environment in the early
stages of the development (and project) planning process; and not using the Strategic Environmental
Assessment (SEA) findings nor incorporating them into the overall development planning process were
highlighted as key issues.
16.
Other issues that were highlighted included the lack of conservation and management of Marine
Protected Areas and Coastal Ecosystems (includes coastal and other sanctuaries), biodiversity issues such
as Human-wildlife conflicts (elephants/monkeys/wild boar) in both rural and urban areas; threats to
isolated natural landscapes through the promotion of unregulated “ecotourism”; the disruption of river
ecosystems through various human activities; and the lack of consideration of ecosystem services during
land allocation for development projects.
17.
The development of strategies, policies and actions that place an economic value on ecosystem
services and promoting business opportunities through ecosystem conservation and management,
restoration of degraded ecosystems, strengthening of environmental and sectoral agencies responsible for
mainstreaming environmental and natural resource management in the development planning process,
ensuring that the protection/conservation of environment is integrated into the school curricular, the
adoption of a holistic approach to growth by avoiding isolated development planning, ensuring the
integration of environmental considerations into every aspect of the development activity, and the active
participation of beneficiaries in the planning were some of the options listed that would enable Sri Lanka
to simultaneously harness the twin benefits of growth and environmental sustainability.
18.
In addition to providing assistance with the above the World Bank was also requested to
undertake studies to value environmental services to assess the conservation values of the environment,
undertake economic, social, and livelihood related impact projections of the loss of these resources, and
ensuring that World Bank projects shift from merely ensuring environmental safeguard compliance to a
more holistic integration and main streaming of environment by integrating safeguards for sustainability
into the development activities and projects.

102

Consultation with the Private sector
19.
A consultation with key members from the private sector and World Bank Group Staff was held
on the 17th of January 2012 at the Cinnamon Lakeside Colombo.
20.
A principal concern voiced by the participants was that the Government was sending out mixed
signals. This lack of clarity and consistency was exacerbated by uncoordinated ministries in the country.
Insufficient communication between the private sector and the Government and also between the public
sector hierarchy and the lower levels and provinces also compounded the problem. Participants went on to
explain that even some of the positive policy measures taken at the Central government level do not get
effectively implemented at the lower levels or at the provincial level owing to this problem.
21.
The participants described how the availability of land remained a major constraint. With the
government owning large tracts of land, obtaining land for commercial purposes remained difficult.
Increased transparency in the process, a one stop shop in most of the industries for investment
information and approvals, an education system geared towards producing a skilled labor force, and
improved public and corporate sector governance were cited as key policies that would boost investor
confidence.
22.
Regular dialogue between the government and the private sector would increase the trust between
the two parties and would lower confusion as in the case of Expropriation Bill, Pensions, and Private
University Bill. The World Bank Group was requested to play an enhanced role in facilitating dialogue
between the private sector and the government. A detailed government vision and the provision of a clear
and consistent operational framework for major sectors were important next steps that would allow the
private sector to operate freely within those sectors and thereby rapidly develop.
Consultation with Development Partners
23.
A consultation with the donor community active in Sri Lanka was held on the 18thth of January
2012 at the World Bank Colombo Country office.
24.
The WBG was encouraged to look more specifically at the extent to which the distribution of
income (or consumption expenditure) among Sri Lankan households has increased (as reflected in the
increased Gini index) and to ensure that the new strategy towards better social inclusion.
25.
Development Partners also highlighted the need to continue supporting the most vulnerable in the
country, including those who had suffered the direct brunt of the war. Internally Displaced Persons were
listed as still requiring assistance towards their return (e.g. from India), their “resettlement “and their
access to sustainable source of income and livelihood.
26.
Issues relating to internal and external Sri Lankan migrants, and the promotion of safe and fair
labor mobility were also discussed by the participants. The WBG was encouraged to ensure equality and
social protection in a dynamic way, and to also bolster basic social support to the poorest and the most
vulnerable was stressed.
27.
The participants also suggested that the WBG work collaboratively and dynamically with other
development partners, to maximize impact. Recognizing that working jointly could exponentially
increase complexity and bureaucracy, especially when using sector wide approaches (as the CPS
proposes) coordination in such cases was likely to be time consuming. In order to overcome these issues
it was felt that actively seeking collaboration and jointly agreeing on division of labor, which goes further
than just information-sharing would be useful.

103

Consultation with Financial Sector
28.
A consultation with key members from the financial sector and World Bank Group staff was held
on the 19th of January 2012 at the Cinnamon Lakeside Colombo.
29.
The participants explained that funding requirements for the Banking Sector are a cause for
concern with banks experiencing difficulty in managing liquidity, with deposit growth not keeping pace
with loan growth and with savings rates also being relatively low in Sri Lanka compared to rest of region.
Long term funding options for banks also remain limited. Banks are often unable to access long term
FCY funding as long term swaps are not available in the local market.
30.
Such liquidity issues may affect future credit growth. It was also felt that the capital markets was
being under-utilized with a clear need emerging to develop the local bond market, explore options of dual
currency listing in the CSE, remove ambiguity on capital gain taxes, proper development of the yield
curve. Overall it was felt that the World Bank Group (WBG) can play a critical role of strengthening the
governance structure and capital market products in Sri Lanka.
31.
Large shareholding by government entities in the financial sector was seen as sending mixed
signals to the investors. It was felt that long term banking reforms are required; especially to address
need for industry consolidation. Further, reforms on corporate governance structure can strengthen the
banking sector.
32.
It was felt the WBG can help the sector in designing products that package both the finance and
the ‘know how’ for more productive use of the funding by the Micro and Small Enterprise segments. It
was also felt that policy support is required for Banks to focus more in this segment. The participants felt
that the high cost structure of banks makes them ineffective in bottom of pyramid financing. High
documentation requirements under KYC were often a deterrent for small borrowers to open an account or
take a loan from a bank. It was also felt that WBG can assist the sector by funding a study to formulate a
comprehensive policy on mobile banking operations.
33.
Citing human resources as a key challenge, the NBFC players mentioned of lack of qualified
entry level staff for their regional expansion. The participants requested WBG to look into strengthening
existing training institutes in the country to be able to support the sector better.
34.
Participants felt that the perception of Sri Lanka can be improved in the eyes of the international
community/international investors, by projecting the post war positive developments in the country. The
participants in the discussion felt that consolidation was the way forward in the financial sector, with the
development strategy of the sector having a four pronged focus on capital markets, private equity,
banking and mobile banking.
Consultation with Parliamentarians
35.
A consultation with key members from the government and the opposition was held on the 20th of
January 2012 at the Parliamentary complex.
36.
The participants were keen to understand what the transition from a lower income country to a
middle income country entailed specifically in terms of different funding options available through the
IBRD lending window and the current blend status of funding.

104

37.
The opposition noted that the main reason the private sector was not investing further was
because there was concerns raised on the decision making process involved in passing legislature such as
the Revival of Under-Performing Enterprises and Under-Utilized Assets Act and the alienation of land.
There was also concerns raised on the consistency and clarity of the policy of the government, which was
cited as the principle deterrent to potential investors. The members from government responded that most
of the companies coming under the Revival of Under-Performing Enterprises and Under-Utilized Assets
Act were loss making institutions that were a drain on the national economy.
38.
Issues concerning the sovereign guarantees the government could provide for FDI's was also
discussed. It was noted that the while the government could facilitate such investments it would face
difficulties in guaranteeing.
39.
There was also discussion on issues concerning the manner in which agricultural productivity
could be raised in the country. Solid waste management was described as a priority area where assistance
is required. Issues concerning the decentralization of solid waste management to municipal authorities,
and the lack of coordination with the central authority were highlighted.
40.
Issues relating to micro finance including the role of the IFC in facilitating increased access to
micro finance and the possibility of increased usage of mobile phones to facilitate such transactions were
also discussed.
41.
The need for greater engagement with parliamentarians in the future and the enhanced role of the
World Bank Group as a key knowledge provider was described as key priority areas for future
engagement. Suggestions were made for the World Bank to organize similar dialogues so as to present
recent findings and other information directly with parliamentarians. The importance of continued World
Bank support for education and skills, labor markets, health, and malnutrition was also highlighted.
Transport sector Consultation
42.
A consultation on the issues facing the transport sector was held on the 23rd of January 2012 at
the Cinnamon Grand Hotel. The participants included representatives from the Ministries of Finance
(National Planning Department & Department of Public Finance) and Transport, representatives from the
National Physical Planning Department, National Transport Commission, Civil Aviation Authority, Sri
Lanka Railways, Sri Lanka Transport Board, Road Development Authority, Sri Lanka Ports Authority,
Colombo Municipal Council, Private Omnibus Association, Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, Association
of Container Transporters, ADB, JICA, members of the Private sector, and World Bank Group staff.
43.
The major issue facing the sector was recognized as “rapid motorization” whilst outdated
transport networks, inadequate institutional capacity, inadequate maintenance, land acquisition, safety,
inadequate land use planning, funding constraints, inadequate regulation in the bus sector and inadequate
administrative structure for central Government coordination were recognized as the issues facing the
transport sector.
44.
There was unanimous agreement that increasing the share of public transport was paramount with
a paradigm shift in attention for public transport required for the resolution of these issues. There was
agreement that improving the quality of public transport (both Bus and Rail) as well as a new mode of
transport was required and demand management measures such as rationing the number of vehicles and
vehicle use management was required through appropriate policy measures to address the issue of
motorization. The participants were also in agreement that other capacity improvement measures on the
road sector is required as a priority as opposed to the acquisition of land for capacity increases in the
metro areas.

105

45.
With regard to freight transport, there was agreement that internal Container Depots and logistics
centres were required although there was no clear agreement on shifting goods transportation from road to
rail. It was agreed that the development of domestic airports should take account of proposed expressways
as they would compete with each other.
46.
Due to the location of the new port and airport, Hambanthota was identified as having significant
potential for development and connectivity to and from Hambanthota was considered a priority in order to
make such economic model work.
SME consultations
Eastern Province
47.
A consultation with key members from the business chambers of the Ampara, Moneragala and
Batticoloa districts and World Bank Group Staff was held on the 24th of January 2012 at the Monty hotel
in Ampara.
48.
The principle constraints to the development of the districts were described as being the lack of
access to finance, the lack of a viable market for their products, and the lack of information and
knowledge. With agriculture being the most important economic driver in the province, the very poor
value addition that is observed along the agricultural value supply chain with no off-season strategy being
implemented were described as being the key causes for low agricultural productivity. Infrastructure
issues such as inadequate government emphasis on the rural road network, the lack of transport facilities
after 5 pm , frequent power failures and high electricity tariffs, were other issues that were presenting
problems for SME’s in the district. In the Batticaloa district in particular a key cause of unemployment
was the lack of SME businesses / industries. Over a period of time the majority of the industries in the
district were shut down due to the difficulties faced in accessing markets for their products.
49.
On potential next steps, the creation of master plan by government, (focusing on key aspects such
as agriculture and tourism) for the districts, in consultation with all relevant stakeholders, and wide
dissemination upon its completion was seen as an essential. The creation of an agricultural technical
knowledge hub in the province and greater government support for the activities of the chamber to ensure
its long term sustainability were seen as key measures that would result in enhanced benefits over time.
The WBG was requested to provide support towards the development of the technical capacity, and
Research and development initiatives of the private sector, with the IFC being listed as key partner that
could contribute to the growth of the province. The provision of vocational training was described as a
primary requirement, especially IT education with an increased emphasis on skilled labor such as masons,
carpenters, plumbers and electricians with the WBG urged to assist in conducting a feasibility study to
explore and identify feasible business opportunities in the district.
Northern Province
50.
A consultation with key members from the business chambers of the Trincomalee, Anuradhapura
and Jaffna and Mannar districts along with World Bank Group staff, was held on the 26th of January 2012
at the Heritage hotel in Anuradhapura.
51.
Overall, businesses were described as being affected severely by war with no forum/dialogue yet
established for business owners to discuss problems and come up with solutions together with the
government and other stakeholders. Access to finance remains a key barrier with issues including - high
interest rates, high tax rates, collateral on loans, and the lack of long term loans being listed as specific

106

constraints. The lack of information on new technology, and resources available was a reason for limited
capacity for the creation of goods for exports. The lack of skilled personnel with the required technical
skills, marketing and management skills to increase productivity and the lack of opportunities specifically
with regard to access to economic zones were also highlighted. SME's in province are finding it difficult
to cope with the competition from well established companies based in the western province. Government
policies, with regard to leasing or purchasing land are considered as an extremely cumbersome process.
As a result the lack of land hinders investment opportunities.
52.
The shortage of SME's in the province was described as the key concern of the business
chambers. With no impact assessment having been carried out thus far, the unavailability of data makes
business decisions an even more complex process. Cultural issues such as those that discourage women
from participating in the tourism sector have resulted in increased gender income disparities.
53.
As plausible next steps, the promotion of joint ventures that utilize both human capital and other
resources readily available in province, and greater emphasis on encouraging private sector activities in
the post conflict set up was seen as key means of alleviating the issues faced by SME’s in the province.
PPP's were seen as viable options for enhancing gains. The creation of knowledge banks, skills and
capacity building, were areas listed for WBG engagement.
Education sector Consultation
54.
An education sector dialogue was held on the 2nd of February, 2012 at the World Bank Colombo
country office. Participants included officials from TVEC, officials from the ministry of education,
university professors, undergraduates, and private sector education service providers, representatives from
UNICEF, representatives from YESL, representatives from LYON and a student representative from the
Model United Nations.
55.
The participants felt that education and skills remain a key issue as critical skill gaps are
hampering the performance of the economy, with continued World Bank to support being required to
address this issue. It was felt that advocacy programs should be conducted with a need to consider market
requirements of specific skills and then develop a pool of such skilled personnel. The skill development
paths should be communicated to parents and families, with greater emphasis on attracting students for
some of the skills related courses where challenges exist, (the examples cited were construction,
carpentry). Professionalization of such skills was also important with career guidance especially before
and after GCE O/L examination being cited as crucial. The participants felt that too much emphasis was
being placed on the Grade V exam.
56.
Vocational skill development courses should be introduced within the school with the inferior
social status of vocational training being addressed. It was felt that integrated policies are required to
address the needs of students in addition to the introduction of technical streams.
57.
It was also felt that a review of vocational training is important, along with the content, quality
and quantity of the entire education sector being evaluated. The service delivery system issues should be
addressed, with accountability and monitoring being important to improve the overall efficiency.
58.
A competency based assessment was considered important, with teacher development also being
cited as a critical area. The National Qualification Framework being developed under the World Bank
Higher Education Project is very important.
59.
Early childhood education was another area where World Bank support was requested. Although
a proliferation of Montessori’s, but a lack of teachers trained for this level. Maintenance of quality was
cited as being of utmost importance. Although a policy was developed a long time ago but only some

107

aspects of the policy have been implemented. Support from provincial councils to assist in the
implementation of policies, activities was important. Advocacy programs were also cited as important.
60.
Research and development especially in terms of studies identifying skills mismatch was
described as being important. Participants also felt that there was a need for tracer studies to be conducted
along with research into evidence based management.
Consultations with Youth
61.
Five consultations were conducted in Northern, Eastern, Western, Central and Southern Provinces
with the participation of a group of 20 – 30 young men and women, representatives of organizations
working on youth and gender in development and World Bank staff. With nearly 5 million of Sri Lanka’s
population being below 30 years of age and with unemployment among educated youth being
significantly higher than the overall unemployment rate, common grievances shared by youth in all 5
consultations related to the lack of opportunities to develop knowledge and skills, a mismatch between
employment requirements and skills development, unmet youth aspirations, parental attitudes and
expectations, lack of career guidance, a lack of trained and informed teachers at primary and secondary
levels and lack of knowledge on developing entrepreneurial skills. The absence of a national policy on
youth development was an overarching national level challenge for youth development.
62.
In the Northern Province during the consultation held on the 27th of January 2012, at the
University of Jaffna, space and opportunities for open dialogue was identified as a strong need for youth
to voice their opinion on development and related issues in the region. Issues brought out were related to
the lack of a longer term citizen engaged approach to development, the need for a social and political
solution to address grievances of the Tamil community, improve the quality of education, with a focus on
higher education, an increase in violence against women, and a greater need for private sector investment.
The need to increase entrepreneurial skills and financial management skills among youth in the region by
creating opportunities to gain professional qualifications was discussed. Most of the manufacturing,
agricultural and fisheries sectors in the area remain largely neglected due to the protracted conflict.
Opportunities for rapid expansion in these areas are available but yet to be achieved in a consultative and
citizen centered manner. The requirement of addressing issues related to the political economy of
development taking place in the region was also discussed.
63.
A consultation for youth form the Eastern province was held in the Batticaloa public library on
th
the 7 of February 2012. The Lack of resources (financial and human), the need for increased private
sector investments and the strong need to change people’s attitudes towards work ethic were the key
issues highlighted. Most educated youth (at graduate level) were seen to be primarily focused on securing
public sector jobs. The key reasons for this being assumptions of job security and stable pension schemes
offered by the public sector, cultural impetus and lack of private sector involvement in the area. Private
sector job opportunities were considered remote and often unstable. Internship facilities were only being
provided by a few public sector organizations and most youth were unaware of such opportunities. The
lack of internship opportunities were highlighted as key constraints in finding jobs. Current problems
relating to the theory based rote learning methodology of education and the skills mismatch between
graduate skills and what was demanded by potential employers was also highlighted.
64.
Issues relating to the education sector in Sri Lanka were identified by participants from the
Western Province as the key drawback that was preventing youth from actively accelerating the countries
development. This consultation was held on the 13th of February, at the World Bank Colombo Country
Office. A loosely based definition of entrepreneurship, the failure to identify that most youth did not have
the drive and determination required , were often risk averse, and did not possess the required skill set,
was seen as important issues that had to be addressed prior to the national promotion of entrepreneurship

108

culture. An increased emphasis on standards through rankings system especially for the faculties and
individual departments was seen as key means of raising overall standards in state run universities.
Recommendations made at this consultation included the need to collaborate effectively, share knowledge
and information related to youth development efficiently, to provide opportunities and space for youth to
voice their concerns in a non-threatening and non-patronizing environment.
65.
During the consultation held on the 17th of February 2012 at the Peradeniya University, the
participants form the central province described job matching as a key issue, with the aspirations of
undergraduates being much higher than what the job market in the country has to offer. Youth continued
to demand public sector employment in search of job permanency and pension schemes. Private sector
jobs were seen to be difficult to obtain as there was a significant skills mismatch and also lack of private
sector opportunities in the central province. Issues relating to state run tertiary education such as the lack
of practical training and insufficient emphasis on soft skill development and relevant career guidance was
highlighted. There was also discussion on the lack of internship opportunities and overall job
opportunities with the private sector in the central province. The western province remained the area of
choice for the securing of good jobs. Solutions to these issues included increase opportunities for
knowledge sharing and platforms for youth to highlight their issues. Even though the central province had
an ideal climate and the resources for agricultural expansion youth were not keen to seek opportunities in
agricultural activities owing to social stereotypes associated with farming and agriculture. A lack of
knowledge on the potential for increased agricultural productivity and the returns that could be obtained
was acknowledged by the participants.
66.
In the southern province recommendations from participants included the need for private sector
investment mainly in education and related fields, the need to coordinate donor support and efforts giving
priority to the country’s vision and development challenges and increased linkages with stakeholders of
development. The discussion also revealed that no forum existed in the southern province for youth to
discuss provincial issues and have a greater impact on the development of the province. Issues such as
the culture of alcoholism among the fishing community that resulted in the perpetuation of alcoholism
amongst successive generations of youth in the fishing community were also discussed. This consultation
was held on the 22nd of February at the Solis hall in Matara.
Consultations with media
67.
A consultation with media personnel representing print, electronic, television and radio was held
on the 28th of February 2012 at the DFCC Bank auditorium.
68.
A principal issue discussed was the role an enhanced adherence to the rule of law and democratic
principles would play in the development of the country. Media freedom remained a key cause for
concern along with access to information. The participants also highlighted the need for a clear and
descriptive strategy for the country for the next 10 -20 years that will provide all stakeholders with clarity
and consistency on the growth trajectory of the country.
69.
Issues concerning health (focusing on the issue of malnutrition and its link to poverty/behavior
change) was also discussed by participants with a possible role the media could play in spreading
important messages to educate the public on proper nutrition.
70.
Problems relating to the education sector were also discussed. The school to university and then
to work transition was seen as a key stumbling block with a clear need to improve the quality of
education. With youth unemployment being a cause for concern in the country, participants felt that
politicians could play a key role in dissuading youth from solely seeking public sector jobs.

109

71.
The participants recommended that as the media was largely unaware of the WB Access to
Information policy the World Bank must take pro-active measures to generate awareness on the policy
and work with media to make this information accessible in formats that would enhance public
consumption and dialogue.
Consultations with General Public
72.
A consultation with members of the Sri Lankan general public, who had registered for
participation through an online application process, was held on the 29th of February 2012 at the World
Bank Colombo country office.
73.
A significant portion of the discussion centered on the education sector with participants
describing it as the crucial sector that must be reformed if the country was to reach its goals. Some
participants stated that state run universities in the country must be transformed from the traditional silo
based systems to those that incorporate a multi or intra disciplinary approach. It was also stated that
undergraduates in particular were highly risk averse and this lead to an increased demand for public sector
jobs over private and entrepreneurial professions. Internship opportunities form the 1st year onwards was
described as being important in this regard as it would allow undergraduates to obtain jobs more easily
and also avail them of job market realities for the outset.
74.
On entrepreneurship development, the participants agreed that there was a need to increase
technological entrepreneurship, set up innovation parks and ensure that social benefits from such schemes
are widely distributed. A key factor that would influence the development of an entrepreneurial culture
was described as attitudinal change.
75.
The participants also felt that the government should not get involved in sectors where the private
sector was already involved in as at time they were unable to compete. Road safety and the increasing
number of roads traffic accidents was also highlighted.
76.
Some participants also felt that corruption was another aspect that needs to be addressed by the
country’s development framework. They also called for the strengthening of public accountability
mechanisms such as the COPE and COPA parliamentary committees by enhancing their capacity to
implement the recommendations suggested in their reports. Participants also stated that governance and
the adherence to the rule of law would be enhanced if forums to voice concerns were made more freely
available. Accountability and transparency to be included in curriculum.
77.
The needs of the vulnerable population (especially IDP’s), was also discussed with the World
Bank being requested to provide increased grant facilities in this regard. A further recommendation was in
relation to greater Civil Society participation and donor coordination. CSO engagement in monitoring
evaluation and social accountability measures was discussed, with participants describing a need for a
development monitoring mechanism.

110

Annex 17: Client Survey and Communications
Communications and Outreach Brief
Introduction
1.
This brief outlines the World Bank’s approach to communications and outreach targeting its
clients in government, private sector and Civil Society groups including media, academia and
parliamentarians. This brief also outlines some key findings of the client surveys, the long term goals of
communications and outreach strategy in support of the broader goals of the CPS and the medium term
objectives that the External Affairs unit of the World Bank will undertake.
2.
There are two objectives for the strategy: (a) to disseminate our global and local knowledge
which would be of much use to the country; and (b) to strengthen the World Bank-Government-Public
policy dialogue. Through this process the World Bank team envisages to play a major supporting role in
achieving country's ambitious development targets over the medium term. Over the years the World Bank
has gathered a considerable wealth of global knowledge and expertise through its extensive operations in
over 150 countries. Increasingly, client countries are seeking this global expertise with the view of
applying similar approaches to their own challenges and issues – albeit with some adjustment for the
domestic context. As such, the World Bank now promotes sharing of this global expertise through a
multitude of means including the highly successful South-South exchanges. At the same time, the country
specialist knowledge as well global interlinks allows the World Bank to position itself as a vital partner in
the policy dialogue process.
3.
To support the World Bank and its client the Government of Sri Lanka as well as the public
groups that are both the clients of the Government of Sri Lanka and beneficiaries and contributors of
World Bank support to Sri Lanka.
World Bank Clients
4.
The World Bank is owned by the people in countries in which it operates or the tax payers. Hence
the people of Sri Lanka are a significant part of the clientele of the World Bank. Representing the people
of the country, the elected Government becomes the main interlocutor or the primary client of the World
Bank.
Sri Lankan
Public

The World
Bank

GoSL

Key and noteworthy findings of the Client Survey
5.
To check the pulse of World Bank clients in Sri Lanka, to seek recommendations to be
incorporated into the CPS and to provide as a baseline for communications and outreach to clients, the

111

External Affairs unit of the World Bank facilitated a client survey. This survey was administered using
both quantitative and qualitative survey methods. In addition, eighteen different consultations were
conducted island wide to gather insights that would inform the future engagement needs of the World
Bank. An island wide consultation was also completed to triangulate the findings. This was done in the
form of focused group discussions capturing a sample of young men and women below 35 years of age
and a selected number of representatives from government, private sector and civil society106.
6.
The main purpose of the client survey was for the
World Bank to gain understanding of how its stakeholders
perceive the World Bank and its operations in Sri Lanka. For
the purpose of this brief, the focus will remain in the client
survey findings that are related to World Bank
communications and outreach.
7.
Respondents from the media and PIUs/PMUs
indicated the highest levels of familiarity with the World Bank
whereas respondents from NGOs, other organizations, and the
office of a Parliamentarian had significantly lower levels of
familiarity. Respondents from the Western Province indicated
significantly higher levels of familiarity with the World Bank
compared to respondents from other areas.
8.
The survey findings demonstrate the widely held view
that growth and government effectiveness/governance are the
top development priorities in Sri Lanka. The top weakness of
the World Bank is identified in the survey as ‘inadequate
alignment with country priorities’ in Sri Lanka. The survey
also identified the lack of awareness and proper consultations
at all levels and groups as a contributor to this perceived
weakness.
9.
Respondents report the greatest level of satisfaction
with sector wide approaches and results based lending and
investment lending in Sri Lanka.

Specific Areas of Effectiveness
“Helping to bring about economic growth”;
“Encouraging greater transparency in
governance”;
“Helping to strengthen the regulatory
framework”;
“Helping to strengthen the judicial system”;
“Helping to strengthen the public sector”;
“Helping to strengthen the education sector”;
“Helping to strengthen the health sector”;
“Safeguarding against corruption in projects/
programs that it funds with its procurement
rules”;
“Helping to strengthen agricultural
development”;
“Helping to reduce corruption in the country
with its advice and support”; and

10.
A nearly equal number of respondents believe that the
“Helping Sri Lanka adapt to/avert risk of climate
World Bank can increase its value in the future in Sri Lanka if
it offers more tailored services for a Middle Income Country,
change”.
reduces the complexity of its financing, improves the quality of
its expertise’s as related to Sri Lanka, and helps to build institutional greater capacity.
11.
The respondents believe that the primary obstacle to World Bank assisted reform efforts in Sri
Lanka is that they do not take into account adequate consideration of the country’s challenges. This
obstacle to reform succeeding is followed by political pressures and an inadequate level of citizen/civil
society participation. The World Bank’s new focus on civil society is particularly relevant now in Sri
Lanka in light of these survey findings.
Communication and outreach

106

Civil Society includes Academia, NGOs, CBOs etc.

112

12.
Two-thirds of all respondents indicated that they got most of their information about economic
and social development issues in Sri Lanka from local newspapers. The Internet was also a popular
information source. A large number of the respondents have visited the World Bank website and prefer to
get updates through web sources. (This includes respondents from outside the Western Province).
Nevertheless there is a significant number of respondents without any knowledge or awareness of the
World Bank Access to Information policy and how to access information from online sources.
13.
Therefore, there is a need to position the Goal: World Bank to be perceived as an effective
Development Partner, committed to partnering the GOSL and its people fairly, transparently and
impartially.
To achieve this goal, the following three communication objectives are proposed: Objectives:
1. Communicate for results
2. Communicate for transparency
3. Communicate for social accountability
14.
Communicate for results. Development communications play a crucial role in the success or
failure of a development project or operation. The need to share global knowledge and expertise has been
identified as a very important expectation from the people of Sri Lanka. As such, there will be a conscious
effort to plan and implement a comprehensive knowledge and information dissemination strategy that
would help build capacity of those who come into constant contact with the development agenda planned
for Sri Lanka. This strategy would help stakeholders institutionalize development knowledge and
information in daily operations. It would also benefit development stakeholders in applying knowledge
for change and development by improving their capacities to engage in evidence based policy dialogue,
which is much needed to achieve the ambitious development goals of Sri Lanka. Targeted and systematic
stakeholder consultations, monitoring the socio-political and economic climate through media and other
information sources, coordination with development partners and taking proactive measures to mitigate
risks can support a development operation reap maximum results.
15.
The World Bank External Affairs unit in collaboration with other sectors will work closely to
document achieves project results as well as to communicate effective practices. This would also help the
World Bank to align its support to country priorities as well as transfer greater ownership of Sri Lanka’s
development to the elected Government and its people.
16.
Communicate for transparency. The client survey finds that there is a significant lack of
awareness of the World Bank policy on Access to Information. With this policy, the World Bank now
makes all its information other than a few exceptions available for public access. In the short term,
strategies will be developed to promote awareness of the policy and what it means in terms of achieving
development effectiveness. Given that most of World Bank clients access information through local
newspapers, media capacity will be built to access information and use the information for public
consumption. In the longer term, World Bank will also engage with public and private sectors as well as
NGOs to work towards policies that promote greater transparency of their work. South-south knowledge
exchanges and technical expertise are available through World Bank resources.
17.
Communicate for social accountability. The client survey also identified the need to actively
engage citizens and Civil Society groups in collaboration with the client Government, specifically at the
local government levels. Such engagements could also help the client government to monitor its
development effectiveness through third party monitoring mechanisms and through initiatives to promote
media and citizens awareness. of budgeting and budget transparency. The CPS consultations also initiated
an engagement with parliamentarians. A strategy to engage parliamentarians to adopt social
accountability tools in their work is another area to be developed.

113

18.
Following up on findings of the client survey, more World Bank staff will engage in
communications and outreach in a systematic manner as facilitated by the World Bank External Affairs
unit.

114

Annex 18: Gender Issues in Sri Lanka

Gender and Poverty in Sri Lanka
1.1
Sri Lanka is a lower-middle income country with a per capita income of approximately US$
2,400 and a population of around 20 million people. Basic human development levels are high, with the
country performing well across a number of socio-economic indicators, including gender indicators. The
country has been ranked in the Global Gender Gap Index 16th out of 134 developing and developed
countries in terms of closing gender gaps in economic participation and opportunity, educational
attainment, health and survival and political empowerment.107 Gender gaps in education and health
indicators tend to be low, particularly when compared with other countries in the South Asia region;
however, women persistently lag men in terms of economic participation: female labor force participation
rates remain low, and unemployment rates are double those of men (World Bank 2011a). Women are also
segregated into lower paying, low-skilled employment in both the formal and informal sectors, and into
domestic service overseas (ibid). Sri Lanka’s performance on the UN Gender Inequality Index (see Figure
1) is second only to the Maldives in South Asia (ranked 72 among 169 countries, compared to the
Maldives 59th place ranking)108, and is rapidly approaching the rank of such upper middle income
countries as Malaysia (ranked 55th).109
1.2
In
terms
of
social
indicators, the country performs at
the level of middle income
0.900
0.800
countries (see Table 1). Literacy at
0.700
91 percent is near universal and
0.600
basic indicators of health are
0.500
uniformly high across income
0.400
groups, with 99 percent of births
0.300
0.200
attended by skilled health staff
0.100
(World Bank 2011a; World Bank
0.000
2007). The total fertility rate has
been dropping from 2.9 births per
woman in 1980-85 to 2.3 births per
woman in 1990-95 and 2002-08
(World Bank 2011a).
MDG
Country/Region (among 169 countries)
timelines for universal primary
school enrollment, gender parity in
primary and secondary school
(Source: UN 2008)
enrollment,
and
universal
provision of reproductive health services are on track. Sri Lanka has met the MDG numerical goals
relating to universal primary school enrollment and completion, reaching near universal enrollment (96
percent) and gender parity in primary and secondary enrollments since the early 1990s (World Bank
2007), though quality questions remain (World Bank 2005a). Its performance on infant and under-5
GII ( 0 = Least Inequality)

Figure 1 – Gender Inequality Index 2008

107

2010 Gender Report presented at World Economic Forum (cited in World Bank 2011a).
The Gender Inequality Index is a composite measure of reproductive health (maternal mortality ratio and adolescent fertility
rate); women’s empowerment (share of parliamentary seats held by women; and female secondary and tertiary educational
attainment rates); and labor (share of women in the labor force) (UN 2008).
109
On the OECD’s Social Institutions and Gender Index which looks at family law, civil liberties, physical integrity (including
violence against women), son preference, and ownership rights, Sri Lanka scores highest among all South Asian countries (score
0.059 versus average regional score of 0.335), due especially to lack of son preference in the country. (See OECD SIGI Index at
http://my.genderindex.org).
108

115

mortality rates is also very strong, and four times better than what might be expected for a country of its
income level. Sri Lanka should reach the goal by 2015 of 6.3 deaths per 1000 live births (ibid).110
Table 3 - Human Development Indicators of Gender Equality: Sri Lanka compared to South Asia
and Lower-middle Income Country Averages

Gender Inequality Index (GII)
Life expectancy at birth (years): females/males
Youth literacy rate (percent age 15‐24):
girls/boys b
Sex ratio (number of females per 1000 males)

Sri Lanka

South Asia

.599

.739

Lower middle‐
income countries
.591

77.7 / 71.6

66.3 / 63.6

66.8 / 63.4

97 / 97

62 / 77

78.6 / 88.8

961.5

933.4

940.1

Source: World Bank 2011a, based on World Development Indicators database
1.3
The Government’s 10-year Development Framework entitled the Mahinda Chintana: Towards a
New Sri Lanka, sets out three pillars: i. equitable development through accelerated rural development; ii.
accelerated growth through increased infrastructure investment; iii. strengthening of public service
delivery (World Bank 2011a).111 A key challenge for the Government is to successfully manage
development and poverty reduction efforts in a manner that is inclusive, pro-poor and gender-responsive.
Improved performance on MDG 3 (Gender equality) will be a challenge given the gender gaps that
remain in most aspects of economic and political empowerment, especially in areas such as representation
in decision-making and public life. Persistent poor performance on indicators such as women’s labor
force participation outside of agriculture, and poor nutritional outcomes across income quintiles, point to
challenges that require a multi-pronged gender-sensitive approach. This is particularly pressing given the
government’s goals of reducing rural employment from two-thirds to a half, and increasing the urban
population from a quarter to a third. Migration policy also seeks to double the proportion of remittances
earned on the basis of skills, with important implications for female overseas workers. Women’s
participation in the garment sector, in particular, remains significant.
1.4
Remittances by female overseas workers working in domestic service and the health sector
contribute greatly to national and household incomes. Remittances are the second largest earner of foreign
exchange in Sri Lanka (Abayasekera 2010) and women are significant participants in the overseas Sri
Lankan labor force--53 percent of the total in 2003 (World Bank 2007). Abroad they work largely as
domestic staff in households in the Middle East (90 percent). Many of these women come from the
generally poor estate sector; however, individual households sending women to work abroad tend to have
more assets than other non-migrant sending households (ibid). Government policy toward female
overseas workers is mixed. The Government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) supports migration because of
remittance earnings, yet it seeks to bar married women with young children from such work since work
conditions abroad can be abusive. Indeed, the government has done little to work with host countries to
reduce these abuses endured by both female and male migrant workers from Sri Lanka (Gunatilaka et al
2010; ADB 2008) .

110

Nonetheless, even infant mortality rates (IMR) vary widely by region: e.g., in 1996, the district with the highest IMR rate in
the country (i.e., Anuradhapura) had a rate almost 20 times that of the district with lowest (that is, Trincomalee) (World Bank
2005). Progress since then has been similarly varied spatially.
111
Sri Lanka’s strategy for attaining high-middle income status is centered around five key hubs for growth, viz: i. knowledgebased industries and services; ii. ports and shipping; iii. aviation; iv. commercial hub; and v. energy (World Bank 2011b).

116

Persistent Gender Inequities in Sri Lanka: Statistical Summary
2.1
Despite favorable composite scores on gender, Sri Lanka performs less well than expected for its
GNI per capita level in two key areas: women’s labor force participation, and nutritional status of women
and children.

Figure 3 ‐ Female Labor Force Participation Time
Trend

Female

(Source: ILO, 2010)

Male

LKA

SAS

MYS

MIC

yr2007

yr2004

yr2001

PAK AFG IND LKA MYS MIC SSF NPL

yr1998

0

yr1995

20

yr1992

40

yr1989

60

yr1986

80

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
yr1983

% of Female Population ages 15‐64

% of population 15‐64

100

yr1980

Figure 2 – Gender Differences in Labor Force
Participation

UMC

(Source: ILO Key Indicators database)

2.2
Women’s Labor Force Participation: Women’s labor force participation in Sri Lanka is just 37
percent, below that of Nepal (NPL); middle-income countries (MIC); Sub-Saharan Africa (SSF);
Malaysia (MYS), which has gender equality outcomes in other areas that are similar to Sri Lanka’s; and
not much higher than in India or Afghanistan (Figure 2). The government is committed to improving this
performance, particularly as the country transitions further into the services and industry sectors.
However, a historical look at Sri Lanka and other comparator countries shows remarkable persistence in
women’s labor force participation in the last three decades, with Sri Lanka actually demonstrating a slight
decline in women’s participation rates as the economy develops (Figure 3). These figures mask
differences in rates in rural and urban areas. Rural women participate in the labor force slightly more
than do urban women, and this disparity persists over time (Figure 4). Women’s labor force participation
for female youth aged 15-29 from 1992-2006 was just 38 percent compared to their male counterparts’
participation at 66 percent, though women’s participation was increasing by 3.4 percent per year
compared to the male increase of 1.8 percent per year (Arunatilake and Jayawardena 2010). Still, from
1992 to 2006, women’s labor force participation (ages 15 and over) increased from 36 percent to 39
percent, while men’s increased from 75 percent to 77 percent of the respective population (ibid, based on
DCS data). The overall unemployment rate for females was double that of men (i.e., 9.7 percent
compared to 4.7 percent) (ibid). Unemployment for women is higher than for men in all sectors, but
highest in the rural sector, followed closely by urban unemployment (Figure 5).

117

Figure 4 – Female LFP, Rural vs Urban

Figure 5 ‐‐ Unemployment by Sector and Gender
9
8

50

7
40
30

% Unemployment

% of Population in Labor Force

60

Total
Urban

20

Rural

10

6
5

Urban

4

Rural

3

Estate

2
0

1

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009

0

Year

Total

(Source: Sri Lanka DCS Annual Bulletin, 2010)

Male

Female

(Source: Sri Lanka DCS Annual Bulletin, 2010)

2.3
Nutrition of Women and Children: Consumption and income poverty persist in Sri Lanka, as does
malnutrition, especially among the poor. While the prevalence of malnutrition is not as high as in other
South Asian countries and even many middle income countries (Figure 6), overall child malnutrition rates
in 2002-08 were 21 percent (World Bank 2011a). Among children under age five, 18 percent are stunted,
22 percent are underweight, and 15 percent are wasted (UNICEF 2009). These malnutrition levels are
higher than what is expected for countries at similar GDP per capita levels. National aggregates,
moreover, mask widening disparities between different groups in the population. While child
malnutrition is present across all income quintiles, it declines as income levels rise. In the estate sector,
where child malnutrition rates are among the highest in the world, stunting (height for age) affects more
than 40 percent of children. A Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) indicator for the period FY09-12 was
to reduce the share of underweight children under age 5 in estate areas from 44.1 percent in 2000 to 34.9
percent in 2011-12; however, this indicator has since been dropped (World Bank 2011a).

100.00
50.00
0.00
AFG
NPL
IND
SAS
BGD
LMC
PAK
BTN
MDV
MIC
LKA
UMC

% of children below age 5

Figure 6 ‐ Malnutrition Prevalence in South Asia

Country
Stunting (Height for Age)
Wasting (Weight for Age)

Source: (Latest Available Data, WDI)

118

References Cited
Abayasekera, Asha. 2010. “Youth Mobility and Overseas Migration in Sri Lanka” in R. Gunatilaka, M.
Mayer, and M. Vodopivec (eds.) The Challenge of Youth Employment in Sri Lanka. Pp. 139-166.
Abbott, Pamela, Dorothy Tukahabwa, Jean Providence Nzabonimpa, and Roger Sapsford. 2010. “Girls into
Science and Technology: Policy Brief - DelPHE Project Girls into Science and Technology”. Kigali, Rwanda:
Kigali Institute of Education.
Agenor, Pierre-Richard, Octaviano Canuto, and Luiz Pereira da Silva. 2010. “On Gender and Growth: The
Role of Intergenerational Health Externalities and Women’s Occupational Constraints”. Policy Research
Working Paper No. 5492. Washington DC: World Bank.
Ajwad, Mohamed Ihsan and Pradeep Kurukulasuriya. 2002. “Ethnic and Gender Wage Disparities in Sri
Lanka”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2859. Washington DC: World Bank.
Amasuriya, Harini. 2010. “Discrimination and Social Exclusion of Youth in Sri Lanka” in R. Gunatilaka, M.
Mayer, and M. Vodopivec (eds.) The Challenge of Youth Employment in Sri Lanka. Pp. 199-216.
Arunatilake, Nisha and P. Jayawardena. 2010. “Labor Market Trends and Outcomes in Sri Lanka” in R.
Gunatilaka, M. Mayer, and M. Vodopivec (eds.) The Challenge of Youth Employment in Sri Lanka. Pp. 1938.
Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2008. Country Gender Assessment: Sri Lanka. Manila: ADB.
Attanasio, Orazio, Adriana Kugler, and Costas Meghir. 2008. “Training Disadvantaged Youth in Latin
America: Evidence from a Randomized Trial”. NBER Working Paper No. 13931. Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Aturupane, Harsha. 2009. “The Pearl of Great Price: Achieving Equitable Access to Primary and Secondary
Education and Enhancing Learning in Sri Lanka”. Create Pathways to Access Research Monograph No. 29.
London: Institute of Education.
Das Gupta, Monica and Lawrence Gostin. 2009. “How Can Donors Help Build Global Public Goods in
Health?”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4907. Washington DC: World Bank.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Returns to Capital in Microenterprises:
Evidence from a Field Experiment”. Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. CXXIII, Issue 4: 1329-1372.
Dewey, Kathryn G. and Kenneth H. Brown. 2003. “Update on Technical Issues Concerning
Complementary Feeding of Young Children in Developing Countries and Implications for Intervention
Programs” in World Health Organization (WHO). 2003. Food and Nutrition Bulletin, vol. 24, no. 1, The
United Nations University.
Gunatilaka, Ramani, Markus Mayer, and Milan Vodopivec. 2010. “Introduction: The Problem of Youth
Unemployment” in R. Gunatilaka, M. Mayer, and M. Vodopivec (eds.) The Challenge of Youth Employment
in Sri Lanka. Pp. 1-18.
Gunewardena, Dileni. 2010. “An Analysis of Gender and Ethnic Wage Differentials among Youth in Sri
Lanka” in R. Gunatilaka, M. Mayer, and M. Vodopivec (eds.) The Challenge of Youth Employment in Sri
Lanka. Pp. 217-241.

119

Hicks, Joan Hamory, Michael Kremer, Isaac Mbiti, and Edward Miguel. 2011. “Vocational Education
Voucher Delivery and Labor Market Returns: A Randomized Evaluation among Kenyan Youth.” Report for
Spanish Impact Evaluation Fund (SIEF) Phase II. Washington DC: World Bank.
Himaz, Rozana. 2010. “Intra-household Allocation of Education Expenditure: The Case of Sri Lanka”.
Economic Development and Cultural Change . pp.231-258.
Koolwal, Gayatri and Dominique van de Walle. 2010. “Access to Water, Women’s Work and Child
Outcomes”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5302. Washington DC: World Bank.
National Institute of Population Research and Training (NIPORT), Mitra and Associates, and ORC Macro.
2007. Sri Lanka Demographic and Health Survey 2006-2007. Colombo, Sri Lanka and Calverton, Maryland
[USA]: National Institute of Population Research and Training, Mitra and Associates, and ORC Marco (cited
in this paper as DHS 2006-07).
Rao, K.P., Vijaysekar Kalavakonda, Shweta Banerjee, and Parmesh Shah. N.d., “Making Markets Work for
the Poor: Community-Managed Procurement Centers for Small and Marginal Farmers in Andhra Pradesh,
India”. South Asia Rural Livelihood Notes. Series 1, Note 2. Washington DC: World Bank
USAID. 2008. Education from a Gender Equality Perspective. Washington DC: USAID.
World Bank. 2011a. Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) Progress Report for the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka for the Period FY2009-2012. Washington DC: World Bank.
_________ 2011b. “Sri Lanka: Transforming School Education as the Foundation of a Knowledge Hub –
P113488”, Project Information Document. Washington DC: World Bank.
_________ 2011c. “Evolving Inequality of School Attainment in Sri Lanka”. South Asia Human Development
Unit Report No. 44. Washington DC: World Bank.
_________ 2010. “Active Labor Market Programs for Youth: A Framework to Guide Youth Employment
Interventions”. World Bank Employment Policy Primer No. 16. Washington DC: World Bank.
_________ 2009a. “Nutrition at a Glance: Sri Lanka.”
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/NUTRITION/Resources/281846-1271963823772/SriLanka.pdf
_________ 2009b. Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook. “Thematic Note on ICT”. Washington DC: World
Bank.
_________ 2007. Sri Lanka Poverty Assessment. Engendering Growth with Equity: Opportunities and
Challenges. Washington DC: World Bank.
_________ 2005a. Sri Lanka: Attaining the MDGs in Sri Lanka: How Likely and What Will it Take to Reduce
Poverty, Child Mortality and Malnutrition, and to Increase School Enrollment and Completion? Washington
DC: World Bank.
________ 2005b. “Youth in Post-Conflict Settings”. Youth Development Notes 1(1). Washington DC: World
Bank.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2003. Food and Nutrition Bulletin, vol. 24, no. 1, The United Nations
University.

120

Annex 18: IDA/IBRD Program Summary
Fiscal
Year

Project

IDA (US$ m)

IBRD (US$ m)

FY13

Second Health Sector Development
Regional Growth Pole/ Economic Development

200
50

250

FY14

Skills Development
Urban Infrastructure/Transport
Investment Policy Reform

227
100

100
100
-

FY15

Private Innovation and Technology Adoption
Legal and Judicial Reform
Water and Sanitation

tbd
tbd
tbd

tbd
tbd
tbd

FY16

Solid Waste Management

tbd

tbd

Note: FY13 and FY14 total IDA lending is expected to be $577 million. FY13 and FY14 total IBRD lending is
expected to be $450 million. Lending program for FY15 and FY16 is tentative and will be developed as part of the
CPS Progress Report process.

121

IBRD 33485
80°E

81°E

SRI LANKA

I N DIA

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

10°N

a

PROVINCE CAPITALS

it

Point Pedro

NATIONAL CAPITAL

St

r

10°N

k

RIVERS

Pal

Jaffna

MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS

Elephant Pass

Delft
Island

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

Palk Bay

Killinochchi

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
Iranamadu
Tank

Ferr y
Ad
am
's B
ridge

9°N

Manakulam

Talaimannar
Mannar
Island

Mullaittivu

NORTHERN

Mannar

Pulmoddai

Vavuniya

Aruvi A
ru

SRI LANKA
Trincomalee

NORTH CENTRAL

Karaitivu
Island

Rambewa

Mannar

Galkulama
Kalpitiya
Ka
la

Kaud

Oya

Puttalan

ulla Oya

Bay of Bengal

Habarane

D

uru
ed

Oya

Madura Oya

NORTH
WESTERN

8°N

Maho

Chilaw

Kurunegala

CENTRAL

ha O y a
Ma

Mahaweli Ganga

8°N

Mutur

Anuradhapura
Yan Oya

Gulf of

Batticaloa

Madura Oya
Reservoir
Kalmunai
Ampara

Negombo

Gal Oyya

Kandy

Kegalla

Victoria Falls
Reservoir
Pidurutalagala
(2,524 m)
Badulla

U VA

WESTERN

7°N

COLOMBO

Kelan

Kattankudi

EASTERN

g
Gan

Senanayake
Samudra
7°N

Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte

Pottuvil

Monaragala
Moratuwa
Wellawaya

SABARAGAMUWA
w
Wala

Laccadive

i Oya

Kalutara

Ratnapura

lu

d
Kirin

Ka

Kumana
Kataragama

INDIAN
OCEAN

eG

g
an

Sea

a

SOUTHERN

Hambantota

Galle
6°N

Matara

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

80°E

Tangalla

0

20

60 Kilometers

40

6°N

Dondra Head
0
81°E

10

20

30

40 Miles

82°E
SEPTEMBER 2004

