Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

76501

FY2013-2015

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR INDONESIA

THE WORLD BANK, INDONESIA OFFICE
Bursa Efek Indonesia, Tower 2, Lt. 12
Sudirman Central Business District
Jakarta - Indonesia
Contact:
Dini Djalal, ddjalal@worldbank.org
Novita Wund, nwund@ifc.org
Website:
www.worldbank.org/id

FY2013-2015

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR INDONESIA
December 13, 2012

Indonesia Country Management Unit, World Bank
East Asia and Paciﬁc Region
The International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Paciﬁc Region
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

Abbreviations and Acronyms
AAA
ADB
AfD
AFEP
AGO
APEC
ASEAN
AusAID
BAPPENAS
BEC
BERMUTU
BII
BKPM
BNPB
BOS
BOS-KITA
BPBD
BPJS
BPK
BTPN
Cat-DDO
CCT
CDD
CIDA
COP
COREMAP
COSO
CPS
DAK
DBM
DGH
DPL
DPL-DDO
DRM
EC
EITI
ESW
EU
FCPF
FDI
FIP
FIRM
FREDDI
FSAP
FY
G20
GDP

ii

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Agence Francaise de Developpement
Aceh Forest and Environment Project
Attorney General’s Oﬃce
Asia-Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Australian Aid Agency
State Ministry of Development Planning
Basic Education Capacity Trust Fund
Better Education through Reformed Management and Universal Teacher Upgrading
Project
Bank Internasional Indonesia
Investment Coordinating Board
National Disaster Management Agency
Government’s School Operational Assistance
Knowledge Improvement for Transparency and Accountability Project
Local Disaster Management Agencies
National Social Security Administrators Law
Supreme Audit Institution
Bank Tabungan Pensiunan Nasional Tbk
Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
Conditional Cash Transfer
Community Driven Development
Canadian International Development Agency
Conference of the Parties
Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Project
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations
Country Partnership Strategy
Special Allocation Fund
Double Burden of Malnutrition
Directorate General of Highways
Development Policy Loan
Deferred Drawdown Option
Disaster Risk Management
European Commission
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
Foreign Direct Investment
Forest Investment Program
Financial Sector and Investment Climate Reform and Modernization
Fund for REDD in Indonesia
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Group of Twenty Financial Ministries and Central Bank Governors
Gross Domestic Product

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

GEF
GFDRR
GFMRAP
GIZ
GPOBA
GPSA
GTI
HIV/AIDS
HPEQ
HRH
IBBS
IBRD
ICT
IFC
IFF
IMDFF-DR
INSTANSI
ISSDP
IT
IWSFF
JBIC
JICA
JICT
JUFMP
KfW
KPK
KUR
LG
LGCD
LPNK
M&E
MCC
MDFTIC
MDG
MEMR
MIGA
MIS
MoF
MoH
MoHA
MoLHR
MP3EI
MSME
MTEF
NGO
NZ
OECD

Global Environment Facility
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
Government Financial Management and Revenue Administration Project
(German Aid Agency)
Global Partnership on Output-based Aid
Global Partnership for Social Accountability
Global Tiger Initiative
Human immunodeﬁciency virus infection /acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome
Health Professional Education Quality
Health Human resources
Integrated Bio-Behavioral Survey
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Information and Communication Technology
International Finance Corporation
Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Facility
Multi Donor Funding Facility for Disaster Recovery
Institutional, Tax Administration, Social and Investment DPL
Indonesia Sanitation Sector Development Program
Information Technology
Indonesian Water and Sanitation Financing Facility
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Jakarta International Container Terminal
Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation Project
(German Development Bank)
Anti-Corruption Commission
Kredit Usaha Rakyat
Local Government
Local Government Capacity Development
Public Research Institutes
Monitoring & Evaluation
Millennium Challenge Corporation
Multi Donor Facility for Trade and Investment Climate
Millennium Development Goals
Ministry of Energy and Mineral. Resources
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Management Information System
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Home Aﬀairs
Ministry of Law and Human Rights
Master Plan for “Acceleration and Expansion of Indonesia’s Economic Development
2011-2025”
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises
Mid Term Expenditure Framework
Non-Governmental Organization
New Zealand
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

iii

OGP
OJK
PAMSIMAS
PBB
PDAM
PDNA
PEACH
PER
PERISAI
PFM
PINTAR
PLN
PNPM
PPIAF
PPP
PT
R&D
RAPP
REDD+
REKOMPAK
RIA
RISET
RPJMN
SBL
SBY
SECO
SJSN
SMART-D

Open Government Partnership
Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (Indonesia Financial Services Authority)
Rural Water and Sanitation Program
Performance-based Budgeting
Perusahaan Daerah Air Minum (Local Water Utility)
Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
Public Expenditure Analysis and Capacity Harmonization
Public Expenditure Review
Program for Economic Resilience, Investment and Social Assistance in Indonesia
Public Financial Management
Project for Indonesian Tax Administration Reform
Perusahaan Listrik Negara (State-Owned Electricity Utility)
National Program for Community Empowerment
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Public-Private Partnership
Perseroan Terbatas (Limited Company)
Research and Development
Road Asset Preservation Project
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
Community-based housing and settlement reconstruction program
Regulatory Impact Assessment
Research and Innovation in Science & Technology Project
Medium-Term Development Plan
Single Borrower Limit
President S.B. Yudhoyono
Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Aﬀairs
National Social Security System Law
Sustainable Management of Agricultural Research and Technology Dissemination
Project
SME
Small- Medium Sized Enterprise
SNDB
Sub National Doing Business Survey
SOE
State-owned enterprises
SPADA
Support for Disadvantaged Areas
SPAN
Automated budget and treasury system
SPIRIT
Scholarship Program for Strengthening Reforming Institutions Project
STATCAP-CERDAS Statistical Capacity Building – Change and Reform for the Development of Statistics
STBM
Community-Led Total Sanitation Strategy
SUN
Scaling Up Nutrition
TA
Technical Assistance
TF
Trust Fund
TSA
Treasury Single Account
TSSM
Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing
UHC
Universal Health Coverage
UK
United Kingdom
UKP4
Presidential Delivery Unit
UNAIDS
Joint United Nations Program on HIV and AIDS
UNDP
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children’s Fund
UNICEF
USA
United States of America

iv

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Abbreviations and Acronyms

USAID
USDRP
UWSSP
VGF
WBG
WBI
WDR
WHO
WINRIP
WSP

United States Agency for International Development
Urban Sector Development and Reform Project
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project
Viability Gap Funding
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Development Report
World Health Organization
Western Indonesia National Road Improvement Project
Water and Sanitation Program

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

v

Table of Contents
I.

Introduction

1

II.

Development Challenges

3

III.

The Government’s Development Program

5

IV.

Recent Economic Developments and Political Context
Current Economic Performance and Outlook
Poverty
The Political Context

7
7
9
9

V.

The Country Partnership Strategy
PRO-GROWTH - Promoting Prosperity
Connectivity
Competitiveness
Financial Sector
Infrastructure
Local Government
Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management
Strengthening the Public Sector
PRO-JOBS - Enhancing Skills and Technology, and Improving Social Protection
Education
Social Insurance
PRO-POOR – Promoting Communities, Protecting the Vulnerable and Improving
Health Outcomes
Targeting Poverty
Community Development
Food Security and Rural Development
Improving Health Outcomes
PRO-GREEN – Ensuring Sustainable Development and Improving Disaster Resilience
Green Growth
Improving Disaster Resilience
CROSS-CUTTING ENGAGEMENTS - Gender and Governance
Gender
Governance and Anti-Corruption

11
15
16
17
18
20
22
24
25
26
26
29
30
30
31
33
35
37
38
40
41
41
43

DELIVERING THE WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM
Financing
Collaboration with Development Partners
Portfolio Management
Sharing Global Development Solutions
Results Management Framework
Managing for Risks

45
45
46
47
47
48
48

VI.

vi

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Attachments
Annex 1
Annex 2
Annex 3
Annex 4
Annex 5
Standard

: Indonesia CPS FY13-15 Results Matrix
: Gender Equity
: Governance and Anti-Corruption
: Portfolio Performance
: Trust Funds
: CPS Annexes

53
65
71
75
77
81

: Alignment of Engagement Areas

14

: Baseline Macroeconomic Outlook

8

:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

14
16
18
20
22
23
24
25
28
29
31
33
34
37
39
40
41
46

List of Figures
Figure 1

List of Table
Table 1

List of Boxes
Box 1
Box 2
Box 3
Box 4
Box 5
Box 6
Box 7
Box 8
Box 9
Box 10
Box 11
Box 12
Box 13
Box 14
Box 15
Box 16
Box 17
Box 18

Ins and Outs FY13-15
Connectivity Results, Instruments and Partners
Competitiveness Results, Instruments and Partners
Financial Sector Results, Instruments and Partners
Infrastructure Results, Instruments and Partners
Local Government Results, Instruments and Partners
Macro and Fiscal Results, Instruments and Partners
Public Sector Results, Instruments and Partners
Education Results, Instruments and Partners
Social Insurance Results, Instruments and Partners
Poverty Targeting Results, Instruments and Partners
Community Development Results, Instruments and Partners
Food Security and Rural Development Results, Instruments and Partners
Improving Health Results, Instruments and Partners
A New Partnership to Support Green Growth
Green Growth Results, Instruments and Partners
Disaster Resilience Results, Instruments and Partners
Trust Funds: A Platform for Results and Innovation

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

vii

viii

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Photo: Matahati Productions

I. Introduction
The Joint IBRD/IFC/MIGA Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) with Indonesia for FY13-15 bridges
the final two years of the administration of President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono (SBY). Since 2004,
Indonesia emerged as a vibrant and stable democracy and as a self-assured middle-income economy with
a fast-growing private sector, and global and regional inﬂuence. Building on six decades of partnership, the
World Bank Group’s engagement with Indonesia continues to move forward on the path developed by the
previous CPS FY09-12, supporting Indonesia’s development agenda by enabling local capacity to implement
and deliver and by strengthening economic competitiveness of the private sector. The CPS is aligned with
the country’s Master Plan for “Acceleration and Expansion of Indonesia’s Economic Development 2011-2025”,
which seeks to accelerate development through a pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-poor and pro-green strategy.
The Government will take a strong position not only as the regulator, but also as the facilitator and function
as “a catalyst for growth” for the private sector. The CPS takes into account changing global and domestic
market conditions and the lessons learned from the assessment of the CPS for FY09-12, in consultation
with the Government of Indonesia (GoI), private sector, civil society, development partners and other major
stakeholders.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

1

Photo: World Bank

Photo: World Bank

II. Development Challenges
Indonesia’s strong economic growth has supported gains in poverty reduction and contributed to
a growing middle class. The country has successfully emerged from the severe economic turmoil of the
1998 Asian Financial Crisis, and the diﬃcult political transition from authoritarianism to democracy. Indonesia’s
development has made remarkable progress in lifting millions of people out of poverty and in improving
social indicators. Prudent economic management has resulted in low budget deﬁcits, a much reduced public
debt-to-GDP ratio, and manageable inﬂation. The past decade has also seen a robust economic growth even
through the more recent global ﬁnancial crisis. In addition, Indonesia has beneﬁted from a boom in commodity
exports, increasing investor conﬁdence and substantial capital inﬂows, as well as a strong demographic
dividend. Rapid urbanization has also contributed by shifting demand patterns towards consumer durables
and services. Output growth has averaged 5.5 percent per year during 2002 to 2011, on the back of strong
domestic consumption and generally sustainable external surpluses. Although ﬁnancial markets remain
vulnerable to changes in international investor sentiment, imbalances declined rapidly as corporate and
ﬁnancial sector balance sheets were repaired. Revenue growth, combined with restrained expenditures, has
contributed to low ﬁscal deﬁcits.
At the same time, development challenges and weak institutional capacity and other constraints
need to be addressed in order for Indonesia to reach its full potential. Building the capacity of
Indonesia’s institutions to eﬀectively formulate and implement public policy and programs remains a
signiﬁcant task. Despite sustained economic growth and poverty reduction, Indonesia still has a large poor
population (30 million live below the national poverty line, which is just below PPP$1.25 a day) and the pace
of poverty reduction is slowing. An additional 65 million people live above the poverty line but are highly
vulnerable to falling back into poverty, and inequality is growing. Although poverty rates of female-headed
households (FHH) remain lower than male-headed households (MHH), the former remain more remain more
vulnerable to shocks. Human development indicators, job creation and infrastructure investment lag behind
the needs of an increasingly urbanized, young population. Public service delivery needs to be strengthened
through improved coordination and greater transparency. The private sector needs to also be able to operate
in a transparent, rules based environment, with fair competition and adequate access to capital. Substantial
increases in education expenditures have not yet translated into commensurate improvements in the quality
FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

3

of education necessary to supplying the mix of skills required by a growing economy. Cities are hard pressed
to keep up with rapid urbanization, and pronounced regional diﬀerences remain. Public investment is lagging
behind its historical levels and a severe lack of infrastructure will increasingly hold Indonesia back from reaching
its potential in terms of economic growth and prosperity. Fuel subsidies absorb much of the budget that would
otherwise be available for infrastructure and social protection. Private sector participation in important sectors
such as infrastructure, logistics, healthcare and education services, amongst others, need to be scaled up, and
improving regulations for small and medium enterprises could lead to additional job growth. Deforestation,
ﬂooding and other environmental concerns have highlighted the importance of adapting and mitigating to
climate change and managing natural resources in a sustainable manner. Increasingly, Indonesian society and
a free press are demanding stronger accountability in institutions, better governance in businesses and are
not tolerating corruption.

4

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Photo: World Bank

III. The Government’s Development Program
A series of five-year development plans have provided the framework for reinforcing economic
stability and initiating structural reforms. Within the ﬁrst ﬁve years after the 1998 crisis, both economic
and political stability were largely in place. When President Yudhoyono came to power in late 2004, plans
for macroeconomic and ﬁscal consolidation and a series of structural reforms to restore conﬁdence in the
Indonesian economy were included into the National Long-Term Development Plan for 2005-2025. In SBY’s
second term, the Government adopted Indonesia’s Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMN) 2010-2014,
with responsibility for monitoring progress assigned to the newly established Presidential Delivery Unit
(UKP4). With the target of increasing economic growth to 7 percent and reducing the poverty rate to 8-10
percent by 2014, the RPJMN highlights the need for growth with equity and a range of cross-cutting policies to
ensure that development is both sustainable and inclusive. The RPJMN gives a special emphasis to increasing
investments in infrastructure and strengthening the poverty agenda. Further, it commits the Government to
a more equitable and inclusive development for, among others, women and children. The Ministry of Women
Empowerment and Child Protection embodies this commitment.
A new Master Plan for Economic Development seeks to accelerate growth and increase equity
with a goal of becoming one of the 10 largest economics in the world by 2025. In May 2011, GoI
launched the Master Plan for “Acceleration and Expansion of Indonesia’s Economic Development 2011-2025”
(MP3EI) based on three strategies: (i) fostering centers of growth in each major island group by developing
leading resource-based industrial clusters; (ii) building synergies between those centers of growth, including
international connectivity for trade and tourism; and (iii), complementing connectivity by improving human
resources capabilities and increasing investments in research and development. Under the plan, business
enterprises have a central role in economic development, particularly in generating investments, creating
employment opportunities and fostering innovation. The Government is responsible for creating conducive
macro-economic and regulatory conditions for the acceleration and expansion of investments.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

5

The Government’s approach to economic policy is based on its four strategic objectives of progrowth, pro-jobs, pro-poor and pro-green development. Equity remains a basic principle for balancing
economic growth and development amongst large cities and smaller cities and more isolated parts of the
country to deliver more even economic development in collaboration with the private sector and job creation
across the country. It also includes a focus on reaching Indonesia’s poorest. The Government concentrates on
thirteen programs, which include education, health, poverty reduction, employment creation, infrastructure
development, food security, energy, good governance, electoral reform, anti-corruption enforcement, inclusive
and equitable development, climate change and environmental protection, and cultural development.
Collaboration with the private sector to complement Government’s eﬀorts through investments, job creation
and innovation is prioritized. Reducing reliance on external ﬁnance and maintaining a low debt to GDP ratio
is also a key priority of President SBY’s administration. In some, but not all of these areas, the Government has
sought assistance from the Bank Group as discussed in the sections below.

6

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Photo: Juferdy

IV. Recent Economic Developments & Political Context
Current Economic Performance and Outlook
Indonesia managed to weather the global economic downturn of 2008-09 and regain its growth
momentum. GDP growth declined from 6 percent in 2008 to 4.6 percent in 2009, but subsequently
recovered to 6.1 percent in 2010 and 6.5 percent in 2011. The social impact of the global crisis was also limited
in Indonesia. There were few reports of layoﬀs, poverty and unemployment rates continued to decline and
household spending was maintained in an environment of low inﬂation. This relatively robust performance
was supported by solid public ﬁnances, healthy ﬁnancial sector balance sheets and the strong of domestic
demand. Indonesia’s exports, focused on commodities, beneﬁted from international commodity price
increases and strong demand for raw materials from China and other emerging economies. Policymakers also
took proactive measures during the crisis, including a ﬁscal stimulus package, supportive monetary policy
and a signiﬁcant contingent support package from development partners whilst managing to bring in a ﬁscal
deﬁcit that was below target in 2009-2011. Along with strong GDP growth, this contributed to a decrease in
government debt to below 25 percent of GDP, healthy leveraging of the private sector balance sheets and
sovereign ratings that are back to investment grade for the ﬁrst time since 1997. At the same time, these
improvements in creditworthiness, along with high relative yields and encouraging long-term prospects,
have contributed to strong portfolio inﬂows, which could expose the economy to sudden reversals the face
of continued global economic uncertainty.
Recent economic performance has continued to be robust, though there are signs of spillovers
from the deterioration in the global economy and financial markets. In recent months the weakening
in external demand and commodity prices has contributed to a narrowing of Indonesia’s trade surplus. While
ﬁnancial market spillovers have been relatively muted, the weak global outlook and possible ﬁnancial market
turbulence present continued downside risks around the projected growth of 6.1 percent in 2012. Although
Indonesia’s solid ﬁscal position, its relatively limited direct trade exposure to the EU, and strong domestic drivers
of growth make it relatively well-placed to handle a turbulent global economy, its reliance on commodities
is a source of vulnerability. A downside scenario with a severe freezing-up of international ﬁnance, curtailed
growth in China and declining commodity prices could slow growth to around 4 percent of GDP.
FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

7

Over the medium term, effective coordination, policy implementation and investment climate
reforms are needed if growth is to accelerate to 7 percent or more and if improvements in social
outcomes are to continue. For increases in ﬁscal expenditures to lead to improvements in public services,
Indonesia will need more eﬀective and accountable institutions that can translate available resources into
better development outcomes. The country will need to prioritize private sector-led competitive, innovative
and sustainable growth. This will be particularly important as Indonesia focuses on its tremendous need for
infrastructure, ﬁnancial inclusion, better education, greater social protection and universal health coverage.
Improvements in the investment climate, including regulatory consistency and certainty, are also necessary
for employment creation and to sustaining high rates of foreign direct investment.
World Bank analysis shows that in a baseline scenario of international financial market fragility
combined with relatively weak external, but continued solid, domestic demand, growth of 6.1
percent is forecast for 2012, moving up to 6.3 percent in 2013. The underlying macro assumptions for
this baseline include a continued weakness in external demand with overall international commodity prices
also projected to moderate.
Table 1

: Baseline Macroeconomic Outlook
2009

2010

2011

2012(p)

2013(p)

2014(p)

Growth
Real GDP (% change)
Real investment (% change)
Real private consumption (% change)
Real exports (% change)
Real imports (% change)
Current account balance (% of GDP)

4.6
3.3
6.2
-9.7
-15.0
1.9

6.2
8.5
4.6
15.3
17.3
0.7

6.5
8.8
4.7
13.6
13.3
0.2

6.1
12.3
5.0
2.8
7.1
-2.3

6.3
11.2
5.1
5.7
4.7
-1.6

6.6
10.5
4.9
11.0
11.8
-1.7

Fiscal variables
Central government balance (% of GDP)1
Central government debt (% of GDP)

-1.6
28.4

-0.7
26.1

-1.1
24.3

-2.2
23.0

-1.6
21.2

-1.4
19.5

Prices
GDP deﬂator (% change)2
CPI inﬂation (%)2

8.3
4.8

8.1
5.1

8.4
5.4

6.5
4.4

7.9
5.1

8.7
5.0

Note:
1
2011 is actual audited, 2012 is revised Budget deficit and deficit from 2013 to 2014 is based on Government 2013 Budget Financial Note.
2
Period averages

The outlook for China is of particular importance for Indonesia. China is an important direct trading
partner (with a weight in Indonesia’s exports of 11 percent in 2011) but the second round eﬀects on Indonesia
of a slowdown in China via global and regional trading partner growth would also be important. The baseline
growth projection incorporates an assumed growth rate for China of around 8 percent, in line with the
June 2012 GEP projections. Moving China’s growth down to 7 percent would directly cut Indonesia’s major
trading partner growth by 0.17 pp (given a weight in Indonesia’s exports of 11 percent in 2011). The second
round eﬀects via global and regional trading partner growth would also be important. However, the real
concern with a relatively marked slowdown in growth would be if China’s growth leads to a sharp fall in global
commodity prices, particularly coal and minerals that form a sizeable share of Indonesia’s exports. For example,
the June 2011 IMF report on China Spillovers estimated that a 3 percent reduction in the growth rate of China’s
industrial output (1 standard deviation, or 1 percent of GDP) would result in international price declines of 6
percent for oil and base metals; while the impact on other commodities is low. If signiﬁcant commodity price
declines were sustained then this would spill over to domestic consumption and investment, as household
incomes and corporate investment, and ﬁscal revenues would also decline.
Growth could also move substantially lower if the impact of adverse external shocks is amplified
domestically. Growth would still be above 4 percent in the international scenarios discussed in the previous
paragraphs. This is similar to that seen in 2009, when growth dropped during the height of the global ﬁnancial
8

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

crisis but remained at 4.6 percent. However, it is important to note that these GDP projections combine the
external scenarios with moderations in the underlying domestic drivers of growth, i.e. private consumption
and investment. In the event that there was a major dislocation to these drivers, for example due to domestic
policy miss-steps or problems in the domestic ﬁnancial sector, then the downside risks to growth could be
much greater.

Poverty
Despite strong economic growth and falling poverty in the last decade, inequality is rising and
many households continue to live on the edge of poverty. Indonesia’s poverty rate, measured at the
national poverty line, fell from 16.6 percent in March 2007 to 12.0 percent in March 2012, with little diﬀerence
between male-headed and female-headed households. The 0.5 percentage point decline since March 2011 is
the lowest drop in ten years, which reﬂects the slowing rate of poverty reduction and the increasing challenges
of lifting the remaining poor out of poverty. With rapid urbanization, poverty will also become increasingly
more urban. Despite the country’s positive progress in reducing poverty, vulnerability remains high. Nearly 40
percent of Indonesians live on 1.5 times poverty-line expenditure (or less) and are highly vulnerable to shocks
that can push them back below the poverty line. The gap between the poor and non-poor is also widening.
The Gini coeﬃcient has increased from 0.32 in 1999 to approximately 0.41 in 2011. Regional disparities also
persist; eastern Indonesia lags behind other parts of the country.
The reduction in poverty rate could have been faster if there were sufficient opportunities for
poor workers to move into better jobs in the formal and non-agricultural sectors. The Bank recently
completed the Indonesia Jobs Report, a comprehensive overview of the labor market over the past 20
years. While overall formal employment grew at 1.2 percentage points per year from 2003 until 2007, formal
employment for the poor increased by only 0.8 percentage points and remained roughly constant for the
near-poor during that period. Going forward, reducing poverty and vulnerability will hinge on the pace of
employment growth for the poor. The Government is also increasingly concerned about the rise in inequality.
The Bank will work with the GoI in analyzing the factors behind the rising inequality. Preliminary analysis of
the data shows a sharp contrast between the situation of skilled and highly skilled workers, who have seen a
rapid increase in wages over the last decade, with that of the unskilled, working largely in informal sectors with
little job security and slow wage growth. The analysis will examine the growth rate of economic sectors with
diﬀerent skill-intensity. A structural transformation often entails some inequality along the skill spectrum since
diﬀerent sectors with diﬀerent skill-intensity grow a diﬀerent pace.

The Political Context
As a result of a decade of political and institutional reforms, Indonesia is a vibrant multi-party
and decentralized democracy. At the same time, the current environment – dominated by uncertainty
over pending election outcomes, tensions amongst the legislative, judicial and executive branches of central
government and a lack of clarity about decentralization – makes it more diﬃcult for Government to make
tough policy choices and implement the changes necessary for better service delivery in the run-up to the
2014 elections.
Over the medium term, Indonesia is expected to continue along a stable political path with a
consensus-based approach to reform and pragmatic economic management. Although political
positioning is expected to dominate in 2013 and the ﬁrst half of 2014with no major ideological diﬀerences
among the dominant political parties and potential presidential candidates, the election will likely be
determined by candidates who appeal most to an increasingly demanding electorate seeking to sustain
political stability and to keep corruption at bay.
The partnership between Indonesia and the World Bank Group has evolved over six decades to
become one of our most significant in terms of lending, knowledge services and implementation
support. With a portfolio of 44 operations, US$1.4 billion in trust funds commitments and a strong analytical

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

9

and advisory program for the World Bank, and a committed portfolio of US$1.2 billion and an innovative
advisory services program totaling US$23-25 million of annual expenditure for IFC, the Bank Group remains
the largest provider of development ﬁnance and advice for Indonesia. The engagement is supported by the
Bank Group’s largest country oﬃce and a decentralized structure recently strengthened by additional sector
management associated with span-of-control improvements. The depth of the engagement comes not only
from more typical Bank lending, IFC ﬁnancing and knowledge services but also from an unusually intensive
advisory and implementation support made possible by third-party ﬁnancing.

10

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Photo: Matahati Productions

V. The Country Partnership Strategy
At the same time, Indonesia has provided both a testing ground and inspiration for a range of
innovations that have shaped the World Bank. These notable ‘ﬁrsts’ include hosting one of the ﬁrst
decentralized oﬃces, bringing into focus the need to systematically address environmental and social
impacts of projects, ground-breaking initiatives in community-driven development, ﬁrst-ever advisory
services project for IFC, sustainable palm oil and forestry advisory services initiatives and provision of short
and longer-term disaster response. Increasingly, Indonesia is not only receiving assistance, but is helping
other members of the Bank Group by sharing its experience and becoming a leader amongst emerging
middle income countries. Notable is Indonesia’s leadership in calling for green development and in disaster
management and recovery.
To remain relevant and responsive to the needs of Indonesia, the Bank Group will continue to call
on a broad range of instruments and knowledge services to respond to the challenges of each
of the areas in which we engage. In many cases, this means approaching each engagement area in a
programmatic way that often cuts across the Bank’s traditional sectors and is in close cooperation with IFC and
MIGA. Over the CPS period and beyond, the Bank Group will continue to take a medium- to long-term view of
its engagements that will provide continuity across diﬀerent political administrations. This long-term approach
allows ﬂexibility to respond to emerging demands drawing on the relevant ﬁnancing and knowledge services.
The Government has indicated its preference for an increasing shift in the overall balance of services toward
knowledge and convening. For ﬁnancing services, the Government is looking for an increasing focus on both
infrastructure and poverty reduction programs.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

11

The partnership is focused on engagement areas where the Bank Group is likely to provide
the most value added in support of Indonesian development priorities. The WBG engagement is
systematically tested against the following criteria to ensure relevance: (i) an important development priority,
(ii) based on demand for the Bank Group’s support from government, the private sector and civil society,
ideally with a strong champion, (iii) is an area where the WBG has comparative advantage and, (iv) oﬀers the
prospect of tangible development results over time. Where these criteria are not met, the WBG will limit its
support (as the Bank did in health and agriculture and IFC limited corporate ﬁnancing to top-tier corporates
in recent years), recalibrate its eﬀorts (in this CPS period, focus will shift from reforming the policy framework
for decentralization to service delivery by local governments) or exit. Where results have been achieved, the
WBG will wind down its engagement (for example, closing the Aceh oﬃce upon completion of the disaster
response. Meanwhile, we are responding to meaningful client demand for policy and institutional reforms
(such as social insurance, ﬁnancial sector regulation, infrastructure and ﬁnancial inclusion). Experience suggests
this pragmatic approach as an eﬀective way to provide steady, predictable support in key development areas
while remaining open to emerging priorities and exploring new ideas.
The CPS takes into account lessons learned from the Bank’s past engagement, including the CPS
Completion Report for FY09-12. These lessons include:

12

•

Effectively supporting an increasingly confident middle-income country requires fully aligning Bank
support with Indonesia’s development program and the country-led and owned policy agenda. This has
solidiﬁed the Bank Group’s status as the development agency of choice and put the Bank in a position to
be responsive to Indonesia’s immediate needs, and to inform the debate on emerging policy issues. Full
alignment, in turn, has positive spillover eﬀects for aligning other donor programs behind the country-led
agenda in their collaboration with the Bank. This has allowed the Bank to deepen its engagements across
key development priorities.

•

Programmatic development policy lending support provides important cross-cutting convening
services for step-by-step incremental reforms. As institutional reform eﬀorts deepen at the sectoral
level, eﬀectiveness of implementation support is further enhanced by drilling down through discrete
projects.

•

Sustained engagement over several years encourages an evidence-based approach that allows to
carefully recalibrate the scope and design of programs as needed. A good example is the Bank’s support
for Indonesia’s signiﬁcant community-driven development program, with demonstrable well-researched
impact on the ground. Its country-wide expansion oﬀers important potential for using social capital as
a platform for addressing health and education, inclusion and environmental concerns, while requiring
increased attention to governance and management, in order to improve impact and reduce operational
and reputational risks.

•

Knowledge services take an increasingly important role and Indonesia seeks to share both its best
practices and lessons learned in development experiences, particularly with other middle-income
countries. In important areas with diminished need for external ﬁnancing, diﬀused leadership or poor
coordination, the Bank’s knowledge and convening services can encourage a policy debate with a view
to forging a consensus (e.g. on private-public partnerships), contribute to eﬀective implementation
(e.g. in education) and help with the coordination among government agencies (e.g. in infrastructure
development). Indonesia recently contributed US$1.5 million to the Bank’s South-South Knowledge
Exchange facility.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

•

As Indonesia’s private sector continues to develop in a vibrant, fast-growing middle-income economy, IFC’s
approach in financing and advisory services is becoming more focused in selected priority sectors, such as
in infrastructure, financial inclusion, climate change mitigation and agribusiness. Going forward, IFC will
continue to support projects and interventions that involve signiﬁcant demonstration impact, i.e. they are
innovative and serve as examples to enable the private sector investors and other stakeholders to crowd in.
This enhances the development impact from IFC’s services in Indonesia’s large and growing economy.

The Country Partnership Strategy aims to enhance Indonesia’s domestic capacity for reducing poverty
and boosting equitable and sustainable prosperity. Its main thrust is to help public institutions
implement and deliver, and to partner with the private sector for sustainable economic and job
growth. The Bank Group’s approach in Indonesia is to (i) closely align with the Government’s own development
strategies, policy objectives and priority programs; (ii) strengthen and increasingly rely on Indonesia’s own
systems and procedures such as those for procurement and ﬁnancial management; while (iii) continuing to
put a strong emphasis on ﬁduciary oversight, tangible development results and technical excellence; and (iv)
continuing to implement innovative, demonstrational and sustainable private sector projects. It seeks to retain
its relevance as a provider of development solutions for an emerging Indonesia by sharing global knowledge,
providing innovative ﬁnancial services and oﬀering the platform of the Bank’s convening services. The CPS
continues to move forward on the path developed by the previous partnership, the FY09-12 CPS by partnering
on investing in institutions in order to enhance governance, through its focus on open and eﬃcient government,
accountable service delivery, clear checks and balances; and fostering a conducive environment and supporting
sustainable private sector enterprises. Gender equality is also another key aspect of the CPS in line with the Bank’s
corporate commitment for 100 percent gender-informed activities in EAP. Bridging the remaining years of the
current administration, this CPS focuses on the implementation of the FY13-15 program until early 2015, when a
newly elected government and a new ﬁve-year plan will be inaugurated.
The Bank Group Partnership is aligned with the Government’s development priorities in their
pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-poor and pro-environment focus. Figure 1 indicates the key engagement
areas where Bank Group support is expected to contribute to tangible development outcomes and make
a diﬀerence in the lives of Indonesians. Cross-cutting themes include gender equity, as well as governance
and anti-corruption. Together, these engagement areas aim to support government eﬀorts in addressing
Indonesia’s key development challenges in collaboration with the private sector including (i) boosting
growth and job creation by facilitating the supply response to the dramatic change in demand that a rising
middle class and urbanization bring (pro-growth and pro-jobs agenda); (ii) accelerating the pace of poverty
reduction and provide greater economic security for the vulnerable so that they can share the beneﬁts of
growing prosperity (pro-poor and pro-jobs agenda) and (iii) enhancing sustainability in natural resource
management (pro-green agenda). In meeting the country’s priorities, the Bank’s approach in Indonesia is to
put together cross-sectoral teams in the ﬁeld to bring best quality knowledge and implementation support.
Our engagements are supported by a wide range of instruments and ﬁnancing sources. In addition to more
conventional Bank instruments, the Indonesia “business model” is based heavily on being a platform for the
delivery of third party ﬁnancing. This includes multi-donor and bilateral donor trust funds and programmatic
and project speciﬁc ﬁnancing and support facilities. By providing a platform for ﬁnancing from other donors,
the Bank Group is able to help deliver an array of innovative solutions and to pilot new ideas in development
that would not be possible using only Bank instruments.
Overall, the breadth and depth of the Bank’s ongoing engagement is maintained, but with several
shifts in emphasis. Box 1 summarizes the areas where the selectivity criteria set out above have led to
changes in the CPS Program.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

13

BOX 1: INS AND OUTS FY13-15
With a strong team on the ground, a long partnership with the Government and donors, the Bank’s approach in
Indonesia is to selectively take on new engagements and exit existing ones as needs or priorities change. Some
examples include the following:
• Disaster response to the 2004 tsunami in Aceh/Nias as well as to the 2006 earthquake and 2010 volcano
eruption in Java will be successfully completed in December 2012, and the Bank’s oﬃce in Aceh will be closed.
• The Decentralization Support Facility (DSF) has closed and new support in this area more narrowly focuses on
supporting incentives and capacity for local and metropolitan governments.
• Food security has surfaced as a strong government priority, which involves a reactivation of rural development,
where the Bank will continually support the Government to pay particular attention to women considering
that the majority of female labor force (38 percent) remain in agriculture and Indonesia’s gender wage gap in
this sector remain among the largest in the region.
• IFC seeks to scale up its interventions in the areas of infrastructure development, ﬁnancial inclusion,
agribusiness and food security, job creation and supporting competitive manufacturing enterprises; in line with
the Government’s request and private sector needs.
• The policy dialogue in health has intensiﬁed, with a particular focus on addressing early childhood nutrition.
• The government has decided to no longer draw on Bank ﬁnancing for basic education after the successful
launch of the BOS program, but continues to seek Bank support to improve the quality of spending and to
program grants from the private sector to address pressing needs in the most deprived areas.
• The Bank is also exiting lending for climate change as GoI prefers to seek grant funding, but demand for our
knowledge services has intensiﬁed.
• Private sector development and trade have been combined under the theme of competitiveness.
• Connectivity, recognized as a new theme of the Master Plan, is being supported by a ﬁrst DPL.

FIGURE 1: ALIGNMENT OF ENGAGEMENT AREAS
&OBCMJOH-PDBM$BQBDJUZ

&OHBHFNFOU"SFBT
Connectivity
Competitiveness
Financial Sector
Infrastructure
Local Government
Macro & Fiscal
Public Sector

t1SPNPUJOH
Prosperity

PRO
GROWTH

&OHBHFNFOU"SFBT
Poverty Targeting
Community
Development
Food Security &
Rural Health

CrossCutting
Themes

14

t1SPNPUJOH
Communities
t1SPUFDUJOHUIF
Vulnerable
t*NQSPWJOH)FBMUI
Outcomes

PRO
POOR

PRO
JOBS

PRO
GREEN

t&OIBODJOH4LJMMT
Technology
t*NQSPWJOH
Social
Protection

t&OTVSJOH
Sustainable
Development
t*NQSPWJOH%JTBTUFS
Resilience

&OHBHFNFOU"SFBT
&EVDBUJPO
Social Insurance

&OHBHFNFOU"SFBT
Green Growth
Disaster Resilience

(FOEFS&RVJUZ
Governance and Anti-Corruption

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

Foto: Matahati Productions

PRO-GROWTH – Promoting Prosperity
The target of the Government during the FY13-15 period is to increase economic growth to the
7 percent range over the medium term. The strategy entails maintaining macro stability and ﬁscal
discipline, while enhancing the governance and quality of spending, promoting connectivity, improving the
investment climate and greater access to ﬁnance, and improving infrastructure including through focusing
external borrowing on infrastructure and energy investment. The challenges of upping the medium-term
rate of growth from the recent 5.5 percent average for 2002-2011 cannot be underestimated in the face
of continuing global uncertainties, domestic political constraints and institutional capacity limitations.
Moreover, the relatively good performance during the current crisis may have inured a broader sense in
Indonesia of, if not complacency, at least a lack of urgency. The costs of not doing so, however, could be
high in not taking advantage of the favorable situation that Indonesia has been facing vis-a-vis commodity
prices and the current demographic dividend, rapid urbanization and shifting demand patterns. Put starkly,
over the course of the next decade maintaining the current 5.5 percent growth implies a 2025 GPD per
capita of US$6,525, whereas an increase to 7 percent over the same period would translate into GPD per
capita of US$9,057.
Pro-Growth Results. For this theme, the WBG expects to support development results that will,
increase connectivity and logistics performance, improve the regulatory environment for competition
and innovation, maintain ﬁnancial sector stability while enhancing access and increasing the quantity
and eﬃciency of investment in infrastructure, and improve the quality of public spending and ﬁnancial
management at the national and local levels.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

15

CONNECTIVITY
Indonesia’s Master Plan sets out its longer term approach to becoming an industrialized economy,
and broaden growth through connectivity, human resource improvements and technology. Poor
national connectivity is identiﬁed as one of the major impediments for growth and undermining Indonesia’s
economic competitiveness, hampering the economic integration among the islands of the archipelago, and
reducing access to international markets. For example, Indonesia ranks 75th on the World Bank’s Logistics
Performance Index, well behind ASEAN competitors such as Singapore (2nd), Malaysia (29th), Thailand (35th)
Philippines (44th) and Vietnam (59th). The price of a bag of cement in certain parts of Papua is 20 times that
in Java. In Java, oranges from China are cheaper than oranges from Kalimantan. High domestic transport
costs are the main reason. In some export sectors, such as cocoa, rubber and coﬀee, more than 40 percent
of total logistics and transport costs come from pre-shipment and inland transportation expenses before
international shipment.
In addition to being crucial for growth, empirical studies show that connectivity has a strong
positive impact on women through a number of channels. These include (i) facilitating access to health
and education facilities, as well as expanding economic opportunities for women and (ii) reducing women’s
workload and time for performing their activities in both the public and domestic spheres.
The WBG has been playing an important role in helping the GoI to focus on enhancing connectivity
to accelerate growth and improve equity. Bank analytic work identiﬁed priorities with a focus on intraisland, inter-island and international connectivity issues (Connecting Indonesia: A Framework for Action). The
Bank has also provided extensive support for the connectivity framework using the WDR 2009 on Reshaping
Economic Geography and to identify a detailed plan of action. On logistics, the Bank has provided analytic,
advisory and convening services, including hosting a series of inﬂuential roundtables with stakeholders.
Through development policy operations and knowledge services the Bank expects to support
development results that will enhance Indonesia’s logistics performance, improve access to
broadband and reduce costs for exporting and importing. The key to addressing connectivity challenges
lies in policy coordination and implementation across multiple levels of government and consultation with
the private sector. Support from the Bank will include a series of proposed Connectivity DPLs with co-ﬁnancing
from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). There are
discussions, as well, for possible Bank investments in speciﬁc corridor development.
BOX 2:

CONNECTIVITY RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Growth Connectivity Development Results: Enhance Indonesia’s logistics performance, improve
access to broadband and reduce costs for exporting and importing.
Financing/Grants
Ongoing:
IFC investments in Jakarta
International Container Terminal
and Wintermar
Proposed:
Connectivity DPLs I-III
Under Discussion:
Corridor 5 Investment
IFC investments to support logistics
sector

16

Knowledge and Convening
Logistics and trade facilitation
Policy notes on logistics, regulatory
reform, and managing openness
Knowledge sharing through
workshops and ﬁeld visits; engage
local think-tanks, universities and
private sector organizations to
participate in policy dialogue
Public Expenditure Reviews of the
Road and Rail Sectors.

Development Partners
ADB, AUSAID, Japan (JICA), The
Netherlands, Switzerland (SECO),
USAID

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

Public investment and improved investment climate is expected to pave the way for private sector
participation. Over the next 15 years, the Master Plan envisages investments of about US$468 billion. Private
sector investment is a key driver and expected to deliver 51 percent of this total. State-owned enterprises
(SOE) would contribute 18 percent with various levels of Government providing much of the remainder.
The contribution of private investment so far has been limited and GoI is aware that regulatory reforms and
improvement of the investment climate are necessary to attract private participation. The WBG is ready to
assist GoI in this endeavor. As international trade ﬁnance has shrunk in the aftermath of the global ﬁnancial
crisis, IFC is stepping in to provide trade ﬁnance for agro-commodity exports from Indonesia. Another role
IFC is playing is to support Indonesian private sector businesses competing in global markets, as they set up
manufacturing plants in other emerging markets.

COMPETITIVENESS
Private sector-led growth is vital to Indonesia’s competitiveness to create jobs for a growing
population, to address the rural-urban income gap and to provide sustainable infrastructure
services for an increasingly urbanized society. Indonesia’s objective is to enhance the environment for
private sector development and to foster accelerated growth and poverty reduction, while mitigating climate
change impacts. While the prospects for investing in Indonesia are quite promising, given its signiﬁcant
population and natural resources; poor government coordination, uncertainty about the legal and judicial
frameworks, infrastructure constraints, and unclear investment policies, regulations, and procedures continue
to drag on the investment climate.
The World Bank Group supports development results that will improve the policy framework,
regulatory environment, and coordinated interventions for productivity, competition and
innovation through development policy operations, knowledge services and IFC advisory
services. Building on synergies between the IFC and the Bank, partnerships have been established with
key institutions that shape the investment climate. The Multi Donor Facility for Trade and Investment Climate
(MDFTIC) supports institutional capacity-building in collaboration with the governments of the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Switzerland and Australia. Additional support is being provided by the IFC on improving the
capacity of local government to support business operations through its Business Entry Regulatory Reform
Program. Competitiveness is also expected to be enhanced through additional engagements to support and
strengthen the ﬁnancial sector.
The export of goods represents 22 percent of nominal GDP, and trade represents a significant part
of the Indonesian economy. Excluding oil and gas exports, more than 70 percent of Indonesia’s exports
are natural resources and manufacturing products. Within Indonesia’s manufacturing exports, almost half of
that are natural resource-based manufacturing products, such as palm oil, processed rubber, and processed
minerals. Although markets in EU and United States remain important, Indonesia is increasingly trading with
emerging markets and countries in the region such as China, India, Malaysia, and South Korea. Such diversity
has helped to buﬀer the sector during the current global economic downturn.
Indonesia has been reforming its trade policies to make them more effective and responsive in
promoting growth and competitiveness. Signiﬁcant reform has taken place in improving trade facilitation
and promoting more inclusive and evidence-based trade policy making. As a member of ASEAN and the G20
process, it has been embracing openness to trade and investment, and greater integration with the global
economy. Indonesia took a bold step in harmonizing the structure of its import tariﬀ and the current average
import tariﬀ is one of the lowest among emerging economies; simple average tariﬀ is about 5 percent. It is
also developing a process to increase transparency in reviewing non-tariﬀ measures that aﬀect trade ﬂows.
There has also been progress in improving customs clearance and transparency through the National Single
Window.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

17

Recent government efforts to move domestic companies up the value chain through trade policy
measures have raised concerns. These include, for example, restrictions on imported horticulture products,
a ban on rattan exports and an export tax and new divestment regulations in the mining sector. Restrictive
policies involving non-tariﬀ barriers may be less eﬀective than more upstream incentives for greater corporate
competitiveness, and could also risk being perceived as serving entrenched domestic interests, undermining
the investment climate and weakening investor conﬁdence in the predictability of policy making in a fragile
global economic environment.
Bank Group support includes knowledge services for improved capacity of trade policy, including
managing price volatility of food imports, and IFC trade finance to support commodity exports. Of
particular note would be the on-going support to advance on food security with knowledge services to improve
the technical capacity to monitor food price data and to develop market based instruments to manage risks from
food price shocks (discussed below). IFC is focusing on increasing international trade and connectivity through
the private sector, which is especially important due to the recent global ﬁnancial crisis as a result of which global
trade ﬂows and investments were signiﬁcantly reduced. As the international trade ﬁnance has shrunk with the
global ﬁnancial crisis, IFC is stepping in to provide trade ﬁnance for commodity exports from Indonesia.
BOX 3:

COMPETITIVENESS RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AN PARTNERS

Pro-Growth Competitiveness Development Results: Improve the policy framework, regulatory
environment, and coordinated interventions for productivity, competition and innovation.
Financing/Grants
Proposed:
Connectivity DPLs I-III

Knowledge and Convening
Support to improve the investment regulatory
environment
IFC Advisory Services – Investment Climate
Program (sub-national Doing Business;
corporate governance; ﬁnancial infrastructure),
Green Banking, capital markets development)
Innovation, Investment Generation
Technology, and Entrepreneurship

Development Partners
AusAID, Canada (CIDA), Finland, The
Netherlands, New Zealand, SECO,
USAID

FINANCIAL SECTOR
The Government’s focus on maintaining and strengthening the stability of the financial system of
the last decade has had demonstrable success. Indonesia’s ﬁnancial sector has suﬀered relatively minor
eﬀects from the on-going crisis and ﬁnancial market volatility. However, Indonesia’s ﬁnancial sector requires
continued deepening, widening, and eﬃciency, in order to remain supportive of competitiveness and growth
goals. The amount of long-term ﬁnancing for corporations, infrastructure and SMEs remains very limited. In
addition, less than 50 percent of the population has access to formal ﬁnancial services.
Indonesia’s financial sector is small relative to emerging market peers. Assets were below 70 percent
of GDP in 2011. In part, this reﬂects the severity of the Asian crisis, when well over half of banking assets and
loans were written oﬀ. Since that time, the ﬁnancial sector has been slow to develop, and continues to be
heavily dominated by a few large banks, which account for roughly 80 percent of ﬁnancial system assets.
Domestic credit to the private sector is improving, albeit slowly, from 25 percent in 2006 to 28.8 percent in
2011. The mortgage debt outstanding to GDP in Indonesia stands at less than 2 percent of GDP, well below
more developed markets such as South Korea (36 percent) and South Africa (47 percent). The non-bank
ﬁnancial sector is small. Stock market capitalization, though increasing, remains low, at around 48 percent
of GDP. At the same time, new technologies such as mobile telephony, and internet, can enable signiﬁcant
expansion of access to ﬁnance especially in the rural areas of the country.

18

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

The Bank Group engagement supports development results that will maintain financial sector
stability, deepen financial markets, and enhance access. Prompted by the global financial crisis,
development outcomes in support of strengthening the financial sector have benefited from Bank
support through the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), including implementation of a crisis
management protocol and capacity building. The proposed Financial Sector and Investment Climate Reform
and Modernization DPL (FIRM) would focus on enhancing institutional and structural reforms specific to
the financial and private sectors. Financial sector reforms would include strengthened financial reporting
and auditing standards and practices in alignment with global benchmarks. Through a WBG operation,
including an IBRD loan and IFC equity, the Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Facility (IFF) is exp ected
to increase the availability of financing for infrastructure. IFC is further designing an advisory services
program focusing on capital markets development for infrastructure finance. In addition, working with
the Ministry of Trade (MoT), IFC helped to develop regulations, policies and procedures for a national
warehouse receipts system. IFC is considering projects to strengthen and deepen capital markets, both
for equity and debt.
Both IFC and the Bank, through multi-sectoral engagements, are supporting the Government’s
strong emphasis on financial inclusion. For an economy that relies heavily on micro and small
enterprises, to expanding financing alternatives to the most vulnerable segments of the underserved
population in Indonesia including women, rural clients, and the very poor is a key priority. A study on
Access to Finance has supported the development of financial services for migrant workers, mostly
women, both through pilots and more broadly in spreading awareness of financial inclusion and
underling Indonesia’s advocacy in the G20 agenda. WBG support for restructuring revolving loan
funds used mainly by women to fund micro-enterprises also contributes to gender equity. In addition,
IFC committed a US$75 million gender facility and provided advisory services to Danamon and Bank
Internasional Indonesia (BII) to facilitate access by women to finance their SMEs. Other interventions
include supporting financial literacy.
IFC is seeking to significantly expand access to finance through a series of investment and
advisory services. IFC’s ﬁnancial market program focuses on: (i) building the capacity of ﬁnancial
institutions, especially the mid-size banks, to better serve micro, small and medium enterprises and lowincome households; (ii) supporting top tier banks with signiﬁcant reach potential to adopt innovative
products to better serve key segments such as MSME and mid to low income individuals, and to expand
mortgage ﬁnance for aﬀordable housing; (iii) promoting sustainable lending with a strong emphasis on
climate-change and women-owned businesses; and (iv) strengthening the Indonesian ﬁnancial system.
IFC’s focus, amongst other priorities, includes promoting good Corporate Governance and Environmental
and Social Standards. Accordingly, IFC extended debt facilities and advisory services to banks with strong
distribution capacity in the MSME sector such as BII. IFC also assists PT Bank Tabungan Pensiunan Nasional
Tbk (BTPN) through equity and debt facilities to support its expansion in microﬁnance sector and advisory
services in AgriFinance. IFC also continues to support Bank Andara, the Indonesian microﬁnance wholesale
bank, by providing advisory services and capital support to be used in the expansion of the bank’s
distribution capacity and to increase its leverage capacity to ﬁnance its loan expansion.
Through its advisory services, IFC is further developing programs focusing on banks and nonbank financial institutions’ capacity in providing innovative finance products and services
for the micro and largely unbanked segment, such as housing microfinance, micro insurance,
and retail payments. IFC is helping financial institutions to expand services to under-banked market
segments, such as to SME’s undertaking sustainable energy investments and to poor marginal farmers. A
research project with Bank Sinar Harapan Bali is piloting a sustainable business model for mobile banking
system, which could benefit unbanked populations in rural areas. Finally, IFC assisted a leading bank to
develop a loan product for women entrepreneurs that was launched on December 22, 2011-Indonesia’s
Mother’s Day.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

19

BOX 4:

FINANCIAL SECTOR RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Growth Financial Sector DevelopmentResults: Maintain financial sector stability, deepen financial
markets, and enhance access.
Financing/Grants
Ongoing:
IIFF
IFG
IFC investments in banks and NBFIs
Proposed:
FIRM DPL
IFC investments in the insurance
sector
Under Discussion:
IFC sustainable energy ﬁnance
products

Knowledge and Convening
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Micro-insurance Marketplace
Review of SME Credit Program (KUR)
TA for Deposit Insurance Corporation
Crisis Binder Workshop
Improving Access to Financial Services in
Indonesia
Support to Financial Sector Authority (OJK)
Crisis Management Protocols
Saving and Loan Cooperatives
SME Access to Islamic Finance
TA for Secretariat of Financial System Stability
Forum,
IFC Advisory Services.

Development
Partners
AusAID, CIDA, Finland,
The Netherlands,
New Zealand, SECO,
USAID

INFRASTRUCTURE
Weak infrastructure development is not only undermining Indonesia’s economic growth, but also
negatively affects efforts to enhance equity and reduce poverty. While the Government is committed
to reducing its debt to GDP ratio, its priority for borrowing remains focused on infrastructure and energy
development. Infrastructure investment fell sharply after the Asian ﬁnancial crisis and has only partially
recovered. The low level of investment is attributed to the GoI’s focus on ﬁscal consolidation and reducing
public debt, as well as the decline in infrastructure spending by the private sector and SOEs. A variety of issues
make it diﬃcult to reverse this trend. Low tariﬀ levels discourage private investment in power and water. Land
acquisition has impeded major public infrastructure projects in the past. Finally, coordination diﬃculties for
projects that cut across jurisdictions or involve a number of central and sub-national actors often prevent
viable infrastructure projects from coming to fruition.
The GoI is committed to reigniting investment in infrastructure, by increasing public investment
and promoting private sector participation through Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs). The recently
approved Land Acquisition Law is expected to help facilitate public investment. Infrastructure laws have been
changed, dismantling public monopolies and opening up to private market investors. To improve the use of PPPs,
the MoF is now the single provider of guarantees and is considering a viability gap funding (VGF) instrument that
would provide capital grants to infrastructure PPPs that are economically viable but ﬁnancially marginal.
The Bank Group will focus its support on development results that will increase the quantity and
quality of national roads, reduce power infrastructure bottlenecks and increase private investment
in infrastructure through PPPs. The Bank Group is expected to continue with its support for public
investment in infrastructure with a focus on energy, transport, water supply and sanitation, as well as solid
waste, and eﬀorts to enhance the use of PPPs.1 The recently approved Infrastructure Guarantee Project (IGP)
helped establish a ﬁscally sound, credible and transparent guarantee framework to support PPP transactions.
The Bank is helping to set up a viability gap funding (VGF) mechanism and supporting GoI’s eﬀorts at better

1

20

Support for infrastructure investment in water supply and sanitation, as well as small scale local infrastructure through community driven development programs, is discussed under
the Pro-Poor theme.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

planning, structuring and procurement of PPPs. IFC is advising the Government on structuring and bidding
PPP projects, supporting the private sector with ﬁnancing and advisory services, including as transaction
advisor for the Central Java Power Project to improve access to electricity for 7.5 million people. MIGA, as well,
is exploring ways to work with IGP.
Indonesia is endowed with substantial energy resources that include both fossil fuels and renewable
energy resources, including the largest geothermal reserves in the world. Domestic consumption of
petroleum products has been heavily subsidized, promoting the development of power generation based
on diesel and other petroleum-based fuels. Indonesia has been a net importer of oil since 2003 and has been
unable to reduce its dependence on petroleum-based fuels, with a fast growing demand and with half of gas
production currently exported.
Creating and maintaining an attractive investment climate for investment in energy infrastructure
is a key challenge facing the Government in light of fast growing domestic demand and the
declining production from maturing oil and gas fields. This requires rationalization of energy tariﬀs
and the refocusing of energy subsidies. Mitigating local and global impacts of emissions from burning fossil
fuels is a major challenge, as rapid urbanization and rising income continue to push up demand. While the
use of coal and fossil fuels is bound to increase, the rate and impact on the environment could be moderated
by scaling-up renewable energy production and applying advanced low-carbon technologies. This would
also improve energy security and help shift the economy to a more productive and sustainable path. At the
same time, 80 million people lack access to electricity and every second household still depends on solid
fuels for cooking.
To stimulate investment in energy, the GoI is improving the regulatory framework and
strengthening the enforcement of existing regulations. The recently enacted legislation provides a
renewed legal framework for the energy sector, with an emphasis on economic sustainability, energy security,
and environmental conservation. The Government’s ongoing expansion targets 60 percent from renewable
resources. The WBG has an important engagement to support eﬀorts to improve power system infrastructure
to meet demand, enhance reliability and quality, scale up renewable energy and natural gas, increase access
to modern energy, and improve energy eﬃciency. This includes the on-going Power Transmission Project, a
proposed follow up Second Power Transmission Development Project, and the Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage
Project. Potential future operations under discussion include additional pumped storage and medium-sized
hydropower generation, renewable energy for electriﬁcation of outer islands, and energy eﬃciency.
Synergies between the Bank and the IFC will support scaling up of renewable energy, particularly
geothermal. The Bank recently approved the Geothermal Clean Energy Project and a follow up operation is under
discussion. IFC focuses on increasing private sector participation in renewable energy with advisory services,
ﬁnancing and equity. IFC has assessed 17 geothermal sites for possible tendering as to their development
impact and likelihood of successful implementation. Moreover, it has provided equity investment in Medco
Power Indonesia to own and operate a series of gas and hydroelectricity projects, and other equity and loan
investments are being considered. MIGA can also provide guarantees on non-commercial risks to support
renewable power.
Roads are the predominant mode of transport in Indonesia and account for about 70 percent of
freight ton-km and 82 percent of passenger km. The vehicle ﬂeet has doubled in the past ﬁve years
and is expected to grow at 10 percent per year over the next decade. Road travel speeds remain low, on
the order of 40 km/hr on the national road network. Only 714 km of toll roads are in place, mainly in urban
areas. While new construction has lagged, the quality of national roads has improved with 86 percent now in
good/fair condition. Sub-national roads face the opposite dilemma – while 100,000 km of roads were added
between 2001 and 2009, 57 percent are now deemed to be in bad/poor condition. Road safety on Indonesia’s
chronically over-crowded roads is poor and getting worse, with some 50 deaths being recorded every day.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

21

The Bank Group would continue playing a role in supporting priority projects on selected regional
corridors, where upgrading national roads requires a comprehensive approach to road renewal.
Two road projects are currently under implementation, the Strategic Roads Improvement Project and the Western
Indonesia National Road Improvement Project (WINRIP). The proposed Road Asset Preservation Project (RAPP)
would support improvements in the execution, eﬀectiveness and delivery of outputs, while strengthening
the framework for improving the quality of expenditures using results-based disbursements. IFC supports the
private ﬁnancing of toll roads by oﬀering long-term capital and sharing best practice. As well, MIGA has global
experience of supporting private investment into toll roads, which could be usefully applied.
BOX 5:

INFRASTRUCTURE RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Growth Infrastructure Development Results: Increase the quantity and efficiency of national and
sub-national government spending on infrastructure, and increase private investment in infrastructure.
Financing/Grants
Ongoing:
Strategic Road Infrastructure
Western Indonesia Roads
Power Transmission I
Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage
Geothermal Clean Energy Investment
Infrastructure Guarantee Fund
Infrastructure Finance Facility
IFC investments inJakarta
International Container Terminal,
Wintermar, Medco Power, Salamander
Energy, and Saratoga II
Proposed:
Power Transmission II
Road Asset Preservation
Connectivity DPL I-III
IFC investments in telecom and hydro
Under Discussion:
Renewable Energy for Electriﬁcation
Medium Hydropower
Energy Eﬃciency
Mantenggeng Pumped Storage
Geothermal II
IFC investments in geothermal
energy

Knowledge and Convening
Assessment of Road Construction
Industry
Roads and Railways PERs
Regionalization and Urban
Development Review
Advisory services on electricity and
fuel subsidies, and on regulatory
framework for electricity sector
IFC PPP advisory services.
PPP Framework and Policy TA
Viability Gap Financing TA
Low-income Housing Policy and
Finance
IFC advisory services for selecting
geothermal energy projects as
potential PPP candidates.
IFC advisory services for PPP
projects, (Umbulan Water, Central
Java).

Development Partners
ADB, AfD, AusAID,Germany (KfW),
JICA

LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Public service delivery and public sector capacity at the subnational level remain major challenges.
With the ‘big-bang’ decentralization of 2001, Indonesia went from being one of the most centralized
countries in the world to one of the most decentralized; but the transition is far from complete. Overlapping
responsibilities without a coordinated decentralization framework undermine eﬀective service delivery, and
sub-national government accountability and transparency mechanisms are weak. Unlike most decentralized
countries, Indonesia has not transferred signiﬁcant revenue power to local governments, distorting incentives
and creating an unhealthy dependence on transfers. Meanwhile, many local governments misuse the revenueraising authority they do have constraining business development, growth and job creation. Transfers provide
the bulk of ﬁnancing, but they are rarely used to as a strategic instrument to improve local government
performance.

22

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

Indonesia is in the midst of a structural transition towards higher levels of urbanization. It is already
more urban than rural and continues to experience very rapid urban growth. Several of Indonesia’s major cities are
becoming metropolitan centers, with populations of ﬁve or more million, but infrastructure services are lagging
with increasing economic, social and environmental costs. Large metropolitan agglomerations act as drivers of
economic growth and job creation but are also increasingly experiencing increased congestion, pollution and
inequalities in access to quality basic services and housing. Medium-sized cities are growing the fastest and
require enhanced institutional capacity and infrastructure investment in order to manage the urban transition.
The Bank supports development results that will promote improved fiduciary, social and
environmental management and technical performance of selected local governments in the
delivery of basic services, and enhance the capacity of local institutions to monitor and assess
subnational public expenditures. The Bank-ﬁnanced Local Government and Decentralization Project (DAK)
works with GoI’s targeted transfers with an initial emphasis on improved accountability and reporting on
grants to infrastructure for pilot local governments. A follow up operation is proposed, which would pilot the
Bank’s P4R instrument. Knowledge services include the Public Expenditure Analysis and Capacity Harmonization
(PEACH) program, which carries out public expenditure reviews at the local level. PERs have been completed
in ten provinces working closely with local academic institutions and stakeholders to improve policy and
analytical capacity. PEACH has incorporated gender analysis in its PERs, identifying key gender issues to which
local government need to pay attention. The Bank is likely to continue selectively supporting provincial
governments in knowledge exchange and capacity building, as well as conﬂict monitoring as needed,
including in fragile regions, such as Aceh and Papua. The foundation laws on sub-national government
including on the division of responsibility, on transfers, on electoral systems and the role of villages are under
consideration, which provide an opportunity to address the incentives and ﬁnancing potential and modes to
support eﬀective local governments.
Urban development is an emerging area of Bank support with several efforts already underway.
The Urban Sector Development and Reform Project (USDRP) aims at changing governance behavior by targeting
reform minded local governments and encouraging increased accountability through citizens participation.
At the neighborhood level, further Bank ﬁnancing services are expected to be provided through the proposed
Fourth National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas, (PNPM Urban IV). The on-going Jakarta
Urgent Flood Mitigation Project (JUFMP) seeks to support improved urban drainage and ﬂood control systems,
and the longer term sustainability of ﬂood management facilities in Jakarta. As the initial foray into directly
supporting major urban infrastructure, the Bank is exploring for larger urban areas the possibility of onlending for complex infrastructure that require convening and advisory services, as well as ﬁnancial support.
Mid-sized cities, on the other hand, would likely be good candidates to reach under wholesale arrangements.
In addition, IFC fosters improvements with less cumbersome procedures for business start-ups and licensing
through the Sub National Doing Business Survey (SNDB), with over 20 cities now participating.
BOX 6:

LOCAL GOVERNMENT RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Growth Local Government Development Results: Improved fiduciary, social and environmental
management and technical performance of selected local governments in the delivery of basic services,
and enhance the capacity of local institutions to monitor and assess subnational public expenditures.
Financing/Grants
Ongoing:
DAK I, USDRP, JUFMP
PNPM Urban III
Proposed:
DAK II
PNPM Urban IV
Under Discussion: Metropolitan and
Urban Development

Knowledge and Convening
Development Partners
PEACH Public Expenditure Analysis
ADB, AfD, AusAID, CIDA,
PEACH PFM Technical Assistance and Capacity JICA
Building
Sulawesi Development Diagnostic Report
SNDB
ECO2 Cities TA and Land Market Assessment
Housing Market Segmentation TA.
IFC advisory services for Sub-national Doing
Business reforms

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

23

MACROECONOMIC AND FISCAL MANAGEMENT
Fundamental for increasing the level of economic growth is to maintain fiscal discipline and
bolster market confidence in the face of continuing global uncertainty, and provide for mitigating
measures in the event of an external shock. Macroeconomic stability from strong fundamentals and ﬁscal
management crisis has underpinned the recovery and sustained growth over the past decade. More recently,
macro management and ﬁscal discipline have helped Indonesia weather the ongoing global ﬁnancial
crisis. At the onset of the crisis to provide conﬁdence to ﬁnancial markets, the World Bank, in collaboration
with the Governments of Australia and Japan and the Asian Development Bank, provided a US$5.5 billion
program of contingency ﬁnancing under the Public Expenditure Support Facility DPL-DDO (FY09, US$2 billion)
to support conﬁdence-boosting measures and social mitigation programs, which closed in December 2010.
Subsequently, with the increased risks stemming from the Eurozone crisis, a follow-up program with the
same development partners of US$5.5 billion put together under the PERISAI (Program for Economic Resilience,
Investment and Social Assistance in Indonesia) DPL-DDO (FY11, US$2 billion).
Sustaining growth and maintaining macro stability requires quality, evidence-based macro and
fiscal policy making. Despite Indonesia’s strong economic performance, signiﬁcant challenges in ﬁscal
and macro policy remain, for example, in terms of the allocation of spending (with subsidies accounting for
almost one quarter of central government spending in the proposed 2013 Budget) and its eﬃciency. The
Bank will continue to support Indonesia in enhancing the Government’s ability to do sound macro and ﬁscal
policy analysis and formulation through the Support for Enhanced Macro Economic and Fiscal Policy Analysis
institutional (SEMEFPA) strengthening program; the Analytical and Capacity Support to Improve Expenditure and
Revenue Policy program, which includes public expenditure review (PER) analysis; and the Resource Revenues
Policy and Administration technical assistance.
A Development Policy Review (DPR), being prepared concurrently with the CPS, will provide an
analytical underpinning of the program and its overall coherence. The DPR has identiﬁed near term risks
and the key long-term global, regional and domestic trends that will aﬀect Indonesia, the key challenges and
opportunities they bring and the policy options to address them. The DPR will provide an analytical underpinning
for the Government’s new ﬁve-year development plan and serve as a basis for dialogue with the incoming new
government in 2014. It will identify near term risks and the key long-term global, regional and domestic trends
that will aﬀect Indonesia, key challenges and opportunities they bring and policy options to address them.
BOX 7:

MACRO AND FISCAL RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Growth Macro and Fiscal Development Results: Enhanced Government ability to meet its financing
needs and maintain critical public expenditures, and use monitoring and evaluation to inform budget
allocation.
Financing/Grants
Ongoing:
PERISAI DPL DDO
Proposed:
INSTANSI DPLs I-III

24

Knowledge and Convening
Development Partners
ADB, Australia (Treasury, AusAID)
SEMEFPA
DPR
Japan (JBIC)
Analytical and Capacity Support to
Improve Expenditure and Revenue
Policy
Initiative for Public Expenditure
Analysis policymaker forum.
Indonesia Economic Quarterly
report (including convening related
quarterly DevelopmentPartner
Discussion and public launch)

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

The Bank contributes to development results that will support Indonesia in securing financing that
will maintain critical public expenditures in the event of tightening in financing conditions, and
improve the analytical framework in support of quality in public spending. In addition to the PERISAI
DPL-DDO, and the aforementioned knowledge services, the proposed Institutional, Tax Administration, Social
and Investment (INSTANSI) DPL with parallel ﬁnancing from Japan and the ADB will support improved budget
allocation for critical social and infrastructure investments, enhanced revenue policy and public ﬁnancial
management in general.

STRENGTHENING THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Institution building to enhance public sector performance has been a keystone of the current
administration. The achievements in strengthening public financial management over the relatively
short reform period have been remarkable. The most notable ones include an automated budget and
treasury system; implementation of a Treasury Single Account; the establishment of cash forecasting capacity
in the Treasury; the development of accounting standards to provide for accrual accounting; an appraisal of
government assets and the introduction of an asset management information system; the establishment
of a new procurement agency; adoption of the COSO control framework and strengthening of external
audit; strengthening of monitoring and evaluation systems; and early stages of a medium term expenditure
framework and initial introduction of performance-based budgeting. While progress has been made, a
number of challenges remain. Among others, policy orientation in budget formulation and execution need
to be strengthened. The underlying business processes at spending agencies need to be reengineered. The
regulatory framework and implementation of e-Government procurement, including the development of
a permanent procurement management function in implementing agencies, is incomplete. Relevant and
reliable ﬁnancial reporting needs to be strengthened along with human resources for accounting and
reporting. The implementation of COSO control framework needs to be accelerated, internal audit function
strengthened, and the supreme audit institution (BPK) needs to strengthen the impact on its audit ﬁndings
and linkages with the legislature. Finally, monitoring and evaluation needs to move toward an integrated
system as the basis for implementing performance based budgeting.
The Bank’s engagement approach to strengthen the public sector continues to support development
results that will sstrengthen the public sector by enhancing public financial management. The Bank
supports eﬀorts by the Ministry of Finance to strengthen its tax administration and broaden its revenue base
including non-tax revenue from mineral resources. The proposed INSTANSI DPLs will reinforce and broaden
ownership and commitment towards the achievement of reform milestones. Project lending provides technical
support and ﬁnancing through the ongoing Government Financial Management and Revenue Administration
Project (GFMRAP), the Project for Indonesian Tax Administration Reform (PINTAR), the Scholarships Program for
Strengthening Reforming Institutions Project (SPIRIT), and the Strengthening Indonesia Statistic Project (STATCAPCERDAS). The Public Financial Management - Multi Donor Trust Fund also supports critical activities, bringing
together key development partners, including the European Commission, the Netherlands and Switzerland.
BOX 8:

PUBLIC SECTOR RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Growth Public Sector Development Results: Strengthen the public sector by enhancing public
financial management.
Financing/Grants
Ongoing:
GFMRAP, PINTAR
SPIRIT, STATCAP-CERDAS
Proposed:
INSTANSI DPLs I-III

Knowledge and Convening
Development Partners
Public Financial Management (PFM) European Commission (EC),
TRE/CFRCR advice on exposure
Netherlands, SECO
management, hedging products
and risk insurance, and asset/
liability management

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

25

PRO-JOBS - Enhancing Skills and Technology, and Improving Social
Protection
The Indonesian economy must create more and better jobs. This will require increased eﬀorts to
elevate the rate of economic growth, including improved quality in public spending, enhanced private sector
investment and increased infrastructure. The share of the population of “productive” age relative to older
people is large in Indonesia, and will remain so for the next 15 years. This demographic dividend presents a
window of opportunity for high productivity growth as long as youth are equipped with the right skills and
presented with the right opportunities. Despite a decade of robust growth, employment opportunities for
higher quality jobs remains insuﬃcient for an increasingly urbanized, young population; undermining the
ability of growth to contribute to contain rising inequality. One reason is that the movement of workers out of
agriculture and low-end services stalled after the Asia crisis because Indonesia’s manufacturing sector never
fully recovered. Bank analytic work suggests that the decline of traditional manufacturing is not inevitable
and points to two major sources of driving a potential revival: (i) a large labor force and growing wage gap
relative to China and other producers; and (ii) the potential for market access of production-scale economies
based on Indonesia’s large and growing domestic market and the increasingly integrated regional market. In
addition, while there is a substantially growth of women entering the labor market than men over the past
seven years, women continue to face lower participation and higher unemployment rates, and are mostly selfemployed and unpaid family workers, as well as migrant workers. A key element of the strategy is to enhance
the education and skills of the labor force, which will require improving the management of the education
system and, including equality of opportunity through improved access to education of the poor. It will also
require fostering the growth in R&D institutions by helping to develop an enabling policy environment. In
addition, to facilitate labor market ﬂexibility and provide for good jobs, the Bank will support the Government’s
focus on improving social insurance.
Pro-Jobs Results. For this theme, the WBG expects to support development results that will improve the overall
governance and management of the education system to improve the education quality and performance
of teachers, enhance human resource capacity in R&D, and facilitate the institutional transformation required
to implementation reform of social insurance. Going forward Bank support would be through knowledge
services. IFC is working to support manufacturing companies that generate good quality jobs directly, as
well as help to develop SMEs through supply chain linkages. IFC’s engagement towards providing access to
ﬁnance for micro, small and medium enterprises are also geared towards job creation.

EDUCATION
Despite significant improvements in a number of education and health indicators in recent years,
Indonesia still lags behind other countries in the region. Indonesia’s Human Development Index rank
is still low (124 out of 187 countries), slightly above Vietnam but below Thailand and Malaysia. Indonesia is
on track with many of the Millennium Development Goals related to human development, especially on
education. Access to early childhood education is expanding rapidly, but still only 47 percent for 4-6 year olds
are enrolled which is of particular importance for lower income children. Access to primary education is nearly
universal and literacy rates are close to100 percent, while gender equity in enrolment in basic education has
been reached.
Indonesia has made a clear commitment to education. A constitutional mandate to allocate at
least 20 percent of the total government budget to education has led to a more than doubling of
spending in real terms since 2002. The biggest payoﬀ for this increase has been access and equity, but
access to early childhood education, senior secondary and above still remains low particularly for the poor.
Progress in access and equity has been very fast. The share of 15 year olds from the poorest consumption
quintile that are still enrolled in school increased from 60 to 80 percent between 2006 and 2010, but then

26

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

drops dramatically. In higher education, total participation has increased from 12 percent in 2000 to 26
percent, yet less than 4 percent of 19-22 year olds from the poorest 40 percent enter higher education.
Gender disparities are not a problem in terms of access, though boys tend to drop out of all levels of
education more than girls.
Along with the need to continue improving equity, a major challenge remains in the quality and
relevance of education. Learning outcomes and the share of top performers remain very low by international
standards. Poor allocation of resources is an important part of problem. The Bank’s recent Education Public
Expenditure Review notes that most of the additional resources for basic education went toward teacher hiring
and certiﬁcation allowances. The resulting student teacher ratios are low by international standards and well
below levels necessary for a good quality education. Moreover, distribution of the teaching force is highly
ineﬃcient and inequitable. At the same time, public funding for post basic education is constrained and
poorly spent. There are few incentives for eﬃcient spending and human resource management is limited by
civil service considerations.
The Bank’s engagement aims to support development results that will improve the performance
of teachers and the human resource capacity in R&D. The Bank has been closely supportive of the
improvements in access, equity and quality through ﬁnancing and knowledge services. The Bank is providing
knowledge services for the GoI’s program to improve incentives for teacher quality, including monitoring
the impact and the ongoing Better Education Through Reformed Management and Universal Teacher Upgrading
Project (BERMUTU) support implementation. The Dutch and the EC, among a number of others have played
an important role in supporting education. The BOS-KITA Project helps to ﬁnance the Government’s School
Operational Assistance (BOS) program that empowers school managers and local communities through a
school-based management approach covering some 42.5 million students. The Basic Education Capacity Trust
Fund (BEC-TF) supports local government school grant programs. For higher education, the ongoing Higher
Education Project (IMHERE) and knowledge services will continue to focus on helping the GoI in creating an
enabling environment and eﬀective support mechanisms for the improvement of the quality, relevance,
eﬃciency, and equity.

Foto: World Bank

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

27

With the GoI indicating a preference not to seek further external financing for education, the Bank’s
engagement will continue to provide support through knowledge service, ongoing operations
and linking with other Bank activities. For example, the Early Childhood Education and Development Project
(ECED), which targets poorer communities through an innovative community managed scheme, would seek
to strengthen linkages with the National Community Development Program (PNPM), also ﬁnanced by the
Bank, to enhance activities focused on the poor and vulnerable, including HIV-AIDS prevention, nutrition and
sanitation. Knowledge services will continue to be a key component of Bank support. Results from rigorous
impact evaluations of teacher certiﬁcation and ECED provision have and will continue to inform government
policy.
Research outputs remain low compared to other countries in the region. The overall resources
devoted to research and development (R&D) in Indonesia are insufficient, and high-level human
capital to supply needed skills for new jobs is scarce. Indonesia’s overall public budget allocation to
R&D is very low, estimated at only 0.05 percent of GDP, much lower than other countries in the region. At the
public research institutes, less than 5 percent of staﬀ holds a Ph.D. degree, and only 15 percent hold Masters
degrees. Public research institutions currently conduct 96 percent of R&D and their low performance is a key
bottleneck to an eﬃcient innovation system. Increasing public spending on R&D is not enough to guarantee
success, public spending should be used to leverage private investment.
The Bank seeks to support an enabling policy environment, and to improve the performance of
public institutions and enhance human resource capacity. It provides advice to improve the public R&D
institutes’ performance and STI human resource capacity, including technical assistance for policy reforms to
reduce fragmentation and increase competitive funding for research. The Bank is already involved in supporting
expansion of necessary research and development with the recently approved Sustainable Management
of Agricultural Research and Technology Dissemination Project (SMARTD), and the proposed Research and
Innovation in Science &Technology Project (RISET) would support improvements in human resource capacity. A
result framework with gender sensitive indicators has been developed for SMARTD to capture and address the
aforementioned gender streaming.

BOX 9:

EDUCATION RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Jobs Education Development Results: Improve the education quality and performance of teachers,
and the improve the human resource capacity in R&D.

28

Financing/Grants

Knowledge and Convening

Ongoing:
BOS-KITA II
BERMUTU
IMHERE
SMARTD
IFC investment in Bonavista School
Proposed:
RISET
Under Discussion:
Skills Training for Economic
Transformation
IFC investments in private sector
education providers

Teacher certiﬁcation impact evaluations.
The Role of Politics and Evidenced Based Policy
Making: The Case of Teacher Reform in Indonesia
Education PER
Indonesian School Grants Program Review
Local Governance Capacity Assessment
Video Study
Projections and assessment of future skills demand
Higher education studies on funding modalities
Higher education and labor market linkages
Infrastructure assessment
Accreditation and access to higher education
TA on skills development fund
TA on 2015 ﬁve year development plan.
Public Financing of Indonesia’s Knowledge Sector
Building Innovation Capacity in Clean Energy

Development
Partners
AusAID, The
Netherlands, USAID

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

SOCIAL INSURANCE
A strong system of social protection, particularly social insurance, is an essential part of any efforts
to improve labor market flexibility and improve the quality of jobs. The current system of social
protection is fragmented and coverage is limited to the poor, civil servants, the military and about 25 percent
of formal sector workers. Each segment has diﬀerent beneﬁts and a diﬀerent administrator, and the system
of supervision and enforcement is a challenge. As a result, only 12 percent of the population has access to
pensions, only 60 percent of the population has health insurance coverage, and beneﬁts can be lost when
changing employment.
The government’s objective is to institute a comprehensive national system of social insurance
covering all Indonesians through the National Social Security System Law (SJSN) and the law on
National Social Security Administrators (BPJS). The SJSN law was enacted in 2004, but there was limited
implementation progress until recently. The government’s stated goal is to establish a uniform health insurance
program by 2014 and to cover all Indonesian workers in both the formal and informal sectors by 2019. Similarly,
the government plans to establish programs for pensions, old age savings, death beneﬁts and worker accident
by mid-2015 and expand coverage to all Indonesians by 2019. The key to success will be program aﬀordability,
ﬁscal sustainability, eﬃcient administration of social insurance programs, proper governance procedures to
assure program assets are properly and transparently managed in the best interests of participants, and analysis
to assure that women, the disabled and other vulnerable groups are adequately protected.
The Bank would engage in activities to support the conversion of the existing social insurance
administrators into not-for-profit institutions and expand coverage and contributions. Social
insurance is emerging as an important area of engagement for the Bank. In response to government demand,
we will share best international practice to facilitate proper design and ﬁnancing of the social insurance
programs and the institutional transformation required for this ambitious reform eﬀort. The Bank is working
closely with development partners to provide extensive analytic work to assist with implementation of the
universal health care program and the four other social security programs, particularly for the pension and
old-age savings programs. This will build on the Bank’s strength and comparative advantage in pensions
and implementation and in the four non-health social security programs, particularly for the pension and
old-age savings programs, working closely with development partners. This will build on the Bank’s strength
and comparative advantage in institutional change management, particularly in the areas of organizational
structure, human resources and IT systems. The Bank also will continue to support the design and
implementation a of reformed civil service pension scheme. AusAID, the German International Aid Agency
(GIZ), ADB and the World Health Organization (WHO) are providing primary support for implementing the
universal health care program. The Bank is leading on implementation of the pension and old age savings
programs with support from AusAID, ILO and GIZ. There are also cross-cutting administrative issues where the
Bank can assist, such as contribution collection and unique identiﬁcation numbers for the SJSN system.
BOX 10:

SOCIAL INSURANCE RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Jobs Social Insurance Development Results: Conversion of the existing social insurance
administrators into not-for-profit institutions and expand coverage and contributions
Knowledge and Convening
Pension and old age savings roadmap.
Transformation of Jamsostek
Membership expansion, improved contribution collection and development of
ID system for SJSN programs

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Development Partners
ADB, AusAID, GIZ, ILO

29

Photo: Matahati Productions

PRO-POOR – Promoting Communities, Protecting the Vulnerable and
Improving Health Outcomes
The Government is committed to accelerating the pace of poverty reduction and increasing
economic security for the large vulnerable population that is at risk of falling into poverty. Policy
reform eﬀorts are aimed at improving the eﬀectiveness of poverty reduction programs. The country is also
focusing on addressing the problems associated with high levels of vulnerability by improving and extending
safety nets. At the same time, rising inequality is an emerging concern and the Government is exploring what
strategies can support the greater sharing of economic growth with the poor and vulnerable. Working with
the Government to ensure continued progress towards poverty reduction goals, and achieving equity and
inclusiveness across regions, remains a top priority for the World Bank Group and is linked to a number of other
engagement areas.
The Pro-Poor Results. The WBG expects to support development results that would enhance response to
shocks, promote the national targeting system to better reach poor and vulnerable households, enhance the
design and performance of the Government’s household-targeted and community development programs,
promote revitalization of the agriculture, improve health and nutrition outcomes, particularly of the poor,
by supporting improved access to quality health care, including maternal and child health services, and
enhanced HIV/AIDS surveillance, as well as increased access to safe water and sanitation.

TARGETING POVERTY
The Bank has supported overall poverty strategy and strengthening central institutions with
the establishment of the National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction. Oversight and
coordination of poverty reduction policies and programs has now been elevated to a cabinet-level team headed
by the Vice-President. With the team, the Bank has collaborated on a reform agenda focusing on the programs
that fall under the Government’s on-going three-pronged approach to poverty reduction: household-based,

30

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

community-driven and employment generating programs. Household-based social assistance programs play
an important role in the strategy to reduce poverty. In 2012 the Bank released Protecting Poor and Vulnerable
Households in Indonesia, a comprehensive household social assistance expenditure and program review, to
provide an evidence base for program and policy reforms.
The Bank supports development results that will enhance local capacity for detecting and
responding to shocks that threaten vulnerable households, increase the number of poverty
programs using the national registry of poor and vulnerable households and increase participation
of children from poor families in early childhood education and development programs. These
results will be supported by the INSTANSI DPLs and knowledge services, involving a multi donor trust fund
initially supported by AusAID to support evidence-based poverty reduction policies and programs, as well as
to build the analytical capacity of local universities and think tanks for research and assessing poverty-related
issues. This is being achieved by: (i) providing poverty analytics and building analytical capacity to inform
poverty and social protection policies, programs and strategies; (ii) supporting the Government in the design,
implementation and evaluation of key poverty and social protection programs; and (iii) improving the quality
and accessibility of data needed for poverty analysis and policymaking.
Support will pay particular attention to gender issues, with an aim to improve women’s access to
poverty reduction and social protection programs, improve access to quality jobs, and improve
protection for female workers including international migrant workers. Globally, the World Bank has
been placing greater focus on issues related to gender that includes the preparation of a World Development
Report on gender. This program will access global knowledge in this area to identify ways to improve gender
equity in Indonesia.
BOX 11:

POVERTY TARGETING RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Poor Poverty Targeting Development Results: Enhanced capacity for detecting and responding to
shocks that threaten vulnerable households, and increase the number of poverty programs using the
national registry of poor and vulnerable households.
Financing/Grants
Ongoing:
STATCAP-CERDAS
Early Childhood Education &
Development (ECED)
Proposed:
INSTANSI DPL

Knowledge and Convening
Household shock monitoring and response
Integration of poverty reduction programs
Social assistance reform
Urban Poverty Review
ECED – implications for policy and practice from
Indonesia
ECED impact evaluation

Development Partners
AusAID, The Netherlands

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
The Bank is particularly active in supporting the community-level efforts at poverty reduction
through its support to Indonesia’s flagship National Community Empowerment Program (PNPMMandiri) – the world’s largest CDD program. The core PNPM Mandiri program now covers 65,000 villages
with an annual budget of almost US$1.7 billion. PNPM’s overall objective is to improve governance and
reduce poverty by promoting community decision making in development planning and management. Its
core idea is that given adequate information and some technical assistance to improve designs, communities
will negotiate a range of cost-eﬀective, economically useful investments that will raise local productivity and
beneﬁt the poor. To translate this idea into an operational project, PNPM funds are used to support: (a) building
community capacity for the formation and institutionalization of elected representative organizations that are
accountable to communities; (b) provision of grants to communities directly and transparently to ﬁnance an
open menu of poverty alleviation activities; and (c) enhancing the capacity of central government and local

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

31

governments to partner with community organizations. The program continues to perform well despite some
of the implementation challenges that the program has faced in its speedy scale up to national coverage in
2008. It is noteworthy that PNPM has a clear gender strategy and action plan which, among others, aims at
ensuring a gender balance in decision making processes.
Several peer-reviewed quantitative assessments have demonstrated significant impact in terms
of effective, attributable poverty reduction. The main ﬁndings conﬁrm that: (a) beneﬁts are heavily
skewed to the poor: the two lowest quintiles of the participating population receive the largest share of
project beneﬁts; (b) beneﬁts are signiﬁcant: household expenditures among the poor increased by an average
of 11% as a result of project investments, beneﬁtting approximately 45 million poor people; (c) beneﬁts are
sustained; physical assessments of PNPM (KDP) built infrastructure found that 85% of the infrastructure built
by communities was in good to very good condition ﬁve years after its completion. Impact simulations found
that after three years the majority of beneﬁts came from increased economic activity attributable to the
investments made by the program, not from project grants; (d) beneﬁts are shared: labor composition in
PNPM programs averages 40-70 percent, which is on the high end of global measurements. PNPM created
over 20 million person-days of paid employment.
The massive scaling-up of PNPM presents major institutional challenges for the implementing
agency. Hands-on implementation support to GoI has helped mitigate governance and ﬁduciary risks,
and build more robust management systems. Still, continuous attention to transparency, the quality of
project management and strong ﬁduciary oversight is required. A comprehensive reform program is being
implemented to strengthen the program’s institutional arrangements.
The Bank will support development results to improve local governance, participation, particularly
by women, increased access to health and education services. The Government is in the ﬁnal stages of
a wide ranging consultation process to articulate the roadmap for PNPM with the goal of integrating the
operating principles of PNPM into regular government operations. Special eﬀorts will go to capacity building
of national institutions, so that these institutions can fully take over the functions that are currently done by
the PNPM Support Facility.
In addition to investment lending, the Bank supports Indonesia’s community based poverty
program by managing a multi donor support facility that provides technical assistance and
strategic inputs to PNPM. The support facility focuses on improving the quality of the delivery of PNPM as
well as supporting a number of innovative pilot operations including:
PNPM-Generasi is a community-based CCT program that uses performance -based block grants to
increase community utilization of basic health and education services and promote closer interaction
between community groups and front-line service providers.
PNPM Green supports ﬁnancing green sub-projects and is moving towards incentivizing results and
addressing the overall village development process, placing particular importance on participative
natural resource mapping, and planning local green growth strategies.
Local Government Capacity Development pilots social accountability processes and tools to improve local
government responsiveness in community-level service delivery.
PNPM Peduli: GoI has launched the PNPM-Peduli program to further operationalize social inclusion
principles by working directly through CSOs for outreach and service delivery.
In addition to these pilot operations, the PNPM Support Facility supports a robust program
of analytical work to measure impact and provide the Government with evidence-based policy
advice. An increasing part of the analytical work is implemented through national institutions, thus building
their capacity and fostering the long term sustainability of the social development agenda in Indonesia.

32

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

BOX 12:

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Poor Community Development Results: Improved local-level governance, greater participation by
women, increased access to health and education, and participation in early childhood education and
development
Financing/Grants
Ongoing:
PNPM Rural III
PNPM Urban III
Proposed:
PNPM Rural IV
PNPM Urban IV
Under Discussion:
PNPM Rural V
PNPM Urban V

Knowledge and Convening
Development Partners
PNPM Rural Economic Impact
ADB, AusAID, Canada, Denmark, EC,
Village Infrastructure Census; Incidence
Islamic Development Bank, JICA, The
of Beneﬁts of Households Local Level
Netherlands, UK, USAID
Institutions III Community Management
Revolving Loan Fund Study; Governance
Review
Integrated MIS for PNPM
TA to Aceh Local Government
Papua Analytical Works
PNPM Rural Sentinel Villages
Urban Poverty Review

FOOD SECURITY AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
The Government is increasingly concerned with food security and the negative impact of the
price volatility of foodstuffs on overall poverty. Because over three-quarters of the poor are net food
consumers, food price hikes have a disproportionately large impact on the poorest people in Indonesia. It is
estimated that a 10% increase in the price of rice leads to a 1.3% increase in the poverty rate. Rural poverty and
unemployment are also critical issues facing Indonesia. Around 50% of the country’s population live in rural
areas and depend mainly or exclusively on the agricultural sector for their livelihood.
While agricultural development was a major contributor to Indonesia’s economic and social
performance from the late 1960s through the 1990s, it has been in decline for the past fifteen years.
Investment in agriculture has so far not been enough to promote productivity growth and a signiﬁcant factor
in the decline in the performance of the agricultural sector is the decrease in the amount and quality of public
investment, as demonstrated in the Bank’s recent Agricultural Public Expenditure Review. Despite its rich agroecological endowments, Indonesia imports fruits and vegetables from neighboring countries, mainly because
of quality and consistency problems with its own produce, but also because of the lack of competition in
commodity trade.
The Bank is expected to support development results that will provide access to smallholders of
client and market-oriented extension and marketing services. Dialogue on food security has helped
to bring into focus the need to revitalize agriculture and greater Bank engagement. During the previous CPS,
lack of Government commitment and championing of reform in the sector had led to a reduced role for the
Bank, as compared to earlier periods.
In collaboration with other donors, Bank support for the Government’s food security concerns
include knowledge services. The Bank, with the support of development partners, facilitated policy
dialogue aimed at improving rice import mechanisms to reduce price volatility in the domestic market. The
Bank supported the Government in establishing a platform to strengthen policy coordination to address
food security challenges in an integrated way, which includes (i) revitalizing agriculture productivity, (ii)
managing domestic price volatility and (iii) protecting the poor and vulnerable. A technical assistance
program funded with a grant from the Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFRP) is assisting the GoI to
identify future policy directions to enable it to achieve the goals related to food security. Furthermore,

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

33

technical assistance funded from the Multi-Donor Fund for Trade and Industry (MDFTIC) is assisting the
Ministry of Trade in designing action plans aimed at strengthening the competitiveness, sustainability, and
value addition of the cocoa, coﬀee, and tea value chains and their strategic positioning in international
market.
The Bank is helping Indonesia implement institutional reforms in the agricultural sector research
and extension system to develop a demand-driven, market oriented agricultural services system,
particularly for small farmers. The on-going Farmer Empowerment through Agricultural Technology
and Information Project (FEATI) helps eﬀorts at improving the delivery of support services to farmers.
Complementing FEATI with a focus on research is the recently approved Sustainable Management of
Agricultural Research and Technology Dissemination Project (SMART-D), which would strengthen the capacity
to develop and disseminate best practice technologies for improved agricultural productivity, proﬁtability
and sustainability to conduct agricultural research, where Indonesia lags far behind most competitors. Most
of the project’s expected beneﬁciaries are women. In the previous SMART-D, more than 60 percent of those
trained were women.
The Bank in collaboration with other donors is supporting Indonesia to enhance water
security for agriculture through institutional reforms, improvements in infrastructure and
modernization of irrigation management. The Bank financed Water Resources and Irrigation Sector
Program (WISMP) supports the Government in the implementation of its reform agenda providing more
stakeholder participation and accountability in the management of water resources and irrigation. These
activities are supported by new multi-stakeholder governance platforms, water user associations and
improvement of facilities and infrastructure to enhance water security, agricultural productivity, and the
value chain. Through the Dam Operation Improvement and Safety Program (DOISP) the effectiveness of
water availability and use in the reservoirs is improved reducing the risks and adapting to climate change
enabling more reliable supplies also for agriculture by improving safety and operational standards and by
enhancing sustainable catchment management practices. A strategic dialogue with the government is
ongoing and aims at the development of an Irrigation Policy for 2014-2025 in the context of water security
for food security, anticipating the rapid transformations in the economy, the increasing competition
for natural resources (esp. land and water), and the upcoming transition from subsistence smallholder
agriculture to viable commercial farming.

BOX 13:
FOOD SECURITY AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND
PARTNERS
Pro-Poor Development Food Security and Rural Development Results: Increase access by smallholders to
client and market-oriented extension and marketing services, and enhance water security for irrigation
Financing/Grants
Ongoing:
FEATI
SMARTD
WISMP II
DOISP
IFC investments in private sector
agribusiness companies (the Wings
Group, Ecogreen)

34

Knowledge and Convening
TA on Food Security
TA on Beverage Crops
Irrigation Management Modernization
Training on risk management
Study on Rural Connectivity (Connecting poor
and disadvantaged areas to improve food
security and rural incomes)
IFC advisory services for agribusiness

Development
Partners
ADB, AusAID, FAO,
SECO

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

IFC is engaging in the agribusiness sector to empower and strengthen communities, especially the
poor and marginal farmers. IFC has begun working with private sector ﬁnancial institutions to support their
expansion to rural/agriculture lending, as well as continuing work with oﬀ-takers seeking to develop stronger
links to smallholders and increase the sustainability of their small holder suppliers for some important agricultural
commodities like coﬀee, cocoa and rubber. Similarly, in the palm-oil industry, IFC is seeking to develop a
smallholder ﬁnancing scheme with access to technical advice and materials, and to increase beneﬁt sharing
between communities and oil palm plantations. In the coﬀee industry, IFC is providing training to marginal
farmers to improve their yields and business practices. IFC is also seeking opportunities to provide long-term
ﬁnancing to those committed to strengthening their environmental and social standards and practices.

IMPROVING HEALTH OUTCOMES
Indonesia has been successful in improving access to health care and made significant progress
on several key population health outcomes over the past few decades, but the poor in particular
suffer from persistent maternal mortality, chronic malnutrition rates, rising HIV infections and
inequitable access to quality services. Indonesia’s maternal mortality ratio (MMR) was recently estimated
to be 220 per 100,000 live births, higher than that of India and Vietnam, despite relatively high rates of antenatal
care and skilled birth attendance in the country, and short of the MDG target of 102 maternal deaths by 2015.
While Indonesia is on-track to attaining the nutrition-related MDG relating to reducing the prevalence of
underweight among children less than ﬁve, however 36 percent of Indonesian children are shorter than the
standard height for their age and an estimated that 42 percent of rural households have stunted children.
Indonesia is not on track for the HIV-related MDG. Women account for 25 percent of HIV cases and in the
provinces of Papua and West Papua the virus has become generalized. Public spending on health is only 1.3
percent of GDP in Indonesia, in stark contrast to Thailand (2.9 percent) and, China (2.7 percent). The ratio of
doctors is 0.2 per 1000, one of the lowest in the region and much worse in rural and remote areas.
The GoI has made a significant leap forward in committing to improve access to quality health
services for all by achieving universal health coverage (UHC). Household health insurance population
coverage rates have increased in the past decade but about 40 percent of the population still remains without
any coverage and, at 40 percent of total health spending, out-of-pocket spending remains high. Almost 2.3
million of Indonesian households currently fall into poverty annually due to catastrophic health spending.
In support of the Government’s goals, the Bank expects to help achieve development results to
strengthen policies governing the education of health professionals and increase access to safe
water and sanitation. The Bank’s health engagement would increasingly link knowledge services with
activities in other engagement areas, including education (ECED), and community development (stunting).
In the latter, for example the Bank is helping GoI to prepare a new Community-Based Health and Nutrition to
Reduce Stunting Project, in support of its key commitment to the global Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) movement,
with grant ﬁnancing from the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) totaling US$131.5million. Signiﬁcant
knowledge support would also be provided in association with social insurance reform, where studies would
be undertaken to support readiness, with supply side assessments, including human resource availability.
Improving the quality and availability of health professions would continue to be pursued through the Bank’s
Health Professional Education Quality Project (HPEQ), which strengthens quality assurance policies governing
medical education. The Bank would continue providing support for strengthening national HIV policies and
program development, including analytical work on epidemiologic and economic aspects of HIV. The Health
Professional Education Quality Project targeted, among others, improving the quality of midwives and other
health care providers to contribute progress in achieving key health outcomes. The same applies to the
Community-based Health and Nutrition to Reduce Stunting Project that aims to improve maternal health services
in a longer term. IFC’s engagement with private sector companies in processed foods sector seeks to achieve
better nutritional health for middle and lower income households.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

35

Access to safe water and sanitation is a major factor in the health and overall welfare of
Indonesians. Access to safe water has stagnated since 2001 at less than half the population. Combined
with poor sanitation this has been estimated to result in an annual expenditure of US$ 6.3 billion in health
care costs, lost productivity, premature deaths, water resource and ﬁshery losses, declining land values and
tourism losses. Together with rapid urbanization, the lack of investment has resulted in an actual decline
in urban coverage from 60 percent to about 50 percent by 2009. Access to sanitary facilities is around 54
percent, signiﬁcantly lower than other countries in the region, such as the Philippines and Vietnam. Open
defecation is still practiced by more than 60 million Indonesians. Sewerage coverage is minimal, with only
2 percent of urban areas having access to centralized systems. Of the solid waste generated by Indonesia’s
urban population of 110 million, only about 40 percent end up in landﬁlls, many of which are open dumps.
In rural areas, while the number of community-managed piped water schemes has grown steadily, they
cover less than 20 percent of the population and formal solid waste collection systems are virtually nonexistent.
The WBG expects to support development results that would increase the coverage of water and
sanitation in both urban and rural areas. The on-going engagement includes a number of activities to
support sector initiatives. The Bank ﬁnances the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project (UWSSP), which
assists three local governments and water utilities (PDAM) to improve and expand coverage of water supply
services for more than 90,000 households. IFC is supporting GoI on the tender of the Umbulan Water Project,
which would provide water of good quality to about 3 million people in East Java, by mobilizing US$100
million in private investment. Trust-funded activities, such as the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), provide
support for institutional development activities to strengthen national policies, as well as local capacities.
The Global Partnership on Output-based Aid (GPOBA) pilot projects in Jakarta and Surabaya to connect the
urban poor to water and sanitation services have been scaled up with funding from other donors, resulting in
more than 70,000 connections for poor households in 35 cities. The Indonesia Sanitation Sector Development
Program (ISSDP), implemented in six pilot cities under the WSP, initiated the development of the National
Sanitation Acceleration Development Program.
To facilitate improved rural water supply and sanitation services, the Bank has financed the flagship
Rural Water and Sanitation Program (PAMSIMAS), which is currently operating in 5,000 villages and
using donor funds to expand coverage to more villages in the eastern part of Indonesia. By 2015,
this program is expected to provide some 7 million rural Indonesians with piped water supply and some 3.4
million with improved on-site sanitation. In addition, the trust-funded Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing
(TSSM) project in East Java, implemented by WSP focuses on the provision of technical assistance to 29 district
governments to support their investing in sanitation. Through this project, a total of 1.4 million people have
gained access to improved sanitation. Most of the aforementioned programs are gender-informed and
equipped with a gender action plan, as well as a strategy and/or results framework with sex-disaggregated
indicators wherever relevant.
The WBG continues to support GoI initiatives, shifting to a more integrated and programmatic
approach in the sector toward water supply and sanitation, solid waste management and
urban drainage and flood control. For urban areas, the Bank has begun to engage with the GoI on
the possible development of an Indonesian Water and Sanitation Financing Facility (IWSFF) with capacity
building, technical assistance and investment windows targeted at a large number of PDAMs. At the same
time, the Bank will continue to consider supporting speciﬁc projects in water supply and sanitation, where
approaches are novel and TA-intensive (as under the proposed Lampung PPP transaction) or large and
technically complex. Similarly, the Bank has begun to engage with the GoI on the possible development
of a national solid waste investment program. IFC remains open to assisting GoI with transaction advisory
services for projects mobilizing private sector resources, and would consider providing the needed
long-term ﬁnancing to sustainable private sector operations. MIGA remains open to supporting private
investment into this sector.

36

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

BOX 14:

IMPROVING HEALTH RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Poor Improving Health Outcomes Development Results: Strengthen policies governing the education
of health professionals and increase access to safe water and sanitation.
Financing/Grants

Knowledge and Convening
Policy dialogue and analysis on universal
Ongoing:
Health Professionals Education Quality health coverage (UHC)
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
Supply side availability and readiness
Human Health Resources
Projects (PAMSIMAS I and II)
HIV/AIDS Survey
Aceh Community Settlement
HIV/AIDS Economic Analysis
Reconstruction project
Water and Sanitation Program; WASAP Double Burden of Malnutrition
Urban Water Supply & Sanitation
Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing
Urban Wastewater Management TA
Grant Facility for Water Management
Water and Sanitation Financing Program
Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation
Jakarta Water OBA project, Surabaya
Political Economy of Water Tariﬀs
Structure Assessment for Water Financing
Water OBA project
Facility
Proposed:
Lampung Water Project TA
PAMSIMAS (AF)
Solid Waste Improvement in Regional IFC advisory services for Umbulan Water
project
and Metropolitan Cities
Under Discussion:
Water and Sanitation Financing
Facility
IFC investments in private sector
healthcare companies
IFC investments in water and
sanitation companies

Development Partners
AusAID, The Netherlands,
Singapore Cooperation
Enterprise (SCE), UNAIDS,
UNICEF, USAID/MCC, WHO

PRO-GREEN – Ensuring Sustainable Development and Improving
Disaster Resilience
Indonesia is well endowed with natural wealth and beauty and is a global epicenter of terrestrial
and marine biodiversity. However, this natural wealth is under threat from deforestation, inefficient
fossil fuel use, unsustainable marine practices, air and water pollution, and smoke-haze from forest
and peat fires. Forest biodiversity is also threatened by wildlife crime, with a number of iconic species such
as tigers and orangutans becoming endangered. At the same time, timber, pulp, and palm oil enterprises
contribute billions of dollars annually in economic beneﬁts, creating opportunities and employment, though
only some of this is sustainable. This illustrates the complex development choices needed to shift to a more
sustainable forest management path. Climate ﬁnance and biodiversity premiums oﬀer some potential to
channel more resources toward conservation and biodiversity protection. However, turning these potentials
into improvements on the ground remains a challenge in terms of policy, governance and implementation.
Pro-Green Results. WBG engagement is expected to support development results that include enabling
the implementation of Indonesia’s REDD+ Strategy, protection for coral and marine resources, and scaling up
disaster and climate risk reduction and adaptation measures. Support would be provided through knowledge
services and mainly grant ﬁnancing, along with IFC investments.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

37

Photo: Matahati Productions

GREEN GROWTH
Climate change is recognized as a key threat to Indonesia’s development, especially for the poor
who are also disproportionately affected. Indonesia is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts – sea
level rise, changing weather patterns, and increased uncertainty. At the same time, Indonesia’s greenhouse gas
emissions are globally signiﬁcant. Land use change, forestry as well as peat conversion, and ﬁres are the main
sources of emissions, contributing more than two-thirds of the total volume of emissions in an average year.
The Master Plan for long term economic development is now a focal point for how “green growth” fits
into sustainable development needs. However, the scope of the challenge is large and success will require action
across legal mandates and economic interests from forestry, agriculture, mining, land use and local governments.
Choices with long term beneﬁts will still have short term costs that have to be borne. Champions inside and outside
of government will need strong economic, social and environmental rationales for the policies they propose.
Since hosting COP 13 in Bali, Indonesia has given priority to climate change actions, with a
commitment to reduce emissions by 26 percent by 2020. GoI has published national action plans and
formed a cabinet level National Council on Climate Change. Indonesia is taking advantage of numerous
international climate ﬁnance options, but stills needs to integrate these opportunities into the development
agenda. Indonesia has agreed with Norway on a US$1 billion dollar performance-based, policy-linked initiative
for accelerating action on REDD+. Australia, UK, Japan, USA, Germany and other development partners are
contributing additional hundreds of millions of dollars.
WBG engagement is expected to support development results that will help implement
Indonesia’s REDD+ strategy and enhance protection for coral and marine resources. Bank technical
assistance has been requested to help design the institutional architecture and ﬁnancing mechanisms for
implementing for REDD+, as well as helping Indonesia to prepare for larger climate ﬁnance ﬂows. By FY15 it

38

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

is expected that a REDD+ Support Facility will be in place with the Bank serving as the advisor, rather than
its traditional role as trust fund manager. The Bank would also be ready to implement performance-based
or carbon-based payments under the FCPF Carbon Fund, the Norway Phase 3 funding, or through bilateral
partnerships. IFC has been supporting sustainable forestry practices through advisory services. In one such
project, IFC will assist a private sector company in Kalimantan to conduct forest carbon assessment, to allow
the company to further build potential REDD+ revenue streams from its sustainable forestry operations. IFC
has provided funding to Bio-Carbon, an equity fund established to acquire and expand sustainable forestry
operations.
The move toward green economy thinking creates a strategic opportunity to develop and deliver
more integrated policy advice, technical assistance, and capacity building to key government
agencies. Integrating climate eﬀorts into national development plans and budgets will anchor these policies and
approaches into central and local governance responsibilities for the long term. The Government of Indonesia has
requested the Bank’s assistance to develop a Green Development Support Facility to provide technical assistance
and analysis on policy issues and ﬁnancing needs toward a broader green economic development initiative.
For its part, IFC plays a catalytic role in private sector engagement in climate change mitigation and adaptation
eﬀorts through its analytical and advisory work. It is seeking investments in geothermal and energy eﬃciency
projects, including mobilizing ﬁnancing support for such projects; helping to improve environmental and social
outcomes in as oil palm; and promoting sustainable forestry practices to enable Indonesia to participate in
global carbon markets. IFC is providing advisory services and ﬁnancing to develop sustainable energy ﬁnance
projects in the SME sector. It is working with large cities, to introduce Green building codes that mandate the
private sector to build more energy and water eﬃcient buildings. The ﬁrst such code was issued by the Governor
of Jakarta in April 2010. WBI supports capacity building on carbon markets and gas ﬂaring.
Conserving biodiversity is also part of the pro-green agenda where the Bank has several strategic
investments. Co-ﬁnancing from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) is expected to support the ongoing
program for coral reef rehabilitation and management (COREMAP), a 15-year commitment to stewardship and
promoting governance at village, district and national levels. The Aceh Forest and Environment Project (AFEP), nearing
completion, supported the largest contiguous forest area in Sumatra. Further engagement would support the GoI
and NGO partners to access grants or low-cost ﬁnancing for conservation and environmental activities, including
development of a GEF-ﬁnanced biodiversity project for protecting habitat and tigers in Sumatra.

BOX 15:

A NEW PARTNERSHIP TO SUPPORT GREEN GROWTH

In an innovative knowledge partnership, the Bank is providing advice and analytical support to the Government of
Indonesia to help it establish and manage a US$1 billion fund for REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation
and Forest Degradation). Indonesia is currently the 3rd biggest producer of greenhouse gases in the world, with
most emissions coming from deforestation. A new REDD+ Agency and a Fund for REDD+ in Indonesia will support
GoI to channel resources to activities consistent with the 2012 National Strategy to cut emissions. Norway has
pledged US$1 billion under a phased program linked to the Government’s ability to govern and distribute REDD
resources. The Global Forest Carbon Partnership Facility and the Forest Investment Program, along with Switzerland,
are also supporting this approach.
This REDD+ advisory support is a good example of a potentially new role for the Bank in assisting middle income
countries by providing knowledge and expertise based on global best practice. It is also a departure from earlier
patterns of trust fund management where the Bank rather than a Government entity acted as trustee. This model,
if successful, could represent an approach for many countries that are willing and institutionally able to build local
institutions to deliver on climate ﬁnance. To deliver on its advisory role, the Bank has assembled a cross-sectoral
“virtual team” to bring global knowledge and expertise on international best practices as well as institutional and
technical arrangements to help build an Indonesia owned ﬁnancing instrument for REDD+. This approach helps
give conﬁdence to both Government and donors that the funds will be well used.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

39

BOX 16:

GREEN GROWTH RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Green Development Results: Implementing of Indonesia’s REDD+ strategy and improving protection
for coral and marine resources.
Financing/Grants
Ongoing:
HCFC Phase Out Project (Montreal
Protocol)
Geothermal Investment (GEF)
Halmahera Conservation
COREMAP II (GEF)
IFC investment in Medco Power
Proposed:
Chiller Energy Eﬃciency (GEF)
COREMAP III (GEF)
Sumatran Biodiversity (GEF)
Under Discussion:
IFC investments in geothermal and
hydroelectricity sectors

Knowledge and Convening
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
(FCPF), Forest Investment Program (FIP)
Indonesia Forest and Climate Trust
Fund,
TA for REDD/FREDDI
AAA on Beneﬁt Sharing
Drivers of Deforestation TA
Green Growth Support Facility
DP Partnership for Market Readiness
Carbon Finance
IFC advisory services for sustainable
palm oil and forestry
IFC advisory services in Green
Banking, Green Buildings Code, and
Sustainable Energy Finance as well as
in geothermal energy sector.

Development Partners
AusAID, AfD, CIDA, Denmark,
Germany (GIZ), Finland,
JICA, The Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, SECO,
USAID

IMPROVING DISASTER RESILIENCE
Indonesia is located in one of the world’s most natural disaster prone areas. According to data
from the National Disaster Management Agency (BNPB), over the last 30 years, there have been,
on average, 289 significant natural disasters per year, with an average annual death toll of 8,000
people. GoI spends on average between US$ 300-500 million annually on post disaster reconstruction, with
spending for major disasters of up to 6.4 percent of GDP. Following the Indian Ocean tsunami, the GoI allocated
more than US$7 billion for reconstruction in Aceh and Nias. Close to US$2 billion was spent following the
eruption of Mount Merapi in Yogyakarta.
Since the devastation caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami, the GoI has made significant
advances in preparing for potential future natural disasters. A comprehensive approach to Disaster Risk
Management (DRM) including prevention and preparation, emergency response and post disaster recovery
was introduced. Yet Indonesia faces a number of challenges. Among these are insuﬃcient investments in
prevention and risk reduction, including a lack of systems to identify risks and manage reconstruction. In
addition, BNPB lacks the conﬁdence of line agencies to coordinate and local DRM institutions are unproven.
A recent study by the Bank indicates that there is suﬃcient ﬁscal capacity and a favorable legal framework
for an adequate DRM system, but implementing regulations and upgrading operational capacities remain
outstanding. There is ample room for improvement in GoI’s eﬀorts to addressing the diﬀerentiated impact of
disaster on men and women, girls and boys. Going forward, the Bank will continue to support the Government
by facilitating the adoption of disaster risk management approaches that have shown a demonstrable eﬀect
on women including through their inclusion in decision making processes.
Development results to be supported by the Bank will include efforts to identify and scale
up disaster and climate risk reduction and adaptation measures, including institutionalizing
community-based settlement reconstruction. The basis for the Bank’s involvement in the development of
Indonesia’s DRM systems resides in its ability to leverage existing engagements and ﬁnancing instruments and

40

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Country Partnership Strategy

its access to international best practices that will serve as the foundation to support the building of a disaster
and climate resilient Indonesia. With support from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
(GFDRR), the Bank provides technical assistance for risk identiﬁcation, integrating risk reduction in investment
projects, and identifying options for catastrophic risk ﬁnancing. Disaster contingent components have already
been included in several Bank-ﬁnanced projects. The Bank is also supporting a standing mechanism for multidonor support in post disaster recovery through a trust fund with an initial contribution of NZ$2 million in
funding from the New Zealand Government. This could represent a major shift from a focus on recovery
to an approach focused on preparedness. There has also been some discussion on the use of contingent
ﬁnancing instruments such as the Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat-DDO). In parallel, existing
Bank engagements in settlement rehabilitation, infrastructure and education and health that form the core of
reactive investment will be further targeted to fully integrate disaster resilience measures. The Bank has also
conducted a gender and DRM rapid assessment in PNPM Urban, which will inform initiatives under this CPS.
During the last few years, IFC supported projects such as Aceh Shrimp Project and Investment Climate Reforms
advisory. It will continue to develop projects towards reconstruction from the Tsunami disaster.
BOX 17:

DISASTER RESILIENCE RESULTS, INSTRUMENTS AND PARTNERS

Pro-Green Disaster Resilience Development Results: Identify and scale up disaster and climate risk
reduction and adaptation measures, including institutionalizing community-based settlement
reconstruction.
Financing/Grants

Knowledge and Convening
Ongoing:
GFDRR National Risk Assessment
Multi Donor Fund for Aceh and Nias
Indonesia Disaster Risk Financing Capacity
Java Reconstruction Fund
Building module on Post Disaster Needs
PNPM support of disaster recovery in
Assessment and Post Disaster Recover.
Aceh/Nias, Yogyakarta and Central Java IFC advisory services for launching Global
Under Discussion:
Index Insurance products
CAT DDO

Development Partners
AusAID, JICA, New
Zealand

CROSS-CUTTING ENGAGEMENTS - Gender and Governance
GENDER
Gender is a key cross-cutting theme in the strategic framework of the CPS. The approach to gender in
the CPS is informed by a series of recently completed initiatives. These include the Bank’s internal stock taking
of gender-related activities and discussion of how it could address gender issues more eﬀectively (note on
“Gender mainstreaming in the World Bank Group in Indonesia”) and the Country Gender Strategy and associated
Action Plan and Result Framework developed to coincide with this CPS (see Annex 2). Using the WDR analytical
framework (focused on endowment, opportunity and voice and agency), the stock taking exercise has shown
that at the national level, the regulatory and planning framework recognizes gender equality as a national
priority. As mentioned above, gender is well mainstreamed in the Government Central Planning (the Five year
Plans); Indonesia has a Ministry of Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection to coordinate mainstreaming
eﬀorts across government and provide support to implementing agencies; and the Ministry of Finance has
adopted best practice legislations such as requiring that budget requests from technical Ministries be drafted
with a gender lens. At the same time, implementation has been weak in part because gender-disaggregated
data and analysis have not been available. Furthermore, at the sub-national level, attention to gender equality is
uneven and implementation is often undermined by weak execution and reporting capacities.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

41

Photo: Irwansyah Putra

Despite tangible progress, persistent gender disparities remain. Gender parity in enrollment rates
has been achieved at all levels of education but persistent gender disparities remain but with evidence of
gender streaming. As noted, maternal mortality rates remain relatively high for Indonesia’s income level and
women’s voice in the public domain remains relatively weak; while Indonesia’s female labor force participation
rate increased from around 45 percent in 1980 to about 55 percent in 2008, it still remained below the 70
percent average for the region; although there is no diﬀerence between men and women’s consumption
based poverty rates and poverty rates amongst female-headed households are lower than male-headed
households, the overall pace of poverty reduction is slower for female-headed households.
Women still earn less than men in all sectors, are more likely to work in the informal sector and
constitute the majority of unskilled migrant laborers. Gender gaps in wages in the service, industry
and agriculture sectors in Indonesia are among the largest in the region. The important socioeconomic
variations in Indonesia are that urban educated women have higher returns than men with the same
education, while less-educated women at the bottom end of the wage distribution face the biggest
wage gap. Enterprise surveys also suggest that, within the same firms, women are more likely than men
to be temporary workers. While female-owned and managed enterprises tend to be less capitalized and
operate in less remunerative sectors. Further, Indonesian women are disproportionally more excluded
from formal financial services than men. The World Bank Access to Finance Survey 2010 and Migrant Worker
Survey found that women are less likely to borrow, and when they do so, they are more likely to borrow
informally. Women are also less likely to enroll in life insurance, asset insurance or private health insurance
than men.
The World Bank Group has been working actively with the Government on programs to help
remove barriers to gender equality. Key activities include (i) consultations with development partners,
NGOs, academia, policy institutes and government around gender equality and how best the World Bank
might contribute; (ii) collaboration with other development partners in producing set of policy briefs, which
collectively provide a country gender assessment; (iii) development of the relationship with Ministry of
Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection; (iv) hosting of a 2012 WDR consultation event and completing
Indonesia’s case study; (v) stock taking of gender-related activities across the country program and (vi) drafting
the country gender strategy.

42

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

GOVERNANCE AND ANTI-CORRUPTION
Over the past decade, the Indonesian government has made strides toward improved public
accountability. Governance and anti-corruption reforms have featured in the programs of successive
governments. Freedom of the press has been enhanced; authority was devolved to the regions; checks and
balances between the executive, legislative and judicial branches were strengthened; the role of security
forces was redeﬁned; direct elections for President and for regional heads were mandated; and an institutional
framework, including the creation of Anti-Corruption Commission (KPK) was developed. Civil society played
an important role in driving these changes. Indonesia has also seen the enactment of ﬁscal laws and the
rearrangement of key economic ministries, many with WBG support, designed to improve budget and
ﬁnancial management systems (including public procurement, business regulation, auditing, and monitoring
and evaluation). Nevertheless old problems remain. Central government institutions struggle to coordinate
eﬀectively, bureaucratic incentives are misaligned and capacity lags. In the private sector existing players retain
market power and use it to inﬂuence political processes. In addition, new challenges are increasing; money
politics is on the increase, decentralization has increased coordination issues and reforms in the judiciary, the
police and the attorney general’s oﬃce (AGO) have been slow.
The governance and anti-corruption approach in the Country Partnership Strategy is led by the
Indonesia Governance and Anti-Corruption (IGAC) Team, composed of engagement leaders from
all the sectors and the Indonesia GAC secretariat. The IGAC team will be responsible for developing and
guiding a strategic approach that eﬀectively integrates governance in the work of the WBG in Indonesia.
International accountability mechanisms are becoming an increasing factor in Indonesia’s
governance. Leadership of the Open Governance Partnership, adoption of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI), Reducing Emissions through Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+), as well as
the UN convention against Corruption (UNCAC) represent signiﬁcant steps in increasing the transparency
of the GoI’s commitment to good governance and an increased focus on monitoring. The World Bank will
support these eﬀorts as part of our governance engagement since they provide much needed support for
local institutions and communities.
The country governance program is organized around four pillars 1) increasing transparency and
efficiency in public financial management, 2) increasing the efficiency of public service delivery,
3) strengthening checks and balances, and 4) promoting open, transparent competition. This
cross cutting focus will be used to improve coordination and provide strategic focus. In the public ﬁnancial
management the focus is on eﬀective and transparent budget and tax systems (SPIRIT, SPAN, PINTAR). The
engagements around improved public service deliver focus on improved systems (including procurement)
and citizen feedback mechanisms (DAK, PNPM, BOS). In the checks and balances area the GAC team is
partnering with Indonesian institutions leading the ﬁght against corruption (e.g. the KPK) and engaging
with CSOs to reinforce these eﬀorts. To promote open and transparent competition the Bank is focused on
resources, including through EITI and REDD+, support for regulatory framework and reforms in the ﬁnancial
sector.
The Bank’s governance approach will build on the Indonesian Government’s Open Government
Partnership (OGP). The OGP should serve as a powerful governance tool to promote transparency, increase
civic participation, improve service delivery, reduce corruption, and harness new technologies to make
government more open, eﬀective, and accountable. In September 2012 Indonesia became co-chair of this
initiative. The Bank’s engagements on PFM and improved statistics are designed around data as a public good,
while community driven development, sub-national development, health, education, water and sanitation,
have substantial social accountability elements. The Bank will leverage the ongoing engagement to create
a space for citizen participation through the recently announced Global Partnership for Social Accountability
(GPSA).

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

43

IFC is promoting enhanced standards of governance in the private sector operations in the country.
Toward this goal, IFC launched a new corporate governance advisory services initiative in Indonesia in 2012.
The strategy will be to work with regulatory agencies to establish model corporate governance practices,
to work with selected private sector companies to enhance their performance, as well as to host events to
highlight enhanced corporate governance practices.
To safeguard against the risk of corruption in the Bank’s own operations, anti-corruption action
plans are required. First introduced in 2005, ACAPs are mandatory in project design and implementation. By
the end of 2011, the ACAPs traditional components (access to information, mitigation of collusion, mitigation
of fraud, participation of external parties in oversight, grievance handling, and sanction/remedies), are
gradually evolving. In particular increasing emphasis is being placed on improved reporting and oversight;
improved public complaint handling with Bank program eﬀorts serving as the basis for ministerial initiatives
(i.e. beyond the project).

44

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Foto: Matahati Productions

VI. Delivering the World Bank Group Program
This CPS is a continuation of the World Bank’s long-term engagement in Indonesia’s development.
It is focused around and consistent with the Government’s agenda. The Indonesia program is organized
around a set of engagement areas and delivered through a mix of lending and knowledge products often
supported by close collaboration with development partners.

Financing
IBRD financing services are expected for priority public programs averaging up to US$1.1 billion
annually over the CPS period, subject to macroeconomic performance, momentum on key reforms
and the quality of program implementation, and IBRD's lending capacity. Lending would continue to
decline as a share of Indonesia’s GDP and its overall ﬁnancing requirements. Actual lending amounts in any
particular year would be determined by borrower demand and can vary depending on overall exposure, but
would remain below the single borrower limit. The overall exposure would be determined not only by the level
of lending (commitments) but also by the speed of disbursements, choices regarding exposure management,
decisions on the possible extension of contingent ﬁnancing provided by the US$2 billion PERISAI DPL DDO,
and possible adjustments to lending volumes of proposed policy-based operations without aﬀecting the
integrity and objectives of the CPS.
IFC is expected to continue its strategy of helping Indonesia reduce the impact of climate change,
create high quality jobs, increase rural incomes and promote sustainable urbanization. This includes
programs to expand access to ﬁnancial services for the underserved population, establish resource eﬃcient
and globally competitive manufacturing, increase access to infrastructure, particularly in frontier areas,
strengthen commodity-based supply chains, such as agribusiness and forestry, and improve investment
climate. In these areas, IFC will seek investments of US$300-500 million per year, with advisory services of
about US$23-$25million annually. IFC Advisory services for PPP transactions will continue to provide support
as needed.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

45

MIGA has begun to increase its activities in support of Indonesia. MIGA's approach to operations in
Indonesia would be consistent with its global strategy focus, which focuses on conﬂict aﬀected and fragile
economies; South-South transactions; IDA countries; complex infrastructure and extractive industries
projects. There are currently two active projects in Indonesia, with guarantees totaling US$257 million, in
the power and mining sectors. Its Weda Bay Nickel operation supports a complex extractive investment that
carefully addresses social and environmental concerns. Moreover, it is an innovative eﬀort to engage mining
operations upstream during the exploration phase to better promote social beneﬁts and environmental
safeguards.

Collaboration with Development Partners
The Bank’s engagement is augmented by strong collaboration with development partners.
Delivering results in a country as large and diverse as Indonesia requires working with a broad range of
multilateral and bi-lateral donors, as well as NGOs. This includes co-ﬁnancing of investment and policy lending,
including active participation in policy dialogue, as well as donor-funded grant programs that run alongside
Bank ﬁnanced operations. Indeed, this collaboration has strengthened the Bank’s engagements across the
CPS. Most DPLs are co-ﬁnanced, as are several operations and a large number of ESW and TA are supported
by grants. As a critical component of the CPS business model, strategic use of trust funds increase the reach
of CPS objectives particularly as most of these funds are multi-year and thus provide, at times, a more stable
source of ﬁnancing than the Bank’s own budget. These collaborations are diﬀerent across the engagement
areas and depend on the nature of the donor relationship and needs of Government. Moreover, the Bank
remains pledged to the Jakarta Commitments, which provide a set of country-speciﬁc principles to enhance
alignment of ﬁnancial and advisory support in line with the Paris Declaration.

BOX 18:

TRUST FUNDS: A PLATFORM FOR RESULTS AND INNOVATION

A hallmark of the Indonesia program is the extent to which ﬁnancing for programs, projects, knowledge and
innovation have been ﬁnanced by non-conventional sources. Australia, the Netherlands, EC, US, UK and Canada
have been particularly generous contributors to Indonesia’s development in this regard. Donor support, largely
through country-speciﬁc trust funds, has allowed the Bank in Indonesia to leverage IBRD-ﬁnanced projects and
programs and scale up coverage to reach more people. Additionally, the Bank acts as a platform for donors
and GoI to work cooperatively to support experimental approaches across our engagement areas. This includes
cutting edge approaches to poverty monitoring, new ways of working with CSOs to reach marginalized groups,
and experimenting with technologies and partnering with the private sector to support schools and rural
infrastructure.
At the same time, as Indonesia evolves, so does the way that trust funds are used and governed. Where typically
the Bank acted as “Trustee”, GoI is increasingly interested in administering trust fund ﬁnancing itself, but looks to the
Bank for technical expertise in ﬁduciary requirements and implementation. Donors too are looking for evolving
governance models but without losing the Bank’s ﬁduciary oversight which provides conﬁdence that monies will
be well spent. Current discussions with GoI, donors and the Bank on REDD+, the US-ﬁnanced MCC (on MDG), and
disaster preparedness demonstrate that innovative structures and new roles for the Bank are possible. A successful
REDD+ (see Box 15) could set the direction of many other Bank interventions in Indonesia and elsewhere. Working
to fulﬁll the Government’s longer-term strategy for PNPM/PSF sustainability means that the structure and staﬃng
of PSF, one of Indonesia’s largest trust-funded programs, will evolve over the next several years with the Bank taking
an increasingly smaller role. The lessons from the successful Aceh and Nias MDF are helping to inform GoI and
governments around the world to prepare for disasters rather than only react when they hit. (See Annex 5 on Trust
Funds)

46

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Delivering the World Bank Group Program

Portfolio Management
The close alignment of the Partnership Strategy with Government priorities and programs and
more proactive and coordinated management, including for trust funds, has benefited portfolio
performance. The share of problem projects, which used to account for one-fourth of operations, has been
brought down to around 15 percent in recent years, and now compares favorably to the performance of
other large, middle-income IBRD borrowers. Projects at risk tend to be smaller, so the volume of commitments
at risk is less than 10 percent. Continued strong support will be provided to ensure compliance with Bank
ﬁduciary and safeguard policies. Lessons from ongoing projects are helping new projects ensure adequate
disbursements, better results on the ground, and ﬁduciary oversight.
The performance of trust funds has also benefited from a more coordinated approach to their
mobilization and management. All trust funds are now vetted to ensure alignment with country priorities
and integrated into the program’s overall ﬁnancial and human resource planning. Quality review processes
mirror those of Bank operations. Larger trust funds beneﬁt from being incorporated into the Bank’s general
operational management and portfolio reviews. (See Annex 4).
The Bank is responsive to the demand for higher performance standards in its project preparation
and portfolio management. Indonesia has access to a growing number of sources for meeting its
ﬁnancing and technical assistance needs, and the Bank must continuously challenge itself to stay relevant.
In response, the Bank is aiming at quicker response times in the preparation and implementation of
projects, more ﬂexibility in its lending program, simpliﬁcation of World Bank Group procedures, greater
alignment with the country’s own systems, and stronger tailoring of the analytical and advisory products to
the needs and timeframes of the Government. As part of the utilization of national procurement systems,
the Bank would explore quick win initiatives including advance procurement and web-based procurement
plan monitoring.

Sharing Global Development Solutions
Indonesia has assumed a growing role in promoting South-South Cooperation through peerto-peer knowledge exchange. Most recently, in July 2012, it hosted a High-level meeting "Towards
Country-led Knowledge Hubs" attended by over 300 senior participants from 46 countries. It has also
played a key role in securing the inclusion of “knowledge sharing” as one of nine pillars in the G20
Development Consensus. Moreover, it pledged a US$1.5 million contribution to the Bank’s South-South
Knowledge Exchange facility.
Indonesia’s leadership on South-South knowledge exchange is further demonstrated by its strong
roles as a provider and recipient of “how-to” development knowledge, often in collaboration with
donors or partnering countries. Indonesia has shared its expertise in, inter alia, agriculture, microﬁnance,
disaster management, and community driven development with states in Asia, Africa, and Latin America
and the Caribbean. Indonesian institutions have received knowledge through peer-to-peer exchanges
in agriculture, urban development, and other key ﬁelds. In addition, the Government has participated in
diverse multidirectional learning initiatives, including regional dialogues on aid eﬀectiveness and triangular
cooperation with ASEAN countries. JICA has been a major partner in ﬁnancing and supporting Indonesia’s
South-South agenda.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

47

Results Management Framework
The CPS seeks to leverage WBG activities in support of the Government’s development and reform
programs. While this approach renders the measurement of the direct impact of WBG activities even more
diﬃcult, it reinforces the objective of supporting Indonesia’s eﬀorts at policy and institutional transformation.
The appended results framework is furthermore designed to reﬂect the ﬂexibility inherent in the CPS’
approach: the variations across diﬀerent engagements in the framework are indicative of the diﬀerent stages
of maturity, with some partnerships and programs being well advanced with more clearly deﬁnable and
measurable targets, while others are at relatively early stages. The results framework will be monitored and
updated periodically. The dialogue with BAPPENAS around program results would be broadened to include
other key partners including the MoF. These assessments will serve as guidelines for any necessary course
corrections and feed into the CPS Progress Report scheduled for Board presentation in FY14.

Managing for Risks
Indonesia remains vulnerable to economic shocks. Indonesia's growth performance has been resilient to
recent global economic uncertainty, its economic fundamentals remain solid and the Government is in a better
position to address economic risks than in the past. Nonetheless, the risk of external economic shocks remains.
Indonesia’s growth over the past three years has been driven by its export performance. A global growth and
trade slow-down would translate into lower Indonesian growth as direct exports to aﬀected markets fall, indirect
exports (commodities) to the region fall and international markets remain volatile. Depending on the magnitude
and duration of the slowdown, this could also slow job creation in Indonesia. Another potential risk could come
from a sudden reversal of ﬁnancial assets held in the Indonesian stock and bond markets, resulting in exchange
rate volatility and inﬂation. Increasing food prices would particularly hurt the poor.
Natural disasters can inflict significant economic and social costs. Indonesia remains vulnerable to a
broad range of disruptive natural disasters, including earthquakes, volcano eruptions and ﬂooding. Indonesia's
experience has contributed to greater disaster preparedness over time; and it is considering a CAT-DDO to
help maintain expenditures in case of a natural catastrophe.
A comfortable economic outlook may engender a sense of complacency and limit the scope for
reforms. Particularly in the run-up to the 2014 elections political parties may be less willing to pursuing
diﬃcult reforms that could be unpopular. Vested interests may seek shelter from competitive pressures under
the mantle of economic nationalism. At the same time, elections will also put pressure on political leaders to
deliver results, especially in areas such as infrastructure development, governance reform, and the investment
climate. During the transition to a new administration, the Bank would use the DPR and sector engagements
notes as a basis for dialogue.
Notwithstanding the ongoing peace-building process in Aceh and the maintenance of political
stability throughout the archipelago, tensions could resurface and regional disparities could be
accompanied by local conflicts. While these do not compare with countries that are fragile and conﬂict
aﬀected, the past year has seen an increase in the number of instances of violence and intolerance, primarily
on Java, which have highlighted the importance of an unambiguous government stance to uphold laws and
protect minorities.
Capacity to develop and implement complex institutional reforms, particularly at the local level,
may be undermined by lack of coordination as well as entrenched organizational behaviors. To help
address some of these implementation risks, the CPS is designed around institution-building which oﬀers the
Bank's convening services, technical assistance and analytic support for the design and implementation of the
government’s own reforms.

48

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Governance and corruption risks remain significant. Through its support for government-led programs
there may be a risk of an impact on the Bank’s reputation, as for IFC and MIGA through their choices of
business partners. To mitigate this risk, the World Bank Group will only engage where it has conﬁdence in
its counterparts, where the authorities are committed to reform, where eﬀective anti-corruption measures
exist, and where it can build long-standing partnerships. As part of its engagement, the World Bank Group
supports measures to strengthen accountability and build ﬁduciary capacity in counterparts. For the Bank's
own portfolio, strong governance and anti-corruption action plans and close supervision remain important,
including for trust-funded activities.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

49

50

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Photo: Poriaman Sitanggang

Attachments

52

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Annex 1:
Indonesia CPS FY13-15 Results Matrix
Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Pro-Growth - Promoting Prosperity
Connectivity
Accelerate growth and
enhance equity through
domestic connectivity

Lack of policy coordination
to implement policy
reforms in the connectivity
agenda
Regulatory barriers that
inhibit better provision of
connectivity services
Ineﬃcient use of public
ﬁnance and management
practice for provision of
connectivity infrastructure
Private sector participation
not being leveraged for
the agenda of growth and
connectivity

1. Improved ranking of
Indonesia’s Logistics
Performance Index.
Baseline: in 2012
Indonesia ranked at 59

- Introduction of a set
of domestic logistics
indicators for monitoring
progress in logistics
policy reform

2. Increase access for
broadband internet
services for population.
Baseline: 5 percent in
2011
Target: 30 percent by
2015

- Eﬀective functioning of
the Connectivity Working
Group and National
Logistics Team

3. Reduced cost and time
to export and import, as
indicated in the Doing
Business Survey
Baseline: 2012: Export:
17 days, US$644 per
container; Import:
27 days, US$660 per
container

- Increased private sector
participation in logistics
and telecom/ IT services

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

- Improved services in
domestic cargo shipping

Financing: Connectivity
DPLs, IFC investments in
private sector projects to
enhance connectivity (i.e. in
areas of logistics, telecom,
ﬁnancial infrastructure)
Knowledge: analytic and
advisory work funded
by AUSAID and MDFTIC
(Dutch, Swiss, and USAID);
ESW on logistics and trade
facilitation; policy notes on
logistics, regulatory reform,
managing openness;
facilitate knowledge
sharing through workshops
and ﬁeld visits; engage local
think-tank, universities and
private sector organizations
to participate in policy
dialogue; Development
Policy Review

53

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Competitiveness
Enhance competitiveness
through improved
environment, including
open, competitive,
sustainable and inclusive
markets for business
to expand and increase
productivity

54

Bottlenecks and
underdeveloped in
trade logistics are
hurting proﬁtability
and undermining ﬁrms’
productivity; complex
regulatory environment
inhibits private sector
investment; time
consuming and costly
procedures to establish
companies, and clear
imports; weak coordination
among government
institutions for investment
policy; pressure to use
protectionist measures to
protect domestic vested
interest; private sector
companies are undertaking
projects which will not
be cost-competitive
versus global competition
in their target markets;
policy decisions are taken
without suﬃcient analysis
of alternatives and of
their costs and beneﬁts
inadequate infrastructure
and incentive regime have
limited capacity and have
not encouraged innovation
in private sector.

1. Policy framework
adopted to improve
competitiveness through
better trade logistics,
Baseline: Score in 2012
Logistics Performance
Indicators (LPI) for
logistics quality
competence of 2.85 for
border management
of 2.53,
Target: Improved 2014
LPI score on logistics
competence of 3.00 and
border management
of 2.7, National Single
Window acting as
the single reference
for cross-border trade
and introduction of
single sign-on for all
participating agencies
2. Improved regulatory
environment,
interagency coordination,
and consultative
process in business
environment that aﬀect
competitiveness of
Indonesia’s private sector,
facilitate innovation and
investment facilitation
and services.
Baseline: 50 days to start
a company; 570 days
to enforce contract;
weak consultative
processes prior to
issuance of regulations;
uncoordinated
investment policy; weak
investor inquiry handling
Targets: 30 days to start
a company; less than
500 days to enforce
contract; coordinated
investment policy and
improved transparency
in regulatory making;
improved performance of
investor inquiry handling

- Coordinated
implementation of
the National Logistics
Blueprint
- Development of Standard
Operation Procedure
and improvement of
the capacity of BKPM
(Investment Coordinating
Board) Investor Relation
Unit to handle investor
inquiries
- Development of the legal
framework to streamline
current procedures and
reduce delays in small
claim resolution
- An implementation plan
for reforms to reduce the
cost of starting a business
is adopted
- Strengthened
interagency coordination
and public consultation
around business
regulatory process.
- IFC supporting
companies which are
cost-competitive in the
exports markets or are
cost competitive with
imports in domestic
markets

Connectivity DPLs;
Financial Sector and
Investment Climate Reform
And Modernization (FIRM)
DPL; IFC supporting
companies which are
cost-competitive in the
exports markets or are cost
competitive with imports in
domestic markets
Knowledge: AAA
supported by MDFTIC
to drive policy reforms
in logistics and trade
facilitation, enhance
reform agenda to improve
the business regulatory
environment; IFC Advisory
Services – Investment
Climate Program (subnational Doing Business;
corporate governance;
ﬁnancial infrastructure)
Innovation, Investment
Generation Technology, and
Entrepreneurship; Report
and policy dialogue on
Indonesia’s manufacturing
sector; Report and policy
dialogue on managing
openness; Development
Policy Review

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

1. Maintain ﬁnancial sector
stability, deepened
ﬁnancial sector and
strengthened private
sector through:
improved regulatory and
supervisory frameworks;
maintained soundness of
banking sector.
Baseline: Key ﬁnancial
ratios of banks (Capital
Adequacy Ratio (CAR),
Non Performing Loan
ratio (NPL), Net Interest
Margin (NIM) are sound
and LDR (Loan to Deposit
Ratio) is 75% ( Dec. 2011);
Targets: Banking ﬁnancial
indicators remain sound
and LDR at minimum
80%;

- Bank ﬁnancial ratios
remain sound: CAR
higher than 8%, NPLs do
not exceed 5%

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Financial Sector
Promote the development
of a stable, eﬃcient and
inclusive ﬁnancial sector in
Indonesia in order to foster
accelerated economic
growth, reduce poverty
and strengthen economic
competitiveness on a
sustainable basis.

Banks intermediation has
improved but it is still low
to the size of economy;
Bank loans need to
increase further to support
economic growth
Non-Bank Financial
Institution (NBFI) assets
need to growth further
to increase eﬃciency and
reduce risk in ﬁnancial
sector and create longterm domestic ﬁnancial
resources/savings
Persistent issues of
limited access to ﬁnance
for underserved groups
(MSMEs and households)
Indonesia’s new Financial
Services Authority( OJK)
must function eﬀectively
as the integrated ﬁnancial
sector authority; the
transition period has to be
managed properly
The ﬁnancial safety net
framework and legal
basis for ﬁnancial crisis
management need to be
strengthened;
Limited local infrastructure
ﬁnancing capacity

2. Growing capital market
and NBFI and a higher
access to formal ﬁnancial
services by the MicroSMEs and underserved
populations
Baseline: 41% of
households have access
to bank accounts;
banking loan to SMEs is
50% (2011), disbursed
KUR (credit program for
SME) amounted to IDR 63
trillion (2011)
Targets: Bank loans to
SME continue to grow
and are maintained at
50% of total bank loans;
proportion of households
with savings account
increased

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

- Bank lending increasing
by twice GDP growth rate
annually; LDR remains at
minimum 80%
- NBFI continues growing
and maintains 20%
share of ﬁnancial assets;
amount of funds raised
from equity and bonds
market increases annually
- Continued increase
of KUR annual
disbursement; increased
in account holders of
Tabunganku ( “no frills”
basic savings account
product)
- OJK is operational and the
Financial System Stability
Coordination Forum is
functioning.
- Infrastructure Finance
Facility is providing
long term ﬁnancing for
infrastructure projects

Financing: FIRM DPL;IFC
investments in banks,
insurance companies, NBFIs
and private equity funds.
Expanding support to
mid-sized banks that mostly
serve the SME market.
Knowledge: Financial
Sector Policy dialogues;
Financial Sector
Assessment Program
(FSAP); Microinsurance
Marketplace; Review
on KUR (Kredit Usaha
Rakyat); Deposit Insurance
Company (LPS); Improving
access to Financial
Services in Indonesia
Empowering Female
Migrant Workers; support
to establish OJK; Fiscal
Policy Oﬃce on developing
a crisis management
protocol ; Saving and
Loan Cooperatives; SME
access to Islamic Finance;
Capacity building of
Secretariat of Financial
System Stability Forum; IFC
Advisory Services – Access
to Finance Program in
the areas of SME banking
(women in business),
mobile banking, and
housing micro ﬁnance,
as well as in Investment
Climate Program including
ongoing support to Credit
Bureau and Moveable
Collateral registry.

55

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Local Government
Strengthen local
government institutions
to improve accountability
and increase the level and
of impact public spending
on service delivery and
support metropolitan areas
and medium-sized cities to
improve infrastructure

Insuﬃcient coordination
and leadership of the
decentralization agenda at
the centrallevel; a limited
and unclear role for the
provinces
A ﬁscal decentralization
framework that does
not provide appropriate
incentives for increased and
higher quality spending
Weak capacity of local
governments (LG) to
manage assets and service
delivery
An inadequate framework
for and insuﬃcient
ﬁnancing of multi-year
large scale infrastructure
programs

1. Improved ﬁduciary,
social and environmental
management as well as
technical performance
of LGs in the delivery of
basic services ﬁnanced
using DAK transfers.

- PEACH transparency
and accountability
components enhanced
and expanded

2. Improved capacity of
research institutions,
media and CSOs to
assess and monitor subnational PFM (PEACH):
enhanced capacity of
local institutions to
analyze and monitor
public expenditure and
PFM and to demand
better local government
performance in these
areas

- Output based
disbursement
approach pioneered
under the LGDP/DAK
Reimbursement

1. Enhanced Government
ability to meet its
ﬁnancing needs and
maintain critical public
expenditures, as
measured by continued
access to markets, and
level of maintenance and
capital expenditures.

- Indonesia maintains
continued access
to market ﬁnancing
(meeting the targets in its
2012 Financing Plan)

- PEACH expanded to
additional provinces

- Government ﬁnancing
and technical
assistance framework
for engagement with
metropolitan areas in
place

Financing: Local
Government and
Decentralization Project
(DAK) I&II; Urban Sector
Development and Reform
Project (USDRP)
Knowledge: Report on
Urban Agglomerations;
PEACH PERs; PEACH PFM
Technical Assistance and
Capacity Building activities;
Sulawesi Development
Diagnostic Report;
Subnational Workshops
on Gender responsive
Budgeting and Planning
IFC Advisory services
for Sub-National Doing
Business reforms

Lack of coordination in
planning, management
and investment at
the metropolitan and
regional in larger urban
agglomerations

Macroeconomic
and Fiscal
Management
Strengthen central
government capacity for
implementing contingency
ﬁnancing, crisis
management and quality
evidence-based macro and
ﬁscal policy making and

Indonesia’s ﬁscal ﬁnancing
position remains vulnerable
to changes in investor
sentiment.
Despite Indonesia’s
strong recent economic
performance, signiﬁcant
challenges in ﬁscal and
macro policy remain in
terms of the allocation of
spending (with subsidies
accounting for almost
one quarter of central
government spending in
the proposed 2013 Budget)
and its eﬃciency

2. Budget allocations
informed by monitoring
and evaluation. Increase
in the number of line
ministries and agencies
reporting through BRISA
(the monitoring and
evaluation system) from a
baseline of zero in FY11.

- In the event of a crisis
the Government is able
to use provisions in the
Budget Laws to revise
expenditures and/
or ﬁnancing sources
under streamlined
parliamentary approval
process
- Development and
usage of medium-term
forecasting tools which
integrate macro and ﬁscal
outlooks

Financing: Program for
Economic Resilience,
Investment and Social
Assistance in Indonesia
(PERISAI); INSTANSI DPLs;
STATCAP-CERDAS
Knowledge: Development
Policy Review; Support
for EnhancedMacro and
Fiscal Policy Analysis
institutional strengthening
program; Analytical and
Capacity Support to
Improve Expenditure and
Revenue Policy including
public expenditure review
analysis; resource revenues
policy and administration
technical assistance;
Indonesia Economic
Quarterly report

- Improved mechanisms
for policy based review
and reallocation of
budgetary spending

56

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Strengthening the
Public Sector
Strengthen central
government institutions
and systems to enhance
public ﬁnancial
management and
governance to increase
the development impact
of priority budget
expenditures.

The budget system is
input-based, excessively
detailed and inﬂexible and
strictly annual, hampering
implementation of multiyear projects
Controls in budget
execution processes are
generally inadequate and
could jeopardize gains from
improvements made in
other areas of PFM
The public procurement
system is deﬁcient as is the
capacity of procurement
practitioners; collusion and
corrupt practices in the
bidding process continue
to exist, causing leakages
and losses in the system
Increasing demand for
improved quality, timeliness
and responsiveness of data
availability are hampered
by poor ICT infrastructure
and data management
and ineﬃcient business
processes

1. Strengthened multi-year
perspective in ﬁscal
planning, expenditure
policy and budgeting
Baseline: PEFA PI-12 rating
C+ in 2011
Target: improve PEFA
PI-12 rating to at least a
B+ by 2015
2. Number of line ministries
receiving unqualiﬁed
opinions for their annual
ﬁnancial statements:
Baseline: 63% of Ministries
and Agencies in Financial
Statement.
Target: 85% of Ministries
and Agencies in Financial
Statement for FY2013
3. Implement new Financial
Management Information
System in all 177 Treasury
Local Oﬃces

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

- Increased correlation
between forward
estimates and annual
budgets
- Professional association
of internal auditors and
drafts of (a) code of ethics
and (b) internal audit
standards established
- New regulations for
adoption of accrual
based accounting
policies and chart of
accounts issued

Financing: INSTANSI
DPLs; Management and
Revenue Administration
Project (GFMRAP);
Project for Indonesia Tax
Administration Reform
(PINTAR); Scholarships
Program for Strengthening
Reforming Institutions
Project (SPIRIT); STATCAPCERDAS
Knowledge: Public
Financial Management
(PFM) Multi Donor Trust
Fund (PFM MDTF);

- Single public ﬁnancial
management
information system for
national government
provides reliable, timely
information on all stages
of budget execution,
including commitments,
in readiness for move
to accrual accounting
in 2015

57

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

WBG Modes of
Engagement

PRO-JOBS – Enhancing Skills and Technology, and Improving Social Protection
Education
Provide good quality
education to all Indonesians
and to produce a smart
and competitive workforce.
Enhance research and
development, science and
technology

Despite signiﬁcant
increases in education
spending the quality of
education remains low
Low teacher competency
Ineﬃcient allocation of
public education spending
Weak management of
education at the district
and school level under
incomplete decentralization
framework
Weak links between
education sector and
labor market including skill
mismatches and weak ﬁrm
based training
Indonesia ranks poorly
on competitiveness and
knowledge economy
indices
Research and Development
(R&D) outputs remain low
compared to other

1. Improved education
quality and performance
of teachers; Increased
number of basic
education teachers meets
academic qualiﬁcation
mandated by the Teacher
Law
Baseline (2010): 41% of
teachers in primary and
junior secondary schools
hold S1 degree or more.
Target: 70% of primary
and junior secondary
school teachers hold S1
degree or more.
2. Improved public R&D
human resource capacity.
Target:Masters or PhD
degree holders in public
research institutes(LPNK)
increases from 15% to
17% LPNK institutional
assessments completed
and reform milestones
set

- Increase in the number
of pre-service teacher
training programs
accredited
- Nationwide
implementation of
revised policies, plans
and procedures for
continuing education
and career development
of teachers
- Development of a skills
training fund supported
by government and the
private sector
- Guidelines for district
level performance and
equity based school
grants developed
- Staﬃng standards for
basic education schools
revised
- Strengthened capacity
of RISTEK management
to enhance the quality
and relevance of strategic
industry-research
consortium funding
- A new competitive
research funding system
for RISTEK designed

58

Financing: BOS-KITA II,
BERMUTU; Indonesia
Higher Education for
Relevance and Eﬃciency
(IMHERE); Research and
Innovation in Science and
Technology Project (RISET);
Sustainable Management
of Agricultural Research and
Technology Dissemination
Project (SMARTD)
Knowledge: The Role
of Politics and Evidenced
Based Policy Making: The
Case of Teacher Reform
ing Indonesia; Education
PER; Indonesian School
Grants Program Review;
Local Governance Capacity
Assessment Survey; Survey
Video Study; Projections
and assessment of
skills demand; Higher
education studies on
funding modalities and
labor market linkages,
Infrastructure assessment,
Accreditation and quality
assurance and equity and
access to higher education;
TA on skills development
fund; Support for 2015
ﬁve year development;
Strengthening Public
Financing of Indonesia’s
Knowledge Sector; Building
Innovation Capacity in
Clean Energy in Indonesia.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Social Insurance
Provide universal coverage
of social insurance to
protect workers and
the poor from adverse
life events or external
shocks through the ﬁve
national social insurance
(SI) programs outlined in
the SJSN (national social
security system) Law and
the BPJS (national social
security administrators)
Law, covering all formal and
informal sector workers.

Only 50% of the population
currently has health
insurance and only about
12% of the population has
any kind of pension, old
age savings, death beneﬁt
or work accident insurance.
Complexity of assuring
ﬁscal sustainability
including proper
investment of program
assets

1. Conversion of Jamsostek
to a not-for-proﬁt
institution that can
administer the SJSN
pension and old age
savings programs
2. Expand membership and
improve contribution
collection from the
formal and informal
sectors.

Need to quickly transform
the legal structure and
business processes of the
administrators

- Roadmap covering
SJSN pension and old
age savings programs
completed
- Design and ﬁnancing
strategy, including
investment policy, for
SJSN pension and old age
savings plans ﬁnalized
- Legal and organizational
transformation of
Jamsostek to BPJS
Employment completed
- Membership expansion
and contribution
collection strategy
completed

Complexity of expanding
membership and collecting
contributions from the
formal and informal sectors
and properly tracking those
contributions over time

- BPJS Employment begins
administration of current
PT Jamsostek beneﬁt
programs for the current
covered group

Lack of government
capacity and experience
with managing the risks of
SI programs.

Knowledge: Advisory
services to Bappenas, DJSN
(national social security
council), the Ministry of
Labor, the Ministry of
Finance and others
Pension and old age
savings roadmap
Strategy and background
papers on various aspects
of the design, ﬁnancing
and administration of
pension and old age
savings programs,
including Jamsostek
institutional transformation,
membership expansion
and contribution collection
Background papers on
international experience
in various aspects of SJSN
implementation
Computer modeling and
analysis of program design
alternatives and costs;
Development of Policy
Notes on various aspects
of SJSN

Pro-Poor – Promoting Communities, Protecting the Vulnerable and Improving Health Outcomes
Poverty Targeting
Reduce absolute poverty
and improve income
distribution through social
protection that is based
on the family, community
empowerment and
expansion of economic
opportunities of the low
income population. From
12% poverty in 2012,
Government is targeting for
single digits by 2014.

Around 110 million people
still live under US$2 a day
(Bank estimate); large
number of urban and
rural poor due to lack of
income and inadequate
productive employment
opportunities; lack of
quality service delivery
to poor people; access to
early childhood education
remains low, particularly
for the poor; wide regional
disparities (particularly,
eastern provinces); poor are
vulnerable to shocks such
as food price increases,
natural disasters

1. National shock
monitoring system
developed and
operational.
2. Poverty programs
management units using
the national registry of
poor and vulnerable
households to identify
beneﬁciaries.
Target: 4 programs by
2015
3. Increased participation in
ECED services particularly
for the poor
Baseline (2010): 47% of
4-6 year olds enrolled
in ECED
Target: 75%

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

- Design and protocols for
shock monitoring system
are developed
- Data sharing agreements
are in place
- Memoranda of
Understanding (MOUs) in
place with implementing
agencies agreeing to use
the national registry
- Conditional cash transfer
program (PKH) expansion
strategy is approved
Number of poor
households receiving
conditional cash transfers
increased from 720,000
households (2010)

Financing: INSTANSI DPL;
ECED STATCAP-CERDAS
Knowledge: AAA
supporting Household
shock monitoring
and response project;
integration of poverty
reduction programs;
social assistance reform;
PNPM Rural Economic
Impact Simulation; Village
Infrastructure Census;
Incidence of Beneﬁts of
Households

59

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Community
Development
Improved local-level
(sub-districts and villages)
governance, quality of
service delivery and
socio-economic conditions
in rural areas through
wider implementation of
poverty reduction and
community empowerment
programs and the provision
of investment resources
to support proposals
developed by communities,
using a participatory
planning process.
Enhance access to health
and education services
among the poor

Community Development
through the PNPM program
has been expanded to
reach over 60,000 villages.
Impact evaluation shows it
to be an eﬀective program,
but it needs to consolidate
program management,
enhance participation,
particularly by women and
marginalized groups.

1. 2.5m community
members participate
directly in meetings;
80% beneﬁciaries feel
that project investments
reﬂected their needs;
>50% of poorest
communities involved in
planning and decisionmaking meetings; 35%
of villages provided
feedback on health and
education services)
2. Women actively involved
in decision-making
(target: 50% of women
in planning/decisionmaking meetings; 30%
of women in community
oversight teams)

- CSOs engaged in
improving access to
services, livelihoods and
rights of marginalized
groups (target: 90 CSOs)
- Increasing provision of
holistic and integrated
ECED services for the
poor

Financing: PNPM Rural
II-IV; PSF MDTF; JSDF; KDP
Sulawesi; Justice for the
Poor; CPDA
Knowledge: PNPM
Rural Economic Impact
Simulation; Village
Infrastructure Census;
Incidence of Beneﬁts
of Households; Local
Level Institutions III;
Community Management
of Development Portfolio;
Revolving Loan Fund
Study; Governance Review;
Integrated MIS for PNPM;
TA to PokjaPengendali,
Bappenas, KPDT; TA to Aceh
Local Government; Papua
analytical work; PNPM Rural
Sentinel

3. Improved community
access to and utilization
of health and education
services in the targeted
areas.
Targets: >80% of pregnant
women receiving 4
prenatal care visit; 80%
of children under 5
weighed monthly; 50%
of pregnant women
attending nutrition
counseling session; 50%
of caregivers of children
under 2 attending
nutrition counseling
session; 70% junior

60

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Food Security and
Rural Development
Increase food security and
continue therevitalization
of agriculture to enhance
self-reliance in
food, increase
thecompetitiveness of
agricultural products,
increase the income level
of farmers, and conserve
environment and natural
resources
Reduce dependence on
imports for staple foods
while diversifying food
consumption
Improve income of
smallholders and expand
opportunities for nonfarm
income activities.

The policy of rice selfsuﬃciency limits the
amount of resources
available for farm
diversiﬁcation and
agricultural development
systems.
Limited access to
technology and marketing
services due to weak
capacity of local and
national government R&D
and extension services
prevents the emergence
of viable agribusiness
enterprises and farm
diversiﬁcation.
Commodities are exported
with limited domestic
value addition and issues of
quality, market positioning,
and competitiveness in the
value chains persist.
Mechanisms to promote
improved service provision
and planning in irrigation
and water resources
management not yet
operational.

1. Modernized client
and market oriented
marketing and extension
services accessible by
smallholders.
Baseline: less than
10% of farmers access
technology and market
information through ICT.
2. Increased value addition
in smallholder-based
agricultural export value
chains (e.g. coﬀee, cocoa,
and tea) coupled with
higher productivity and
more eﬃcient marketing
systems.
Baseline: Regulatory and
policy framework of value
chains of smallholderbased exportable
commodities is weak
with low capacity of
support systems.
3. Improved water
resource and irrigation
and planning
and coordination
mechanisms established.
Target: Water security
improved in at least 50
irrigation Districts.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

- 10% of IAARD’s research
and management staﬀ
undertakes advanced
training in accredited
foreign institutions
- MoT launches Action
Plans for enhancing
the sustainability and
competitiveness of at
least one small-holder
based beverage crop (e.g.
coﬀee, cocoa, or tea)
- The Government issues
a service oriented
irrigation policy and
establishes a concept
for modernization of
irrigation management.

Financing: Farmer
Empowerment through
Agricultural Technology
and Information (FEATI)
Sustainable Management
of Agricultural Research and
Technology Dissemination
Project (SMART-D); Water
Resources and Irrigation
Sector Mgmt; Dam
Operational Improvement;
IFC investments in
agribusiness companies
with a view to enhance
food security or to provide
sustainable livelihoods to
poor farmers
Knowledge: TA on
Food Security to MoA;
TA to the MoPW on
irrigation management
modernization and policy
development IFC advisory
services work in sustainable
palm oil to improve
sustainable livelihoods for
outgrowers

61

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

1. Quality assurance policies
governing the education
of health professionals
with establishment of
independent National
Accreditation Agency,
and National Agency
for Competency;
accreditation of 7 health
professional schools.

- Comprehensive analysis
of supply side availability
and readiness.

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Health Outcomes
Improved population
health outcomes, including
improvements in life
expectancy and reductions
in maternal mortality and
malnutrition to meet MDG
targets by 2015
Access to safe water and
sanitation is a major factor
in the health and overall
welfare of Indonesians and
expanding coverage is a
priority

High out-of-pocket
spending for health.
Low and variable levels,
distribution and supply of
health services, especially in
poor and rural areas.
Rising HIV/AIDS epidemic,
especially in select
provinces
Slow reduction in maternal
mortality, despite relatively
high levels of skilled
birth attendance and
institutional deliveries

2. 7 million people provided
with piped water supply
and 3.4 million people
provided with improved
sanitation under
PAMSIMAS

- Study of human resources
for health (HRH) policies
completed
- Analysis of Jampersal /
Jamkesmas policies to
achieve UHC of maternal
health care.
- Second Integrated
Biological and Behavioral
Survey (IBBS) in Papua
provinces.

Chronic malnutrition and
stunting rates

- Economic analysis of HIV/
AIDS programs

Access to safe water has
stagnated since 2001 at less
than half the population, in
particular urban coverage
from 60 percent to about
50 percent by 2009

- Analysis of multisectoral
determinants of double
burden of malnutrition
(DBM).

Access to sanitary facilities
signiﬁcantly lower than
other comparable countries
in the region

- Financing facility
established to support
PDAM technical
assistance and
investments
- National expansion of
the total sanitation and
sanitation marketing
(TSSM) programmatic
approach to sanitation
into a national program
targeting 20,000 villages

62

Financing: Health
Professionals Education
Quality; Solid Waste
Improvement in Regional
and Metropolitan Cities;
Indonesia Water and
Sanitation Investment;
PAMSIMAS; Urban Water
Supply & Sanitation
TF; GPOBA Jakarta and
Surabaya ; WASAP;
IFCInvestments in private
sector water and sanitation
companies
Knowledge: Policy
dialogue on universal
health coverage; supply
side availability and
readiness assessment;
HRH study; HIV/AIDS IBBS
survey; HIV/AIDS economic
analysis; DBM analysis.
Total Sanitation and
Sanitation Marketing, Urban
Wastewater Management;
Surabaya water policy
advice; WASAP; Water
and Sanitation Financing
Program; Political Economy
of Water Tariﬀs; Assessment
for Water Financing Facility;
Lampung water project
TAs.IFC advisory services
for structuring water sector
PPP projects

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Pro-Green – Ensuring Sustainable Development and Improving Disaster Resilience
Environment,
Natural Resources
and Climate
Change
Conservation and
utilization of the natural
environment that supports
sustainableeconomic
growth and increased
welfare of the people,
accompanied by the
control andmanagement
of disaster risks, in order to
prepare for the expected
impacts of climate change.
GHG emission reduction of
26% by 2020.
Promote renewable
energy sources as part of a
sustainable

Deforestation, peat burning,
habitat loss; globally
signiﬁcant emissions:
forests and land use
change.
Fragmented, overlapping
and decentralized land use
authority hampers ability
to manage forest and peat
lands

1. Fund for REDD
established with legal,
technical and managerial
capacity to support
and ﬁnance Indonesia’s
National REDD+ Strategy
2. Phase III of COREMAP
providing expanded
support for coral and
marine protection.

Climate change: threat to
development, especially
the poor; vulnerability
in agriculture, water
management, health,
preparedness, resilience
Great renewable energy
potential relatively
untapped due to need
for improved pricing
and investment climate
incentives
Power sector is fastest
growing source of
emissions, mainly from coal
based power generation
Lack of coordination of
policies and incentives
for environmental
improvement and climate
change mitigation; weak
economic incentives; policy
distortions
Limited incentives for
ﬁrms to develop forest
plantation and climate
change mitigation program
on degraded grasslands
and to apply best practices
because of high costs
and risks, as well as lack of
knowledge and experience
in blending forest-based
climate change mitigation
and commercial forestry
investment

- Green Growth Support
Facility established
- Increased ﬁnancing for
terrestrial biodiversity
- Geothermal investments
under implementation

Financing: Chiller
Energy Eﬃciency Project,
HCFC Phase Out Plan;
Geothermal investment
projects; Halmahera
Conservation Project;
COREMAP III, Sumatra
Habitat Conservation with
GEF; IFCInvestments in
clean energy, Sustainable
Energy Finance – either
directly by IFC or through
intermediaries; and
sustainable forestry/
agribusiness projects
Knowledge: Policy
dialogue and TA on
green economy issues;
Green Growth Support
Facility; AAA on ﬁsheries
management and coral/
marine ecosystem values;
Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility; Forest Investment
Program, Indonesia Forest
and Climate Trust Fund;
AAA on Beneﬁt Sharing,
Drivers of Deforestation;
Support UKP4 on REDD/
FREDDI; program support
for REDD Agency and
Financing Mechanism;
Inputs to ongoing
Partnership for Market
Readiness, GEF V pipeline;
policy dialogue and TA;
Carbon ﬁnance, landﬁll
gas, and Persistent Organic
Pollutants control (POPs)
Awareness and Capacity
Building; GTI Support; AAA
on land , mapping, tenure,
and customary land Rights
Outreach to Civil
Society &Customary
Peoples,National
Indigenous Peoples’
Alliance of the Archipelago
(AMAN) JSDF Grant;
Capacity building with
CSOs;
IFC advisory services in
areas of clean energy
development, sustainable
energy ﬁnance, green
banking, sustainable
forestry/ agribusiness, green
building development etc.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

63

Indonesia’s
Longer-term
Objectives

Issues and
Obstacles

Development
Results To Which
the WBG Will
Contribute

Intermediate
Indicative
Development
Milestones

WBG Modes of
Engagement

Disaster Risk
Management
Enhance capabilities
to improve disaster
risk preparedness,
mitigation measures, and
post-disaster recovery
and reconstruction
responsiveness to
strengthen sustainability

Duplication of eﬀorts
due to the plethora of
development partners in
Disaster Risk Reduction
(DRR); new Disaster
Management Agency
structure may not have the
capacity to mainstream
DRR

1. Create evidence-based
examples of practical and
concrete disaster and
climate risk reduction
and adaptation measures
(e.g., safer schools,
resilient villages and
urban wards with DRR
plan and investment
program) that can be
scaled up and replicated
nationally
2. Community-based
settlement reconstruction
incorporated as a
Government program

64

- Mainstreaming
adaptation and
resilience issues into
urban development,
community driven
development programs,
water and waste
management programs,
agricultural and rural
development programs
- GoI led disaster
fund (IMDFF-DR) as
new mechanism to
institutionalize donor
support

Financing: Multi Donor
Fund for Aceh and Nias
(MDF), Java Reconstruction
Fund (JRF), PNPM Support
Facility (PSF) in support
of disaster recovery in
Aceh/Nias, Yogyakarta
and Central Java; Zero
Contingent and Disaster
Mitigation Components in
WINRIP and PNPM Urban III
Knowledge: GFDRR
National risk assessment
study/mapping as the
basis for GoI’s National
Disaster Management
Plan 2009-2014 and
National Action Plan for
DRR 2009-2014.;Indonesia
Disaster Risk Financing
Study and policy dialogue,
Capacity Building module
on PDNA and Post Disaster
Recovery; IFC Advisory
services for Global Index
Insurance products

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Annex 2:
Gender Equity
Recent Progress & Challenges
Indonesia has successfully developed the necessary legal framework for addressing gender
inequality concerns and has experienced an improvement in narrowing the gender gap in some
important areas such as endowment, opportunities, and voice and agency. Gender parity has been
achieved in all levels of education. Maternal health has signiﬁcantly improved. There are no pronounced
gender disparities in infant and under ﬁve mortality rates as well as other health outcomes. Women labor
participation rates continue to increase with highly educated women enjoying better returns on their
education than men. Political representation of women in national parliament and nearly all district and
city legislatures has also increased. Indonesia has also ratiﬁed important international conventions and has
produced a signiﬁcant amount of legislations on gender equality such as the anti-domestic violence act,
gender equality in development, and the general election law as well as the national strategy for enhancing
access to justice. A strong political commitment on gender equality has also outlined in the Medium Term
National Plan for 2010-14 (RPJMN). Indonesia is one of a few countries that assigned a dedicated ministry for
women’s empowerment and child protection.
However, challenges remain especially in maternal mortality, political representation at the
national and sub-national level, access to justice, and voice and agency at community level.
Indonesia continues to face challenges in Maternal Mortality Rate (228 per 100,000 births in 2010), HIV/AIDS
(Indonesia has the fastest growth of AIDS epidemic in Asia), as well as stunting and wasting. Gaps in access to
economic opportunities remain large. For instance, female labor market participation remains at around 50%
compared to 80% for men; the gender-wage gap is among the widest in EAP countries; female-led enterprises
tend to be smaller, more precarious, less capital-intensive and less productive with limited access to ﬁnance;
women constitute nearly 80% of Indonesia’s cross-border migrant workers with often limited access to
ﬁnancial services and exposure to exploitation and other sorts of human rights violation. Other areas where
Indonesia is lagging behind include access to legal justice, political representation and participation to key
policy decision makings. These challenges juxtapose the emerging ones in climate change and disaster risk
management as women are more vulnerable to these risks than men.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

65

FIGURE 1.

SUMMARY TABLE FOR GENDER EQUALITY IN INDONESIA THROUGH THE LENS OF WDR
2012

ASPECTS OF GENDER
EQUALITY

Endowments

INDONESIA’S ACHIEVEMENTS

INDONESIA’S REMAINING CHALLENGES

• Indonesia has achieved gender parity in enrollment
rates at all levels of education
• There are no pronounced gender disparities in infant
and under-ﬁve mortality rates and in most health
outcomes.
• The HIV/AIDS case in Indonesia is low

• Gender streaming in education: boys and girls tend to
enroll in traditional gender roles related subject.
• the maternal mortality rate at 228 per 100,000 births in
2010, is amongst the highest in EAP
• The prevalence of stunting and wasting are quite
alarming for both boys and girls
• Indonesia is considered to have the fastest growth on
AIDS epidemic in Asia.

• The average annual growth of women entering labor
market has been substantially higher than men over the
past seven years
• Women’s access to better jobs and higher wages

• Female labor force participation in Indonesia (52% in
2010) is low by EAP regional standards
• The gender wage gap in Indonesia is larger than in
other EAP countries—women only earn about 70% of
what men earn, in part because of gender streaming in
choice of ﬁelds of tertiary education…
• …but mostly because female workers tend to have less
secure terms of employment and are more likely to be
self-employed, doing unpaid family work or be working
in the informal sector
• Female-led enterprises tend to be smaller, more
precarious, less capital-intensive and less productive
• Women entrepreneurs account for a much lower
share of loans extended to MSMEs than their numbers
warrant
• Women constitute nearly 80% of Indonesia’s 6 millionplus cross-border migrant workers and often lack
ﬁnancial and other protections and are vulnerable to
exploitation

• Law and legislation products to enhance women’s
voices and agencies such as on women’s political
participation (General Election Law No 10/2008), anti
domestic violence (Act No 23/2004), gender equality in
development (Presidential Instruction No 3/2010)
• Women representation in politics has increased from 11
in 2004-2009 to 18 in 2009-2014 with similar increases
across provincial and sub district level.2

• Growing trend of local government decrees that
directly or indirectly discriminate against women
• Women’s political representation is low—only 18% of
the 2009 DPR members were women—perhaps in
part because nearly 70% of Indonesian men and even a
majority (51%) of Indonesian women believe men make
better political leaders
• Women are also under-represented in the policy
sphere—in 2011, only 9% of the Echelon-1 level oﬃcials
in GoI were women
• Women’s access to the formal justice system is limited
as is their role in traditional justice systems

OPPORTUNITIES

VOICE AND
AGENCY

CROSS-CUTTING
DIMENSIONS

2

66

Access to Justice
• The development of national strategy on Access to
Justice : in which women’s access to justice is one of the
8 key elements of the strategy – making legal justice as
compulsory, free of charge, and aﬀordable for women
• Legal framework for access to justice and issuance
of some progressive law that provide protection on
women and children
• Supporting facilities for access to justice such as Prodeo
- the cost-free court, support facilities for women
survivor of violence
• Indonesia is a signatory to most major international
conventions upholding principles of gender equality
and the RPJM-N identiﬁes gender mainstreaming within
GoI as a priority target
• Indonesia is one of only a few countries that has a
dedicated Ministry of Women’s Empowerment and
Child Protection (KPPA)
• Indonesia’s social assistance programs favor femaleheaded households
• A broad range of sex-disaggregated data are collected
by BPS

Access to Justice
• Women’s access to the formal justice system is limited
as is their role in traditional justice systems
• While property laws are non-discriminatory, the
Marriage Law only recognizes men as household heads

• Law enforcement need to be further strengthened
• The weak bargaining position of KPPA as a state
ministry towards other technical ministries is the major
challenge for KPPA in delivering their main mandate of
advocacy.
• Female-headed households tend to be more vulnerable
to shocks and poverty rates amongst female-headed
households tend to be more volatile.
• The existing sex disaggregated data are not widely
accessible

Policy Brief on Gender 7: Women’s Voice In Politics and Decision Making, World Bank and others, 2011

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

World Bank Support of Gender Equality So Far
The Bank Group has been working actively with the Government on programs to help remove
barriers to gender equality. There have been a number of successes in integrating gender equality and
women’s economic empowerment into the Bank program in areas such as equitable access to resources, voice
of women in the development of their community and country, and access to new opportunities. Furthermore,
the Bank’s support covers the key dimensions of endowment. The Bank has provided support through
operations such as Early Childhood Education and Development, BERMUTU, PNPM-Generasi(CCT) program/PKH,
and SPADA (in its training for teachers), andgender-informed reports on basic education, teacher quality. The
Health Professional Education Quality Project (HPEQ) supports the strengthening of quality assurance policies
governing the education of health professionals, including midwifery education through accreditation of
education institutions and certiﬁcation of graduates. Some analytical works on safe motherhood have also
been conducted such as the well-known report “…and then she dies”. Activities such as HIM (HIV in Indonesia
Model) and child nutrition (under PNPM Generasi) are other health areas where the Bank is actively doing
gender analysis and informing project design accordingly. The CCT program has been underway since 2007,
through two pilot programs – one community-based funded under PNPM and one household-based funded
by the Government in six provinces, West Java, East Java, Jakarta, Nusa Tenggara Timur, Gorontalo and North
Sulawesi. They provide cash assistance to 720,000 poor households on the condition that children receive
preventative healthcare and attend school, and mothers receive pre- and post-natal care. The project targeted
EFA (Education For All) goals and maternal mortality, as well as poverty alleviation. Work on gender also
involves seeking to expand access to ﬁnance to women owned enterprises. A study on Access to Finance has
supported the development of ﬁnancial services for migrant workers, mostly women. IFC provided a US$75
million gender facility and advisory services to Danamon and Bank Internasional Indonesia (BII) to facilitate
access by women to ﬁnance their SMEs.
The Bank’s engagement in economic opportunities focuses on labor market participation, access
to finance, livelihoods and property rights, some of which specifically target the women’s economic
empowerment and focus on female-headed household, as well as on female migrant workers.
PNPM has strong women’s economic empowerment components and equipped with tools to well address
women’s needs. The Bank provides supports to migrant workers, the majority which are women, through a
training module on ﬁnancial literacy that uses the research results from studies on migrant workers’ access
to ﬁnance. A joint titling initiative of MDTF/RALAS is another important Bank’s eﬀort to support women’s
economic opportunities. The Indonesia Jobs Report (2010), using sex-disaggregated data, identiﬁes gender
inequity issues in male and female labor participation, labor trends, analysis of labor market segmentation,
examination of the eﬀects of labor regulations on workers, and skill attainment and returns to education,
among others. A number of studies have been carried out to analyze issues faced by female migrant workers
and identify policy solutions3. The FMW program also provided grants to strengthen the institutional capacity
of relevant ministries, including the State Ministry of Women’s Empowerment (SMoWE) and Ministry of
Foreign Aﬀairs (MoFA), in addressing female migrant workers’ issues.
The Bank has addressed strategic and sustainable women’s voice and agency at community
level focusing on legal rights and access to justice, as well as participatory planning and public
decision-making. The Bank’s PNPM supported program adopted gender equality and equity in its twelve
basic principles. Gender equality and equity is also part of the ﬁrst speciﬁc goal on community’s participation.
The Bank has also put the foundation for women’s political empowerment through establishing women’s
speciﬁc forum to ensure women’s voices are heard in program development and planning in both PNPM Rural
(including PAWE-Papuan Women’s Empowerment Program of PNPM RESPEK) and PNPM Urban, and PAMSIMAS.
The Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) women leadership program and the Justice for the Poor’s women

3

Including the following studies: (i) Malaysia - Indonesia Remittance Corridor Study containing a descriptive overview of the Malaysia – Indonesia remittance corridor and a set of
recommendations to the Government on how to maximize the developmental impact of remittances; (ii) a study to map out points of vulnerability experienced by female migrant
workers (FMW) from the pre placement to post-placement stage, and to identify the causes of such vulnerability.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

67

legal empowerment program are two major initiatives for enhancing women’s access to justice at the
community level and with formal justice institutions. The Bank has also played an important role in ensuring
gender to be one of the eight thematic areas of the National Strategy for Access to Justice, providing support
on women’s legal empowerment, as well as research and diagnostic work on gender in thematic areas, such
as the “Aceh Gender Impact of Titling” by the MDF team for Aceh and Nias and “Case study on Women Dispute
Resolution through Adat Institutions in Aceh” by the Justice for the Poor team. The Bank has also mainstreamed
gender issues in its Initiatives for Local Governance Reform Project (ILGR), which supports district (Kabupaten)
governments to improve transparency, accountability and public participatory practices and to undertake
reforms in ﬁnancial management and procurement. The MDTF and JRF has adopted the community–based
settlement planning (CSP) in which women and men work together to develop comprehensive village
mapping, prepare a needs assessment report for discussions at the Rukun Warga (community group) level,
and at the village level to prioritize proposed facilities for CSP funding. A participatory approach was also
adopted in Water and Sanitation support.
Efforts have also been made in addressing some of the key cross-cutting issues that are highly
relevant and can be valuable for Bank’s initiative on endowment, opportunities and voice and
agencies such as making sex-disaggregated data and gender analysis in analytical works more
available, supporting the Ministry of Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection in developing
the minimum standard for public services, and conducting gender informed public expenditure
reviews. The Bank has actively supported Indonesia by identifying key gender issue in its analytical work
and using sex-disaggregated data. The National Targeting System beneﬁts from such analysis, particularly
as regards pregnant mothers. The Social Service Data Collection Survey (PPLS11) has also been established
with sex-disaggregated for better targeting. The PEACHprogram has incorporated gender analysis in its public
expenditure review, identifying key gender issues (such as migrant workers) that the local government in
diﬀerent pilot areas needs to pay attention to. Through its DSF program, the Bank supported the Government
in developing the national minimum standard for public services with among others, the Ministry of Women’s
Empowerment and Child Protection.

Moving Forward on Gender Equity, the World Bank Group Strategy
The quite extensive Bank Group support for gender equality and development needs to be further
shaped in a more systematic and comprehensive manner, and with visible connections across
sectors. The Bank has been engaging extensively not only in the overall dimensions of gender equality
(endowment, opportunities, and voice and agency) but also the cross cutting dimensions by making sexdisaggregated data and gender analysis more available. These supports, however, have been conducted
sporadically rather than an in a systematic and integrated manner. This is partly due to the absence of a welldocumented review detailing the various Bank activities and their interconnections and joint contributions, as
well as to the lack of an explicit strategy to move towards more equitable development.
Moving forward, the Bank Groupis developing a gender engagement strategy that further identifies
ongoing and upcoming activities within the three dimensions of gender equality of endowments,
voice and agencies, and opportunities to fortify Indonesia current achievement and further
address existing challenges on gender equality. The sum of these eﬀorts is signiﬁcant and will be built
through a more strategic, program-wide approach to gender, for improving eﬀectiveness, enhancing synergies
with various stakeholders, and increasing the ability to aﬀect gender-related reforms. The Government has
signaled a renewed commitment and is seeking to accelerate improved gender equity; Inpres No.3/2010 on
equitable development, highlights issues of justice for women and children, gender equality and women’s
empowerment. The RPJMN also outlined the importance of increasing the role of women in development,
particularly women leadership in public sector, business community and social organizations.

68

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

The Bank Group will continue mainstreaming gender into its operations, financing, and analytical
programs at different levels and has dedicated resources in translating the Bank’s commitment into
practice. A gender practice group at country level, which includes relevant TTLs, has been instituted with a
gender coordinator assigned to lead the group and a gender advisor hired to backstop. In addition, many of
the programs/projects have their own gender advisor/analyst/focal point. These will further shape, deﬁne,
and monitor the Bank’s engagement on gender equality in Indonesia. This work will be done in collaboration
with the relevant line ministries and development partners such as the Australian Government, as well as civil
society organizations.
Moving further, considering the broad range of the issues, Bank’s limited resources and scope of
work, as well as the Bank’s comparative advantage, the Bank will work selectively and strategically.
The Bank will work on areas where (a) pressing needs are evident – MMR and stunting and wasting, (b)
emerging opportunities that carry emerging risks – urbanization, migrant workers, DRM/Climate Change, ICT,
Population Aging, HIV/AIDS --and (c) strategic interventions to accelerate gender equality in other areas –
voice and agency at community level, gender streaming in education, and access to justice.
Future assistances will also include the emerging trends as identified by WDR 2012 – EAP
Companion Study, which not only identifies new opportunities but also new risks in the Region,
including Indonesia – increased global economic integration, the rising use of information and
communication technologies, migration, rapid urbanization, and population aging. Between 2000
and 2015, Indonesia, together with China and Cambodia are predicted to increase their urban populations by
17 percent, 13 percent, and 9 percent, respectively (UN, 2010). This will aﬀect all aspects of life, employment
structure, service availability, family and community networks supports. Emerging areas for further support
include gender-sensitive social protection,more equal access to ICTs, stronger protection and law enforcement
for women migrant workers, safe and enabling environments in urban areas for full female labor participation
such as aﬀordable day care services and inclusive ﬁnance, as well as old age income security for an aging
population.
Careful monitoring and evaluation will be critical to meet the Group’s commitments to gender
equality. Currently, monitoring and evaluation tools seem to be eﬀectively tracking sex-disaggregated
indicators at the output and, to a degree, outcome levels. Going forward, more eﬀort will be required to
ensure that the gender dimension is integrated in the outcome monitoring and impact evaluations. This
could be achieved by strengthening partnerships to agree on gender goals and targets and to identify and
select the gender-relevant indicators to measure results and impacts. Such information could be valuable in
improving program interventions and increasetheir impact.
The Bank Group will also work in partnership with other development stakeholders. The Bank will
continue to work collaboratively with the relevant line ministries and other development partners and further
strengthened the current partnership. The Bank will also work closely with the IFC, which is in the process of
deﬁning the gender aspects of its sustainable forestry and infrastructure work as well as agribusiness. A series
of gender ﬁnance modules and analytical work have been conducted by IFC. IFC is also seeking to collaborate
further with the Bank and other development partners especially in expanding women’s participation in the
value chain of important agri-commodities in Indonesia.
Below are Indonesia’s gender-related goals, which the WBG would seek to support. The Bank would
closely monitor the results and be accountable for the activities designed to support them (As higher level
country goals they are notformally part of the CPS Results Matrix).

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

69

INDONESIA - GENDER COUNTRY-LEVEL RESULT FRAMEWORK
Result

Indicator

Relevant Sector

Part 1: National Level Targets
1.1.

1.2.

Progress toward gender-related Millennium
Development Goals is achieved

Country policy and Institutional Assessment
(CPIA) indicates progress on key gender issues

EASPR, EASHD, SD
1.1.1.

Eliminate gender disparity in primary and
secondary education in all level education no
later than 2015 (MDG2A)

EASHD

1.1.2.

Increase share of women in wage employment
in non-agricultural sector (MDG 3.2)

EASPR, SD

1.1.3.

Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990-2015, the
under-ﬁve mortality rate (MDG4A)

EASHD, EASPR, SD

1.1.4.

Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and
2015, the Maternal Mortality Rate Ratio (MDG5A)

EASHD, EASPR

1.1.5.

Achieve, by 2015, universal access to
reproductive health (MDG5B)

EASHD

1.1.6.

Reduce the spread HIV/AIDs (MDG6A)

EASHD

1.1.7.

Achieve, by 2012, universal access to treatment
for HIV/AIDS for all those who need it (MDG6B)

EASHD

1.2.1.

CPIA rating: Promote equal access for men/
women to human capital development

Gender Mainstreaming Team

1.2.2.

CPIA rating: Promote equal access for men/
women to productive and economic resources

Gender Mainstreaming Team

1.2.3.

CPIA rating: give men and women equal status
and protection under the law

Gender Mainstreaming Team

Part 2: Operational Work
2.1.

Projects are gender informed

2.1.1.

100 % of IBRD projects in country portfolio and
percentage are gender informed

Gender Mainstreaming Team

2.2.

Projects’ results frameworks are gender
responsive

2.2.1.

80% of all of projects under implementation
have a sex-disaggregated indicator in results
framework

All sectors

2.3.

Evaluation of projects provides information on
the gender-related consequences

2.3.1.

80% of project in portfolio conduct an-endof-project impact evaluation with sexdisaggregated data

All sectors

Number of certiﬁed female teachers at the
respective project areas
Number of relevant policy papers and analytical
works that are gender informed

EASHD

Number of female migrant workers target
beneﬁciaries with ﬁnancial access in the
respective project areas
Number of relevant policy papers and analytical
works that are gender informed

EASPR, EASHD, SD

Percentage of women participated in relevant
decision meetings at community level in the
respective project areas.
Number of community proposed projects that
are gender informed in the respective project
areas

SD

Number of women organization and
organization that have concerns on gender and
development issues consulted
Number of relevant policy papers and analytical
work that are gender informed

EASPR, EASHD, SD

Part 3: Project Results across Four Dimensions
3.1.

Gender equality in endowments and human
development is promoted

3.1.1.
3.1.2.

3.2.

Active measures taken to close gender gaps in
economic opportunity

3.2.1.

3.2.2.
3.3.

Active measures taken to strengthen women’s
voice and inﬂuence

3.3.1.

3.3.2.

3.4.

Gender inequalities addressed in emerging risk
areas

3.4.1.

3.4.2.

Part 3: Gender-related organization within country team
3.5.

Gender focal point is appointed

3.6.

TOR for gender focal point is available

3.6.1.
3.6.2.

Fully operational gender focal point
Implementation of the gender focal point TORs

Country Management Team
Country Management Team

3.7.

System in place to review gender in project
preparation phase

3.7.1.

Country-wide team and processes exist for
providing gender technical backstopping in the
project preparation phase

Country Management Team

**) From MDGs Road Map, Indonesia, 2010

70

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Annex 3:
Governance and Anti-Corruption
Introduction
Over the past decade, the Indonesian government’s progress on public accountability is
unmistakable. The World Bank’s partnership with the GoI on governance issues reﬂects our continuing
commitment, but also change and variation over time. Governance and anti-corruption have featured in
the programs of successive governments with early years of reformasi focusing on sweeping reforms and
constitutional amendments. For example, between 1999 and 2004 press freedom was enhanced; authority
was devolved to the regions; checks and balances between the executive, legislative and judicial branches
were strengthened; the role of security forces (police and military) was redeﬁned; direct elections for President
and for regional heads were mandated; and an institutional framework to prevent, investigate and prosecute
corruption was developed. Civil society played an important role in driving these changes with the Partnership
for Governance Reform especially prominent. These years also saw the enactment of foundation ﬁscal laws and
the rearrangement of key economic ministries, all designed to improve budget and ﬁnancial management
systems.
By 2004, Indonesia was increasing the focus on improving service delivery and consolidating
accountability agencies. This eﬀort built on the legislative foundations for public ﬁnancial management,
(including public procurement, business regulation, auditing, and monitoring and evaluation) and introduced
limited (ministerial level) civil service reforms. The consolidation of accountability continued in the anticorruption area, with the role of the Anti-Corruption Commission (KPK) especially prominent and high-level
corruption investigations and convictions became increasingly common. However, reforms in the judiciary,
the police and the attorney general’s oﬃce have been slow and collaboration a problem. Indonesia’s free press
functions well, with corruption scandals regularly revealed and covered. The role of CSOs has increased and
they have increasingly developed specialized expertise. For example, in the area of budget transparency and
environment, CSOs played a critical role in Indonesia’s accession to candidate status in the Extractive Industry
Transparency Initiative (EITI).
The administration has continued its focus on reform of core government systems. In fact, there is an
increased emphasis on bureaucracy reform at the whole government level, a previously identiﬁed constraint
to the eﬀectiveness of civil service reforms at the ministerial level. Nevertheless, the process of improving
accountability has not been smooth, as witnessed by the continued political and bureaucratic attacks of the
authority of the KPK. The public popularity of the KPK and its ability to weather repeated conﬂicts with its
power in tact suggests a strong, underlying foundation for better governance. Meanwhile, the police and the
attorney general’s oﬃce continue to be plagued by corruption allegations. A growing concern is electoral
corruption at both the national and regional level and the eﬀect this corruption has on budget and policy
decisions.
The World Bank and other development partners have played an important role in supporting
governance reforms in Indonesia. The Partnership for Governance Reform led the CSO alliance that
supported the critical Government initiatives that transformed Indonesia in the aftermath of the Asian ﬁnancial
crisis. The World Bank provided analytical and technical support including through its ﬂagship publication
Combating Corruption in Indonesia. The World Bank GAC team has been led by a senior governance advisor
in Jakarta with a mandate to address both systemic and Bank-speciﬁc governance problems (including such
things as project speciﬁc anti-corruption action plans).

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

71

The World Bank’s governance focus has evolved since 2004. With sustained economic growth and a solid
performance during the global economic crisis international credibility was renewed. Strong governancerelated reform programs, especially at the Ministry of Finance, but also at the KPK and elsewhere, attracted
attention. Against this background, World Bank support evolved in two important directions. First, institutional
reform programs conﬁned initially to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) on improved budget and treasury systems
were expanded to tax administration and then on to other government agencies. These programs focused
on comprehensive institutional change, revised business processes, improved human resource management,
and supportive information and communication systems. In addition, the World Bank added support for
key government programs around improved governance of major poverty, education and regional transfer
programs to its earlier focus on policy and project lending. The Bank’s support to key accountability agencies
(outside of KPK) was limited given restricted change in the judiciary. Support for improved performance
through demand side eﬀorts (by CSOs) has been continued with a focus around speciﬁc programs and
engagements, an approach common with other development partner eﬀorts.
IFC launched corporate governance advisory program in Indonesia in 2012. The work program involves
working with regulatory bodies to enhance corporate governance standards in the industry, to increase
awareness about the beneﬁts of higher governance standards, and to work directly with private sector businesses
and sponsors to provide them with advise on enhancing their companies’ corporate governance practices.

Governance and Anti-Corruption Work going forward
The governance and anti-corruption approach in the Country Partnership Strategy is led by
the Indonesia Governance and Anti-Corruption Team (IGAC). The IGAC team is made up of senior
management augmented by selected country leadership team personnel.
The country governance program (the IGAC agenda) is organized around four pillars: 1) increasing
transparency and efficiency in public financial management, 2) increasing the efficiency of public
service delivery, 3) strengthening checks and balances, and 4) promoting open, transparent
competition. These cross cutting focuses will be used to improve coordination and provide strategic direction.
In the public ﬁnancial management pillar, the focus is on the civil service, and eﬀective and transparent budget
and tax systems (SPIRIT, SPAN, PINTAR). The engagements around improved public service deliver focus on
improved systems (including procurement) and citizen feedback mechanisms (DAK, PNPM, BOS). In checks
and balances we will partner with Indonesian institutions leading the ﬁght against corruption (e.g. the KPK)
and engaging with CSO’s to reinforce accountability. To promote open and transparent competition the Bank
is focused on Indonesia’s resource endowment, including the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI),
Reduced Emissions through Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+), and support for regulatory framework
and ﬁnancial sector reforms.
The Bank’s governance approach will build on the Indonesian Government’s Open Government
Partnership (OGP). The OGP should serve as a powerful governance tool to promote transparency,
increase civic participation, improve service delivery, reduce corruption, and harness new technologies to
make government more open, eﬀective, and accountable. In September 2012 Indonesia became co-chair
of this initiative. The Bank’s engagements on PFM and improved statistics are designed around data as a
public good, while community driven development, sub-national development, health, education, water and
sanitation, have substantial social accountability elements. The Bank will leverage the ongoing engagement
and relationship with Government to create a space for citizen participation and cooperation, through the
recently announced Global Partnership for Social Accountability (GPSA).
The governance approach will also take advantage of an increased focus on tri-party and
international accountability mechanisms. Leadership of the Open Governance Partnership, adoption
of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), a commitment to Reducing Emissions through
Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+), as well as the UN convention against Corruption (UNCAC)
represent signiﬁcant steps in increasing the transparency of the GOI’s commitments to good governance

72

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

and an increased focus on monitoring. The World Bank will support these eﬀorts as part of our governance
engagement since they provide much needed support for local institutions and communities.
The IGAC team will strengthen the country program through better integration and additional
tools at the engagement level. These tools include a Governance, Operational and Anti-Corruption Lens
(GOAL) Analysis that is being piloted in the form of an annex to our Engagement Strategy Notes. GOAL focuses
on aligning with government policy, taking into account of the stakeholders and institutional constraints and
opportunities. With GOAL there is an assessment of governance and anti-corruption issues at the engagement
level well before projects and AAA are taken on. Second, there will be more emphasis on selected political
economy analysis. The IGAC team will also provide a forum for integrating and developing approaches to
cross cutting issues, for example, ICT for accountability and Open Government.
The IGAC agenda will be supported by a Governance and Anti-Corruption secretariat who will provide
technical support across the governance pillars, and take the lead on governance work on enhanced ﬁduciary
oversight in Bank projects.

Partnering with Indonesian institutions leading the fight against
corruption
The World Bank support for Indonesian anti-corruption institutions is wide ranging with special
attention to the engagement with the Anti-Corruption Agency (the KPK). The World Bank program
with KPK includes capacity building, (professional and leadership training as well as knowledge sharing), and
support on communications and reporting. Under the Bank’s Governance Partnership Facility, work is getting
underway to support KPK audits of public service institutions including developing mechanisms to handle
public feedback.
While the KPK is the leading institution combating corruption in Indonesia, the majority of
corruption cases are investigated and prosecuted by the attorney general’s office (AGO). In
recognition of the AGO’s crucial role, the World Bank is supporting the AGO R&D bureau reform its processes
and procedures based on evidence from ﬁeld research and public consultation. For example, consultations
with communities are leading to a change in the remedies for misappropriation of funds in community-driven
development projects.
The Bank is also working with select ministries and agencies on enhancing transparency and
accountability. These eﬀorts encompass support for the application of e-government tools in DG Highways
in order to improve project transparency and reporting, and collaboration with DAK on the creation of a
results-based ﬁnancing mechanism for local governments where infrastructure ﬁnancing is released based on
the achievement of transparency standards.

Collaborating with CSOs for Improved Accountability
The World Bank GAC team is also working with CSOs in Indonesia, to improve institutional
accountability. To do this involves assessing and aiding CSOs with technical input and strategic advice
with our partnership not limited to formal agreements but also including idea sharing, discussions and
consultations.
In the area of social accountability, the Bank is facilitating CSOs working on open government to
improve the transparency and reporting in Government Institutions. The GAC Team working with AntiCorruption NGOs, practitioners, academia and the public is working to develop concrete recommendations
on how budget reporting should be done. This ongoing eﬀort will augmented by the World Bank’s Global
Partnership for Social Accountability.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

73

Strengthening Indonesia’s anti-corruption systems in WBG-supported
projects
The integration of governance principles World Bank initiatives is done by mainstreaming anticorruption measures and initiatives. A Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC) team, led by the Indonesia
Country Oﬃce Senior Governance and Anti-Corruption Oﬃcer (a member of the Country Leadership Team
and head of the IGAC secretariat), coordinates anti-corruption relationships and policy dialogue, oversees
governance-related operations, advises project team leaders on governance and anti-corruption strategies,
and is responsible for the development of the research agenda and governance monitoring framework. A
ﬁeld-based operations support team supervises ﬁduciary practices to mitigate the risks of corruption and
integrates anti-corruption mechanisms into project design, supports and reviews Anti-Corruption Action Plans
(ACAPs), monitors the implementation of ACAPs, shares recommendation and liaises with GoI partners. The
GAC team also works with GoI agencies on ACAPs and to support government investigations of corruption
allegations in WBG-ﬁnanced programs.
Regular meetings are held with the MoF to review progress, develop follow-up actions, and discuss
remedies and sanctions, as well as possible measures to prevent recurrence. When the WBG proposes
to exercise legal remedies or apply administrative sanctions, it discusses these with MoF the basis for the
proposed action and with adequate advance notice.
Since 2003, all Bank-supported projects have included governance-related risks to achieving
project objectives and how those risks will be mitigated and managed. Nevertheless ownership and
implementation problems with ACAPs persist and addressing this problem will require collaboration with key
organizations, including the KPK, the AGO, and sectoral counterparts such as Ministry of Public Works and
the Ministry of National Education. It is anticipated that this collaboration will improve our ability to address
corruption at the institutional level (that is above the project level), leading to change in the role of agencies
around identifying and mitigating risks. The Bank support for this initiative will alter the nature of the ACAPs
— from an instrument of compliance with Bank-ﬁnanced projects to a government-owned mechanism of
accountability to improve public sector performance.

74

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Annex 4:
Portfolio Performance
Among the East Asia Pacific countries, Indonesia has the second largest portfolio after China, in
terms of net commitment amount, which at end August 2012 amounted to US$ 7.7 billion including
a US$ 2 billion of a DPL DDO. The portfolio consists of 31 lending projects, as well as two GEF operations
and nine other large trust funds.
Portfolio performance is comparable to the other middle-income countries (MICs). In EAP, the
Indonesia’s commitment at risk (8%) is same as China (8%) and signiﬁcantly lower than of the Philippines (19%).
The number of at risk project (18%) is comparable with China (13%) and the Philippines (19%). The percentage
of project at risk increased from 11.8% (FY 2010), to 12% (FY 2011), to 19.4% (FY 2012), and 18.2% in FY 2013.
The increase could come from a combination of more realistic and stringent project assessment rating and
some innovative and high risk project that was approved during this period. The amount of commitment at
risks in Indonesia portfolio, in terms of percentage to the lending & GEF projects has been increased too from
3% in FY 2010, to 3.8% in FY 2011, 8.6% in FY2012 and currently at 8% in FY 2013. This level of commitment at
risks is among the lowest compare to other selected IBRD countries (as shown in the table below).
No
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Country
Indonesia
China
Philippines
India
Pakistan
Brazil
Mexico
Turkey
Egypt

# of project
33
89
21
79
24
57
22
11
21

% Commitment at risk ($)
8%
8%
20%
18%
12%
6%
1%
16%
10%

% of at risk project (#)
18%
13%
19%
13%
17%
12%
9%
27%
24%

Source: Business Warehouse

IFC Portfolio
As of September 30, 2012, IFC’s committed portfolio in Indonesia was US$911.71 million for IFC’s own account
and US$332.25 million held on account of participant banks. NPLs were at 0% of total portfolio, while the
equity committed portfolio accounted to US$215.07 million. Detailed information about the portfolio is given
in “Annex B8: IFC”.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

75

Financial Management, Procurement and Country Systems
The Bank continues to work closely with the Indonesian government in enhancing project
implementation in the area of financial management and procurement, as well as on country
system as envisaged in the CPS.
•

For ﬁnancial management the progress to date is improvement of internal controls and internal and
external audit systems, and more timely and reliable ﬁnancial reporting is evidenced by an important
reduction in qualiﬁed audits.The implementation of COSO control framework needs to be accelerated
and the internal audit function strengthened at all levels of Government. The capacity building of the
supreme audit institution (BPKP) needs to continue particularly in the area of follow up and impact on
its audit ﬁndings and linkages with the legislature. The proposed Financial Sector and Investment Climate
Reform and Modernization DPL (FIRM) would promote reforms would include strengthened ﬁnancial
reporting and auditing standards and practices in alignment with global benchmarks.

•

In terms of improving public procurement system the progress to date is the establishment of a new
procurement agency, issuance of a revised presidential decree and national standard bidding document,
and requirement to establish procurement service unit in all implementing agency.The Bank, the
National Public Procurement Agency and other key stakeholders will engage on a joint work program to
support strategic priorities such as procurement performance measurement, modern risk management,
and professionalization of the procurement function. This cooperation will include knowledge transfers
from other countries with successful, relevant experiences. The main area of focus will be on increasing
procurement eﬃciency by, for example, more strategic use of e-procurement, data driven procurement
policy making and management, and enhancing the use of framework contracts to achieve savings and
streamline transactions. In addition, the Bank will look at ways to shift more of its procurement resources
to strengthening institutions by reducing transaction work, better integrating work at the project and
country level, and tailoring capacity building strategies to speciﬁc circumstances such as implementing
agencies’ performance, objectives, and level of decentralization.

•

The BOS KITA and Local Government DAK projects use country systems in terms of internal controls,
ﬁnancial management and procurement. Under BOS KITA project, the objective is to strengthen
school-based management and community participation, improving existing ﬁduciary arrangement
for greater transparency and accountability. The features of Local Government DAK project are results
focused, reimburse eligible outputs, strengthen local government internal control, and improve current
Government ﬁduciary and monitoring system.

•

The Bank and the Government undertook a Joint Country Portfolio Review for year 2012 (CPPR 2012). The
Government took lead of the review process with analytical support from the Bank.

Development Impact
Indonesia has a legacy of poor development impact, but performance has been on the upswing
since 2005. Of the 32 operations rated by IEG during the FY09-12 period, 12 have been rated as MU or U (38
percent). Most of these poorly performing operations were approved during the transition period following
the Asia Crisis leading up the ﬁrst President SBY administration in 2005. As well, these MU or U operations
were largely in sectors, health and agriculture, where few reforms were undertaken by the Government and
implementation was diﬃcult and drawn out. Of the 10 operations approved prior to the SBY administration,
8 were rated as MU or U (80 percent). Improved development impact since that time can be attributed to
the increasing alignment of the Bank’s program with the Government’s agenda and reform eﬀorts, as well as
improved implementation capabilities. Of the 22 operations approved since 2005 and rated by IEG in FY09-12,
only 4 were rated MU or U (18 percent).

76

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Annex 5:
Trust Funds
The Country Team has well defined procedures for taking on new trust funds. All proposals go to the
Indonesia Country Leadership Team (CLT) for endorsement prior to establishment. The CLT screening focuses
on priorities, approach and staﬃng implications.
The Indonesia trust fund portfolio will remain a strategic component of the World Bank’s program.
TFs are essential to support clients in their own implementation of programs and projects, to undertake
analytic work and support sector dialogue, and to help build a pipeline of future investment lending. It is
expected, however, that the size and composition of the trust funds will remain dynamic. For example, today’s
portfolio will shrink by 30% with the closing of the Multi Donor Trust Fund for Aceh &Nias (MDF) and the
Java Reconstruction Fund (JRF) by the end of FY13. The lessons learnt from the MDF and JRF – both from its
implementation and its closing -- will be invaluable for Indonesia (and other countries) and the TF is supporting
a number of learning activities for both domestic and international audiences as part of its exit strategy over
the course of FY13. Whether a similar level of assistance will be necessary for a disaster/emergency in the
future is, of course, unpredictable. In the current trust fund portfolio, a new trust fund is in place under GoI
leadership that could support better readiness to respond to disasters in the future. While it is diﬃcult for
donors to commit funds to a future disaster, putting in place the governance structure could prove useful to
ensure a rapid response to emergencies.
This is not to say the “trust fund model” is static. As Indonesia evolves so does the way that trust funds
are used and governed. GoI is increasingly interested in directly administering trust funds, but continues to
look to the Bank for technical expertise both in terms of ﬁduciary requirements and implementation. Donors
too are looking for evolving governance models but without losing the Bank’s ﬁduciary oversight. Current
discussions with GoI, donors and the Bank on REDD+, MCC (on MDG), and disaster preparedness demonstrate
that innovative structures and new roles for the Bank are possible. If REDD+, where the Bank acts not as
trustee, but as advisor, is successful, it could set the direction of many other Bank interventions in Indonesia
and elsewhere. Working to fulﬁll the Government’s longer-term strategy for PNPM/PSF sustainability means
that the structure and staﬃng of PSF, one of Indonesia’s largest trust-funded programs, will certainly evolve
over the next several years. The PSF team, and the Country Oﬃce more widely, is engaging with a number
of regional and Bank Corporate units to seek advice and guidance on how best to take on these challenges
which will ultimately lead to the Bank’s exit from this program.
Other multi donor engagements such as on trade and investment climate, public financial
management, and PNPM support will continue until at least 2015 and are country priorities
reflected in the CPS. TF funding in these areas is multi-year and quite secure. As Government changes some
of its borrowing priorities (in particular for education where it will no longer seek IBRD ﬁnancing), the Bank’s
engagement in the education sector will be supported more heavily by trust fund sources of ﬁnancing. If
P4R lending is successfully introduced to Indonesia, analytic and implementation support by Government
will likely need to be assisted through trust fund ﬁnancing. As in many other countries, analytic work in other
priority borrowing sectors for Government, including infrastructure, can likewise be expected to have some
trust fund ﬁnancing.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

77

Management of Trust Funds
Portfolio monitoring of TFs is done on a regular basis including through The Indonesia Dashboard
and includes specific issues e.g. grants with no disbursement, overdue GRMs, overdue ICMs, grants
with closing date in the next 6 months. All staﬀ areencouraged to enroll in online TF accreditation as part
of their learning plans. In FY 12, 100% of LORs were signed on time and without qualiﬁcations. During the
preparation of trust funds or grants, it is ensured that the cost of administering the TFs will be fully recovered.
For large grant programs in particular the PNPM Support Facility, the PSF team has established an additional
Portfolio Management Dashboard that integrates data to help the Sector Manager and TTLs assess the
portfolio on a real time basis.
Accountability. Supervision is conducted on a regular basis to ensure that trust funds are used for
the agreed purposes. Financial Management Specialists (FMS) are an integral part of all task teams, but also
provide clearance for a reallocation or extension of a grant, speciﬁcally with regard to the availability of an
audit report. Time required for proper FM review could be better planned by some task teams. The inability to
charge preparation costs to the TFs can be another constraint to FM input. In the case of NGO recipients, the
use of NGO selection worksheet and IAF is useful in providing a preliminary assessment of the recipients and
to anticipate potential issues during the assessment. Risk-based ﬁnancial management reviews are conducted
twice a year for big TFs and once a year for small TFs. Additional reviews are conducted if required. The review
includes accounting, reporting, internal control framework and limited transaction sampling. These reviews
take into account the projects’ management report, previous reviews and audit reports. They are conducted
by ﬁnancial management specialists (FMS) and Bank consultants under FMS supervision. There are no overdue
audit reports as of June 2012. The Bank’s procurement Unit normally delivers procurement training to
Implementing Agencies for all projects so that they can better carry out procurement processes in compliance
with the Bank’s guidelines and procedures as indicated in the GA. Nevertheless, procurement remains an area
that is often very diﬃcult for government counterparts in both trust funded and IBRD ﬁnanced projects.

Trust Fund Portfolio
As of the end of FY12, Indonesia managed 25 country-speciﬁc TFs and 38 global/ corporate TFs, totaling of
USD 1.681 billion. These trust funds ﬁnance 215 active grants totaling USD 1,155 billion. The Multi Donor Trust
Fund for Aceh and Nias projects accounted for 39% of the total (USD 654 million out of total of USD 1.681
billion, of which USD 480 million is active). These TFs will complete activities and close on December, 31 2012.
Contributions have come from 17 Donors to Indonesia Country Speciﬁc Trust Funds for a total of USD 1.448
billion. New contributions were received in FY 12 for a total of USD 123 million. In terms of value, Recipient
executed TFs are 83 percent of the portfolio. Cumulative disbursement reached 73% compared to 68% at the
end of FY 11.

78

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

SUMMARY INDONESIA TRUST FUND PORTFOLIO

SUMMARY

Number of
Trust Fund

Total
Contributions
(million USD)

Country Speciﬁc
Trust Funds

25

1,488

Regional/Corporate
Trust Funds

38

233

Total Indonesia TF
portfolio

63

1,681

Total Grant Amount
(million USD)

Number of Grant

Total Cummulative
Disbursement
(million USD)

Total FY
Disbursement
(million USD)

REFT

BETF

Total

REFT

BETF

Total

REFT

BETF

Total

REFT

BETF

Total

757

165

922

55

70

125

662

127

789

170

38

208

202

31

233

36

54

90

32

15

47

10

7

18

959

196

1,155

91

124

215

693

142

836

181

45

226

INDONESIA COUNTRY SPECIFIC TRUST FUNDS – END OF FY 12
Trust Funds
Country Specific TF
Single Donor
KDP - Sulawesi (Canada)

Total Contribution Amount (USD)
1,447,553,819
226,591,191
15,420,512

KDP - Respek Papua (Australia)

2,981,600

Dutch Basic Education (Dutch)

31,132,800

BERMUTU (Dutch)

52,000,000

Early Childhood Education (Dutch)

25,300,000

Indonesia Infra. (Australia)

9,522,217

Geothermal Power Support Program (Dutch)

2,708,711

Geothermal (New Zealand)
Institution Development and Capacity Building (Dutch)
Poverty Reduction (Australia)
WASAP (Dutch)
PAMSIMAS (Australia)
Multiple Donor
PNPM Support Facility
Consolidating Peaceful Develop. in Aceh
Basic Education Capacity
MDTF Aceh Nias

7,483,550
25,358,325
7,483,550
33,921,796
53,405,679
1,180,962,628
265,041,803
6,770,750
61,935,047
654,661,379

Java Reconstruction Fund

94,062,124

Public Financial Management

25,993,316

Macroeconomic and Fiscal Policy Analysis
Trade & Investment Facility
Disaster Management Fund (DMF)

5,243,525
11,656,084
2,048,850

DSF II

44,384,290

PEACH

9,165,460

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

79

INDONESIA COUNTRY SPECIFIC TRUST FUNDS – END OF FY 12
Grant Amount (million USD)
Pro Growth
Public Financial Management & Expenditure Management

21

National Institution - Governance

5

PHRD local governance reform co-ﬁnancing (USDRP)

5

Decentralization (PEACH & PREM Aceh) Dutch + CIDA
Infrastructure grants (AusAid, PHRD, GEF, Dutch Geothermal)
MDF Economic Development Financing Facility
MDF Livelihood
Trade
Investment Climate
Pro Job

8
160
50
8
0
10
145

Education - Bank executed

45

Education - Government executed

23

Education - Coﬁnancing ECED

25

Education - Coﬁnancing BERMUTU
Pro Poor
PNPM Support Facility

52
281
186

Food Crises

1

Other KDP and community development

7

Conﬂict

8

Justice for the Poor

2

Gender, Female-headed households & Female migrant workers

7

National Institution - Poverty
PAMSIMAS and WSLIC2 coﬁnancing
WSP: WASAP (Recipient Executed)
Other - WSP
Others - Water
Pro Green
MDF Aceh Forect (LIF)
MDF Aceh Forect (FFI)

6
27
3
30
5
295
10
8

Environmental Sustainability - excluding green KDP

11

Climate change/Global environment issue (GEF. CDM. ODS)

33

Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery
GEF COREMAP
MDF Infrastructure Reconstruction Financing Facility (IRFF)
Java Reconstruction Funds (Jogya housing)
Marine Electronic highway
Others
MDF Admin
Fiscal Agency - MDF Aceh and Nias
Fiscal Agency - Decentralization Support Facility

80

268

2
8
137
86
1
166
24
141
2

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Annex A1:
Key Economic and Program Indicators
KEY ECONOMIC AND PROGRAM INDICATOR - CHANGE FROM LAST CAS
Forecast in Last CAS
Economy (CY)

2008a

2009b

2010b

Actual
2011b

2010c

Current CAS Forecast

2011c

2012c

2013b

2014b

2015b

Growth rates (%)
GDP

6.0

6.4

6.7

6.7

6.2

6.5

6.1

6.3

6.6

6.6

Exports

9.5

8.4

8.6

9.1

15.3

13.6

2.8

5.7

11

10.2

Imports

10.0

9.9

7.9

8.3

17.3

13.3

7.1

4.7

11.8

11.7

9.8

7.0

6.0

5.5

5.1

5.4

4.4

5.1

5.0

4.8

Current account
balance

0.0

0.9

0.

-0.2

0.7

0.

-.3

-1.6

-1.7

-0.9

Gross investment

27.7

27.0

27.0

27.0

32.1

32.0

33.3

34.5

35.4

36.6

Fiscal balance

-0.1

-0.9

-0.5

-0.1

-0.7

-1.1

-2.4

-1.7

-1.4

-0.5

Foreign ﬁnancing

0.5

-0.3

-0.3

-0.3

0.4

0.2

0.7

0.6

0.7

0.9

433.0
4.0

44.2
4.2

45.6
4.0

49.7
4.0

96.2
7.2

110.1
6.4

110.2
4.3

122.5
4.5

143.1
4.7

159.9
4.7

FY2008a

FY2009b

FY2010b

FY2011b

FY2010c

FY2011c

FY2012c

FY2013b

FY2014b

FY2015b

Lending ($ million)

8,126

8,500

8,700

9,200

9,772

11,314

12,159

12,660

13,231

13,851

Gross disbursements
($ million)

1,240

1,300

1,350

1,400

2,240

2,186

1,543

1,000

1,000

1,000

Inflation (%)
National accounts
(% GDP)

Public finance (% GDP)

International reserves
(as months of imports)

Program (Bank’s FY)

a. Estimated year
b. Projected year
c. Actual Outcome

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

81

Annex A2:
Key Economic and Program Indicators
Key Development Indicators

East Asia &
Pacific

Indonesia

Lower middle
Income

(2011)
Population, mid-year (millions)

242.3

1,9962

2,519

Surface area (thousand sq. km)

1,905

16,302

23,579

Population growth (%)

1.0

0.7

1.5

Urban population (% of total population)

54

46

39

649.6

7,249

4,078

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)

2,680

3,696

1,619

GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

4,200

6,657

3,632

GDP growth (%)

6.5

9.7

6.9

GDP per capita growth (%)

5.4

8.9

5.3

Poverty headcount ratio at $ 1.25 a day (PPP, %)

18

14

-

Poverty headcount ration at $ 2.00 a day (PPP, %)

46

33

-

Live expectancy at birth (years)

68

72

65

Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)

27

20

50

Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

18

6

25

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)

95

96

80

Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)

89

91

62

Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)

119

111

110

Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

104

(most recent estimate, 2005-2011)

115

112

Access to an improved water source (% of population)

80

90

87

Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

52

66

47

Age Distribution, 2010

Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

Male

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34
0-4
10

5

0

percent of total population

82

5

1990
Indonesia

1995

2000

2010

East Asia & Paciﬁc

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

1980

1990

2000

2011

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and oﬃcial aid

941

1,716

1,653

1,393

Australia

48

77

72

356

France

44

122

22

262

United States

117

31

174

180

Aid (% of GNI)

1.3

1.6

1.1

0.2

Aid per capita (US$)

6

9

8

6

Top 3 donors (in 2010)

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual % change)

9.5

7.7

3.7

5.4

GDP implicit deﬂator (annual % change)

10.4

7.7

20.4

8.4

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)

637

1,843

8,422

10,121

Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

-

107

100

137

Population, mid-year (millions)

151

184

213

242

GDP (US$ billions)

78

114

165

734

Agriculture

24.0

19.4

15.6

14.7

Industry

41.7

39.1

45.9

47.2

Manufacturing

13.0

20.7

27.7

24.3

Services

34.3

41.5

38.5

38.1

Household ﬁnal consumption expenditure

51.4

58.9

60.7

56.8

General government ﬁnal consumption expenditure

10.5

8.8

6.5

9.0

Gross capital formation

24.1

30.7

22.2

32.8

Exports of goods and services

34.2

25.3

41.0

26.3

Imports of goods and services

20.2

23.7

30.5

24.9

Gross savings

28.7

28.1

26.1

31.3

(% of GDP)

1980 1990

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
15

1990 2000

2000 2010

(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)

10

GDP (US$ billions)

151

184

213

78

114

165

5

(% of GDP)

0
-5

Agriculture

24.0

19.4

15.6

Industry

41.7

39.1

45.9

13.0

20.7

27.7

Manufacturing

-10

Services

34.3

41.5

38.5

-15

Household ﬁnal consumption
expenditure

51.4

58.9

60.7

General government ﬁnal
consumption expenditure

10.5

8.8

6.5

-20

1995
GDP

2005
GDP per capita

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Gross capital formation

24.1

30.7

22.2

Exports of goods and services

34.2

25.3

41.0

Imports of goods and services

20.2

23.7

30.5

Gross savings

28.7

28.1

26.1

83

2000

2011

Balance of Payments and Trade
(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)

65,408

200,788

Total merchandise imports (cif )

44,404

182,604

Net trade in goods and services

15,243

24,154

7,998

1,712

Current account balance
as a % of GDP
Workers’ remittances and compesation of employees (receipt)
Reserves, including gold

4.8

0.2

1,190

6,916

29,268

106,530

Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)

19.7

16.3

Tax revenue

11.1

11.8

Current expenditure

15.6

10.3

Overall surplus/deficit

-1.8

-1.1

Individual

35

30

Corporate

30

28

143,344

199,240

16,624

30,681

Highest marginal tax rate (%)

External Debt and Resource Flows
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)
Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

-

-

86.9

27.2

26.2

13.0

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)

-4,550

19,242

Portfolio equity (net inflows)

-1,021

-326

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)

-

45

Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)

-

21.5

Time required to register property (days)

-

22

Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Economic and regulatory policy uncertainty

48.2

-

Corruption

41.5

-

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)

16.3

58.4

6.0

11.4

57.1

56.9

Bank capital to asset ratio (%)
Technology and Infrastructure
Paved road (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports (% of manufactured exports)

5

10.8

16.4

11.4

Environment
Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
Fresh water resources per capita (cu. meters)
Fresh water withdrawal (billion cubic meters)
CO2 emissions per capita (mt)
GDP per unit of energy use (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

84

25

30

54.9

52.1

13.6

14.1

9,218

8,504

-

-

1.2

1.7

3.6

4.3

730

851

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

World Bank Group Portfolio

2000

2011

(US$ millions)
IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed

11,715

9,054

1,051

2,078

Principal repayments

761

900

Interest payments

950

291

Total debt outstanding and disbursed

Disbursements

IDA
714

2,313

Disbursements

59

142

Total debt service

31

49

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account

880

648

480

507

Disbursements for IFC own account

20

46

Portfolio sales, prepayments and repayments for IFC own account

43

165

Gross exposure

56

207

New guarantee

0

207

MIGA

Governance Indicators, 2000 and 2010

Composition of total external debt, 2011
(in US$ millions)

Voice and accountability
IBRD
9,717

Political stability and
absence of violence

Short-term
38,173

Regulatory Quality

IDA
2,277
Other
Multilateral
10,848

Rule of law
Bilateral
43,639

Control of corruption
0
2010

2000

25

50

75

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

Source: Worldwide Governance Indicators (www.govindicators.org)

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Private
94,586

85

Millenium Development Goals
With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Indonesia
1990

1995

2000

2010

54.3

43.4

47.7

18.1

-

17.6

23.4

13.3

Goal 1: Halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest quintile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

9.4

9.0

9.6

8.3

31.0

27.4

24.8

17.5

Goal 2: Ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)

98

95

90

95

Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)

96

99

93

105

Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)

48

49

53

77

Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

96

-

-

99

Ratio of girls to booys in primary and secondary education (%)

93

93

96

98

Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (%of non agricultural employment)

29

29

32

32

Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament

12

13

8

18

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

85

67

54

35

Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

56

46

38

27

Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

58

63

74

89

Goal 3: Eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women

Goal 4: Reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds

Goal 5: Reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

620

440

350

240

Births attended by skilled health staﬀ (% of total)

32

37

64

75

Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

50

54

55

57

Goal 6: Halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.2

Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)

189

189

189

189

Tuber culosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

21

9

21

66

Goal 7: Halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)

71

74

77

80

Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

33

38

44

52

Forest area (% of land area)

65.4

-

54.9

52.1

Terresterial protected areas (% of land area)

10.0

10.9

13.6

14.1

CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)

0.8

1.1

1.2

1.7

GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

3.7

4.0

3.6

4.3

Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)

0.6

1.7

3.1

15.8

Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)

0.0

0.1

1.7

91.7

Internet users (per 100 people)

0.0

0.0

0.9

9.9

-

-

-

1.5

Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development

Computer users (per 100 people)

86

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Education Indicators (%)
125
100
75
50
25
0
2000

2005

Primary net enrollment ratio

2010

Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary education

Measles immunization (% of 1-years-old)
100
75
50
25
0

1990

1995

2000

Indonesia

2010

East Asia & Paciﬁc

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
100
80
60
40
20
0
2000

2005
Fixed + mobile subscribers

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

2010
Internet users

87

CAS Annex B2:
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio
Performance and Management
Indicator

2010

2011

2012

2013

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementationa

34

33

31

33

Average Implementation Period (years)b

4.1

3.7

3.8

3.8

Percent of Problem Projects by Numbera, c

8.8

12.1

16.1

15.2

Percent of Problem Projects by Amounta, c

2.2

3.7

7.0

6..9

11.8

12.1

19.4

18.2

Percent of Projects at Risk by Numbera, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amounta, d
Disbursement Ratio (%)e

3.0

3.8

8.6

8.5

54.5

43.2

38.5

6.8

Portfolio Assessment
CPPR during the year
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amount (US$ millions)

88

No

No

Yes

3,444

4,901

5,620

5,800

52

50

52

52

Since FY 80

Last Five FYs

291

16

27,285.6

1,931.7

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number

24.9

37.5

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amount

20.0

13.3

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank’s country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress(IP)
As deﬁned under the Portfolio Improvement Program
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank’s portfolio at the beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

*

All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursements Ratio, which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited
during the ﬁscal year.

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

CAS Annex B3:
Indonesia
Indicative IBRD Lending Program, FY13-15
Fiscal
Project ID
Year
FY 13

US$(M)

Strategic
Rewards
(H/M/L)

Implementation
Risks
(H/M/L)

M

2048

Planned Deliverables
Pro Growth

857

Power Transmission and Distribution II

327

M

Institutional, Tax Administration, Social and Investment (INSTANSI) DPL

300

M

L

Connectivity DPL

100

H

L

Financial Sector and Investment Climate Reform and Modernization (FIRM) DPL

100

M

L

30

H

H

80

M

H

95

M

M

Infrastructure Guarantee Fund
Pro Jobs
Sustainable Management of Agricultural Research and Technology
Dissemination project (SMARTD)
Research and Innovation in Science & Technology Project (RISET)
Pro Poor

175

1016

National Community Empowerment Program in Urban Areas for 2012-2014
Project (PNPM - Urban IV)

266

H

M

National Community Empowerment Program in Rural Areas for 2012-2014
Project (PNPM - Rural V)

650

H

M

100

M

M

Rural Water and Sanitation Program AF (PAMSIMAS II)

FY 14

750

Planned Deliverables
Pro Growth

600

Institutional, Tax Administration, Social and Investment (INSTANSI) DPL II

300

M

L

Connectivity DPL II

100

M

L

Road Assets Preservation Program (RAPP)

200

H

M

Pro Green

150

Solid Waste Management Improvement Support Project for Regional and
Metropolitan Cities

100

M

H

50

M

M

Financial Sector and Investment Climate Reform and Modernization (FIRM) DPL II

100

M

L

Geothermal II

300

M

M

Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Project III (COREMAP III)

Potential Deliverables *)

Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT DDO)

500

M

L

Renewable Energy for Electriﬁcation (1,000 islands)

300

M

M

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

89

Indicative IBRD Lending Program, FY13-15 (continued)
Fiscal
Project ID
Year
FY 15

US$(M)

Strategic
Rewards
(H/M/L)

Implementation
Risks
(H/M/L)

650

Planned Deliverables
Pro Growth

650

Institutional, Tax Administration, Social and Investment (INSTANSI) DPL III

300

M

L

Connectivity DPL III

100

M

L

Local Government and Decentralization Project II (DAK Reimbursement II)

250

H

M

Matenggeng Pumped storage power project

400

M

M

Metropolitan Area Development project

400

H

H

Skills Training for Economic Transformation

100

M

H

Corridor 5 (Lombok Tourism) Development

100

H

H

PNPM Rural

200

H

M

PNPM Urban

100

H

M

Indonesia Water Supply and Sanitation Investment Facility (IWSIF)

100

H

M

Energy Eﬃciency Finance Facility

100

H

M

Small and Medium Hydro Development

100

M

M

Potential Deliverables *)

*) subject to resolving of Indonesia’s exposures and/or readiness of direct lending to SOEs

90

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Annex B4:
Summary of Knowledge Service
(Thousand US$)
Planned Analytical and Advisory Work, FY13-14
BB

TF

Economic and Sector Work
FY 2013
Indonesia-Openness, Competition and Grow

143.2

Indonesia Economic Quarterly FY13

21.5

Indonesia: Urban Poverty Analysis

33.9

An Agenda for Senior Secondary Education

77.4

Indonesia Life Long Learning
Teacher Reform in Indonesia
PER: Financing Local Governments in ID

173.5
612.4

107.4
12.4
192.2

FY 2014
Education: ID-HE Strategic Studies

14.9

Indonesian Social Protection Public Expenditure Review (PER)
Improving Targeting Performance of Poverty Programs
HIV/AIDS PET Study (UBW 1st Tranche)
Indonesia ROSC Update Accounting and Audit

Technical Assistance
FY 2013
Support for Bureaucracy Reform

101.6

Public Procurement Reform
Indonesia's Non-Tariﬀ Measures
Policy Dialogue on Services

228.1
12.1

70.5

8.7

30.6

Rapid Response Supp. on Fin. Sec. Policy

49.7

170.3

Rapid Response Supp. on Trade Mon. & Pol

33.9

58.6

Supp. for ID Intl Econ. Engagement-FORA

10.8

367.1

Support for Enhancing Fiscal Transfer
Indonesia Viability Gap Financing

2.4
122.1

Corruption Prevention Capacity Building

936.5

Indonesia - Access to Justice (TF097761)

1,087.1

ID: eServices Secure Govt Network
Helping Generate Jobs for Pro-Poor Growth
Supp. for Dev. Gender Engagement in ID
TA- Food Security Policies in Indonesia
Sustainability of Ag Export Crops
Stunting Reduction and PNPM-Generasi TA
Indonesia Beverage Crops Value Chains

60.8
174.1

2,063.2

73.1
108.6
73.8

42.0

205.7
14.8

Food Security Policies in Indonesia

170.2

PNPM Field Operations

1,362.1

PNPM WINDOW 3

554.1

PNPM Supervision and Monitoring

4,931.2

TA for PNPM Generasi Pilot Program

3,616.9

PNPM M&E and Special Studies

7,763.8

PNPM Communication Strategy

2,387.0

Mainstreaming DRR in Indonesia phase II
Disaster Risk Financing
ID Climate Policy and Institutional Support

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

842.9
38.4
533.7

164.09

91

(Thousand US$)
Planned Analytical and Advisory Work, FY13-14
BB
WSP - Program Administration

TF

14.6

WSP-Advisory Services
Geothermal Power Support Program
Low-income Housing Policy and Finance
Modernizing Water Management Sys

2,135.0
2,713.1

0.1

899.6

126.2

480.4

1.0

MDTF - Indonesia Domestic Trade

4.1
2,037.7

TA for MIS and Evaluation Study

392.6

Energy Eﬃciency Financing Program

75.2

Indonesia Clean Stove Initiative

186.0

MDTF to Improve Investment Climate

17.0

2,286.2

ID - Logistics and Connectivity

20.3

474.8

Supporting Financial Sector Development

50.9

Jakarta Fiscal and Bond Issue
Strengthening Local Capacity for Poverty

52.2
142.6

ID-TF Local Government Capacity Development
Supp. for Strengthening Sub-National PFM
Sub National Development Diagnostics

475.2
1,441.1

135.6
32.7

FY 2014
Public Expenditure Analysis and Capacity Harmonization
Improving Poverty Data Quality
Support for Social Security Reform
Support for Domestic Trade

215.5

794.4

43.2

1,051.9

63.3

86.4

123.0

108.4

Integration of Poverty Reduction

11.8

Support for Non-Tax Revenue Management

47.3

Supporting ID Corruption Eradication
Indonesia SP Engagement TA

145.4

ID-TF CPDA

1,768.1

ID-TF CPDA Supervision & Operational

272.9

ID-TF CPDA Program Management & Admin
ID - Higher Education Intro/Dissemination

92

211.3
(46.0)

Natural resources and governance

55.5

Gas Development Master Plan

78.4

Sustainable Cities Dialogue

69.9

PEACH -TA and Capacity Building (BETF)

2.7
86.2

7.2
1,155.0

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Annex B5:
Indonesia - Key Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2005-11

East Asia & Pacific

Lower-middle-income

168.1

199.4

242.3

1,961.6

2.2

1.6

1.1

0.7

1.6

Urban population (% of population)

26.1

35.6

53.7

45.9

39.4

Total fertility rate (birth per woman)

3.7

2.7

2.1

1.8

2.9

Population
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)

2,518.7

Poverty (% of population)
National headcount index

13.3

Urban headcount index

9.9

Rural headcount index

16.6

45.9

39.4

Income
GNI per capita (US$)

510

980

2,680

3,696

1,619

Consumer price index (2005=100)

20

44

239

131

140

Food price index (2000=100)

15

38

260

Gini index

30.5

29.3

34.0

Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)

8.7

9.5

8.3

Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

39.5

39.1

42.8

0.6

1.2

2.0

2.0

3.8

4.0

Income/consumption distribution
Share of income or consumption

Social Indicators
Public expenditures
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Net primary school enrollment rate (% of age group)
Total

98

95

95

93

85

Male

99

97

97

93

87

Female

92

92

94

94

83
87

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Total

74

80

90

Urban

91

89

97

93

Rural

65

71

84

83

Immunization rate (% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles

26

63

89

95

80

DPT

27

69

83

94

79

27

18

6

25

Children malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Total

60

64

68

72

65

Male

58

62

67

70

64

Female

62

66

70

74

67

Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)

67

46

27

20

50

104

67

35

24

69

Male (per 1,000 population)

368

275

210

157

244

Female (per 1,000 population)

208

219

175

105

175

Maternal (per 100,000 live births)

440

240

89

300

Births attended by skilled health staﬀ (%)

37

75

91

57

Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15 - 59)

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMULDB system - 10/11/12
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Immunization: refers to children ages 12 - 23 months who received vaccinations before one year of age or
at any time before the survey

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

93

Annex B6:
Key Economic Indicators
<--------------- Actual ---------------->

Estimate

<------------- Projection ------------->

Indicator
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

National accounts (as %) of GDP
Gross domestic producta

100

100

100

100

100

100

Agriculture

15.3

15.3

14.7

12.6

10.7

9.3

100
8.2

Industry

47.7

47.0

47.2

43.0

40.4

37.8

35.2

Services

37.1

37.7

38.1

44.4

48.8

52.9

56.6

Total consumption

66.2

65.7

65.8

67.8

67.5

66.6

65.9

Gross domestic ﬁxed investment

31.1

32.1

32.0

33.3

34.5

35.4

36.6

Government investment

1.4

1.2

1.6

2.0

2.1

1.9

1.9

29.8

30.8

30.4

31.3

32.4

33.5

34.7

Exports (GNFS)b

24.2

24.6

26.3

31.0

28.8

28.0

27.2

Imports (GNFS)

21.4

22.9

24.9

28.9

26.5

25.8

24.7

Gross Domestic savings

22.8

34.3

34.2

32.2

32.5

33.4

34.1

Private investment

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product (US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

540

708

847

898

1,024

1,187

1,375

2,160

2,500

2,940

3,010

3,420

3,810

4,380

Real annual growth rates
Gross domestic products at market prices

4.6

6.2

6.5

6.1

6.3

6.6

6.6

Gross domestic income

7.0

4.1

5.0

9.1

6.5

6.6

7.9

Real annual per capita growth rates
Gross domestic product at market prices

3.5

5.1

5.4

5.0

5.3

5.6

5.6

Total consumption

3.2

3.0

2.6

3.7

3.6

4.3

4.2

Private consumption

1.6

3.6

2.7

3.9

4.1

3.9

4.0

132.8

174.8

221.5

259.6

271.7

306.6

339.2

119.6

158.1

200.8

236.8

245.8

275.9

304.4

111.6

153.5

197.3

278.4

295.2

332.5

374.0

Balance of Payment (US$ billion)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investments
Change in reserves

88.7

127.4

166.0

227.4

238.4

268.5

301.9

21.2

21.3

24.2

(18.9)

(23.5)

(25.9)

(34.8)

4.6

4.6

4.2

28.1

36.4

34.4

45.9

10.6

5.1

1.7

(20.6)

(16.3)

(20.2)

(12.6)

1.6

11.1

11.5

10.1

10.0

11.0

11.0

(12.5)

(30.3)

(11.9)

(0.1)

(13.2)

(20.3)

(16.6)

3.9

3.0

2.9

-2.1

-2.3

-2.2

-2.5

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates (YR00 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)

-19.4

4.6

4.5

2.9

5.8

11.1

10.6

Merchandise imports (CIF)

-17.9

18.6

12.5

7.2

3.6

12.1

12.0

Revenues

15.1

15.5

16.3

16.0

16.1

16.2

16.1

Expenditures

16.7

16.2

17.4

18.3

18.1

18.0

17.7

Budget surplus (+) or deﬁcit (-)

-1.6

-0.7

-1.1

-2.4

-1.9

-1.7

-1.6

Capital expenditure

2.7

2.6

2.8

3.5

3.6

3.4

3.3

Foreign ﬁnancing

0.7

0.4

0.2

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.9

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)c

94

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

<--------------- Actual ---------------->

Estimate

<------------- Projection ------------->

Indicator
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP

38.2

38.4

38.7

38.7

38.7

38.7

38.7

Growth of M2 (%)

13.0

15.4

16.4

13.0

14.7

15.9

15.9

Merchandise export price index

328.5

415.0

504.6

578.4

567.8

573.6

572.0

Merchandise import price index

430.3

521.5

604.0

699.9

7-8.3

711.4

714.3

76.3

79.6

83.5

82.6

80.2

80.6

80.1

129.3

146.3

146.7

135.7

129.1

122.0

115.6

Price indices (YR00 = 100)

Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)d
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)

4.8

5.1

5.4

4.4

5.1

5.0

4.8

GDP deﬂator (% change)

8.3

8.1

8.4

6.5

7.9

8.7

8.7

a.
b.
c.
d.

GDP at market prices
“GNFS“ denotes “goods and non factor services“
Actual ﬁgures was consolidated central government
“LCU“ denotes “local currency units“. An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

95

Annex B7:
Indonesia - Key Exposure Indicators
<--------------- Actual ---------------->

Estimate

<------------- Projection ------------->

Indicator
Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)

a

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

24,891

29,333

30,681

31,151

25,809

27,933

24,340

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb

123.8

111.5

98.3

88.4

83.4

73.5

66.8

TDO/GDP

32.5

32.8

30.6

30.9

26.8

23.0

20.3

TDS/XGS

17.8

16.2

13.4

11.5

9.1

8.7

6.7

Concessional/TDO

49.7

45.0

41.5

44.5

42.6

39.7

36.3

IBRD DS/public DS

14.0

13.4

10.0

6.1

5.5

4.3

4.7

Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%)c

25.3

26.3

24.4

21.6

22.3

16.0

16.3

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

IBRD DS/XGS

1.0

0.7

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

7,877

9,054

9,716

9,963

10,468

11,163

11,784

Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

6.8

8.2

9.3

10.1

11.6

12.4

13.3

IDA TDO (US$m)d

4.6

6.2

6.5

6.1

6.3

6.6

6.6

Loans

97.0

150.0

180.0

222.0

275.0

275.0

275.0

Equity and quasi-equity /c

50.0

7.1

5.0

65.0

25.0

25.0

25.0

0

207

627

627

627

627

627

IBRD TDO (US$m)d

IFC (US$m)

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private non guaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital
“XGS“ denotes exports of goods and services, including workers’ remittances
Preferred creditors are deﬁned as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF and the Bank for International Settlements
Includes present value of guarantees
Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments

note:

96

TDO as deﬁned by Bank Indonesia includes, among others, holdings of local currency instruments by non-resident investors and may
diﬀer from the ﬁgure that appears in Annex Table A2

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Annex B8:
IFC
Indonesia Commited and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio as of 9/30/2012
(In USD Millions)
Commited
FY
Approval

Company
Loan

2006

Bank Danamon

2011

Bank Intl Indo

10/12/2008

Bank of Banks

10/12/2008

Bima

2011

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

Disbursed Outstanding
*GT/RM

Participant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

58.18

0

0

5

0

58.18

0

0

0

0

75

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0
0

0

9.51

0

0

0

0

7.91

0

0

15

22.58

0

0

0

15

20.25

0

0

0

Biocarbon

0

5

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2004

Bonavista
School

0.21

0

0

0

0

0.21

1

0

0

0

2009/12

BTPN

149.58

68.88

0

0

0

49.58

68.88

0

0

0

2012

CIMB Niaga

75

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

FHP Indonesia I

0

25

0

0

0

0

0.14

0

0

0

2007/08

Fuqui Indonesia

18.82

0

0

0

2.44

18.82

0

0

0

2.44

2009

LIFF

0

39.49

0

0

0

0

21.57

0

0

0

2010

JICT

29.14

0

0

0

40

24.86

0

0

0

34.29

2012

Medco Power

2011

Oto Finance

2004/05

PT Ecogreen

7/8/2006

PT Karunia (KAS)

2008

PT Prakars (PAS)

2008

PT SAS

2006/08

0

25

0

0

0

0

25

0

0

0

71.84

0

0

0

116.25

71.84

0

0

0

116.25

4.58

0

0

0

0

4.58

0

0

0

0

11.27

0

0

0

0.67

11.27

0

0

0

0.67

7.09

0

0

0

2.22

7.09

0

0

0

2.22

2.45

0

0

0

0.67

2.45

0

0

0

0.67

PT TAS

6.18

0

0

0

0

6.18

0

0

0

0

2008/09

PT TVS

10.91

0

12

0

0

10.91

0

12

0

0

2009/11

PT Viscose

56.67

0

0

0

170

47.67

0

0

0

137

2008/09

Saratoga Asia II

0

19.61

0

0

0

0

7.72

0

0

0

2010

Trada

33.13

0

0

0

0

33.13

0

0

0

0

0/13

Wintermar

44.59

0

10

0

0

25.6

0

0

0

0

669.64

215.07

22

5

332.25

387.37

152.47

12

0

293.54

Total Portfolio

* Denote Guarantee and Risk Management Products
** Quasi Equity include noth loan and equity types

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

97

CAS Annex B8:
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Closed Project

329

IBRD/IDA*
Total Disbursed (Active)

1,956.46

of which has been repaid

82.43

Total Disbursed (Closed)

10,310.95

of which has been repaid

11,899.04

Total Disbursed (Active+Closed)

12,267.42

of which has been repaid

11,981.47

Total Undisbursed (Active)

4,584.61

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active+Closed)

4,584.61

Last PSB

Original Amount in US$
Millions

Active Projects
Supervision Rating
Project
ID

98

Project Name

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal
Year

IBRD

IDA

Difference Beetween Expected and
Actual Disbursements

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

Frm
Rev’d

P114348

Water Resources and Irr
Mgmt Program 2

S

S

2011

150

142.5

19.5

P113078

Geothermal Clean Energy
Investment Project

S

S

2012

175

175.0

30.0

P085133

Govt Final Mgt & Revenue
Admin Project

MS

MS

2005

55

5

34.7

34.7

25.1

P096921

ID-National UPP (PNPM
UPP)

MS

MS

2008

167.68

125

32.8

-77.1

37.9

P092218

ID-Indo Infrastructure
Finance Facilty

MU

MU

2009

100

100.0

0.0

P097104

ID-BERMUTU

S

MS

2008

24.5

P077175

ID-Domestic Gas Market
Development Proj.

S

MS

2006

160

P089479

ID-EArly Childhood
Education and Dev

S

S

2006

P083742

ID-Farmer Empower.
Agric. Tech. & Info

MS

MS

2007

P068133

ID-GEF MARINE
ELECTRONIC HWY

MS

MS

2006

P099757

ID-GEF-Geothermal Power
Generation Dev

MS

MU

2008

P113341

ID-Health Professional
Education Quality

S

S

2010

P085374

ID-HIGHER EDUCATION

S

MS

2005

50

P063913

ID-Java-Bali Pwr Sector &
Strength

MS

MS

2003

303.715

P111577

ID-Local Government and
Decentralization

S

S

2010

220

P122810

ID-PNPM RURAL IV

MS

MS

2012

521.19

P079906

ID-Strategic Roads
Infrastructure

MS

MS

2007

414.4551764

P078070

ID-Support for Poor and
Disadvant Areas

MS

MS

2005

138

P090991

ID-URBAN WATER SUPPLY

P071296

ID-USDRP

32.8

61.5

19.1

16.7

9.2

19.8

67.5

0.7

-4.5

60

8.9

7.5

8.3

3.2

3.2

4

2.8

2.8

43.9

31.3

10.6

77.822

S

MS

2010

23.56

MS

MS

2005

90

30
3.6

1.5
35

6.6

1.5

7.3

6.9

5.9

34.5

8.0

8.0

163.3

41.6

21.7

-130.8

69.9

71.4

1.4

0.2

16.7

4.8

3.8

10.4

17.0

10.4

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

Last PSB

Original Amount in US$
Millions

Active Projects
Supervision Rating
Project
ID

Project Name

P085375

ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS)

P096532

ID-Dam Oprational
Improvement (DOISP)

P118916

Indonesia Infrastructure
Guarantee Fund

P117323

Indonesia Power
Transmission
Development

P111034

Jakarta Urgent Flood
Mitigation Project

P100740
P118113
P130048

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal
Year

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Difference Beetween Expected
and Actual Disbursements

Cancel.

137.5

Undisb.

Orig.

S

S

2006

9.3

0.3

MU

U

2009

50

39.2

24.8

#

#

2013

29.6

29.6

MS

MU

2011

225

225.0

S

S

2012

139.64

139.6

0.0

PINTAR

MU

MU

2009

110

109.7

81.0

PNPM - Urban III Project

MS

MS

2010

149.98

7.0

-7.7

Progr for Econ Resilience,
Inv & Soc Ass

#

#

2012

2000

2000.0

P118150

Scholarships Program

MS

MS

2011

112.65

104.9

P106384

Strengthening Indonesia
Statistics

MS

MS

2011

65

65.0

P117243

Sustainable Management
of Ag Research

#

#

2013

80

80.0

P112158

Upper Cisokan Pumped
Storage Hydro-Elect

S

S

2011

640

640.0

0.0

P090990

Western Indonesia
National Roads Improv.

S

MS

2011

250

250.0

46.7

4590.6

233.8

Overall Result

FY2013-2015 Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia

6565.592176

521.5

12.3

22.3

Frm
Rev’d

105.8

99

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

300

6

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

400 Miles

100 °

5

A

105 °

L

A

19

9

JAWA

JAWA BARAT
JAWA TENGAH
D.I. YOGYAKARTA
JAWA TIMUR
BALI
NUSA TENGGARA BARAT
NUSA TENGGARA TIMUR
RIAU KEPULAUAN
KALIMANTAN BARAT
KALIMANTAN TENGAH
KALIMANTAN SELATAN

105 °

10

13

23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

15

115 °

15 °

10 °

Parepare

Makassar

Waingapu

120 °

Timor

Alor

125 °

Kupang

Muna
Baubau

Moa

Aru
Is.

130 °

33
Timika

Yapen

Biak

Arafura Sea

Tanimbar
Is.

Kai
Is.

32

135 °

AUSTRALIA

Babar

TIMOR-LESTE

Wetar

Misool

B a nd a 31
S ea

Manokwari
Sorong

Waigeo

Jayapura

140 °

140 °

Merauke

Puncak Jaya
(5030 m)

PAPUA

OCEAN

135 °

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

RAILROADS

MAIN ROADS

RIVERS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

PROVINCE CAPITALS

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

INDONESIA

PACIFIC

Amahai Fakfak

Ceram
Ambon

Buru

30

Morotai

Halmahera

Obi

Talaud
Is.

10 °

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

Ternate

Sula Is.

Peleng

Gorontalo

Kendari

Ende

Flores

29

Sumba

18

28

25

24

Manado

Celebes
Sea

INDIAN OCEAN

17

Mataram

Palu

26

SULAWESI

27

Mamuju

Balikpapan

Samarinda

Tarakan

125 °

PHILIPPINES
Sulu
Sea

120 °

Sumbawa
Bali Lombok
Raba

16

22

Denpasar

Surabaya

Madura

KALIMANTAN TIMUR
SULAWESI UTARA
GORONTALO
SULAWESI TENGAH
SULAWESI BARAT
SULAWESI SELATAN
SULAWESI TENGGARA
MALUKU UTARA
MALUKU
PAPUA BARAT
PAPUA

14

21

Bandjarmasin

Ja va S ea

Yogyakarta

23

KALIMANTAN

I

115 °

BRUNEI

Palangkaraya

20

S

Bandar
11
Lampung
JAKARTA
Serang
12 Bandung Semarang

8

Y

Belitung

Pangkalpinang

Bangka

Palembang

7

Jambi

Pontianak

Tanjungpinang

Lingga

110 °

VIETNAM

Natuna
Besar

SINGAPORE

SUMATERA

3

Bengkulu

4

M

Pekanbaru

Enggano

400 Kilometers

NANGGROE ACEH DARUSSALAM
SUMATERA UTARA
RIAU
SUMATERA BARAT
JAMBI
BENGKULU
SUMATERA SELATAN
LAMPUNG
BANGKA-BELITUNG
BANTEN
D.K.I. JAKARTA

PROVINCES:

95 °

200

Siberut

Padang

aw

.

100

200

nt

Is

0

0

Nias

2

Medan

Pematangsiantar

1

Me

ai

5°

0°

Simeulue

5°

INDONESIA

THAILAND

MYANMAR

Banda Aceh

10 °

15 °

100 °

A

0°

5°

15 °

10 °

PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

95 °

IBRD 33420R2

AUGUST 2008

The World Bank Oﬃce Jakarta
Jakarta Stock Exchange Building, Tower 2, 12th ﬂoor
Jl. Jenderal Sudirman Kav 52-53
Jakarta 12190, Indonesia

