d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

For Official Use Only

Report No: 25925 GUI

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF GUINEA

June 10, 2003

Guinea Country Office
Country Department 11
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

(Exchange Rate Effective May 1, 2003)

Currency Unit = Guinean francs (GNF)
US$1.00 = 1973 Guinean francs
Guinean francs 1.00 = US$0.00051

FISCAL YEAR

January 1-December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AfDB 
CBSD 
CFAA 
CIDA 
CPAR 
CPPR 
CRD 
ECOWAS 
EU 
GDP 
GTZ 
HIPC 
IDA 
IDF 
IFC 
IMF 
MDGs 
MIGA 
NPVR 
OED 
PER 
PRGF 
PRSC 
PRSP 
QAG 
SAC 
SME 
UNDP 
UNIDO 
USAID 

African Development Bank
Capacity Building for Service Delivery Program
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Canadian International Development Agency
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Communautes ruraux de developpement
Economic Community of West African States
European Union
Gross domestic product
Deutsche Gesellschaft fuir Technische Zusammenarbeit
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Net present value debt-to-export ratio
Operations Evaluation Department of the World Bank
Public expenditure review
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility of the International Monetary Fund
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Quality Assurance Group
Structural Adjustment Credit
Small and medium size enterprises
United Nation Development Program
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
United States Agency for International Development

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Country Program Coordinator: 
Country Manager/Team Leader: 

Callisto E. Madavo
Mamadou Dia
Peter N. Ngomba
Jan Weetjens

REPUBLIC OF GUINEA

Country Assistance Strategy

CONTENTS

v

1

23

Executive Summary ..................
1. Country context ......................
A. 
Poverty and growth .................... 
1
B. 
Political environment, governance, and regional stability ........................................ 3
C. 
Fiscal performance and management of public finances ..........................................
5
Progress in social sectors .................................................... 5
D. 
2. Guinea's Poverty Reduction Strategy ................................................ 
.
.
8
A. 
PRSP pillar 1: fostering sustainable and equitable growth ....................................... 9
B. 
PRSP pillar 2: access to and quality of basic social services ................... 
............... 11
C. 
PRSP pillar 3: governance and institutional and human capacity .............. 
............ 12
D. 
Summary of PRSP assessment .................................................... 
13
3. Prospects for Growth .................................................... 
14
4. Bank Group Assistance Strategy .................................................... 
15
A. 
Objectives of the 2003 country assistance strategy .15
B. 
The Bank's experience in Guinea, lessons learned, and consultation .15
C. 
Strategic elements of the CAS .18
D. 
Support to PRSP pillar 1: sustainable and equitable growth .20
E. 
Support to PRSP pillar 2: access and quality of basic social services .21
F. 
Support to PRSP pillar 3: governance and institutional and human capacity .
G. 
Donor coordination and collaboration .24
5. Bank Group Assistance Program 
.
A. 
Managing the existing portfolio .................................. 
B. 
Analytical and advisory services .................................. 
C. 
Lending program .................................. 
D. 
Scenarios and triggers .................................. 
E. 
Impact of IDA lending on debt sustainability .................................. 
F. 
PRSP and CAS monitoring .................................. 
G. 
MIGA and IFC .................................. 
H. 
Risks and mitigation measures .................................. 
6. Concluding remarks ................................... 

25
25
26
27
28
30
31
33
33
34

......................... 

.

Boxes
Box 1: Guinea core labor standards .................................................................
8
Box 2: Summary of 2002 client survey results ......................... 
........................... 18

Figures
Figure 1: Transition from support through projects towards programmatic lending ........... 19

Tables
Table 1: Evolution of health indicators (percent) ................................................................. 6
Table 2: Evolution of education indicators (percent) ..............................................................
7
Table 3: PRSP objectives and indicators .................................................................
9
Table 4: Guinea 2002 update of PRSP macroeconomic framework (percentage of GDP or
Guinean francs) ................................................................ 
10
Table 5: Guinea financing requirements, 2003-2006 ............................................... 14
Table 6: Existing Bank portfolio ................................................................ 
25
Table 7: Recently completed and ongoing core diagnostic and other ESW ........................... 26
Table 8: New analytical and advisory services ................................................................ 
27
28
Table 9: Bank assistance program 2003-06 ................................................................ 
Table 10: Program triggers ................................................................ 
30
Table 11: Guinea MDGs and PRSP targets ................................................................ 
31
Table 12: Core CAS benchmarks ................................................................ 
32

Annexes
Annex A2 
Guinea at a Glance
Annex B2 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3 
IDA Program Summary and Bank Group Fact Sheet (IFC and MIGA Program)
Annex B4 
Summary of Non-lending Services
Annex B5 
Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Annex B6 
Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7 Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8 
IDA Operations Portfolio and Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B9 
CAS Program Matrix
Annex C 
HIPC tracking action plan
Annex D 
PRSP objectives, strategies, and donor support
Annex E 
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Annex F 
Bank Fund Relation
Annex G 
Map IBRD 31718

This country assistance strategy was produced under the general direction of Mainadou Dia, Country Director,
CDI I, and Peter Ngomba, Country Program Coordinator, CD1 1, by a team led by Jan Weetjens, Country
Manager. The team included Ezzeddine Larbi, Zeljko Bogetic, Kevin Lumbila, Boubacar-Sid Barry, Suzanne
Piriou-Sall, Moctar Thiam, Amadou Oury Diallo, Catherine Farvacque, Ronald Kopicki, Linda English, Tonia
Marek, Anne Pierre-Louis, Khamna Rogo, Rogerio Pinto, Stefanie Teggeman, Noureddine Bouzaher, Ousman
Jah, Sarah Lacoche, Issa Sanogo, Bella Diallo, Mathieu Meguhe, Marina Ghea, Kim Venne, Wendy S. Ayres
Asmaou Diallo-Bah, Dominique Aka-Abhe, and Mariama Diabate.

Guinea Country Assistance Strategy
Fiscal Years 2004-2006
Executive Summary

i. 

In November 1997, the Board discussed Guinea's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS),

and a Progress Report in July 2001. Guinea presented its PRSP to the Board in July 2002. Since
the 1997 CAS, Guinea had modest growth, and this growth was not translated into significant
poverty reduction. Nevertheless, 
important progress was made 
in improving health and
education services and outcomes.
ii. 
In discussing the 2003 CAS, Executive Directors may wish to address these questions:

* 

Are the triggers to move from the base to the high and low case lending scenarios
appropriate?

* 
Is the proposed strategy to prepare the country for PRSCs appropriate?
Country context and the government's program
iii. 
Guinea has great potential for economic growth due to its abundance of minerals, its
excellent conditions for agriculture, and its strategic location that favors trade. Guinea's real
gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average rate of 4 percent per year during the past
decade. This growth, however, has not been widely shared. As a result, the proportion of the
population living in poverty has not fallen during the decade and remained at about 40 percent.
Guinea is mobilizing around 12 percent of its GDP in fiscal revenues, and thus has limited
resources available to finance investments in priority sectors. The efficiency and effectiveness of
public expenditures is also poor. This weak performance is closely linked to problems with
govemance and corruption, which raise the cost of doing business and prevent Guinea from
unlocking its huge potential.

iv. 
The overall objectives of Guinea's PRSP are to reduce poverty, and to improve the living
conditions and prospects of the population, particularly the poorest people. These objectives will
be achieved through action in three broad areas, which also constitute the framework for the
CAS: (a) fostering sustainable and equitable growth, (b) improving access and quality of basic
social services, and (c) strengthening governance and institutional and human capacity. To foster
sustainable and equitable growth requires improving the overall investment climate. This calls
for a stable macroeconomic and financial environment; improved access to basic infrastructure
(specifically electricity, water, and transportation); and a strengthened institutional, legal, and
regulatory environment.
v. 
To improve access and quality of basic social services, the government's strategy is to
increase the transfer of resources to priority sectors and to local levels of government and
beneficiaries. This will be achieved through the further consolidation of the medium-term
expenditure framework. The strategy also calls for further transfer of responsibilities for
financial management, and for strengthening of transparency and accountability of service
providers through empowerment of beneficiaries.
vi. 
The PRSP recognizes that achieving its third objective-strengthening governance and
institutional and human capacity-is critical for achieving the first two objectives. The PRSP
calls for decentralizing and deconcentrating resources and decision-making authority to

vi

subnational 
levels of government, stepping up the fight against corruption, and building
institutional and human capacity at both the local and central levels.
World Bank Group program
vii. 
This CAS will support the implementation of Guinea's PRSP. By supporting the PRSP
implementation, the Bank also supports Guinea in achieving the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), which are consistent with the PRSP objectives.
viii. 
The current CAS period will be a period of transition during which the Bank will move
gradually towards more programmatic support. This transition period is required mainly to
strengthen Guinea's fiduciary arrangements in public finance management and institutional
framework for service delivery. During this period, the Bank will assist Guinea to reform its
institutional and policy framework, build its capacity for service delivery, and improve the
management of public finances so that Guinea's national institutions are able to effectively
implement the country's development programs. To support this transition, the Bank and other
donors will gradually move away from projects to prepare the various sectors for a more
programmatic approach. To the extent that satisfactory public expenditure and fiduciary
arrangements would be in place, the Bank would consider moving towards future support
through PRSCs.
ix. 
During this transition period, the Bank will provide continuity in its support to Guinea by
using selected economic and sector work, a structural adjustment operation, and second phases of
existing adaptable program loans to support the PRSP objectives of sustainable and equitable
growth, better access to social services, and stronger capacity and governance. To prepare
Guinea for support through PRSCs, these activities will be designed to ensure that sector reforms
are consistent with cross-sectoral reforms in the area of public finance management, management
of human resources, and local administration. Thus, the Bank will support the implementation of
the PRSP while fostering progress with regard to governance, 
transformation of country
institutions, and empowerment of beneficiaries.
x. 
IDA commitments during the three-year CAS period could total approximately US$125.4
million. No IDA grants are scheduled for Guinea during the CAS period. About 30 percent of
IDA funding would be provided in the form of budget support. The base case scenario is
consistent with Guinea's macroeconomic program. It assumes no further deterioration in the
security situation in the subregion, continued political stability in the country, and sustained
efforts 
from 
the government 
to 
(a) 
implement 
the PRSP; 
(b) maintain a satisfactory
macroeconomic 
framework; 
(c) 
strengthen governance; 
and 
(d) 
ensure 
satisfactory
implementation of Bank supported programs.
Risks and mitigation measures
xi. 
Both domestic and exogenous factors constitute risks that might trigger the low case
scenario. The domestic factors are mainly related to Guinea's capacity to improve governance,
maintain fiscal discipline and political stability in the country. Exogenous factors are related to
the stability in the subregion. Slippages in the area of governance or macroeconomic stability
would trigger the low case scenario for Bank support. To mitigate the risk related to political
stability, the Bank is supporting institutional reforms and encouraging the empowerment of local
communities and local governments. This is expected to increase the sustainability of the Bank's
programs. To mitigate the impact of the insecurity in neighboring countries, the Bank through
support for community driven development will assist the government in extenuating the impact
of refugees on local communities. The Bank will also continue to coordinate closely with the
specialized UN agencies to ensure adequate response.

1. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT

1. 
Guinea's real GDP grew at an average rate of 4 percent per year during the past
decade. This growth however has not significantly reduced poverty or led to major
improvements in social spending. Specifically:

* Guinea remains one of the poorest countries in the world because growth, which comes
mainly from extractive industries and agriculture, has not been equitable.
* Guinea faces external constraints due to the instability in the subregion and deteriorating
terms of trade, and internal constraints related to governance, and a centralized and
interventionist public sector.
* Guinea raises limited fiscal resources.' Priority expenditures are not always used
effectively or efficiently.
In spite of some improvements in social indicators, more effort is required if Guinea is to
meet its PRSP objectives and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

* 

A. 

Poverty and growth

2. 
The incidence of poverty in Guinea remains high. Although no recent data on
Guinea's poverty profile are available (the most recent poverty profile was produced in 1995)
the PRSP provides a discussion of poverty in Guinea.2 3 Guinea ranked 159 out of 173
countries listed in UNDP's 2002 Human Development Report. This is marginally better than
its 1994 ranking of 161 out of 174 countries. While gross enrollment and infant mortality
rates have improved in recent years (see tables 1 and 2), per capita gross national income
stood at only US$410 in 2002 (World Bank Atlas method), as compared to US$450 in 2000.4
With regard to poverty, this decline in per capita gross national income could affect the
relative gain in social welfare in the medium and long run.
3. 
Based on the 1994/95 poverty profile, about 40 percent of the population nationwide
is estimated to live on less than US$1.00 per day. About 53 percent of rural dwellers are
estimated to be poor, compared with 25 percent of urban residents. Poverty also varies from
region to region. The poorest region is Haute Guinee, with about 60 percent of the
population living below the poverty line. Next are Moyenne Guinea and Guinee Forestiere
with respectively 50 percent and 40 percent of the population poor. The richest region is
Basse Guinee with 30 percent of people living below the poverty line.5 Of all socioeconomic
groups, subsistence farmers are worst off. They account for 68 percent of the poor, although
they make up just 50 percent of the population.

I Fiscal revenues are around 12 percent of GDP.
It would be difficult to achieve the PRSP objective of reducing poverty from 40 percent in 1995 to 30 percent in
2010 if poverty elasticity were to remain constant and if GDP were to grow at its rate since 1996 of about 4 percent per

2 

year.

3'The 

comprehensive household survey to be completed in 2003 will provide the data needed to analyze changes in
the incidence, depth, geographical distribution, and causes of poverty. These poverty data will be used to update the
PRSP. Support to strengthen Guinea's statistical and monitoring and evaluation systems will be provided through the
Statistical Capacity Facility of the World Bank. A full poverty assessment is scheduled for 2006 and will support the
preparation of the next CAS.
This change can be attributed to three factors: depreciation of the Guinean franc, the decrease of external
assistance by 42 percent and the increase of private transfers to foreigners by 23 percent over the same period.
5 
These figures from the PRSP will be confirmned through the national household survey, currently underway.

- 2 -

4. 
About 50 percent of Guinea's citizens are below 15 years of age, leading to a very
high dependency ratio. Life expectancy in 2000 stood at 47 years. Population is growing at
about 2.7 percent a year, and is projected to double during the next 20-25 years.
5. 
Real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita during 1996-2002 grew by only
1.4 percent. Inflation measured by consumer price index was 5.4 percent in 2001, but
accelerated to 6.1 percent by the end of 2002, as government pursued an accommodating
monetary policy to finance the budget deficit in the second half of 2002. The government is
discussing an IMF-supported Staff Monitored Program to reestablish macroeconomic
stability. This is needed to negotiate a new Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)
program with the IMF, and to move to the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC)
completion point, expected by 2004.
6. 
The main sector source of growth was mining and industry while growth of
agriculture and services lagged behind in part due to constraints on the overall business
climate. 
Industry and mining, which accounts for 38.1 percent of GDP, has grown at an
average of 5.2 percent over the last decade and has been the primary driver of growth.
Growth in the sector comes mainly from the extraction of bauxite, diamonds, and gold. 6
Manufacturing, an activity that typically has greater linkages to the domestic economy and
therefore greater impact on poverty than the extractive industry, has grown by 4.6 percent
over the last decade. Agriculture 7 has grown at an average annual rate of 4.0 percent for the
past ten years, but most of the agricultural growth has come from expansion of cultivated
areas, rather than through improvements in productivity. Services, comprising mainly
commerce and transportation, have grown slowly-at an annual rate of 3.2 percent since
1992-due to significant obstacles in Guinea's environment for commerce and trade.8

7. 

Growth has been hampered by a weak investment climate. In the mining sector,

persisting uncertainties regarding the fiscal regime for major investments and continued
public sector interference deter private investment. Following departure of private partners,
the power and water sector face deep-rooted problems, linked to weak management and
maintenance of production and distribution infrastructure, and uncertainty regarding the legal
and regulatory framework. The power sector is also plagued by poor collection of tariffs
from consumers and lack of transparency in financial management. Agricultural productivity
is hampered by low use of inputs, poor marketing infrastructure, weak transportation and
trade policies, and weak rural financial services. Widespread tax evasion and lack of political
will to enforce regulations are undermining the contribution of fisheries to the economy and
their sustainable management. Complex tariff regulations, institutional and governance
problems in customs and tax administration, and inefficiencies in the operation of Conakry's
port and international airport limit the development of services, especially trade. Weaknesses
in telecommunications also discourage investment and impede Guinea's growth.
8. 
Nevertheless, Guinea has maintained its external competitiveness. After being
relatively stable, Guinea's real exchange rate index depreciated at an average annual rate of 9
percent during 1998-01.9 The real depreciation of the Guinean franc preserved the country's

6 

Guinea has over 30 percent of the world's known reserves of bauxite and has since 1971 been the world's second
largest producer of bauxite after Australia.
7 Agriculture's contribution to GDP reached 25.5 percent in 2002, compared with 22.3 percent in 1992.
Poor growth in services has reduced its contribution to GDP from 49.8 percent in 1992 to 36.4 percent in 2002.
9 
The measure of the real effective exchange used is the multilateral index defined as the ratio of the nominal
effective exchange rate index multiplied by the ratio of the weighted average of the CPIs of the trading partners to the
CPI of Guinea. A decline (increase) of the index implies an appreciation (depreciation) in the real value of the local

8 

- 3 -

external competitiveness, allowing bauxite exports to increase by 2 percent. However, the
devaluation of Brazil's currency 
in 1999 and Australia's ability 
to maintain 
its
competitiveness posed a challenge for Guinean bauxite in the world markets. Looking to the
future, bauxite prices are forecast to recover in 2003 and over the medium term, following
the sharp fall of aluminum prices after September 11, 200 1.
9. 
Guinea is addressing challenges for regional integration and trade. Although
some progress has been made on achieving regional integration, much more needs to be
done. While Guinea has formally adopted the Organization for the Harmonization of
Business Law in Africa agreements, training of judicial personnel and increasing awareness
in the business community of its provisions are still needed. Preparations, including customs
reform, are scheduled for mid-2003 to facilitate adoption of the common external tariff. The
launching of the West African Monetary Zone is postponed to July 2005.10 Reforms in
Guinea's customs and tax administration are being pursued as part of Guinea's program
supported by the IMF, and the mobilization of financing to link Guinea's road network with
Senegal, Mali, and C6te d'Ivoire is being undertaken through a donor conference.
10. 
Environmental resources are under pressure. Guinea possesses significant forests
harboring endemic species. The forest region is also the source of several of West Africa's
largest rivers. 
These resources are under threat from demographic pressures, poor
agricultural practices, mining activities, and influxes of refugees. Degradation of these
resources in turn is leading to declines in soil fertility and consequently to falls in agricultural
productivity.
B. 
Political environment, governance, and regional stability
11. 
Since the start of the Second Republic in 1986, Guinea's political institutions
have experienced several important changes and faced challenges. Guinea approved a
multiparty constitution in 1991, and held presidential elections in 1993 and 1998. In 1994 it
allowed the operation of an independent press, although radio and television remain under
state control. The imprisonment of one of the main opposition candidates in 1999 resulted in
significant political tensions in the country. He was subsequently released from prison in
2001. A national referendum in 2002 to amend the constitution eliminated term limits and
age restrictions for the president (which allowed the president to run for a third consecutive
tern) and modified the administrative organization of the country. All opposition parties
except one boycotted the July 2002 legislative elections to protest what they perceived to be
irregularities in the management of the election process. Guinea's bilateral development
partners also voiced concerns about the referendum and parliamentary elections, especially
with regard to the mandate and independence of the electoral committee, the neutrality of the
public service, and the access of political parties to the media. Guinea's institutions of
representative democracy and local participation-the national assembly and the local
government councils-are still evolving and in the process of developing their capacity to
become effective sources of checks and balances on the executive.
12. 
Poor governance and corruption are major factors inhibiting growth and
reduction of poverty. Little progress has been made to curb widespread rent seeking

currency. This real effective exchange index is the reciprocal of the index constructed by the IMF, which defines the
real exchange rate as the relative price of non-tradable to tradable goods.
1° 
The criteria for countries to participate in the monetary zone include: achieving by 2003 a five per cent inflation
rate; reducing budget deficit to 4 percent of GDP; limniting central bank financing of budget deficits to 10 percent of the
previous year's fiscal revenues; and maintaining foreign exchange reserves to six months of imports.

-4 -

behavior and corruption. These problems hurt disproportionately the poor, since they often
belong to the less politically connected segments of the population. Three years after the
creation of Guinea's Anti-Corruption Committee, governance has worsened according to
observers. For example, convictions were made in only one of the corruption cases identified
by the committee. Complaints by the Anti-Corruption Committee and a recent strike by
lawyers to protest the infringement on the operations of the judicial system by the ministry of
justice highlight the widespread dissatisfaction with the judiciary.
13. 
Guinea has in place the legislation and the institutional framework needed to
strengthen the rule of law. However, powerful groups that benefit from the current system
have often succeeded in protecting their privileges by delaying the application of the rule of
law and by preventing the proper operating of institutions. As discussed in the PRSP,
improving governance is hindered by Guinea's weak institutional and human capacity, by its
centralized procedures for managing government business, and by the limited involvement of
citizens in the management of public affairs.
14. 
Guinea's highly centralized and interventionist public sector amplifies the
governance challenge. While the November 2001 amendments to the constitution can be
seen as a reversal of earlier progress on decentralization (districts and quartiers which used to
have democratically-elected councils and presidents are now governed by appointed
presidents), they also consolidated the communautes rurales de developpement (CRD) and
the municipal governments as the fundamental units of local government. Nevertheless, the
electoral procedures to be followed at the CRD level to ensure full accountability of CRD-
elected leaders to their constituents remain to be clarified. At the same time, a system of
checks and balances at the prefectoral level (which is the most important deconcentrated
level of government) through development councils remains to be established. Nevertheless,
progress has been made in the case of Conakry with the introduction of an improved
allocation of local fiscal revenues between 
the government of Conakry and the five
municipalities of Conakry, contributing to greater financial autonomy of the municipalities.
15. 
Guinea has been experiencing humanitarian, economic, and security difficulties
due the crises in the subregion. Pressures to spend to meet humanitarian needs of refugees
from a series of regional crises have been significant.11 It has been recently estimated that the
cost of accommodating refugees from the latest crisis in Cote d'Ivoire will create a small
financing gap of about US$5 million.12
The influx of refugees has adversely affected
Guinea's economy primarily by disrupting trade, transport, and remittances of Guinean
workers abroad. Moreover, regional uncertainty has curbed foreign direct investment and
trade, dampening the overall level of economic activity. While Guinea has benefited
somewhat from a temporary transport diversion from Cote d'Ivoire, the cumulative effect of
these crises has been negative. However, the most direct effect of the security situation on
the economy has worked through the budget: increased military and security spending may
have squeezed other priority expenditures.

I According to the report to the Secretary-General of the United Nations from the mission of the humanitarian
envoy for the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire "the Government of Guinea has been the most generous country for asylum
seekers in Africa and prior to the outbreak of the armed conflict in Cote d'Ivoire, Guinea was hosting an estimated
100,000 Liberian and Sierra Leonean refugees" (January-February 2003).
'An Approach Paper for Responding to the Impact of the Cote d'lvoire Crisis on the Neighboring Countries,"
February 2003, World Bank.

12 

- 5 -

C. 
16. 

Fiscal performance and management of public finances
Fiscal revenues remain well below the subregional average. Guinea mobilized

only 12.1 percent of GDP (excluding grants) in 2002 in fiscal revenues, as compared to an
average in the subregion of 18 percent. Low mobilization of revenues is due primarily to
wide-ranging tax exemptions, a weak regulatory framework, institutional weaknesses 
in
customs and tax collection, and governance problems. Private entrepreneurs stated during
the CAS consultations that fiscal revenues could be substantially increased through better
governance and greater transparency in the collection and management of taxes. Moreover,
much economic activity takes place in the informal sector, which also constrains Guinea's
capacity to raise fiscal revenues.

17. 

The pattern and quality of public expenditures have improved recently, but

challenges remain. 
Budget allocations 
to priority sectors 
(education, health, rural
development, and roads) have risen, with the share of the budget allocated to these sectors
rising to 32 percent of total nonwage recurrent expenditures in 2001 from 25.5 percent in
1997. Four important factors account for the improvement: (a) public expenditures are
increasingly being managed through the medium-term expenditure framework, (b) reforms in
the budget mechanisms have been introduced to allow resources to be transferred to
subnational levels of the government, (c) public procurement has been deconcentrated to the
regional and prefectoral levels; and (d) a computer-based accounting and monitoring system
has been introduced. While these are important steps, challenges remain to ensure that all
expenditures follow budgetary procedures, to further improve expenditure tracking systems,
and to develop monitoring and evaluation systems to allow analysis of the impact of
expenditures. The government started in 2002 to disseminate budget figures through the
media, particularly for priority sectors.
18. 
HIPC and debt sustainability. Guinea reached its decision point under the
enhanced HIPC Initiative in December 2000. At the end 1999, the net present value (NPV)
of Guinea's debt was estimated to be US$1,727 million and was equivalent to 219 percent of
exports. HIPC assistance 
lowered the debt stock by US$545 million in NPV terms,
equivalent to US$800 in nominal terms. The assistance from the International Development
Association (IDA) was US$152 million in NPV terms, equivalent to US$234 million in
nominal terms. HIPC assistance reduced Guinea's debt burden substantially. The NPV of
debt-to-exports was projected to fall to 133.6 percent at the end of 2002 and to remain under
the 150 percent threshold throughout the projection period (1999-2018).'3
19. 
Guinea remains vulnerable to external shocks. An update of the debt sustainability
analysis (annex E) shows that exports have been lower than projected for the decision point,
mainly due to the fall in bauxite prices. The NPV of debt-to-exports is higher than expected
at decision point projections. 
It will remain below 200 percent with prudent external
borrowing policies and in the absence of adverse shocks, but a drop in exports would threaten
long-term debt sustainability.
D. 
Progress in social sectors

20. 

Guinea has made progress towards achieving the MDGs for health, but much

more needs to be done. Since adopting the Bamako Initiative and reorganizing its health

13 

The completion point, which was initially scheduled for December 2002, is now scheduled for December 2004,
after successful completion of a Staff Monitored Program and adoption and beginning of implementation of a new
PRGF.

- 6 -

system in 1991, Guinea has significantly reduced infant and under-five mortality and
maternal mortality, especially in the rural areas. Guinea has also increased immunization
coverage against measles from 35 percent in 1990 to 52 percent in 2001, and improved
access of women to prenatal care from 57 to 65 percent of pregnant women. The poor now
seek much more care for common, but often fatal childhood problems, such as diarrhea and
acute respiratory illnesses. However they are much less likely to follow-up care than the
better off. Nevertheless, the total fertility rate is 5.5, maternal mortality exceeds 520 per
100,000 live births, the contraceptive prevalence rate is only 4 percent, and the unmet
demand for family planning services is over 20 percent. These indicators are worse in rural
areas and among the poor.
Table 1: Evolution of health indicators (percent)

1990 

1992 

Guinea 

1994-95 

Africa

1998-99 

1998-99

1 99 7-98 
46.5 

Life expectancy at birth 

Infant mortality rate 

Under five mortality rate 

43.7 
44.4 
45.7 
47 
n.a. 
136.3 
121.3 
120 
98 
229 
229 
n.a. 
182 
177 
Maternal mortality rate 
n.a. 
666 
470 
493 
528
Total fertility rate 
n.a. 
5.7 
n.a. 
5.4 
5.5 
5.2
Source: Demographic and health surveys 1992 and 1999, household integrated survey, World Bank,
Ministry of Health (analyse du secteur sante), United States Bureau of Ceslsus.

47
91
151

21. 
In spite of improvements, health expenditures continue to be low (less than 2 percent
of GDP) and are focused on secondary care, tertiary care, and central administration, while
only 14 percent of expenditures goes to primary care 14 . The wealthier groups benefit the
most from the public health expenditures. For example, 65 percent of women from the
richest income quintile gave birth in a public facility, while only 11 percent of women from
the poorest quintile did. About 60 percent of health personnel are concentrated in Conakry,
serving only 20 percent of the countries' population, and shortages of drugs and vaccines
continue to hamper service quality.

22. 

Access to education has improved markedly during the past ten years, but issues

of equity in access and quality still need to be addressed. Guinea has experienced average
enrolment growth rates of 10 percent per year (12 percent for girls) during the 1990s,
resulting in significant improvements in girls' schooling, survival, and literacy rates (see
table 2).15 Learning outcomes in both French and math have also improved during the past
five years. Nevertheless, Guinea needs to address serious disparities and management issues
in the sector in order to meet the MDG of having all children complete primary school by
2015.
23. 
In recent years, public expenditures in education increased from 1.7 percent of GDP
in 1999 to 2.2 percent in 2001. While increasing in nominal terms, the share of the education
budget for primary school has remained at 44 percent of the total. This has slowed down
Guinea's progress in improving quality and equity of public expenditures.

14 The main reasons why indicators improved in spite of low health expenditures are gains in efficiency and
transparency in front line service delivery due to community empowerment as part of the Bamako initiative and
increased service utilization. Improved access to drinking water also had a positive impact.
is This is the highest sustained rate of enrolment growth in any country worldwide during the period: gross
enrolment rates increased from 34 percent in 1990 to 67 percent in 2001.

- 7 -

Table 2: Evolution of education indicators (percent)
1991-92 

Gross primary enrolment ratio of girls (percent) 
Gross primary enrolment ratio of boys (percent) 
Female literacy rate (percent) 
Male literacy rate (percent) 
Source: Guinea PRSP.

20 
45 

2002 
(or most recent 
data available) 

63 (2002) 
72 (2002) 
15 (1996) 

37 (1996) 

Sub-
Saharan
Africa

71 (1997)
85 (1997)
31 (1999)
47 (1999)

24. 
School completion rates are low (43 percent) and repetition rates (30 percent of
students per year) are the highest in the region. This is partly due to the little emphasis given
to teacher in-service training, weak supervision, and insufficient availability of textbooks.
While studies have shown that repetition does not result in greater learning or the greater
probability that a child will complete school, it accounts for about 34 percent of all primary
education expenditures.
25. 
Great inequities in access to education between urban and rural areas persist. 
In
urban areas the gross enrolment rate was over 90 percent in 2001 (about equal for boys and
girls) while in rural areas it was about 57 percent (62 for boys and 51 for girls). About 68
percent of children in urban areas finish school, while only 36 percent of children in rural
areas do. This is partly explained by higher repetition and drop-out rates and lower
availability of complete schools in rural areas. 
In addition, over 3,000 classrooms in rural
areas have no teachers, although 2,000 teachers per year complete training. This is partly
because private schools, which are growing faster than public schools, are attracting qualified
teachers. But, mismanagement of teachers is also an important factor. The government
payroll has about 5,000 teachers more than there are in classrooms, which represents about
33 percent of the total. Since teachers' salaries comprise about 34 percent of government's
wage bill, managing teachers in a cost-effective and transparent way is one of the key policy
reforms needed to meet the education MDGs.
26. 
Gender inequity remains. Women are more likely to be poor on all dimensions of
poverty, 
including 
access 
to 
education, 
employment, 
income, 
decision-making
responsibilities, political participation, and others. Only 6 percent of rural women are able to
read and write. Yet, they produce about 80 percent of the nation's food and work 15-17
hours a day. While Guinea has ratified several conventions affecting gender equity,
inequities persist in the civil and labor codes (see box 1). Women are also victims of cultural
practices such as forced marriage, genital mutilation, and inheritance customs that favor men.
27. 
HIV/AIDS prevalence is rising in Guinea. According to a July 2001 survey,
HIV/AIDS prevalence among pregnant women had reached 4.4 percent in urban areas (5
percent in Conakry). The war-affected regions in Guinee Forestiere show an even higher
prevalence rate of 7 percent. The gender ratio of HIV/AIDS infected patients has shifted
from eight men to one woman in 1989 to two women for one man in 2001. Among
vulnerable groups, the latest surveys show 42 percent prevalence among commercial sex
workers, 7.3 percent among truck drivers, 6.7 percent among the military, and 4.7 percent
among people working in the mining sector. Since the end of 2001, the fight against
HIV/AIDS has gained momentum. The personal commitments of the president and the first
lady, the prime minister, and various members of government have resulted in accelerated
efforts to fight HIV/AIDS. For example, a national Multisectoral HIV/AIDS committee was
created under the leadership of the prime minister, and similar committees were created at the

- 8 -

prefectoral level. A national strategy and sector-specific strategies have been prepared.
Guinea has also succeeded in mobilizing external resources to finance the fight against
HIV/AIDS, including a grant of US$20.3 million from the World Bank.

Box 1: Guinea core labor standards
Guinea ratified 56 ILO conventions, among which six relate to core labor standards. Guinea ratified
three conventions related to minimum age in industry, agriculture, and nonindustrial employment, but
not the two core labor standards pertaining to child labor. Given that 50 percent of Guinea's population
is younger than 15 years old, and that especially in rural areas, the school enrolment rate is 57 percent
(51 percent for girls) this is relevant, particularly for young women.
Despite the fornal ratification of conventions related to discrirnination, the government's Civil
Service Act prohibits discrimination only on the basis of philosophical or religious views and gender.
This doesn't include all of the grounds set forth in the convention. Regarding freedom of association,
Guinea ratified convention C87. However, contrary to the convention, arbitration issues included in the
labor code are likely to restrict the exercise of the right to strike. The government should address this
question in the ongoing revision of the labor code. The national legislation should also include
provisions aimed at protecting workers' and employers' organizations against any acts of interference
from each other. Provisions should be made to provide expressly for legal procedures and sufficiently
dissuasive sanctions against acts of antitrade union discrimination and interference.

2. 

GUINEA'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY

28. 
After developing 
its poverty reduction strategy through a highly participatory
process, Guinea presented in July 2002 its PRSP to the Boards of the World Bank and the
IMF. The PRSP provides a frank analysis of the challenges in Guinea and lays out the
government's strategy to address these challenges. A summary of the various actions to
implement the PRSP and the partnerships to provide support are outlined in annex D.
29. 
PRSP objectives and the MDGs. The overall objectives of the poverty reduction
strategy are to significantly and sustainably reduce poverty in Guinea, and to improve the
living conditions and prospects of the population, particularly of the poorest people. To
achieve the objectives, the poverty reduction strategy centers on three pillars: (a) fostering
sustainable and equitable growth; (b) improving access and quality of basic social services;
and (c) strengthening governance and institutional and human capacity. The PRSP objectives
are broadly consistent with the MDGs, except with regard to the reduction of poverty (see
table 3).

- 9 -

Existing situation 
Date 
Value of 

PRSP objectives MDG objectives
2005 
2010 
2015 
MDG/

5.0 

2.9' 
39.4 

70 
63 

70 
300 
<5 
80 

10
30 
62
65

1003 

1003 
452
50 
200 
<5 
100 

20 Not in line

100 
100 

40 
167 
<5 
100 

In line
In line

In line
In line
In line
In line

catorPRSP

3.7 
40.3 
2.7 
16.4 

56.7 
44.3 
36 
98 
528 
4.4 
49 

73 
303
No quantitative information available in PRSP

No quantitative information available in PRSP

No quantitative infornmation available in PRSP

1996/00 
1995 
1997 
1999 

1999 
1999 
1998 
1999 
1999 
1998 
1999 

2002 
2002 

2002 

2002 

Table 3: PRSP objectives and indicators

Objectives / Indicators 

_______________________I_ind 

Sustainable and equitable growth
GDP growth rate (annual rate in %) 
Incidence of income poverty (in %) 
Road density (km of road/100 sq. km) 
Electricity access rate (%) 

Improving access and quality of basic social services

Gross primary school enrolment (%) 
Gross primary school enrolment girls (%) 
Adult literacy rate 
Infant mortality rate (9/oo) 
Matemal mortality rate (%) 
HIV seroprevalence rate (%) 
Access to safe drinking water (% pop.) 

Number CRDs strengthened 
Reduced counuption 

Increased accountability to beneficiaries 

Independent, professional justice system 
Notes: (I) by 2003, (2) by 2007, (3) by 2012.
Source: Guinea PRSP.

Strengthening governance and Institutional and human capacity

A. 
PRSP pillar 1: fostering sustainable and equitable growth
30. 
The poverty reduction strategy aims to achieve sustainable and equitable growth.
This will require maintaining a stable macroeconomic framework, reforming policies, and
creating an investment and trade environment that attracts private sector participation in
delivering services, including in provision of basic infrastructural services (specifically
electricity, water, and transportation services).
31. Macroeconomic stability, improved fiscal and monetary policy, and improved
quality and quantity of expenditures 
in priority sectors are key. 
The 
initial
macroeconomic framework underpinning the PRSP was finalized in January 2002 on the
basis of information 
then available and was updated 
to reflect 
revisions of the
macroeconomic program as reflected in table 4. The growth projections have been lowered to
an annual average of about 5.6 percent over the medium term, which the World Bank and
IMF staff consider to be reasonable and attainable. 
Inflation is projected to decline to 3
percent by 2004, compared with the initial objective of 2.8 percent. The external current
account deficit is considerably higher than initially programmed, reflecting the imports
associated with the major investmnents in mining projects, which are financed by private
sector capital inflows. The overall government deficit is somewhat higher in the outer years
than initially expected, owing to revised revenue projections, lower projected levels of
external grants, and higher programmed spending in the priority sectors. To address further
changes in the macroeconomic framework, the authorities are discussing an IMF Staff
Monitored Program, which will ensure that the government's financial operation remain
consistent with available resources and with the maintenance of macroeconomic stability.

2002 
Estimate 
4.3 
3.0 
2.5 
(% of GDP)
25.2 
7.8 
17.4 

20.1 
1.5 
18.6 

12.1 
20.3 

24.7 

29.9 

-5.9 

-6.1 

2003 
Projection 
4.5 
3.5 
4.2 

2004 
Projection 
5.0 
3.0 
3.8 

2005 
Projection 
5.8 
3.0 
2.6 

2006
Projection
6.1
3.0
3.3

23.8 
7.9 
15.9 

20.5 
3.8 
16.8 

12.4 
18.7 

26.2 

29.5 

-2.0 

-4.5 

26.2 
9.2 
17.0 

24.8 
3.8 
21.0 

12.4 
20.3 

27.5 

29.0 

29.7 
10.5 
19.2 

27.0 
4.5 
22.6 

12.9 
21.2 

26.3 

29.2 

-3.0 

-3.0 

32.1
10.8
20.2

28.3
49
23.4

13.2
21.3

26.1

30.0

-2.8

-3.8 

-5.4 

-6 4

21 9 
7.1 
14.8 

16.8 
3.3 
13.5 

10.9 
16.5 

24.0 

29.2 

21.9 
7.2 
14.8 

20.0 
1.3 
18.8 

11.3 
18.8 

27.1 

29.0 

-3.2 

-4.1 

-7.4 

-2.4 

Gross domestic investment 
Govemment 
Nongovernment 

Gross domestic saving 
Government 
Nongovemment 

Govemmentrevenues 
Govemmentexpenditures 

Exports (goods and nonfactor
services) 
Imports (goods and nonfactor
services) 

Extemal Overall Budget Balance
(including grants) 

External Current Account (including
official transfers) 

Memorandum Item:
Nominal GDP (billions of Gnf) 

- 10-

Table 4: Guinea 2002 update of PRSP macroeconomic framework (percentage of
GDP or Guinean francs)

Real GDP growth (% change) 
CPI (period average annual %/o change) 
GDP implicit deflator (% change) 

2000 
Estimate 
1.8 
6.8 
11.1 

2001 
Estimate 
3.8 
5.4 
4.9 

5,434.2 

5,918.6 

6,324.9 

6,885.3 

7,501.30 

8,149.0 

8,914.9

Source: Govemnment of Guinea and IMF staff estimates.

32. 
Improvements in the policy environment for agriculture will aim at increasing
agricultural production and productivity and improving incomes for the poorest. Policy

reforms will be designed to strengthen, and finance the demand side of services by
decentralizing resources for service delivery to subnational levels of government and to
communities. This will reduce transaction costs, increase accountability of service providers
to beneficiaries, and create a competitive market for service delivery. Service delivery will
be rationalized and strengthened so that public and private providers reposition themselves
based on their comparative advantage. The opening of menus of eligible expenditures under
the Community Development Program will allow the financing of small scale production-
oriented investments (market places, storage facilities, feeder roads, and the like). Policy
reforms will also be pursued to encourage the development of agro-processing industries and
to strengthen linkages with external markets.

33. 

The PRSP also calls for policy reforms in fisheries and mining. 

In fisheries,

policy reforms are envisaged to ensure sustainable management, and mobilization of fiscal
revenues from the sector. To foster growth in the mining sector, the government will support
reforms to attract private investment by further clarifying the regulatory framework for major
mining investments, and by reorienting public administration in the sector.

34. 

Improvements in the investment climate focus on utilities, and infrastructure.

Regarding water and electricity, the government envisages attracting private participation in
managing the utilities; improving the institutional and regulatory framework; and ensuring

adequate competition, respect for environment, and minimization of fraud. The PRSP calls
for private sector involvement to supply energy services in rural areas. To link producers to
markets, the government has adopted a national transport plan to improve the management
and maintenance of transport infrastructure. The government also plans to rehabilitate
essential infrastructure damaged during the 2001 skirmishes. Demand for urban services and
infrastructure is growing fast. 16 The strategy is to (a) continue financing and implementing
the primary road network, (b) improve access within densely populated neighborhoods, and
(c) improve solid waste management. 
In secondary cities, the government will continue to
introduce municipal contracts to improve management and governance, mobilize resources,
and improve municipal services and infrastructure.
35. 
Actions will be taken to improve the environment for trade. Guinea's trade
environment is one of the main impediments to economic growth. The PRSP envisages that
policy reforms 
in customs, 
tax administration, 
transportation and 
the 
like will be
implemented to foster regional integration and to remove bottlenecks constraining trade. The
results of a 2003 integrated trade framework diagnostic will support the government's actions
in this area.
36. 
The joint staff assessment of the first PRSP pillar, concludes that the strategy
recognizes the need for growth to reduce poverty, and identifies the sectors of growth,
Nevertheless, the strategy could be strengthened with a thorough discussion of the reforms
needed to substantially raise the investment rate. This should cover in particular the
improvements needed in the investment climate, including in the overall judicial and
regulatory framework. The strategy would also gain from a better understanding of how to
overcome the constraints to agricultural growth.
B. 
PRSP pillar 2: access to and quality of basic social services
37. 
The PRSP aims to make progress towards the MDGs in health, education, access to
water, and the fight against HIV/AIDS. The strategy calls for sector reforms and the
empowerment of beneficiaries over service delivery.
38. 
In health, the focus will be on achieving specific MDGs. These include reducing
infant mortality rates from 98 to 50 per 1,000 and reducing maternal mortality from 528 to
200 per 100,000 live births by 2010. Improving health outcomes calls for scaling up the
Bamako Initiative. This will require (a) substantial investments to strengthen the primary
health care facilities; (b) increasing access of the poor to cost-effective and affordable
interventions (such as 
immunization programs, 
integrated management of childhood
illnesses, and essential drugs and micronutrients); and (c) reducing maternal and neonatal
mortality by increasing access to family-planning services, by strengthening prenatal care,
and by promoting safe deliveries. The implementation of these strategies will require
improving overall sector performance. 
This will involve measures such as reducing
inequities, improving efficiency through reforms at the secondary and tertiary levels of care,
improving financial management at all levels of the system, and strengthening human
resources through public service reforns, training, and creating partnerships with NGOs and
the private sector.
39. 
In education the focus 
is on providing equitable access to a high-quality
education system. The first goal is to increase enrolment rates in primary, and middle
schools, especially of girls in rural areas. Early childhood initiatives, and literacy, secondary,

16 Conakry's population has almost doubled in the last 15 years and now stands at about 1.4 million inhabitants.

- 12 -

vocational, and higher education programs will also be supported. The PRSP calls for
improving the quality of education by developing strategies to improve teaching and learning
in schools by introducing multigrade schooling, reformning the curriculum and examination
system, improving textbooks, reading materials, school nutritional programs, among other
actions. The strategy recognizes the need to strengthen the capacity for decentralized
management and for greater involvement of communities in the management of schools.
40. Water supply will be increased and management of water resources improved.
In water supply and water resource management the focus is on preparing a national strategy
and policy, defining an adequate legal framework, and building sustainable and decentralized
water resources institutions. This includes developing an overall coordinating mechanism
that has capacity to defend Guinea's interest in subregional negotiations on water resource
management. 
In rural areas, many communities will receive resources 
through the
Community Support Program, which they can use to improve drinking water systems. 
In
addition, 330 to 450 boreholes per year will continue to be constructed using HPIC resources.
With regard to wastewater, establishing a sustainable institution to recover the costs of
operation and maintenance of facilities 
that are currently under construction will be
important.

41. 

The flght against HIV/AEDS is a top priority for the government. The objective

is to maintain the HIV prevalence below 5 percent. The government will transfer resources
to communities (including organizations or people living with HIV/AIDS) to implement local
HIV/AIDS action plans. The participatory methodologies used to develop these action plans
will pay particular attention to women's needs. The government will strengthen the capacity
for voluntary testing and counseling, prevention of mother to child transmission, treatment of
opportunistic infections, detection and treatment of sexually transmitted infections, and
access to antiretroviral 
therapy. Finally, it will provide massive support to prevention
campaigns, promoting increased use of condoms among other actions.

42. 

The joint staff assessment of the second PRSP pillar underlines that the strategy

rightly puts the emphasis on improved access to social services. 
In health, the focus on
community empowerment builds upon the approach that has allowed Guinea to substantially
improve some health outcomes. However, the strategy should offer solutions to the chronic
underfunding of recurrent health expenditures and the strong bias in spending in favor of
urban areas, secondary and tertiary levels of service, and the central administration. 
In
education, the strategy could be strengthened by discussing how to improve management of
teachers, and by specifying specific actions to improve quality of and access to education,
especially for girls. 
In HIV/AIDS, 
the strategy could strike a better balance between
treatment and prevention.

C. 

PRSP pillar 3: governance and institutional and human capacity

43. 
The PRSP recognizes that achieving its third objective-strengthening governance
and institutional and human capacity-is critical for achieving the first two objectives. The
PRSP calls for stepping up the fight against corruption, strengthening and empowering
beneficiaries and subnational 
levels of government, and 
improving 
transparency 
in
macroeconomic management.
44. 
To step up the fight against corruption, the Anti-Corruption Committee was
established in 2000. Members of the committee represent the government, various political
parties, civil society, and the private sector. The committee has documented several
corruption cases and presented them to the judicial system for follow-up. Thus far, however,

- 13 -

a verdict has been reached in only one of the cases. In response to requests from citizens,
anti-corruption committees will be created at the regional level to strengthen the fight against
corruption.
45. 
Empowering beneficiaries and strengthening subnational levels of government is
central to the strategy. To improve access and quality of basic social services and
availability of resources for recurrent expenditures, the strategy is to increase the transfer of
funds to priority sectors and to local government and beneficiaries, and to strengthen tracking
of funds down to the front line. This will be achieved through the further consolidation of the
medium-term expenditure framework. 
In addition, the government plans to move towards
contracting out public services and giving responsibility for recruiting service providers to
local government and users' organizations. 
It will also implement performance-based
incentive systems.
46. 
Improving transparency in macroeconomic management will contribute to
improved governance. The PRSP calls for the systematic release of information to the
pubic on budget allocations and actual expenditures to strengthen the management of public
resources. To strengthen transparency in macroeconomic management, the government is
implementing the recommendations of the 2002 country procurement assessment report
(CPAR), the country financial accountability assessment (CFAA), and the public expenditure
review (PER). The government plans to build statistical and monitoring and evaluation
capacity in recognition that the capacity to monitor and evaluate the impact of development
expenditures is key to strengthening institutional capacity and governance.
47. 
The joint staff assessment of third PRSP pillar points out that the emphasis in the
PRSP on improving governance and fighting corruption is appropriate. However, the PRSP
does not analyze the nature and causes of corruption, provide detailed proposals to reduce it,
offer clear objectives, or name indicators through which to measure progress.
D. 
Summary of PRSP assessment
48. 
The staff of the Bank and the Fund believe that the PRSP provides a credible
framework for the implementation of poverty reduction strategies. With the PRSP, the
govemment has developed an effective framework to coordinate support from donors. The
main strengths of the PRSP are (a) the quality of the participatory process, through which a
genuinely country-owned strategy has been elaborated; (b) the inclusion of a relatively
thorough poverty analysis, 
in spite of 
limited availability of data; and 
(c) 
the
comprehensiveness of the strategy. The use of traditional communicators in the PRSP
preparation process strengthened 
the quality of participation, and allowed effective
communication in Guinea's various vernacular languages. To further increase ownership, the
government has launched a series of regional workshops to develop regional strategies within
the overall PRSP framework.

49. 

Nevertheless, the joint staff assessment also identifies some weaknesses. Overall,

the targets of the PRSP are probably overly ambitious. The strategy should prioritize key
policy reforms required for equitable growth and identify specific actions. The chronic
underfunding of recurrent expenditures in priority sectors is not yet adequately addressed.
Also in the area of governance the PRSP can be strengthened by the identification of specific
actions. These deficiencies constitute risks for the implementation of the PRSP, and should
be discussed in future versions of the document. They are taken into account in defining the
triggers for the high case scenario of this CAS.

- 14-

3. 

PROSPECTS FOR GROWTH

2005 
2005. 

Proj. 

Table 5: Guinea financing requirements, 2003-06 
(in millions of US$) 

50. 
Guinea has not realized its full economic potential. Guinea has great potential for
economic growth due to its abundance of minerals, its excellent conditions for agriculture,
and its strategic location that favors trade. However, both internal and external factors have
kept Guinea from realizing its potential. 
Internal constraints include an inhospitable
investment climate due to a weak regulatory framework, institutional and regulatory
constraints on trade and regional integration, and overall weak governance. Exogenous
factors include the continued instability in the subregion and heavy dependence on a single
commodity, bauxite, for export revenue. The combination of these domestic and exogenous
factors makes Guinea vulnerable to shocks that may come from continued instability in the
subregion, declines in bauxite prices, or deterioration in the political stability of the country.
51. Macroeconomic framework for 2004-06. The country's poverty reduction strategy
recognizes the need for accelerated and sustained growth as the basis for the poverty
reduction effort. As previously mentioned, the macroeconomic framework underpinning the
PRSP has been revised 
to
reflect less optimistic growth
projections 
than when 
the
PRSP was presented to the
Boards of the IMF and World
Bank in July 2002. 
The
current 
macroeconomic
framework projects 
annual
GDP growth to be 5.8 percent
in 2005, and 
inflation 
to
average 3 percent during
2004-06 
(see 
table 
4).
Despite slightly lower growth
projections, 
the 
targets 
for
revenues, spending in priority
sectors, monetary policies,
and structural reforms remain
the same. Nonmining fiscal
revenues are projected to be
11.1 percent of GDP and
current expenditures 
to be
10.3 percent of GDP. The
primary balance for 2005 is
projected to be 2 percent of
GDP and the external current
account balance to be negative 5.2 percent. In spite of the recent deterioration in foreign
reserves, the projected gross official reserves for 2005 are equivalent to 2.9 months of
imports. Achieving the targets will require an extra effort from government.
52. Medium-term financing requirements. Guinea's external financing requirements in
the PRSP base case scenario total about US$ 1.8 billion for 2003-06, resulting in an estimated
financing gap of US$ 110.2 million after accounting for projected debt relief of about US$370
million for the period. The government (with Bank and IMF assistance) is updating
financing requirements in light of recent developments and risks to the external outlook. To

2003 
2004 
2006 
2003/ 
2004. 
2006 
Proj/2
Proj. 
Proj. 
357.1 441.2 478.1 
520.5 
196.0 
179.4 243 
295 
129.1 
115.2 
105.8 
106.1 
32 
146.6 
129.3 
119.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
357.1 
391.6 
444.1 493.9 
121.8 
148.1 
177.6 
187.7 
103.7 
117.7 
135.5 
143.3 
28.4 
28 
32.5 
59.8 
0.0 
3.2 
7.3 
21.9 
103.2 94.6 
91.2 
81.2 
Dbtrei10.2 
94.6 
91.2 
81.2 
0 
49.6 
34.0 
26.6 

Total requirements 
Current account deficit 
Debtamortization 
Increase in reserves 
Reduction of area. 
Financing Sources 
Official grants 
Long-term off. loans 
Foreign direct inv. 
Private capital 
Debt relief 
Financing gap 
Memo Item: 
IDA disbursements 

19.0 

22.0 

33.0 

- 15 -

cover Guinea's sizeable financing gap will require improvements in the policy environment
and a commitment to strong macroeconomic management. As mentioned previously, the
government 
is currently discussing a Staff Monitored Program. 
Its successful
implementation will strengthen Guinea's track record of reforms and provide the basis for
negotiations of a new three-year PRGF-supported program. 
It will also lead to greater
mobilization of resources from donors to implement the PRSP.

4. 

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. 
Objectives of the 2003 country assistance strategy
53. 
The government's strategy for poverty reduction has three pillars: (a) fostering
sustainable and equitable growth, (b) improving access and quality of basic social services,
and (c) strengthening governance and institutional and human capacity. The objective of the
CAS is to support the implementation of the government's strategies in each of these pillars.
The Bank intends to do this through selected economic and sector work, a structural
adjustmnent operation, and second phases of existing adaptable program loans to foster
growth, improve access to social services, and strengthen capacity and governance (see tables
8 and 9). Through these activities, the Bank will assist Guinea to reform its institutional and
policy framework, to build its capacity for service delivery, and to improve the management
of public finances so that Guinea's national institutions are able to effectively implement the
country's development programs. The Bank would consider moving towards support
through a PRSC, provided that Guinea establishes a strong fiduciary framework for public
finance management.
B. 
The Bank's experience in Guinea, lessons learned, and consultation
54. 
This CAS reflects lessons learned from (a) Guinea's past perforrnance; (b) the
implementation of the previous CAS; (c) a 2003 OED review of the past four structural
adjustment operations in Guinea; (d) extensive consultations with stakeholders including
government, private sector, civil society, and the donor community; and (e) a 2002 client
survey.
55. 
Guinea's past performance has been erratic. For example, considerable progress
made in the 1990s with improving the performance of water and electricity services has been
reversed and severe water and electricity shortages are again occurring. After a period of
macroeconomic instability in late 1999 and early 2000. However new fiscal slippages in
2002 led the PRGF supported program to go off track again. Hence, the government has
requested the IMF to informally monitor the macro situation until end-year, with a view to
pursuing a staff monitored program for six months thereafter. Guinea's track record of
erratic performance has been taken into account in determining the CAS triggers.
56. 
Since the late 1980s, Guinea has benefited from four structural adjustment
credits. Notable progress was made in the area of public expenditure management,
specifically through the introduction of a medium-term expenditure framework, and through
the development of a computerized budget tracking system. This resulted in a substantial
increase of transfer of funds for front line service delivery in 2002. Nevertheless, important
challenges remain. A 2003 OED review of the four structural adjustment credits points to
several lessons:

- 16-

* A solid program of analytical work is essential to underpin policy-based lending
operations. Partly due to a lack of analytical underpinnings, govemment ownership
of some of the previous structural adjustment programs was weak.

* Policy reform should focus on a few key areas where government has demonstrated
its commitment. Tranche release should come after actual implementation of policy
reforms, in accordance with clear performance indicators.

* 

In light of the persistent fiscal deficit, more balanced attention should be given to
both revenue mobilization and public spending.
* More attention should be given to improving the investment climate and trade.

* The Bank should closely monitor debt sustainability, and identify a strategy to
manage its exposure to risk.
57. 
The Bank's support to Guinea during the previous CAS. While several of the
Bank supported programs achieved results, not all were successful. The Conmmunity Support
Program and the Urban Program successfully promoted community empowerment over
delivery of services. 
In education and health, the Bank-supported activities helped Guinea
improve quality of and access to services. 
In the mining sector, the Bank contributed to
policy reforms and a better regulatory framework, which opened the way to new investment.
In spite of support from a Bank project, agricultural exports did not pick up during the
previous CAS period. Implementation of the Bank supported Capacity Building for Service
Delivery Program (CBSD) was unsatisfactory due to persistent management and fiduciary
problems. The Bank is taking action to address these issues. In spite of its dialogue and
operations, the Bank was not able to prevent the water and power utilities being again put
entirely under public management. Due to lack of political commitment in the country, the
Bank was not able to support reforms of the judicial system, as planned under the previous
CAS.
58. 
The Bank learned lessons from what worked and what did not work under the
previous CAS:

* 

What worked
Community participation has been key. Programs such as the Community Support
Program and the Urban Program that involved strong participation of beneficiaries, and
transfer of financial resources and decision-making authority to subnational levels of
government have been particularly successful in improving poor people's access to and
quality of services, and in bettering govemance. Such programs have also promoted
gender equity, since many of the community-identified priorities have involved
measures that improve the quality of women's lives, such as improved access to
drinking water, to maternal health services, and to agricultural services.

* 

The 
involvement of the private sector (including beneficiary and producers'
organizations) in service delivery has increased the quality of services. For example,
beneficiaries of the Community Support Program have expressed increased satisfaction
with services in a recent survey. Garbage collection in Conakry has improved under the
Urban Program through subcontracting of the services to private organizations.

* Programs implemented through government agencies were more sustainable and had
greater institutional impact than those that were implemented through project

- 17 -

implementation units. 17 A recent review of statements of expenses of the Bank's entire
portfolio showed that such programs also performed better with respect to fiduciary
aspects.

* 

Transfer of resources to the front line has improved, but more remains to be done to
improve quality of expenditures. Through the Fourth Structural Adjustment Credit, 80
percent of the nonwage recurrent budget was transferred in 2002 to the subnational
level. However, revenue mobilization, and adequate controls on public spending remain
weak.

* Donor coordination has been important in scaling up successful programs to national
coverage. Programs involving strong donor coordination, such as education and the
Community Support Program, have made more progress in scaling up to national
coverage than those in which donor coordination has been weak. The establishment of
clear national strategies facilitates donor support to a common program.

What did not work

* 

The Bank did not have a decisive impact on governance. Nevertheless, the Bank has
been able to support progress in governance in selected areas, where there has been
national leadership and political commitmnent. These include the reforms towards
budgetary deconcentration and the development of budget tracking mechanisms.

* 

Bank efforts to support agricultural exports have not had the desired impact. The
Agricultural Export Promotion Project that was designed to improve access to finance
for exporters and to support export-oriented infrastructure has not succeeded, due to
weak implementation arrangements and management capacity, and due to the overall
constraining environment for agricultural production, export, and trade.
59. 
As part of the CAS preparation the Bank consulted with government and the
donor community. The consultations with the government took the form of a workshop that
focused on the general messages of the CAS, and on the implementation arrangements that
would allow greater transparency and accountability in the budgeting and management of
public resources, the increased responsibility of government agencies, the attainment of
national coverage for key programs, and the strengthening of fiduciary requirements. The
government asked the Bank to gradually deliver a greater proportion of resources through
programmatic and multisectoral lending to ensure that cross-sectoral reforms and sector-
specific programs are consistent. The government also emphasized the importance of
empowering communities to increase effectiveness of development programs and to enhance
transparency and accountability. Donors have been consulted and express support for the
Bank's strategy.
60. 
Consultations with the private sector and with civil society were organized
jointly with the Economic and Social Council of Guinea and the World Bank. Both
groups gave a very clear message that the top priority to reduce poverty is to improve
governance. The management of public finances, the fight against corruption, and the
improvement of the justice system were identified as key prerequisites to foster growth and

17 

Project implementation units have often been used to circumvent weaknesses in government institutions. While
this may create short-term advantages with regard to reaching specific project related development objectives, it also
tends to delay needed reforms in government institutions. Moreover, project implementation units often create
distortions by duplicating national institutions that are mandated to undertake the programs, and by attracting the best-
qualified staff in government through remuneration system that is out of line with the government compensation scales.

- 18 -

improve the delivery of social services. The participants also named improving access to
credit, promoting rural development, and enhancing access to markets as critical for growth.
61. 
Compared to the results of the client feedback survey completed in 1998, the
results of the 2002 survey showed that clients in Guinea are more satisfied with the
Bank. Nevertheless, clients request that the Bank do more to improve the investment climate
and to strengthen governance (box 2). This CAS attempts to respond to this request. 
In
reaction to the client survey, the Bank will step up efforts to strengthen partnerships in the
country, to share knowledge and best practices, and to increase its capacity to assist with
implementation, including through timely disbursement of funds.

Box 2: Summary of 2002 client survey results
According to the 2002 client survey, the overall impression of the World Bank's effectiveness in Guinea
is fairly favorable. The changes that the Bank has introduced in Guinea in recent years have resulted in
greater client focus, greater staff effectiveness, and better quality of products and services, which, clients
say, make the Bank a preferred partner in Guinea.
Compared to the 1995 client survey, clients see improvements on a number of issues including: (a) the
Bank's contribution to poverty reduction, (b) respecting Guinea's social priorities, (c) reflecting the
diversity of views, (d) participation and partnerships; (e) utilization of local expertise, (f) adapting to
country circumstances, (g) adapting global knowledge to Guinea's needs, (h) strengthening the public and
private sectors, (i) enhancing individual capacity, (j) Bank staff's overall effectiveness and focus on
clients' needs, (k) Bank staff's technical competence and straightforwardness in dealings with clients, and
(1) helping to attract donor support.
Nevertheless, greater efforts are required to meet clients' needs to (a) secure an enabling political,
economic and legal environment, (b) promote good govemance, (c) bring results that last, (d) broaden
partnerships, and (e) improve project and program design and implementation. The Bank also scored
lower in 2002 than in earlier surveys with regard to its contribution to economic growth; and to
accessibility of staff, consistency of messages, and sharing knowledge about international best practices.
Finally, the Bank's performance on timely disbursement of project funds and delegation of
decisionmaking responsibility to country office staff, as in earlier surveys, is rated weak.

62. 
The present CAS takes the lessons learned into account. 
In particular the Bank
will support (a) a program of analytical work to underpin the Bank's operations; (b)
improvements 
in 
the 
investment climate and growth 
through support for a stable
macroeconomic framework and for policy reforms; (c) programs that empower communities
and involve the private sector in service delivery; and (d) institutional reform and capacity
building to improve governance.
C. 
Strategic elements of the CAS
63. 
The current CAS period will be a period of transition during which the Bank and
other donors would move gradually towards more programmatic lending (see figure 1).
During this period, the Bank will (a) support the implementation of the three pillars of the
PRSP; and (b) ensure that sector reforiis are consistent with cross-sectoral reforms in the
areas of public finance management, management of human resources, and 
local
administration to ensure that resources intended to reduce poverty are used efficiently and
transparently. This would allow possible future support through PRSCs provided that Guinea
maintains a stable macroeconomic framework and strengthens public finance management.

- 19 -

Figure 1: Transition from support through projects towards programmatic lending

FY98 to FY03 CAS 

FY04 to FY06 CAS 

Future CAS

Projects 

Sector Programs 

Programmatic Lending

SAC 111, IV 

Mining Project 

SAC V 

-O

PRSC I 

_

Policy 

Policy

Ec. Govern. _ 

Ec. Govern.

Health Projects 

Health APL 11 

Health

Education Projects 

Educ. for All 

_ Education 

Education

|Agr. Services Project 

u 

i 

OtherTBD

Community Support Program (CDD)

Rural and urban infrastructure programs, including rural electrification

Capacity Building for Service Delivery Program

HIV/AIDS MAP

64. 

The Bank's strategy will be selective in the following ways:

* 

* 

Selectivity in sectors of engagement. While the PRSP identifies many sectors as
priorities, the Bank will support only those areas where it has a comparative
advantage, or where other donors are not already taking the lead. For example,
the IMF is taking the lead in reforming financial sector regulations. The French
development agency and a number of NGOs are leading efforts to create
sustainable microfinance 
institutions. 
UNIDO, GTZ, and 
the African
Development Bank are taking the lead to foster the development of small and
medium size enterprises and of the private sector generally. USAID, GTZ, and
the European Union are supporting large programs for environmental protection
and sustainable management of natural resources. The African Development
Bank, the Islamic Development Bank, the European Union, and the French
development agency are financing large operations in support of the national
highways. 
In each of these areas, the Bank will leave leadership to the other
development partners.
Selectivity within sectors of engagement. Within the sectors of engagement, the
Bank will focus on front line service delivery, institutional capacity building,
and policy reforms. Specific subsectors will be left to the lead of other
development partners. For example, in the agricultural sector, the French
development agency is leading the effort to strengthen producers' organizations.

-20 -

D. 
65. 

Support to PRSP pillar 1: sustainable and equitable growth
To support the first PRSP pillar of sustainable and equitable growth, the Bank will

carry out analytical work and will contribute to (a) fostering macroeconomic stability; (b)
improving 
the 
investment climate 
through assistance for establishment of minimum
infrastructure services required for growth; (c) supporting policy reforms in fisheries,
agriculture, mining, and trade; and (d) improving rural services. This should help Guinea
achieve an annual GDP growth rate of 5.8 percent (8 percent rural areas) by 2005.
66. 
Strengthening the knowledge base. Building on a recent 
integrated trade
framework diagnostic, a country economic memorandum (FY04-05) combined with a
private sector assessment (to be led by other donors), will fill the existing knowledge gap of
sources of and constraints to growth. An assessment of the gap between actual and minimal
infrastructural services needed for growth will be part of these studies. The analytical work
will aim at strengthening the dialogue between the partners in the economy, including private
providers of social services, and will allow the Bank to further refine its growth strategy
during the CAS period.
67. 
Fostering macroeconomic stability. The strategy aims at triggering a virtuous cycle
where growth and macroeconomic stability mutually reinforce each other. This synergy will
depend to a large extent on improvements in govemance, which is one of the triggers for the
high case scenario. To complement the IMF program, and in full coordination with the
European Union and the African Development Bank, the Bank will support macroeconomic
stability through further structural reforms aimed at (a) increasing fiscal revenues through
reductions in tax exemptions and greater transparency and efficiency in tax collection; (b)
improving budget management through full implementation of the action plans resulting
from the CPAR, the CFAA, and the PER, expanding the medium-term expenditure
framework to include all sectors, and establishing a budget tracking mechanism down to the
local level; and (c) establishing a track record of adequate budget allocation and release for
front line service delivery. These reforms will be supported through the fifth Structural
Adjustment Credit (FY04).
68. 
A satisfactory macroeconomic framework, including the various actions to strengthen
public expenditure management, combined with strengthened monitoring and evaluation at
community and national levels to assess development impact will allow the Bank to consider
providing support through a PRSC. Given the magnitude of the challenge, the Bank does not
expect that the conditions for support through a PRSC will be established before 2006.
69. 
Supporting improvements 
in the investment climate through assistance for

minimum infrastructure services required for growth. Using ongoing and new operations

and selected economic and sector work that will be led by other donors, the Bank will
support the establishment of minimum infrastructure services required for growth. Regarding
utilities, the focus will be on improving governance and increasing involvement of the private
sector in the provision of water and electricity services. However, through dialogue with the
govermment, the private sector, and other donors, the Bank will examine how the private
sector can be involved differently than in the past to avoid repeating the problems that led to
reversals in performance of the water and electricity services.
70. 
Urban and rural infrastructure services will be supported through two programs.
First, the second phase of the Rural Infrastructure Program (FY04) will support (a)
rehabilitation of essential social 
infrastructure 
that was damaged during 
the border
skirmishes, (b) rehabilitation of the country's rapidly deteriorating rural road network, (c)

- 21 -

construction of selected economic infrastructure, and (d) capacity building to ensure that the
improved infrastructure are managed in an environmentally and socially sustainable way.
Second, the second phase of the Urban Program (FY05) will support construction of primary
infrastructure, 
scaling-up 
the existing neighborhood upgrading programs, solid waste
management, establishing agreements between municipal governments and their citizens on
the transparent use of resources, and the strengthening of local municipal governments.
However, based on the outcome of the assessment of requirements 
for minimum
infrastructure services, the design of these operations may be adjusted.
71. 
Supporting policy reforms in fisheries, agriculture, mining, and trade. Policy
reforms in fisheries will be aimed at achieving sustainable management of fisheries and at
increasing fiscal revenues from the sector. The European Union will take the lead, building
upon economic and sector work that was carried out by the Bank as part of the integrated
trade framework diagnostic. Guinea may be included in a larger initiative that the Bank
envisages to improve fisheries in the subregion. Agricultural policy reforms will aim at
supporting private service delivery, 
linking producers 
to markets, and strengthening
producers' influence in policy making. This will be supported through an agricultural
services component of the Community Support Program (FY05). Policy reforms in mining
will reduce public sector interference and improve the regulatory framework to attract foreign
capital. Policy reforms in trade will be designed to better link Guinea to the regional and
international markets by implementing the action plans defined through the integrated trade
framework diagnostic. The dialogue on trade and mining policies will be supported through
the fifth Structural Adjustment Credit.
72. 
Improving rural services. The second phase of the Community Support Program
will widen the menu of activities eligible for financing to include production-oriented
activities, including establishment of small-scale irrigation systems. Special efforts will be
made to assess and address the socioeconomic needs for both women and men. The program
will include a component for rural service delivery (research, extension, livestock services,
small-scale irrigation, support to producers' organizations, and support to small and medium
size enterprises) that will foster rural growth and encourage private sector providers to
emerge in response to the demand for rural services. The program will include the
development of monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to allow the assessment of the impact
of the program on progress towards the MDGs, both at the community level and at the
national level, and to strengthen accountability of local authorities and service providers to
beneficiaries. Community driven development will be supported in a multisectoral way, by
coordinating reforms in the respective sectors with reforms in cross-sectoral institutions
(finance, local administration, and human resource management).
73. 
Improving environmental management. Although the Bank will leave the lead for
improved environmental management in Guinea to other donors, especially the European
Union and USAID, it will support two projects through the Global Environmental Facility.
These are the coastal zone management project and the community ecosystem management
project (FY04).
E. 
Support to PRSP pillar 2: access and quality of basic social services
74. 
To support the PRSP pillar of increasing equitable access to social services, the Bank
will strengthen its analytical base in support of a two-pronged strategy. This will focus on (a)
empowering urban and rural people, their local governments, and their organizations; and (b)

- 22 -

strengthening service delivery in specific priority sectors (health, education, fight against
HIV/AIDS, and water resource management).
75. 
Strengthening the knowledge base. To strengthen the analytical basis underpinning
the dialogue and programs in the social sectors, a poverty assessment will be conducted in
FY05-06 that will include an analysis of the distributional and social impacts of the Bank
supported policy reforms in the education and health sectors. This will build on an education
sector review that will be carried out in FY05.
76. 
Empowering communities. Empowering beneficiaries by providing them with
resources and authority in decision-making has proven to be a powerful tool in improving
service delivery and social outcomes. 
Through 
the appropriate use of participatory
methodologies for problem analysis and priority setting at the community level, the needs of
various community subgroups will receive attention: women, men, the very poor, youth, and
others. Both the Community Support Program and the Urban Program will have important
participatory elements. The Bank is taking the lead in these two programs, but the support
from other donors will allow national coverage to be attained during the CAS period.
77. 
The second phase of the CBSD operation (FY06) will support improved service
delivery by transforming the centralized public administration into an organization that
supports decentralized service delivery. 
This will require 
institutional 
reform, 
the
strengthening of the interface between beneficiaries and service providers (CRD and
subprefectures), and provision of performance incentives to encourage health providers to
work in underserved areas, such as rural areas.
78. 
Strengthening service delivery. Strengthening of service delivery in specific sectors
will aim at increasing coverage, accessibility, and quality of services. The second phase of
an existing health operation (FY04), will scale-up the Bamako Initiative to reach national
coverage; strengthen the primary health care level and the first level of referral with strong
support from the central level; increase the share of resources for primary health care; and
increase attention to health outputs, processes, outcomes, and realization of the MDGs. This
includes increasing access for the poor to cost-effective and affordable interventions such as
immunization programs, integrated management of childhood illnesses, improving quality
and proportion of institutional deliveries, making essential drugs and micronutrient available
in various health structures at the front line, and reducing maternal and neonatal mortality.
79. 
The Bank will support activities to improve overall health sector performance and
prepare the sector for possible support through a PRSC. These activities will include: (a) the
formulation of a sector strategy grounded in the PRSP to reduce inequities, to improve access
to basic services, and to strengthen the overall management of the system; (b) improvements
in financial management at all levels of the systems; and (c) measures addressing human
resources issues through public service reforms, training and partnerships with the private
sector and NGOs.
80. 
The Bank will support the PRSP objectives 
in education through the existing
Education for All program that will be implemented throughout the CAS period. In addition
this program will prepare the sector for a possible PRSC through measures to improve the
quality of expenditures in the sector. The recently approved Multisectoral HIV/AIDS
operation will also be implemented throughout the CAS period.
81. 
The Bank will continue supporting the water sector through the ongoing Water and
Sanitation Program, through the Community Support Program, and through a grant from the

- 23 -

Institutional Development Fund to support Guinea's participation in the Senegal River Basin
Authority. The Bank will also support Guinea's participation in the Regional Program for
the Niger River Basin Cooperation.
F. 
Support to PRSP pillar 3: governance and institutional and human capacity
82. 
In support to this PRSP pillar, the Bank will seek to build capacity in its broadest
sense, creating conditions for effective use of existing capacity (public and private sectors,
and civil society) to deliver basic services to the poor in rural and urban areas. To achieve
this, the focus will be on cross-sectoral generic issues relating to institutional transformation.
The ultimate goal is to transform the public sector agencies from organizations focusing on
bureaucratic control-which hinders service delivery and provides opportunities for rent
seeking, patronage, and corruption-to organizations supporting public and private service
delivery to the poor. To support the PRSP objective of strengthened institutional and human
capacity and governance, the Bank will focus on: (a) establishing the analytical base to
support the government's actions to strengthen governance; (b) transforming cross-cutting
national institutions and service delivery agencies; and (c) strengthening mechanisms of
accountability to ensure that local government is accountable to citizens, and operates in a
transparent and participatory way. 
In addition, the Bank will support developing statistical
capacity to allow adequate monitoring and evaluation of the PRSP implementation.
Activities of the World Bank Institute will also contribute to strengthen institutional and
human capacity.
83. 
Strengthening the knowledge base. In support of the government's anticorruption
efforts, the Bank will strengthen the analytical base on capacity and governance through a
legal and judicial sector assessment (FY04) and an institutional and governance review
(FY06) that will complement an ongoing governance and corruption diagnostic sponsored by
the World Bank Institute. Based on the results of the study the government will develop an
anticorruption action plan. 
Its effective implementation will be a trigger for the high case
scenario. 
In addition, the Bank will support an integrated fiduciary assessment (FY05) that
will assess Guinea's readiness to move towards a PRSC. Depending on the findings of these
various studies, the PRSC may also include further analytical and technical support to
improve economic governance.
84. 
Institutional transformation. The CBSD program will finance the costs related to
the transformation in both sector-specific and cross-sectoral departments and will focus on
decentralization, 
deconcentration, 
subcontracting of service delivery, 
transfer of
responsibility to local government and user organizations, and accountability to end users.
The operation will also include a statistics component to improve capacity for monitoring and
evaluation. In combination with the CBSD program, the Bank will also support parts of the
legislative and judicial branches that play a role in financial oversight through a grant from
the Institutional Development Fund (IDF) to build capacity of the finance committee of the
national assembly and the chambre des comptes.
85. 
Subject to government's demonstrated political will to address corruption, the CBSD
program may support reforms in the judicial system to (a) improve access to and delivery of
quality judicial services, in particular to the poor and to the business community through the
strengthening of the network of justices of the peace and of the arbitration center; (b)
improve the independence, integrity, and professionalism of the judiciary personnel; (c)
ensure that the judiciary operates transparently and accountably through the establishment of

- 24 -

more effective controls and mechanisms of oversight and through assistance to implement the
Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa agreements.
86. While the Bank's ongoing CBSD operation and its second phase will be the chief
operation to support institutional transformation, each of the above-mentioned operations will
make substantial contributions. The sector-specific operations (the second phase of the
health adaptable program loan, the ongoing Education For All Program, and the rural
services component in the Community Support Program) will support the move towards
decentralization, subcontracting of service delivery where possible, empowerment of
beneficiaries and local government, and accountability to the end users.
87. 
Strengthening downward accountability. 
The Community Support Program
strengthens community participation and capacity building for budget planning and
implementation at the community level. The second phase of the CBRD operation will
support 
the 
implementation of 
the medium-term expenditure 
framework at 
the
deconcentrated level to link local development plans to decisionmaking at this level. It will
also support institutional reforms and capacity building in participatory planning in order to
make deconcentrated agencies more responsive to local communities. It further promotes the
establishment of prefectoral development councils, a 
forum of representatives of
deconcentrated entities, local communities, and CRDs to oversee and participate in budget
preparation and execution.
88. 
Support to monitoring and evaluation. The Bank will continue to support the
development of an overall national monitoring and evaluation 
framework 
for 
the
implementation of the PRSP. It will support the development of statistical capacity through a
grant from the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building. In this, the Bank joins the efforts
of UNDP and GTZ who provide support and ongoing technical assistance to build capacity
for monitoring and evaluation in Guinea. 
In addition, the Bank will support the National
Directorate for Statistics through the design and implementation of a multiyear household
survey, which will track household revenues and expenditures and progress towards various
MDGs. The Bank will continue to closely collaborate with its partners to ensure that the
MDG indicators and the interim benchmarks for the implementation of the CAS are fully
taken into account, and that the mechanisms to report on these benchmarks are further
developed.
89. 
The activities of the World Bank Institute will also contribute to the PRSP
objectives. The number of Guinean participants in activities sponsored by the World Bank
Institute has been increasing steadily over the past three years (50 in FY00, 86 in FY01, 161
in FY02). The support of the World Bank Institute to Guinea is in line with the current CAS
focus and includes t-aining programs on management of public resource for poverty
reduction and health, on economic and business journalism, on social risk management, and
on management of the budget cycle. Guinea has started the preparations for the construction
of a Global Development Learning Network center. 
Its completion would lead to a
significantly stronger participation of Guinea in activities sponsored by the World Bank
Institute.
G. 
Donor coordination and collaboration
90. 
Donor coordination in Guinea has been traditionally strong and led to a division of
labor to support the PRSP (see Annex D). Various donors provide support to programs such
as the Community Support Program, the Education for All Program, or the Multisectoral
HIV/AIDS Program, and jointly carry out supervision missions. Coordination is also strong

- 25 -

with regard to the macro program. The IMF and the World Bank coordinate to ensure that 
PRGF reviews and structural adjustment supervisions are merged into a joint exercise, with
the systematic participation of the European Union and the African Development Bank.
91. 
Beyond support to specific sectors, the various partners (donors, civil society, and
government) have constituted a number of thematic and discussion groups that greatly
facilitate dialogue and informal coordination. 
For example, a working group on
decentralization has been created to follow up on the implications of the 2001 referendum
that altered the administrative organization of the country. Similar groups exist in the areas
of HIV/AIDS, education, health, rural development, and governance.
92. 
Systematic efforts are also being undertaken to coordinate analytical work. For
example, the Bank has been involved in a UNDP-led governance study. The European
Union and the African Development Bank have been involved in the CFAA and the CPAR.
Canadian Intemational Development Agency has provided financing and technical assistance
for a gender assessment. And the World Bank Institute is closely coordinating the
govemance survey with the African Development Bank. Moreover, analytical work carried
out by one donor cani lead to operational follow-up by another donor, as is the case in
fisheries.

5. 

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

93. 
To implement the Bank's strategy, the CAS proposes a three pronged-program. This
program comprises (a) ongoing activities; (b) new analytical work, building on the existing
knowledge base; and (c) new lending operations.
A. Managing the existing portfolio

94. Guinea's current portfolio is in line with the PRSP. The portfolio comprises eight

projects representing a total commitment of US$215.6 million in IDA allocations and
US$20.3 million in grants (see table 6). Of this, US$172.8 million remains undisbursed,
representing about 80 percent of the net commitment. The recently approved Education for
All Program, 
the Multisectoral HIV/AIDS Program, and 
the Decentralized Rural
Electrification Project will be implemented throughout the CAS period, and successor
operations are envisaged beyond the horizon of the curTent CAS. 

- 26 -

95. 
The quality of the portfolio has improved compared to the situation prior to 1996
when five Guinea projects were rated problem projects. Currently, only one project is rated
unsatisfactory. This positive trend is also reflected in OED's evaluation reports. 
In FY99
and FY00 OED rated only two of five projects that it evaluated as satisfactory. However, in
FY01 and FY02 OED rated all three projects that it evaluated as satisfactory. Nevertheless,
the overall positive trend should not mask challenges. A full 37 percent of the portfolio is at
risk. The CBSD operation is being restructured to address longstanding implementation and
fiduciary problems, the Education for All Program is hampered by weak disbursement rates,
and 
the credit effectiveness of the Rural Electrification Project has been delayed.
Appropriate action is being taken to address each of these issues.
B. 
Analytical and advisory services
96. 
Recently completed and ongoing core diagnostic and other diagnostic economic and
sector work and other analytical work include a rapid fiduciary assessment, a CPAR, a
CFAA, and a PER (see table 7). This analytical work aimed to strengthen governance and
institutional capacity. Satisfactory implementation of the action plans arising from the core
diagnostic economic and sector work would strengthen the fiduciary framework and would
allow the Bank to consider a move towards providing budget support through a PRSC. 
In
support of the PRSP's growth objectives, the Bank carried out an integrated trade framework
diagnostic. To support the PRSP objective of improving access to core social services,
analytical work is ongoing, in particular a gender assessment and a CPPR. To support the
PRSP's governance objective, a governance and anti-corruption diagnostic is being carried
out with the involvement of the Anti-Corruption Committee.
Table 7: Recently completed and ongoing core diagnostic and other ESW

FY 

01 
02 
03 

04 

Product 
Rapid fiduciary assessment 
CPAR 
Integrated trade framework diagnostic 
CFAA 
CPPR 
Gender assessment 
PER 
Govemance and anti-corruption diagnostic 

PRSP Oblectives
Growth 
Social 
Govern.
XXX
XXX

XXX

XX 
XXX
XXX 

XXX
XX

XXX
XXX

(XXX: major support; XX: significant support; X: some support)

97. 
Strengthening the knowledge base and supporting capacity building. This CAS
will build upon the existing body of analytical work as explained in table 8. In support of the
first PRSP pillar the Bank will produce in FY04-05 a country economic memorandum and a
private sector assessment. In support of the second PRSP pillar, an education sector review
and a poverty assessment will be carried out during FY05-06. In support of the third PRSP
pillar a legal and judicial sector assessment will be conducted in FY04, an integrated
fiduciary assessment will be carried out in FY05, and an institutional and governance review
will be completed in FY06. Beyond the analytical work, the Bank will support statistical
capacity building through a trust fund, conduct training through the World Bank Institute,
and strengthen the capacity of the national assembly and the chambre des comptes to monitor
public expenditures through an Institutional Development Grant.

- 27 -

Table 8: New analytical and advisory services

FY 

Product 

04 

Legal and Judicial Sector Assessment 

WBI Activities 
IDF grant to support institutions with govemance related mandates in the 
judicial and legislative branches of govermnent.
Trust fund grant to support statistical capacity building 

05 

Integrated Fiduciary Assessment 

Private Sector Assessment 

Education Sector Review 

County Economic Memorandum 

WBI Activities 

Institutional and Governance Review 
Poverty Assessment 

06 

WBI Activities 

PRSP Oblectives
Growth 
Social 
Govern.

XX 

XXX 

XX 

XXX

XXX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

xxx

XX 

XX

XX 

XXX

XX
XXX

XXX

XXX

XXX

XX

XXX

XX

(XXX: major support; XX: significant support; X: some support)

C. 
Lending program
98. 
Lending program. Under the base case scenario, IDA commitments during the
three-year CAS period would total up to US$125.4 million (see table 9). The Bank is
planning to support the first PRSP pillar through a structural adjustment operation (FY04)
covering policy reforms in tax administration, mining and trade, and including various
activities to strengthen Guinea's public expenditures and fiduciary framework. The reforms
will be implemented during FY04-05. A planned rural infrastructure program (FY04) and
the second phase of the Urban Program (FY05) will be used to support the establishment of
minimum infrastructure services for growth in rural and urban areas. The second phase of
the Community Support Program (FY05) will foster growth in rural areas and will include an
important component for rural services. Two Global Environmental Facility-supported
projects in FY05 will support the sustainable management of natural resources. Under the
high case, the Bank would support the development of water and power services with two
projects.
99. 
The Bank will support the second PRSP pillar through the second phase of the
existing health program (FY04). Should the Bank move towards provision of budget
support, the first PRSC will focus on health and education. 
This operation would
complement the ongoing support to social sectors (the Education for All program, and the
Multisectoral HIV/AIDS program). The Bank will support the third PRSP pillar by
following the existing CBSD Program with a second phase in FY06.

- 28 -

Table 9: Bank assistance program 2003-06

Bank Group Assistance Program 

FY 
04 

05 

06 

Assistance Program 
Structural Adjustment Credit 
Second Health Adaptable Program Loan 
Second Rural Infrastructure 
GEF Coastal Zone Management Project 
GEF Community Ecosystem Management Project 
Second Community Support Program 
Second Urban Program 
Electricity Support Program 
Water Support Program 
First PRSC 
Second CBSD Program 
Total IDA allocation 
MIGA and IFC support 

15.0 

35.0 

Base 
Low 
High 
case 
l 
case 
case
IDA Allocation (US$ mil) 
20.4 
20.4 
15.0 
15.0 
20.0 
20.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
22.0 
22.0 
20.0 
20.0 
15.0 
15.0 
25.0 
8.0 
160.4

20.0 
8.0 
125.4 

10.0 
60.0 

PRSP Objectives

Growvth 
XXX 

Social Gover
XXX

XXX

XXX
XX
XX
XXX 
XXX 
XXX
XXX

XXX

XXX 

XXX
XXX

XXX 
XX 

XX

XXX

(XXX: major support; XX: significant support; X: some support)

D. 
Scenarios and triggers
100. Guinea's PRSP provides a comprehensive framework for the implementation of its
development strategies. Successful 
implementation will depend on Guinea's ability to
maintain a stable macroeconomic environment, 
to improve service delivery, and to
strengthen governance.
101. 
The base case scenario. The base case corresponds to the program that is outlined in
the PRSP. It assumes that the security situation in the subregion does not deteriorate further
and that the political situation in the country remains stable. 
It also assumes that the
government sustains its efforts to (a) implement the PRSP, (b) maintain a satisfactory
macroeconomic 
framework, 
(c) 
strengthen governance, 
and 
(d) ensure satisfactory
implementation of Bank supported programs. Triggers and indicators for remaining in the
base case are specified in table 10.
102. Under the base case, Guinea is expected to attain a growth rate of 5.8 percent due to
increase 
in agricultural and mining output. 
Further reforms 
to maintain a stable
macroeconomic framework and to improve the investment climate would be implemented,
access and quality of social services would improve, and governance and institutional
capacity would be strengthened. The Bank will support the government's efforts through a
structural adjustment operation, 
investment 
lending 
to support service delivery and
institutional reform, and analytical and advisory services. Conditional on satisfactory
implementation of reforms in public finance management, the Bank may move towards
providing budget support through a PRSC at the end of the CAS period.
103. No IDA grants are scheduled for Guinea as part of the IDA US$125.4 allocation. Up
to 30 percent of IDA funding would be provided through budget support. To the extent that
Guinea maintains a stable macroeconomic environment, the Bank will help the govemment
raise adequate donor funding.
104. 
Low case scenario. Guinea's capacity to improve the overall governance situation
and to maintain fiscal discipline constitutes the main risk that might trigger the low case
scenario. This would happen if the implementation of the PRSP seriously slipped, if
macroeconomic performance seriously deteriorated, if efforts to improve governance were

- 29 -

delayed, or if implementation of the Bank-supported programs worsened. If the stability in
the country or the in subregion declined, the Bank may also decide to move to the low case.
105. 
IDA commitments under this scenario would total about US$60 million over the CAS
period. There would be no budget support or support to infrastructure, but to protect the
poor, and to continue strengthening Guinea's institutional capacity and governance, new
lending in health, environment, community driven development, and capacity building would
continue.
106. High case scenario. The lending scenario could move to a high case if Guinea
would achieve (a) an increase in fiscal revenues to 13 percent of GDP; (b) improvements in
the quality of governance as illustrated through the actual implementation of a three-year
action plan based on the survey results of the governance and corruption diagnostic; and (c)
an increase in private sector involvement in the water and electricity sectors. The specific
modalities for private sector involvement remain to be determnined.8
107. 
IDA lending under the high case scenario would increase to up to US$160 million.
Under the high case scenario, the Bank would finance investment in the water and electricity
sectors to further improve Guinea's investment climate. 
It would also provide increased
budgetary support through the PRSC.

18 One option under examination is the unbundling of various activities in the operations of services and
the selectively privatizing specific functions (for example, production, financial management, and
distribution.).

- 30 -

Table 10: Program triggers

Trigger area 

To sta 

in the base"iase, 

T-4- ' Nleans of verification,

Poverty Reduction Strategy implementation-

Effective implementation of the 
PRSP 

Macroeconomic management

Maintain sound fiscal and 

monetary policies and a stable 

macroeconomic environment 

Governance
Progress in the fight against 

Satisfactory implementation of the PRSP 

Expenditures in priority sectors at a 
minimum level of 32 percent of nonwage
recurrent expenditures

Joint staff assessment of PRSP
progress report
Quarterly IMF/Bank review

Satisfactory implementation of 

govemments macro program

Quarterly IMF/Bank review

Fiscal revenues at a minimum of 12.1 

Quarterly IMF/Bank review

percent of GDP

Initiate implementation of anticorruption 

Quarterly IMF/Bank review

corruption and in establishing 

action plan

transparency and accountability in 
public finance management 

Portfolio performance

Satisfactory implementation of 
Bank supported programs 

Trigger area 
Base case triggers plus:
Macroeconomic management
Strengthen macroeconomic 
framework 
Governance
Significant improvements in 
governance 
Investment climate
Provide minimum infrastructure 
services for growth 

Satisfactory progress on implementation 
of HIPC expenditure accountability 
action plan 
Implementation of CFAA, CPAR, and 
PER action plans 

Fifth Structural Adjustment Credit
supervision reports and integrated
fiduciary assessment
Fifth Structural Adjustment Credit
supervision reports and integrated
fiduciary assessment

No more than 20 percent of projects with 
unsatisfactory ratings for implementation 

Bank supervision reports
CPPR

progress or development objectives

To move to the high*Faset-. 

Means of verification 

Increase in fiscal revenues to at least 13 
percent of GDP

Quarterly IMF/Bank review

Full implementation of anticorruption 
action plan. 

Monitoring by the Anti-Corruption
Committee

Selective private sector involvement in 
the water and electricity sectors 

Fifth Structural Adjustment Credit
and infrastructure supervision
reports

E. 
Impact of IDA lending on debt sustainability
108. 
The NPVR remains below 200 percent under each IDA lending scenario (Annex E).
In the base case, the NPVR averages 137 percent during the CAS period and 130 percent
thereafter (2007-18). 
In the low case, the NPVR averages 137 percent during the CAS
period and 138 percent thereafter. In the high case, the NPVR averages 138 percent during
the CAS period and 149 percent thereafter (peaking at 167 percent at the end of the
projection period). This should not be a matter of concern because the ratio remains well
below 200 percent. Nevertheless, to prevent the debt burden from becoming unsustainable,
debt indicators will be monitored.
109. 
Even though the NPVR is projected to remain well below 200 percent, Guinea could
suffer an external shock, a reform setback, or a natural catastrophe, which could seriously
affect its export performance and increase the burden of debt service payments. For this
reason, irrespective of which CAS scenario prevails, Bank staff will monitor the NPVR, the

- 31 -

debt service to exports ratio and the debt service to revenue ratio on a regular basis to ensure
that these indicators of debt sustainability do not exceed prudent levels. Should the NPVR
rise above 200, Bank management will review the size of the IDA program. 
In this case,
reductions in the lending program may be necessary, while every effort would be made to
match shortfalls in the external financing needs with incremental grants from donors to
support Guinea's efforts to attain the MDGs.
F. 
PRSP and CAS monitoring
110. Guinea's progress in implementing the PRSP, including its progress towards the
MDGs, and the Bank's effectiveness in supporting the PRSP implementation will be assessed
through: (a) the annual joint staff assessment of the PRSP progress reports; (b) the results of
the household survey; (c) annual monitoring of the portfolio through the CPPR; and (d)
annual reviews of CAS triggers as part of the country policy and institutional assessment.
Guinea's PRSP targets are largely in line with the MDGs (table 11).
Table 11: Guinea MDGs and PRSP targets

MDGs 
Cut in half between 1990 and 2015 the proportion of 
people whose income is less than one dollar per day. 

Guinea PRSP target
While Guinea's objective to reduce poverty by 25 percent
by 2010 is less ambitious than that of the MDG, attaining
it will still require higher and more equitable growth.
Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls With only 40 percent of school age children completing
alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary 
school, extraordinary efforts will be needed to reach the
schooling. 
MDGs in education, including enrolment of all children in
grade one by 2005.
Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary 
According to UNDP estimates, Guinea is likely to reach
education, preferably by 2005, and to all levels of 
the objectives on gender equality and empowernent of
education no later than 2015. 
women.
Reduce by two thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under While Guinea may reach a child mortality rate of 40 by
five mortality rate. 
2015, this will require considerable extra efforts.
Reduce by three quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the 
While Guinea may reach a matemal mortality rate of 167
maternal mortality rate. 
by 2015, this will require considerable extra efforts.
Halt by 2015 the spread of WIV/AIDS and begin to 
Guinea has significantly stepped up the fight against
reverse the incidence of infection. 
HIV/AIDS. While initially prevalence is likely to
increase, Guinea may eventually be able to keep
prevalence below 5 percent.
No specific target determnined in PRSP.

Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the incidence 
of malaria and other major diseases.
Integrate the principles of sustainable development into 
country policies and programs and reverse the losses of
environmental resources.
Cut in half between 1990 and 2015 the proportion of 
people without sustainable access to safe drinking water. 

No specific target determined in PRSP.

Access to drinking water has improved, and in this area
Guinea is likely to achieve the MDG if current trends
intensify.

111. 
The Bank will support the PRSP implementation through its lending program and
analytical and advisory services. The core CAS benchmarks to assess Bank's performance
are listed in table 12. Additional benchmarks are reflected in annex B9. These benchmarks
are developed based on the limited information available. During the CAS period, the Bank
will support the strengthening of the knowledge base and of statistical capacity, which will
allow establishing a stronger baseline of the various benchmarks, especially in the area of
strengthened governance and institutional capacity, and measuring the progress over the CAS
implementation period. Depending on the progress made during implementation, the Bank
will adjust the strategy as needed at the midpoint of the CAS period in FY05.

- 32 -

Table 12: Core CAS benchmarks
PRSP 
CAS benchmark 

I

pillar 
Ensure 
Action plans based on the CPAR, CFAA, and PER are 
sustainable 
implemented. 
and equitable Mechanisms to track budgetary expenditures to the front line
growth 
developed and implemented.

Policies to reduce cost of doing business clarified and under 
implementation. 
Number of days needed to clear goods through customs 
reduced from between 10 to 15 days in 2003 to 3 days in
2006.

Minimum package of infrastructural services for growth 
identified and under implementation at the end of the CAS 
period.
The percentage of the country's rural roads rated good or 
above average increased from 30 percent in 2003 to 60
percent in 2006.
NPVs of debt-to-export ratios below 200 percent. 

Coverage of community support program increased from 73 
CRDs in 2003 to 303 CRDs in 2006. 
Policy recommendations to increase impact on poverty 
reduction r eflected in the PRSP updates.

The percentage of total budgetary expenditures in health 
allocated to primary health care increased from 14 percent in 
2003 to 20 percent in 2006.
The percentage of one-year-old children immunized against
measles increased from 52 percent in 2001 to 60 percent in
2006.
The percentage of non-wage recurrent expenditures for 
primary education managed at the school level increased 
from 0 percent in 2003 to 50 percent in 2006.
Repetition rates for primary education reduced from 30
percent in 2003 to 20 percent in 2006.
National coverage of HIV/AIDS program attained by 2006. 
Improved fiduciary framework for public finance 
management adopted.
Modalities for operating of prefectoral development councils 
adopted.

Policies to strengthen judicial framework formulated and 
under implementation. 

Anticorruption action plan under implementation. 

._____________I 

Improve 
access and 
quality of 
basic social 
services

Strengthen 
govemance 
and 
institutional 
and human
capacity 

Bank instruments

Fifth Structural Adjustment Credit
CPAR, CFAA, PER*

Country economic memorandum
Private sector assessment
Fifth Structural Adjustment Credit

Urban Program phase 1 * and 2
Water and electricity projects *

Rural infrastructure program

HIPC completion point debt
sustainability analysis.
Community support program phase
I* and 2
Poverty assessment

Second phase of health project
Possible PRSC

Education for All project*
Education sector review

HIV/AIDS project*
Integrated fiduciary assessment

CBSD program phases 1 * and 2

Support to legislative and judicial
reform through IDF grant
Legal and judicial sector assessment
Institutional and govemance review
Govemance and corruption
diagnostic

Note: *Existing program; **High case scenario; these benchmarks will be used to monitor progress under the base-
case assistance program, and assume that no major exogenous shocks occur.

- 33 -

G. MIGA and IFC
112. 
The outstanding portfolio of guarantees of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA) in Guinea consists of eight contracts of guarantee in the agribusiness and
manufacturing sectors, representing US$39.4 million in gross (and net) exposure. The total
amount of foreign direct investment facilitated to date is US$62 million. 
In fiscal 2001,
MIGA issued a guarantee to Guinea Investment Company Limited for its investment in
Alumina Company of Guinea Limited, and a guarantee for US$40 million of loans to that
company. The project includes a bauxite mine, an alumina plant, captive electricity and
water utilities, and a 144-kilometer railway linking the project site to the Conakry port.
113. 
The current portfolio of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) stands at US$3.5
million. It consists of projects in the hotel industry, agribusiness, and schools. To the extent
that Guinea manages to improve its overall investment climate and to attract private capital
for further developments in mining, agribusiness, or trade, the Bank group will be ready to
support investments through IFC and MIGA.
H. Risks and mitigation measures
114. 
Institutional instability. The combination of the lack of a clear consensus about the
transition process, general discontent with severe water and electricity shortages, and the
importance of the army in the stability of the country constitute risk factors that may result in
an increase in civil unrest or a contested transition of power. 
In case of a breakdown of
effective governance and institutional instability, the Bank would move to the low case
scenario. Meanwhile, the Bank's strategy is to focus on reformn in subnational and national
institutions and the empowerment of local communities and their governments. This is
expected to increase Guinea's long-term capacity for development even if the country were
to go through a period of institutional instability.
115. Poor governance. 
Poor governance 
is at the heart of Guinea's development
challenge, and little progress has been seen over the previous CAS period. While the Bank
realizes the limits to its capacity to influence the national resolve to improve governance, its
operations are designed to help Guinea address governance to the extent that there is effective
political will. In the absence of this, and in case of deterioration in governance, the low case
scenario will apply.
116. 
Instability at Guinea's borders. Guinea has suffered greatly from the instability in
its neighboring countries, and from rebel attacks in 2001. The country had to accommodate
refugees from Sierra Leone and from Liberia, and 650,000 internally displaced people.
Although the peace in Sierra Leone has allowed refugees from that country to return home,
the continued instability in Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire poses a risk for Guinea's security and
macroeconomic stability. To mitigate this risk, the Bank through the Community Support
Program is able to assist the government in reducing the impact of refugees on local
communities. The Bank will also continue to coordinate closely with the specialized UN
agencies to ensure that an adequate response is made.
Failure to adopt policy reforms. To attain its macroeconomic objectives, Guinea
117. 
will have to implement policy reforms that have proven to be difficult in the past. In spite of
declared intentions to move forward with regard to private sector involvement in water and
electricity, the utility sectors are again entirely under public management. Implementation of
policies to maintain, and, subsequently, raise fiscal revenues and to protect spending in
priority sectors will touch the interest and rents of powerful lobbies. Lessons from the past

- 34-

indicate that successful implementation of policy reforms depends on the political will. In
the absence of strong r esolve to push reforms, Guinea would move to the low case scenario.
118. 
Failure to move towards decentralization. The amendment to the constitution

modified the relationship of the lowest level of government to the central administration by
transforming it to a government body, headed by a government appointee, rather than an
elected representative. Unless the existing regulations concerning the elections of officials at
the CRD level are adapted, there is a risk that local councils will not be fully accountable to
beneficiaries. To mitigate this risk, the organization of transparent CRD elections is a
condition for the second phase of the Community Support Program. The Bank, together with
other donors, will continue the dialogue with the country on this issue.

6. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS

119. 
The main goal of the government's PRSP and the Bank Group's CAS is to foster
sustainable and equitable growth, 
to improve access to basic social services, and to
strengthen governance and institutional capacity. The economic and sector work and lending
operations proposed in this CAS are specifically designed to help Guinea reach these
objectives.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:

Shengman Zhang

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Guinea at a glance 

325S03

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Low-
Income 

Guinea 

Development dlamond

2002
Population, mid-vear (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

7.7 
410 
3.1 

674 
470 
317 

2,511
430
1,069

Avrage annual growth, 1996-02

Population ((%) 
Labor force (%) 

2.7 
2.5 

2.5 
2.6 

1.9
2.3 

/

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1996402)

Poyerty (% of population below national poverty line)

Urban population (% oftotal population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (%6 ofpopulation age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-age population) 

28 
47 
98 
33
49 

32 
47 
91 

31
59
76

55 
37 
78 

76
37
96 

67 

Guinea

Male 

72 

85 

103 

Gie

Female 

63 

72 

88 

Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1982 

1992 

2001 

2002

Econom Ic ratlos

GDP (USS billfons) 

.. 

3.3 

3 0 
22.1 
27.6 
20.2 
19.7 

3.1
26.0
25.4
20.1
19.8

Gross domestic investmentVGDP 
Exports of goods and servceas/GDP 
Gross domestic savlngs/GDP 
Gross national savlngslGDP 

17.4 
19.4 
11 2 
5.2 

Current account balance/GDP 

-7.4 

-2,4 

-6.1

Interest pavnents/GDP 1/ 

.. 

1.0 

0.8 

0,7

Total debtlGDP 
Total debt service/exports 1/ 
Present value of debtVGDP 
Present value of debVexports 1/ 

80.6 
10.7 
49.5 
200.4 

104.3 
8.4 
78.4 
179.3 

95.0
10.4
73.8
145.8

1982-92 

1992-02 

2001 

2002 

2002-06

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of floods and services 

3.7 
0 8 
4,0 

43 
18 
5 6 

3.6 
13 
3.3 

4.2 
2.0 
3.8 

55
3.3 
4.3 

Guinea
Low-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1982 

1992 

2001 

2002

(% of GOP)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

22 3 
27 9 
3.4 
49.8 

24,5 
37.8 
4.4 
37.7 

25.5
381 
4.4
36.4

r

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

81,3 

75 0 
4.8 
29.6 

73.8 
5,4 
30.7

97 

95 

99 

os 
ci 
OGDP

02

7,5 
25.6 

-

GDI 

1982.92 

1992-02 

2001 

2002

(average annual growth)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

3.2 
2.3 

4.0 
5 2 
4.6 
3.2 

2.4 
4.9 
5.5 
-1 7 

4.3 
6.0 
6.0
0.2

15

10

3 9 

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic Investment 
Imports of goods and services 

4.1 
-3.7 
4.1 
3.7 

3 3 
5 0 
4.5 
3.0 

3.1 
5 2 
6.0 
4.0 

5.9 
5.0 
6.3 
9.4

o 

9 

99 

Do 

01 

0c2

5

-

Exports 

Imports

Note: 2002 data are preliminary estimates. Group data are through 2001.

* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with Its income-proup average, If data are missing, the diamond will
be Incomplete.
1/ In 2001 and 2002, ratios take Into account enhanced HIPC assistance (estimates)

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Guinea

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1982 

1992 

2001 

2002 

Inflation (%)

Domestfc prices 

i

(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

1.

32 4 
26.7 

5.4 
4.9 

3.0 
2.5 

8
4-
4
2

.

Government finance 
(% of GOP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

o

.. 
.. 

12.2 
2.0 
-7.1 

14.8 
1.9 
-4.1 

14.4 
3 5 
-5.9

97 

9O 

99 

00 

S1 

02

-

GDP deflator 

-: 

CPI

-

TRADE

1982 

1992 

2001 

2002

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob) 
Bauxite 
Alumina 

6. 57 
343 
107 

723 
314 
121 

713 
376
110 

1,000

.. 
.. 
.
.
.. 
.. 
.. 

900

Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 

600
400.d

740 

629 

728 

Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 
Exportpriceindex(1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

49 
69 
98 
117 
95 
124 

93 
107 
132 
95 
126 
76 

100
116 
146 8 
98 
129 
75

200

o 

| 

-

.. 

GE 

07 

eS 

99 

00 

01 

02

.. 

*Exports 

*Imports

.. 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1982 

1992 

2001 

2002

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

484 
491 
-7 

811 
856 
-45 

822 
880 
-58 

792 o
956 
-184 

.1

2-

Net Income 
Net current transfers 

.. 

-141 
-73 

-66 
-13 

-59 
-16 

-4 

*

0 

. i *I 

I*

Current account balance 

.

-244 

-73 

-195 

.7

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

.

247 
-3 

127 
-54 

189 
6

8

-2 

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, local/USS) 

0 
22.4 

155 
902.0 

282 
1,950.6 

287
1,992.7

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1982 

1992 

2001 

2002

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

1,366 
49 
57 

2,648 
0 
548 

2,935 
0 
1,002 

2,791
0 
987 

G 178

F8 86

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

89 
8 
1 

87 
15 
5 

166 
0 
22 

163
0 
14

\ 

B: 987

Composition of net resource flows 

E: 511

Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Forelgn direct Investment 
Portfolio equity 
World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

e,

22 
23 
0 
0 

157 
-8 
56 
0 

... 
13 
-58 

...
80 
30

-.

21

D:628

18 
11 
3 
8 
5 
3 

78 
88 
16 
72 
4 
68 

0 
71 
14 
57 
8 
49 

0 
9 
7 
2
7
-5

A- lORD 
B IDA 
C - IMF 

E -ilateral
F - Prvate
G -Short-term

D- Other multilateral 

Development Economics 

3/25/03

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

CAS Annex B2 - Guinea

As Of Date 03/06/2003

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousands) 
Average Supervision (US$ thousands/project) 

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

13 
3.4 
7.7 
2.0 
15.4 
19.3 
20.1 

no 
916.4 
70.5 

10 
4.4 
10.0 
12.9 
10.0 
12.9 
23.0 

no 
747.1 
74.7 

7 
4.1 
14.3 
9.0 
14.3 
9.0 
31.4 

no 
1,155 
96.3 

8
3.0
12.5
8.8
37.5
64.5
8.2

yes
983.5
109.3

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

43 
986.7 
40.5 
36.1 

8
288.2
50.0
48.6

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page lof2

CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary 

Guinea

As Of Date 03/06/2003

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program

Fiscal year 

Pro] ID 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(H/M/L) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

2004 

2005 

2006 

Overall Result 

Fifth Structural Adjustment Credit 
Health Sector Support Program 
Rural Infrastructure Program 
GEF Coastal Zonet Management Project 
GEF Community Ecosystem Management Project 
Result 
Community Support Program 
Urban II 
Result 
PRSC I 
Capacity Building and Institutional Reform II 
Result 

H 
H 
H 

M 
M 

H 
H 

H 

H 

20.4 
15.0 
20.0 
0.0 
0.0 
55.4
22.0 
20.0 
42.0
20.0 

8.0 

28.0
125.4

M
M
M
L
L

M
M

M

M

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks
are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Guinea

Guinea - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2000-2003

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

TRANSPORTATION & WAREH 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total 

0.50

100

100 

100

0 

0 

0

0 

0 

0 

0

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

3.99

Annex B4
Page 1 of I

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Guinea

As Of Date 03/06/2003

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) 

Audience a 

Objective b

Recent completions
Rapid fiduciary assessment 
CPAR 

Underway
CFAA 
Gender Assessment 
CPPR 
Integrated Trade Framework 
Diagnostic
PER 
Governance and anti corruption 
Diagnostic

Planned
Legal and Judicial Sector Review 
CEM 
Private Sector Assessment 
Integrated Fiduciary Assessment 
Education Sector Review 
Institutional and Governance Review 
Poverty Assessment 
Support to PRSP Progress Report 

FY01 
FY02 

FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

FY04 
FY04 

FY04 
FY05 
FY05 
FY05 
FY05 
FY06 
FY06 
Annual 

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

65 

30 
15 
20 

125 
175 

30 
180 
30 
80 
60 
60 
115 
30 

GOG/Bk 
GOG/Bk 

KG, PS
PS

GOG/Bk 
PS
GOG/Bk/Dr/PD PD
GOG/Bk 
PS
GOG/Bk/PD 
KG, PD, PS

GOG/Bk 
PS
GOG/Bk/Dr/PD KG, PD, PS

GOG/Bk/PD 
GOG/Bk 
GOG/Bk/PD 
GOG/Bk 
GOG/Bk/PD 
GOG/Bk/PD 
GOG/Bk/PD 
GOG/Bk 

KG, PD, PS
PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD
KG, PS

CAS Annex B5 - Guinea Poverty and Social Development Indicators

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

Latest single year 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1994-00 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 

Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

4.1 

1.2 
16.3 
5.9 

5.0 

2.2 
22.3 
6.2 

POVERTY

(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME

GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini Index 

Lowest quintile (% of Income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 

Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate

(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

Access to an Improved water source
(% of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate

(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.
.. 
.. 

., 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

38 
38 
39 

164 
345 

636 
534 

.. 
.. 

.. 
..
..

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
..

27 
36 

18 

., 
.. 
.. 

29 

15 
23 

42 
41 
42 

137 
265 

589 
507 

.. 
.. 

7.4 

2.7 
32.8 
5.5 

40.0

450 

.. 

101

40.3

6.4
47.2

1.9 
1.7 

46
54
37

49 
72 
36 

52 
46 

23

47 
46 
47 

98 
177 

448 
443 

1,200
35

Same region/income group
Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

Low-
Income

658.9 

2.6 
34.4 
5.2 

2,459.8

2.0
31.9
3.6

470 
133 

410
140

2.4 
3.6 

1 2
3.4

55 
82 
41 

53 
46 

47 
46 
47 

91 
162 

504 
459 

76
88
70

57
57

59
58
60

76
115

294
261

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.

2002 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Annex B6 Guinea - Key Economic Indicators

Acmual 
199'.7.- 

EmePoeic
200f 

| ; 

Indicaiot 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2001 

;:2002 .'20U3 

204N 

2005 '; 

206J_j

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100 
22 
34 
44 

100 
23 
36 
41 

100 
24 
37 
39 

100 
24 
.38 
38 

100 
24 
36 
40 

100 
24 
38 
38 

100 
25 
38 
37 

100 
25 
36 
38 

100 
25 
35 
40 

100 
25 
34 
41 

100
25
34
41

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

88 
17 
5 
12 

80 
18 
6 
12 

85 
18 
4 
14 

83 
22 
7 
15 

83 
22 
7 

80 
22 
7 
15 

80 
25 
8 
17 

80 
24 
8 
16 

75 
26 
9 
17 

73 
30 
11 
19 

72
32
11
21

15 

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

19 
24 

20 
23 

21 
25 

22 
27 

24 
29 

27 
29 

25 
30 

26 
30 

28 
29 

26 
29 

26
30

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

12 
9 

20 
17 

15 
13 

17 
15 

17 
15 

20 
20 

20 
19 

21 
19 

25 
23 

27 
25 

28
26

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(GINF billion at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

3867 

4144 

4438 

4802 

5434 

5919 

6325 

6885 

7501 

8149 

8915

570 

560 

520 

500 

450 

420 

410 

420 

440 

450 

460

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1994 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
4.6 

5.0 

4.8 

4.6 

1.8 

3.8 

4.3 

4.5 

5.0 

5.8 

6.1

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1994 prices)
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprices 
2.0 
2.3 
Total consumption 
0.6 
0.9 
Private consumption 
0.7 
0.4 

2.2 
1.3 
2.4 

1.3 
1.2 
1.2 

0.1 
-0.4 
-0.6 

1.3 
1.0 
0.8 

2.0 
3.2 
3.6 

2.8 
2.2 
2.2 

3.1 
2.0 
1.9 

4.3 
1.7 
1.5 

3.1
2.0
1.2

Balance of Payments (USS milllons)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

734.1 
610.0 
941.9 
583.7 
-207.8 
-36.8 
-339.0 

770.7 
660.0 
855.0 
572.5 
-84.3 
-25.9 
-233.2 

770.2 
659.4 
903.3 
576.6 
-133.1 
22.2 
-239.4 

759.0 
645.8 
923.7 
581.8 
-164.7 
-4.3 
-252.8 

734.6 
666.6 
893.8 
583.3 
-159.2 
10.5 
-226.4 

822.3 
722.8 
880.5 
561.9 
-58.2 
51.6 
-72.8 

792.2 
713.3 
956.0 
649.6 
-163.8 
27.9 
-195.1 

871.3 
787.0 
980.2 
674.8 
-108.9 
27.5 
-150.8 

955.9 
866.8 
1010.5 
697.3 
-54.6 
18.9 
-131.1 

981.6 
891.1 
1087.2 
755.7 
-105.6 
9.0 
-201.8 

1028.8
934.8
1184.2
856.0
-155.4
7.0
-251.1

Netprivate foreign direct investment 
Long-termnloans(net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (ns incr. eors & omnussion) 
Change in reservesd 

16.8 
1364.6 
-18.2 
1382.8 
-1069.7 
27.3 

44.5 
2056.4 
122.7 
1933.7 
-1821.2 
-46.5 

49.1 
1522.1 
46.0 
1476.1 
-1336.3 
4.5 

33.8 
1631.0 
-24.0 
1655.0 
-1453.7 
41.8 

-47.2 
1200.3 
-75.0 
1275.3 
-970.6 
43.9 

-58.0 
1396.3 
-13.5 
1409.8 
-1211.6 
-53.9 

30.3 
1143.0 
-115.8 
1258.8 
-984.5 
6.3 

28.4 
809.7 
-63.3 
873.1 
-679.3 
-8.0 

27.8 
1293.4 
-62.3 
1355.8 
-1180.6 
-9.5 

261.3 
1846.9 
-47.3
1894.2
-1850.7 
-55.7 

261.3
2011.0

-2021.2
0.0

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR94 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-5.4 

-2.2 

-3.7 

-4.8 

-5.1 

-1.9 

-5.2 

-3.3 

-1.6 

-2.8 

-3.9

0.5 
5.6 

14.3 
10.6 

11.9 
8.4 

6.7 
6.5 

5.9 
6.6 
.. 
5.3 

5.6 
5.0 

5.1 
5.0 

5.0 
5.0 

5.0 
5.0 

5.0 
5.0 

5.0
5.0

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

-8.9 

10.2 

7.5 

7.2 

5.6 

5.9 

6.0 

6.0 

6.0 

6.0

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Guinea - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

lradctoi 

,. 

1996 

.1997 

1998 

1999 

Actual 

Es=acPro 
i. 200u 

2001 

r 2002 

2003 

d 

2004 

.

_

2005' 

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues (incl. cur. grants) 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 

Price indices( YR94 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise importprice index 
Merchandise terns oftradeindex 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)r 

Real interest rates
Consumerpriceindex (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

10.3 
9.0 
1.2 
7.4 
6.2 

9.0 
2.8 

14.6 
9.1 
5.5 
8.3 
5.9 

9.9 
17.3 

14.1 
8.7 
5.4 
6.0 
3.6 

9.8 
6.1 

75.5 
122.1 
61.8 
69.0 

71.5 
121.0 
59.1 
69.9 

63.8 
118.8 
53.7 
68.6 

3.0 
1.4 

1.9 
1.7 

5.1 
2.2 

13.1 
8.9 
4.2 
7.2 
5.3 

9.9 
8.9 

58.6 
87.9 
66.7 
68.1 

4.6 
3.5 

13.2 
5.8 
7.4 
7.2 
7.4 

10.9 
23.4 

57.1 
83.6 
68.3 
58.5 

6.8 
11.1 

14.8 
13.2 
1.6 
7.3 
4.4 

11.6 
14.8 

59.3 
76.3 
77.7 
55.6 

5.4 
4.9 

14.4 
11.9 
2.5 
8.0 
7.2 

11.7 
19:2 

59.1 
82.5 
71.7 
... 

3.0 
2.5 

16.7 
10.7 
6.0 
8.0 
1.3 

11.1 
8.6 

60.3 
82.5 
73.1 
... 

3.5 
4.2 

17.3 
11.0 
6.3 
9.3 
2.1 

10.9 
9.0 

61.5 
82.5 
74.6 
... 

18.3 
10.7 
7.6 
10.6 
2.1 

10.8 
9.5 

62.7 
82.5 
76.1 
... 

3.0 
3.8 

3.0 
2.6 

18.6
10.4
8.2
10.9
1.8

11.3
9.5

63.0
82.0
76.8
...

3.0
3.3

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page 1 of I

CAS Annex B7 Guinea - Key Exposure I[ndicatorsl

| 

- | ~ ~ ~ 

| 

; 

, 

' 

.- 

AC.UBI~~~~ 

, ;,. 

i.,. e-. 

Ermz 

' 

~ 

I'°;k3 

'f''

_ 

- _ dtadLcalbr 

- 1996 

I 9 

1998 

1999:_ , 

20C0 _ 

20C 

.

2002 7 

-

-0 

,'0 ,20 

2006

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

3271 

3355 

3218 

3375 

3251 

3119 

2986 

2842 

2466 

2482 2674.47

Net disbursements (US$m). 

... 

... 

... 

... 

... 

... 

.

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)'

234 

177 

209 

213 

180 

78 

90 

94 

82 

80 

80

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

444.9 
84.6 
31.8 
78.7 

435.3 
88.7 
23.0 
78.7 

417.8 
89.7 
27.2 
78.5 

444.6 
97.5 
28.0 
79.3 

442.5 
104.5 
24.5 
79.9 

379.3 
102.8 
9.5 
80.4 

376.9 
93.9 
11.4 
90.7 

326.2 
83.8 
10.8 
91.3 

258.0 
68.0 
8.6 
91.6 

252.8 
64.3 
8.1 
91.6 

250
64
8.1
91.6

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

0.0 
32.2 

0.0 
42.0 

0.0 
41.9 

0.0 
42.5 

0.0 
48.8 

0.0 
51.9 

0.0 
48.1 

0.0 
38.9 

0.0 
38.2 

0.0 
52.6 

0
52.6

DS (%)'

IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0
0.0

Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

IDA TDO (USSm)d 

908 

989 

978 

1013 

1009 

1002 

1022 

1007 

1020 

1052 

1052

IFC (US$m)

Loans 

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Equity and quasi-equity /c 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

MIGA

MtGAGrossGunranreesOutsmanding(US$m) 

0.0 

8.3 

6.0 

4.0 

2.9 

51.5 

39.4 

19.4

1. Assessment based on the HPC decision point document and debt relief and projections under the CAS base case scenario.
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital. The debt outstanding takes into account HIPC assistance when a stock of debt operation is conducted.
Debt service takes into account all projected HIPC assistance as from 2001.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Guinea

Guinea
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 6/30/2002
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
1988 
Aurifere 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
0
1998 
SEF Agro 0.14 
0 
0 
0 0.14 
0 
0 
1993/98 
SGHI 
2.58 
0.56 
0.48 
0 2.58 
0.56 
0.48 
0

Total Portfolio: 

2.72 

0.56 

0.48 

0 2.72 

0.56 

0.48 

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan Equity Quasi Partic

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B8 - Guinea

Operations Portfolio (IBRDIIDA and Grants)
As Of Date 03/2012003

Closed Projects 

53

IBRDIIDA *
Tota Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active * Closed) 

of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

48 68
0.00
1,18924
196.93
1,237,914,007 97

196,933,374.91

172.88
4-25
177,129,930.86

Active Projects 

Project ID 

P049716 
P050046 
P074288 
P050732 
P073378 
P041568 
P001075 
P001074 
Overall Result 

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Disbursements"

Project Name 

Development 
Obiectives 

Implementation 
Proaress

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

IDA 

GRANT 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Revd

CAPACITY BUILDING FOR SI 
EDUCATION FOR ALL PROJ I 
Guinea: Decentralized Rural E 
Guinea:VILLAGE COMMUNIT 
MULTI-SECTORAL AIDS PRC 
POP & REPROD HEALTH 
THIRD WATER SUPPLY 
URBAN III 

U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

2000 
2002 
2003 
1999 
2003 
1999 
1997 
1999 

19 
70 
5 
22 

11.3 
50 
18 
195.3 

20.3 

20.3 

13.81267 19.518693
71.11393 -5.446988
5.553778 0.2439024
11.8267 12.226042
20.99112 
1
0.41042 
-2.010361
37.22566 10.628768 7.7673791
11.9474 12.481107
172.8817 48.641162 7.7673791

a. Intended disbursement to date minus actual disbursement to date as projected at appraisal

Dia;gnosis 

PRSP' Strategic 
Directions 
1. Sustained and equitable growth_

____ 

Developrnent 
Partmaers' i^ocus __ 

IMF: Macro stability 

Maintain mnacro economiic 
stability 
Improve investment 
clinmate through: 

AfDB: Macro stability; 
transport infrastr. and 
policy dialogue; ag. 
water and 
siie 
ndrrl 
elette 
supply dsevices and rural 
eethricity supy 
development 
through 
involvement of 
UN System: SME; ag. 

MIaintain macroeconomic Reach 5.8 percent annual 
siability 
growth rate by fiscal 2005 
Expansion of budget 
Maintain inflation below 
tracking mechanism 
3 percent 
down to front line 
Expansion of miedium 
term expenditure 
framework to include all 

Increase fiscal revenuecs 
to 13 percent of GDP 
Maintain spending in
priority sectors at 20)2 

sectors 

levels 

Annual growth of about 
4% of GDP stemring 
mainily fronn extractive 

Little equity in growth 
and impact on poverty 
imatoBpvryetter 
Yn 
reduction 
Growth haTnpered by 

adverse investment 

climate and weak 
govmaeranc ea 

governance 
Fiscal revenues hover 
around 11 °6 to 120,t of 

aouDI 

tdv;fIshre 

private sector 

s 

PolIicy refo)rms in 

nmining, 
agriculture, trade, 
and fishing sectors 

* 

Improved 

govenmance 

* 

* 

Support to small 
and medium 
enterprises in 
urban and rural 

areas throujgh 

infrastructure ancl 
services 

Su<tainab][e 
management of 
environmental 

resources 

policy and rural 

dvlpet.vesand 
development 

EU: Macro stability; 
transport infrastr. and 
policy; ag. serviccs; rural 

dv;fseisanrd 

Fnrnch development 
agencv: R,ural and urban 
infrastr; water sector 
dialogue- farmers' 
organizations and ag. 
seivices; micro credit 

French CGoperation: TA 
to Minisby of Fin. 

GTZ: PRSP monitoring; 
SME 
CIDA: water sector 

diogesupport

ulsources 
U'AID: 
credit 

dialogue 
SME, micro 

Annex -B9 - CAS Program Matrix

Annex B9
Page 1 oif3

Fiscail 2004-06 Actions and. Performance Obe 

s/Benchmarks

__Country 

Actioins 

=p 

enclunarks:=t 

World Bank Group
Actions 
B= B chmarks

Improved public 
expenditure iianagennent 
sepnve sec 
vwat r 

Seetv novmn 
private sector in water 

f 

Implementation ofGEcomntad 

CPAR, CFAA, and PER 
action plans 

Privatization of public 
parastatal enterprises, 

including private sector 
involvernent in water and
electricity sectors 
.
Policy reforms in 
agriculture, miring, trade, 

aind fisheries 

Lendippgj 
FY04 
i 
adjustment creditu 
al Intrctre 
Rua nisrcuethe 
Progral 
Pormadipectd
GEF coastal zone 

management project 

GEF community 
project 

FY05: 

Action plans based on
CPAR, CFAA, anc PER
implemented.
Mectanisms to 
r 
rack
budgetary expendietures to
firont line dcvcloped
and implemented.

Policies to ieduce cost of

doing business clarified

under
de

implementation.
Numiber of days needed
to clear goods through

csosrdcdfo
bestwm eduen0t5day 
fino

and power sectors 

Urbanl program 

AAA activitiies: 

FY04: 

Country econiom

memorandumn 
Private sector assessment 

WBI support 

Possible IFC and MIGA 

support 

between IO to 15 dlays in

Minimum package of
infrastructural services
for growth identified and
under implementation.

The Ipercentage of the
counteyd s 
g 
iral roab s

average increased from
30 percent in 2003 to 60
perccnt in 2006.

NPV's of debt-to-export
ratios below 200 percent.
Satisfactory portfolio
indicators (realism index
> 80 percent; pro-activity
index > 95 percent)

Satisfactory QAG and
OED evalualtion.

Diagnosis 

PRSP Strategic 
Directions 

2. Access and quality ol basic social services
Important progress i 
Improved access, equity, 
health and education 
and quality of education 
indicators, butt yet at 
Improved health and 

indSato 
letelsmpuove 

SSA levels 

Challenges wihrgrUN 

quality and quantity of 

public expenditures in 

social sectors 
Ilighly centralied 

organization of service 

delivery with limited 
accountability towards 

henefteiaries 

49 percent of population 
in Conakry has access to 
drinking water; about 
10,000 improved water 
points in rural areas 
HIV/AIDS levels 
currently at 4.4 percnt 

through an 

strengthened primary 

teghndprmr 

health care and referral 

systems, decentralization 

of health services and 
improved quality of 

expenditures 

Increased access to 
drinking water in urban 

and mral arras 
beneficiaries 
areas 

Maintain HIVIAIDS 
incidence below 4 percent 
Pilot programs for rural 
electrification 
Gender focus in social 
services 

Development 
Partners' focus 

AtDB primary health 
care, drug supply 
HlV/AIDS 

I/IStenm 

N S 

em: halth 

oiy fsemal hanchlth 

pealth fealea 

chld 

health, water supply, 

HlV/AIDS, social 

primary education, 
security reform 

EU: hospital reform, 
primary health care, rural 

~waler supply, gender 
and rural 
equity 

Improve quality of 
expenditures in social 
sectors through medium 

expenditure 

framework and budgetary 

deocnrto 

deconcentration 

Empowermnent of se 

servics delveryarojec

beneficiaries ovcr social 
scrvices delvery 

Policy reform in health 

and education to improv 
quality, equity, and 

accessibility of servi'ces 
implementation of 

ety 
French Dcv Agencv: 
primary and technical 
education, rural water 
supply 
French 
Education for all 

lmptemealion of 
national HIV/AIDS 
strategy 
Double percentagc of 
population with access to 
dooperation: 
rinking water through 
and rural water 
supply 
GTZ: primary health care, Ensure gender equity in 
rural water supply, 
social sectors 
education, e 
IdV/AIDS 
CILDA: education, health, 
water supply 
USAID: reproductive 
health, education policy, 
HIV/AIDS 
Japam Intcrational 
Cooperation Agnency: 
class room construction 

Fiscal 2004-06 Actions and Performance Objectives/Benchmarks
Country 
World Bank Group
Actions 
Benchmarks

Benchmarks 

Actions 

Annex B9
Page 2 of 3

Gross prmary school 
enrollment at 70 percent 
(63 percent for girls) 

iInfant mortality rate at 70 

pcr thousand; 

Matemal mortality race at 

300 per 1 00,000 live

Onaoine: 
Community support 
program 

Natioruil HlV/AIDS 

program 

Education for all program 

Increase coverage of
community support
fr3 73 CRDs
po 

t.303 CRDs by 2006.

Pnlicy recommendations

to increase impact on

poverty reduction

birth; 
Water and sanitation 
HIV/AIDS prevalence <5 Rural electrification 

RpaleecrrcaioePrenaetftoa

percent 
90 percent population 

acest 

rnigwtr 

proct 

~~FY04: 

edn:primary 
Health sector operation 
FY05 
0 
Second phase of 
commun 
program 
Y06; 
PRSC I (focus on health 
and education) 
AAA activities: 
Poverty Assessment 
(FY05-06) and Education 
Sector Review (FY05) 
WBI training 

reflected in the PRSP
Percentage of total

budgetary ependiturs in
health aocatd t

health care
increased from 14 % in

2003 to 20 % in 2006.
Percentage of I year-old
cen 
tm yed
children immunized
from 52 % in 2001 to 60
% in 2006.
n 
non-wage
recurent expenditures for
prim. Educ mpanaged at
the school level from 0 %
in 2003 to 50 % in 2006.
Repetition rates for prim.
Educ. reduced from 30 %
in 2003 to 20 % in 2006.
National coverage of
HIV/AIDS program
attained by 2006.
Satisfactory portfolio
indicators (realism index
> 80 %; pro-activity
indcx > 95 %)
Satisfactory QAG and
OED evaluation.

Diagnosis 

PRSP Strategic 
Directions 

| 

Developmcnt 
Partners' focus 

| 

Fiscal 2004-06 Actions and Performance Objectives/Benchmarks
Couniy 
World Bank Group
Actions 
| 
Bencrak

enchmarks 

Acin 

Annex B9
Page 3 of 3

3. Strengthening governance and institutional and human capacity
Govemance problems 
Decentralization and 
AfDB: govemance 
negatively affect growth, 
deconcentration of 
assessment 
poverty reduction, and 
service delivery 
social service delivery 
tncreased accountability 
Existing body of 
of local authorities 
legislation and 
legislation and 
Fight against conruption 
institutions to improve 
Em-powermnent of 
implementation buapered 
beneficiaries 
by powerful lobbies 
Refom injustice system 
by powerful lobbies 
Refomm In JUSbCC system 
Decentralization/ 
deconcentration 
framework under 

Further clarification of 
dceentralization and 
deconcentration 
LIN System; 
framework 
decentralization, support 
Processing of cases 
atcorpin 
dumtebyheAnti- 
committee, empowerment Corrupton Committee 
of beneficiarics, supportt CrutoCmite 
to legislative and judicial 
Adoption and 
systems 
implementation of 
Govemance and anti- 
corruption action plan 
of 

EU: institutional reform, 
fiduciary capacity 
building, suppoit to aeh- 

~~~~to 

governance, but 

| Organization of CRD 
elections 
Establishment of 
prefectoral development 
councils 
IpoSecond 
govemance as measurcd 
gvrnceamased 
through Govcmance 
Survey and Diagnostic 
Empowcmmcnt of 
beneficiaries over service 
delivery 
Publication of budget 
allocation and release in 
national press 

Oneoing: 
CtsnD program 
Lending: 

AAatvte:aotd

Y06: 
phase of CB3SD 
program 
Pgancvlp 
AAA artivities: 
Legal and judicial sector 
assessment (FY04) 
Integrated fiduciary 
assessment (FY05) 
Institutional and 
govemance rcview 
(FY06) 
Annual follow-up to 
govemance survey and 
diagnostic 

Support to legislative and 

n

judicial through IDF 
grant 
Strengthening monitoring
and evaluation

Improved fiduciary
framework for public
finance management
adopted.
Modalites foT operating
of prefectural
developmcnt councils
ntonis

adopted.
Policies to strengthen
judicial framework
formulated and under
imlementation.
mImplementation 
Auticorruption action
plan under
implementation.
Satisfactory portfolio
indicators (realism index
> 80 percent; pro-activity
index > 95 percent)
Satisfactory QAG and
OED evaluation.

judicial reform 
Expansion of community 
support program to reach 
national coverage 
Decentralization and 
deconcentration of 
sectoral service delivery 

French Development 
Aeency: support to 
decentralization, 
community 
empowerment 
GTZ: suppoat to 
decentralization, 
commupnty 
empowerment, support to 

GTZ: support to~ 

~ ~~~~~~~~~upot oleilaie 

~ 

~ 

piDA: strcngtbening 
CIDA: strcngthening 
capacity in social sectors 
USAID: support to
govemance at local level,

decentralization

Training offered by the
World Devclopment
Instmute.

CAS Annex B10

CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B 10
Page 1 of 1

| 
Country 
| Perlormance8

Major issueb 

| 

I 

Country 
priorityc 

[ 

Bank 
Priorityc 

~~~~~~Reconciliation

of country and
Bank prioritiesd

Network area 

Poverty Reduction & Economic Managent

Poverty reduction 

Poor 

Economic policy 
Public sector 

__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ ___ 

Poor 
Poor 

Modest growth with little 

equity

Weak investment climate 
Highly centralized public 

Gender 
Fair 
Human Development Department 
Education 
Fair 

Health, nutrition & Population 

Social protection 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development

Rural development 

Environment 

Social development 

Fair 

_____ _____ _____ ____ _ 
__industry

Fair

Finance, Private Sector & In rastructure

Financial sector 

Good 

Private sector 
Energy & Mining 

Infrastructure 

Fair 
Poor 

Fair 

administration
Equity 

____ccess__qua

| Access, quality, and equity 
| Access, quality, and equity 

| Equity 

Decentralization, growth in 

rural areas

Biodiversity, impact of mining

Micro credit 

Weak investment climate 
Private sector involvement in 

energy sector

Transportation infrastructure 

and policy

High 

High 
High 

High 

High 

High 

High 

High 

High 

High 
High 

High 

High

High

High

High

High

High

High

High

Low 

High
High

High

AFD is taking

a Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g. for poverty reduction, "rural poverty," for education, "female secondary completion,"
for environment, "urban air pollution").
' To indicate priority, use "low," moderate," or "High."
d Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue

Annex C
Page 1 of 3

Exipendfture Accountability Assessment and Actlon Plan (AAP)
Guinea Action Plan Update TablRe

December 2002

Indicator 

-

;UDGVET PC"P 1JL..TlON 

I 

Consolidated positions -
Adherence to MSFP public 
administration standards. 

Actions to Strengthen -

From Agreed Action 
PlansI and time horizon
(S/M2 ) 

(from AAP)

_. 

_ 

Unified budget objective: Joint 
preparation of the 2003 budget law 
by the National Budget Office and 
the National Directorate of 
Investment (S) 

11 

Status3 

Progress to Date on Action Plans and

Indicated Improvements (Outcomes)

(to be completed by country team)

* 

I' 

I 

- Although completion of this activity is still a long way off,
work was done in this area, particularly at the time of budget
analysis within the PRSP framework. In particular, a method
of assessing recurrent costs needs to be decided upon, as well
as the incorporation of the execution of donor-financed
investment spending 
into budgetary transactions. The
implementation of the medium-term expenditure framework
(MTEF) should provide an opportunity to strengthen
cooperative efforts between the respective directorates.

- This activity is expected to start and be carried out in 2003.
It is understood that an accounting plan for local authorities,

compatible with that of the government, will be prepared

within the framework of the World Bank's capacity building

program (PRCI).

The Government incorporated in the 2002 budget some
allocated revenue that was not so far included. The
Government made a commitment to continue this effort in
order to achieve a single treasury account. To that end, the
closing of extra budgetary accounts has started. Their
consolidation in a unique treasury accounting system is a
target under the program supported by the Fund.

The execution of priority expenditures for FY 2002, with the
exception of investments financed using HIPC resources,
was roughly as projected; a great improvement compared
with previous fiscal years. A number of Financial
Administration Directors (DAF) have been replaced, with a
view to achieving this objective. The execution of non-
priority expenditures for FY 2002 exceeded budget forecasts
partly because of security expenditures.

NS 

11 

II 

2 

- Strengthen consolidate the general 

government budget with the EPAs 
_______________________and the local authorities (M) 
Government activities are not Make the budget more 
carried out through extra- 
comprehensive: 
budgetary transactions to a 
great extent. 

- Calculate govermnent revenue that 
has not been paid back to the 
Treasury (S) 
- Pay back all state revenue to the 
Treasury (M)
- Close all satellite accounts, with
the exception of project accounts
subject to double signature ----
donor/Government (S)
Improve the rate of execution of 
expenditure 

3 

Budget execution is very close 
to budget forecasts 
(in terms of the volume and 
operational allocation). 

l IMF, and World Bank.
2 S = short term, i.e. action that is expected to be completed in one year. M = medium term, i.e action that is expected to be completed in 2-3 years.
3Progress to date should include: short description of progress and improvements; note degree of implementation, i.e. whether implementation has been
initiated (11), is not yet started (NS), or is complete (Fl, for fully implemented). If Fl, please state date of completion.

4 

5 

6 

The budget includes donor- 
financed capital and current
expenditure.
Budgetary classifications are 
administrative, economic, and
functional in nature.

N/A (meets benchmark)

N/A (meets benchmark)

Poverty reduction expenditure 
is clearly identified in the 
budget. 

Codify the budgetary lines 
identified in order to monitor 
poverty reduction expenditure (S). 

II 

7 Medium-term expenditures are 
incorporated into the budget 
cycle. 

II 

- Improve the programming of 
medium-term expenditure for the 
priority ministries (S). 
- Train staff in the Directorates of 
Administrative and Financial 
Affairs (DAAF) (S). 

Annex C
Page 2 of 3

The Govemment has identified and indicated the budgetary
lines that involve expenditure using HIPC resources.
However, poverty reduction expenditure includes also
expenditure of the priority sectors financed on non-HIPC
resources. A number of expenditures of the non-priority
sectors that support the management of expenditures using
HIPC resources were added to this category. At the time of
the mission, this information was obtained from the system
using a query covering multiple criteria A specific identifier
will be introduced in the coming months to obtain
information in a simple and more reliable manner, with a
view to detenmining the level of execution of the
expenditures allocated to poverty reduction.

The Govemment has already a fairly comprehensive
procedure in place, which, for the past two fiscal years, has
been facilitating the establishment of a medium-term
macroeconomic fiscal account by the year 2005, based on the
sectoral policies developed in the PRSP. The next step is to
include in the process a number of objectives to be attained
by the ministerial departments and to take into account
progress made with the deconcentration of expenditures.
These two areas (implementation of the CDMT and support
for deconcentration) the specifically covered in the World
Bank's capacity-building program (PRCI).

BUDGET

EXECUTION 

.

8 

Low level of the arrears build 
up; slow build up of new 
arrears during the previous 
year. 

Avoid build up of arrears. 

9 

Intemal control is effective 
and efficient. 

- Prepare an overall global control 
policy (M). 
- Train financial controllers and 
ministries' inspectors (M). 
- Overhaul the Inspectorate General 
of Finance (IDF) (M). 
- Improve the follow-up of 
inspection reports (M). 

II 

II 

.

, 

: 

.

,I

Remarkable progress has been made. At end-2002, the
govemment reduced the totality of domestic arrears
previously audited that were scheduled for reduction during
2002. It has made significant efforts to avoid the buildup of
arrears whether internal or external.

-With regard to communication between the control entities,
the financial control office will submit a half yearly budget
execution report to the Inspectorate General of Finance, in
order to achieve an overall control policy. Joint missions
between these two entities will also be held.
- A number of training activities are already under way,
particularly as regards 
training of financial controllers at
both the central and deconcentrated levels. A training
program geared towards Financial Inspectors is already
being prepared.
Lastly, the Inspection Office of the National Treasury
Directorate has been improved through the recruitment of
young inspectors.

10 Audit monitoring conducted in Conduct physical and financial 
addition to intemal control. 
monitoring in all the priority 
sectors.(M) 

_______________________________ 

NS 

In addition to internal control, the anticorruption committee
has conducted a number of audits that target the
effectiveness of expenditure. However, ministerial

11 Reconciliation of banking and 
accounting data takes place on
a systematic basis.

4. DGET" 

,roRTG U

N/A (meets benchmark)

12 

13 

Intemal data from ministries is N/A (meets benchmark)
received within four weeks of
the reference period.
Periodic statements are 
classified by function, 

Improve the information system (M) 

14 Accounts are closed two 
months after the end of the 
fiscal year. 

15 Accounts are audited and 
submitted to parliament within 

12 months of the end of the 

fiscal year. 

- Reduce the duration of the 
supplementary period to two months 
(S) 
- Observe the term of the 
complementary period and the 
closing of accounts by the National
Treasury Directorate even if there
are suspense accounts that have not
been balanced. (S)
- Shorten the time period for the 
auditing of accounts and preparation 

of the draft budget law. 

- Incoease the number of magistrates 
in the Public Account Chamber and 
make provisions for their training. 
(S) 

Annex C
Page 3 of 3

departments have not taken any action in this area.
The Public Account t Chamber of the Supreme Court is
currently unable to perform its functions in the area of public
accounts audits and management control. Activities aimed at
training magistrates and improving their working conditions
should be undertaken, in order to allow this critical entity to
carry out overall activities related to the management of
public finance.

NS 

11 

Regular improvements are made to the information system;
however, in specific terms, this task has not yet been
executed.
The duration of the three-month supplementary period to
The trahons he 
thr 
cmn shortened. 
per, 
to
fclose transacions has not been shortened. However, the date
for the closing of accounts hs been significantly brought
forward compared with previous fiscal years.

The new expenditure information system has made it
pse to close 
moreapidly 
an the dt

possible to close accounts more rapidly and the draft budget

settlement law [loi de reglement] for FY 2001 was prepared
in September 2002 and submitted to the Audit Office of the
Supreme Court. It will be submitted to parliament as soon as
possible, depending on when the relevant certificate of
conformity is issued by the Public Account Chamber. The
December 31, 2002 deadline was not met.

It should also be noted that the National Treasury Director
has started submitting the documents related to the
management account to the Public Account Chamber on a
quarterly basis to the Audit Office. This will make it
possible for balancing this account throughout the fiscal
year. In order to carry out its mission, the Public Account
Chamber should however, receive assistance to build
capacity in management tools.

Annex D
Page 1 of 1

PRSP objectives, strategies, actions, and donor support

PRSP Objectives, Strategies, and Actions 

GOG WBG 

IMF 

AfDB 

UN 

EU 

AFD 

I Other Civil 

Private

I 

I I 

l 

l 

l 

l 

| ~~~~~~BlEat. 

|Soc. 

|Sector

Fostering sustainable and equitable growth
Establishment of stable macroeconomic and financial environment
Increased fiscal revenues and efficiency gains in public expenditures 
Inflation control and exchange rate policies to increase competitveness 
Promotion of micro finance 
Extemal debt management through transparent management of debt relief 
Privatization of public and parastatal enterprises 
Regional integraton through trade framework, monetary integrabon, and cross-border 
initiatives
Improvement of access to basic infrastructure
Better access of water through private sector involvement in the sector 
Better access to electricity through fight against fraud and private sector involvement 
Transportation policy with focus on rural roads and ports management 
Better regulatory framework to attract private investment in post and telecommunication 
Support to sectors of growth
Growth in rural areas through increased productvity of agriculture involving improved 
services, access to markets, and empowerment of producers organizations 
Growth in mining thr-ough improved technical and legal security of mining claims; 
development of basic geological infrastructure; and attracting private investors 
Promoton of Tourism and Crafts 
Promotion of SMEs 
Natural resource management and environmental protecton 
Improved access and quality of basic social services
Improved access, equity, and quality of educaton 
Improved health and nutriton through prevention, better access to essential health 
services; institutional and management capacity-building and improving service quality. 
Fight against HIV/AIDS through sector specific action plans and local response. 
Improved access to drinking water through rural water supply 
Rural electrification through pilot programs 
Housing and sanitaton through better urban planning and investment 
Reform in social security 
Focus on gender and equity in respective social services 
Strengthening govemance and institutional and human capacity building
Good govemance
Decentralization and deconcentra6on of service delivery and accountability of authorifies 
Transparency and fight against corrupton 

X_X 
XXX 
X 
XXX 
YY_ 
vvv 
XXXIXXX XXX XX XX XtXX XtXx 

XXX 

XXX 
XXX
x 
XXX 

XXX 

XXX 

XXX 

XX 

XX

XXX 
XX 

XX 

XX 

XXX 

XX 

XX 

X

XXX 

X X 

_

_YY 

V 
tx

__

XXX 

XXX 
XX 
XX 

X 

XXX 

XXX 
XX 
XXX 

XX 

X 

X

IXXX 

[ 

I
l
I

|XXx 
XXX 

X_ X 

XX 

XXX 

| 

__I 

| 
l 
|x XXX 

XXX| 
l 
| 

XX 

XXX 

| 
l 

XXX 

XXX 

XXX 

XXX

l 
| XX 

l 

l 

l 

l I 

l
|XXX

X 

| 

i 

_ 

_ 

i 

ii 

i

|XX 

| 

l 

l 

_| 

XXX 

XX 
XXX 

XXX
| XXX
l

X 

XXX| XXX 

| 

_ 

XXX 

XXX 

xxx 
XXX 

| 

X 

| 

l 

l 

XXX |_ 

| XXX 

| 

XXX) 
XXX 

XXX 
XXX 

XXX 
XXX 

XXX 
XXX 

XXX 
XXX 

XXX 
XX 

XXX 
XXX 

XXX 
XX 

X
X

lllll

XXX 
XXX 

XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 

X 

XXX 
XX 

X 
XXX 

X 
IXXX 

XXX 
XX 

XXX 
X 

XX
X

I 
| 

_ 

XXX 
XXX 

l 
l 
I 

l 

_ 

i 

| 
l 

XX

XXX 
XXX 

I XX 

XXX 

l 
I XXX 

l

XXX 

__ 

XXX 

XXX 

XXX 

XXX 

XXX 

X

|__ XX X |_X__ 
XX 
XXX 
xx TxxxT 
XXX
|_ X 

XXX 
XXX 
xxx T xx 

| X 

| XXX 
X 
xxx 

XXX 
XX 
xxx 

| XX 
XXX 
xxx 

|

XXX 

X 

__ X 

XX
xx

Participation and accountability towards beneficiares 

Stability and security at Guinea's borders and in the urban centers 
Institutional and human capacity building 
Monitoring and evaluation of the strategy 

| 

|X 

XX 
_ X 

XXX 
XXX 

|_ XX 

| 

|XXX 

XX 
X 

|

_XXX_ XXX 

XX 

__ 

__ 

___ 

_X_XX_

(XXX: major support; XX: significant support; X: some support)

Annex E
Page 1 of 4

IDA lenclin2 and updated Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA)

HIPC assistance will significantly lower the debt service burden. At end 1999, Guinea's
debt outstanding and disbursed amounted to US$3,375 million in nominal terms. The Net
Present Value (NPV) of debt was estimated at US$1,727 million and was equivalent to 219
percent of exports. Guinea reached its decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative in
December 2000. HIPC assistance lowered the debt stock by US$545 million in NPV terms,
equivalent to US$800 million in nominal terms. Of this, IDA committed to provide debt
reduction of US$152 million in NPV terms as its contribution under the enhanced HIPC
Initiative. IDA is delivering its assistance through 50 percent debt service reduction starting
January 2001 and ending end-September 2015, representing a reduction of US$234 million in
nominal terms. Starting January 2001, Guinea has received interim relief from its Paris Club
creditors and its main multilateral creditors. The completion point was originally planned for
December 2002, but it has been delayed because of poor performance under the 2001-2004
PRGF-supported program arising mainly from significant overruns in non priority outlays.
The PRGF went off-track at end December 2002 and has not been resumed.
At decision point4 , Guinea's stock of debt was reduced substantially. The NPV of debt-
to-exports was projected to be reduced to 133.6 percent at end-20025 and to remain under the
150 percent threshold throughout the projection period (1999-2018). The NPV of debt-to-
exports was projected to average 131.6 percent from 2000 to 2009, and 93.1 percent from
2010 to 2018. At decision point, the base case scenario assumed: (i) 4.5 percent GDP growth
from 2000 to 2001, 5.1 percent in 2002 and over 5.6 percent per year from 2003 until 2018;
and (ii) 7.6 percent export volume growth from 2000 to 2006, 5.5 percent from 2007-2019.
After 2003, export prices were projected to increase by under 2 percent per year.
The NPV of debt-to-export ratio (NPVR) has turned out to be higher than projected. In
2003, the NPVR is projected at 139 percent, compared with 125 percent in the decision point
document. Exports have been lower than projected (Table 1), mainly due to the prices of
mining products such as bauxite, alumina, and gold, which account for 70 percent of
Guinea's exports. This was compensated slightly by changes in exchange rates and discount
rates6 which lowered the projected NPV of debt by 4 percent from 2003 to 2018.
The updated DSA projects the impact of the base case and low case macroeconomic
scenario on the NPVR. For 2003-2018, the base case assumes: (i) real GDP growth rate
rises from 4.5 percent to 6 percent by the end of the projection period; (ii) growth of exports
expressed in dollars averages 6 percent; and (iii) the ratio of revenue-to-GDP increases from
10.5 percent to 15 percent. The low case scenario assumes: (i) real GDP growth rate remains
stable at 4 percent through the projection period; (ii) growth of exports averages 4 percent;
and (iii) the ratio of revenue-to-GDP climbs from 10.5 percent to 12.5 percent.

4 IDA/R2000-222 and IDA/R2000-222/1.
5 It was the expected completion point date.
6The DSA update takes into account end-2002 parameters (exchange and discount rates) while the decision
point DSA was done on the basis of end-1999 parameters. Guinea's external debt is mainly composed of
SDR (45 percent), US dollars (15 percent), Russian rubles (15 percent) and Euros (15 percent).

Annex E
Page 2 of 4

In both scenarios, the NPVR remains below 200 percent under each IDA lending
scenario. In the base case IDA lending scenario (i.e., US$124.5 million FY 2004-2006), the
NPVR averages 137 percent during the CAS period and 130 percent thereafter7 . In the low
case IDA lending scenario (i.e.,US$60 million FY 2004-2006), the NPVR averages 136
percent during the CAS period and 135 percent thereafter. Under the high case scenario (i.e.
US$160 million FY 2004-2006), the NPVR averages 138 percent during the CAS period and
149 percent thereafter (reaching a peak at 167 percent at the end of the projection period).
This should not be a matter of concern because the ratio remains well below 200 percent. But
to prevent the debt burden from becoming unsustainable, debt indicators would be monitored
(Table 2 and Figure 1).
Guinea remains vulnerable to external shocks. In an alternative scenario, shocks on
exports were assumed in 2005 and 2012. Under this assumption, the NPVR averages 137
percent during the CAS period and 156 percent thereafter. The NPVR would reach a peak at
172 percent in 2016. Guinea was not eligible for IDA grants for the fiscal year 2003 because
it is not among the poorest IDA countries: its GNI per capita is higher than US$360.
Nevertheless, in the case of a severe external shock, supporting debt sustainability may
require mobilization of'more grants.
The DSA update shows that Guinea's fiscal debt sustainability will improve and remain
robust. Guinea was not eligible for assistance under the fiscal openness window at decision
point because of its low export and revenue-to-GDP ratio8 . Nevertheless, HIPC assistance
committed under the NPV of debt-to-export criteria was expected to contribute significantly
to fiscal debt sustainability. At decision point, Guinea's NPV of debt-to-revenues after HIPC
assistance was projected to average 197 percent from 2003 to 2006, and 129 percent from
2007 to 2018. The DSA update shows that the NPV of debt-to revenues averages 222 percent
during the CAS perio(d under the base case scenario and 153 percent from 2007 to 2018.
These higher than projected fiscal debt sustainability ratios are explained by lower than
projected government revenues.
Measures to improve debt sustainability should focus on export base diversification and
debt management. Guinea's debt sustainability is sensitive to export shocks. To minimize
the impact of such shocks, Guinea need to strengthen and diversify its export base, which is
predominantly composed of mining products. The liberalization of trade, particularly the
strengthening of regional trade with the Economic Community of West African States
(Ecowas), is expected to be an important component of this strategy. Nonetheless, easing
existing structural and institutional bottlenecks highlighted in the country's PRSP would be a
key to promoting a (iversified export structure. Guinea should strengthen its revenue
collection system, particularly with regards to mining sectors. Guinea should also pursue its
efforts ion better use of external borrowing and debt management, particularly as regards the
evaluation of the impact of new borrowings and the link between external debt policy and
macroeconomic management.

7 For each IDA lending scenario, it was assumed that IDA lending from 2007 to 2018 would average the
average annual IDA lending under the CAS.
8 To be eligible under the fiscal/openness criteria, a country should have an export-to-GDP ratio of 30
percent and a revenue-to-GDP ratio of 15 percent. Guinea's exports-to-GDP was 21.3 percent and its
revenue-to-GDP was 10.7 percent at end 1999.

Annex E

Page 3 of 4

Table 1: Exports and GDP: comparison between decision point projections and CAS
projections

(in mnillion US dollars, otherwise indicated)

Average 
2000- 
2002 
(Actual) 

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

(Proj.) 

(Proj.) 

(Proj.) 

(Proj.) 

Average Average
2004- 
2007-
2006 
2018
(Proj.)

940 

1090 

1168 

1251 

1339 

1252 

2141

Projections of exports
atdecisionpoint 

Base case exports projections 

783 

871 

956 

982 

1029 

989 

1533

Projections of GDP at
decision point (nominal) 

Actual GDP/ revised base
case projections (nominal) 

3414 

4117 

4553 

5066 

5512 

5044 

9946

3083 

3677 

4087 

4531 

5057 

4284 

8770

5.0 

5.5 

Projections of GDP at constant
prices at decision point 
(annual percentage growth)
Actual GDP at constant prices
/revised base case projections 
(annual percentage growth)
Source: Decision point Document, IMF and Bank staff estimates.

5.0 

3.0 

5.4 

4.5 

5.6 

5.8 

5.6 

6.1 

5.6 

5.6 

5.6

6.0

Table 2: NPV of debt-to-export ratios after enhanced HIPC Assistance 9

(percentages) 

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

Average 
Average
2004-2006 2007-2018

Decision point scenario 

Base case scenario 

Low case scenario

125 

139 

139 

119 

140 

139 

113 

137 

136 

High case scenario 
139 
140 
137 
Source: Decision point Document, IMF and Bank staff estimates.

108 

135 

133 

137 

113 

137 

136 

138 

95

130

135

149

9 The Table does not take into account additional debt relief beyond enhanced HIPC assistance.

190%

170% 

150%/ 

130% _= 

110% 

90% 

70% 

50%

Figure 1: NPV of debt-to-exports after enhanced HlPC assistance

e 

-

_ 

.-- e 

Annex E
Page 4 of 4

Decision

point

scenario
-0-- CAS

scenano

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~brase 

case

CAS low
case
scenario

-6- CAS
high case
scenario

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 2015 

2016 

2017 2018

Figure 2: NPV of debt-to-exports after enhanced HIPC assistance
Shock scenario

180%

170% -

160% -

150% -

140% -

130% -

120% -

110%

100%

-

-

-- Shock scenario 

--

CAS base case scenario 

- K -

t 

> Ns > 

t <9 Ko o a , ~~~~~~~~~~~~~s 

.s a vx w0~~~~t

Annex F
Page I of 3

GUINEA: World Bank Relations

Partnership in Guinea's Development Strategy

Guinea's development strategy is laid out in the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP), which was endorsed by the Executive Board of the Bank on July 25, 2002. The
PRSP rests on three main pillars. First, to sustain faster economic growth and create income-
eaming and employment opportunities, particularly for the rural poor; second, to increase and
extend access to basic: services; and third, to improve governance and strengthen institutional
and human capacity. The PRSP builds on the groundwork of Guinea's poverty reduction
policies as formulatecd in the "Guinea-Vision 2010" document of December 1996 and the
interim PRSP of 2000.

The IMF is taking the lead in assisting Guinea's poverty reduction strategy throughout its three-
year arrangement under the Poverty Reduction Growth Facility (PRGF) program for the period
May 2001-May 2004. Besides the overall macroeconomic quantitative targets which include
public debt supervision, the program has established structural performance criteria in key
reform areas i.e., tax administration, banking supervision, and microfinance. Also, structural
benchmarks have been set in the areas of revenue and expenditure-tracking management and
money laundering. The Bank has complemented the Fund's work through social sector and
structural adjustment credits supporting reforms in the areas of public expenditure management,
governance, improved public sector management, regulatory reform and privatization.

The World Bank is taking the lead in the policy dialogue and areas of structural reforms,
including banking sector restructuring; privatization; administrative decentralization; capacity
building; sectoral programs in the priority areas of health, education, rural development and road
maintenance; and the anticorruption program. Overall, noticeable improvement has been made
in 
the above-mentioned areas; however, 
in 
the 
judicial 
sector and utilities 
sector
(telecommunications, electricity and water) progress has been slow.

Bank Group Strategy

The previous Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Guinea was presented to the Board in
November 1997. It focused on macroeconomic stability, private sector development and public
sector reform through a grassroots decentralization process. A CAS Progress Report was
presented to the Board on July 2, 2001. The 2003 CAS will support elements of the country's
PRSP (approved by the authorities in March 2002) and would also support the Government's
desire to enter into new relationships with its development partners, based on a gradually phased
change from projects to programmatic lending for more effective and efficient use of aid
resources.

IDA provided a fourtlh Structural Adjustment Credit (SAC IV) to Guinea in 2001, which is
designed to support the country's poverty reduction strategy in the areas of public expenditure
management, governance and public goods delivery to the poor. The SAC IV has satisfactorily
impacted the country's macroeconomic performance in the medium-term. The credit was
disbursed in one tranche (US$50 million) on the grounds that, despite the lack of any external
budget support for a two-year period, Guinea had kept its economy broadly on track and had

Annex F
Page 2 of 3

demonstrated commilment 
to the program 
reforms with regard to public expenditure
management, governance and the decentralization of basic service delivery. The adjustment
program supported by SAC IV has paved the way for a gradual transition towards programmatic
lending to support the Government's poverty strategy.

As of January 6, 2003, the IDA has approved 61 credits for Guinea, of which three have been in
the transport and infrastructure sector; eight in the energy, water and telecommunications sector;
five in strengthening the country's management capability (Technical Assistance (TA)/Economic
Management), six in financing rural sector development; four in the urban sector; three in the
health sector; four in the education sector; three in mining sector development; four in structural
adjustment; four in the financial sector and one in private sector development. The total value of
these projects amounts to about US$1,310 million equivalent, of which US$1,159 million has
been disbursed. During FY98-02, the Board approved one adjustment operation (Public
Expenditure Management Adjustment Credit) and six investment operations: 
the Village
Community Support Program, 
the Capacity Building for Service Delivery Program, 
the
Microfinance LIL, the Pre-service Teacher Education LIL, the Urban Project and the Population
and Reproductive Health project. In July 2001 
the Fourth Structural Adjustment Credit
(US$50 million), the E]ducation-for-All project (US$70 million), and the Rural Electrification
LIL (US$5 million) were approved. The Multi-sectoral HIV/AIDS Project was approved in
December 2002. The Bank's active portfolio in Guinea currently comprises eight projects,
totaling US$215.6 million, of which US$172.8 million is undisbursed. The non-lending program
includes fiduciary assessment; analysis management systems and cross-cutting assessment of
Guinea's social, structural and key sectoral development under PRSP work, sectoral programs
and Bank/Fund collaborative work on social impact analysis.

The proposed World Bank lending program will support in FY04 a Structural Adjustment
Operation (US$20.4 million), a Health Sector Support Project (US$ 15 million), a Rural
Infrastructure Project (US$20 million); in FY05 a Community Support Program (US$22
million), and an Urban Development Program (US$20 million); and in FY06 a Capacity
Building and Institutional Reform Program (US$8 million), and a Poverty Reduction Support
Credit (US$20 million).

Bank-Fund Collaboration in Speciflc Areas

The IMF and World Bank staff maintain a collaborative relationship 
in supporting the
Government's structural reforms. As part of its overall assistance to Guinea through lending,
country analytic work and technical assistance, the Bank supports policy reforms in the
following areas in collaboration with the Fund:

Public Expenditure Management

Improvements in public expenditure management have been one of the top priorities of the
Guinean Government since 1996. The Bank, the Fund, and other donors have worked closely
together to provide the Government the needed support for institutional and policy reforms.
While 
the Fund 
is 
leading 
the dialogue on 
tax policy, 
the Bank 
is 
focusing on
strategic resource allocation and operational efficiency of public expenditures. To enhance
strategic resource allocation and operational efficiency, the Bank has assisted the Government in
the preparation of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and is supporting the

Annex F
Page 3 of 3

strengthening and openring up of the budget process as well as the allocation of resources to pro-
poor priority areas at the decentralized level. A Public Expenditure Review (PER) has been
designated to be fully participatory with overall management by the Bank but substantial
participation by the authorities. The Bank and Fund collaborate closely to support institutional
budget and expenditure management reforms. A Country Procurement Assessment Review
(CPAR) was undertaken in 2002; a recent rapid Country Financial Assessment Analysis
(CFAA) was also undertaken in 2001 and a full CFAA is scheduled for 2003.

Public Service Reform and Improved Service Delivery

In recent years, the Government of Guinea with support of the Bank and other donors has
launched a number of major initiatives to improve performance and to foster greater
accountability, transparency and integrity in the public sector. These include: (i) the Public
Finance Management Reform Program; and (ii) the National Anti-Corruption Strategy and
Action Plans for Guinea. Among these reforms, the public service reform program plays a
central role, since its objective 
is to improve accountability, 
transparency and resource
management for service delivery. The program is closely linked with other major reforms in
public finance and decentralization. Cooperation between the Bank and the Fund covers those
areas where public sector reform has a direct impact on fiscal stability and public sector
financial management.

Trade Reforms

The Bank and the Fund also are working closely together to assist Guinea in establishing a pro-
growth trade framework. While the Fund has taken the lead in reformns in the tariff regime, the
Bank is trying to foster trade through its Integrated Trade Framework. The Bank is also involved
in a dialogue on trade reformns in the context of the West African Economic and Monetary Zone
(WAEMU) at the regional level.

Poverty and Social Impact Analysis

The Bank and the Fund's respective Guinea Country Teams are currently discussing the Poverty
and Social Impact Analysis. It is envisaged that a few selected areas may be analyzed over the
coming years. These rmight cover: an analysis of the impact on social output indicators of
govemment spending in health and education, an assessment of the impact of the adoption of the
Common External Tariff of the West African Economic and Monetary Union on the taxation of
basic consumer goods, an assessment of the impact of exchange rates flexibility on consumer
prices, a social impact analysis of trade reforms, and an analysis of the impact of taxation on
growth and income distribution. The selection of the few reforms to analyze will be based on the
importance of the expected poverty and social impacts of each reform, the prominence of the
issue in the government's agenda, the timing and urgency of the reform, and the level of national
debate surrounding the reform.

