d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Report No. 26054-BEN

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

TIHE REPUBLIC OF BENIN

July 16, 2003

Benin Country Office
Country Department 13
Africa Region

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EOUIVALENTS
(as of April 2003)

Currency Unit = CFA Franc (CFAF)
US$1.00 
CFAF 607.5

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

FISCAL YEAR OF BORROWER

January I - December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
APL 
AfDB 
BOAD 
CDD 
CFAA 
CPAR 
CPIA 
CPPR 
ECOWAS 
ECVR 
EFA 
ELAM 
EPI 
ESW 
EU 
HDI 
HIPC 
INSAE 

JSA 
MAP 
MDGs 
MPS 
MTEF 
NGO 
NPV 
PERAC 
PRSC 
PRGF 
PRSP 
PSIA 
PSR 
SBEE 
SONAPRA 
SONACOP 
UNDP 
SSA 
WAEMU 

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Adaptable Program Lending
African Development Bank
Banque Ouest-Africaine de DIveloppement (Development Bank of West African States)
Community Driven Development
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Economic Community of West African States
Enquete Legere aupres des Menages (Household survey in urban areas)
Education for All
Enquete sur les Conditions de Vie en Milieu Rural (Household survey in rural areas)
Expanded Program of Immunization
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Human Development Index
Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Institut National de la Statistique et de I 'Analyse Economique (National Institute of statistics and
Economic Analysis)
Joint Staff Assessment
Multi-Country HIV/AIDS Program
Millennium Development Goals
Minimum Package of Services
Medium-term Expenditure Framework
Non-Governmental Organization
Net Present Value
Public Expenditure Reform Adjustment Credit
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Poverty & Social Impact Analysis
Portfolio Status Report
National Company for Water and Electricity
Societe Nationale de Promotion Agricole (National Company for Agricultural Promotion)
Societe Nationale de Commercialisation des Produits Petroliers (National Petroleum Company)
United Nations Development Program
Sub-Saharan Africa
West African Economic and Monetary Union

Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Team Leader 

Callisto E. Madavo
Antoinette M. Sayeh
Diarietou Gaye

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

I. 

II. 

m. 

IV. 

V. 

INTRODUCTION 

POVERTY, MACROECONOMICS, AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 

POLITICS AND GOVERNANCE 

REMAINING DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES 

THE BANK'S TRACK RECORD IN BENIN 

-
-

-

The country portfolio and non-lending program 
Impact of Bank operations under the 1994 CAS and 2001 Interim CAS 
Lessons learned 

VI. 

THE GOVERNMENT'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY 

VII. 

THE BANK'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

-

-

-

Strategic choices in the formulation of the assistance strategy 
Thematic presentation of the base case program 
Pillar 1: Bolstering the medium-term macroeconomic framework 
Pillar 2: Strengthening human development and environmental management 
Pillar 3: Improving governance and institutional reforms 
Lending and non-lending program 
Lending scenarios 
Lending triggers 
IDA grant allocation 
Debt sustainability and IDA lending 
Non-lending activities 

Vm. MANAGING RISKS 

CAS MONITORING AND EVALUATION 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 

IX. 

X. 

Tables

Table 1. Social Indicators, Benin & Sub-Saharan Africa 
Table 2. PRSP Targets and the MDGs 
Table 3. Economic Trends, 1985-89 to 2000-02 
Table 4. Compliance with WAEMU Convergence Criteria 

1

1

6

7

8

9
10.
13

14

17

17
23
23
25
28
29
29
30
30
30
32

33

34

35

3
4
5
6

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

Table 5. Status of Portfolio as of April 2003 
Table 6. Medium-Term Macro-Economic Framework 
Table 7. Lending Scenarios 
Table 8. CAS Base and High Case Triggers 
Table 9. Non Lending Work Program, FY04-06 
Table 10. Core CAS Outcomes 

Boxes

Box 1. Poverty Trends 
Box 2. Cotton Sector Reform 
Box 3. Bank-supported Programs and Poverty 
Box 4. CAS Consultations: Building on the PRSP Participatory Process 
Box 5. Benin's External Partners 
Box 6. Selectivity in the PRSC 

Chart

Impact of lending scenarios on debt sustainability 

Standard CAS Annexes

9
16
29
31
32
34

2
12
18
19
20
21

32

At-a-Glance
Social Indicators
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance
IDA Program Summary; and IEFC & MIGA Program
Summary of Non Lending Services
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Statement of IFC; and IDA Operations Portfolio
Partnership Strategy Matrix
Summary of Development Priorities
IMF completes Fourth Review under the PRGF
Implementation Status of Action to Strengthen Tracking of Poverty-Reducing
Public Spending

Annex 1 
Annex 2 
Annex 3 
Annex 4 
Annex 5 
Annex 6 
Annex 7 
Annex 8 
Annex 9 
Annex 10 
Annex 11 
Annex 12 

Other

Annex 13 
Annex 13 

AAA services in support of PRSP refinement and implementation
IDA Lending and Debt Sustainability

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
Background. Relative to most other countries in the sub-region, and to its starting point of
economic collapse and political crisis in 1989, Benin has achieved remarkable progress in sustaining robust
growth while building a pluralist democracy over the past decade. Growth generally exceeded other
economies in the region and productivity gains allowed per capita incomes to rise. The Government's
structural adjustment program has been successful in establishing fiscal discipline, opening up the economy,
privatizing most public enterprises, and strengthening private sector incentives. Most social indicators
improved steadily throughout the 1990s, particularly for education and health. But as Benin's recently
completed PRSP explains, these achievements did not translate into significant progress in poverty reduction.
The completion of the PRSP combined with irrevocable access to debt relief following the March 2003
Enhanced HIPC Completion Point provide Benin with an unparalleled opportunity to pursue and sustain a
more poverty focused growth strategy for the well-being of all of its people.

ii. 

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion of this CAS:

* 

Is the assistance strategy adequately focused on helping Benin translate its impressive growth record
into a reduction in poverty?
* Given the weaknesses identified in the JSA of the PRSP and capacity constraints in Benin, is the
focus of non-lending services appropriate?
* Does the CAS fully assess the risks to the program, and are actions proposed to mitigate those risks
adequate?
Is the proposed mix of Bank lending instruments suited to the fiduciary framework and appropriate
to maximizing the developmental impact of the Bank assistance?

* 

iii. 
The Government's program. The PRSP reiterates the Government's commitment to addressing
poverty issues and refers explicitly to poverty reduction goals over the next fifteen years. 
It sets forth a
national development program around four central pillars: (i) consolidating macroeconomic stability
through accelerated private-sector-led growth and rigorous public finance management; (ii) improving access
to basic education, literacy, primary health care, safe water, and deepening the fight against prevention of new
HIV/AIDS infections, malaria and tuberculosis, with specific attention to vulnerable groups, especially
women; (iii) strengthening good governance and reinforcing institutional capacities; and (iv) promoting long-
term employment and building capacity for poor people to participate in the decision-making process and in
production.

iv. 
The Bank's program for Benin aligns itself with the PRSP. Strategic priorities have also been
informed by the lessons learned from the implementation of the 1994 CAS and the 2001 Interim CAS.
Selectivity, ownership and government leadership, better harmonization of donor efforts, and capacity
enhancement thus drive the program. The CAS reaffirms the Interim CAS's vision of a progressive shift
towards consolidated programmatic support through PRSCs, although programmatic investment lending as
well as one traditional investment project are also foreseen.

v. 
Lending and grant program. The FY04-06 base-case program provides for US$200 million in
IDA credits and grants, consisting of 2-3 operations per year, including annual PRSCs aligned with the
Government's budget cycle. Public finance management, as well as financing of key sectoral programs will
be supported by the PRSC, building on the experience in 2001-2003 under the Public Expenditure Reform
Adjustment Credit (PERAC) and the Supplement to the PERAC. A National Community Driven
Development project will build on the successful experience of previous projects in the area of community
development. A Second Decentralized Cities project (second phase of an APL) is planned to provide support
to the decentralization process, while an Electricity Services project (also an APL) will support the

- ii -

privatization of the electricity parastatal SBEE and, in the second phase, help expand rural access to
electricity. The unutilized FY03 grant envelope of about US$11.5 million is being carried over into FY04
and used to partly finance the National CDD project. Because its GNI per capita now exceeds the threshold
of US$360, Benin is no longer eligible for IDA grants in FY04 and beyond, except for this carry over.

vi. 
In a low case scenario, resulting from poor policy or implementation performance, commitments
would not exceed US$85 million (around 42.5 percent lower than the base case level), and program emphasis
would shift to basic social services that can directly contribute to reducing poverty. The high case program,
resulting from a superior level of performance, would be up to US$220 million, or about 10 percent above
the base case. 
In the high case, the Bank will respond to better than expected performance by the
acceleration of programmatic financing via PRSCs (i.e. via a larger share of IDA financing channeled
through PRSCs). Simulations conducted for the CAS show that such levels of lending would not adversely
affect Benin's debt sustainability, although continued prudent debt management policies and economic
diversification will remain critical to safeguarding it.

vii. 
Non-lending program. The Bank's non-lending program will contribute to attainment of PRSP
objectives, help address weaknesses identified in the JSA, and underpin lending operations. The planned
non-lending work program is designed to: (i) expand on the analytical work underway on poverty analysis
and on the poverty and social impact (PSIA) of cotton sector reforms; (ii) support capacity building in order
to strengthen implementation capacity as well as financial and public expenditure management; (iii) provide
support to the refinement of selected sector strategies and expenditure programs in order to enhance their
poverty focus and prepare them for programmatic lending; (iv) support the Government's public sector
reform strategy and decentralization efforts; and (v) help Benin better address gender concerns in public
policy and expenditure programs. Core diagnostic ESW is planned, including a Poverty Assessment, a
Development Policy Review, a Public Expenditure Review, and a CFAA/CPAR update.

viii. 
Risks. Attainment of CAS and PRSP objectives faces six main risks: (i) the economy's vulnerability
to a further drop in cotton prices and/or in cotton production; (ii) an unsatisfactory macroeconomic
framework due to reform slippages and crowding out of priority spending by large infrastructure
investments; (iii) economic and political developments in Nigeria; (iv) weak institutional capacity; (v)
implementation delays linked to Benin's democratic political environment; and (vi) failure to translate higher
sustained growth into significant poverty reduction. Bank interventions are designed to mitigate and limit
exposure to these risks. The focus of a substantial part of Bank lending and AAA services under the CAS is
to help Benin build a more diversified economic base in order to limit its vulnerability to cotton price and
regional shocks, as well to enhance capacity. Reform of the cotton sector, diversification into food crop
production, and more poverty-focused expenditure programs should help leverage the impact of growth on
poverty reduction. Partnership and participation by civil society organizations, the private sector, other
donors, and academic institutions in development programs, as well as in analytical work will be key to,
enhancing the sustainability of Bank interventions. Upstream consultation of the parliamentary branch of
government is planed so as to facilitate timely implementation and political sustainability of Bank assistance.

ix. 
CAS monitoring and evaluation. Monitoring of the Bank's effectiveness will take place both at the
project level and at the level of the overall assistance program. The core CAS benchmarks are derived from
PRSP targets. These benchmarks: (i) reflect the selective areas of Bank involvement under the CAS; (ii)
cover the key challenges that Benin must address and that the Bank is best-placed to assist with; and (iii) are
achievable within the CAS timeframe. At the mid-point of the CAS period the Bank will review the
indicators and targets to assess progress in implementing the assistance program, adjust the Bank's strategy
as necessary, and improve indicators and targets where better data are available.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BENIN

I. 

INTRODUCTION

1. 
This Country Assistance Strategy covers the three-year period from FY04 to FY06. it identifies
key issues in Benin's economic and social development, reviews performance under the previous full
CAS (1994) and Interim CAS (2001), and discusses a selective program of lending and non-lending
operations under different scenarios of risk and performance. Two important developments since the
2001 Interim CAS have influenced the priorities of this CAS. First, Benin completed its PRSP in
December 2002, and second, the Completion Point under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative was reached in
March 2003. The CAS constitutes the strategic response of the Bank to Benin's PRSP. It fully aligns
itself with the PRSP, while proposing a program of assistance to support its further refinement in areas
highlighted in the Joint Staff Assessment (JSA), all with the view to helping Benin better translate its
impressive record of sustained reform and growth into tangible improvements in the lives of all of its
people.

II. 

POVERTY, MACROECONOMICS, AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

2. 
Benin's population was estimated at about 6.8 million in the 2002 census.' Per capita income
stood at $380 in 2001, with agriculture contributing to over one-third of GDP and employing two-thirds
of the active population. The main export crop, cotton, accounted for 76 percent of domestic exports on
average in 2000-2002. The small industrial sector consists largely of cotton ginning and small
enterprises involved in the production of basic consumer goods for the local market and accounting for
about 14 percent of GDP.. The large share of services (50 percent of GDP) partly reflects Benin's role
as a transportation and transit hub for the landlocked neighboring countries and their principal trading
partner Nigeria.

3. 
Social indicators (in particular in health and education) improved significantly over the past
decade. Benin's Human Development Index 2 rose by 11 percent between 1992 and 2000. Primary
school enrollment also increased by more than a quarter in the 1990s. As a result, four fifths of school-
aged children now attend primary school. Infant mortality fell by 25 percent over the past decade, and
life expectancy has increased by one year (compared to a decline on average in Sub-Saharan Africa). At
about four percent, HIV/AIDS prevalence is in the lower range of countries in the region.

The final more detailed results of the census will be available in July 2003.
2 The value of the Human Development Index (HDI) is composed of life expectancy at birth, adult literacy,
combined gross enrollment (primary to tertiary) and GDP per capita (expressed in US$ adjusted for purchasing
power parity).

- 2 -

BOX 1. POVERTY TRENDS

Poverty data
Benin has conducted a number of household surveys since the mid-i 980s. The budget consumption survey of 1986-
87 was followed in the mid-to-late 1990s by a series of rural household surveys (ECVR), conducted by the Ministry
of Rural Development and supported by UNDP, and urban household surveys (ELAM), undertaken by the National
Statistical Institute. Two Demographic and the Health Surveys (DHS) conducted respectively in 1996 and 2001
provide useful data for poverty analysis. Finally, a general population census was carried out in 2002, that will
provide by July 2003 additional valuable data, including a poverty map. While these surveys provide important
information on poverty in Benin, more research is needed to produce a reliable and robust picture of the incidence
and dynamics of income poverty. In particular, the survey design raises concems with regard to the division of Benin
into 12 agro-ecological zones, and the comparability of poverty statistics across urban and rural areas and across
time. Also, the treatment of the nonfood expenditure share in the calculation of the poverty line and other
methodological choices made to calculate the poverty line are subject to debate. Although the National Statistical
Institute has conducted a sensitivity analysis showing that the estimates of poverty incidence vary significantly with
the methodology used in surveys, the Govemment has not revised its methodology for the most recent household
surveys conducted in the late 1990s.

Poverty profdle and trends
Based on available data (including the shortcomings noted above) , income poverty incidence in rural areas would
have increased from 25.2 percent in the mid-1990s to 33 percent at the end of the decade. The depth and severity of
poverty would have also increased between the two periods, from 6.3 percent to 9.4 percent, and from 2.4 percent to
3.9 percent, respectively. All the departments in the North and, to a lesser degree, the Atlantique and Couffo
departments, have poverty levels that are considerably above average. In urban areas, the incidence of income
poverty would have declined from 28.5 percent in 1996 to 23.3 percent in 1999. Poverty also decreased from the
standpoint of its depth and severity. The poorest urban areas are in the departments of Couffo, Atacora, and Oueme,
and, to a lesser extent, the Atlantique, Borgou, and Donga departments. From the gender standpoint, the proportion
of poor men exceeds that of poor women, but female poverty is more severe than male poverty. The fact that poverty
disproportionately affects women is more readily apparent when considering non-monetary poverty. The incidence
of non-monetary poverty (defined as the inability to satisfy basic needs), estimated using a composite indicator
derived from the 1996 and 2001 DHSs, is higher than the incidence of income poverty and increased from 43.4
percent in 1996 to 49 percent in 2001. The incidence of non-monetary poverty is also higher in rural areas than in
urban ones, respectively 59 percent and 34.7 percent in 2001. Non-monetary poverty incidence is highest in the
northern departments of Atacora and Borgou, both in 2001 and 1996.

Poverty monitoring
In addition to the methodological weaknesses mentioned above that need to be addressed in order to establish robust
income poverty estimates, the most salient knowledge gap relates to reliable data on inequalities, which are
apparently relatively high and have increased significantly over the last decade. In particular, no data are available on
income and wealth quintiles for household surveys and it is not possible to assess the growth and distributional
impact of past policies and programs. The PRSP proposes an ambitious and comprehensive plan to improve data
collection and analysis and establishes a Poverty Reduction Information System. The PRSP also proposes an agenda
of surveys to address gaps in poverty knowledge and methodological weaknesses of income poverty data. In
particular, the National Statistical Institute is planning to carry out a new national household survey on living
conditions in 2003 based on a revised methodology and an annual Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire (CWIQ)
survey. The Bank's poverty assessment (see Box 4) will be based on (i) household level data including access to
social services, employment, income and consumption information from a CWIQ survey conducted in early 2003;
and (ii) a qualitative survey carried out in early 2003 in a sample of CWIQ communities to understand the poor's
own perception of poverty and its causes, their assessment of their vulnerability and ways to reduce it, intra-
household power dynamics, and the impact of cotton cultivation.

- 3 -

4. 
Despite these impressive results and relatively robust growth throughout the 1990s (see para. 7),
poverty remains widespread and inequality may have increased (see Box 1). Surveys show that the
nutritional status of children and food poverty incidence remain high nationwide. The Demographic
and Health surveys conducted in 1996 and 2001 show for example that rates for stunted children under
age five worsened from 25 percent to 31 percent. At 498 per 100,000 live births, maternal mortality
remains high, and only 68 percent of children aged 13-24 months are immunized against measles. The
utilization rate of health services is only around 34 percent. Gender gaps are widespread in education,
in access and control of resources, economic opportunities, as well as in power and political voice.

Table 1. Social Indicators, Benin & Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA)

1990 
Benin 

SSA 

2001 1/
Benin 

360 
34 
58 

540 
28 
76 

380 
42 
81 

GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Gross primary school enrollment (% of school-age 
population)
Male 
Female 
Literacy (% of population age 15+) 
Male 
Female 
Infant mortality (per. l,OOO live births) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
HIV prevalence (% ofpopulation) 
Access to safe water (% of population) 
Urban 
Rural 
1/ 2001 or the latest available statistic.
Source: Institut national de la statistique et de I 'analyse economique (INSAE), World Bank.

78 
39 
26 
38 
15 
104 
52 
35 

83 
68 
50 
60 
41 
100 
50 
38 

98 
69 
39 
48 
21 
87 
53 
31 
4 
56 

50 
79 
35 

71 

46 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

SSA

500
34
78

85
72
63
66
50
91
51
32
8
43
74
32

5. 
While there are some bright spots, progress towards achieving the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) in the social sectors is lagging overall. 
In education, the overall primary school
enrolment rate was already 81 percent in 2001 but universal enrollment for girls may not be reached in
2015. The universal primary education completion rate, which is still low (only about 40 percent), is
unlikely to approach 100 percent by 2015, nor would gender disparities be reduced without reinforced
In the absence of enhanced targeted measures, the target for maternal mortality will not be
effort. 
reached. In health, Benin has significantly reduced infant mortality (from 104 per 1,000 live births in
1996 to 87 in 2001) and is on track to achieving this MDG. With respect to HIV/AIDS the objective of
maintaining the prevalence rate below 6 percent through 2015 is achievable if the national strategic plan
developed for 2000-2005 and the recently multisectoral approach are fully implemented.

-4 -

Table 2. PRSP Targets and the MDGs

MDG 
Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion 
of people whose income is less than one dollar 
a day.
Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion 
of people who suffer from hunger. 
Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, 
boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a 

full course of primary schooling.

Benin PRSP target
Reduce income poverty incidence by 50 percent
by 2015.

The PRSP contains no target directly linked to
this MDG.
Achieve 99 percent primary school enrolment
rate by 2015 from a current rate of 81 percent.

Eliminate gender disparity in primary and 
Eliminate gender disparities in education by
secondary education, preferably by 2005, and to 2015.
all levels of education no later than 2015.
Reduce by two thirds, between 1990 and 2015, 
the under-five mortality rate. 
Reduce by three quarters, between 1990 and 
2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the 
spread of HIV/AIDS. 
Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the 
incidence of malaria and other major diseases. 

Reduce infant mortality rate from 87 per
thousand live births in 2001 to 28 in 2015.
No specific target established in PRSP.

Limit HIV/AIDS prevalence to under 6 percent
(4.1 percent in 2002).
Reduce the death rate from malaria per 10,000
habitants from 7.6 percent in 2001 to 6.2
percent in 2015.
No specific target established in PRSP.

Integrate the principles of sustainable 
development into country policies and
programs and reverse the losses of
environmental resources.

6. 
Benin has ratified all eight fundamental conventions of the International Labour Organisation
(ILO) related to Core Labor Standards including: (i) freedom of association and the right to collective
bargaining; (ii) equal opportunity and non-discrimination in employment; (iii) elimination of all forms
of forced or compulsory labor; and (iv) effective abolition of child labor, with priority to the worst
forms. The labor code prohibits child labor, although implementation remains problematic. A 2001
LO Report indicates that child labor and child trafficking remain significant in Benin despite increased
Government awareness and effort to address them. Particularly worrisome is the practice of vidomegon,
where children are placed in families in which they work as domestics for several years with little or no
pay, and are sometimes victims of physical abuse. This phenomenon has strong cultural underpinnings,
and on-going debates on its elimination touch on religious and cultural sensitivities. Government
capacity and resources for enforcement of laws against child labor and trafficking are minimal. A
number of development agencies (UNICEF and ILO in particular) are working with the Government
and especially the Ministry of Family to improve its capacity to protect children from exploitation. 3

3 Apart from its indirect support through increasing school enrolment, the Bank is also providing direct
assistance on child labor-related issues through a Japan Social Development Fund grant attached to the
Social Fund project.

Recent economic developments. Since the discussion of the Interim CAS by the Board in
7. 
January 2001, the macroeconomic program has remained broadly on track. Although lower than
expected, real GDP growth continued to be substantial in 2001 at 5.0 percent, and is estimated at 5.8
percent in 2002 (see Table 3). Despite increases in intemational oil prices, inflationary pressures
remained limited at 4 percent in 2001 and at 2.3 percent in 2002. On the fiscal front, poor performance
of the customs administration contributed to a decline in the revenue-to-GDP ratio from 16.6 percent in
2000 to 16.2 percent in 2001, but the resource mobilization effort rebounded to an estimated 17 percent
of GDP in 2002. The overall budget deficit, on a commitment basis and excluding grants, widened from
3.5 percent of GDP in 2000 to 4.2 percent in 2001, and to 5.2 percent in 2002. In the extemal sector, the
current account deficit worsened from 6.7 percent of GDP in 2001 to 8.2 percent in 2002 and is
estimated to have slightly improved in 2002 to 7.0 percent of GDP.

Table 3. Economic Trends, 1985-89 to 2000-02

Population (million) 
Population growth (%) 

GDP (US$ billion) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
Real GDP growth (%) 

Real GNP per capita growth(%) 

Inflation (CPI, average, %) 

Fiscal balance (primary balance, % of GDP) 
Overall balance of payments (% of GDP) 
Gross international reserves (months of imp.) 

Export growth (volume, %) 

Share of cotton exports (% of exports) 
Debt service to GDP ratio (%) 

Debt service to exports ratio (%) 

Source: Bank and Fund staff estimates.

1985-89 

1990-95 

1996-99 

2000-01 

2002

4.3 
3.2 

1.4 
326.0 
0.3 

-2.9 

3.4 

-13.5 
-3.3 
0.0 

-10.6 

48.7 
7.1 

46.7 

5.1 
3.1 

1.9 
363.0 
4.1 

1.1 

11.5 

-1.3 
0.7 
3.7 

-1.1 

75.1 
5.0 

32.7 

5.9 
2.7 

2.3 
375.0 
5.2 

2.3 

3.3 
-1.7 

2.1 
9.6 

2.4 

82.9 
2.9 

16.8 

6.4 
2.6 

2.4 
383.0 
5.4 

2.8 

3.1 

-2.9 
2.3 
8.6 

7.3 

76.1 
2.5 

11.8 

6.8
2.6

2.7
380.0
5.8

3.2

2.3

-2.8
-1.8
8.7

19.3

72.0
2.3

16.5

As a member of the West African Economnic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), Benin has been
8. 
implementing a number of reforms in order to comply with the WAEMU convergence criteria. Table 4
confirms that Benin continues to be one of the most compliant members of WAEMU regarding regional
convergence, stability and, growth. Benin met all the WAEMU primary convergence criteria in 2002.
With respect to secondary criteria Benin is still falling short on tax revenue collection, and the current
account deficit remains higher than the target. The on-going PRGF program with the IMF is paying
particular attention to these two issues.

- 6 -

Table 4. Compliance with WAEMU Convergence Criteria

(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)

Primary criteria
Basic fiscal balance/GDP 1/ 
Basic fiscal balance/GDP 2/ 
Inflation (annual average) 
Total debt/GDP 3/ 
Non accumulation of domestic arrears 4/ 
Non accumulation of extemal arrears 4/ 
Secondary criteria
Wages/tax revenue (in percent) 
Domestically financed investment/tax 
revenue (in percent)
Current account deficit, excluding public 
transfers/GDP (in percent)
Tax revenue/GDP (in percent) 

Convergence 
Criterion 

1999 

2000 

2001 

>=o.o 
>=0.0 
<=3.0 
<=70.0 
<=0.0 
<=0.0 

<=35.0 

>=20.0 

-=5.0 

>=17.0 

2.8 
2.8 
0.3 
56.6 
-11.13 
-13.3 

33.0 
13.9 

8.7 

13.7 

1.9 
2.2 
4.2 
59.6 
-15.8 
-14.8 

32.0 
15.0 

8.1 

14.6 

0.4 
1.4 
4.0 
59.5 
0.0 
0.0 

32.6 
22.4 

7.9 

14.2 

2002
Est.

0.2
1.1
2.3
50.7
0.0
0.0

31.6
18.6

8.4

15.1

Sources: Beninese authorities; and staff estimates.
1/ Basic fiscal balance is defined as total revenue rninus total expenditure, excluding foreign-financed investment.
2/ Basic fiscal balance, excluding the use of enhanced HIPC Initiative resources.
3/ Includes domestic and extemal debt.
4/ In billions of CFA francs

m. 

POLITICS AND GOVERNANCE

9. 
Benin's multi-party democracy continued to mature in recent years. In both the 1991 and 1996
presidential elections, the incumbent lost and power was peacefully transferred to the elected president.
The development of an independent National Assembly, the emergence of a free press, greater scrutiny
of the behavior of political leaders, and the development of more vocal civil society groups, have all
reinforced the country's democratic institutions. The relative political maturity demonstrated by the
1996 presidential hand-over, which returned Mathieu Kerekou to power, has strengthened economic
reforms by providing continuity for the market-oriented, private-sector led growth strategy.

10. 
The political environment remains nonetheless complex. Opposition parties gained a slight
parliamentary majority in the legislative elections of March 1999 and relations between the Assembly
and the Government subsequently became difficult. Following his reelection in March 2001, President
Kerekou formed a new coalition Government in May 2001. Local elections finally took place in
December 2002 after repeated postponements, paving the way for deepening efforts at decentralization.
A noteworthy feature of these first municipal elections is the victory of the opposition in all major cities.
The March 2003 legislative elections have given President Kerekou's party control of the National
Assembly, but the pace of reforms is expected to slow through mid-2003 due to the anticipated cabinet
reshuffle.

- 7 -

Benin, like most of the countries in the sub-region faces a range of governance and corruption
11. 
issues, which are acknowledged in the PRSP. The Govermnent has adopted an anti-corruption strategy,
discussed it with civil society, and reaffirmed its commitment to fighting corruption. The proposed
strategy is organized around the following pillars: (i) accelerating the institutional and administrative
reforms pertaining to the fight against corruption; (ii) revising the legal framework; (iii) strengthening
public finance management; (iv) increasing civil society involvement; and (v) encouraging ethical
behavior in the civil service. But significant challenges remain in making this strategy fully operational
and effective.

IV. 

REMAINING DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

The main development and poverty reduction challenges highlighted in the Interim CAS remain
12. 
and concern:

* HIVWAIDS: With an official prevalence rate of around 4 percent, Benin could be on the verge
of an exponential increase with potentially disastrous consequences for its development and
poverty reduction objectives. The differences in prevalence rates between men and women (2.2
percent of women aged 15 to 24, compared to 0.9 percent of men) are of additional concern. To
prevent a generalized epidemic (i.e. a prevalence rate of 7 percent or greater), the Government
has stepped up the fight against HIV/AIDS, but significant challenges lie ahead in implementing
the multi-sectoral and comprehensive strategic framework recently put in place.
* Gender inequities: The heavy weight of tradition, as well as less than full commitment and
absence of a focused strategy, permitted only limited progress on gender issues in the past.
Indications of this are that there is still a 41 percentage gap in primary school enrollment rate
between boys and girls, and that birth and fertility rates remain very high. Although it
emphasizes gender issues, the PRSP omits any reference to action to address the persistence of
systemic legal and socio-cultural barriers to women's empowerment, which affect their ability to
contribute to economic growth and development.
* Population growth: The high rate of demographic increase limits the potential for improving
the welfare of the population, puts pressure on the growth and availability of productive
resources, and threatens the conservation of the environment, especially in the coastal zone.
The PRSP proposes no concrete actions to accelerate the implementation of the 1996 National
Population Policy, which has been much slower than desirable because of lack of a sound
implementation strategy and of synergies between reproductive health services on one hand and
other sectors such as education and rural development on the other, as well as with the fight
against HIV/AIDS.
institutional and administrative capacity: Weak public institutions are a major
* Weak 
constraint 
to development and poverty reduction. 
Important bottlenecks remain in the
processing, implementation, and monitoring of projects, while administrative capacity to cope
with the procurement and financial management burden of the plethora of donor-funded
projects remains limited. 
In addition, coordination mechanisms within Government are weak,
and there is a widespread perception of insufficient quality and availability of public services as
well as of a poorly performing judicial system.
* Slow progress in decentralization and administrative reform: A detailed fiscal decentralization
It is expected however, that with municipal elections now
framework is not yet in place. 

- 8 -

completed, the pace of reform will accelerate (in response to demand from the newly-elected
local governments). Civil service reform has not kept up with other elements of the structural
reform program. There is a need for a comprehensive strategy for civil service reform going
beyond the introduction of the new compensation system, long stalled at the National
Assembly.
* Competitiveness: Limited competitiveness hampers private sector development, while private
investment and financial intermediation remain at low levels. 
Inadequate 
infrastructure
increases transaction costs, and there is an insufficient supply of skilled workers. Addressing
these shortcomings requires completing the privatization program, deepening reforms to create
an incentive-friendly and stable regulatory framework with low transaction costs, financial
deepening, and overhauling the judiciary system. In parallel to initiatives to improve the policy,
legal and regulatory environment for private sector development and the effectiveness of the
public-private dialogue on these issues, attention will also need to be paid to developing the
market-based service providers - both financial and non-financial (i.e. business development
services) - that are required for SMEs to survive and grow.
* Diversification and vulnerability: Limited diversification of the economy creates highly
vulnerable living standards. Agriculture is dependent on cotton cultivation, which is also a
major source of employment, foreign exchange earnings, government revenue, and banking
activity for the economy as a whole. The challenge for rural development is to accelerate
productivity growth in both the cotton and non-cotton sectors through technology generation
and diffusion, and promotion of productive off-farm activities in rural areas, such as textile
industries (only 3 percent of produced cotton is transformed in Benin). Broad-based growth is
also important for other sectors. The secondary sector remains at a low 14 percent of GDP, and
is comprised of a small number of companies mainly producing cement and ginning cotton. In
order to further develop the industrial sector, Benin must reduce operational costs drastically
and improve its transport and port facilities.
* Regional integration: Benin is actively pursuing regional integration within WAEMU, as well
as the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). Benin's strong economic and
financial ties with both WAEMU and non-WAEMU countries create special opportunities and
challenges. Since the bulk of its intra-regional trade is with Nigeria, Benin is well-placed to
benefit from renewed growth in Nigeria. As policies improve in Nigeria a more open and
competitive economic environment will be created for Benin's economy, calling for more
conducive commercial policies. Benin competes with Ghana and Togo as a key port of entry
for trade with landlocked Sahelian countries, and the efficiency of its port and transport systems
are therefore key. As a transit country among the large economies of the region, it will be a key
player in sub-regional efforts to improve infrastructure in roads, electricity and gas pipelines in
the context of the Regional Assistance Strategy for West Africa discussed by the Board in July
2001.

V. 

THE BANK'S TRACK RECORD IN BENIN

13. 
The last full CAS for Benin dates from 1994 and was followed by an Interim CAS in 2001.
Both helped to move forward the reform agenda. 
In particular, the 1994 CAS supported the deepening
of the liberalization process that Benin embarked upon in 1989/90 and helped the country take
advantage of the January 1994 devaluation of the CFA franc to significantly improve its growth
perfornance and prospects. 
Important strides in budget management, and significant reforms in major

-9 -

sectors such as cotton, private sector development, education and health, paved the way for the more
recent progress obtained under the Interim CAS.

The country portfolio and non-lending program
14. 
Portfolio performance. The Bank has regularly reviewed its Benin portfolio through CPPRs,
ICRs, and OED reviews. Results from the first Client Survey conducted in 2001 have also provided
useful input for improving portfolio management. Quality and implementation performance in FY94-97
improved, with the disbursement ratio increasing steadily from 11.5 percent in FY94 to 17.6 percent in
FY97. After a sharp decline to 13.1 percent in FY98, the ratio rebounded significantly, exceeding the
Interim CAS target of 25 percent in both FY01 and FY02. The present portfolio consists of 8 projects
(including the GEF-financed National Parks project) with a net commitment of $127.2 million and an
undisbursed balance of $69.5 million. Portfolio performance has remained strong in FY03 4 , and as of
the last project supervision data, all projects are rated satisfactory (see Table 5). Project management is
however characterized by long delays in effectiveness (on average 6-8 months after Board approval).
Most delays occur at the level of credit ratification at the National Assembly, reflecting the past
contentious relations between 
the executive and (opposition-controlled) 
legislative branches of
government.

Table 5. Status of Portfolio as of April 2003

Projects under Commitment 
implementation 
(US$ million) 

___

Is" Decentralized 
City
Management
Social Fund 
Distance 
Learning 
Labor Force 
Development
Private Sector 
National Parks 
Cons. &
Managt.
Cotton Sector 
Reformr
HIV/AIDs Multi 
Sector

Total 

25.5 

16.7 
1.8 

5.0 

30.4 
6.8 

18.0 

23.0 

127.2

Devt. 
Obj. 
Rating 

HS 

Impl. 
Prog. 
Rating

HS 

Approval 
Date 

Signing 
Date 

Closing
Date

06/03/99 

07/01/99 

06/30/03

= 

S 
HS 

S 

S 

S 

S 

S 
HS 

5 

S 
S 

S 

S 

05/19/98 
02/07/00 

06/09/00 

11/30/99 
03/30/00 

01/22/02 

01/04/02 

06/22/98 
03/24/00 

12/31/03
04/30/04

07/26/00 

06/30/04

12/30/99 
04/21/00 

12/31/04
12/31/05

02/15/02 

06/30/06

01/17/02 

09/15/06

Administrative budget constraints and the large supervision budget required by the sizeable
15. 
portfolio limited the Bank's non-lending services under the 1994 CAS, although a PER and CPAR
were completed. Informal AAA provided important support to the Government in managing the impact
of the 1994 devaluation. Several pieces of ESW were prepared during the Interim CAS period and
served as input to the PRSP or should feed into subsequent progress reports. In particular, the Bank
completed in collaboration with the authorities the following AAA pieces which inform this CAS: a

4 The disbursement ratio data for 2003 in Annex 3 do not cover the full year.

- 10-

CFAA (FY01), a Gender Analysis Note (FY02), a Stocktaking Note on Decentralization (FY02); and a
Report on Reforming the Centralized State for Better Service Delivery (FY02).

Impact of Bank operations under the 1994 CAS and 2001 Interim CAS

16. 
While problems of attribution make it difficult to assess the precise contribution of the Bank to
Benin's achievements over the past decade, it is clear nonetheless that IDA was successful in providing
support to help restore a viable macro-financial situation (para. 17). Progress in structural reforms and
in addressing institutional weaknesses was much less than expected, in particular in public resource
management and market institutions, and as discussed in Section II above, the relatively robust growth
achieved in the 1990s appears to have done little to reduce poverty.

17. 
Macroeconomic stability. Over the period of the 1994 CAS, Benin sustained an annual GDP
growth above 5 percent and inflation below 4 percent supported by IDA adjustment lending through the
late 1990s. In the area of fiscal management and trade policy reform, the 1994 CAS period witnessed a
simplification of the tax system, the implementation of the WAEMU common external tariff (which
largely copied Benin's earlier tariff reform which was a major focus of SAC II under the previous
CAS), and the strengthening of the customs and tax administration. These reforms permitted a
sustained improvement in revenue performance, from 12.8 percent of GDP in 1994 to 16.6 percent in
2000.

18. 
In the area of structural reforms, SAC M's accomplishments were mixed, and
implementation of ongoing projects in education, health, and transport in support of the 1994 CAS
objectives were far behind schedule. While budgetary procedures were partially reformed and
allocations to social sectors increased, actual expenditure improved only marginally and the quality of
the Public Investment Program remained unsatisfactory. Procurement procedures were still inefficient,
slow, and left open too many opportunities for corruption despite a new procurement code. There was
virtually no progress in public administration and civil service reform, notwithstanding significant Bank
support through an economic management TA project as well as SAC III.

19. 
The divestiture program under SAC m took longer than planned. Between 1994 and
1997, the Government took further steps to liberalize the cotton sector by authorizing input distribution
and cotton ginning by private companies. This limited liberalization of the cotton sector, carried out
within a still highly administrative environment, led to mixed results. SONAPRA continued to rely on
an administrative allocation of seed cotton among private ginning companies, while cotton producers
received a low share of international prices. Poorly implemented changes in the sector compromised
crop years in 1998-99. In the case of SONACOP, important issues such as petroleum product pricing
policies were not addressed and the Government was slow to authorize new entrants. As a result,
SONACOP (eventually privatized through financially questionable arrangements) has remained the
main distributor and Benin continues to have one of the lowest density of petroleum stations. During
the period of the Interim CAS, however, the Government adopted strategies for the privatization of the
water and energy parastatal (SBEE) and for SONAPRA. 
In light of the SAC III experience and the
delayed implementation of the project portfolio, the Interim CAS focused on strengthening budget
management, supporting further liberalization of the cotton sector (see Box 2), limiting new investment
projects, and assisting the Government in the preparation of a comprehensive poverty reduction
strategy.

20. 
Public expenditure management reform. The preparation and implementation of the PERAC
under the Interim CAS deepened the budget management reform process. The PERAC was intended to

- 11 -

address major deficiencies in the existing budget management system and to prepare several sectors for
consolidated programmatic lending. The reform focused on two fundamental changes: (i) a delegation
of spending authority from the finance and planning ministries to line agencies and eventually to
decentralized levels of government within a stronger fiduciary framework; and (ii) a move toward
performance-based budgeting through well-defined program budgets formulated within a medium-term
expenditure framework, under which progress would be monitored on the basis of explicit, quantified
In addition, the Credit supported a set of institutional reforms and capacity building
indicators. 
measures essential to reaching these objectives. Despite difficulties experienced with the launching of
the new computerized budget management system in early 2001, the impact of reforms so far has been
broadly positive. The pilot ministries involved in these reforms received significant increases in their
budget allocation, and the budget execution rate rose to 94 percent while payment lags decreased from
30 days in 2000 to 23 days in 2001. A medium term expenditure framework (MTEF) for 2003-2005
was prepared, with the 2003 budget consistent with and derived from it. Also in 2003, and for the first
time, the recurrent and investment budgets were presented in one consolidated budget by ministry. The
MTEF covers sector-specific programs financed by HIPC debt relief. The use of HIPC resources,
which are managed like other government expenditures, is clearly identified in the budget. The
Government recently finalized a comprehensive audit and impact assessment of 2000 HIPC
expenditures, and according to this audit, funds reached the intended beneficiaries (mostly schools and
health centers) and were used for the intended purpose. The audit of 2001 HIPC expenditures has been
launched and is expected to be completed by September 2003.

A Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) conducted in 2000/2001 covered
21. 
The main findings and
public expenditure management at 
the central government 
level. 
recommendations of the CFAA were taken into account in the agreed action matrix (2000-2002) of the
PERAC. Some of the actions completed in 2002 include: (i) appointment and training of 17 internal
auditors by the General Inspectorate of Finance; (ii) creation of a national committee to fight corruption;
and (iii) completion of a performance audit in 2002 by the Auditor General in collaboration with the
internal audit department. While constituting a very useful first effort, the performance audit of the
budget still requires more coordination among the institutions participating in the exercise. Other
remaining challenges in public expenditure management reform include: (i) better coordination of the
budget reform agenda; (ii) improved Government capacity to produce relevant and timely information
on budget execution, including timely production of information; (iii) improved control framework and
elimination of redundant and inefficient control procedures, so as to further reduce payment lags; (iv)
harmonization of economic and program budgets; and (v) better targeting and allocation of resources to
poverty-focused programs.
Human development. Benin has achieved considerable progress in human development
22. 
resulting from Government reforms and development partner (including Bank) investments across
priority sectors (see para. 3 and Table 1). Both SAC m and the PERAC supported increases in
budgetary allocations to health and education. IDA-financed health and education projects contributed
to the expansion of access to basic social services, but were less successful in helping to improve
quality. Little progress was made in narrowing the gap between girls' and boys' enrollment rates (see
paras. 5 and 12). Health sector performance remains unsatisfactory, with the utilization rate for health
facilities only at 34 percent and implementation of priority public health programs (reproductive health,
malaria and tuberculosis) lagging. Notwithstanding the remaining challenges, strong IDA support
through both adjustment and investment lending helped Benin lay a good foundation for sustainable
improvements in the living standards and well-being of its population.

- 12 -

23. 

Rural and sustainable development. 

Important progress was made in rural development, in

particular where projects were implemented through communities. Thus the Community Based Food
Security project assisted civil society organizations to build the capacity among vulnerable population
groups and rural communities to design and implement micro-projects aimed at sustainable income
generation, employment creation, and better nutrition. Partnerships were encouraged between stronger,
larger NGOs and weaker, newer NGOs so as to stimulate the transfer of methodologies and technology.
A Social Fund project increased access to credit and savings institutions among the poor and financed
community-conceived infrastructure projects. The Borgou Pilot Rural Support project (a Learning and
Innovation Loan) experimented with demand-driven approaches 
to community 
infrastructure
development, social service provision, and natural resource management in over 250 communities. The
pilot program has informed the Government's broader rural development strategy (see para. 49) and will
help to guide

BOX 2. COTTON SECTOR REFORM

Background: The cotton sector is the engine of Benin's rural growth and constitutes the bulk of primary production
and domestic exports. The sector has experienced rapid growth over the last thirty years, both absolutely as well as
compared to other cotton countries. Yields have grown by 50 percent and output has gone up six-fold. Despite this
high growth, there remain significant pockets of poverty, particularly in the cotton growing areas. Thus, the main
issue facing the cotton sector as far as the goal of poverty reduction is concemed can be summarized as follows: (i)
how to further expand cotton cultivation, while (ii) spreading the productivity gains and income increase to a larger
group of cotton producers, and (iii) generating income multiplier effects within and outside the cotton sector and the
rest of the rural economy.

Reform process: With past support from IDA, Benin took strong measures to liberalize the cotton sector and
encourage private sector investment in ginning activities. Private operators currently control 50 percent of the
installed ginning capacity, and the privatization of the govemment-owned ginning plants is underway. Three new
institutions have been created: (i) Cotton Interprofessional Association (AIC) comprising two entities -
the
producer's organization (FUPRO) and the ginner's association. The AIC has taken over all the critical functions
(planting seed production, research financing, rural roads maintenance, etc.) initially ensured by SONAPRA; (ii) the
Cooperative of Agricultural Inputs Procurement and Management (CAGIA) has taken over responsibility for input
supply; and (iii) the Central of Cotton Payment and Input Credit Recovery (CSPR), operates as a clearing-house
through which the payment of seed cotton by ginners to producers and the repayment of input credit by producers to
distributors are coordinated.

Current Bank involvement: An IDA-financed Cotton Sector Reform Program (FY02), whose main objective is to
ensure a successful transition to a more competitive system of production and trading, supports the reform. The
project provides assistance for the privatization of the publicly-owned ginning mills and aims at strengthening the
capacities of producer organizations in order to move later to a system encouraging competition among ginners while
eliminating the administrative allocation of seed cotton. The project also supports the functioning of the newly
created institutions to ensure a smooth transition.

Next steps: After this transitional phase, the centralized collective contracting system in place will need to evolve in
order to move the commercial and technical decision making process closer to local producer organizations. This
transition is necessary in order to empower producers and bring more competition to the sector. Under such a
system, seed cotton prices would be negotiated between ginners and producers at the local/regional level and the
allocation of seed-cotton based on ginning capacities would be phased out. Similarly, input procurement, bank credit,
as well as the provision of technical advisory services would be managed primarily at the local level with the
necessary support of the central institutions. Such a decentralized system would strengthen the negotiating power of
the producer organizations. 
It would also allow the ginning companies to better plan supply and other business
activities. Furthermore, it would eliminate the risks of rigidities and inefficiencies, which, over time, would
undermine the effectiveness of the current arrangements. 
Finally, the decentralization of the commercial and
technical decision-making process would allow the central institutions, AIC, CAGIA, and CSPR, to better focus their
activities and provide the collective goods that cannot be intemalized at the level of production or ginning.

- 13 -

future community-driven development operations (see para. 63). Two other projects developed as part
of the effort to provide more responsive agricultural services, as well as rural credit, and to expand the
role of the private sector, were less successful. The Agricultural Services Restructuring project (PRSA)
supported a major reduction of staff but fell short of the full restructuring and skills enhancement
needed to improve agricultural services. The Second Rural Savings and Loans Cooperatives project
(Rural Credit II) aimed to rehabilitate and strengthen the network of rural savings and loans
cooperatives but despite some important achievements, govemance problems and uncoordinated donor
funding undermined the rural savings network, which has only recently started to recover.5 In the cotton
sector important reforms were implemented with the view to increasing private sector involvement and
increasing producers' share in revenues (see Box 2). 
In relation to sustainable development, the
Environmental Management project provided technical support and investments to build institutional
capacity and complemented the PERAC-supported public expenditure reform program aimed at more
closely aligning public spending with key environmental priorities.

Lessons learned
24. With the view to helping Benin make progress in poverty reduction, the main objectives of the
1994 CAS and 20.01 Interim CAS were to: (i) consolidate the benefits of the devaluation by increasing
the supply response to the change in relative prices; (ii) assist in the liberalization of the cotton sector in
order to leverage its impact on growth and the well-being of cotton producers; (iii) strengthen budget
management so as to permit better formulation and implementation of poverty focused programs; and
(iv) lay the basis for a progressive shift to consolidated programmatic lending. Bank assistance was
broadly successful with respect to objectives (i) and (iv), but only partially achieved objectives (ii) and
(iii), as is evident in the absence of significant progress in poverty reduction over the past decade. From
the results achieved, the following lessons can be drawn:

Growth performance in Benin needs to be sustained by enhanced support to private sector
25. 
development and through diversification. The economy's vulnerability to a single crop, cotton, calls for
a redoubling of efforts to promote more broad-based growth through agricultural diversification and
improved competitiveness of the secondary and tertiary sectors.
More equitable distribution of the gains from cotton production combined with more broad-
26. 
based growth in agriculture and services are critical to reducing inequality and poverty. Decentralized
delivery mechanisms can also expand access to quality basic social services, the other critical dimension
of poverty reduction.

Participation and direct involvement of the poor and communities in the design and
27. 
implementation ofprojects has proven successful and therefore warrant scaling-up. With newly elected

5 The success of the Borgou Pilot has generated significant interest from other countries in the sub-region and
across the Bank itself. OED's April 2003 Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) contains a very
positive evaluation of the project, while highlighting two important issues that it raises for sustainability and
decentralization efforts: (i) that the long-term effects of a parallel extra-government implementation structure on
the functioning, organization, and effectiveness of government should be more fully understood; and (ii) that the
harmonization of village committees with the decentralization framework is an issue that needs more attention up
front. A May 2003 CPAR rated project outcomes satisfactory for the Food Security project. Both the ICR and the
May 2003 OED PPAR rated the PRSA's outcome as unsatisfactory. Both the ICR for Rural Credit II and the May
2003 PPAR rated the outcome as satisfactory.

- 14 -

local governments, there is now the added opportunity of supporting such participatory development on
a more sustainable basis.

28. 
Ownership and sustained country and donor dialogue are key. Bank support for reforms must
focus on achievable objectives to which the Government can commit for the long term, based on a broad
domestic consensus. The example of the budgetary reform implemented under the PERAC is one where
constant dialogue with the authorities and other donors was critical to the success achieved so far. By
contrast, the long-stalled civil service reform clearly demonstrates the limits of Bank advice and
leverage in the absence of consensus on reforms.

VI. 

THE GOVERNMENT'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY

29. 
Supporting Benin's efforts at poverty reduction remains the overriding objective of Bank
assistance, with the PRSP providing the overall framework. The PRSP reiterates the Government's
commitment to addressing poverty issues and refers explicitly to poverty reduction goals over the next
fifteen years. It outlines a medium-term macroeconomic framework and provides a policy matrix of
structural reforms and sector policies consistent with achieving higher growth and poverty reduction. A
detailed Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) for the period 2003-2005 underpins the
macroeconomic framework of the PRSP. The structural reform agenda, as outlined in the PRSP policy
matrix, reflects the present objective of liberalizing the economy and draws on existing sector policies to
promote private sector-led growth.

30. 

* 

The core PRSP objectives are articulated around four pillars:
* Consolidating macroeconomic stability through accelerated private-sector-led growth and
rigorous public finance management;
Improving access to basic education, literacy, primary health care, safe water, and fight against
prevention of new HIV/AIDS infections, malaria and tuberculosis with specific attention to
vulnerable groups, especially women;
* Strengthening good governance and reinforcing institutional capacities;
* Promoting long-term employment and building capacity for poor people to participate in the
decision-making process and in production.

31. 
The JSA 6 recognizes: (i) the comprehensiveness of the strategic framework; (ii) the effort to
make explicit the linkages between policy actions and result indicators; and (iii) the detailed and
comprehensive medium-term expenditure framework prepared by the authorities in line with strategic
priorities. However the JSA also states that the PRSP suffers from important shortcomings, which the
authorities will need to address during the first year of implementation so as to sharpen the poverty
focus and make the strategy fully operational. First, the poverty diagnosis did not benefit from a full
analysis of the impact of past policies on the poor, and methodological weaknesses precluded a
definitive analysis of key determinants of poverty as well as the evolution of key quantitative poverty
indicators over the past decade. Second, the strategy for private sector led growth proposed in the PRSP
needs to be further developed and made more coherent. Third, in many instances, the document lacks
sufficient 
indications on the Government's implementation plans, 
including on how the fiscal
decentralization strategy would ensure better public service delivery. Fourth, the PRSP does not

6 See IDA/SecM2003-0076 - February 27, 2003.

- 15 -

adequately address the shortcomings in implementation capacity that have in the past, undermined the
Government's efforts to reduce poverty. Fifth, the PRSP points to gender disparities in some key
sectors, but fails to propose actions to tackle the persistence of systemic legal and socio-cultural barriers
to women's empowerment, which affects their ability 
to contribute 
to economic growth and
development. While recognizing that the PRSP is a long-term process that should improve over time,
the Bank is encouraging early and forceful action to address these shortcomings with support from
Benin's development partners (see para. 44).

32. 
The Macroeconomic framework for 2003-2005. Current macroeconomic projections were
prepared in the context of the Enhanced HIPC Completion Point and cover the PRSP period (2003-05).
The Government's macroeconomic framework (see Table 6) and the structural reform agenda are
consistent with accelerating growth and reducing poverty. Growth performance is expected to improve
from 5.4 percent on average over the 2000-02 period to 6.5 percent in 2003-05. Growth in the primary
sector is expected to rise from 5.4 percent on average in 2000-02 to 6.3 percent in 2003-05, mainly as a
result of an increase in food production. Secondary sector growth would decline slightly as a result of a
drop in manufacturing production in 2002/03 but remain high at 7.2 percent on average. Such growth
would be driven by agribusiness, construction, and public works. A pick-up in trade and services, in
particular in tourism, is expected to underpin growth in the tertiary sector. To sustain the overall GDP
growth rate, the investment-to-GDP ratio is expected to increase from 18.7 percent in 2000-02 to 20.6
percent in 2003-05, as government finances are strengthened and domestic investment opportunities
Public investment in the infrastructure and social sectors will increase, with private
improve. 
investment rising as sectors become privatized (energy, telecommunications, and transportation).
Higher investment will also depend on the implementation of policies leading to higher domestic
savings, which are expected to rise from 6.2 percent of GDP in 2000-02 to 10 percent in 2003-05. The
external current account deficit would widen by 0.3 percent of GDP on average to 7.9 percent in 2003-
05, and Benin is expected to continue to receive substantial concessional financing. The objective is to
achieve a small surplus by 2003-05 in the overall balance of payments. As a result, gross international
reserves would slowly decrease from 9.4 months of imports in 2000-02 to 8 in 2003-05. The
Government aims to keep the overall fiscal deficit including grants below 5 percent of GDP, while
increasing budgetary allocations for health, education, and public investment in the context of the
comprehensive poverty strategy. Excluding interest payments and grants, the primary deficit will be
kept below 4 percent of GDP up to 2005.

33. 
Sources of growth and poverty reduction. Since the role of the cotton sector will remain
important in the short-term, the Government expects to increase its contribution to poverty reduction
through pursuit of the reforms described in Box 2. Diversification into foodcrops in the short-to-
medium term would be supported by an improvement of agricultural services delivery and increased
access to markets through better rural roads. To make such diversification and growth possible and pro-
poor, the Government plans to strengthen support for already well-developed producers' organizations.
Thus, smallholder-led foodcrop expansion would make an important contribution to poverty reduction
In the tertiary sector, it is expected that
in rural areas where the majority of poor people live. 
improvement in road transportation and port competitiveness resulting from the privatization of its
management would support an acceleration in the growth of trade and services. In trade and services, a
pro-poor focus would be pursued by tapping the considerable potential of the informal sector (a major
source of non-public sector employment) in exploiting opportunities in the Nigerian market.

34. 
Risks to the macroeconomic framework. The major risk to the macro framework is that
assumptions underlying the economic growth projections would not materialize. First, further delays in
implementing critical structural reform, 
in particular 
the privatization program and setting-up

- 16 -

appropriate regulatory frameworks in privatized sectors, as well as longer than expected response lags to
these policies would compromise the expected increase in private sector investment. Previous studies
(Social and Structural Policy Review, SSPR FYOI) have shown that two-thirds of Benin's growth
performance can be explained by improved policies and that further improvement of these policies
could lead to an increase in per capita growth of 0.8-1.2 percent. Accordingly, the expected acceleration
of growth is contingent on the timely implementation of structural policies, including those required for
diversification. Second, a significant level of diversification into food crops may require a longer
timeframe than the PRSP anticipates. Third, delays in mobilizing financing for the public
investment program and in implementing it would jeopardize achievement of the PRSP growth

Table 6. Medium-Term Macro-Economic Framework

Growth, Investment, and Savings
Real GDP growth (lo) 
Primary 
Secondary 
Tertiary 
Real GNP per capita growth (%o) 
Gross investment (%ofGDP) 
Govemment investment (%ofGDP) 
Private sector investment (% of GDP) 
Domestic savings (% of GDP) 

Cotton Sector
Production (thousand tons) 
Export price (CFA/kg) 
Exports (USS million) 

Oil
Import price ($/BBL) 
Import to GDP ratio (Y) 
Public Finance
Govemment revenue (% of GDP) 
Govemment expenditure (% of GDP) 
Primary balance (% of GDP) 
Overall balance (%of GDP) 

Balance of Payments
Terms of trade (%) 
Resource gap (% of GDP) 
Exports (GNFS; % of GDP) 
Current account deficit (% of GDP) 
Gross International reserves (months of imports) 

External debt
Debt service to export ratio (after debt relief %6) 
Source: PRSP; Staff estimates.

1990-95 

1996-99 

2000-02 

2003-05
Projections

4.1 
4.3 
4.9 
2.7 
1.1 
15.5 
5.7 
9.9 
7 

189 

116 

15.7 
1.9 

12.1 
19.9 
-1.3 
-7.9 

0.6 
-8.8 
15.6 
-4.9 
3.7 

5.2 
6.6 
3.5 
4.4 
2.5 
17.6 
6.3 
11.2 
7.5 

349 
807.9 
192 

16.2 
2.5 

15.3 
18.1 
-1.7 
-3.1 

-7.1 
-8.9 
17.4 
-5.8 
9.6 

5.4 
5.4 
8.0 
4.7 
2.8 
18.7 
7.4 
11.4 
6.2 

371.3 
679.2 
143.5 

25.2 
2.5 

16.6 
20.4 
-2.9 
-4.7 

-0.5 

-12.5 
14.9 
-7.6 
9.4 

32.7 

16.8 

11.8 

6.5
6.3
7.2
6.5
3.9
20.6
95
11.0
10.0

371.5
770.5
179.5

22.5
1.9

17.0
22.0
-4.2
-5.0

12.9
-13.0
14.8

-7.9

8.0

6.7

- 17 -

rates. As a first step, the Govemment's strategy is to raise public investment in infrastructure and social
sectors that most contribute to an improvement of human capital and agricultural productivity, and to
rely on highly concessional financing in doing so. The Govemment is also cognizant of the need to
improve its absorptive capacity, so as to maximize the effectiveness of donor support. 
Indeed, the
mobilization of extemal financing for the proposed priority investment projects will depend to a
significant extent on better implementation of the current sectoral programs, which, in turn, will require
improvements in prioritization of spending, implementation capacity, and budget management, along
the lines set out in the PRSP.
35. 
To date the impact of the Cote d'Ivoire crisis on Benin is estimated to be marginally positive.
Workers' remittances from M6te d'Ivoire have not been significant in the past. In addition, the Port of
Cotonou was able to capture part of the traffic to landlocked countries, in particular to Burkina Faso and
Niger. If the crisis were to endure significantly beyond mid-2003, Benin could be indirectly affected by
lower performance of the WAEMU as a whole and weaker momentum in the regional integration
process, historically led by C6te d'Ivoire.

36. 
The refinement of the macroframework is underway to mitigate the risks discussed in para. 34
and address two fundamental weaknesses: (i) heavy reliance on increased public investment juxtaposed
to a stagnant private investment-to-GDP-ratio; and (ii) the unrealistic pace of substitution of program
financing for project financing given the portfolio's inertia and past delays in implementing investment
projects.

VII. 

THE BANK'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Strategic choices in the formulation of the assistance strategy

37. 
The overriding objective of the Bank's assistance in the years ahead is to help Benin reverse
recent trends of limited or no poverty reduction amidst relatively robust growth. Progress in reducing
poverty and towards attainment of the MDGs requires the further deepening of cotton sector reforms,
strengthened efforts towards diversifying the economy, tangible progress in the social sectors, building
effective and responsive public institutions, promoting gender equality, and strengthening collaboration
with the private sector and civil society. The CAS describes a focused program of financial assistance
and non-lending services as the Bank's contribution to addressing these challenges. The poverty focus
of this program is summarized in Box 3.

38. While pursuing alignment with the PRSP, the proposed program builds on the lessons leamed
from the 1994 CAS and 2001 Interim CAS, and has also been informed by the CAS consultations
described in Box 4. These lessons (see paras. 24-28) point to:

* The need to be more selective and for greater harmonization of donor support, using Benin's
own institutions. A dissipated Bank (and wider donor) effort has resulted in only modest results
while at the same time competing for and undermining scarce capacity.
* The need for more modesty in setting the objectives of Bank assistance, supporting only those
reforms that are broadly owned and being more realistic about the timeframe for their
implementation, given Benin's political context.
* The need for focused and sustained Bank support for capacity enhancement, based on strong
government ownership.

- 18 -

* The need to balance the positive impact and clear potential of CDD-type operations in fulfilling
the felt needs of communities with the requirements of institutional sustainability in a context of
decentralization.

* The significant potential of demand-driven AAA for influencing policy reform design and
enhancing capacity.

In light of these considerations, and of the substantial donor interest and involvement in Benin (see Box
5), the following core principles underpin the strategic and instrument choices made in this CAS: (i)
selectivity in lending through forging stronger partnerships with other donors; (ii) closely linking
support for community-driven development to decentralization, as required for sustainability; (iii)
providing more programmatic and predictable assistance to underpin a more equal partnership in
implementing long-term poverty reduction strategies; and (iv) assuming a leadership role in capacity-
enhancing AAA in response to the Government's and other donors' request.

BOX 3. BANK-SUPPORTED PROGRAMS AND POVERTY

Debt relief HIPC assistance is being used to finance poverty-reducing expenditures, including direct transfers to schools to
compensate for the abolition of school fees and to hire teachers and health care staff (see also para. 20)
Community-based social services. Increasing ownership through greater community involvement in their development
holds immense potential for building social capital and meeting the felt needs of communities. The Bank is currently
financing two projects that provide assistance directly to communities (Social Fund and Decentralized City Management)
and is preparing a National Community Driven Development project to provide direct assistance to communities nation-
wide, in particular in rural areas where most of the poor live.
Poverty reduction support credit. The wide-spread poverty incidence is related to the still limited levels of pro-poor
public spending. The proposed PRSC would support policies and spending programs designed to improve basic service
delivery. 
It would also support Benin's far-reaching public expenditure management reforms to enhance the poverty
impact of government expenditures. Performance-based budgeting would link budgetary spending to quantified poverty
reduction objectives from sectoral strategies.

Cotton sector reforms are designed to increase competition within the cotton sector with the view to raising its

competitiveness and producers' share of sector revenues, thereby helping to reduce poverty in cotton growing rural areas.

Poverty-focused AAA services redate to:

- PRSP action plan. In the PRSP, the Govemment has identified a series of actions that it intends to take with the
assistance of donors (including the Bank) in order to improve the quality of its poverty assessment. These actions include
carrying out a national survey of poverty, preparing a poverty map, detailed studies of the description of poverty by social
and occupational category, more in-depth analysis of poverty, and a heath survey.
- Poverty Assessment (FY03). The Poverty Assessment will provide an updated picture of poverty as a baseline for
monitoring the impact of poverty reduction measures as well as a guide for future interventions. At the same time, the
process leading to the production of the Poverty Assessment aims at strengthening the capacity of the Beninese
Govemment to carry out rigorous and efficient data collection, as well as analysis and dissemination for poverty
monitoring and evaluation. More specifically, the Poverty Assessment will: (i) produce a poverty profile including
estimates of poverty incidence (monetary and non-monetary) by geographic location, correlations between various poverty
indicators, a poverty map, an analysis of inequality, and the perceptions of the poor themselves; (ii) establish trends related
to the MDGs; (iii) complement static poverty analysis with a risk and vulnerability assessment focusing on the dynamics
of poverty; (iv) carry out a benefit incidence analysis to assess the impact of selected policies on poverty reduction; and
(v) produce a brief assessment of the current systems and capacity for poverty monitoring and evaluation as part of the
ongoing PRSP process.
Monitoring and evaluation. The Government, with the assistance of several donors, is also working on improving the
monitoring and evaluation system of the PRSP. The Bank will continue to provide technical assistance to the Govemment
and the National Statistical Institute to improve data collection and analysis.

- 19 -

BOX 4. CAS CONSULTATIONS: BUILDING ON THE PRSP PARTICIPATORY PROCESS
Consistent with the core principle of linking the CAS to the PRSP process, the Bank has connected its CAS
consultations with the nation-wide consultations held both prior and subsequent to the PRSP's finalization. This
CAS draws upon a number of documents that were prepared by the PRSP team and on the 2001 Client Survey. In
addition, the Bank carried out consultations with the Govemment, elected officials, civil society, the private sector,
beneficiaries, and the donor community. This process was initiated with a full week of discussions in June 2002 on
the CAS and PRSC preliminary concepts. In November 2002, while reviewing the penultimate version of the PRSP,
the Govemment and the Bank further discussed areas in which the Bank could provide better support. This
consultation also included NGOs, the private sector and the donor community.
The Client Survey was useful in conveying Beninese (govemment, project managers, and members of the civil
society) perceptions of the Bank and of its support to the reform program. 
In general, respondents were quite
positive about the Bank's impact in Benin, especially with respect to expenditure management, health, education,
and infrastructure. They also expressed satisfaction with the Bank's decentralization process and the increased role
of the Country Office. Their main recommendations were for: (i) increased dialogue with civil society and private
sector; (ii) better communication about the role of the Bank, including with respect to poverty reduction; and (iii)
finding ways to simplify the project preparation cycle and procurement procedures.
In early March 2003, once the PRSP was distributed to the Board, a series of discussions were held in Cotonou on
the concept note for the CAS. These meetings discussed the main points of the CAS as well as its linkage with the
PRSP and other donor planning processes. The participants included an array of Govemment officials, NGO
representatives, community representatives, and business people. The feedback helped in refining the CAS' strategic
objectives as well as the lending and non-lending program. The main feedback can be summarized as follows:
- Fight against poverty: more emphasis needs to be given to coordination of donor programs in the fight against
poverty so as to avoid the diffusion of aid resources in Benin. Debt relief and budgetary assistance are effective
instruments for the fight against poverty so long as good governance and transparency are assured.
the PRSP is a sound basis for organizing future development assistance. However, this
- The PRSP framework: 
entails significant changes in the relations between the state, civil society, the private sector, and the donor
community in the design and the implementation of national policies.
- Improving service delivery: a number of participants stressed the importance of community-driven development as
an effective approach to empowering the poor and improving service delivery, especially in the context of
decentralization.
- Capacity building: to underpin the PRSP and the consolidated programmatic lending approach, capacity
enhancement is a priority in Govemment as well as NGOs and civil society so that they better understand and
contribute to the reform process.

39. 

Building partnerships. Since the Interim CAS, and particularly in the context of the

preparation of the PRSP, there has been increased collaboration and better partnerships between the
Bank and other development partners on major issues (see Box 5). The Bank participated in the
preparation of the UNDAF (United Nations Development Assistance Framework) document for which
Benin is a pilot country and which is fully consistent with the PRSP. Bilateral partners were closely
involved in the PRSP process and meet on a regular basis in the context of the PDGG (Participatory
Development and Good Governance) group to discuss progress 
in implementation and share
experiences regarding ongoing programs. A consistent effort will be made to improve partnership with
other donors, including encouraging others to take the lead in some activities where the Bank plays an
important financial role. For example, the United States is taking the lead in education, while Canada
and UNDP are in the forefront of support to administrative reform. Denmark leads rural water supply
activities while the Bank continues to play an important financial role through the PERAC (and will do
so under the PRSC). In legal and judicial reform, the Bank is working in close partnership with France
to help the Govemment operationalize its strategy in the sector. The Bank will take the lead: in
coordinating donor's programmatic lending through the PRSC; in providing programmatic investment
support to the energy sector; and in supporting decentralization through the National CDD project and
the Decentralized Cities Management project. The Bank will also continue to play a major role in
financing the program to fight HIV/AIDS.

- 20 -

40. 
The Country Office in Cotonou, in the context of its outreach program, is developing a
communication strategy to increase consultation with civil society and NGOs as well as partnership with
the media. During the CAS period, and with the new National Assembly in place, the Bank will
redouble efforts at upstream consultation and information sharing with the Finance Commission of the
National Assembly, including by the Country Office and project teams, with the view to reducing
ratification delays. And in response to demand from the National Assembly itself, we will draw on
WBI support to better sensitize it to the Bank's work in Benin.

BOX 5. BENIN'S EXTERNAL PARTNERS

Multilateral
The European Union is a major source of funds for Benin's investment budget, mostly via grant assistance
concentrated in the focal sectors of health care, private sector development, transportation (roads), and legal and
judiciary sector. The EU is collaborating with the Bank and the IMF in developing coordinated programmatic
support to the economic reform program. It has also agreed to provide support for judicial reform.
The African Development Bank provides significant budget support, and maintains a project portfolio focused on
agriculture, water and sanitation, transport, health, and education.
The United Nations has just completed its UNDAF, consistent with the PRSP and with active participation of the
Bank. All the major UN agencies are represented in Benin. UNDP focuses on sustainable livelihood, governance,
private sector development, HIV/AIDS, and development management. UNICEF has programs focusing on
health, education, community development, HIV/AIDS, and children's and women's welfare rights. UNFPA is
particularly active in support of reproductive health, women's rights, and HIV/AIDS. FAO is active in smallholder
food security, and WFP supports basic education, particularly girls, and assists children and youth in difficult
circumstances. UNAIDS, currently chaired by UNDP, is playing a central role in assisting Benin's national
HIV/AIDS strategy.
The BOAD focuses on roads, telecommunications, energy, water and sanitation.
The Nordic Development Fund is preparing support for energy in coordination with the Bank.

Bilateral
France provides support to rural development (including cotton), urban infrastructure development, public sector
management, govemance, justice, and capacity building.
The Netherlands supports natural resource management, and has been a major source of assistance in rural
development, education, health and community radio development. It is also moving to budget support.
Germany has a significant program of assistance via GTZ and KFW and, with a significant focus on rural
development and environmental management, rural water development, poverty monitoring and decentralization.
Canada has an aid program focusing on health (including HIV/AIDS), education, as well as support to
administrative reform and decentralization.
Belgium focuses on health and rural development and has recently added support to justice.
USAID is funding govemance reform, decentralization, and HIV/AIDS. The U.S. also has a significant Peace Corps
Volunteer program in Benin.
China has supported rural, health and infrastructure development.
Denmark provides budget support and project support in transport, rural water supply, poverty monitoring, and
decentralization.
Switzerland 
leads the bilateral donor coordination group (the PDGG) and supports good govemance and
decentralization, as well as reforms in the cotton sector, in collaboration with the Bank and France.

Donor harmonization: Benin's major partners participate actively in the ongoing elaboration of sector strategies as
well as in thematic groups in the areas of rural development, private sector development, judicial sector reform,
food security, HIV/AIDs, health and education. With the PRSP now in place, donors are expressing greater
interest in harmonizing their assistance around it. Already, those donors involved in providing programmatic
support for the reform program are working to harmonize around Benin's own budgetary, procurement, and
financial management procedures.

- 21 -

41. 
Selectivity in the Bank's work. Selectivity in the Bank's work will be informed by PRSP
strategic priorities and donor consensus around them, by very limited future stand-alone investment
operations, and by Bank comparative advantage. Bank assistance will be centered in three of the four
PRSP pillars, and would provide support to only a sub-set of activities under them7 . Selectivity in the
PRSC is discussed in Box 6. While providing support for transport and trade facilitation through a
regional project (see para. 47), and possibly for rural roads, the Bank will not finance road construction
and maintenance, continuing to give only technical advice in the transport sector (including to complete
the reform agenda of the Port of Cotonou). This is because other donors (EU, BOAD, AfDB) are
already providing major support to both the extension and the rehabilitation of the road network. And
beyond support for microfinance in the on-going Private Sector Development project, the Bank does not
foresee dedicated lending for financial sector development but together with the 1MF will conduct sector
work to identify remaining policy issues in the sector. 8 As explained in para. 45, the Bank will not
finance stand-alone capacity building operations, but will instead build capacity within project and
program design and implementation. As a pilot country for implementing the new programmatic
approach to capacity building of the Africa Capacity Building Foundation (ACBF), Benin will also
receive a comprehensive package of assistance from the Foundation, including the preparation (with
support of other donors) of a comprehensive capacity building strategy, continuous support to CAPE
(Cellule d'Analyse des Politiques Economiques) and assistance to the parliament, as well as key
ministries and institutions.

BOX 6. SELECTIVITY IN THEF PRSC

While building on the PERAC experience, which focused on five sectors at the outset (health, education, rural
development, public works and transportation, and environment and urban development) and covered eight
sectors at completion, the PRSC will opt for a more selective and gradual approach. This will be informed by
three major considerations:

The Bank's comparative advantage and the potential for coordination and synergy with other donors;
Continuity with the 2001 Interim CAS under which the Bank supported the Govemment's strategy to
move toward consolidated programmatic lending (sector projects closed were expected to be folded into the
PERAC/PRSC);
. The readiness of the sector, that is whether conditions for ensuring its effective participation 
in
programmatic financing are considered acceptable, judged notably by the quality of the sector strategy, the
reform agenda for increasing expenditure efficiency, and the capacity to prepare and implement a program-
budget.

Selectivity will also be informed by the assessment of the scope and nature of the remaining policy reform
agenda with regard to progress achieved under the PERAC. 
In this respect, PRSC I would likely focus on a
maximum of five core sectors / sub-sectors (including education, health and rural water). Other sectors would
be progressively included in subsequent PRSCs to support the Govemment's reform agenda on the basis of their
readiness (see paras 49 and 61).

42. 
Enhancing the strategic focus on programmatic lending: Building on the lessons
summarized in para. 38 and in response to the PRSP's call to donors, this CAS will pursue the vision
laid out in the Interim CAS by progressively channeling IDA assistance through consolidated

7 No specific targeted assistance is envisaged for Pillar 4. However, since emnployment creation should be helped
by broad-based growth, Bank support to Pillar 1 (especially with respect to the rural sector) will indirectly support
the emnployment generation objective of Pillar 4. The participatory objective of Pillar 4 is indirectly supported

through several Bank lending and non lending instruments (see paras. 47-61 below).
IEC has provided substantial assistance to the financial sector as discussed in para. 48.

8 

- 22 -

programmatic lending to support growth and poverty-reducing policies, in the context of well-designed,
multi-year program budgets. Such financial support would be provided through Benin's own budget
management system, consistent with the country's efforts to develop medium-term expenditure
frameworks and to unify the dual recurrent and investment budgets of the past. This support will take
the form of annual PRSCs, providing quick-disbursing financing to support the Government budget.
Such an approach, as tested under the PERAC, should facilitate donor coordination, to the extent that
other donors, especially the EU, the AfDB, Switzerland, Denmark, and the Netherlands are preparing
similar operations in support of it. The Bank is working to ensure joint appraisal and evaluation of these
operations. The Bank will also seek greater collaboration with other donors on core diagnostic ESW,
including a joint effort on the FY04 Poverty Assessment follow-up and PER, as well as on the FY05
CFAA/CPAR update.

43. 
The Bank will also provide programmatic investment support in selected areas not suitable or
ready for consolidated programmatic lending (e.g. energy services, decentralization pending a full fiscal
decentralization 
framework) and continue traditional self-standing operations (adjustment or
investment) where the benefits of separate implementation and financial arrangements appear to
outweigh the advantages of a more integrated approach to public financial resource transfers. Such
stand-alone operations would however become the exception over time as further progress is made in
strengthening the fiduciary framework and poverty-focused sector expenditure programs, and an
effective fiscal decentralization framework is made operational. Even then, separate operations may be
justified by special circumstances, including:

* 

* 

to support government projects that involve a substantial level of international competitive
bidding, as a way of providing Bank/external certification that government procurement will be
handled transparently;
to offset the specific fiscal costs related to policy reforms or negative transitory fiscal shocks
that could not be foreseen at the time of budget formulation.

44. 
Strengthening analytical and advisory activities (AAA): Building on the lessons of the
previous CAS and Interim CAS, in response to areas of weaknesses in the PRSP, and to further
strengthen the foundations for consolidated programmatic lending, the priority agenda for AAA during
the CAS period includes: (i) improving the knowledge base on poverty and its determinants and analysis
of the impact of public expenditures on the poor, including looking explicitly at the gender dimensions
of poverty and vulnerability in Benin; (ii) strengthening the agricultural strategy, with a focus on
diversification and related support services to farmers; (iii) supporting the development of a coherent
private sector strategy; (iv) analysis of policies as well as of infrastructural and financial services to
improve competitiveness, diversification, and growth; (iv) contributions to the design of comprehensive
civil service/institutional reform and fiscal decentralization strategies; and (vi) supporting 
the
integration of gender equity considerations into the design of public policies and expenditure programs.
For sectors already engaged in the budget reform process (health, education, rural development, roads,
rural water, and environment) and those which would be progressively integrated, the Bank will initiate
focused AAA (through existing projects where available, a proposed IDF grant, or separate non-lending
tasks) in order to help the Government strengthen its existing sector-wide expenditure programs /
program budgets and develop additional ones. To enhance Beninese analytical capacity, the bulk of the
AAA program will be carried out in partnership with the Government and other domestic stakeholders.

45. 
Enhancing Capacity. Past experience in Benin and elsewhere has shown that ownership, an
enabling environment in which new skills can be applied, and an effective demand for results are critical

- 23 -

elements of capacity enhancement. Building on the approach taken since the Interim CAS, in particular
under the PERAC, the CAS favors a learning-by-doing approach, and to also embed capacity
enhancement directly into planned lending operations. Most projects in the portfolio already include
substantial capacity building components (private sector development, decentralized city management,
labor force development, cotton sector reform, and HIV/AIDS), as will all new operations. Under the
CAS the capacity building program would focus on the following areas: developing a coherent private
sector-led growth strategy; refining sector strategies; participatory annual sector PERs; poverty
monitoring and evaluation capacity (program performance monitoring and evaluation, public
expenditure 
incidence analysis, 
sector 
statistics); public expenditure 
reform design; 
fiscal
decentralization; and human resource management in public sector. 
In the medium-term horizon
covered by this CAS, among the most important contributions the Bank can make to Benin's capacity
enhancement agenda is to help the Government re-invigorate the long-stalled civil service management
reform (see paras. 18, 28 and 70) so as to build the enabling environment and demand for results
required for sustainable improvements in capacity.

Thematic presentation of thse base case program

46. 
The Bank will use the current IDA portfolio, new lending operations, and planned AAA to
support three of the four pillars of the PRSP.

Pillar I - Bolstering the medium-term macroeconomic framework

47. 
Accelerated private-sector-led-growth. 
The on-going Cotton Sector Reform and Private
Sector Development projects will constitute the main instruments to assist the Government in its policy
of accelerating private sector-led growth. 
In the cotton sector, the privatization of SONAPRA will
complete the series of important reforms that have been implemented in order to improve the efficiency
of the cotton sector and distribute the returns more equitably. The Private Sector project will support
the implementation of an appropriate regulatory framework for privatization of the telecommunications
sector. In addition, the Electricity Services project (an Adaptable Program Loan - APL) will support
the privatization of SBEE and finance the investments required to improve the distribution of electricity
services throughout Benin. By reducing energy costs, two Bank-financed regional projects (the West
Africa Gas Pipeline project and the West Africa Power Market Development project) will also
contribute to the PRSP's growth objectives. Through the expected positive impact on transport costs,
the planned Regional Trade and Transport Facilitation project should help underpin the improvement in
competitiveness required for achievement of the growth objectives. The Bank's AAA work program (in
particular the study on competitiveness and diversification) will help develop a reform agenda for
seizing regional trade opportunities (especially with Nigeria) and for promoting Benin's further
integration into global markets.

48. 
IFC and MIGA activities will also contribute to this pillar. 
IFC's Benin portfolio remains
concentrated in the financial sector with projects in leasing, insurance, and banking. IFC intends to
pursue investments in the banking sector as well as expanding financing and technical assistance to
small and medium enterprises via IFC facilities and intermediaries. As the strategic infrastructure and
cotton sectors are opened to private participation, IFC may also play a direct financing role. MIGA has
issued three guarantees totaling $8.6 million in support of a telecommunications project. MIGA was
also approached to support the West Africa Gas Pipeline and is currently considering providing risk
coverage for the creation and operation of a new commercial banking facility.

-24 -

49. 
Implementing a comprehensive rural development strategy. During the CAS period,
support to the rural sector will be provided mainly through the ongoing Cotton Sector Reform project,
and through AAA. Depending on assessment of the sector's readiness, support would also be provided
through PRSC II / Im. The focus would be on deepening the Government's strategy along four
dimensions: 9

* Developing a strategy to increase the contribution of cotton cultivation to poverty reduction in
rural areas through: (i) technical and institutional support to ease the transition towards greater
competition in the ginning and primary marketing activities; (ii) further strengthening of
producer organizations; and (iii) promotion of more effective and demand-responsive research
and extension systems.

* Conducting ESW in agricultural production diversification strategies to be done in the context
of an overall growth and competitiveness study (DPR, FY05).

* Analysis of cost-effective rural non-farm investments to generate sustained growth and poverty
reduction.

* Further work in the area of land reform. Land tenure reform and increasing access of women
to land ownership would be at the core of this analysis.

50. 
In addition to continuing to refine poverty-focused strategies in the rural sector, Bank assistance
would help the Government operationalize the following components of its strategy:

* Agricultural Services and Organizations Support Program (PASAOP) through improving the
delivery of agricultural services and operation of rural producers' organizations. Emphasis will
be placed on increasing competition in agricultural production, marketing, processing, and
support services, which are dominated by the public sector. A soil fertility window to advance
the implementation of Benin's soil fertility management action plan could complement the
PASAOP program.

* Agricultural Diversification Support Program: Building on the study on competitiveness and
diversification, 
the program will promote productive 
investments necessary to diversify
agricultural and livestock production systems, with special attention devoted to managing
natural resources and other risks that impact on smallholder livelihoods.

* The Broad-Based Rural Growth (off-farm) Development Program would aim at promoting a
more enabling environment for rural off-farm growth. The capacity of national and local
administration 
to design and implement small and medium-sized enterprise development
programs would be built.

9 The Government developed a comprehensive rural and agricultural development strategy (the Strategic
Framework for Rural Development completed in 2000). The strategy aims at lifting the major constraints
impeding the development of the Beninese agriculture to allow for: (i) an increase of the agricultural sector's
contribution to GDP; (ii) agricultural diversification to supply domestic and international markets; (iii) an
improvement of rural producers' incomes; and (iv) food and dietary nutrition security. The Government has
devised a set of fourteen action plans in concert with donors to advance its rural development strategy. Broadly,
these action plans focus on modernizing agricultural production, particularly for poor households, in a socially
equitable and environmentally sustainable manner; diversifying and expanding crop production and markets
(particularly those for export); raising the share of revenues accruing to producers; enhancing food security and
nutrition levels; and raising the profile of gender considerations in rural areas.

- 25 -

Continuing support to the forestry strategy. The main objective would be to remove the most
obvious sources of inefficiencies constraining the sub-sector's growth as well as other factors
limiting its contribution to poverty alleviation. To meet this objective, the Bank will support
policy measures and actions in the area of: (i) institutional strengthening; (ii) pricing and
taxation of forestry products; and (iii) improving the regulatory framework to accompany the
government's withdrawal from production and commercialization activities.

51. 
Public finance management. The PRSCs will be the main instrument to strengthen public
finance management, building on the PERAC. Together with on-going and planned sectoral operations,
it will support building administrative and financial capacity at national and decentralized levels. The
Second Decentralized Cities project (second phase of an APL) will provide support to secondary cities
in the area of administrative and fiscal decentralization, and the National CDD project would help build
local government capacity in public expenditure management. The Bank's AAA program (including
the PER, fiscal decentralization AAA, capacity building in budget management, and the updates of the
CPAR and CFAA) scheduled during the CAS period will be carried out with the Beninese authorities,
with the view to further building fiduciary and public expenditure management capacity.

Pillar 2 - Strengthening human development and environmental management, including
improving the access of the poor to quality basic services (basic education, primary health care,
water and sanitation, food security and nutrition, adequate habitat, and rural roads)

52. 
The Bank's support in this area targets Benin's human development challenges using three on-
going projects (Social Fund, Distance Learning, Labor Force Development) as well as the planned
PRSC, National CDD project, and HIV/AIDS operation. ESW will focus on strengthening the poverty
database and monitoring poverty, and on integrating gender considerations in the design of public
policies. The incidence analysis of public spending in the FY04 PER will explore whether differences
in service delivery improvements help explain the differing trends in urban and rural poverty, drawing
out the implications for expenditure policy. The FY06 Health Financing study will review more pro-
poor financing mechanisms for basic health services. Much of Bank support under this pillar should
make a significant contribution to addressing Benin's gender equity challenges.

53. 
Improving access to education. The Bank will support the Government in preparing its ten-
year sector-wide education development plan together with other partners. The PRSC will be the main
instrument to support the Government's program in this area and to make progress towards the MDGs,
with a specific focus on girls' education. With well-coordinated support of other donors, the program
for 2003-2005 aims at assisting the Government sharpen its sectoral vision and strategies. In addition,
PRSC I would provide focus on access to primary and secondary education and on education of
reasonably good quality. It would help expand ongoing initiatives to empower communities in school
management, based on lessons learned thus far. More specifically, the focus in 2003-2004 will be to:

* Prepare a comprehensive sectoral strategy along with a long-term development program to
inform PRSP priorities and future progress reports. The objective is not only to prepare a sound
policy and strategic development framework for the entire sector but also to improve sector
In close collaboration with other education-sector donors, the preparation of the
management. 
Program would build on the on-going UNESCO-led process to set up an EFA action plan.
Increase access and retention in primary education, particularly for girls. Support would be
provided to respond to new school demands from the population, and to improve retention rates
in targeted areas.

* 

- 26 -

* 

* 

Improve primary education teacher distribution and management. A redeployment plan would
be prepared, based on the results of an in-depth technical study, to eliminate teacher gaps
through a one/two year recruitment plan. Other teacher management issues and measures to
address them would be identified.

Increase the quality of public spending and empower communities in school management. 
In
collaboration with the Ministry of Finance, a study would be carried out to evaluate the recent
experience of transferring resources to schools (a grant was made to primary schools to cover
revenue lost due to the abolition of school fees; and funds were transferred to secondary schools
for the hiring of teachers). This study would analyze the core spending processes (provision of
textbooks and other pedagogical inputs), the implementation process of the transfers, and the
impact on schooling conditions.

* Provide technical support for the formulation of alternative policy and operational options for
primary and secondary teacher training and recruitment. A study would be carried out and
recommendations made to formulate more effective policy and operational options in these
areas, providing a basis for the development of a longer-term, sustainable program.

54. 
Improving access to health services. 
Supporting the implementation of Benin's health
strategy would also be a key focus of the PRSC, including improvement of Tuberculosis and Malaria
treatment. The 2004-2006 PRSC cycle will assist the government in addressing the major challenges
identified as priorities in the PRSP and with regard to the millennium development goals (MDGs). In
close collaboration with other donors in the sector, PRSC I will seek to: (i) strengthen Government
capacity to plan, implement, monitor and evaluate 
its overall sector strategy; (ii) support the
decentralization process initiated in the sector; and (iii) improve financial access of the poor to quality
health services. It is expected that these three sets of activities will have a mutually reinforcing effect on
the quality of health services. Quality would be expected to improve as particular attention is paid to:
(i) assessing the performance of the minimum package of services (MPS) offered at the peripheral level
and implementing activities to improve this performance; (ii) ensuring appropriate support to priority
health programs, particularly to the execution of reproductive health, malaria, tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS
programs, and the reduction in the prevalence and incidence of diseases, which can be prevented by a
sound expanded program of immunization (EPI); (iii) improving supervision mechanisms; (iv) ensuring
that personnel are properly trained to deliver the MPS; and (v) deploying personnel in priority areas.

55. 

The focus on improving the performance of the national health system will encompass:

* Assistance to MOH to elaborate and agree on: (i) an appropriate set of sector indicators and
adequate methods 
for collecting 
them; 
(ii) a realistic action plan 
for 
the effective
implementation of the National Health Development Policy; (iii) comprehensive strategies for
the availability, cost-effective management and deployment of human, material, and financial
resources; (iv) mechanisms and procedures for ensuring efficient and equitable allocation of
resources among regions and among different levels of care, financial accessibility of the poor
and indigent population to good quality health services; (v) elaboration of a health map for the
rationalization of health sector investments; and (vi) the monitoring and evaluating system in
order to monitor and assess progress made toward reaching MDG objectives set forth for 2015.

* Assisting MOH's work with other stakeholders (i.e. NGOs, private sector, and donors) to
implement a sector-wide approach. This will require the operationalization of the main
strategies identified by the Government in the health sector and their translation into the MTEF,
in line with MDG targets.

- 27 -

* Strengthening the capacity of health districts ("zones sanitaires') to (i) manage, implement and
monitor 
the priority health programs; 
(ii) endow public hospitals with autonomous
management; (iii) improve mechanisms for resource transfer from the center to the regional/
intermediary and districts/peripheral levels; and (iv) improve efficiency and accountability by
using performance based-contracts in selected districts as a basis for resource transfers.
* Supporting the adoption and implementation of more equitable mechanisms for the financing of
the sector. This will include, among other things, revision of the current cost recovery system,
better targeting of health subsidies, and better use of resources by the COGES ("comite de

gestion ').

56. 
Prevention of new HTV/AIDS 
infections. Benin has currently under implementation a
HIV/AIDs MAP project (FY02). The challenge during the CAS period will be to accelerate
disbursements based on well-targeted programs prepared by the authorities, the main stakeholders, and
civil society organizations. 
In addition to the MAP, a FY04 regional project involving five countries
(Benin, Togo, Nigeria, Ghana and C6te d'Ivoire) will specifically target the transport corridor and
border areas.

57. 
Access to safe water. The PRSC will support Benin's rural water and sanitation strategy,
PADEAR (Programme d'Assistance au Developpement du secteur de l'Eau et de l'Assainissement en
milieu rural). The fully demand-driven strategy, encourages participation of communities towards full
cost recovery for operations and maintenance, the systematic integration of sanitation and hygiene
sensitization, as well as the promotion of local private sector and NGOs for the delivery of goods and
services. Improving access to safe water has been a core government priority for several years and is
reinforced in the PRSP. Significant increases in budget allocations for the water sector took place under
the PERAC and helped ensure smooth execution of planned activities. The program for 2003-2005
builds on this positive trend and aims at improving access to water and sanitation for the poor, through
the construction of 700 new water points per year, hygiene and sanitation sensitization, and focus on
In particular, PRSC I will support private and decentralized maintenance
long-term sustainability. 
systems and water point rehabilitation in order to increase the rate of water point functioning. On the
basis of the program designed by the Directorate of Water (DH), it is expected that by 2015, 90 percent
of the rural population would have access to safe water.

58. 
As far as water resources management is concerned, the sector has started preparing an
integrated strategy under the PERAC, implementation of which will begin in 2003, including the
development of a unique water resources management database. During the three-year PRSC cycle,
support will be provided to improve sector implementation capacity 
through strengthening of
decentralized water services for planning, contracting and implementing. It is expected that by 2005, 75
percent of the contracts will be signed at the regional level. Emphasis will also be given to
implementing a sector monitoring and evaluation system and strengthening donor coordination.

59. 
Environmental management. The participation of the Ministry of Environment, Habitat and
Urbanization (MEHU) in the public expenditure reforms supported by the PERAC provided the
opportunity to consolidate its investments in environmental management and align them with the
strategic priorities of the department. The participation of MEHU in these reforms also allowed the
mainstreaming of the activities supported by the (now closed) IDA environmental management project
(EMP) into the core programs of MEHU funded by the national budget. Bank support would likely be
provided through the PRSC, and related GEF financing focusing on two major domains:

- 28 -

* 

Improving capacity building through (i) strengthening support to the national environmental
agency; (ii) establishing a sound monitoring and evaluation system; and (iii) continuing training
in environmental management for staff at the central and local levels.
* Sustaining specific sector investments through (i) strengthening environmental enforcement and
compliance, (ii) supporting the implementation of the municipal environmental actions plans;
and (iii) investing in the protection of the coast line.
The on-going GEF-financed National Parks Conservation and Management program will continue
support for sustainable management of Benin's national parks, while the Niger River Basin GEF project
under preparation will help Benin and the other eight riparian countries better manage this critical
regional asset.

Pillar 3 - Improving governance and institutional reforms, such as decentralization, public
administration reform, and the strengthening of the legal and judicial system

60. 
Bank support for public finance management would advance this objective at the central level
(see para. 51), with the National CDD and Second Decentralized Cities projects specifically targeting
local governments. The Bank's AAA program will also contribute through a proposed IDF grant to
support capacity building in public sector management (FY04), the PER (FY04), an update of the
CFAA and CPAR (FY05), an assessment of fiscal decentralization, a stock-taking on civil service
reform (FY05), and an institutional and govemance review (FY06). In addition, the Bank will support
govemment efforts to improve good govemance through the anti-corruption action plan while taking
into account the results of the on-going anti-corruption survey being conducted with WBI assistance. In
the area of individual capacity building, 
the Bank will continue 
to provide distance-learning
opportunities for both the public and private sectors in Benin through the WBI. Bank assistance will
also seek to strengthen Government accounting, reporting, and external oversight. Support to the
Chamber of Accounts for auditing budget execution as well as the regular production of an annual
budget reporting law (Lois de reglement) will be pursued, building on the achievements of the PERAC.
In addition, the computerization of the Chamber of Accounts as well as further efforts in training and
human resources policies will be enhanced.

61. 
Recognizing that strong legal and judiciary systems are indispensable for private sector-led
growth, the Government prepared with Bank support (through a PHRD Grant) a ten-year integrated
program for the development and modernization of Benin's legal and judiciary system, which was
adopted in 2001. The program, which is expected to be supported by several donors (including EU,
French Cooperation and the Bank under later stages of the PRSC), covers the following main areas: (i)
strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Justice, including the provision of technical advisory
services, the recruitment and training of staff, as well as office rehabilitation and equipment; (ii)
strengthening the Courts to make them more efficient, particularly through the adoption of new laws and
regulations applicable to the judiciary and the reorganization of the Courts' "greffes", as well as through
better trained staff and equipped structures; (iii) improving the capacity of judges; (iv)strengthening the
training system for all legal professions; (v) improving and updating the legal system; (vi) strengthening
the penitentiary system; and (vii) improving citizens information regarding their rights and obligations
under existing laws and regulations.

- 29 -

Lending and non-lending program

Lending scenarios

62. 
Base case lending scenario. 
The base case lending and grant program of about US$200
million will fully utilize Benin's current IDA allocation.'0 The first three-year PRSC cycle would be
completed in FY06, with PRSCs progressively accounting for a larger share of IDA financial transfers.

63. 
Under this scenario, IDA would also undertake programmatic and traditional investment
operations. Two such operations amounting to US$65 million are scheduled for Board presentation in
FY04. An Electricity Services project will support the privatization of SBEE, strengthen the
institutional and regulatory framework in the sector, and provide resources for much needed investment
in both urban and rural areas. Preparation of a National CDD project, the objective of which is to
follow up on three successful and highly visible operations involving communities (see para. 23), is also
being initiated. This project will build in mechanisms to ensure the transition to consolidated
programmatic support at its closing, when an appropriate fiscal decentralization framework should be in
place. The second phase of the Decentralized Cities Project is scheduled in FY05, while that of the
Electricity Services project would be presented to the Board in FY06.

64. 
High case lending scenario. Under this scenario, larger envelopes would be allocated to
PRSCs. A lending total of up to US$220 million is envisaged under the high case scenario.

Table 7. Lending Scenarios

65. 

Low case lending scenario. 

FY04

Operation 

Under this scenario Bank lending 
would be limited to poverty-focused 
interventions 
in 
health 
and 
education. In the event the low case 
scenario were to materialize, 
two 
new projects in education and health 
would be prepared 
(for a 
total 
PRSC I 
lending amount of US$85 million) 
Electricity Services 
drawing 
on 
and 
appropriately National CDD 
adapting the education and health 
components of the PRSC. 
In that 
regard the preparation of the PRSC 
will specifically focus on the intra- 
sectoral strategies and expenditure 
programs (basic education and basic 
health 
care) 
so 
that 
these 
components 
can 
easily 
be 
into 
traditional 
transformed 
investment projects. 

Sub - Total 
FY05 

PRSC II 
2nd Decentralized Cities 
Education 
Sub - Total 
FY06

PRSC II 
Electricity Services II 
Health 

Sub - Total 
Total 

' Equivalent to SDR 144 million at a SDRIUS$ exchange rate of 1.39.

Proposed lending amounts 
S$ nillions) 
J 
i
High 

Low 

Case 

Case 

Base 
Cas 

Case 

20 
30 
35 

85 

30 
30 
0 
60 

35 
20 
0 

55 
200 

20 
30 
35 

85 

40 
30 
0 
70 

45 
20 
0 

65 
220 

0
0
35 

35 

0
0
25
25

0
0
25

25
85 

o/w IDA
Grants

(US$
l

mnillions)

11.5

(FY03

carry over)

1

-30-

Lending triggers

66. 
The triggers for the base and high case lending programs cover some of the major areas of the
PRSP that the JSA highlighted as needing improvement in subsequent progress reports. They also
target areas of relative weakness in Benin's most recent policy performance (see Table 8). The Bank
would move to a low case scenario if the basic triggers for remaining in the base case were not met, in
particular if: i) progress in implementation of the PRSC was unsatisfactory; ii) priority poverty-focused
expenditures are crowded out by large poorly-evaluated infrastructure investments; iii) the cotton sector
reforms as well as privatization of SONAPRA and SBEE were stalled; and iv) the Govermnent fails to
develop on effective policy approach to gender issues.

IDA grant allocation

67. 
As explained in the FY04 IDA Grants Guidelines, Benin has become ineligible for grants
because its per capita GNI of US$380 exceeds the US$360 threshold. However, Benin will be allowed
to carry over its unutilized FY03 allocation of US$11.5 million in FY04. This carry over will be used to
partly finance the National Community Driven Development project.

Debt sustainability and IDA lending

68. 
Benin reached the Decision Point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative in July 2000. In March
2003, the IMF and World Bank Boards of Executive Directors determined that Benin had met the
conditions for the Completion Point. At that time, Benin's creditors committed themselves irrevocably
to reducing Benin's extemal debt by 31 percent in NPV terms as of end-1998, bringing the NPV of debt
down from 240 percent to 173 percent of exports as of end-2002. Taking into account additional
bilateral relief and full delivery at end-2001, the NPV of debt to export ratio would stand at 154 percent
at end-2001 and would remain below the 150 percent threshold from 2005 onward.

69. 
IDA has been the single largest creditor to Benin in recent years, accounting for some 40
percent of the country's borrowing in 1999-2001. 
In determining the size of the lending program,
therefore, debt sustainability has been an important consideration. The chart below illustrates the
impact of base (total lending of US$200 million equivalent), high (US$220 million) and low (US$85
million) case IDA lending programs during the period of this CAS on the NPV of debt-to-export ratios
over the next twenty years. All three scenarios assume that 17 percent of Benin's allocation of the
FY03 allocation (disbursed in FY04) in the form of grants, and that there is no grant allocation
thereafter. As of end-2006, the projections based on the macroeconomic framework in the Completion
Point document suggest that the debt-to-exports ratios could vary from about 131 percent under the low
case lending scenario to 140 percent under the high case lending scenario. Thus the lending program
foreseen under the CAS would not adversely affect Benin's debt sustainability, although prudent debt
management policies and economic diversification will remain critical to safeguarding it. A detailed
analysis of Benin's debt sustainability and of the impact of the IDA lending and grant program is
provided in Annex 14.

- 31 -

Table 8. CAS Base and High Case Triggers

Trigger areas 
Implementation of PRSP
Effective implementation of the 
PRSP. 

Structural reforms
Completion of structural reforms in 
the areas of privatization and 
satisfactory progress on PSD, cotton 
sector, and administrative reforms. 

To stay in the Base Case 

To shift to the High Case

* Satisfactory implementation of 
the MTEF in key sectors covered 
by the PRSC. 
4 Maintain stable macroeconomic 
framework, as evidenced for 
example by satisfactory 
performance under the PRGF 
and the PRSC. 
*: Reduce poverty incidence in 
rural areas in line with PRSP 
targets.

* Completion of the privatization 
of SONAPRA and SBEE within 
agreed timeframe. 
4 Prepare and reflect in PRSP 
Progress Report a coherent 
strategy for private sector 
development. 
* Satisfactory pursuit of the cotton 
sector reform, per agreements 
under IDA-financed project. 
* Develop, adopt, and submit to 
Parliament a comprehensive 
public administration reform 
program.

* Attainment of base case triggers
plus:
> Sustained increase in
absorptive capacity in health
and education sectors, as
demonstrated by program
budget execution rates of a
least 90 percent.
> Poverty reduction in rural
areas above PRSP targets.

* Attainment of base case triggers
plus:
> Accelerated implementation
relative to agreed framework
and scope of privatization
program, including
completing privatization of
the telecomnmunications
parastatal OPT.
Initiate implementation of
comprehensive
administrative reform
program.

> 

Gender
Development and implementation of * 
an effective policy and institutional 
framework to address gender issues. 

Increase girls' primary school 
enrollment rates in line with 
PRSP targets. 

Governance 
Continuous progress in establishing 
transparency and accountability in 
public sector management. 

*: Satisfactory implementation of 
the anti-corruption strategy. 
* Pursue implementation of CFAA 
and CPAR recommendations. 

Portfolio Performance 
Continued satisfactory 
implementation of the Bank- 
supported lending and grant portfolio. 

* No more than 20 percent of 
projects with unsatisfactory IP or 
DO ratings and disbursement 
ratio (for investment projects) at 

least 20 percent. 

* Attainment of base case trigger
plus:
> Ensure effective
implementation of Family
Code and other legislation
protecting women's rights.
* Adaptation of anti-corruption
strategy to feedback from anti-
corruption survey.
* Full implementation of CPAR
and CFAA action plans.
* Zero projects with unsatisfactory
IP and DO ratings and
disbursement ratio (for
investment projects) of at least

25 percent.

- 32 -

Impact of lending scenarios on debt sustainability
(FYV04-Y06)

165

135 --

I s 

L

1 _ 

105 _ 

_CAS Baseline sceario

o - CAS High Case scenario

+ CAS Lo. Case scnario

95

S5

2003 20)04 2005 2006 

2007 

2008 2009 2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 2014 

2015 2016 2017

Non-lending activities

70. 
The planned non-lending work program (see Table 9) is designed to (i) expand on the analytical
work already initiated in FY03 in the area of poverty analysis and on the poverty and social impact
(PSIA) of cotton sector reforms; (ii) support capacity building in order to strengthen implementation in
the key areas of financial and public expenditure management; (iii) provide support to the refinement of
selected sector strategies and expenditure programs in order to prepare these sectors for programmatic
lending and increase the poverty focus of sectoral expenditure programs; (iv) support the Government's
public sector reform strategy refinement and decentralization efforts; and (v) help Benin better address
gender concerns in public policy and expenditure programs.

Table 9. Non Lending Work Program, FY04-06

FY04 
Poverty Assessment follow -up 

Financial sector review 

FY 05 
Assessment of fiscal 
decentralization
CPAR / CFAA update 

PER / Incidence analysis of 
Stocktaking on civil service 
public spending 
reform 
IDF grant - capacity building in DPR / Growth, 
public sector resource 
competitiveness, and 
management 
agricultural diversification

FY 06
Health cost & financing

Institutional and governance
review
Integration of gender in public
policies
Infrastructure sectoral policy
notes

- 33 -

VIII. MANAGING RISKS

71. 
Implementation of Benin's PRSP and of the CAS faces six major risks, which the assistance
program should help mitigate:

* The first risk is that higher growth may not lead to a significant reduction in poverty, in line
with past trends in Benin. By supporting cotton sector reforms, a broad-based growth strategy,
and expanded affordable access to basic social services, the assistance program is especially
focused on mitigating this risk.
* Second is the economy's vulnerability to a further drop in cotton prices and/or in cotton
production. Given the importance of the cotton sector to the economy, a significant drop in
intemational cotton prices or a disruption of production would have a major adverse impact on
growth and living standards. The acceleration of the reform process in the cotton sector and the
medium term prospects for diversification should help mitigate this risk.
* Third, economic and political developments in Nigeria represent both a big opportunity and a
serious risk for development and poverty reduction in Benin. Thus far, Benin has benefited
from policy distortions in Nigeria. To benefit from positive developments in Nigeria (and
mitigate the impact of adverse ones), Benin should aim to become a more efficient trade
platform by ensuring that its customs system operates fairly and efficiently; by leading the West
African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) to adopt even more liberal and open trading
policies; and by ensuring that its infrastructure services are delivered at lowest cost (especially
port and transport operations).
* Fourth, in spite of the relative stability and maturity of the democratic system, and the ruling
party's victory in the March 2003 legislative elections, the time needed for the new ministers
and parliament to establish themselves may detract attention in the near term from timely
refinement and implementation of the PRSP and Bank support to it. Enhanced dialogue with
the new Government and upstream consultations of the parliament would contribute to timely
implementation and political sustainability of Bank assistance, and thus help to mitigate this
risk.
* Fifth is the possibility of reform slippage and other risks to the macroeconomic framework
discussed in para. 34, which could affect the Government's ability to maintain a stable
macroeconomic environment and focus expenditure on priority sectors identified in the PRSP.
Addressing the weaknesses in the macro framework, forging of a stronger domestic consensus
on reforn, and closer monitoring, would help mitigate these risks.
* The final major risk is that weak institutional capacity would undermine implementation of the
PRSP. Increased ownership by the government and the public, as proposed in the PRSP, should
provide'greater incentives for strengthening national capacity, but there is clearly a risk that
improvements in capacity will be slower than desired. 
In that regard, the PRSP institutional
framework will need to be revised and strengthened to institutionalize the participatory process
and improve government coordination and priority setting.

- 34 -

IX. 

CAS MONITORING AND EVALUATION

72. 
Under the CAS, monitoring the Bank's effectiveness will take place at two levels: (i) at the
project level, the Bank will continue to strengthen project and PRSC monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
frameworks to better evaluate the effectiveness of specific operations in achieving desired outcomes; (ii)
at the level of the overall assistance program, the Bank will monitor how successfully the CAS supports
PRSP objectives, using the Country Partnership Strategy Matrix (Annex 9), and especially the core CAS
benchmarks shown in Table 10. The CAS is fully aligned with the PRSP pillars, and these benchmarks
are in turn derived from PRSP targets. The outcomes reflect the selective areas of Bank involvement
under the CAS; they cover the key challenges that Benin must address and that the Bank is best-placed
to assist with, based on its comparative advantage and track record. And they are achievable within the
CAS timeframe. At the midpoint of the CAS period -
in mid-FY05 -
the Bank will review the
indicators and targets to assess progress in implementing the assistance program; adjust the Bank's
strategy as necessary; and improve indicators and targets where better data are available.

73. 
As discussed in the JSA, important weaknesses remain with respect to the quality of data and
monitoring and evaluation. Apart from the weaknesses in poverty data discussed in Box 1, sectoral
monitoring and evaluation capacities are weak, and an effective overall M&E institutional framework is
not yet operational. As explained in Box 3 and Annex 13, the Bank will devote significant effort to
helping Benin strengthen data availability and quality as well as M&E over the CAS period, working
closely with a number of other donors (in particular Denmark, the EU, and the UNDP). The PRSP
proposes an ambitious program to improve data collection and analysis.

Table 10. Core CAS Outcomes
(Base case scenario)

PRSP/CAS Pillars 

CAS Outcomes 

Associated CAS instrument

1. Strengthen the 
medium term macro 
economiic framework 

o 

* Expanded private sector and broad-based 
growth 
o 

Increase share of private 
investment to GDP by 1/2 
percentage point per year 
Limit inflation to less than 4 
percent annually 
* Reduction in the current 63 days to register 
a business (2003) to 45 days in 2005 
* Strengthened public expenditure 
management 
* SIGFIB (budget management 
computerized system) covers all 
expenditures
* Privatization of SBEE and SONAPRA are

completed

* Access to electricity has increased from 22

percent in 2002 to 24 percent in 2006

o Private sector
Development
project
o PRSC
o Electricity
Services project
o Cotton sector
reform program
o PER/CFAA/CPAR
o DPR / Growth,
competitiveness
and agricultural
diversification

POVERTY and SOCIAL- 

: 

2002 
Population, mid-year (mrllons) 
GNI per capita (Atlai menth USS) 
GNI (Atia Mithoi.t USS bilions) 
Average annual growth. 1996-02
Population (%) 
Labor force (%J 
Most reeent estimate (latest year avaihble. 1996402) 
Poverty (% ot,population below national poverty lIne)
Urban population (% of total populaon) 
Ufa expectancy at birth (yea's) 
infant mortality (per 1,000 lIve bIrths) 
Child malnutrtion (% of crhidren under S) 
Access to an Improved water sourme (% of population) 
itemcy (% ofpopuliaton age 15+) 
Grossprimaryenrollment (%olsfshool-agepopulation) 
Male 
Female 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1982 
1.3 
27.6 
25.8 
7.0 
0.0 
-31.0 
0.5 
55.8 
8.0 

GDP (USS btilins) 
Gross domestic lnvestmen-tGDP 
Etports ot goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savingstGDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
interest paymrents/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Tota debt servlcevexporta .
Present value of debtGDP-
Present value of debttexports 

6.8 
380 
2.5 

2.6 
2.9 

42 
53 
87 
29 
56 
61 
81 
98 
69 

1992 
22 
13.8 
23.9 
2.5 
0.0 
2.8 
0.5 
63.8 
7A 

674 
470 
317 

2.5 
2.6 

32 
47 
91 

.. 

55 
37 
78 
85 
72 

.

2001 
2.4 
19.2 
15.2 
6.5 
12.5 
4.8 
0.6 
69.8 
.14.3 

GN 
GNI 
per 
capita 

G
Grosa
primary
enrollment

Acess to improved water source

Ein 

Lowlrconws roup

Econonic ratlos'

Trde

Domestic 
ea anos

ve n

1.9 
2.3 

31
59
76

.. 

76
37
98 
103
88

2002
2.7
17.3 
14.1
6.1
9.9
-8.2 
0.7 
52.8
16.5

Annex 1
Page 1 of 2

Benin at a glance

Sub-
Saharen 
Afta 

Benin 

LOW
Inome 
.1 
2,511 
430
1,069

Developtont dlamond
ieepCSC
Ufa expectancy

(average annual gn7wth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Expots of goods and services 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP)
Agricufture 
industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
Genera govemment consumption 
imports of goods and services 

(avge 

annul growth)

Agriculture 
industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
imports of goods and services 

.. 

: .
.
1982-42 199242 

2001 

2002 

20024i6

2.3 
-0.9 
0.8 

5.1 
2.3 
2.5 

5.0 
2.3 
-2.8 

5.8 
32 
19.3 

62 2- 
3.6 
3.3

Inetens
i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ndbotedness

Eenin 

w m
LowIncomegroup

1982 

1992 

2001 

2002 

Giowd of Investment and GOP (%)

32.5 
15.1 
9.1 
52.4 
82.5 
10.5 
46.5 

36.0 
13.3 
8.3 
50.7 
86.2 
11.3 
35.2 

35.5 
14.4 
9.2 
50.0 
81.9 
11.6 
27.9 

4

2

35.8...
14.4 e
9.1 
49.8 
80.8 
13.1 
25.3

at 

so 
fS 
oo 
or 
GDI _GDP

02

1982-92 199242 

2001 

2002 

Growt of expert and imprts (9%)

5.8 
1.7 
4.1 
0.3 
2.6 
-0.1 
-2.1 
-1.4 

5.8 
4.5 
5.6 
2.7 
4.4 
3.7 
6.5 
3.6 

3.1 
9.1 
9.0 
5.4 
6.4 
3.0 
7.5 
5.0 

6.7
6.2 
5.6 
4.8 
5.6 o 
3.1 
8.0 
4.4

15

1I.
5r

Li 

-5 -

' 

De 

-

4ot 

0'

1

lmports

o 
_ 

Note: 2002 data are preliminary estimates. Group data are through 2001.
* The diamonds show four key indicators In the country (ln bold) compared with Its Income-group average. data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

II. Strengthen human 
resource development 
and environmental 
Management 

III. Strengthen 
Governance and 
Institutional Capacities 

-35 -

Progress towards MDGs with specific 
improvement in: 
* Girls' participation in Grade-I has increased 
from 42.7 percent in 2001 to 46 percent in
2006 
* Completion rate in CM2 has increased from 
45 percent in 2001 to 59 percent in 2006 
* Utilization rate of health services has 
increased from 34 percent in 2002 to 38 
percent in 2006 
* Measles and DTCP immunization coverage 
rate remain above 80 percent
* HIV/AIDS remains below 6 percent
Population with access to safe water has
* 
increased from 66 percent in 2001 to 74
percent in 2006
* Number of cities meeting specific criteria 
(decrease in municipal administrative 
budgets, increase in tax revenues, 
streamlined structure) has increased to at 
least 6 in 2005, from 3 in 2003 
* Effective M & E framework for the PRSP is 
operational, and credible data on poverty 
trends produced on regular basis 

o PRSC
o MAP - HIV/AIDS
project

o Mational CDD
project
o Poverty
Assessment update
o Health cost and
financing study
o PER

o PRSC
o 
2nd Decentralized
City Management
project
o Poverty
Assessment and
follow up
o Civil service
reform stock
taking - AAA

X. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS

74. 
Having completed its first PRSP and reached the HIPC Completion Point, Benin now has an
unparalled opportunity to begin translating its impressive track record of reform and sustained growth
into improvements in the lives of its poorest citizens. Through implementation of this CAS, the Bank
will provide a focused program of lending and AAA services as its contribution to helping Benin meet

this challenge. The CAS will do this in strong partnership with other donors and through greater use of
Benin's own institutions, so as to better enhance its currently limited capacity to lead development

efforts.

James D. Wolfensohn

President

By Shengman Zhang

Washington, D.C.
July 16, 2003

Annex 1
Page 2 of 2

Benin

PRICES arnd GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1982 

1992 

2001 

2002 

Inflsion

Domestlc frices
(% chsnge) 

_

Consumerprices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

.. 

6.9 
3.4 

4.0 
3.1 

2.3 
1.9 

8
4

16.1 

Government flnance 
(% of GDP, indLudes current grants) 

2
o

Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deflctt 

.. 
.. 
.. 

11.9 

162 
3.6 
-4.2 

17.0 
3.1 
-3.7

97 
-

sa 
9 00 
GDPdeflator 
-*e-CPI

o 

0

-4.6 
-8.9 

TRADE

(USS millions) 

1982 

1992 
132 
104 
16 

2001 
210 
159 
.-

2002 
432 
152 

Expot and Import levels (US$ mill.)
GoM
SDD

Totalexports (fob) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

Ginned cotton 

Crude oil 
Manufactures
Total Imports (cli) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 
Export prIce Index (1995-100) 
Import price Index (1995-100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

384 
117 
40 
215 

467 
143 

487 
149 
60 
273 

. _d 
200_
IOD
o

d

.. 
.. 
.

55 

262 

,. 

38 
47 
79 

101 
116 
87 

81 
111 
73

go 

ra 
go 
* Exports 

99 

oD Cl 
*lnports

02

.. 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millons) 

1982 
214 
700 

1992 
299 
383 

2001 
362 
665 

2002 
379
701

Current account balance to GOP (%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 

Resource balance 

486 

-84 

-303 

*322

Net inoome 

-6 

-60 

-21 

*25

Net current transfers 

100 

206 

163 

127 

Ia 

*--

Current account balance 
FinanIdng Items (net) 
Changes In net reserves 

-393 

62 
92 
-92 

-162 
181 
-19 

-221 
247 
-26 

7

n

N/A 

-9

Utemo:

Reserves IncludIhg gold (US$ mililons) 
Conversion rate (DEC, bocalVS$) 

.. 

255 
264.7 

277 
728.8 

280
697.8

328.6 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1982 

1992 

2001 

2002

(USS mnilions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

ComposItion of 2001 debt (US$ mill.)

708 
0 
73 

1,373 
0 
389 

1,367.5 
0 
604.8 

1.418.7
0
654.0 

F 3 G: ss

Total debt servIce 
IBRD 
IDA 
Compositon of net resource flows
OffIdal grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Forelgndirectinvestment 
Poritfolio equlty 
World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

25 
0 
I 

28 
0 
5 

65 
0 
15 

38.6
0 
7.3 

8a:s

E 512

26 
79 
177 
0 
0 

166 
65 
0 
78 
0 

138 
76 
0 
131 
0 

122
66.1
0
N/A 
0 

c C:77

D: 390

23 
11 
0 
11 
1 
10 

40 
33 
2 
31 
3 
29 

10 
48 
10 
38 
5 
33 

51 
22.8 
9.4 
13.3
4.6
8.7

A- lsRD 
8 - IDA 
C -IMF 

E -8iaterW
D -Other mrultilateraj F - Prvate
G -Shorl4rsn

Development Economics 
* 2001 and 2002 debt data Include HIPC Interim debt relief.

5/29/03

Social Indicators

Latest single year 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1994-00 

3.0 
2.4 
21.9 
7.0 

.. 
.. 
.. 

220 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

46 
44 
48 

125 
260 

4.0 
3.0 
30.8 
6.9 

.. 
..
..

280 

.. 
.. 

..
..

.. 
.. 
..

53 
71 
36 

.. 
.. 
.. 

23 

17 

.. 

50 
48 
52 

114 
212 

6.3 
2.7 
42.3 
5.5 

33.0

370 

120 
110

1.8 
2.6 

64
80
48

63 
74 

55 

79 
79 
29

53 
51 
55 

87 
143 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for pefiod) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (birlhs per woman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNI per capita (USS) 

Consumner prce index (1995100) 
Food prce index (1995=100) 

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index

Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of inconme or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Access to an Improved water source

Total 
Male 
Female 

(% of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Ufe expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under5 (per 1,000 lve births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

373 
322 
880
34 
60
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.
2002 Worid Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

504 
459 

.. 

.. 

488 
397 

.. 

478 
384 

Annex 2
Page I

Same region/Ancome group
Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

Low-
Income

658.9 
2.6 
34.4 
5.2 

2,459.8
2.0
31.9
3.6

470 

133 

410

140

2.4 

3.6 

1.2
3.4

55 
82 
41 

53 
46 

47 
46 
47 

91 
162 

76
88
70

57
57

59
58
60

76
115

294
261

Annex 3
Page 1

CAS Annex B2 - Benin
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number 8' c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number 8' d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) @ 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousand) 
Average Supervision (US$ thousand/project) 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

14 
3.3 
7.1 
1.8 
7.1 
1.8 
23.0 

yes 
895 
67 

12 
3.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
26.7 

yes 
875 
74 

9 
2.7 
0.0 
0.0 
11.1 
3.2 
36.7 

no 
885 
98 

8
3.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
22.1

no
889
98

Memorandum Rem 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
40 
11
586.5 
152.7
17.5 
36.4
11.6 
29.3

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex 4
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary - Benin

Proposed IBRDIDA Base-Case Lending Program a

F7sca I year 

Pmaj ID 
Flscal year ProJ ID 

US(M) 
USS(M) 

Strategic Rewa rds b 

~~~~~~(H/M/) Risks (H4%I)

Inplementation b

2004 

2005 

EJecIcity Servcs Delivery Project 
Natioala CDD Project 
PRSC I 

Total 

PRSC 11 
Second Decentralized CWes Mgt 
Tetel 

2006 

PRSC III 

Eecbicity Services 11 
TotaL 

Grnd Toal 

30.0 

35.0 

20.0 

85.0

30.0 
30.0 
60.0

35.0 

20.0 
55.0

200.0

M 

H 
H 

H 
M 

H 
M 

M
L
M

M
L

M
M

Annex 4
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B3 (LFC & MIGA) for Benin

Benin - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2000-2003

2000 2001 2002 2003

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

FINANCE & INSURANCE 

Total 

Investnent instrument(%)

Loans
Equity 
Quasi-Equity
Other 

Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

1.76

100

100 

20

80

80 

83.14

0 

0 

0

0 0 

0

Annex 5
Page 1

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Benin

Product 

Recent completions

CFM 
Social and structural policy review 
Reforming the centralised state for
better service delivery: stakes and 
challenges in Benin
Decentralization stocktaking note 

Underway

PSIA (Cotton) 
Poverty assessment 

Planned

PER / Incid. analysis of publ.spending 
Financial sector review 
Poverty assessment follow-up 

Assessment of fiscal decentralization 
CPAR / CFM update 
DPR / Growth, competitiveness, and
agricultural diversification 
Stocktaking on civil service reform 

Institutional and govemance review 
Intregration of gender in public policies 
Infrastructure sectoral policy notes 
Health cost & financing 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objectiveb

FY01 
FY01 

FY02 

FY02 

FY03 
FY03 

FY04 
FY04 
FY04 

FY05 
FY05 

FY05 
FY05 

FY06 
FY06 
FY06 
FY06 

80 
100 

150 

50 

80 
120 

130 
80 
55 

50 
80 

90 
75 

90 
100 
100 
140 

G,D,B 
G,D,B,P 

KG,PS
KG,PD,PS

G,D,B 

KG,PS

G,B 

KG

G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 

KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS

G,D,B, P 
G,B,D 
G,D,B,P 

G,D,B 
G,D,B,P 

G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 

G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 

KG,PD, PS
KG,PS
KG,PD,PS

KG,PS
KG,PD,PS

KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS

KG,PD
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD
KG,PD, PS

a. Govemment (G), donor (D), Bank (B), public disseminaton (P).
b. Knowledge generaton (KG), public debate (PD), problem-solving (PS).

Annex 6
Page I of 2

Benin - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator 

1965 

1970 

1975 

1980 

1990 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

Ntatonal accounts
(as % CDP at current
market prices)

Gross domestic product 
Agriculture' 
lndustas 
Services' 

100.0 
44.6 
8.0 
47.4 

100.0 
36.3 
11.7 
52.0 

100.0 
30.5 
16.2 
53.3 

100.0 
35.4 
12.3 
52.3 

100.0 
36.1 
13.2 
50.7 

100.0 
34.0 
14.6 
51.4 

100.0 
36.9 
14.3 
48.8 

100.0 
37.5 
14.5 
48.1 

100.0 
38.2 
13.5 
48.3 

100.0 
37.8 
13.7 
48.5 

100.0 
36.5 
13.9 
49.6 

100.0 
35.5 
14.4 
50.0 

100.0 
35.8 
14.4 
49.8 

100.0 
35.5 
14.3 
50.1 

100.0 
35.6 
14.2 
50.2 

100.0
35.6
14.2
50.2

Total Consumprion 
Gross domestic fxed 
investrnent
Govemment investment 
Privateinvestmnent 
(includes increase in
stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

97.9 
.. 

94.7 
.. 

98.3 
.. 

105.1 
.. 

95.7 
13.4 

91.5 
17.2 

92.4 
17.5 

94.4 
18.4 

93.4 
17.0 

95.2 
17.5 

94.0 
18.9 

93.5 
19.2 

93.9 
17.3 

91.5 
18.9 

90.4 
19.2 

90.0
19.1

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

... 
.. 

5.4 
8.9 

7-8 
11.8 

6.3 
11.2 

6.8 
11.6 

5.8 
11.2 

6.3 
11.2 

7.6 
11.3 

7.8 
11.4 

6.7 
10.6 

8.4 
10.5 

8.7 
10.5 

8.6
10.5

10.6 
17.3 

22.1 
28.4 

21.1 
38.7 

23.0 
43.3 

21.8 
30.5 

27.1 
36.6 

25.2 
34.2 

16.1 
28.9 

17.1 
27.5 

16.1 
28.8 

15.2 
28.1 

15.2 
27.9 

14.1 
26.1 

14.6 
25.6 

14.9 
25.0 

15.0
24.6

Gross domestic savings 
Grossnationalsavings' 

2.1 

5.3 
5.3 

1.7 
3.9 

-5.1 
2.5 

4.3 
14.2 

8.5 
15.2 

7.6 
14.9 

5.6 
12.4 

6.6 
11.9 

4.8 
9.9 

6.0 
10.9 

6.5 
12.5 

6.1 
9.9 

8.5 
12.4 

9.6 
13.1 

10.0
13.3

.. 

Mlemorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(USS million at current
prices)
Gross national product per 
capita (USS, Atlas method)

288 

332 

677 

1405 

1845 

2009 

2223 

2157 

2334 

2390 

2278 

2385 

2686 

3092 

3373 

3719

130.0 

130.0 

220.0 

410.0 

360.0 

350.0 

360.0 

380.0 

380.0 

380.0 

410.0 

430.0 

460.0

Real annual growth rates
(%. calculated from 1985
prices)
Gross domestic product at 
market prices
Gross Domestic Income 

.. -4.9% 

6.8% 

3.2% 

4.6% 

6.0/. 

5.7% 

4.6% 

4.7% 

5.8% 

5.0% 

5.8% 

5.6% 

6.5% 

6.5%

.. -6.5% 

4.7% 

8.9% 

10.7% 

3.3% 

0.6% 

8.2% 

0.8% 

4.9% 

7.0%. 

2.7% 

10.3% 

6.5% 

6.5%

Real annual per capita
growth rates (%/., calculated
from 1985 prices)
Gross domestic productas 
market prices
Total consumption 
Private consumption 

.. -7.2% 

3.9% 

0.0%. 

1.8% 

3.2% 

2.9% 

1.8% 

2.01% 

3.0% 

2.3% 

3.1% 

2.9% 

3.9% 

3.9%

.. 4.4% 
.. -4.0% 

4.4% 
3.0/. 

5.8% 
6.7% 

10.8% 
12.2% 

1.0/ 
1.2% 

2.7% 
2.8% 

3.7% 
3.7% 

-0.8% 
-0.9% 

2.7% 
2.9%/. 

3.7% 
4.1% 

0.4% 

6.2% 
6.9% 

2.8% 
3.0% 

3.0N
3.3%

.0.5% 

Balance of Payments
(USSm)

Exports (GNFS)' 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resouce balance 
Netcurrentransfers 
(including official current
transfers)
Current account balance 
(aftr official capital grants)

29.8 
18.3 
47.7 
36.5 
-17.9 
.. 

69.9 
58.0 
90.5 
66.0 
-20.6 
0.0 

144.2 
116.1 
263.5 
205.6 
-119.3 
14.9 

306.2 
222.4 
608.0 
499.2 
-301.8 
107.4 

249.3 
117.7 
297.5 
297.5 
-48.2 
182.2 

390.7 
235.0 
614.5 
439.0 
-223.8 
136.1 

423.8 
262.5 
633.6 
444.4 
-209.8 
163.0 

346.8 
191.2 
622.8 
425.7 
-276.0 
146.8 

399.0 
239.3 
641.8 
450.5 
-242.9 
123.0 

386.0 
222.8 
689.2 
473.7 
-303.2 
138.1 

345.7 
188.5 
640.3 
446.5 
-294.6 
124.3 

362.3 
210.3 
665.4 
466.6 
-303.2 
162.5 

3793 
210.5 
701.1 
487.1 
-321.8 
126.6 

452.9 
259.5 
790.2 
549.5 
-3373 
146.8 

503.2 
297.0 
844.0 
588.5 
-340.8 
144.3 

557.4
335.2
916.0
640.4
-358.6
151.0

-1.2 

-3.0 

-53.4 

-133.9 

18.6 

.61.5 

-36.9 

.74.9 

-74.1 

-114.2 

-136.9 

-118.5 

-191.9 

-134.8 

-127.3 

-129.1

Net private foreign direct 
investment
Official long-tcrm loans (net) 
Change in reserves' 

0.4 

6.7 

1.9 

4.3 

1.8 

4.0 

-63 

18.8 

18.1 

77.2 

75.5 

48.2 

43.6 

74.2 

60.7 

67.0

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 
55.1 
.. -110.2 

61.3 
18.0 

74.8 
-58.1 

17.5 
-14.4 

24.3 
-9.1 

31.1 
-180.7 

41.8 
-81.8 

U4.1 
-150.5 

72.3 
22.5 

59.6 
.36.0 

62.4 
-30.5 

63.8
-33.9

.. 

.. 

Annex 6
Page 2 of 2

Benin - Key Economic Indicators

Indfcator 

1965 

1970 

1975 

1980 

1990 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of 
GDP at current market
prices)
Real annual growth rates
(NE.CON.GOVT.CN prices)
Merchandise exports 
(FOB)
Merchandise imports 
(CIF)

..

.. 13.3% 

0.7% 

10.8% 

3.6% 

-6.1% 

17.4% 

2.2% 

-1.0% 

12.1% 

8.1% 

-2.8% 

19.0Y. 

-9.6% 

10.0% 

8.7/.

.. 

8.2% 

6.1-; 

18.0% 

32.3% 

36.5% 

4.1% 

3.7% 

6.8% 

1.7% 

7.4% 

5.0'/ 

4.4% 

6.0%/. 

6.5% 

6.5%

PubUc flnance
(as % of GDP at current
market prices)
Current revenues 
CurTentexpenditures 
Currentaccountsurplus(+) 
or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.

.. 

5.7% 
14.8% 
.. 14.6% 14.0Y% 
.. -8.9% 
0.8% 

15.1% 14.5% 
13.0% 
11.9% 
2.1% 
2.6% 

15.3% 
10.4% 
4.9% 

16.0% 
10.9% 
5.1% 

16.6% 
12.4% 
4.2% 

16.2% 
17.0Y% 17.1% 
12.5% 13.9% 
13.2% 
3.7% 
3.1% 
3.9% 

17.0% 
12.5% 
4.5% 

17.0%v
12.3%
4.7%

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

5.4% 
.. 9.3% 

8.1% 
8.3% 

6.4% 
7.6% 

6.8% 
2.2% 

5.9% 
2.3% 

6.6% 
2.7% 

7.6% 
3.1% 

7.8% 
3.2% 

6.8% 
3.5% 

8.4% 
2.4% 

8.7% 
2.6% 

8.6%
2.5%

Monetary Indicators
M2/GDP (ut current market 
prices)
Growth ofM2(%) 
Private sector credit growth / 
total credit growth (/%)

0.9% 

1.1% 

2.2% 

2.0% 

1.8% 

2.5% 

2.5% 

2.6% 

2.3% 

2.9% 

3.3% 

3.4% 

3.3% 

3.3%

*- 

17.2 

73.1 

49.1 
93.9 

62.0 

16.3 

11.3 

17.1 

-2.7 
1009.0 

35.0 
752.8 

21.2 
96.8 

12.7 
1.0 

4.7 
67.9

7.9

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

122.0 

Price Indcets( YR85 -100)
Merchandise exportprice 
index
Merchandise import price 
index
Merchandisetermnsofterde 
index
Real exchange rte 
(USS/LCU)r
Consumer price index 
(% growth rate)
GDP deflator 
(% growth rte)

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 132.8 

273.2 

252.9 

257.5 

273.9 

212.4 

231.6 

274.8 

220.7 

282.9 

294.0 

302.3

.. 

.. 

.. 

.

107.6 

222.5 

225.9 

233.8 

234.8 

234.1 

251.3 

258.4 

247.1 

247.1 

248.5 

251.3

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 123.4 

122.8 

112.0 

110.1 

116.6 

90.7 

92.2 

106.3 

89.3 

114.5 

1183 

120.3

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

97.5 

77.5 

79.5 

78.0 

83.9 

81.0 

84.6 

86.3 

..

.. 

.. 

.. 

1.1% 14.5% 

4.9% 

3.8% 

5.8% 

0.3% 

4.2% 

4.0% 

2.3% 

2.4% 

2.5% 

2.5%

.. 

.. 14.2'; 

10.2% 

1.6% 

15.4% 

7.0% 

4.7% 

4.6% 

1.9N. 

3.3% 

3.1% 

1.9% 

2.5% 

2.4% 

2.5%

a. 'GNFS denotes 'goods and nonfactor services.'
b. Includes nel unrequited tansfess excluding official capital gants.
c. Includes use of iMF resources.
d. Consolidated cental govemment.
e. *LCU- denotes 'local currency units.' An increase in USS/LCU denotes apprecation.

Annex 7
Page 1

Benin-Key Exposure Indicators

Totaldebt oustanding and 
disbursed (TOO) (USSm)'

1556.1 

1589.1 

1620.3 

1652.4 

1698.7 

1800.1 

1888.5 

1940.7 

1994.0 

2050.3

Net disbursements (USSm)' 

92.8 

45.1 

11.8 

58.4 

36.0 

200.8 

90.9 

56.2 

55.8 

59.1

Total debt service (TDS) 
(USSrn)

46.0 

55.0 

61.0 

70.0 

70.0 

53.3 

59.4 

63.8 

62.6 

62.9

Debt and debt service indicators

(5b)

TDO/XGS(afterdebtrelief)b 
TDO/GDP (after debt relief) 
TDS/XGS(beforedebtrelief) 
Concessional/TDO 

327.8 
71.1 
20.2 
81.2 

315.0 
63.8 
20.4 
77.7 

228.1 
53.7 
14.8 
80.8 

231.7 
55.0 
17.1 
80.6 

239.4 
58.3 
18.1 
83.9 

221.6 
58.5 
15.7 
84.5 

205.2 
50.4 
16.5 
85.8 

141.0 
38.7 
15.4 
87.0 

124.1 
37.5 
12.4 
87.9 

108.4
35.9
11.3
88.6

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%f
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (USSm)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m) 
Share of IBRD portfolio () 
IDA TDO (USSm)d 

0,0 
61.0 

0.0 
62.0 

0.0 
56.0 

0.0 
54.0 

0.0 
45.0 

0.0 
62.0 

0.0 
79.2 

0.0 
77.5 

0.0 
73.9 

0.0
69.8

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0
0.0

0.0 
0.0 
520.0 

0.0 
0.0 
510.0 

0.0 
0.0 
543.0 

0.0 
0.0 
574.0 

0.0 
0.0 
578.0 

0.0 
0.0 
598.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0
0.0

..

IEC (USSm)

LoaDs 

.. 

.. 

.. 

* .. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.

..

Equity and quasi-equity /c 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed. use of IMF credits and set short-
term capital, prior to HIPC debt relief.
b. "XGS denotes exports of goods and services, including worker' rerittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional nmullateral development banks, the IMW, and the
Bank fir International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Itncludes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments,

Annex 8
Page I of 2

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Benin

Benin
Statement of EFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1991/93/95 AEF BOAB 
1995 AEFUnionBenin 
1999 AEF Vision + 
1994 Equipbail-Benin 
2000 FINADEV 

Loan 

0 
0 
0.01 
0 
0 

Equity Quasi Panic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.02 
0 
0 
0 
0.02 
0 
0
0.08 
0 
0 
0 
0.08 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 0.01 
0 
0 
0
0.1 
0 
0 
0 
0.1 
0 
0
0.34 
0 
0 
0 
0.34 
0 
0

Total Portfolio: 

0.01 

0.54 

0 

0 0.01 

0.54 

0 

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

2000 FINADEV 

Loan 
1411.91 

Equity Quasi Panic
0 
0 
0

Tota Pending Comnitment: 

1411.91 

0 

0 

0

Annex 8
Page 2 of 2

CA Anrx E4 * Benrn

Op.mtbm Pwoto0 (IBRDIIDA end Cante)

LNt PSR. 

IhhbAmn RAW 

wlAmun=rtL 

O 
pE 

h B_nW
d end Achd

Dbsbunnb ib

Cowsd Psojct 

46

16RDIIDA '
TotM D 
l o(Dd) 
0101t10D_.etecwd 
TOWI dW.Md (Ad).) 
Id Wih h- bl 
.
01 0llh41Ioe bo op)d 
Toto Dhos.d (AdIt. Cooo. 
W- h.h h b0 
pdd 

Tot ldWW_d (A.) 
T.W Ukb..d 
(Ctd) 
tot WLdb-d (Ac)., CO-a 

5B 81
0.00
829.2
B.9
5.91
680010

t5.91

8.07
0.08
81.14

Aedw4 PmWab 

Prolurt ID 

Poject Ne. 

D _4 

l 

, 

n 

Flol Y_r 

IDA Udlfb. 

Odg. Fnn R*Wd

P035645 
P035648 
P067329 
P070204 
P0375dO 
P039882 
P072503 
P073116 

SOCIAL FUND 
1ST DECEN.CITY MGMT. 
EJ D0st1nm Lanting Prcn 
LABOR FORCE DEVELOPI 
NAT PARKS CONS.& MGT 
PRIVATE SECTOR 
Cotton Sector Rotorm Proe 
HIV/AIDS MULTI SECTOR 

S 
HS 
BS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
KS 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

1998 
1999 
2000 
2000 
2000 
2000 
2002 
2002 

Total 

16.7 0.612216 
25.5 8.665076 
1.83 0.516885 
5 
4.08089 
4.014433 
30.4 15.00173 
18 18.20576 
23 23.82054 

-1.8 -4.516216
92
13.3 0.19318
2.6
.2.7
-14.3 5.434413
3
2.5

127.23 74.917t5 

11.8 1.111378

Partnership Strategy Matrix

Diagnosis 

Need to consolidate 
macroeconomic 
stability and promote 
higher growth 

Strategy, Actions 

PRSP Performance 
Indicators/Benchmarks 
Improve allocation of 
Reduction of monetary 
public resources 
poverty in 2005 from 
- Public expenditure 
2002 
management reform 
- Incidence of urban 
- Improved fiscal policy poverty at 19.1 percent
and revenue collection 
from 23.3 percent
- Incidence of rural
poverty at 27.1 percent
from 33 percent

Achieve PRSP 
macroeconomic targets 
- 6.5 percent annual GDP 
growth
- 3 percent annual
inflation
- fiscal balance from -5.2
percent to -4.5 percent of
GDP
- Investment rate from 
10.9 to 20.7 percent of 
GDP 

SONAPRA privatized

80 percent of farmers are
satisfied

Increased revenue from
forest and livestock
resource management

Increased crop yields
Increased farms revenue

Consolidate sources of 
growth 

Complete reform of the 
cotton sector 

Increase support to 
farmers associations 
Encourage agriculture 
diversification and 
promote marketing of 
agriculture products 

Implement 
comprehensive policies 
in livestock, fishery, 
and forest

Improve agriculture 
productivity and land 
tenure
Increase private sector 
investment in agro 
industry, tourism, new 
technologies of
Information and transit
activities

Strengthen basic 
infrastructure to 
reduce factor costs 

___(water, electricity,

Annex 9
Page I of 3

Partners' Programs

Bank Group 
instruments
PRSC 
IMF, Denmark,
AAA. Poverty update 
Netherlands, AfDB,
National CDD project UNDP, EU,UNFPA,
UNICEF, OMS

PRSC
Economic monitoring
CPAR update

Cotton sector reform 
project 

AFD, Switzerland,
IMF, Netherlands,
Denmark, EU, AfDB,
FAO, BOAD

AAA. Growth and
competitiveness and
agriculture
diversification
PRSC-2

PSD project
AAA. Financial sector
review

PSD project
Electricity services
project

telecommunication, and
transports)
Despite considerable 
Education
improvements in social 
Improve access and 
indicators, important 
quality of education 
efforts need to be made with focus on primary 
to reduce gender 
education, girls
inequality and improve 
education. 
access to and quality of 
social services. 

Annex 9
Page 2 of 3

Improve sector 
PRSC 
performance from 2001 to National CDD project 
2005 
Social Fund project 

France, USA,
UNICEF, UTNFPA,
WFP, EU, Denmark

- Primary school
enrollment ratio: 81
percent to 93.6 percent

- Girls primary school

enrollment from 42.7
percent to 46 percent

- Adult literacy rate from

83.5 percent to 88.1
percent

- Primary school

completion rate from 45
percent to 57 percent

- Drop out rates from 29

percent to 25.2 percent.

Health
Improve equitable access 
to health services 
through: 

Improve overall 
population form 2001- 
2005 

PRSC 
UNICEF, UNFPA,
National CDD project WHO, USA, UNDP,
Social Fund project 
France, Switzerland

- Increasing health service - Use of health service

coverage 

- Prevent and cure 

malaria, tuberculosis and 
HIV/AIDS 

- Promoting family health 

care 

care from 34 percent to 37

percent

- Prevalence of HIV/AIDS
from4.1 percent to 2.8
percent

- Infant mortality rate (0-5

per 1000 births) from 89
to 65

- Death rate from malaria

per 10,000 from 7.6 to
6.2

- Prenatal consultation

rate from 82 to 85
percent use of modem

- Use of modem

contraceptive methods
from 8.9 to 11 percent.

Water and Sanitation
Improve access to 
quality safe water and 
sanitation services 
through:

- Securing access and 
improving management 
to drinkable water 
- Improving price 
policy with particular
attention to the poor

- Decentralizing water 

I

Share of population with 
PRSC 
Denmark, EU,
access to safe water from National CDD project GTZ,France
66.4 to 74.4 percent 
Social Fund project

- Rate of servicing rural

population's safe water
requirements from 49
percent in 2003 to 64.7
percent in 2005

Poor institutional and 
human capacities to 
achieve PRSP 
objectives. Political and 
institutional 
govemance, including 
the rule of law need to
be strengthened in 
order to consolidate 
democracy and 
political and legal 
institutions 

management in rural
areas

- Increasing community

participation to
investment cost and
management of water

wells.

Implement the action
plan to reform the 
judicial system 

Acceleration of 
administrative reform 

Implement the 
decentralization process
through transferring to 
the communes the 
prerogatives, spheres of 
competence and
activities devolved to
them under the
legislative and
regulatory texts of
decentralization
Promote Community
Development
Operationalize the 
National Community 
Development Program 
Social protection and
gender promotion
Implement the 
multisectoral action plan 
for the promotion of 
Women

Measures to improve 
access to credit for
women

Measures in support of 
re-education of
practitioners of female
genital mutilation

Development of micro 
finance 
Improve legal and 
regulatory framework of
the micro credit
institutions

Annex 9
Page 3 of 3

France, Canada
UNDP, EU,
Switzerland

Stocktaking on civil
service reform AAA

PRSC

Ist and 2nd
Decentralized Cities
projects

Implementation of 
development plan in 100 
pilot communes 

National CDD project 

Switzerland,
Netherlands, UNFPA,
Denmark

National CDD project UNFPA, USAID,
UNDP, Switzerland,,
France, Denmark

National CDD project

National CDD project

PSD project
Financial sector
review

Annex 10
Page I

CAS Annex BIO - Benin
CAS Summary of Development Priorites

Nletr*ama 

County 
nancei 

p 

Majo issueb 

Country 
noilty0

Bank 
Reconciliation
p,0rty0 Of Couraly and
an,k pawsm 

Povrty duoo A Ectnoimno Mwnginud
Povrty 
tib 
Eonoond poky 
Pihec 
t3br 

tood 

poor 

-

gOoor 
poor 

PPsP htWlwfllon 
High 
Otmo&ee me 
amllty Ht 0 
Itrbmpent -
nsbn 
Ht0 
Low stabs of 
n 
modeat 

High
High
High
High 

Hunan Dew 
Eiabn 

tu Deetm

Heh, 

otittbn & popqation 

Sooh ptction 

HIV/ ADS 

fodr 

fta 

poo 

Crrahnua o 
ely and High 
roaeeJlCtInbtwe 

en

Htgh

Owhenr on quality and 
reeoe allcation betn

High 

High

Abnc of ooot potcotion ndte 
atrategY 

High

goold 

Ihn_ 
MAP

fttlon of HIVIAIDS High 

Hgh

Envtrmety & Soetay Suaenaebe Deveopount
Raxt deonert 
ta 

Dhvdatton, eoport iN 

og 

tigh

Polly dioge
waer PPSP

Potlicy d 
tog via
PpSP ord PRSC

Enronswt 
Sodol dwme4nnt 

Flr_no, Pdvet Sieb Ar & inikanutbe
FPSe er 
Pityat SecbDr 

Eney & rnhhg 

trora o 

good 
tbr 

grwod 
poor 

fair 

Stab 

Urban poibdion 
hNg 
onouidfty, panrabon nd o high 

modrate 
hih

Ohe dortom h the h d

Poor reotoy &W. 
high 
Poorw 
fr PSD. high 
Need to conscoidato egal Sand
regdainry nbf
Pvalzation ot SBEE and 
tRa pnroon of enray
Nad marnnianeo 

high 

hig 

hih
high

high

morato 

Oher dor hi the d

a. ' 'ocelent. 
good. -k,' or 
.
ror'
b. 
Indla prlOa omatry4poite pnloem (e.g., fbr pOery reduton, taw povorly:' So erducatiDn, 'enate eaoordary oonploSibn:' bor awonmret 
c. To bulicate pDrfrty. use low,- 
o 
,'c r 
igh.'
d.Gee ioar 
n, 0 prbre do not age;eorax eo,n. 

srter may hat thoe td on the leao, or the wmay boongon dlo.

iwban ai poshntb).

Annex 11
Page 1 of 4

Press Release No. 03/41 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
March 24, 2003

International Monetary Fund

Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Completes Benin's Fourth Review Under the PRGF

The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today completed the fourth
review of Benin's performance under the three-year SDR 27 million (about US$37 million)
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement (see Press Release No. 00/43). This
decision will entitle Benin to the release of SDR 4.04 million (about US$5.5 million), which will
bring total disbursements under the program to SDR 22.96 million (about US$31 million).

The PRGF is the IMFs concessional facility for low-income countries. PRGF-supported
programs will in time be based on country-owned poverty reduction strategies adopted in a
participatory process involving civil society and development partners, and articulated in a
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). PRGF loans carry an annual interest rate of 0.5
percent, and are repayable over 10 years with a 5 l/2-year grace period on principal payments.

After the Executive Board's discussion of Benin, Anne Krueger, First Deputy Managing Director
and Acting Chair, made the following statement:

"The Beninese authorities have continued to make good progress in implementing their Fund-
supported economic program in 2002. All the program's quantitative performnance criteria for
end-September were met, and the four structural benchmarks were observed by end-December
2002. Economic growth remained robust; inflation continued to be moderate; although the
external current account deficit widened, as a result of a sharp drop in the world cotton price.
Progress was also made in the implementation of structural reforms in 2002. The civil service
reform, however, continued to stall, and spending on health and education remained below target.

"Looking ahead, the authorities intend to continue 
to vigorously implement the ambitious
economic framework underpinning the poverty reduction strategy that was adopted in December
2002. They are committed to pursuing prudent macroeconomic policies and implementing the
structural reform agenda. The primary fiscal objective for 2003 is to pursue fiscal consolidation
while increasing social spending, by broadening the tax base and limiting nonpriority outlays.

"Structural reforms are crucial to achieve sustained high economic growth and reduce poverty.
The authorities attach high priority to private sector development, and to broadening the
production base in order to reduce the economy's vulnerability. Reform will focus on divesting
public utilities; enhancing the cotton sector reform, through the privatization of the state-owned
ginning company (SONAPRA); strengthening public resource management and the financial
sector; and promoting good governance. Further efforts are needed to gamer broad public support
for civil service reform.

'The authorities' poverty reduction strategy was prepared through a broad consultative process,
and sets out a credible policy framework for reducing poverty. The authorities are encouraged to

Annex 11

Page 2 of 4

deepen their analysis of the poverty situation and of their strategy for private sector-led growth,
and to reinforce mechanisms to monitor implementation and evaluate outcomes.

"Benin has satisfied the conditions for reaching the completion point under the enhanced HIPC
Initiative. The debt sustainability analysis based on end-2001 data indicates that the ratio of the
net present value of Benin's external debt to exports would decline steadily and remain below the
150 percent threshold from 2005 onwards. Some risks remain, however, owing to Benin's
dependence on a single commodity," Ms. Krueger stated.

Annex 11
Page 3 of 4

The Acting Chair's Summing Up
Benin-Fourth Review Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Arrangement; the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and Joint Staff Assessment;
and Completion Point Under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative
Executive Board Meeting 03/28
March 24,2004

Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal. They commended the
Beninese authorities for the encouraging macroeconomic performance during 2002. Directors

noted that Benin had displayed rapid output growth with low inflation, while maintaining a
prudent fiscal policy. They stressed, nevertheless, the existence of downside risks, particularly the
possibility of a decline in the world cotton price and higher oil prices. Directors commended the
authorities for progress made in the implementation of structural reforms in 2002.They noted with
concern, however, that spending on health and education had remained below target, and that
civil service reform had continued to stall. More generally, they regretted that, despite Benin's
overall impressive economic performance, a significant reduction in poverty had yet to be
achieved and that not enough progress was being made in diversifying the economic base.

Directors welcomed the efforts made by the authorities to pursue fiscal consolidation in
2003. They stressed that external uncertainties had increased the importance of maintaining a
cautious fiscal policy in 2003, especially by limiting nonpriority outlays. Directors also welcomed
the ongoing actions to improve public expenditure management and prepare medium-term
expenditure 
frameworks. 
In this regard, 
they noted 
that decentralization can enhance
accountability and transparency, but underscored that the authorities should ensure that it does not
result in a weakening of expenditure control. Directors welcomed the progress made in
strengthening tax administration, and encouraged the authorities to broaden the tax base, in
accordance with Fund technical assistance recommendations. They also recommended that efforts
to improve the tracking of poverty-related spending be strengthened.

Directors noted the authorities' efforts to increase public expenditure execution capacity
in order to correct the shortfall in social spending, and stressed the need to ensure that resources
are used effectively in priority sectors. Directors welcomed the establishment of the debt
committee, and emphasized the importance of maintaining the external debt level on a sustainable
path by adopting a prudent debt-management policy and increasing reliance on grants and highly
concessional loans. Accordingly, preparation of a supplementary budget that would commit more
expenditures for priority sectors should be envisaged only after financing that is consistent with
the objective of debt sustainability has been secured, and absorptive capacity in social spending
has improved.

Directors noted that the regional monetary policy of the BCEAO continues to serve
Benin well, and needs to be underpinned by firm adherence 
to the fiscal 
targets. They
commended Benin for being one of the most compliant members of the WAEMU, meeting all
primary convergence criteria. Directors were encouraged by the authorities' commitment to
ensure that banks meet the Regional Banking Commission's prudential ratios and to improve the
health of the cooperative and mutual credit institutions. They welcomed the adoption of the
rehabilitation strategy for the state-controlled bank adopted in December 2002, and urged the
authorities to implement this strategy in a timely manner, including divesting the government's
shares in the bank.

Annex 11
Page 4 of 4

Directors emphasized the implementation of the structural reform agenda through a
timely and transparent process, which they considered is of critical importance for achieving the
objectives of the program. They underscored the need to strictly adhere to the new timetable for
the divestiture of public utilities and the privatization of the state-owned ginning company
(SONAPRA). Directors also noted that the authorities intend to pursue the civil service reform by
calling on the parliament to approve the legislation on the new compensation system, and they
recommended that, in the event that the new parliament does not pass the legislation promptly,
the authorities examine alternative options to pursue the objectives of the reform. More generally,
Directors encouraged the authorities to work to achieve a broader social consensus for civil
service reform.

Directors welcomed the adoption of the poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP), noting
that it was prepared through a broad participatory process and that it sets out a credible policy
framework to reduce poverty. They endorsed the joint staff assessment that the PRSP provides a
sound basis for Fund concessional assistance to Benin. Nevertheless, Directors urged the
authorities to deepen the poverty analysis, address weaknesses in implementation capacity,
reinforce mechanisms to monitor implementation, and further develop a medium-term strategy
for achieving sustained high, private sector-led economic growth. The PRSP approach would also
benefit from better prioritization of objectives and policies. Directors also encouraged the
authorities to further institutionalize the PRSP participatory process and develop communication
including the poor. Directors underscored the importance of
with all relevant stakeholders, 
policies that facilitate diversification of Benin's production and export base, which would reduce
its dependence on a single export commodity. In this connection, Directors considered that any
actions by developed countries to increase access for Benin's exports to their markets would be
beneficial to Benin' s external position.

Directors agreed that Benin has satisfied the conditions for reaching the completion point
under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. They noted that the ratio of the net present value of Benin's
external debt to exports would remain above the threshold when Benin reaches the completion
point under the HIPC Initiative but would steadily decline subsequently, remaining well below
150 percent from 2005 onwards. Most Directors agreed that no additional enhanced HlPC
Initiative relief above that committed at the decision point is required, and encouraged Benin to
continue to seek debt relief from non-Paris Club creditors. A few Directors, however, expressed
some concern that Benin's debt sustainability would remain vulnerable to movements in cotton
prices for some time to come, given its dependence on a single commodity, and notwithstanding
future financing on highly concessional terms.

Annex 12
Page 1 of 2

Implementation Status of Actions to Strengthen Tracking
of Poverty-Reducing Public Spending

Timing 
(S/M) 1/ 

Status
(FL/Il! 
NS) 2/ 

Date
Achieved 

Comments

Fl 

NS 

Fl 

FI 

Fl 

II 

II 

II 

II 

Fl 

Action plan to be
adopted by March
2003

2001

2003

2001

2002 

Included in the PRSP

These classifications
will be applied to all
public entities

The 2001 audit will
be finalized before
September 2003

Ongoing, with
donors' assistance

First 300 accounts
closed as of January
2003
A debt committee
was established in
July 2003.

Actions 

Actions to strengthen budget formulation

Identify poverty reducing items in budget. 

Include externally financed projects and 
external debt service in the SIGFIP. 

Include table showing poverty-reducing 
expenditures in 2003 budget.

Identify separately in the budget poverty- 
reducing expenditure financed from enhanced
HIPC Initiative resources.

Develop a medium-term budgetary framework. 

Set budget classifications as: administrative, 
economic, and functional. 

Actions to strengthen budget execution

Audit enhanced HIPC Initiative-related 
expenses annually. 

Strengthen internal controls. 

S 

S 

S 

S 

S 

S 

S 

M 

Reduce and eventually eliminate cash advances. M 

Set priorities for investment projects in context M 
of strengthened debt management. 

I/ S=short-term action; M=medium-term action.
2/ FI=fully implemented; II=implementation initiated; NS=not started.

Annex 12
Page 2 of 2

Implementation Status of Actions to Strengthen Tracking
of Poverty-Reducing Public Spending (concluded)

Actions 

Actions to strengthen budget reporting

Timing 
(S/M) 

Status
(Fl/il 
NS) 

Date
Achieved 

Comments

Treasury balances are reported monthly. 

The monthly budget operations are received 
within four weeks of the end of the reference 
period, 

Accounts are closed within two months of 
year's end.

The accounts are audited and presented to the 
chamber of accounts within 12 months of fiscal
year's end.

S 

S 

S 

S 

FI 

FI 

August
2002

2000 

FI 

2000

I 

2000

Data on capital
expenditure are
available after a
longer delay

AAA services in support of PRSP refrnement and implementation

Area of weaknesses 

Government action plan 

Planned AAA

Annex 13
Page 1

Poverty diagnosis
Poverty data 

Poverty analysis 

CWIQ survey; integrated household 
survey; poverty map
In-depth analysis of DHS; impact 
analysis of agricultural reforms on 
producer's income
Monitoring and evaluation capacity
M&E indicators 
Establish a set of indicators; establish 
a single data base; primary surveys to 
document performance indicators;
governance and corruption survey

M & E system
Institutional setting 

M&E capacity 

Establish a M&E Committee at 
national and departmental levels
Capacity building program in M&E 

Participation

Voice of the poor 

MTEF 
Poverty focus of the MTEF 

Sectoral program-budgets 

participatory poverty assessment; 
regional poverty profiles;

_

Strengthen the links of MTEF with 
PRSP programs and priorities
Improve the design and prioritization 
of sectoral program-budgets 

Incomplete private sector led growth strategy
Private sector development 
Study of impediments to private 
sector development 

Growth strategy 

Competitiveness study 

Improve implementation plans
Dissemination and 
communication 

Strengthen consultation and dialogue 
capacity 

Civil service management 

Fiscal decentralization 
Weak implementation 
capacity

Support to CWIQ (social fund 2003)

Poverty assessment (AAA 2003);
PSIA cotton (AAA 2003)

Support to governance and
corruption survey (WBI, TF)

Technical advice (informal)

Support to the public expenditure
monitoring and evaluation
component (PERAC/PRSC);
technical advice (informal)

Poverty assessment (AAA 2003)

PERAC/PRSC

PERAClPRSC
Integration of gender into public
policies (AAA 2006)

Private investment and
competitiveness (TF); Financial
sector review (AAA 2004)
Competitiveness study (PSD
project); Growth, Competitiveness,
and agricultural diversification
(AAA 2004)

PRSP strategic communication (TF);
Localization of the PRSP in rural
areas and stakeholder capacity
building (TF); attacking poverty
program (WBI)
Stock taking on civil service

management (PHRD)

Assessment of fiscal decentralization
IDF Grant

Annex 14
Page 1 of 3

Benin: IDA Lending and Debt Sustainability

Introduction

In common with many countries in the region, Benin has suffered from a considerable external
debt burden. The enhanced HIPC Initiative has had a substantial impact in reducing that burden,
and at its recent completion point in March 2003 Benin's creditors committed themselves
irrevocably to reducing Benin's external debt by 31 percent in NPV terms as of end-1998,
bringing the NPV of debt down from 240 percent to 173 percent of exports as of end-2002. After
additional bilateral relief, the debt-to-exports ratio as of end-2002 would stand at 154 percent.
The Boards of the Bank and Fund concluded in March 2003 that in the absence of major
exogenous shock, this relief reduced Benin's debt to a sustainable level. Achieving long-term
sustainability will require prudent debt management on the part of the authorities along with the
provision of financing on suitably concessional terms by the international community.

Given that the completion point document was presented to the board in March 2003, the
macroeconomic projections (see Box below) and the results of the debt sustainability analysis at
Completion Point have been retained in this annex. The baseline scenario, predicated on base
case IDA lending, indicates that Benin's debt to export ratio will fall rapidly, remaining under the
150 debt-to-export threshold from 2005 onwards. Moreover, the debt service ratios indicate that
projected debt service payments are not expected to place an undue burden on fiscal revenues or
export earnings over the projected period. The completion point document also includes a
sensitivity analysis of debt sustainability to lower cotton export and lower grants and concludes
that: (i) Benin's strong reliance on cotton exports constitutes a major source of vulnerability for
the economy; and (ii) prudent debt management remains key to debt sustainability.

Impact of new IDA lending

IDA is the single largest creditor to Benin, accounting for 40 percent of the country's borrowing
in 1999-2001. Debt sustainability must therefore be an important consideration in determining
the size of the program. The Figure (below) illustrates the impact of the base ($200 million), high
($220 million), and low ($85 million) IDA lending scenarios for the period of this CAS on the
NPV of debt-to-export ratios over the next twenty years'. All three scenarios include 17 percent
of the FY03 allocation (to be disbursed in FY04) in the form of grants; no IDA grants are
assumed thereafter in line with the FY04 IDA Grant Guidelines under which Benin became
ineligible. As of end 2006, the projections suggest that the debt-to-exports ratios could vary from
131 percent under the low case-lending scenario to 140 percent under the high case lending
scenario, well below the HIPC sustainability thresholds. However, Benin still remains vulnerable
to external shocks beyond its control, and for this reason it will be important to monitor closely
the evolution of the key debt sustainability ratios.

1 The simulations of the impact of IDA lending are done by taking the NPV of debt projected at
comnpletion point, subtracting the NPV of debt resulting from IDA new borrowing simulated at completion
point, and adding in the NPV of debt of the new IDA lending projected in the CAS instead.

Annex 14
Page 2 of 3

Impact of lending scenarios on debt sustainability

(FY04-FYe06)

165

155 -C ~ 

--*- -

--.............-....-.

...-_-_..-.. 

_.-.-__._ .

____._._._.

X115 .- ...--..-.--.------ 

.----.-..-- 

- -

-

....- _ 

. -.. _ 

_ _ 

... -.-
_._ 

.

.

105 

_ 

.

-CAS Bascline scenario

95

9 

- CAS High Ce scenario

-

CAS Low Case scenario

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

2007 

200S 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015 

2016 

2017

Measures to Improve Debt Sustainability

The authorities are aware of the need to improve the mechanisms surrounding the contracting of
extemal debt. Maintaining extemal debt sustainability will require a prudent borrowing policy.
To address this question, the Govenmment has strengthened the monitoring of external financing
policy. Foreign-financed expenditures will be prioritized in light of Benin's objective of
maintaining a sustainable extemal debt and alternative-financing sources will be identified, with a
view to increasing reliance on grants and highly concessional loans.

In addition, a debt committee has been established and will have the role of assessing the impact
of new project loan proposals on debt sustainability and of formulating and monitoring debt
policy. It will also update the debt sustainability (DSA) analysis annually.

Annex 14
Page 3 of 3

Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying the Debt
Sustainability Analysis

Economic growth. The economy is projected to grow at an average annual rate of 6 percent
over the period 2003-06 and at 5 percent during the period 2007-21. These projections are
based on expected diversification of agricultural production beyond the cotton sector,
continued improvement in infrastructure, and increased private sector investments following
the privatization of public utilities, development of the regulatory framework, and the
strengthening of national institutions.
Inflation. Sound fiscal and monetary policies are expected to keep annual average inflation
below the WAEMU convergence criteria of 3 percent.

Exports and imports. Exports of goods and nonfactor services are projected to remain at
around 15 percent of GDP throughout the period. Imports of goods and services are projected
to grow in line with GDP.
Current account. Benin's external current account deficit is expected to narrow from 8.3
percent in 2002to 7 percent in 2003 and remain around that level during the 2004-2021 period.

Foreign direct investment is projected to grow at about 8 percent per annum on the average.
Grants and loans. New borrowings are projected to remain above the historically high levels
recorded in 1999-2002, growing by 3 percent on average per year over 2003-2021.

