d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of

The World Bank

Report No. 25203-NIR

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK

FOR THE REPUBLIC OF NIGER

January 21, 2003

Niger Country Office / Country Department 13
Africa Region

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit 

US$1.00 

CFA Franc (CFAF)

= CFAF 710 (2002)

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
AfDB 
CAS 
CAP 
CPPR 
ESW 
EU 
GDP 
HIPC 
ICR 
IDA 
IFC 
IMF 
JSA 
NGO 
NIGELEC 
NPV 
NPVR 
MIGA 
MDGs 
OFEDES 
PEAC 
PPA 
PRGF 
PRSC 
PRSP 
PSR 
UNDP 
SNE 
SONITEL 
SONIDEP 
WAEMU 

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Country Assistance Strategy
Community Action Program
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Gross Domestic Product
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Implementation Completion Report
Intemational Development Association
Intemational Finance Corporation
Intemational Monetary Fund
Joint Staff Assessment
Non-Govemmental Organization
Electncity Supply Company
Net Present Value
Net Present Value of Debt-to-Export Ratio
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Millennium Development Goals
Deep well-drilling for Water Resources Company
Public Expenditure Adjustment Credit
Participatory Poverty Assessment
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Project Status Report
United Nations Development Program
National Water Company
Telecommunications Company
Petroleum Distribution Company
West African Economic and Monetary Union

FY03 - FY05

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task-Team Leader: 

Callisto E. Madavo
Antoinette M. Sayeh
Geoffrey H. Bergen

THE REPUBLIC OF NIGER

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Table of Contents

Pages

Executive Summary 

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

Introduction 

Poverty, Risk and Vulnerability: The Macroeconomic, Social and
Political Environment 
- A Harsh Environment for Overcoming the Challenges of Development 

Niger's PRSP and the Bank's Program of Assistance 
- Key Objectives and'Challenges in Formulating the Bank's Assistance Strategy 

The Bank's Track Record in Niger 
-
The Country Portfolio and Non-Lending Program 

- Development Impact 

Lending and Non-Lendmg Program, 2003-2006 
-
IDA Lending and Debt Sustainability 
-
Lending and Non-Lending Program 

-
-

-

Lending Scenarios 
Lending Triggers 

Thematic Presentation of the Base Case Program 
Pillar 1: Macroeconomic framework 
Pillar 2: Development of productive sectors 
Pillar 3: Improving access of the poor to quality social services 
Pillar 4: Strengthening institutional and individual capacity 

- Monitoring of Outcomes 

VI. 

Managing Risks 

VII. 

Concluding Remarks 

Tables
Table 1. 
Table 2. 
Table 3. 
Table 4. 
Table 5. 
Table 6. 
Table 7. 
Table 8. 
Table 9. 

Summary Economic Indicators 
Macroeconomic Framework, 2001-2005 
External Financing Requirements 
Investment Operations Under Implementation 
Core Diagnostic ESW 
Lending Scenarios 
CAS Base and High Case Triggers 
Niger PRSP Targets and the MDGs 
Core CAS Monitoring Benchmarks 

I

I

1
4

6
10

14
14

15

18
18
20

21
22

23
23
25
26
27

28

30

31

3
8
9
15
15
21
24
29
30

Boxes
Box 1. 

Box 2. 
Box-3. 
Box 4. 
Box 5. 
Box 6. 

Figure

Figure 1. 

How Nigeriens define their own condition: The Participatory
Poverty Assessment 
Core Labor Standards in Niger 
Extensive Consultations for the Preparation of the PRSP 
Niger's External Partners 
CAS formulation: participatory process linked to the PRSP 
Progress against 1997 CAS Base Case Indicators 

Impact of Lending / Grant Program on Niger's Debt Sustainability 

2
6
7
11
12
17

19

Standard CAS Annexes
Annex 1 
At-a-Glance
Annex 2 
Social Indicators
Annex 3 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance
Annex 4 
IDA Program Summary
Annex 4 
IFC & MIGA Program
Annex 5 
Summary of Non Lendmg Services
Annex 6 
Key Economic Indicators
Annex 7 
Key Exposure Indicators
Annex 8 
Statement of IFC
Annex 8 
IDA Operations Portfolio
Annex 9 
Partnership Strategy Matnx
Annex 10 
Summary of Development Priorities
Annex 11 
Bank-Fund Collaboration
Annex 12 
Expenditure Accountability Assessment and Action Plan - Update

Other
Annex 13 

IDA Lending and Debt Sustainability

Executive Summary

i. 
Background. Niger, one of the world's poorest countries, has made considerable
progress towards macroeconomic stability and growth smce the return of democratic governance
in late 1999. Yet the reform agenda remains vast and poverty widespread. Niger's prospects are
clouded by a lack of natural resources and a highly degraded natural environment, explosive
population growth, extremely low human and institutional capacity, very limited mternational
competitiveness, 
its location m a potentially volatile sub-regional context, uncertain donor
commitment, and years of poor governance. These factors contribute to the extreme vulnerability
of poor Nigeriens, particularly women and children.

ii. 

With improved macroeconomic performance over the past few years, Niger has benefited
from increased flows of donor support, as well as interim debt relief since the Enhanced HIPC
Decision Point of December 2000. In addition, Niger will benefit significantly from grants under
IDA 13 arrangements. Nonetheless, resource flows are limited by contmued donor concerns
about stability and absorptive capacity, as well as by HlPC-related constraints on Niger's ability
to borrow. Thus Niger's central challenge is to achieve the ambitious program of economic and
social transformation set forth in its PRSP by maximizing the effectiveness of development
assistance and public resources.

iii. 
The Government's program. Niger's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)
provides a framework for implementing sectoral strategies that seek to achieve significant
progress towards 
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The PRSP provides an
uncompromising analysis of poverty and its underlying causes, and sets forth a national
development program around four central pillars:

* A macroeconomic framrework ensuring economic and financial stability while promoting
sustainable and robust growth;
* The development of productive sectors, especially .in rural areas, to mitigate vulnerability
and stimulate income generation;
* The improvement in the access of the poor to quality social services, including basic
education, primary health care, reproductive health services, HIV/AIDS prevention,
water and sanitation, and adequate urban habitat; and
* The strengthening of institutional and mdividual capacity within and outside
Govemment, at the central and local level.

iv. 
In addition, three cross-cutting themes are identified as guides to policy formulation m
all sectors:

* The effective inclusion of gender considerations;
* The promotion of good govemance; and
* The redefinition of stakeholders' role in the implementation of policies, startmg with the
state.

v. 
The PRSP proposes several ways of dealing with Niger's difficult external
environment and human vulnerability. To address the vulnerability of Niger's poorest citizens

- ii -

to repeated drought and famine, 
it identifies rural development, and particularly 
irrigated
agriculture as top priorities along with improved development and maintenance of transport
infrastructure that connects the rural poor with markets. To address capacity and governance
issues, the PRSP emphasizes measures to improve capacity for;delivery of basic services, and
notes in particular the importance of building capacity for the decentralizatlon process. To
counter the risk of macroeconomic instability, the PRSP emphasizes disciplmed management of
public finances as well as the search for new sources of growth to reduce the volatility associated
with past reliance on uranium. 
In response to the risk of economic deterioration at the sub-
regional level, the PRSP calls for Niger's full participation m regional organizations, such as the
West African Economic and Monetary Union, and initiatives, such as NEPAD, that underpin
regional economic integration. And with regard to the risk of continued lack of donor resources
and coordination, the PRSP seeks to establish a framework for unifying donors, under Nigerien
leadership, around strategies that constitute the blueprints for action in the prionty sectors
identified in the PRSP.

vi. 
The Bank's program for Niger will be fully aligned with the PRSP. 
In order to
maximize its development impact, the Bank's assistance to Niger will seek to underpin and
enhance national ownership and leadership. A cntical challenge will be to bring about a
progressive shift towards consolidated programmatic lending, requiring significant changes m the
ways both the government and donors, including the Bank, do business. Key steps toward
meeting this challenge will be an emphasis on buildmg the govemment's capacity to plan and
manage development programs (including significantly strengthening the fiduciary framework),
and its coordination of donor activities by building consensus around sectoral strategies and
expenditure programs. The Bank will seek gradually to shift the bulk of its support from retail
investment projects towards consolidated programmatic support, with the Poverty Reduction
Support Credit (PRSC) as the preferred lending instrument.

vii. 
IDA lending and debt sustainability. The FY03-05 base-case scenario provides for a
maximum of US$238 million, Niger's current IDA allocation. Simulations conducted for the
CAS suggest that in the absence of a major external shock this level of lending would not result in
a significant deterioration of debt sustainability indicators. However they also suggest that in the
event of such a shock and resulting detenoration (despite base case performance), the Bank
would need to reduce lending substantially while approaching donors for increased grant funding.
In light of the high sensitivity of the debt sustainability indicators to cyclical changes in export
performance, however, it would not be advisable to rigidly link lending levels to them. Rather
the Bank would plan base case lending up to US$238 million, while monitoring Niger's debt
sustainability indicators annually. Appropriate adjustments to the base case lending program
would be made at the mid-point of the CAS period in the event that the NPV of Niger's debt-to-
exports ratio exceeds 200 percent.

viii. 
Lending program. The base case lending program would consist of 1-2 projects per
year as well as adjustment lending in support of the PRSP. Macroeconomic stability and growth
will be supported via adjustment lending, continued support for pnvatization, agro-pastoral
export promotion, and financial sector reform. The portfolio will emphasize 
reducing the
vulnerability of Niger's poor, promoting rural development, and provision of basic social
services, with particular attention to gender equity. The transition towards use of PRSCs will be
facilitated by Public Expenditure Adjustment Credits (PEACs). that continue building capacity for
fiscal management at both central and decentralized levels of Govemment, and by investment
operations that build capacity within specific sectors, spanning public, private and community
organizations.

- iii -

ix. 
In a low case scenario, resultng from poor policy or implementation performance,
commitments would not exceed US$ 100 million, and program emphasis would focus on social
services. The high case scenario, resulting from a superior level of performance, would be up to
US$260 million. There is thus little difference between the base and high case levels of IDA
commitments; the Bank will therefore also respond to better than expected performance by the
acceleration of programmatic financing via PRSCs (i.e. via a larger share of IDA financing
channeled through PRSCs at a faster pace than under the base case).

x. 
Non-lending program. The Bank's non-lending program will contribute to Niger's
ability to attain the PRSP's objectives, underpinning lending operations and providing Important
policy advice. Recent Bank economic and sector work (ESW) -
in particular the Participatory
Poverty Assessment - directly supported the PRSP and informed the strategic priorities of this
CAS. Further ESW is planned to help the government design policy responses to issues raised in
the Jomt Staff Assessment of the PRSP, for example on gender and population. 
In addition to
formal ESW, some sector studies - mcluding transport and rural development - will be
undertaken in the context of project preparation or implementation. Core 'diagnostic ESW is also
planned, including a Poverty Analysis, a Development Policy Review, a Public Expenditure
Review / CFAA, and a CPAR.

xi. 
CAS risks. CAS implementation faces five main risks- (i) reform slippage; (ii) a return
to poor governance practices; (ill) an inability to mobilize domestic and extemal support; (iv)
poor implementation progress; and (v) drought. The Bank seeks to mitigate these risks with
support for the PRSP reform program, focusing on transparency and accountability, embedding
capacity building in all Bank operations, and using a mix of adjustment and investment
operations (including in education, health, and rural development) both to support reforms and to
build admmistrative and service delivery capacity.

xii. 

The following four issues are suggested for Board discussion:

* Poverty reduction: Does the proposed Bank program adequately support the goals of the

PRSP?

* Debt sustainability:- Do Directors agree that an IDA base case lending program of up to
US$238 million be pursued while being prepared to adjust lending levels downward m
the event of a major deterioration in Niger's debt sustamability indicators ?
* Addressing vulnerability: Is the proposed program of adjustment and investment support
the most effective contribution the Bank can make toward helping Niger overcome the
constraints of its operational context as well as the human vulnerabilities that it creates?
* Transition to programmatic lending: 
Is the proposed phasing towards consolidated
programmatic lending via PRSCs appropnate?

NIGER

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

I. 

INTRODUCTION

1. 
This Country Assistance Strategy covers the 3-year period from FY03 to FY05. It
identifies key issues in Niger's economic and social development, reviews performance under the
previous CAS (1997) and CAS Progress Report (2001), and discusses a potential program of
lending and non-lending operations under different scenarios of nsk and performance. Two
major developments since the last CAS have mfluenced the strategic thrusts of this CAS. First,
Niger reached the Decision Pomt of the Enhanced HIPC Initiative in December 2000 and second,
Niger completed its first full PRSP, which was discussed by the Boards of the Bank and the Fund
in February 2002. 

-

HI. POVERTY, RISK AND VULNERABILITY: THIE MACROECONOMIC, SOCIAL
AND POLITICAL ENVIRONMENT

2. 
Niger is one of the poorest countries in the world. 
Per capita GNP stood at
approximately US$180 in 2000 (World Bank Atlas method), and Niger ranks 161 out of 162
countries listed in UNDP's 2001 Human Development Report (HDR).' Available data on mcome
poverty point to a poverty headcount of 63 percent and to an extreme poverty mcidence of 34
percent. 2 Vulnerability to drought has worsened food insecurity and consequently malnutntion,
which affects 40 percent of children under 5 years old. Combmed with poor access to safe water,
poor nutrition contributes to an mfant mortality rate of 114 per 1000 and life expectancy at birth
of about 46 years. Adult illiteracy remains high at 84 percent and gross pnmary enrollment rates
low at 42 percent overall, with female enrolment at only 33 percent of school-age girls for the
school year 2001/2002. 
The burden of poverty and 
low social development 
falls
disproportionately on women, whose access to land, credit, technology, and social services
remains very limited, despite some recent progress.

3. 
Limited prospects for economic growth. As the, Nigeriens responding to 
the
Participatory Poverty Assessment mdicate (see Box 1), Niger's growth prospects are severely
constrained by its limited natural and human resource base. The growth record of Niger's rural-
based and poorly diversified economy is to a large extent determined by factors such as climatic
conditions and the level of external assistance. Niger's primary sector (about 40 percent of GDP

'Countries' ranks in the HDR are determined by the value of the Human Development Index (HDI), which
is composed of life expectancy at birth, adult literacy, combined gross enrollment (primary to tertiary) and
GDP per capita (expressed in US$ adjusted for purchasing power parity).
2 These data are based on the most recent household survey dating back to 1992-93. Work on a new
household survey began in 2002, drawing on the results of the 2001 population census.

- 2 -

Box 1: How Nigeriens define their own condition: The Participatory Poverty Assessment

Niger's vulnerability can best be understood via its direct impact on the lives of the average Nigerien. The
Participatory Poverty Assessment, undertaken as input for the Niger PRSP and which informs the present
CAS, reveals the extent to which Nigenens themselves define their lives in terms of vulnerability. In order of
expressed importance, they view the determinants and causes of this vulnerability to be

* Explosive population growth that is not accompanied by economic growth;
* Recurrent droughts that compromise the efforts of farmers in particular;
* The deterioration of factors of production;
* 
Inadequate investment, which reduces the scope of opportunity,
* 
Physical remoteness;
* 
In addition, factors such as widowhood, divorce, lack of job opportunities, old age, out-mrgration as
well as certain beliefs and socio-cultural attitudes, exacerbate the vulnerability of a substantial
segment of society.

Source. Permanent Secretariat of the PRSP, Office of the Pnme Minister, Participatory Poverty Assessment,
Final Report, June 2002

in 2001) is dominated by rain-fed agriculture, while livestock production accounts for about a
third of the value added in the sector. Of the actively employed populaton, 84 percent of men
and 97 percent of women are involved m growing crops or raising livestock. However, population
pressure and environmental degradation have severely limited productive potential. Agro-
pastoral GDP grew at an annual average rate of less than 1.1 percent in real terms m the period
1969-2000, as increased cultivation area was accompanied by declining yields. This has
translated into an annual decline m per capita agricultural GDP of more than 2 percent, and an
increase in the number of households lacking food secunty. Having increased dramatically
during the uranium boom which had ended by the mid-1980s, the share of the secondary sector
(including mming and construction) in total production has stagnated. The economic indicators
summarized in Table I show the recent progress achieved in broadly restoring macroeconomic
stability but confirm that restoration of adequate sustained levels of growth remains a central
challenge for the future.

4. 
Politics and governance. During virtually the entire span of the 1990s, Niger underwent
a great deal of political instability coupled with poor govemance and widespread official
corruption, and these factors have had a strong negative effect on the country's economic
prospects. Following years of military rule, Niger reinstated democratic governance in 1992.
Two military coups d'etat took place successively in 1996 and 1999, but m December 1999 the
military junta handed power to a civilian Government, following presidential and legislative
elections in October-November 1999 that international observers judged to be free and fair. Over
most of the last decade, the political situation was complicated by tense social relations as
recurrent cnses m public finances led to trade union and student unrest (at the end of the
transition period in December 1999, cumulative salary arrears for civil servants had grown to 13
months). The coalition Government headed by President Mamadou Tandja has for the past three
years stabilized and restored a measure of confidence to Govemment, through much improved
political and economic governance, and by restoring sufficient discipline in public finance to
meet basic commitments - beginning with regular payment of public sector salaries. President
Tandja's party and its political allies enjoy a majority in parliament, and this has facilitated debate
and passage of difficult but necessary economic reforms. Though stabilized, the political situation

- 3 -

Table 1: Summary Economic Indicators

1997-1999 

2000-2001

Average annual growth
Real GDP 
GDP Deflator 
Shares of nominal GDP (percent)
Gross domestic investment 
Domestic Savings 
Exports (GNFS) 1/ 
Imports (GNFS.) 

Overall fiscal balance, excl. grants 
Basic fiscal balance 2/ 
Budgetary revenues 
Current public expenditure 

Current account balance (excl. grants) 

4.2 
2.7 

10.8 
2.7 
16.7 
24.2 

-8 2 
-3.7 
8 7 
11.3 

-9 4 

3.1
4.3

11.2
3.2
17.3
25 1

-7 5
-3.2
8.9
11.1

-8 5

Other
Debt service/exports (percent) 
Sources: Niger PRSP ; Bank and IMF staff estimates
1/ "GNFS" denotes "goods and non-factor services"
2/ Revenues minus expenditures excluding foreign-financed investment projects.

15 2 

8 7

remains tense. Students, teachers, and other civil servants continue to press their demands for
increased entitlements and settlement of long-overdue arrears. Also contributing to the political
uncertainty of the 1990s were armed rebel mQvements expressing a sense of exclusion among
minority ethnic groups in the North (Touareg) and the East (Toubou). The current Government
has succeeded in commg to terms with these movements; however, it remams to be seen whether
the lynchpin of peace accords-the economic re-integration of ex-combatants-can be fully
achieved. The military, which has repeatedly intervened in politics, has returned to the barracks,
but remams a potential source of destabilization, as witnessed in a short-lived mutiny of soldiers
based in the eastern part of the country in August 2002.

5. 
A key event on the horizon is the completion of Niger's political decentralization, for
which the initial framework was established with a 1996 law establishing local collectivities.
Planning for decentralization has gained momentum under the present govemment, with
implementing legislation passed by the National Assembly, and local elections promised for late
2003. Given Niger's geographic features and the need to bring public service delivery closer to
communities and promote greater accountability, decentralization 
is potentially beneficial,
especially in remote areas. Initially, decentralization will take the form of a transfer of resource
mobilization responsibilities as well as service delivery responsibilities to the level of the
communes (local administrative districts) of which 265 are being created (from the present 36).
This is likely to have a profound impact on both public finance management and political
outcomes. A number of challenges remain for the process to be successfully implemented, such
as fully assessing the costs of decentralization and securing its financing, defining modalities for
the transfer of revenue and spending authority at the decentralized level, and establishing
effective inter-governmental fiscal transfer mechanisms. 
In particular, decentralization may
strain Niger's already sparse implementation capacity, e.g. in the area of fiduciary control,
beyond its current limits.

- 4 -

A Harsh Environment for Overcoming the Challenges of Development
6. 
The context in which Niger must tackle its development challenges is an immensely
difficult one, characterized in particular by:
e A hostile and deteriorating physical environment. Niger's population, the vast majority of
which depends upon rain-fed subsistence agriculture, has endured repeated droughts over the
past thirty years. Encroaching desertification has been exacerbated by high rates of
population growth (see below), deforestation, and overuse of already marginal soils. Since
independence the arable land surface of Niger has shrunk m half, from 25 percent to 12.5

percent.'

* Very rapid population growth. Niger currently has a total fertility rate of between 7.5
and 8 children per woman,-which is the highest in the world. The doubling time of the
population is estimated at 20 years and, under UN population projections, Niger would
become in 2050 the second most populated country of the Western Africa region, after

Nigeria.

* Lack of international competitiveness and vulnerability to external shocks. Niger's
uiamum deposits once gave it substantial leverage in international markets and provided a
steady source of government revenue. No longer. Niger's comparative advantage in several
agricultural products and livestock has not been fully exploited, the result of inappropriate
economic policies of the past, as well as extremely weak development of linkages between
producers (often poor and isolated from market information) and sub-regional or international
markets. Poorly developed and deteriorating roads and telecommunications infrastructure
increase this isolation. Niger is also highly exposed to exogenous shocks, such as oil price
increases, or the recent political turmoil in CMte d'Ivoire which cut it off from an important
market for agricultural production and source of important consumer items, as well as
remittances from the large number of Nigeriens living there. Nor is Niger well-positioned to
take advantage of quickly changing 
international economic conditions; 
for example,
following the CFA devaluation of 1994, Niger's supply response was limited.
* Poorly developed public sector institutions. Average Nigeriens lack access to basic public
goods that well-developed and well-managed public sector institutions can provide. The
judicial system is weak and understaffed. Basic social services, begmnmg with health care
and education, are poorly developed, and the majority of Nigenens still do not have access to
them. Enforcement of legal nghts, including gender equality, is the exception rather than the
rule. As elsewhere, governance and corruption issues are a concern, but in Niger the
problem is exacerbated by low capacity to carry out basic fiduciary and judicial oversight

functions.

* Limited financial intermediation. A weak financial sector does not allow for adequate
mobilization of domestic resources, nor for financing of pnvate sector and rural development,
housing, health care or education.
* Extremely low levels of capacity. Human and institutional capacity is a challenge at all
levels m Niger. 
In the public sector, progress is hindered by low administrative capacity,
itself the result of years of deteriorating conditions in public sector management, political
instability and a tendency for Niger's best educated citizens to seek better opportunities
elsewhere. Competition between the Government, development partners and the private
sector for scarce managerial talent limits the availability of related expertise in the public
sector. Private sector development suffers from a lack of professional and entrepreneurial
skills, or the training facilities that might produce them. The emergent NGOs that often
prove to be important partners in the design and implementation of development programs
also suffer from their fairly recent legalization and lack of experience.

- 5 -

* Uncertain public ownership of government sponsored programs. Following years of
public sector mismanagement and political instability, average Nigeriens - most living in
isolated villages where traditional authority holds sway - have little confidence m their
government's ability to deliver development programs or social services, and are skeptical
when officials request their participation. Exacerbating the disconnect between public
ownership and govemment initiatives are madequate communication between authorities and
ordinary people (an exception 
is the PRSP process, which has received international
recognition for the effectiveness of its communications effort). The national press readership
and distnbution is largely limited to the urban centers, and although radio ownership is
widespread, it is likely that most Nigeriens get news and information via local language
broadcasts emanating from northern Nigeria and elsewhere.
* Uncertain donor support and weak coordination of development efforts. Following the
military, coups d 'etat in the late 1990s, many donors withdrew or reduced their programs in
Niger, and although many have resumed support since the return of democratic government
m 2000, renewed political instability could tip the scales the other way. Perhaps because the
turmoil of the 1990s prevented significant donor 
involvement, 
there has been 
low
coordmation of donor programs, meaning that Niger is left with a diffusion of development
operations 
that dilute their overall 
impact and burden already weak capacity. 
The
government and most donors view the PRSP as an instrument that will help remedy this

situation.

7. 
Human vulnerability. These factors that form the context of development efforts m
Niger translate into a high degree of vulnerability that threaten the average Nigenen in terms of:

* Food insecurity. Hunger and the specter of famine loom large in the lives of the Nigerien
poor, and with continued dependence on rain-fed staple crops, the failure of one season's
rains can lead to widespread malnutrition and, as occurred in the worst droughts in the recent
past, starvation.
* Endemic disease. Widespread malnutrition, particularly among children, 
increases
vulnerability to otherwise preventable diseases. 
In some parts of Niger, as many as 40
percent or more of children die before the age of 5, with malaria, diarrhea and measles the
leading causes. HIV/AIDS constitutes a new risk to human and economic development,
which could substantially increase poverty and compromise or reverse Niger's development
progress.
* Economic exploitation. Lacking legal protections, and in the absence of market information,
infrastructure, or credit, most of Niger's rural poor are highly vulnerable to economic
exploitation. Most small farmers sell their products to mtermediaries who control the means
of transport and storage, and who profit in sub-regional markets, with little of it going back to
poor producers. Box 2 below suggests that although Niger's legal framework incorporates
core 
labor standards, 
the persistence of certain cultural practices and weakness of
Govemment enforcement capacity limit their impact.
* Women: the most vulnerable of all. As Niger's PRSP makes explicit, women are the most
vulnerable. They suffer greater income poverty, have higher rates of disease, lower rates of
schooling, and are highly vulnerable to abuses of legal and basic human rights.

8. 
Aware of these risks and vulnerabilities, and wiling to confront them fuly, Niger's
Government has developed a poverty reduction strategy (discussed in Section m below)
that seeks to address them. Nonetheless, the options for Niger remam constrained by its limited
domestic savings and access to external resources, and in particular to grant resources, for

- 6 -

development. While access to HIPC debt relief, and more recently to IDA grant resources, offer
additional opportunities to combat poverty and implement the PRSP, the work undertaken at the
time of the Enhanced HIPC Decision Point also highlighted the fragility of Niger's extemal
financing situation, even after it will have reached the Completion Pomnt. Niger's very gradual
return to debt sustainability calls for an extemal assistance strategy of limited borrowing, even on
IDA terms. An inherent tension therefore exists between the immensity of development needs
faced by the country and the constraints imposed by debt sustamability, especially when grant
funding from other development partners has been slow to respond to Niger's recent progress.

Box 2: Core Labor Standards in Niger

Collective bargaining. Niger's Labor Code is based on ILO principles, protecting the right to organize and
prohibiting antiunion discrinmination by employers. In private and state-owned enterprises, unions widely use
their right to bargain collectively with management without government interference for wages greater than
the statutory minimum as well as for more favorable work conditions. Collective bargaining also exists in the
public sector.

Slavery. The Labor Code prohibits forced or compulsory labor, except by legally convicted prisoners;
however, although slavery is prohibited by the Constitution, and the National Assembly has passed revisions
to the penal code to include new punishable offenses for crimes against its practice, a traditional form of
slavery still is practiced in some parts of the country, particularly in remote northem regions. In this cultural
context, those bom into the traditional subordinate caste are expected to work without pay for those in higher
castes within the traditional social structure. Most such individuals appear to accept their status, and can leave
their home areas without sanctions.

Child Labor. In 2000 the Government ratified ILO Convention 182 proscribing the worst forms of child
labor. Current laws put the minimum age for basic employment at 14 years, and 18 years for industnal jobs.
All children are required by law to attend school until age 12, although in reality only about 42 percent of
school-age Nigerien children actually attend pnmary school. Niger is currently in the process of improving
upon and harmonizing national legislation with intemational legal standards. A committee for harmonization
within the Ministry of Justice has put forward a proposal to improve legal protections against child labor to be
considered by the National Assembly in 2003. Despite these measures, the Govemment's capacity and
resources for enforcement are minimal. In 2000, UNICEF estimated that roughly 70 percent of children
between the ages of 5 and 14 in Niger were working, primanly in the informial and unregulated sectors of the

economy. A number of development agencies, including UNICEF and the ILO, are working with the
govemment to improve its capacity to protect children from exploitation, along with others, including the
Bank, to achieve the fullest possible enrolment of children in pnmary school.

9. 
Constrained on the one hand by an unusually difficult operating environment, and on the
other by limited resource availability and low capacity, Niger's central challenge is to achieve the
ambitious program of economic and social transformation set forth in its PRSP by maximizing
the effectiveness of development assistance and of its own sparse domestic savings.

III. 

NIGER'S PRSP AND THE BANK'S PROGRAM OF ASSISTANCE

10. 
Niger's PRSP was completed and adopted by the Government in December 2001, and
was subsequently discussed by the Bank and Fund Boards, along with a Joint Staff Assessment
(JSA) in February 2002. The JSA found the PRSP a credible framework for the implementation

- 7 -

of an effective poverty reduction strategy. The Bank and Fund found the document's main
strengths to be an extensive consultation process and strong country ownership (see Box 3), a
thorough poverty diagnosis, and the strategy's comprehensive scope.

Box 3. Extensive Consultations for the Preparation of the PRSP

The Niger PRSP is the result of an extensive consultative process that capitalized on the lessons learned
from previous expenences, such as the preparation in 1997 of a poverty reduction program in
collaboration with the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). 
In line with the commitments
taken in the l-PRSP, the authonties developed a comprehensive participation plan for the preparation of
the full PRSP. The PRSP consultative process was launched with a national workshop in February 2001,
which resulted in an agreement on an institutional framework that the Government established quickly
thereafter. This workshop also led to the constitution of eleven thematic groups, with the responsibility
of producing the building blocks of the PRSP, in terms of diagnosis as well as future strategies. The
participatory process was conducted in conjunction with a communication plan aimed at raising the
awareness within the country about the PRSP's objectives, the process, and the role of the concerned
stakeholders.

Source: International Monetary Fund and International Development Association, Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper, Joint StaffAssessment (January 16, 2002) (IDA/SecM2002-0012).

11. 
The Government's strategy for economic growth and poverty reduction is based on
four key pillars:
* A macroeconomic framework ensuring economic and financial stability while promoting
sustainable and robust growth;
* The development of productive sectors, especially in rural areas, to mitigate vulnerability and
stimulate income generation;
* The improvement in the access of the poor to quality social services, including basic
education, primary health care, reproductive health services, HIV/AIDS prevention, water
and sanitation, and adequate urban habitat; and
* The strengthening of institutional and mdividual capacity within and outside Government, at
the central and local level.

12. 
In addition, three cross-cutting themes are identified as guides to policy formulation m
all sectors:
* The effective inclusion of gender considerations;
* The promotion of good governance; and
* The redefinition of stakeholders' role in the implementation of policies, starting with the
state.

13. 
The macroeconomic framework for 2002-2005.- As the Joint Staff Assessment
concluded, the macroeconomic framework presented in the PRSP is generally sound, and the
CAS therefore adopts the PRSP framework as its baseline scenario. The average economic

- 8 -

growth rate of 4 percent in real terms over the period 2002-2005 is only slightly higher than the
post-devaluation average of 3.5 percent in 1995-2001 and is therefore considered feasible.
Assuming that the population growth rate remamns constant at 3.3 percent, this would translate
into real growth m annual per capita income below one percent and a reduction of only 2
percentage points in the poverty headcount rate during this period3 . It is expected that the current
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire will have a negative impact on the Nigerien economy in 2002 and 2003.
The Bank is working with the authorities and the IMF on assessing the extent of this potential
impact, which could result from reduced demand for Nigerien exports, lower remittances, as well
as reduced transfers under the WAEMU common external tariff arrangements. For subsequent
years, and barring the occurrence of more external shocks, in particular a severe drought, further
consolidation of political and financial stability should lead to an increase in investment of both
pnvate and public ongin, financed by higher domestic and foreign savings, and contribute to the
attainment of the growth targets over the period.

Table 2: Macroeconomic Framework, 2001-2005

2001 

Est. 

7.6 

2002 

Proj. 

2.7 

2003 

Proj. 

3.9 

2004 

Proj. 

4.1 

2005

Proj

4 1

4.0 

3.0 

2.0 

2.0 

2 0

Current Account Balance (excl. 
grants) 
I_I
Sources: PRSP (baseline scenario), Bank and Fund Staff estimates.

-7.5 

-8.6 

-9 5 

14. 
Sources of growth. The PRSP stresses the importance of identifying sources of growth
and presents some preliminary reflections on this, which will need further examination and
research. Increased private and public investment in the rural sector (irrigation) as well as the
modern sector (infrastructure) are expected to fuel production and growth. A likely channel for
absorbing the additional production, especially of agro-pastoral products is through expanded
trade, mainly (but not only) within the sub-region. Niger has demonstrated a comparative
advantage in certam niche commodities and for livestock. The strategy focuses on improving the
supply response of what is believed to be latent demand for these products. Much demand
originates from the WAEMU area, but most comes from Niger's main sub-regional economic

3 The Niger PRSP assumes the elasticity of the headcount ratio with respect to GDP growth to be below
one. This assumption remains to be confirmed when the household survey is completed.

Real GDP growth (percent) 

Inflation (GDP deflator) 

In percent of GDP

Gross domestic consumption
Govemment 
Non-Government 
Gross domestic investment 
Exports (GNFS) 
Imports (GNFS) 

Total budgetary revenue 
Current expenditure 
Overall fiscal balance, (excl: grants) 
Basic fiscal balance 

12.3 
84.4 
11.5 
16.7 
24.9 

9.2 
11.0 
-7.4 
-3.4 

123 
83.6 
13.3 
16.1 
25.2 

10.6 
11.1 
-7.4 
-1.9 

122 
82.6 
14.9 
15.5 
25.2 

10.6 
I1 3 
-8.3 
-2.0 

11.8 
82.6 
15.0 
15.2 
24.6 

11.0 
11.0 
-7.5 
-1.2 

-9.4 

11.4
83 0
14.8
14.9
24 0

11.3
10.5
-6.4
-0.5

-9.1

-9-

partner, Nigeria. Trade and investment flows along the 1,600 km long border between the two
countnes are mostly unrecorded. The Govemment believes that regional and global integration
will continue to offer the best opportunities for diversifying and stabilizing economic growth in
Niger. Private investment in infrastructure has received increased attention with the acceleration
of the pnvatization program. Public investment, supported by regular donor programs and HIPC
resources is expected to pick up with the resumption and increase in aid following the political
stabilization and the adoption of the PRSP.

15. Medium-term fmancing requirements. Niger's total extemal financing requirements in
the PRSP base case scenario could surpass one billion dollars for the period 2002-05, resulting m
an estimated total financing gap of US$266 million (after projected debt relief)4 .
In light of the
anticipated negative impact on Niger of the C6te d'Ivoire crisis (including weaker regional
demand for Niger's exports), financing requirements may be even larger. Niger could also suffer
a terms of trade shock stemming from higher oil pnces in the event of intemational events
reducing supply. The Govemment (with Bank and Fund assistance) is therefore updating the
financing requirements in light of these recent developments and nsks to the extemal outlook.
While the prospects for covering Niger's sizeable financing gap are not unfavorable given the
improvement in the policy environment, the Govemment will need to further consolidate its track
record of reforms (including strengthening domestic resource mobilization) and increase its
dialogue with donors, notably around the PRSP, in order to secure such a level of resources.

Table 3: External Financing Requirements

In US$ mrillion 

Requirements 

Current account deficit (excl grants) 
Debt amortization (public debt) 
Change in net foreign assets 

Resources 

Official gross transfers 
Long term official loan 
Private capital 
Debt relief 

Financing Gap 

Sources. Bank and Fund staff estimates.

2002 

314.4 

180.8 
109.4 
24 2 

300.1 

98.9 
123 1 
11.3 
66 8 

14.3 

2003 

272.3 

191.6 
82 7 
(2.0) 

225.4 

72.8 
1048 
14.7 
33.1 

46.9 

2004 

319.8 

215.6 
83 0 
21.2 

201.2 

76.6 
38.9- 
16.3 
69.4 

118.6 

2005

297.2

235 0
66 6
(4.4)

210.6

81 2
391
17 2
73 1

86.6

16. 
The PRSP proposes several ways of dealing with Niger's difficult external
environment and human vulnerability. To address the vulnerability of Niger's poorest
citizens to recurrent drought and famine, it identifies rural development, and particularly irrigated
agriculture as top priorities along with improved development and maintenance of transport
mfrastructure that connects the rural poor with markets and sources of food. To address capacity
and governance issues, the PRSP emphasizes measures to improve capacity for delivery of basic
services, and notes in particular the importance of building capacity for the decentralization
process. To counter the risk of macroeconomic instability, the PRSP emphasizes disciplined
management of public finances as well as the search for new sources of growth to reduce the

4 Assummg a CFAF/US$ exchange rate of 710 (2002), 706 (2003), 702.2 (2004) and 698 6 (2005).

- 10-

volatility associated with past reliance on uranium. The PRSP recognizes the cross-cutting role
of the financial sector and the need to strengthen it so that it can provide adequate support for all
sectors of activity. In response to the risk of economic detenoration at the sub-regional level, the
PRSP calls for Niger's full participation m regional organizations, such as the West African
Economic and Monetary Union, and initiatives, such as NEPAD, that underpin regional economic
integration. With regard to the risk of continued lack of donor resources and coordination, the
PRSP seeks to establish a framework for unifying donors, under Nigerien leadership, around
strategies that constitute the blueprints for action in the pnority sectors identified in the PRSP.
The next step in the PRSP process is the organization of a donor forum for purposes of resource
mobilization around the PRSP's sectoral themes and strategies. The meeting is scheduled to take
place in February 2003.

17. 
Several areas of weakness in the PRSP (noted by the JSA) require further development.
In the poverty profile the most important gap is the lack of comprehensive assessment of the
poverty impact of past policies and programs, implying the need for a reliable mechanism for
monitoring and evaluation. The PRSP contains insufficient analysis of sources of growth. The
PRSP does not adequately address gender and population growth rate issues. It lacks a coherent
strategic framework for agricultural development. There is a need to link macroeconomic targets
and poverty reduction objectives, establish a strong link between the poverty reduction strategy
and multisectoral response to HIV/AIDS, and strengthen partnerships with the non-govemmental
and private sector for better delivery of social services. 
In addition, there is a need for the
govemment to assume a more forceful leadership role in mobilizing and coordinating donor
resources to finance the resource gap associated with achieving the PRSP's goals. With support
from the Bank and from UNDP, Niger's PRSP Secretariat is developmng analytical and policy
work in most of these areas of weakness, and these will be presented to Niger's development
partners at the February 2003 donors forum.

Key Objectives and Challenges in Formulating the Bank's Assistance Strategy

18. 
The Bank's thematic and sectoral choices will fully align themselves with the
PRSP's priorities. The main objective of this CAS is to support the implementation and further
refinement of the PRSP,'imcluding by helping Niger mitigate the many risks and vulnerabilities it
faces. The strategic focus of the CAS is directly derived from the PRSP's four strategic pillars, as
well as its three cross-cutting policy principles. 
In addition, areas identified in the JSA as
important yet not sufficiently developed in the PRSP will receive particular attention in the
Bank's program of operations and AAA, as well as in its dialogue with the donor community.

19. 
Selectivity in Bank's Work. Selectivity in the Bank's work will be informed by PRSP
strategic priorities; by the lending constraints imposed by debt sustainability considerations (see
para. 34); and by Bank comparative advantage as well as the leadership expected from other
development partners in specific areas (see Box 4). The Bank's assistance will concentrate on the
key areas covered by the PRSP, yet provide support only to a sub-set of activities specified. In
the spmt of both selectivity and the Bank's desire to facilitate improved development partner
collaboration, a consistent effort will be made to ensure that other donors take the lead in some
activities. For example, Canada is already leading coordination for the education sector, while
the Bank continues to play a lead role in providing funding and technical assistance in a
coordinated donor effort around Niger's 10-year strategic plan for education. Other donors have
taken a lead role 
in multi-donor coalitions of support in other areas mcluding Water
(Switzerland), Food Security (FAO) and HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) - all areas in which the Bank is
playing a major financing role. In some other areas, such as Justice sector reform, the Bank par-

-11 -

Multilateral

Box 4. Niger's External Partners

The European Union is the pnncipal source of funds for Niger's investment budget, mostly via grant assistance concentrated in the
focal sectors of education, health care, rural development (imgation) and transportation (roads). The EU plays a lead role among donors
providing food secunty assistance The EU is collaborating with the Bank and the IMF in developing a coordinated program assistance in
support of Niger's economic reform program, and will participate in the PER/CFAA scheduled for FY03
The African Development Bank provides significant budget support, and maintains a project portfolio focused on 
infrastructure, health, and education.
The Islamic Development Bank provides significant support for transport infrastructure , water, food secunty and franco-arab
education
The United Nations is completing its Development Assistance Framework for 2003-06, with active participation of the World Bank All
the major UN agencies are represented in Niger. LJNDP focuses on sustainable livelihoods, govemance, pnvate sector development and
development management - and is the key partner along with the Bank in supporting the PRSP process UNICEF has programs focusing on
health, education, community development, HlIV/AIDS and children's and women's welfare nghts, UNFPA is particularly active in support of
reproductive health, women's nghts, and HIV/AIDS, FAO, IFAD and WFP are active 
in smaliholder food secunty, soil and water
conservation, and food-for-work programs UNAIDS, currently chaired by WHO, is playing a central role in assisting Niger's national
HIV/AIDS strategy
Other Multilateral Development Institutions are actve in Niger, including the OPEC Fund, West Afncan Development Bank, IFAD
and others.

ransport

* 

Bilateral
* Belgium has provided assistance in response to specific needs, including paying a month of salary arrears at a cntical moment when the
new govemment was taking power, and it supports projects in rural development and health. Belgian trust funds have been the pnncipal
source of Bank-admnistered support to the PRSP process.
* Canada chairs the donor group in support of Niger's national education strategy, and has an aid program focusing on education,
HIV/AIDS, and gender equity In the context of its regional projects, Canada also supports Niger in the areas of health, the environment,
capacity building for the public sector and civil society
* China has supported rural, health and water infrastructure development, including a co-financing role in the Water Sector Program with
the Bank
* Denmark provides budget support and project support in education, agnculture, micro-credit, HIV/AIDS, the environment and
govemance reform (including for parliament). Denmark is currently playing the lead role in a multi-donor initiative in support of judicial
reform.
France has histoncally been Niger's largest bilateral donor Through its Cooperation Service, Development Agency (AFD) and
volunteers, it supports a broad program including rural development, urban infrastructure development, educaton, health, food security,
govemance, capacity building, military and police and support for peace initiatives in the North and East The AFD is involved in co-
financing arrangements with the Bank in the areas of transport, water sector infrastructure and community development
* Germany has a significant program of assistance via GTZ, KFW and DED, with a significant focus on rural development and
environmental management, education, health, HIV/AIDS, and rural water development.
Italy is taking a-lead role in mobilizing donors around Niger's anti-desertification efforts and supports projects in rural development and
the environment
Japan has contnbuted significantly to the eradication of Polio and Guinea Worm, and has supported projects in education, health, food
secunty, rural development and environmental management
* 
Libya is a major source of development assistance in targeted interventions that include roads and wells/imgation
* Luxembourg (via Lux-Development) provides important assistance in the fight against HIV/AIDS, in education, development of artisan
trades, rural development, health and food security
* The Netherlands (via SNV) delivers capacity strengthening support to local intermediary organizations with the aim of improving
govemance and reducing poverty. SNV has a special focus on education, rural radio, and decentralization
Switzerland leads the multi-donor group in support of Niger's water resources development, and supports programs through a local
development approach in water and sanitation, rural roads and infrastructure, agnculture and animal husbandary, with a tranversal
emphasis on gender and the rule of law
The United States withdrew USAID funding from Niger in the wake of the coups of the late 1990s, but has recently retumed with
funding for cultural hentage, rural radios, govemance reform and HIV/AIDS The U.S has a significant Peace Corps Volunteer program
In Niger.

* 

* 

* 

* 

Donor harmonization Niger's major partners participate actively in the ongoing elaboration of sector strategies as well as in thematic groups
in the areas of rural development, pnvate sector development, judicial sector reform, food secunty, and education Coordination of donor
interventions has been weak, largely as a result of the unstable conditions of the 1990s. The Bank has recently initated work at the countiy
level with interested multilateral and bilateral partners to support govemment-led harmonization programs, and Niger has agreed to participate
as a pilot country in this program The harmonization of donor operational policies, procedures and practices will be an important topic of
discussion at the February 2003 donors' forum, and work on the pilot program will inform these discussions

- 12 -

ticipates in the donor-Government group (headed by Denmark with EU support), but will limit its
direct support to identifying ways its operations can contribute to the strategic objectives
identified by the group. The Bank's assistance for private sector development, beyond its present
support for the privatization process and financial sector restructuring, will be limited to ESW as
other donors (notably, the EU and France) are providing significant capacity building assistance.
The Bank will take the lead in promoting collaboration and harmonization of multi-sectoral,
community-based interventions within the framework of the Community Action Program (CAP).
While the CAP will provide limited support to decentralization, focusmg on capacity for
community-level development, and focused AAA will help further the agenda on fiscal
decentralization, France and the EU are playing the lead role in mobilizing multi-donor support
for decentralization.

Box 5. CAS formulation: a participatory process linked to the PRSP

Consistent with the core pnnciple of linking the new Niger CAS to the PRSP process, the Bank has connected its
CAS consultations with the nation-wide consultations held both pnor and subsequent to the PRSP's formulation,
which the Govemment organized and led. This CAS draws upon a number of documentary sources, including the
Participatory Poverty Assessment (PPA) that the Bank financed and which served as the basis for the PRSP's analysis
of poverty in Niger. The CAS also draws upon a recent client survey (conducted in 2001), OED and QAG reviews,
and project supervision and Implementation Completion reports. In addition, the Bank has carried out consultations
with Government, elected officials, civil society, the private sector, beneficianes and the donor community. This
process was initiated with a full day of the June 2002 Niger CPPR devoted to discussing CAS-related issues with a
representative group of Government officials, project staff, beneficiaries, parliamentanans and development partners.
During October 2002, the Bank conducted extensive consultations, visiting 4 of of Niger's 7 regional capitals in the
company of officials of the PRSP secretariat, the Ministry of Finance and Economy, and the UNDP. In so doing, it
discussed the main points of this CAS and its linkage with the PRSP and other donor planning processes with an
array of Govemment officials, NGO representatives, community representatives, traditional authonties, and business
people The final draft version of this CAS was discussed extensively with the Prime Minister and the Minister of
Finance, and in a half-day workshop (November 13, 2002) with all Ministers whose areas of mandate are affected by
Bank operations. This feedback was highly useful in refining the CAS' strategic objectives as well as operational

activities.

In regional consultations, a number of participants noted the relevance of the PRSP and praised the assistance
provided by Niger's extemal partners, in particular UNDP and the Bank. Participants supported the new approach,
emphasizing the country "in the dnver's seat", and the focus on reaching the poorest. Their comments can be
summarized at three levels.
* 
International: More emphasis needs to be on the coordination of donor programs in the fight against poverty to
avoid the diffusion of aid resources in Niger. Debt relief and budgetary assistance are effective instruments so
long as good govemance and transparency are assured However, so long as there is bias against countnes such
as Niger in international markets, it will be difficult for them to export their way to growth and it is extremely
important that the World Bank serve as their advocate in intemational fora.
* National: The PRSP is a sound basis for organizing future development assistance. Achieving its objectives
will require a programmatic approach 
It also signifies a restructuring of relations between the state, civil society
and the private sector in the implementation of national policies. A number of speakers expressed concem about
the effective roll-out of decentralization and spoke of the need for intemational assistance to make it work
Local: A number of participants stressed the importance of community-driven development as an effective
approach to empowering the poor. Several mentioned the need for assistance in building the capacity of NGOs
and pnvate associations in order to make them more effective in helping the poor.

* 

20. 
Towards consolidated programmatic lending. 
In order to maximize its developrnent
impact, the Bank's assistance to Niger will seek to underpin and enhance national ownership ard
programs, m line with the PRSP. The Government and the Bank share the view that this can best
be achieved through a progressive shift towards consolidated programmatic lending, with the
Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) as the preferred lending instrument. Presently the
Bank and all other development partners in Niger provide most assistance in the form of stand-

- 13 -

alone projects that are poorly coordinated. Scaling up of durable poverty-reducing effects on a
national scale will not be possible if this approach is pursued. In addition, the proliferation of
retail projects has in some cases helped to undermine rather than build national capacity and
ownership, particularly by recruiting away some of govemment's best-performing personnel mto
numerous project implementation entities. In contrast, a well prepared and properly sequenced
transition to consolidated programmatic lending could mcrease leadership and management of
development processes by the Govemment. At the same time, it would facilitate a coordinated
approach by donors in support of development objectives identified by the Government in
consultation with its own citizens, the essence of the PRSP instrument.

21. 
The challenge of transition. In order for the Bank, and other donors to provide the bulk
of their assistance through consolidated programmatic lending, Niger would need to complete the
"first generation" structural reform agenda, which is currently underway. This will enable Niger
to squarely focus its efforts on the budgetary, sectoral and institutional reforms required for
consolidated program support to unleash its full potential. In addition, two important transitional
challenges present themselves:

* Capacity. The first is the need to establish sufficient capacity for program implementation in
all sectors, fiduciary controls and effective budget management. Particularly m light of
Niger's imminent decentralization, attention will need to be focused on developing both
central and local capacity 
to deliver social services and carry out basic administrative and
developmental functions. Poor fiduciary management, particularly in public procurement,
has been a barrier to effective implementation of projects for the Bank and for other donors,
and is responsible for limited confidence among development partners in Niger's ability to
manage budget support. An important focus of the Bank's lending and non-lending program
is therefore 
to help improve capacity for fiduciary control at both 
the central and
decentralized levels, working closely with other development partners such as the EU.
* Sectoral and multi-sectoral strategies. The second transitional challenge is to prepare sector
programs based on comprehensive strategies, ultimately leading to the preparation of a full
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework as the budgetary expression of PRSP prionties. A
strategic goal of the CAS will therefore be to reinforce Niger's capacity in preparing such
sectoral strategies, 
through processes 
that encompass 
rigorous analysis and broad
consultations. 
In some instances, multi-sectoral strategies are required, such as is the case
with the fight against HIV/AIDS, as well as for gender, population, and govemance.

22. 
A shift to consolidated programmatic lending will not preclude preparation of new stand-
alone IDA operations, and in the transition period the share of IDA resources channeled through
these would likely surpass that of PRSCs. The Bank would continue traditional self-standing
operations where the benefits of separate implementation and financial arrangements appear to
outweigh the advantages of a more integrated approach to public financial resource transfers.
Separate operations may be justified by these special circumstances, in particular where:

* Govemment projects mvolve a great deal of international competitive bidding, so that the
Bank can certify that procurement is handled transparently and fairly.
* There is need to offset the specific fiscal costs related to policy reforms, or where there are
unforeseen fiscal shocks (revenue or expenditure) that could not be foreseen at the time of
budget formulation and that require an urgent response.
* There is an urgent need for more intensive support in achieving the health and education
Millennium Development Goals.

- 14-

* An autonomous implementation mechanism has been established by the Government and is
necessary to support highly visible emergency activities (e.g. HIV/AIDS).

23. 
Such self-standing operations are expected however to become the exception over time,
and it will be an objective of all such operations to help develop the national capacity (public and
private, central and decentralized) to plan, implement, monitor and evaluate under budget support
operations m the near future. Most stand-alone projects would also increasingly reflect a
programmatic approach by supporting sector-wide programs and coordinated interventions by
donors.

IV. 

THE BANK'S TRACK RECORD IN NIGER

24. 
The Bank has regularly reviewed its Niger portfolio since the introduction of the 1997
CAS, via annual CPPRs, supervision and mid-term reviews, OED evaluations, a Participatory
Poverty Assessment prepared as input for the PRSP, results from the 2001 Client Survey, as well
as Project Status Reports (PSRs), and Implementation Completion Reports (ICRs). Because
Niger's PRSP process was underway at the time a new CAS would normally have been prepared,
a CAS Progress Report was presented to and discussed by the Board in November 2001. It found
that progress towards the 1997 CAS objectives was generally on track, but had been hampered by
political instability and consequent high turnover 
in key Government positions, by weak
implementation capacity, and by low degrees of ownership. Although these factors had not
changed the overall direction of reform, they had affected its pace.

The Country Portfolio and Non-Lending Program

25. 
The Niger country portfolio has improved dramatically during the period since the
1997 CAS. As successive CPPRs and project supervision have found, the CAS itself had a
positive effect by simplifying the Bank's objectives and by limiting intervention to areas of
comparative advantage. 
In addition, a number of Improvements to project supervision and
fiduciary controls have contributed substantially to portfolio perfornance. 
Perhaps most
importantly, the Bank's more participatory approach in project design, implementation and
evaluation, has considerably enhanced local ownership. As of the latest project supervision data,
all 7 projects in the Bank's portfolio are rated "satisfactory" in terms of development objectives,
and 6 of the 7 projects were rated "satisfactory" in terms of implementation progress (see Table

4).5

26. 
Past administrative budget constraints limited the Bank's non-lending services, and thus
the availability of "core diagnostic" ESW to inform this CAS (see Table 5). In the last two years
however, these have focused on helping the Government complete 
the PRSP, both in its
analytical and participatory elements. In this context, the Bank has introduced to Niger poverty
analysis techniques that have broken ground in other African countries, notably the Participatory
Poverty Assessment (PPA) and Poverty Mapping exercises (undertaken in preparation of the
Community Action Program and the PRSP). In terms of financial management and fiduciary
controls, the Bank's CPAR of 1999 has served as critical background for the Government's over-

5 In FY02, QAG assessed the supervision of the Natural Resources Management Project (para. 29) as

highly satisfactory.

- 15 -

Table 4: Investment Operations Under Implementation

Projects under implementation 

I) Pnvatization TA 

2) Transportation Infrastructure 

3) Urban Infrastructure 

4) Health ll 

5) Water Sector 

6) Pnvate Imgation 

7) Agro-Pastoral Export 
Promotion

TOTAL 

Commitment 
amount (US$ 
millions) 
$18.6 

Devt 
Obj. 
Rating 
S 

Impl. 
Prog. 
Rating
5 

Approval 
Date 

Signed 
Date 

Closing
Date

15-09-98 

30-09-98 

31-12-03

S 

S 

S 

S 

5 

S 

S 

S 

5 

S 

5 

U 

18-12-97 

08-01-98 

31-05-03

29-05-97 

20-06-97 

31-03-03

05-09-96 

13-09-96 

31-12-03

03-05-01 

08-06-01 

31-12-06

19-03-02 

09-05-02 

31-12-07

01-06-00 

15-07-00 

31-10-05

$28.0 

$20.0 

$40.0 

$48.0 

$38.72 

$10.35 

$203.67

haul of its public procurement laws and their implementation (supported by an IDF grant).
Significant work on extemal debt and related sustainability analysis has also been carried out in
the context of the HIPC initiative. A financial sector review was conducted in FY00. In FY02 the
Bank also assisted four ministries to develop a rural development strategy, which is being further
refined in FY03. Indications are that the non-lending program has had an impact on the design of
lending operations and the policy dialogue. But, as the Bank expands its non-lending services, it
will need to develop more robust means of measuring their performance and impact as has
progressively been achieved for the lending portfolio (e.g. by systematically assessing the extent
to which the analysis and key recommendations from the Bank's core diagnostic ESW influence
the design of subsequent PRSPs and PRSP annual progress reports).

Table 5: Core Diagnostic ESW

Past Completions 

Planned

Participatory Poverty Assessment (FY02) 
CPAR (FY99) 
PER (FY99) 
Poverty Assessment (FY96) 

PER/CFAA (FY04)
Poverty Analysis (FY04)
CPAR (FY04)
Development Policy Review (FY05)

Development Impact

27. 

i Macroeconomic stability and fiscal management. As the CAS Progress Report notes,

a significant number of key economic reforms have been completed with IDA support. In
particular, public finance management has improved since the present Government took power in
January 2000. The Government has adopted a plan to reduce the stock of domestic arrears,
including civil service salaries, and made initial payments on past salary arrears in 2001 and
2002. Budgetary revenue collection has also improved in response to a series of administrative
reforms. Building upon achievements since 1996, the Government has adopted a program to

- 16 -

establish 
transparency and accountability 
in budgetary management while mamtaining
macroeconomic stability. On the revenue side, achievements mclude better management of the
corporate income tax, especially for large taxpayers, taxpayer monitoring, fight against customs
fraud, reform of the petroleum products excise, and improved monitoring of taxpayer compliance.
With respect to public expenditure management, initial progress has been achieved throughout
the budget cycle, starting with the linking of the macroeconomic framework and medium term
expenditure program in the PRSP. 
Important progress was also achieved with respect to the
restoration of fiscal accountability with the orderly closing of accounts for FY 1997 to 2001, and
the launch of an ex post external control by the legislative and judiciary branches of the state.

28. 
Human development. While Bank-specific attribution is mherently problematic, the
CAS Progress Report also found considerable development impact resulting from Government
reforms and development partners' (including Bank) investments across priority sectors. For
example, m the education sector, the gross primary enrollment rate (GER) has increased from
around 27 percent m 1995/96 to 42 percent at the end of the 2001/2002 school year. In the health
sector, service quality has improved as a result of investments in training, essential drugs and
medical consumables, rehabilitation works, maintenance and the fine-tuning and implementation
of a quality assurance program. Access to basic health care (defined as population living within 5
kilometers of a health center) has increased from 32 percent of the population in 1997 to 47.6
percent in 2000 (most recent data available). Application of Niger's cost recovery law and
capacity building of its drug procurement agency have resulted in modestly improved availability
of essential drug stocks in health facilities. Likewise, considerable progress has been achieved in
organizing the national fight against HIV/AIDS; and following a lengthy process of national
strategy building and organization, a multi-sectoral mechanism for the national effort is now in
place.

29. 
Rural development and infrastructure. Considerable progress has been made in rural
development, particularly where projects have been implemented via communities: (i) the Natural
Resources Management Project established decentralized and community-driven 
financing
mechanisms in several areas to support a multi-sectoral range of micro-investments; and (ii) the
Private Pilot Irrigation Promotion Project, working through water users' organizations, has
disseminated low-cost and locally manufactured pumping systems to many farmers to support
increased incomes through gardening. In the infrastructure sector road maintenance is improving
now that the Government has implemented key sector reforms, including creating an autonomous
road maintenance fund.

30. 
Privatization. Necessary structural reforms have also progressed with the Government's
renewed commitment to its privatization agenda, and the passage of enabling legislation. The
telecommunication sector has been liberalized (two cellular licenses were granted) and the fixed-
line telecommunications company (SONITEL) as well as the water company (SNE) were
successfully privatized in 2001. The Government has recently committed to a revised calendar
by which the remainig parastatal utilities 
including the petroleum distribution company
(SONIDEP) and the electricity supply company (NIGELEC) will be privatized by the mid-2003.
Also slated for privatization in 2003 is OFEDES, an entity specialized in deep well-drilling for
subterranean water resources.

- 17 -

Box 6. Progress against 1997 CAS Base Case Indicators

Niger's progress against the base case indicators of the 1997 CAS has been generally positive. While the
Government remains committed to the reform agenda included in the base case and has recently taken action to
accelerate 
implementation, Niger has undergone 2 major changes of Government since that time, and
conditions have changed more generally, rendering some 
indicators less relevant than at the time of
formulation. Progress against the key indicators has been as follows:

* Access to primary education has climbed steadily over the past decade, from 27.8 percent overall in
1992/93 to 41.7 percent in 2001/02. The primary school enrolment rate for girls has also nsen from 21
percent in 1992/93 to 33 percent in 2001/02, but is still far from satisfactory.
* Both the quality and the coverage of basic health care improved with considerable investment in
rehabilitation works, training and essential generic drugs and with the construction of 157 integrated health
centers (primary health care facilities) around the country. The population living within 5 kilometers of a
health center has increased from 32 percent in 1996 to 47 6 percent in 2000 and improved quality is
reflected in modestly increased utilization rates (from 18percent in 1996 to 28percent in 2001)
* Access to safe drinking water remains largely unchanged over the penod; however, this should improve
once the Water Sector Development project approved by the Board in May 2001 -begins having an impact
* Reforms contnbuting to the attainment of minimum quality standards on the priority road network
were delayed due to repeated Government turnovers; however, these have recently been enacted and Niger
is on its way to improving the pace and quality of road construction and maintenance
Performance againsi annual budgetary targets was globally satisfactory from 1996 to 1998 While actual
budgetary revenue undershot targets each year, it also showed a steady increase over the period. Public
expenditure was adjusted each year so that the deficit targets could be reached in 1996 and 1997
* Portfolio performance improved significantly over the CAS penod.

* 

31. 
Despite these positive advances, overali progress toward some key development
objectives remains limited. For example, although basic education has been made more
accessible to many of Niger's most destitute rural populations, demand for education remains
weak, as recently confirmed by results from the Participatory Poverty Assessment (many
Nigenen parents do not see any benefit to education where there are few employment
opportuxiities for. those with basic- education). And notwithstanding notable progress m health
service coverage and quality since 1997, still less than half of Nigenens live within 5 kilometers
of a health facility, and many are unable to pay for essential drugs and services. A particular
problem involves staffing health facilities (particularly outside of major cities) with qualified
personnel. The lack of progress in reducing rapid population growth is also of major concern. 6
Despite some progress on gender issues - for example in increasing girls' enrolment rates and in
recent legislation promoting public sector female employment - women continue to suffer from
discrimmation in the labor market and lack legal protection.

32. 
Implementation issues continue to slow progress toward development goals across
sectors. The June 2002 CPPR noted that inconsistent application of procurement laws and
procedures leads to numerous slowdowns m programs funded by donor agencies. Failure to
disburse counterpart funding on a timely basis remains a significant implementation problem.
Public finance management still shows weaknesses with respect to the preparation of the budget,
the execution of some expenditure items and the timely recording of transactions. Lack of
capacity in key Governmental institutions, but also in local implementing NGOs, and in the key
service mdustries (for example, construction) also slows implementation.

6 The data show that the annual population growth rate of 3.3 percent and the total fertility rate between 7.5
and 8 percent have not changed over the past several years.

- 18 -

V. 

LENDING AND NON-LENDING PROGRAM, 2003-2005

IDA Lending and Debt Sustainabiity

33. 
Fragile external financing situation. Debt sustainability concerns have played a major
role in the determmation of the CAS lending scenarios, as Niger is one of the most fragile
countries among the group having acceded to the Enhanced HIPC Initiative. 7 At end-i999,
Niger's outstanding and disbursed debt was estimated at US$1.6 billion in nominal terms or about
80 percent of that year's GDP. The net present value (NPV) of this debt stock was equivalent to
322 percent of exports, well above the sustainability threshold of 150 percent determined in the
framework of the Enhanced HIPC Initiative. Niger reached the Decision Point in December 2000
and has since been receiving interim debt relief under the HIPC mitiative from several
multilateral and bilateral creditors. Niger's Completion Point, originally planned for 2002, is now
scheduled for mid-2003. By participating m the initiative, Niger will receive an estimated
US$890 million in nominal terms (out of which US$302 million from IDA) over 20 years. The
provision of HIPC assistance has an important positive effect on the sustainability of Niger's
external debt. However, even after full HIPC assistance delivery at the Completion Point,
Niger's external financing situation will remain fragile. According to latest projections, enhanced
HIPC assistance and bilateral assistance beyond HIPC would reduce the NPV of the debt-to-
export ratios (NPVRs) significantly, to 167 percent in 2003, down from 344 percent for the same
year after traditional debt relief mechanisms. While this constitutes a significant reduction, the
ratio would only fall below 150 percent by 2015, which confirns that Niger's extemal financing
situation will remain extremely fragile, even after full HIPC delivery.

34. 
Updated debt sustainability scenario. Better than expected export performance in 2000
and 2001 and the granting of additional bilateral debt relief beyond HIPC have resulted In a
reduction of Niger's NPVRs in the short term relative to the original Decision Point scenario,
while revised export projections have induced a slight deterioration from 2010 onwards (see
figure 1 in Annex 13). These updated projections leave limited room for new borrowing from
IDA, which in the recent past has been the main source of extemal financing. 8 A simulation
conducted for the CAS shows that retuming to the NPVRs of the updated Decision Point scenario
by the end of the CAS period would require limiting IDA commitments to US$124 million
between 2003 and 2005, in contrast to Niger's current IDA allocation of US$238 million
equivalent. 
In light of the actual lending pipeline and the Bank's current engagements to the
Govemment, restricting lendmg in such a way would mean stopping financial commitments to
Niger after FY04, an overly harsh stance for the Bank's relationship with one of its poorest
clients and one that is making satisfactory overall progress on key reforms. 
In addition, the
sensitivity of the NPVR to short-term changes in export performance suggest that it would not be
appropriate 
to rigidly link the base case lending volumes to the updated Decision Point
projections. 
Indeed the fact that the updated NPVRs have improved relative to those in the
original Decision Point scenarios underscores the importance of allowing some flexibility in
response to cyclical changes in export performance. 
In light of these considerations, the Bank
would plan to make base case lending commitments to Niger up to a maximum of US$238

7A detailed discussion of debt sustainability and the impact of IDA lending is presented in Annex 13.
8 In 2001 and 2002 external grant financmg for Niger did not reach the levels assumed in the original
Decision Point Projections.

- 19 -

million as long as NPVRs remain below 200 percent.9 Nonetheless, NPVRs would be expected
to evolve in a downward direction by the end of the CAS period in the absence of a major
external shock.

35. 
Impact of base and high case 1DA commitments. Figure 1 shows the impact of IDA
lending on debt sustainability in the base case and in a high case of US$260 million relative to the
updated Decision Point scenario. It suggests that committing the full IDA allocation in the CAS
period would result in NPVRs that are higher than those in the updated Decision Point scenario,
yet result in an average NPVR of 166 percent for the period 2003 - 2018, only slightly higher
than the corresponding 157 percent average from the updated Decision Point scenario. Most
importantly, the NPVRs associated with both the base and high case lending commitments stay
significantly below 200 percent during the entire period.

Figure 1: Impact of lending scenarios on debt sustainability

200

m 190 

t_180- 

I 

x 170 Mr-- 

; 

160 -
v 150

0) 

il 

140 -

130 

.

N 

N 

-

Updated

Decision

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Point

_ 

_ 

^allocation)

Base case
(full IDA

High case

. .

C' n 

.

.

Lt 

C O 

.

.

.

.

) 0 

.

.

_- N 

.

.

C') 

.t 

.

1-. C 0 

N 

N 

N> N 

NI N 

NI N 

N 

N 

NI N 

.

(D 

s- 

CO

NS N N

U) 

N 

36. 
Measures to improve debt sustainability. Niger's debt sustamability is highly sensitive
to export shocks. - To minimize the impact of such shocks in the future, Niger needs to strengthen
and diversify its export base, which is now predominantly composed of agricultural and livestock
products, and the stagnant uranium sector. However, due to important capacity and resource
constraints, the stronger growth and export performance that the Government aims to achieve
through implementing the PRSP is likely to materialize only in the medium term.

37. 
Ensuring debt sustainability in the medium and long term will require mobilizing more
domestic resources and attracting larger amounts of grant financing. Through its ongoing efforts
to strengthen the fiduciary framework and to enhance transparency and effectiveness of public
finance, the Government has begun improving conditions for more effective use of external
assistance. 
In addition, the completion of the PRSP has equipped the Govemment with a
comprehensive strategy to improve the provision of social services and promote economic
growth. Niger will nonetheless require sustained high levels of external financmg, mostly on
grant terms, if it is to successfully implement the PRSP and make substantial progress towards
meeting the Millennium Development Goals.

9 The original Decision Point scenario projected a trajectory of the NPVR that peaked at 190 in 2003, and
the 200 percent threshold would therefore ensure that new IDA lending during CAS penod would not result

in a deterioration relative to the early period in that scenario.

- 20 -

Lending and Non-Lending Program

38. 
IDA allocation and instruments. 
In the high case, commitments of up to US$260
would be only about 9 percent higher than the base case, reflecting debt sustainability
considerations. The Bank will therefore also respond to better than expected performance by the
acceleration of the transition to programmatic financmg via PRSCs (i.e. via a larger share of IDA
financing channeled through PRSCs at an accelerated pace than under the base case). Under the
high case scenario, assuming basic capacity has been built withm a relatively short time span, and
also assuming adequate preparation of a Medium Term Expenditure Framework, PRSC lending
could commence m FY04 with a focus on social sector (education and health) service deliveryl0 ,
and possibly components of rural development, including rural transport. Under the base case
scenarno, which assumes that putting in place the minimum necessary capacity will require more
time, PRSC lending would commence in FY05, with intensive capacity building efforts put in
place via a PEAC II in late FY03 and a PEAC III in FY04, coupled with investment lendmg and
grant-financed operations. Under a low case scenano, commitments of up to US$100 million
would be around 42 percent of the base case level.

39. 
IDA grant allocation. In accordance with the IDA 13 guidelines for allocation of grants,
Niger will receive a significant proportion of future fundmg (including 100 percent of the
HIV/AIDS operation under the MAP program) in the form of IDA grants. Beyond the MAP
program, the remainder of the grant allocation for operations under preparation will be allocated
taking into account the IDA grant allocation guidelines; e.g., a focus on reducing poverty among
the poorest of the poor, and the fight agamst endemic diseases including HIV/AIDS. The balance
of the FY03 IDA grant allocation after the MAP (about US$35 million) will be used to fund the
CAP. In FY04 and FY05 we expect both the Basic Education and Health In projects to receive
substantial amounts of grant financmg.

40. 
Non-lending services. The Bank's non-lending program will contribute to Niger's
ability to attain the PRSP's objectives, will underpm lending operations, and will provide policy
advice on issues that were not well-developed in the PRSP. Recent-Bank financed analytical and
advisory activities (AAA) - in particular the PPA and support to the Rural Development Strategy
- directly supported the PRSP. Other ESW underpins the assistance program's focus on
interventions to increase food secunty and community-driven development, as well as the agenda
to contain population growth. Further AAA are planned to help the government design policy
responses to issues raised m the Joint Staff Assessment, for example on gender, with the view to
helping the Government make progress on the gender and population agenda under the proposed
PRSC.

41. 
Planned AAA under the base case is summarized in Annex 4. 
In addition to formal
ESW, some sector studies/strategies -
including transport and rural development- will be
undertaken in the context of project preparation or implementation so as to inform the design of
support to these sectors under the planned PRSC. As summarized m Table 5, core diagnostic
economic and sector work is also planned, includmg a Public Expenditure Review/CFAA
(FY04), a Poverty Analysis (FY04), a CPAR (FY04) and a Development Policy Review (FY05).
This work, which will be done in consultation or partnership with the Government and key
development partners, will provide the basis for identifying where the most intensive support will

10 Since the PRSP's completion, the Bank has launched analytical work in preparation for the Education for
All initiative with the goal of mobilizing multi-donor grant resources adequate for Niger to achieve the
MDG of universal primary education in 2015.

- 21 -

be needed, particularly with regard to reinforcing public sector capacity in pursuit of the PRSP's
objectives and in readying Niger for the transition to consolidated programmatic lending. It will
also help to define the policy agenda for the FY05 PRSC. The Poverty Analysis will be based on
updated census and survey data on income poverty to supplement the qualitative analysis from
the FY02 PPA and will contribute to the design of the PRSC.

Lending Scenarios

42. 
The planned 
lending program will build on the existing portfolio to support the
implementation of the PRSP. The Bank has selected the operations in the proposed lending
program in consultation with the Government, taking into consideration the programs of other
development partners. Despite debt sustainability concerns, 
the high case is essential as a
performance incentive for Niger and a signal to other development partners for enhanced
assistance if perfornance is exceptional.

43. 
Base case scenario. The base case assistance program would support the priorities of
the PRSP. In managing the lending program, the Bank and the Govemment will closely monitor
the evolution of debt sustainability indicators, including seeking additional grant funding from
donors that is essential to longer-term debt sustainability.

31w IDA
13
Grants
(US$
millions)

x 

PEAC ill 

44. 

full 

30.0 
25.0, 
35.0 

FY. 
_Y03

30.0 
25.0 
'35ff 

I Table 6: Lending Scenarios 11
Operation 
Proposed Lending Amounts 
,(Millions of US$) .
H 
L 
Case 
Low 

B 
Case 

PEAC II 
HIVIAIDS (MAP) 
Community Action Program 
FY04 

To merit committing 
the 
base 
case 
amount, 
the 
Govemment needs to demonstrate 
significant 
progress 
in 
implementing 
the PRSP's goals. 
Linked to this would be a gradual 
move to program budgeting on the 
basis of comprehensive 
sector 
strategies, 
to be developed with 
support of Niger' s development 
partners. 
In. support of this, the 
Bank would 
initiate a shift 
to 
consolidated programmatic lending 
Financial Sector.Reform 
in FY03. The PEAC II would help BaiEuton3. 
further consolidate fiduciary and 
budget management reforms, and 
in FY04 a PEAC III would be 
prepared intensifying the capacity 
building that will facilitate a first 
PRSC 
in FY05. 
Under 
this 
scenario, 
the Bank will 
still 
undertake 
investment 
lending 
in 
key sectors for a number of years, 
fo a numbe of years,e 
although gradually 
incorporating 
most funding to these sectors into
the PRSC. Non-lending instruments will play an important role in the Bank's support in the base
case scenario, with a focus on strengthening capacity in key reform areas and preparing for
programmatic lending. Triggers for remaining in the bae case are presented in Table 7.

21 
2 
.
.
1/ Assumes no significant slippage in the remainder of FY03 'to,warrant
move to a low case scenaro

PRSC I 
Health Ill 
PRSC i 
PRSC 

Basic Educaton 
PRSCI 

40.0
'. 28.0 

.,,

15.0
300 

30.0 
45.0

30.0 ,. 

o.o

35.0 

15.0 

30.0 

25.0
35.0
TBD

2 

0.0

.

.

TBD.

30.0
25.0 

10

10.0

.

L 

FY05 

ke setr 

cean

.

.

.

.

.: -

- 22 -

45. 
High case scenario. The high case differs from the base case mainly regarding the pace
of reform implementation. While maintaining strict fiscal discipline, the authorities would
succeed in accelerating fiduciary (especially procurement) and budget reforms as well as
achieving better than expected results in resource mobilization. Another feature of the high case
scenario would be accelerated progress in capacity building efforts, fnancial sector reform,
privatization and regulatory reform. 
Implementation of comprehensive strategies to address
population growth and gender inequities, and of the education and health strategies would begin
to lay the basis for sustamable human capital development and higher per capita income growth.
As a result, Niger would make faster progress towards the MDGs, in a context of higher pnvate
sector - led growth. Triggers for moving to the high case are specified in Table 7.

46. 
Implicationsfor Bank program. The main response of the Bank in the high case would
be an accelerated transition to consolidated programmatic lendmg by increasing the amount of its
overall support channeled through PRSCs. Under this scenario, a first PRSC would be presented
to the Board in FY04 and the first 3-year PRSC cycle would be completed in FY06.

47. 
Low case scenario. The low case scenario would result from a halt in reform efforts and
deterioration of fiscal discipline. Political problems, for example, weakened resistance to vested
interests with political clout, a return to power of the military, or general political destabilization,
could be sources of such a scenario. A setback in reform efforts would lead to falling behind
PRSP targets, loss of fiscal control resulting in accumulation of arrears, deterioration in fiduciary
standards, reduced poverty focus in budget execution, and general macroeconomic instability
(including the unraveling of the PRGF support program). Triggers for moving to the low case
are discussed in para. 49.

48. 
Implications for Bank program. Under such a scenario, IDA lending over the next years
would have to be reduced substantially. The Bank's assistance strategy would have to be adapted
by ceasmg adjustment lending and postponing the shift towards consolidated programmatic
lending. The Bank would concentrate its efforts on strengthening capacity and building support
for reform in close coordination with other development partners, with the aim of bringing Niger
back into the base case as soon as possible. The Bank would also finance selective interventions
in basic social services with appropriate fiduciary standards being assured through expanded use
of autonomous agencies, and ESW would be limited to studies in support of social service
delivery.

Lending Triggers

49. 
The specific triggers for the base and high cases, covering some key actions in the
implementation of the PRSP, are shown below in Table 7. These triggers also build on prior
actions for the HIPC Completion Point. The Bank would move to a low case scenario if the basic
triggers for remaining in the base case were not met, in particular if: (i) execution of the budget
for PRSP priority sectors is deemed unsatisfactory; (ii) the macroeconomic framework goes off
track, with a significant deterioration in debt sustainability ratios; (iii) the Government fails to put
in place implementation decrees for the new public procurement code; (iv) the prvatization
program for the remaining parastatals in the electricity and energy distribution sectors is stalled;
and (v) the Government fails to formulate a satisfactory population and reproductive health
strategy.

50. 
The evolution of the debt sustainability indicators and their possible deterioration are
captured through a component of the trigger on maintenance of a satisfactory macroeconomic

- 23 -

framework. This signals the need to reduce IDA commitments below base case levels if long-
term projections (2003-2018) show NPVRs in excess of 200 percent in any given year. Such a
provision is different from a trigger in the traditional sense, as it could be either policy-induced
(e.g. by uncontrolled borrowing by the Government) or reflect exogenous shocks beyond the
Government's control (e.g. by a major terms of trade shock), A significant deterioration in debt
sustainability. should elicit a reduction of IDA lending, independent of the cause: However, the
response of the Bank to a debt sustamability crisis would be different depending on whether the
crisis was caused by exogenous or policy induced factors: in the case of a exogenous shock, the
Bank would make a strong effort to convince other donors to increase grant financing to Niger,
while a policy-induced detenoration of debt sustainability would warrant a more cautious
approach to Bank financing in general, and thus a low case lendmg scenario. While the Bank
would monitor debt sustainability indicators on an annual basis, the lead-time required for project
preparation make yearly adjustments of the lending program in response to the evolution of
NPVRs impractical. Instead such an adjustment would be made at the mid-point CAS review in
late FY04 (see para. 68).

Thematic Presentation of the Base Case Program

51. 
The Bank's program supports the four pillars of the PRSP.' It seeks in particular to
address both the constraints of Niger's operational context and consequent human vulnerabilities
that loom large as the central challenges of development on which the success of the PRSP lies.
Under each pillar, the Bank will selectively provide assistance to reforms and expenditure
programs in different sectors. At the same time the Bank will support reforms in the three key
cross-cutting policy themes highlighted in the PRSP, i.e. gender, governance and stakeholder
participation.

Pillar 1: A macroeconomic framework ensuring economic
and financial stability while promoting sustainable and robust growth

52. 
Financial and fiduciary management will be a key focus of the Bank's program m
support of the PRSP. PEACs planned for FY03-FY04 will address capacity shortages in plannmng
and implementation of Government programs as well as in strengthening fiduciary control, both
at central and decentralized'levels, and this work will be continued under the FY05 PRSC. The
CAP will build financial capacity at the level of communities and communes (the key locus of
administration under the pending decentralization program). An IDF grant is financing the
implementation of a national procurement code and capacity building -for more effective and
transparent procurement administration at both the central and decentralized levels. Effectiveness
of this program will be reviewed via a CPAR to be conducted in FY04. A combined CFAA and
PER (undertaken in collaboration with the European Union) will look closely both at the
procedural and substantive usage issues connected with management of public funds for
development, and will provide the analytical bases for further capacity building support and the
public expenditure reform agenda in Bank-financed operations.

- 24 -

Table 7: CAS Base and High Case Triggers

Trigger areas: 

To stay in the Base Case 

To shift to the High Case

Poverty Reduction Strategy Implementation

Effective implementation 
of the PRSP 

.

* 

-

Adequate budget allocation and execution for 
PRSP pnonty sectors 
Satisfactory 
macroeconomic 
framework * 
(bamng extemal shocks), as demonstrated for 
example by non-accumulation of payment 
arrears, attainment of PRGF macroeconomic 
benchmarks, and NPVs of debt-to-export ratios 
below 200 percent 

Adequate budget allocation and execution
for PRSP pnority sectors
Significant improvement in macroeconomic
framework, as demonstrated, for example,
by 
accelerated 
attainment 
of PRGF
macroeconomic 
benchmarks 
(including
higher revenue/GDP ratios), and NPVs of
debt-to export ratios below 200 percent.

Governance

Continuous progress in 
establishing transparency 
and accountability in 
public sector management 

Structural Reforms

Completion of structural 
reforms aimed at 
stimulating pnvate sector- 
led growth 

Gender and Population

Development of effective 
policy approaches to 
gender and population 
issues 

Portfolio performance

Continued satisfactory 
implementation of the 
Bank-supported lending 
and grant portfolio 

* 

* 

Satisfactory implementation of public finance 
reforms, such as regular and tmely closing of 
fiscal accounts and effective auditing 
Satisfactory implementation of procurement 
reforms supported by Bank IDF grant

* Attainment of base case tnggers, plus
* 
Successful design and implementation of
an appropnate first phase fiscal
decentralization system

* 

* 

.

* 

* Accelerated 
implementation 
agreed 
timeframe) 
of 
regulatory, 
and 
financial 
programs.

(relative 
to
pnvatization,
sector 
reform

Satisfactory implementation of the pnvatization 
and regulatory reform program (power 
distnbution company, petroleum products 
company, regulatory authonty) within agreed 
timeframe
Satisfactory implementation of the financial
sector reform program (restructuring of state-
owned banks, restructunng of the postal
savings bank, consolidation of the micro-
finance sector) within agreed timeframe.

Adequate 
targeting of actons 
to promote 
.
gender 
equity 
in 
sector 
strategies 
and * 
expenditure programs emanating from PRSP. 
Formulation of a population and reproductive
health strategy

Attainment of base case tnggers plus
Satisfactory implementation of appropnate
population and reproductive health strategy

* No more than 20 percent of projects with 
unsatisfactory IP or DO ratings and 
disbursement ratio(for investment projects) at 
least 20 percent.

* 

Zero project with unsatisfactory IP and DO
ratings and disbursement ration (for
investment projects) of at least 25 percent

53. 
Supporting the privatization of state-owned enterprises and promoting an improved
environment for private sector investment. Niger's pnvatization program will continue with
emphasis on the remainmg large utilities in electricity generation and energy distribution, plus a
number of smaller state-owned operations in both the service and production sectors. A Private
Sector Assessment (including a review of the legal and judicial impediments 
to private
investment) will be carried out in FY05. Although IFC does not presently have on-going or
planned activities for Niger, it intends to field a mission later in FY03 with a view to exploring
opportunities for future operations in support of private sector development. Niger will need to

- 25 -

satisfy remaining requirements 
for full MIGA membership before MIGA guarantees can
contnbute to improving the prospects for increased foreign investment."

54. 
Reform and development of the financial sector. The financial sector reform project
will support far-reachmg reform of the banking and insurance sectors, re-establish the postal
savings system on a solvent footmg separate from the standard postal operation, and restructure
the currently semi-functioning national social secunty system. 
In achieving these goals, the
project will seek to improve the legal and institutional operating environment, re-structure state-
owned banks, build capacity for financial institution management, and will launch studies of
improved financing arrangements for SMEs, as well as of micro-credit institutions.

Pillar 2: The development of productive sectors, especially in rural areas,
to mitigate vulnerability and stimulate income generation

55. 
The Bank's support in this area will address Niger's high vulnerability to climatic
shocks and food insecurity as well as economic marginalization and exploitation with an
emphasis on irrigated agriculture focused on smallholders, non-farm income-generating activities
and cereal bank construction (via the CAP). The Private Irrgation Project follows upon a
successful pilot that introduced highly affordable irrigation technology for small-scale farmers,
along with technical and financial assistance targeting the poorest. The CAP will build capacity
in rural communities throughout Niger - m partnership with UTNDP, the French Development
Agency (AFD), the European Union, and various local and international NGOs - emphasizing
communities' capacity to plan, implement and monitor micro-development projects that focus on
social and productive infrastructure. Future support for agricultural services will aim to reduce
vulnerability and 
increase growth of smallholder agricultural production 
through targeted
research and extension on drought-resistant varieties, diversification into alternative crops, and
value-added post-harvest production.

56. 
Addressing environmental degradation. Bank support addresses rapid environmental
degradation via integration of the best practices developed 
in the recently closed Natural
Resources Management Project into the CAP, as well as mclusion of a substantial GEF-financed
environmental component. The CAP is also co-financed with a US$4 million GEF grant to
support local-level approaches to combat land and water degradation. The GEF will support two
sub-regional environmental management projects with major implications for Niger: the Niger
River Basm project, and the Lake Chad Basin project.

57. 
Increasing rural production and income-generating activity. The Agro-Pastoral
Export Promotion Project is helping producers of exportable crops and animal products
collectively invest in production and marketing so as to allow them to increase sales by putting
tools of transport, market information, storage and credit in their hands. With the PRSP as the
starting point, and a multi-donor approach including Bank support, refinement of a Rural
Development Strategy is underway. The Bank will take this strategy as its reference point for
additional focused AAA in FY04 that will identify further opportunities for selective Bank
intervention to improve conditions for the poorest rural producers, possibly in the FY05 PRSC.
Given the high prnority of rural roads, the Bank will undertake AAA with the goal of supporting

"Niger signed the MIGA Convention in April 1994 but must still ratify it and make the required payment
for its initial subscription to the capital stock of MIGA before becoming a full member.

- 26 -

Niger's formulation of a national roads infrastructure strategy, with the likelihood of at least
partial financing (most probably for rural roads construction and mamtenance) through the FY05
PRSC.

Pillar 3: Improvement in the access of the poor to quality social services,
including basic education, primary health care, reproductive health,
EIIV/AIDS prevention, water and sanitation, and adequate urban habitat

58. 
The Bank's support in this area directly targets Niger's human development
deficiencies and the vulnerabilities that result from them. It seeks to improve the delivery of
basic education and health, with particular emphasis on women and girls in both grant and lending
operations as well through AAA. And it directly tackles the ever-present threat of endemic
disease, both via support for national health strategies and for clean water and urban sanitation.
Both the FY04 PER/CFAA and FY04 Poverty AAA will help strengthen the poverty analysis
necessary for more poverty-focused design of Government policies and programs by: (i)
undertaking incidence analysis of public spending; (ii) assessmg the poverty / social impact of the
privatization and regulatory reform program; (iii) reviewing the gender dimensions of poverty;
and (iv) analyzing the key determinants of poverty for different groups. The Bank will also
undertake analytical work in FY05 to review household risk coping strategies and help the
government design a social protection strategy to help poor Nigeriens weather the shocks that are
a constant in the country's operating environment.

59. 
Primary education for all. Under the recently closed Primary Education Project, the
Bank financed the construction and staffing of primary schools across the country. Financial
support for the training and salaries of "volunteer" (non-civil service) teachers begun through this
project is continumg under the current PEAC. As Niger's proposal for the Education for All
Initiative (EFA-FTI) has been endorsed by donors, the Bank has taken stock of the financial,
administrative and human resource needs to help Niger achieve the education MDG, and this is
now a factor in multi-donor planning in support of its 10-year Plan for Education. Bank support
for education will combine a Basic Education Project (FY04) that will provide the intensive
support necessary to help Niger achieve the highly ambitious goals of the EFA-FTI, and program
support via the social services delivery component of the FY05 PRSC. The Project will be
designed to support expanded access to primary education, capacity building and improvements
in accountability, with the objective of shifting fully from project to programmatic support by the
end of the project. Support through the PRSC could provide for necessary recurrent costs such as
volunteer teacher salaries, as well as supporting the policy agenda; for example, in addressing
sector-wide reform issues identified in ESW on higher education (FY04).

60. Making health care accessible to the poor. The Bank's ongoing support for Niger's
health sector will be based upon its 10-year strategic plan, and designed in collaboration with the
multi-donor support group led by the WHO. As with education, the need to help Niger achieve
the MDG goals for health will require mtensive project assistance, combined with program
support through PRSCs. Program support (PEAC or PRSC) is expected to help finance priority
recurrent costs, such as salaries and training of health personnel m rural zones recruited under
Health II, following that project's closing. The Health III project (FY05) will focus on
performance-based management systems for decentralized health care administration, as well as
on increasing access and affordability for the poorest m line with MDG goals.

- 27 -

61. 
Population issues. Reproductive health and family planning remain extremely difficult
topics to address m the Nigerien cultural, socio-economic and religious context. The govemment
is nonetheless aware that continued unchecked population growth will preclude the achievement
of its poverty reduction objectives. To support the Government in developing an appropriate
strategy, sector work on population will be completed in FY03. It will also serve as the basis for
determining Bank support in this area via the planned health project and the FY05 PRSC.

62. 
Improving gender equity. One of the cross-cutting issues in the PRSP, the Bank
promotes gender equity in a number of its operations, including, via a focus on girl's education,
and in both the CAP and the MAP. The Bank is presently financmg via an IDF grant a project in
support of women's legal status, which generated legal texts and built the capacity of the Ministry
of Social Development to enforce women's nghts. Beginnig in FY04, the Bank will launch
AAA on gender issues to, inter alia, take stock of women's legal status and explore the best ways
of supporting gender-related reforms going forward, including via PRSC support for improved
social services. Through its support to the development of sectoral program budgets and an
MTEF, the Bank will also assist the Govemment m mcluding gender considerations in the design
and choice of public investments and expenditure programs.

63. 
Intensifying the fight against EIIV/AIDS. 
Following an intensive period of re-
structurmg and planning for a multi-sectoral approach to HIV/AIDS, and m close collaboration
with the multi-donor coalition centered in UNAIDS, the Bank will finalize a MAP operation later
in FY03. The Niger MAP builds upon a national HIV/AIDS strategy that provides for sectoral
plans which the Bank will selectively finance in collaboration with other donors. 
It will also
support ongoing capacity building, particularly withm the Ministry of Health, 
to deliver
preventive and post-diagnosis counseling and services; and will also support a comprehensive
national communications strategy emphasizing prevention.

64. 
Making water infrastructure accessible to the poor. The Water Sector Project will
continue supporting the delivery of water services and various regulatory and institutional
changes associated with water sector reform. The project will extend water mfrastructure to the
poorest urban and peri-urban areas where the poor presently pay significantly more for water than
the better-off areas served by the water network, and also contams a substantial component
addressing the needs of rural communities.

Pillar 4: Strengthening institutional and individual capacity within
and outside Government, at the central and local level

65. 
Improving capacity as a central operational imperative. Addressing Niger's capacity
gap is a central priority in all the Bank's work. At the level of general budget support, PEAC II
will both continue PEAC I's support for improving public finance and fiduciary capacity at the
central Government 
level, with 
the view to subsequently providing support for Niger's
administrative and fiscal decentralization. The CAP is primarily focused on building community-
level capacity for managing development processes, and also contams a sub-component for
building administrative and financial capacity at the commune level. Current and planned
sectoral operations all contain components m support of improved ministerial capacity; for
example the operations in support of health, education, infrastructure (urban, transport and water)
and the fight against HIV/AIDS provide substantial resources for staffing, training, statutory
reform, administrative restructuring and other aspects of capacity buildmg. The Bank provides

- 28 -

increasing support for buildmg capacity in the pnvate sector, for example via the Agro-pastoral
export promotion project, which reinforces capacity for private and collective non-governmental
initiatives in improved export production; or via the Private Irrigation Project, in which irrigation
technology is manufactured by local entrepreneurs with Bank-supported training and seed money.

66. 
The Bank's ESW program, including the PER/CFAA and CPAR scheduled duiing this
CAS period will be carried out in collaboration with Nigerien counterparts, and is intended to
serve as the underpinning for future capacity building support via PRSCs. The Niger Country
office administers a very active Small Grants Program that has as a major goal capacity building
in civil society organizations 
(women's organizations have been particularly 
important
In addition, WBI has provided a number of training opportunities, notably via
recipients). 
distance learning in recent years; the Bank will continue to make this available to Niger during
the CAS penod. Finally, the proposed shift to consolidated programmatic lending holds the
promise of creatmg sustamable capacity by using Niger's own institutions (budgetary, financial,
procurement) to channel the bulk of donor fundmg for development and poverty reduction.

Monitoring of Outcomes

67. 
Effective monitoring was discussed at length in Niger's PRSP, and is an absolute
necessity in any transition to consolidated programmatic 
lending. Analytical work under
preparation for the PRSP donors' forum will identify Niger's needs and recommend actions
which the Bank will consider supporting within the context of selectivity in overall donor
coordination. A broad range of performance indicators and targets are shown in the Country
Partnership Strategy Matrix (Annex 9), which is based on Niger's PRSP matrix. As shown in
Table 8, these are broadly consistent with the MDGs. The Bank, with other donors, will align its
operations in support of these indicators in order to ensure progress toward the MDG targets. The
fact that the numerical targets are generally below the MDGs for 2015 is in line with the MDG
concept, which recognizes that MDGs need to be adapted to country specific circumstances.
These discrepancies reflect Niger's low starting point and realistic outlook rather than a lack of
commitment or ambition.

68. 
Under the CAS, monitoring the Bank's effectiveness will take place at two levels: (i)
at the project level, the Bank will continue to strengthen project M&E frameworks to better
evaluate the effectiveness of specific operations in achieving desired outcomes; (ii) at the level of
the overall assistance program, the Bank will monitor how successfully the CAS supports PRSP
objectives, using the Country Partnership Strategy Matrix, and especially the core CAS
benchmarks shown in Table 9. At the mid-point of the CAS penod - in late FY04 - the Bank
will review the indicators and targets to assess progress in implementing the assistance program
and adjust the Bank's strategy as necessary. As explained in para. 50, this mid-point CAS review
will also be the occasion for a reassessment of the debt sustainability situation, with a view to
adjusting lendmg commitments if necessary in the remainder of the CAS period.

- 29 -

Table 8: Niger PRSP Targets and the MDGs

MDG 
Halve, between 1990 and 2015, 
the proportion of people whose 
income is less than one dollar a 
day. 
Halve, between 1990 and 2015, 
the proportion of people who 
suffer from hunger. 
Ensure that, by 2015, children 
everywhere, boys and girls alike, 
will be able to complete a full 
course of primary schooling. 

Niger PRSP target
Reduce income poverty incidence by 20 % by 2015.
This takes mto account Niger's limited resource base, persistently
high population growth and uncertain economic growth
prospects.
Reduce under-five malnutrition rate from 39:6 in 2000 to 17 m
2015.
The PRSP contains no target directly linked to this MDG.
Achieve 84 % primary school enrolment rate by 2015.
This reflects the low current level of gross primary enrolment
(42% in 2001). This is likely to be revised m the context of
Niger's participation in the Education for All Initiative, whose
objective is to help countries achieve universal primary education
by 2015.
Elimnate gender disparities m education by 2005.
In line with MDG. However, this target is considered ambitious
and will require a strong commitment on behalf of the
Government and its partners, as well as significantly improved
institutional capacity.
Reduce infant mortality rate by 60 % from 2000 to 2015
Broadly m line with MDG.

Eliminate gender disparity in 
primary and secondary education, 
preferably by 2005, and to all 
levels of educationno later than 
2015. 
Reduce by two thirds, between 
1990 and 2015, the under-five 
mortality rate.
Reduce by three quarters, between Reduce maternal mortality rate by 60% from 2000 to 2015
1990 and 2015, the matemal 
Broadly in line with MDG.
mortality ratio.
Have halted by 2015 and begun to Reduce HIV/AIDS prevalence rate from 1.4 in 2000 to 0.8 in
reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS. 
2015.12
A key reason for this target being more ambitious than the MDG
is the exceptionally low level of the prevalence rate, m regional
comnparison.
Have halted by 2015 and begun to No specific target determined in PRSP. -
reverse the incidence of malaria
and other major diseases.
Integrate the principles of 
sustainable development into
country policies and programs and
reverse the losses of
environmental resources.

No specific target determined m PRSP.

12 A recently completed epidemiological survey financed by the Bank has determined that the overall
HIV/AIDS prevalence rate is in fact lower than previous data had suggested, and is around the 0.8 percent
target currently.

- 30 -

Table 9: Core CAS Monitoring Benchmarks if

* 

CAS Progress Benchmark 
Improved primary fiscal balance to generate 
public savings and avoid accumulation of
intemal and extemal arrears.
* NPVs of debt-to-export ratios below 200 

.

* 

percent 
Restructunng cum pnvatizationAiquidation of 
remaining state-controlled banks.
Pnvatization of SONIDEP and NIGELEC,
establishment of a multisectoral regulatory 
agency.

* Comprehensive Rural Development Strategy 
finalized, translated into annual program
budgets and implementation underway.

* 

* 

* 

* Rural Roads subsector strategy prepared, 
costed and implementation initiated. 
Increased access to imgation technology for 
small scale farmers
Establish annual education sector program 
budgets denved from the 10-year educaton
strategy Build a multi-donor framework to
finance these program budgets
Performance-based management systems for 
decentralized health care provision in place
* Adoption of a revised health financing policy 
that facilitates access and affordability of health 
services for the poorest
* HIV/AIDS adequate preventive and post-
diagnosis counseling and services in place 
Satisfactory population policy prepared and
reflected in PRSP I.
Significantly increased share of Govemment 
procurement subject to competitive bidding.

* 

* 

Associated CAS Instrument
PEAC II, PEAC II, PRSC

* 

* 

HIPC Completion Point DSA,

PEAC 11, PEAC 111, PRSC
Financial Sector Reform Project.

.

* 

Pnvatzaton & Regulatory Reform

* Rural Development AAA.

* Rural Development and Transport
AAA
Private Irrigation Project.

.

* Basic Education Project, PRSC

* Health III Project.

.

Health III Project Health / Social
Protection Strategy note

* HIV/AIDS Project, Popula.on

* 

PTocurement IDF, PEACs, PRSC.

PRSP/CAS Objective 
I Ensure economic and 
financial stability while 
promoting sustainable and 
robust growth 

11. Develop productive 
sectors to mitigate 
vulnerability and 
stimulate income
gencration 

III 
Improve access for 
the poor to quality social 
services 

IV. Strengthen 
insiuuonal and 

individual capacity within

* 

Procurement IDF, PEACS, PRSC.

and outside govemment, 
at the central and local 
level 

Full transparency of public offenngs and their 
outcomes ensured, as measured by the
standards set in the Procurement Reform
Program 
Enhanced delegation of expenditure 
responsibility to local governments together
with appropnate resource availability 
* Development of MTEF as tool for annual
budget formulation, progressively integrating
key sectors
I/ These benchmarks would monitor progress under the base case assistance program and assume no major exogenous
shocks.

* Decentralization AAA; PEACs;
PRSC.

PER/CFAA; PEACs, PRSC.

* 

* 

* 

VI. 

MANAGING RISKS

69. 
As described above, Niger presents an operating environment laden with risks. Working
towards the over-arching objective of sustainable poverty reduction, the Bank will assist the
country manage these risks via areas of intervention identified in the PRSP. With regard to the

- 31'-

Bank's program of lending, grants and AAA, there are several sets of risks that it needs to monitor
and seek to manage:

* Reform Slippage. The first risk is that Niger will backslide in the ongoing effort to develop
adequate management of public finances, and in structural reforms that include privatization,
procurement reform, and financial sector reform. 
The Bank presently does not foresee
significant slippage in these respects, but given the continued fragility of the political
situation, there remains the possibility of back-tracking as a purely political calculation or in
response to pressure from vested interests. Significant loss of momentum or reversal of
reforms would move the assistance program into a low case scenario.
* Governance Issues. A second area of risk is the possibility that poor govemance, including
corruption, political nepotism and poor policy implementation, would stand in the way of the
overall reform agenda as well as achievement of poverty-reducing sectoral goals from the
PRSP. A major area of attention within the broader development community is that of
fiduciary controls, and the Bank along with other donors -has made building capacity to
address problems m this area a high prionty. Significant deterioration of governance would
also be consistent with a low case scenario.
* Mobilization of internal and external support. A third- area of risk concems the
govemment's ability to maintain (in the case of Niger's population) and build (in the case of
some donors) ownership and support for the PRSP agenda. 
If the govemment cannot
mobilize adequate local ownership nor coordinated donor support for its general and sectoral
objectives, there will be little the Bank can achieve on its own.
Implementation 
issues. A fourth area of risk concems 
the govemment's limited
implementation capacity which may affect staying power in pursuing the PRSP agenda.
* Recurrent drought. The final major nsk is that of recurrent drought which could derail the
reform program and divert Niger's energies away from the longer-term poverty reduction
agenda. Through support for irrigated agriculture, the Bank is helping to mitigate this risk.

* 

VII. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS

70. 
A great deal is at stake for Niger over the next few years. The country has made
significant steps 
towards overcoming 
its past history of poor govemance and economic
mismanagement, and is beginnig to improve the economy's ability to weather the extemal
shocks to which it is so vulnerable. A great deal remains to be accomplished under the PRSP,
however, in order to make a significant impact on poverty and well-being. The Bank will fully
support Niger's strategy for poverty reduction and growth, and will strive to catalyze the support
of the broader donor community. A long-term and productive Bank relationship with Niger can
help restore hope to Niger's poor and confirm the Bank's commitment to fighting even the deepest
poverty in the harshest of.environments.

January 21, 2003
Washington D.C.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By Shengman Zhang

- 32 -

ANNEXES

Annex 1 
Annex 2 
Annex 3 
Annex 4 
Annex 4 
Annex 5 
Annex 6 
Annex 7 
Annex 8 
Annex 8 
Annex 9 
Annex 10 
Annex 11 
Annex 12 
Annex 13 

At-a-Glance
Social Indicators
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance
IDA Program Summary
IFC & MIGA Program
Summary of Non Lending Services
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Statement of IFC
IDA Operations Portfolio
Partnership Strategy Matrix - Description of Donor programs
Summary of Development Priorities
Bank-Fund Collaboration
HIPC Action Plan Update
IDA Lending and Debt Sustainability

Annex 1
Page 1 of 2

Niger at a glance 

12t16/02

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

POVERTYand SOCIAL 

Low.
Income 

Nlger 

Development dismond

2001
Population, mid-year (triUigm) 
GNI per capita (Atlas nmoed USS) 
GNI (Atls me 
4ct USS bilons) 
Average annual growth. 1990501
Popatlon (%) 
Labor force /) 

11.2 
180 
20 

674 
470 
317 

2.511 
430
1069 

LJe expectancy

.

3.4: 

2.5 
2 6 

19 9 
2 3 

*

3.3 

GNI 

Gross

per- 
capita 

pnmary

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1995-01) 
Poverty (% otpopulation belownatnal poverty llne) 
Urbanpopulation(%oflotalpopulation) 
Ute expectancy at bith (yars) 
Infant mortality (oer 1,000 live bths) 
Child malnutrtUon (% ofd rddran under 5) 
Access to an Improved water source (% odpopulatfon) 
lWteray (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primaly enroUment (% of schoolmage populatbon) 
Male 
Female 

enrollment

.. 

.
31
59
76 

21 
46 
114 
40 
59 
84 
42 
50 
33 

32 
47 
91 

-

.

Access to Improved water source

56 
37 
78 
856 
72 

76
37
96 
103 
Be

-

higer 
g 

Low-incomaggrwp

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

G 

Economic ratios'

GOP (U1$ blINW s) 

2.2 

2 7 

18a 

2 0

GrossdomesUtcinvestment(G)P 
Exports of goods and servicessGOP 
Gross domestc savWlgsl 
P 
Gross national savtngaGODP 

203 
24 2 
8.2 

78 
119 
3 8 
3.1 

10.8 
17.8 
3 3 
2 6 

11.5-; 
16.7
3 2
2 7

Trade

Current account balance'GDP 
Intarest payrnentstGDP 
Total debVGDP 
Total debt serv/cetexpolts 
Present value of debttGDP 
Present value of debVexports 

.

-4.6 
0.8 
64.4 
31 5 

-82 
0.5 
911 
8.0

-88 
1.4 

Domestic 
savings

Investment

3.1 
47.1 
31 6 

.

7.1

3461

Indebtedness

1981-91 

199141 

2000 

2001 

2001-05

(average annual gwtrh)
GDP 

0p0 

3 0 

-1.4 

7.6 

3.8 

Niger -- 

Low-Income group

GOP per capita 

-3.1 

-0.4 

-4.7 

4.1 

0.4

Exports of goods and services 

-4.6 

S.4 

0.6

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)
o
4

(% of GDP) 
Agnruiture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and servioss 

45 7 
19.2 
3 9 
35 2 
80.8 
10.9 
36.2 

33 2 
15.0 
5 3 
35 0 
831 
13 1 
15.9 

37 8 
17 8 
6 8 
44 4 
83 7 
13.0 
25.3 

40 4 
169 9 
65 
42 7 
84 4 
12.3 
24 9

/

o*

o20/ 

Da 
rs 

9r 

n 

00 

01

.40 

GGD1 

O GDP

1981-91 

199141 

2000 

2001 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(average annual growth)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Pnvate consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic Investrmrent 
Imports of goods and services 

2 4 
-17 
-18 
-2 6 
-0 8 
6.2 
-3 4 
-5.7 

3 1 
2 5 
33 
2 6 
2 2
-0.9 
5.7 
-1.4

-8 4 
2 0 
3.2 
3.7 

14 7 
2 4 
34 
3 3 

30
20
ro
0t

0

E. 

a. e 

i Imports

Note 2001 data are prelImInary esUmates
The dIamonds show four key Indicators In the country (in bold) compared with Its income-group average If data are missing, the diamond wil
be incomplete

Annex 1
Page 2 of 2

Niger

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflation (%)

Domestic prices 
(% change)
Consumer prices 
impicit GDP deflator 

I

-1.9 
14.8 

2 9 
4.5 

4.0 
4 0

a

10.6 

Government finance 
(% ot GDP, Irnludes cunant grants)

2

Crufent revenue 

.. 

78 

8.6 
-2.8 
-7.6 

9.2 
-1 8 
-7 4

s 

97 

Us 
GD Pdeflator 

9l 
00 
O CPI

o0

Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/defclt 

.. 
.

-1 6 

-6.6 

TRADE

(USSn2WIonB) 

1981 

1991 
270 
199 
40 

2000 
283 
90 
60 

2001 
283
88
62 

Export and Import levelS (USS mil.)

Totail exports (lob) 
Uranium 
Uvestock Products 
Manufactures
Total imports (cd) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capitalgoods 
Export price Index (1995=100) 

.

_

.

366 
31 
19 
102 

402 
88 
67 
66 
106 

432
95
62 
78 
107 

too
o

.

95 

96 

97 

as 

oo OD

Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995 100) 

.
.

139 
75 

137 
78

H Exports 

1irrporns

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ nsLtions) 

1981 
24 
786 
-261 

1991 
327 
436 
-109 

2000 
321 
455 
-135 

2001 
325
486 
-161

Current account balance to GDP(%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

*2

Net Income 

1 

-16 

-16

Net cuffent transfers 

109 

is 

4 

4 

.

Current account balance 

-128 

-147 

*172 

4 

Financing items (net) 
Changes In net reserves 

128 
0 

176 
-29 

193 
*22 

-o*
12

Memo:
Reserves includIng gold (USS millons) 

.

78 
712.0 

94
733 0

Conversion rate (DEC, tocal/US$) 

271.7 

282.1 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(USS rrillions) 

ComposItlon of 2000 debt (USS mill.)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

1,022 
0 

1,494 
0 

1.638
0
723 

79 

479 

F- 68

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

173 

107 

28

0 

0 

0 

I

1 

5 

14 

E 447 

B 723

ComposItion of net resource flows
Officwal grants
OffIca creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct Investment 
Portfolio equity 

136 
198 
-6 
0 

23 
-55 
15 
0 

54
-2
15 
0 

D

C 74

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
PrIncipal repayments 
Netflows 
Interest payments 
Nettransters 

0 
13 
0 
12 
1 
12 

19 
17 
2 
16 
4 
12 

45 
68 
8 
s0
8
54

130 

A - IBFI 
8-IDA 
C - IMF 

E -Bklatedr
F-Prvate
G - Short-term

.

D- OthermLtrblateral 

* 

Development Economics 

12/16/02

Niger Social Indicators

Annex 2

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of populaton) 
Total ferbility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY
(X of population)
National headcount Index
Urban headcount Index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (USS) 
Consumerpnceindex(1995=100) 
Food pnce index (1995=100) 
INCOMEICONSUMPTiON DISTRiIUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quinble (% of income or consumpton) 
Highest quinble (% of income or consumpbon) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(' of age group)

Total 

Male 
Female 
Access to an Improved water source
(% of populabon)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
, 
Child malnutnlon (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under5(per1,000livebirths) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 populabon) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

Latest single year 

Same reglonlincome group

1970-75 

1980485 

1994-00 

4 8 
2 9 
10 6 
8 0 

8 6 
3 2 
14 3 
8 0 

10 8 
3 5 
20 6 
7 2 

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

658 9 
2 6 
34 4 
5 2 

Low-
Income

2,459 8
2 0
31 9
3 6

250 
31 

230 
89 
95 

23 

.

40 
38 
42 

181 
320 

611 
490 

31 
0 3

25 

32 
17 

27 
4 
49 

44 
42 
45 

137 
322 

562 
453 
, 
20 

180 
114 
123

5 05
2 6
53 3

12 
27 

28

32
20

59 
70 
56 

36 
28 
40

46 
44 
48 

114 
248 

476 
389 
920
18

470 
133 

410
140

2.4 
36 

12
34

55 
82 
41 

53 
46 

47 
46 
47 

91 
162 

504 
459 

76
88
70

57
57

59
58
60

76
115

294
261

Note 0 or 0 0 means zero or less than half the unit shown Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 Indicate discrepandes
between the estimates of school-age populabon and reported enrollment data

2002 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, Worid Bank

Annex 3

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

CAS Annex B2 - Niger

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation 8 
Average Implementation Penod (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number 8. 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount ', 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number 'd 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount 8. d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousand) 
Average Supervision (US$ thousand /project) 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

8 
3,4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
28.1 

Yes 
1099 
137.4 

9 
3,9 
11.1 
11.7 
22.2 
16.0 
29.0 

Yes 
709 
78.8 

9 
3,3 
0.0 
0.0 
11.1 
3.4 
19.1 

Yes 
799 
88.8 

7
3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
7.0

-

880
97.8

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eva! by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
36 
5
715.6 
139.3
44.4 
40.0
50.6 
33.2

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Rato of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only
* All indicators are for projects actve in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursemnent Rato,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex 4
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B3 - IBRDIIDA Program Summary - Niger

Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year 

Proy ID 

USS(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(HWL) 

Implementabon b
Risks (HIMiL)

2003 

2004 

2005 

COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
HIV/AIDS PREVENTION AND CARE PROJECT 
PEAC 11- (Pub Exp Adj Cr) 
sub4otal 

PEAC III 
FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORM PROGRAM 
BASIC EDUCATION 
sub-total 

PRSCI 
HEALTH III 
sub-total 

Total 

35.0 
25 0 
30 0 
90.0

35 0 
15.0 
30.0 
80.0

40.0 
28 0 
68.0

238.0

H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 

H 
H 

M
H
M

M
H
M

H
M

Annex 4
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Niger

Niger - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2000-2003

2000 2001 2002 2003

IFC approvals (US$m)

Sector (%)

Investment instrument(%)

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

Annex 5

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Niger

Product 

Recent completions

Nigeria Links (informal) 
Energy Note (informal) 
Rural Development (informal) 
Participatory Poverty Assessment 

Planned

Support to PRSP Progress Report 
and Donors' Forum
Stocktaking on Decentralization 
Rural Development Sector Work 
Population Sector Work 

Public Exp. Mgmt. Rev. /CFAA 
Poverty Analysis 
Gender/Legal Status 
CPAR 
Transport / Urban Strategy 
Higher Education Study 

DPR 
Health/Social Protection Strategy Note 
Private Sector Assessment 
Energy Assessment 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) 

Audience a 

Objective b

FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 

FY03 

FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 

FY05 
FY05 
FY05 
FY05 

100 
60 
60 
80 

40 

50 
25 
45 

100 
80 
50 
120 
80 
80 

100 
80 
80 
80 

G,D,B,P 
G, B 
G, B 
G, D, B, P 

KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS

G,D,B,P 

PD, PS

G,D,B,P 
G, B 
G, B 

G,B 
G, B 
G, B 
G,D,B,P 
G, B 
G, B 

G, B 
G, B 
G, B 
G, B 

PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
PD, PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS

KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS

a Govemment, donor, Bank, public disseminabon
b. Knowledge generabon, public debate, problem-solving.

Annex 6
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B6 - Key Economic Indicators - Niger

Actual 
1997 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2002 
2003 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2001 

2004

100.0 
38.9 
17.8 
43.3 

100.0 
38.9 
17.9 
43.2 

100.0 
42.6 
16.7 
40.7 

100.0 
40.7 
17.2 
42.1 

100.0 
37.8 
17.8 
44.4 

100.0 
40.4 
16.9 
42.7 

100.0 
39.9 
16.9 
43.3 

100.0 
39.5 
16.9 
43.6 

100.0
39.2
17.0
43.8

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

96.9 
9.4 
4.6 
4.7 

96.8 
10.6 
5.8 
4.8 

97.3 
11.0 
6.4 
4.6 

96.3 
10.0 
6.4 
3.6 

96.7 
10.5 
5.9 
4.6 

96.8 
11.2 
6.5 
4.8 

95.9 
13.1 
7.9 
5.2 

94.8 
14.7 
8.7 
6.0 

94.4
14.9
8.7
6 2

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

16.9 
23.5 

16.4 
24.0 

17.8 
26.3 

15.9 
22.4 

17.8 
25.3 

16.7 
24.9 

16.1 
25.2 

15.5 
25.2 

15.2
24.6

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsC 

3.1 
0.4 

3.2 
0.4 

2.7 
1.3 

3.7 
2.5 

3.3 
2.6 

3.2 
2.7 

4.1 
4.2 

5.2 
4.6 

5.6
5.1

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

1987 

1846 

2077 

2018 

1798 

1954 

2135 

2276 

2430

200 

200 

210 

190 

190 

180 

180 

190 

190

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1987 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
3.4 
Gross Domestic Income 
0.5 

2 8 
2.5 

10.4 
9.6 

-0.6 
0.1 

-1.4 
-1.8 

7.6 
8.8 

2.7 
1.3 

3.9 
4.2 

4.1
2.5

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1987 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
-0.1 
-0.8 
Total consumption 
-5.4 
-1.3 
Private consumption 
-5.8 
-2.5 
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

6.6 
5.9 
7.3 

-4.0 
-4.0 
-6.2 

-4.7 
-5.7 
-3.8 

4.1 
4.3 
3.9 

-0.5 
-2.3 
-1.9 

0.7 
-0.9 
-1.2 

0.8
-1.8
-1.8

337 
302 
466 
306 
-130 
-25 
-183 

303 
272 
444 
300 
-141 
-22 
-192 

369 
334 
547 
396 
-178 
-6 
-207 

321 
287 
452 
317 
-131 
-5 
-156 

321 
283 
455 
324 
-135 
4 
-148 

325 
283 
486 
347 
-161 
4 
-172 

343 
299 
538 
384 
-195 
17 
-208 

353 
312 
574 
400 
-221 
5 
-236 

369
325
598
416
-229
5
-245

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 

0 
40 
32 
8 

0 
154 
65 
90 

0 
42 
73 
-31 

2 
1 
33 
-32 

9 
20 
27 
-7 

28 
13 
16 
-3 

3 
-17 
-12 
-5 

9 
-3 
-12 
9 

10
-5
-14
9

Other capital (net, mci errors &ommisslons) 

132 

10 

164 

131 

147 

152 

245 

257 

263

Change in reservesd 

11 

29 

1 

22 

-29 

-22 

-23 

-27 

-23

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR87 pnces)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary

-6.5 

-7.6 

-8.6 

-6.5 

-7.5 

-8.2 

-9.1 

-9.7 

-9.4

8.0 

1.9 

6.5 

0.7 

21.9 

0.4 

0.1 

2.3 

1.9

Manufactures 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

Merchandise imports (CIF) 

5.5 

10.4 

4.6 

6.2 

7.0 

12.2 

6.3 

7.0 

1.4

Annex 6

Page 2 of 2

(Continued)

Niger - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

1996 

Actual 
1997 

1998 

-
1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

Projected
2002 
2003 

2004

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Budget revenues 
7.8 
Current expenditures 
8.5 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
-0.7 
Capital expenditure 
3.8 
Foreign financing 
6.5 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
Prnvate sector credit growth / 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR87 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f 

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

9.9 
-24.9 
-57.2 

79.6 
93.0 
85.6 
57.0 

5.3 
4.7 

8.4 
10.5 
-2.1 
4.6 
8.5 

9.2 
-1.0 
31.4 

70.4 
82.3 
85.5 
57.1 

2.9 
3.1 

8.9 
10.9 
-2.0 
5.6 
9.6 

8.5 
12.1 
-3.6 
5.6 
5.8 

8.6 
11.2 
-2.6 
5.2 
17.9 

9.2 
11.0 
-1.8 
5.7 
7.9 

10.6 
11 1 
-0.5 
6.9 
5.7 

8.2 
0.7 
-37.0 

7.6 
-5.5 
-23.8 

8 1 
8.9 
-275.0 

9.5 
32.3 
-108.3 

9.7 
8.2 
233.3 

10.6 
11.3 
-0.7 
7.7 
5.0 

9.8 
6.8 
27.5 

60.0 
72.6 
82.7 

11 0
11.0
0 0
7 6
5.1

10 3
11.9
391 7

61.5
744
82.6

55 7 
70.4 
79.2 

58.9 
73 2 
80.4 

81.1 
102.1 
79.4 
58.5 

3.0 
3.0 

69.2 
78.4 
88.2 
55.0 

3.0 
2.0 

56.1 
73.5 
76.3 
53.8

29 
4.5 

4.0 
4.0 

3.2 
3.0 

2.6 
2.0 

2.6
2 0

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central govemment.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex 7

Niger - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator 

Actual 
1997 
1998 

Estimat( 
2000 2001 

Projected
2002 
2003 

1999 

2004

1996 

1536 

1570 

1653 

1640 

1639 

1555 

1512 

1502 

1463

13 

56 

99 

64 

33 

62 

29 

34 

54 

28 

50 

34 

7 

-6 

-39

89 

86 

97

442.7 497.8 413.5 477.4 466.2 427.7 391.0 381.0 356.0
77.3 
85.0 
79.6 
81.3 
91 2 
79 6 
70.8 
66.0 
60.2
16.3 
20.4 
15.4 
9.8 
8.0 
9.4 
22.9 
21.9 
23.5
67.3 
66.9 
70.2 
71.8 
72 3 
76.7 
79.2 
81.3 
83 1

0 

.. 

0 
0 

0 

.. 

0 
0 

0 

.. 

0 
0 

0 

.. 

0 
0 

0 

.. 

0 
0 

0 

..

0 
0 

0 

0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0

0
0

0 
609 

0 
625 

0 
688 

0 
694 

0 
723 

0 
753 

0 
802 

0 
840 

0
855

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators
(%/0)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio(%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital (for 1996-2001). Projections (2002-2004) do not include IMF purchases nor short term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex 8
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Niger

Niger
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio

(In US Dollars Millions)

FY Approval Comnpany Loan Equity Quasi Partc Loan Equity Quasi Partic

Held 

Disbursed

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan Equity Quasi Partic

Annex 8
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B8 - Niger
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

Closed Projects 

43

IBRDDA '
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Oosed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Dibursed (ActIve + Oosed) 
of which has been repald 
Total Undrsbursed (Active) 
Total Undlsbursed (Ctosed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Ciosed) 

74 59
0 00
832 31
66 65
906 91
68 65
12615
1 24
127 39

Adn Pnlodt. 

LM. PeR 

Supewieltn R.tee 

ee,o.nt 
In USS mnIons. 

ofl n 
t ee,wn
Expected and Actual

0bnruernnts

P.otod 10 

P001999 
P049691 
P035608 
P051272 
P058730 
P061558 
P072996 

lNOted 

5 

_brnl 

-j.nt"' 9" FtenI Y.n 

IDA 

Undi.b 

Org. PnF Revd

Health It 
Urban Infrastructure Rehab 
Transport Infrastructure Rehab 
Privatezabon/Regulatory Reform 
Agro-pastoral Export Promobon 
Water Sector 
Pnvate Imgatton Promobon 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 

1997 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 

40 
20 
28 
186 
10 35 
48 
38.72 

8 43284 
543952 
5 92682 
100726 
7.69929 
470989 
41 4828 

114 0 849756
6 6040732
4 3
101 0787409
-2 4
57
83

Total 

203.67 

126.153 

43.6 7.677897

Diagnosis 

Need for quality 
growth for achieving 
PRSP objective of 

poverty reduction 

* Fiscal decentralization 

* PRSC I 

CAS Annex B9 - Country Partnership Strategy Matrix - Niger

PRSP pillar No. 1: Ensure economic and financial stability while promoting sustainable and robust growth
Strategy, actions 
Selected PRSP Performance 
Bank Group Instruments (base case) 
Benchmarks
Sustainable reduction in monetary 
povertyfrom 1994 to 2005 
* Head count poverty level from 65 to 
590/o 
* Extreme poverty level from 34 to
30e 

Financial(budget) supportfor PRSP 
implementation 
* PEAC II & III 

Improve allocation ofpublicfunds 
U Public expenditure management 
reform 

AAA for strengthening offiduciary and
30.. 
economic management framework:
Achieve PRSP macro-economic targets * DPR (Sources of Growth)
* Poverty Analysis
a PER/CFAA (with EU)

.In 2001-2005 

Annex 9
Page 1 of 5

Partner Programs

IMF, EU (fiscal
management)
EU, France, UNCDF

(decentralization)

* 4% annual growth 
a 3% annual inflation rate
. 3% annual 
inflation rate 
* fiscal balance from -2 9 in 2000 to -
1.2% of GDP by 2005 
* investment rate from 10.8 in 2000 to
15% by 2005 
* debt, service to GDP ratio from 4 
(2000) to 1% (2005) 

* Capacity buildmg for budget/expenditure
reforms in context of PEACs and PRSCs

*CPAR

* IDF grant for implementation of national
procurement code and capacity building on
procurement
* HIPC Completion Point

*PRSP/donors 

forum

Financial and Technical Assistance/or 
Financial Sector Re/orm 
* Fiancial Sector Reform Project

Financial and Technical Assistance/or 
Privatization Reform 
* Pnvatization and Regulatory Reform Project 
AAA for promotion ofprivate sector
development
* Private Sector Assessment
* DPR (sources of growth)

France, EU, Denmark,
IAD (microefinance)

EU, France (Capacity
building for private
sector development)

Financial sector reform: 
* Improve regulatory environment 
* Restructured banking and 
insurance sector
* Develop micro-finance institutions

Implementation ofprivatlization 
program. 
* Improve infrastructure 
* Simplify regulatory framework 
* Improve legal and judiciary system 

PRSP pillar No. 2: Develop productive sectors, especially in rural areas, to mitigate vulnerability and stimulate income generation
Diagnosis 
Strategy, actions 
Selected PRSP Performance 
Bank Group Instruments (base case) 
Partner Programs
Benchmarks

Annex 9
Page 2 of 5

Rural sector to 
constitute main growth 
engine as 85 % of 
population live in rural 
areas. Given the 
feagilty of Niger's 

Increase agro-pastoral production 
through: 
m promoting irrigated agriculture 
. rmtn ietc 
eeomn 
promong ivestockdevelop ent 
*improvmg 
transport infrastrucdure 

climatic uncertainty, 
there is need to 
increase productive 
land bases and to
eand bagrcutue 
expans 
agncu ture, 

Promote income generating 
activities in the agricultural 
economy by: 
* reinforcing basic services to 
producers (mcl. micro-credit and 
agricultural extension) 

* Fostering integrated development 
of natural resources, through. 
* environmentally sound land-use 
policies 
* measures to fight desertification 
* improve access to electricity
* diversify mining resources
Ensuringfood secunty through: 
 Reinforcmg food crisis 
management capacity at regional
level

* Substantial increase in real agro- 
Integrated financial and technical assistance 
pastoral GDP from 2000 to 2005 
to agro-pastoral development: 
* Increase share of well miaintained 
, Community Action Program 
upvdrasfo 
3(01 oDenimark, 
private Iigation Project 
* Agro-Pastoral Export Promotion Project 

* Build 2000 rural roads by 2005 

(2005) 

* Reduction of poverty index in 
* PRSC I (Transport) 
areas from 0,66 (1994) to 0,62 
AAA on Rural Development. 
(2005) 
* Rural Development Strategy
* Increase of livestock vaccination 
* Rural Development Sector Work
cover (PPCB) from 35 (2000) to 50% * ESW on formulation of national road
(2005) 
infrastructure strategy

* Substantial increase of share of 
arable/fertile land in total from 2000 
to 2005 
* Substantial increase in households 
using non-wood fuel 

* DPR (sources of growth) 

GEF Grants:
a Niger River basin Initiative
* Lake Chad Basin Initiative

EU, IDB, ADB, IFAD,
BADEA, BOAD,
Germany, Switzerland,
Belgium,
Japan, Lybia, China,
Luxembourg, Norway

France, Germany, EU,
UNDP, [FAD, Belgium

Italy, ADB, UNDP, EU,
Denmark Belgium

* Achieving positive cereal balance in 
each year from 2002 to 2005

FAO, EU, WFP, France

Diagnosis 

Niger's low level of 
human development 
makes access to health 
care, education and 
safe water 
prerequisites for 
poverty reduction 

Improve access and quality of 
education with focus on primary 
education, education of girls, 
promotion of education in rural 
areas. 

.

Budget support to enhance social service 
delivery 

* PRSC I 

* PEAC I & III 

PRSP pillar No. 3: Improve access for the poor to quality social services
Strategy, actions 
Selected PRSP Performance 
Bank Group Instruments (base case) 
Benchmarks
Improve education sector performance 
from 2000 to 2005. 
* primary school enrollment ratio: 37.3 
to 48% 
aGirls'primary school enrollment ratio: 
Girl primr 
29.6 to 48% 
* adult literacy rate. 19.9 to 28% 
* primary school completion rate: 24.5 
to 44% 
* student-teacher ratio in pnmary 
education 43 to 45
*education exp./GDP: 3.4 to 4% 
Improve overall health status of 
population (from 2000 to 2005): 
a Life expectancy at birth: 48 to 50 
* Total fertility rate: 7 5 to 5.5% 
* Infant mortality rate (per 1000): 126 to 
94.5 
* Maternal mortality rate (per 
1000,000) 700 to 500 
l HIV/AIDS prevalence rate: 1.4 to 
1 .5% (contain increase) 
* Health system coverage: 48 to 50% 
* Immunization rate: 18.4 to 36.8% 
a Under 5 malnutntion rate: 39.6 to 30% 

Financial and technical assistance to social
service delivery:
* Health II & III projects
HIV/AIDS prevention and care project
(MAP)
Basic Education

Economic and Sector Work on human 
development issues: 
* Poverty Analysis 
IDF to support women's legal status
a Institutionalizing gender considerations in
budget formulation and execution through
PEACs and PRSCs
a ESW on gender issues
a Study on population
a Higher education study
* HIPC completion point
a Health/Social Protection Strategy Note
a Transport and Urban Strategy
a Energy Assessment

* Participation of Bank in "Education for All
initiative"
* Water Sector Project 
* Urban Infrastructure project 

Inprove equitable access to 
health services for all, through: 
* Increasing health service 
coverage 
 Reducing infectious and 
.parasitic diseases 
* Facilitating access to 
affordable health care 

Annex 9
Page 3 of 5

Partner Programs

Canada, France,
Switzerland, Germany,
Japan, Luxembourg,
EU, ADB, UNICEF,
BADEA, OPEC Fund

WHO, Japan, Germany,
USAID, France,
Belgium, Canada
Luxembourg, EU,
ADB, UNICEF, OPEC
Fund

Diagnosis 

Niger's low level of 
human development 
makes access to health 
care, education and 
safe water 
prerequisites for 
poverty reduction 
(ctd.) 

PRSP pillar No. 3: Improve access for the poor to quality social services - (continued)
Strategy, actions 
Selected PRSP Performance 
Bank Group Instruments (base case) 
Benchmarks
Increase access to safe water (ASW) 
(from 2000 to 2005) 
* ASW mini-scheme implementation 
ratio: 35.5 to 52% 
* Access to safe water: 52 to 61% 

See previous page 

Improve the access to and quality of 
water and sanitation services, 
through: 
* Improving water resource 
management 
* Improving coverage ratios for
water and sanitation
* Adapting legal and institutional
framework
Urban development (by 2010, no. of No specific benchmarks defined in 
people with no resources living in 
PRSP for improving housing and
urban centers will constitute nearly 
urban environment
40% of total pop.):
* Development of adequate
infrastructure and facilities
* Improve housing conditions and
capacities for planring urban
development

Annex 9
Page 4 of 5

Partner Programs

Switzerland, Germany,
France, EU, BOAD,
BID, ADB, Denmark,
China, OPEC Fund,
Saudi Arabia

EU, France

PRSP pillar No. 4: Strengthen institutional and individual capacity within and outside government, at the central and local level
Diagnosis 
Strategy, actions 
Selected PRSP Performance 
Bank Group Instruments (base case) 
Partner Programs
Benchmarks

Annex 9
Page 5 of 5

Low institutional and 
human capacities are a 
major challenge for 

Enhance political govemance: 
* Strengthenmg the capacities of 
civil society organizations 

Substantial increase in: 

* Degree of awareness of the rule of 
law among population 

Financial and technical assistance to 
decentralization community driven 
development 

and poverty reduction 
objectves. Political 
and economic 
govemance to be 
strengthened through 
consolidation of 
democratization and 
building of political 
and legal institutions 

* Strengthening and consolidating 
the rule of law 
* Promoting and protecting human 
nghts, civil liberties and civil 
peace 
* Reforming the legal system 
* Implementing civic and political 
training program for the army 
Strengthenmg the National 
Social Dialogue Commission
Enhance economic govemance: 
* Comprehensive public 
experiditure review 
* Public procurement reform 
* Establishing effective controlling 
and auditing 
institutions 
* Strengthening capacity in public 
finance management 

* Number of rejected expenditure 
commitments 
* -Publication of public budget 
execution reports
* Utilization ratio of judicial services
* Share of households with access to
an information mrdium (%)
* Number of corruption cases
brought to court

Substantal increase in/compliance 
with 
* Audits mandated by the Chamber 
o Accounts
* Share of public tenders complying 
with regulation 
* Budget revew laws are passed 
every year 

Decentralization reform: 
* Strengthen democracy and good 
govemance at local level

No specific benchmarks on 
decentrallzation reform in PRSP 

France, EU, Denmark,
Netherlands, USAID,
Switzerland, UNDP,

ACBF

a Community Action Program 
a PEAC 11 & Ill
- PRSC I

Financial and technical assistance to PSD. 
* Privatization and regulatory reform project
* Financial Sector Reform Project

EU, UNDP

AAA 
to strengthen the fiduciary framework
and promote PSD
* CPAR
* PER/CFAA
* Private sector assessment
* DPR (on sources of growth)
ESWon decentralization 
* Decentralization Stocktaking

UNDP, France, EU

Building human and institutional 
capacity: 
* Improving and reorganizing
administrative structures and
human resources
* Civil Service reform

No specific benchmarks on 
decentralization reform in PRSP 

Capacity buildig 

WBI traynuig and distanFe learnmeg

UNDP, France, EU

Nlger
CAS Annex B1 0 - Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
perfonnance 

Mapr Issuab 

Country 
priority" 

Bank 
priorityP 

ReconcillatIon of country
and Bank prloritead

Annex 10

Poverty Reduction &
Economic Management
Poverty reducUon 
Economic policy 
Public sector 

Gender 

Human Developmnent
Department
Education 

poor 
fair 
fair 

poor 

fair 

Health, nutrition & population tair 

Social protection 

Population 

HIV/AIDS 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustalnable Development

Rural deveiopment 

Environment 
Social development 

Finance, Prtivate Sector &
Infrastructure
Financial sector 

Private sector 

Energy & mining 
Water & lnfrastncture 

poor 

poor 

poor 

poor 

poor 
poor 

fair 

fair 

fair 
fair 

high 
high 
high 

PRSP Implementatlon 
Consolidate macro-stability 
Allocation and use of pubic 
resources
low status of women In terms of moderate 
law and access to services & 
opportunities 

high 

hgh 

high 

Ltd access due to resource 
constraints; qualty & demand
Issues
Ltd access due to resource 
constrilnts; qualKy & demand
Issues
food security, absence of socil 
safety nets,

Only reoently began recelving 
attenton & resources; capacity
constraints

Policy dilogue, esp via of
PRSP refinement &
implementation

high
high
high

high 

high

high

moderate 

Other donors in the lead

moderate 

high 

high 

high

Polcy dialogue, esp. via of
PRSP refinement &
implementaton

Enhancing rural Infrastructure, 
access to markets

Desertlfication 
Community development and 
empowerment

high 

high 
high 

FragIe financil sector, weak bgal high 
& regul. environment; ltd. access
of poor to financing
Consoidate gal & regul Reform high 
program
Rural energy 
Roads maintenance, water 
resources management

moderate 
high 

Other donors In the lead

high

moderat 
high

high

high

low 
moderate 

Other donors in the lead
Other donors In the lead

a Use excelibnt, "good," 
ar. or poor.-
b Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reducton, *rural poverty- for education, 'female secondary
completion, for environment, 'urban air pollutIon")
c. To indicate priority, use low," "moderate," or hiNgh-
d. Give explanation, if prlorities do not agree; for example, another MD8 may have the lead on the issue, or there may be
ongoing dialogue

E Lia 
i 

tr 

* 

Public Information Notice 

zJ} 

* ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~RELAIONS

EXTERNAL

DEPARTMENT

Annex 11
Page 1 of 4

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 02/19 
EMBARGOED 
;
NOT FOR NEWSWIRE TRANSMISSION
UNTIL 3:00 PM WASHINGTON TIME (2000 GMT)
March 1, 2002

International Monetary Fund
700 1 9th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2001 Article IV Consultation with Niger

On February 8, 2002, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Niger.'

Background
With a per capita income of about US$200, Niger is one of the poorest countries in Africa and
is ranked very 
low on all social 
indicators. 
It is highly vulnerable 
to external and
weather-related shocks. Its main economic activities, agriculture and 
livestock, account
approximately for 40 percent of output, while the export base is limited to uranium, cattle and a
few agricultural products. Furthermore, Niger has suffered a series of social and political
upheavals over the last decade that hinrdered the implementation of reforms and economic
recovery measures. Since their election at end-1999, the authorities have been able to
reestablish economic, social, and political stability in the country. From negative 1.4 percent in
2000, the real GDP growth is estimated to reach 5.1 percent in 2001 as a result of good
climatic conditions. Inflation slowed to under 4 percent on average, and the external current
account deficit (excluding official transfers) is estimated to have widened slightly to around
8.5 percent of GDP due to deterioration in the terms of trade. The basic fiscal deficit (i.e., the
budget revenue minus expenditure, excluding foreign financed investment projects) narrowed

' Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

Annex 11
Page 2 of 4

from 4.8 percent in 1999 to 2.9 percent in 2000, and is expected to have improved slightly in
2001 because of a better control of budgetary spending and an improved revenue collection.

Niger also made progress in implementing structural reforms. Progress in the reform of the
budgetary expenditure process, 
including 
the strengthening of budget execution and
monitoring, was supported by a new public expenditure credit of the World Bank. Concurrently
with the budgetary reforms, the authorities implemented in August 2001 a new pricing system
for petroleum products that is transparent, automatic, and flexible, and privatized in November
2001 the communications company, SONITEL. The authorities are committed to strengthening
external debt management and to keeping the momentum of the privatization program, in
particular, through divestiture from the energy and petroleum companies.

Niger is eligible for assistance under the enhanced HIPC Initiative and reached the decision
point in December 2000. Although the bulk of the debt relief will be delivered after reaching the
completion point under the Initiative, creditors (including Paris Club creditors, the World Bank,
and the International Monetary Fund, and the African Development Bank) provided interim
assistance under the HIPC 
lnitiative- of CFAF 8.8 billion in 2001 (SDR 9.5 million, or
0.6 percent of GDP). The resources freed under the HIPC Initiative were fully used for the
financing of a poverty reduction program that was launched at the initiative of the President of
Niger in 2001. The government has also prepared, through a large participatory process, a full
poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) approved-by a national workshop held in Niamey on
November 26-27, 2001.

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors welcomed the satisfactory macroeconomic outcome for 2001, including a
rebound of economic growth to about 5 percent, and a reduction of year-on-year inflation to
less than 4 percent. Program slippages identified in early 2001 had been rectified and the
program had been brought back on track at end-September 2001. Directors were encouraged
by the additional measures taken to ensure the achievement of the program objectives at end-
2001, despite delays in budgetary assistance disbursements.

Directors 
regretted 
the 
temporary 
resurgence of external payment arrears 
at
end-September 2001 and the suspension of the petroleum product pricing system in October
2001. They welcomed the authorities' commitments to reinforce debt management and ensure
the continuous implementation of the petroleum product pricing system, which resumed in
November 2001. They urged the authorities to avoid stop-and-go policies, stay the course on
structural reforms, and strengthen Niger's institutional capacity.

Directors endorsed the authorities's economic and financial program for 2002, which aims to
consolidate further the fiscal stance through higher revenue, while stepping up implementation
of the poverty reduction strategy. They urged the authorities to reduce domestic payments
arrears in 2002 with a view to revitalizing the private sector and strengthening confidence in
the public sector. They welcomed the authorities' intention to strengthen treasury management
further and to establish an appropriate level of precautionary cash balances, in order to limit
the vulnerability of government spending to the timing of foreign aid disbursements. At the

Annex 1 1
Page 3 of 4

same time, Directors urged Niger's development partners to make timely, better coordinated,
and full delivery of external project and budgetary assistance pledges, to avoid treasury
cash-flow problems and program curtailments.

Directors observed, that Niger's balance of payments should remain sustainable over the
rnedium term if adequate international support were provided.-They urged the authorities to
implement a prudent external debt management policy and 
to' continue seeking the
participation and contribution of non-Paris Club bilateral creditors under the enhanced HIPC
Initiative.

Directors noted that Niger's competitiveness has been maintained in the context of the
institutional arrangement of the Franc zone. They welcomed the prudent monetary policy
conducted at the regional level by the Central Bank of the West African States. Directors
encouraged the authorities to continue their efforts to comply with the convergence criteria set
under the pact of the West African Economic and Monetary Union.

Directors urged the authorities to maintain their structural- reform agenda, particularly the
privatization program, and to implement without delay the reforms to strengthen the financial
system, 
in collaboration with the World Bank. The ongoing reforms - of the budgetary
expenditure process and the treasury operations should be deepened to improve governance
and strengthen management of.- public finances, and to ensure satisfactory expenditure
monitoring and tracking in the context of the poverty reduction strategy. The authorities are
encouraged to enhance their efforts to combat money laundering and 
the financing of
terrorism.

Directors welcomed the finalization of the PRSP, which has been based on an intensive
participatory process, and agreed -with the thrust of-the joint staff assessment of the PRSP.
The strategy provided a credible framework for poverty reduction.

Directors stressed the need to address the serious weaknesses in Niger's statistical database,
notably with respect to national accounts, balance of payments and external debt statistics.
They welcomed the authorities' decision to follow the guidance provided for compiling and
disseminating macroeconomic and socio-demographic data under the Fund's General Data
Dissemination Standard.

Directors commended the authorities for the vigorous measures taken to bring the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility-supported program back on track during the second half of
2001. All of the program targets were met at end-September 2001, except for a small
accumulation of external payments arrears that was corrected by end-2001. Directors also
welcomed 
the measures 
taken by 
the authorities 
to ensure satisfactory program
implementation at end-2001, despite delays in budgetary aid disbursements.

Directors endorsed the economic and financial program for 2002, and noted that the 2002
budget is consistent with the newly established poverty reduction strategy. They encouraged
the authorities 
to 
focus on 
improving 
the business enVironment and private sector
development. Progress in these areas, as well as the reform of the financial sector, would

Annex 11

Page 4 of 4

complement sound financial and external debt policies, and help to create the necessary
conditions for achieving higher levels of economic growth and an effective reduction of poverty
in Niger.

Public /nfonnation Notices (PINs) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the
conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the
public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member
countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF's assessment of these policies; and (ii) following
policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. The Staff Report for the 2001
Article IV Consultation with Niger is also available.

Niger: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998-2001

Domestic economy 
Real GDP 
GDP deflator 
Consumer prices (annual average) 

Gross investment 
Gross domestic savings 

External economy 
Exports of goods, f.o.b. 
Imports of goods, f.o.b. 
Current account balance (excl. current official transfers) 
Overall balance 
Current account deficit (excl. current official transfers, in percent
of GDP) 
External debt (in percent of GDP)" 
Real effective exchange rate (percent change) 

Financial variables 
Govemment revenue (excl. grants) 
Total expenditure 
Overall fiscal balance (on a commitment basis and excl. grants) 
Basic fiscal balance 
Change in broad money (in percent) 
Change in credit to the economy (in percent) 

11 Before debt relief

1998 

1999 

2000 

(Annual Percentage change)
-0.6 
-1.4 
2.0 
4.5 
-2.3 
2.9 

10.2 
2.6 

10.8 
3.2 

10.4 
3.0 
4.5 

11.4 
2.4 

2001
Est.

5.1
4.0
3.9

11.7
3.5

(In millions of U.S. unless otherwise specified)
333.9 
287.2 
283.3 
274.0
403.8 
335.8 
324.5 
334.9
-197.7 
-157.3 
-139.8 
-160.9
-70.9 
-75.9 
-30.6 
-51.9

-9.5 
76.2 
2.4 

9.1 
17.3 
-8.2 
-3.3 
0.7 
28.5 

-7.8 
83.8 
-6.3 

-7.8 
90.3 
-2.6 

(In percent of GDP)
8.8 
8.6 
17.9 
16.2 
-9.0 
-7.6 
-4.8 
-3.0 
-5.5 
8.9 
-3.0 
43.8 

-8.4
86.0
2.1

9.5
16.7
-7.2
-2.9
...
...

Annex 12
Page I of 2

Expenditure Accountability Assessment and Action Plan (AAP) - Update

Indicator 

Actions to Strengthen - from Agreed Action 
Plans' and time horizon (SJM") 

Status' 

Progress to Date on Action Plans and Indicated Improvements
(Outcomes)

,
Budget law 2003 to include an annex with the financial 
statements of collectivities locales,
Budget law 2004 to include an annex with the financial 
statements of parastatals.
NIA 

NS 

NS 

Implementation of decentralization process has been delayed.

To be initiated with preparation of 2004 budget law.

N/A N/A

I 

2 

3 

BUDGET FORMULATION 
Composition of budget entity 

Limitations to use of off-budget 
transactions
Reliability of budget as guide to 
outturn-level 

4 

Data on donor financing 

N/A 

NIA 

N/A 

NIA 

I 

I 

Fl 

I 

Not in acton plan, yet judged as broadly satisfactory: recurrent budget
execudion amounts are close to budget projections. Execution of
investment budgets is around 60%.
Not in action plan, yet judged as generally satisfactory: donor financed
expenditures accounted for in the budget though informiation on
execution of donor financed activities sometimes only available with
delay.
New nomenclature adopted by Govemment in July 2002. New
classification and IT used for preparation of budget law 2003, actual
implementation from January 2003 onwards.
Adopted by Govemment in July 2002. New charter of accounts prepared
according to WAEMU standards, will be unplemented from January 2003
onwards.
PRSP finalized in December 2001 and discussed by Bank/Fund Boards in
February 2002.
Basic MTEF prepared for PRSP, although weak link to budget
preparation. Preparations of sectoral expenditure frameworks have started
in 3 key sectors (Education, Healdi, Rural Development).

5 

Classification of budget 
transactions 

Introduction of new budget nomenclature in Budget law 
2003. 

Preparation of new charter of accounts and use for 
implementation of budget 2003. 

Finalization of PRSP. 

Preparation of MTEF for 2002-04 with clear link to PRSP 
prionties. 

6 

7 

Identification of poverty reducing 
expenditures 
Quality of multi-year expenditure 
projections 

BUDGET EXECUTION

8 

Level of payment arrears 

9 

Quality of intemal audit 

Domestic arrears settlement plan to be adopted in 2001. 
Settlement of domestic arrears in line with objectives for 
each fiscal year. 

Assessment of effectiveness of existing internal control 
mechanismns at different stages of the expenditure chain
and implementation of recommendations (from 2002
onwards).
Introduction of new methodology for control of service 
provided (liquidation stage) (2002 onwards). 
N/A 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

Use of tracking surveys 

Quality of fiscal/banking data 
reconciliation 

Monthly reconciliation of budgetary data from 2001 
onwards.

BUDGET REPORTING 

-

Timeliness of intemal budget 
reports 

Classification used for budget 
tracking 
Timeliness of accounts closure 
Timeliness of final audited 
accounts 

Introduction of a Management Information System (FMIS) 
and use for regular production of reports about different 
aspects of budget execution.
Consistency/ between commitment data and payments. 

Compliance with calendar. 
Adequate staffing of audit court and preparation of work 
program (2001).
Submission of treasury accounts to Audit court, 
preparation of audit reports by court (2002 onwards).
Audit reports for budgets 1997, 1998, 1999 prepared by 
audit court.

Annex 12

Page 2 of 2

Fl 

I 

NS 

I 

I 

Fl 

I 

I 

I 

I 

Fl 

I 

Domestic arrears settlement plan finalized in November 2001.
Quantitative target of domestic arrears settlement plan for 2001 met in
January 2002. Targets for 2002 are being revised in the course of the year
on basis of estimates of financing availability. There are clear indications
that the revised targets will be met.
To be undertaken in 2003 in the context of the PER / CFAA.

Methodology introduced with new budget nomenclature in 2002.
Application from 2003 onwards..
No activity originally planned, yet pilot tracking survey in education
sector to be conducted in 2003.
Done.

FMIS introduced in 2001, so far only limited use for production of
execution reports.

New budget nomenclature and charter of accounts introduced, to be used
from 2003 onwards.
Closure of budgetary accounts of 2001 by mid-2002.
Work program completed, strengthening of human resources underway.

Accounts for 1997-2000 submitted to Audit Court.

Draft audit report for 1997 completed.

iAction plans were agreed between the Government, the IMF, and World Bank.
iS = short term, i.e. action that is expected to be completed in one year. M = medium term, i.e action that is expected to be completed in 2-3 years.
Progress to date should include: short description of progress and improvements; note degree of implementation, i.e. whether implementation has been initiated (11), is not yet
started (NS), or is complete (Fl, for fully implemented). If Fl, please state date of completion.

Annex 13
Page 1 of 5

Niger: IDA Lending and Debt Sustainability

1. Niger's fragile external financing situation
In terms of debt sustainability, Niger is one of the most fragile countries among the group having
acceded to the Enhanced HIPC Initiative. At end-1999, Niger's outstanding and disbursed debt
was estimated at US$1.6 billion in nominal terms or about 80 percent of that year's GDP. The
net present value (NPV) of this debt stock was equivalent to 322 percent of exports (after
traditional debt relief), well above the sustainability threshold of 150 percent determined in the
framework of the Enhanced HIPC Initiative.

The provision of HIPC assistance has an important effect on the sustainability of Niger's external
debt. Niger reached the Decision Point in December 2000 and has since been receiving interim
debt relief under the HIPC initiative from several multilateral and bilateral creditors. By
participating in the initiative, Niger will receive US$521 million of debt relief in NPV terms, or
about US$890 million in nominal terms. 
IDA's contribution to HIPC debt relief is US$302
million in nominal terms over 20 years. Niger's Completion Point is scheduled for mid-2003,
slightly later than originally envisaged in the Decision Point document (2002). According to the
latest projections, enhanced HIPC assistance and bilateral assistance beyond HIPC would reduce
the NPV of the debt-to-export ratio (NPVR) significantly, to 167 percent in 2003, down from 344
percent for the same year after traditional debt relief mechanisms. While this constitutes a
significant reduction, the ratio would still increase until 2007 (168 percent) and only fall below
150 percent in 2015. This means that even after full HIPC assistance delivery at the Completion
Point, Niger's external financing situation will remain fragile.

The Decision Point baseline scenario has recently been updated with revised projections for
exports. The revision took into account actual export performance in 1999, 2000 and 2001 and
revised export projections in the period 2002-2007, based on new information on the evolution of
prices and volumes of Niger's main export products. Parallel to the relatively strong economic
performance after 2000, exports have recovered faster than expected at Decision Point from their
low point in 1999. This resulted in export projections that are higher than the ones presented in
the Decision Point document for 2000 to 2005, but lower than Decision Point projections from
2006 onwards. The update of the Decision Point scenario also took into account additional
bilateral debt relief beyond HIPC, which has a significant effect on the NPVRs. The net effect of
updating the Decision Point scenario is as follows: 
the NPVR in 2002 is reduced to 167 percent
as compared to 190 percent in the original scenario, stays below its trajectory until 2009, after
which it rises slightly above it. As can be seen from the scenario in figure 1 that assumes a lower
growth rate from 2008 onwards, these projections are very sensitive to assumptions about changes
in export growth.

Annex 13
Page 2 of 5

Figure 1: Original and Updated Decision Point Scenarios 1

200 

190

0 1

S 180_ 

170

160 

-

2150 

> 

a.z

140

130 

120 

150 

N o 

X 
X 

O 
0 

N M 
X 

N 

r 

+ 

Ordginal Decision

Point Scenario 1/

-- _-Updated Decision
Point Scenario

(DP export growth)

2/

* Updated Decision

growth) 31

Point Scenano

(lower export

1/ After enhanced HIPC debt relief
2/ After enhanced HIPC debt relief and additional bilateral debt relief beyond HIPC, taking into account revised export
results/projections for 2000-2007 (assumes same export growth rate for 2008-2018 as in original DP scenario)
3/ This scenario assumes an export growth after 2008 that is lower than the one projected by the original DP scenario
(about 3 percentage points lower).

2. Financing PRSP implementation vs. debt sustainability

Niger's fragile external financing position imposes important limitations on borrowing in the
future, even if all new borrowing is contracted on highly concessional terms 2 . This stands in
strong contrast 
to Niger's very 
large external 
financing 
requirements associated with
implementing its economic and social reforms. In the absence of a fully developed MTEF, it is
not yet possible to assess in detail the medium term financing requirements for implementing the
PRSP. However, there is no doubt that Niger will have to mobilize large amounts of additional
resources if it is to successfully implement its poverty reduction strategy and make significant
progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals. Given its limited potential for
raising these resources domestically, Niger will require sustained high levels of external financing
in the foreseeable future.
The political instability and widespread mismanagement of public resources in the 1990s had
practically disconnected Niger from most sources of external financing. Although the current
Government has managed to establish a respectable reform track record since taking office in
2000, donors have been returning to Niger only gradually. Financing since then has been limited
and unpredictable. As a result, IDA has been the principal source of adjustment support since
2000. Prospects for increased levels of financial support have however improved since the

' The updated Decision Point scenario and all simulations presented in this CAS do not take into account
revised figures on new borrowing other than IDA, nor the evolution of exchange rates and discount rates.
Given the sensitivity of the NPVR to these factors, the results of the full DSA that will be conducted for the
HIPC Completion Point document may be significantly different.
2 The PRGF program has set a concessionality requirement that limits new borrowing to loans with a grant
element of at least 50 percent.

Annex 13
Page 3 of 5

completion of the PRSP. Together with ongoing efforts to improve fiduciary controls and public
finance management, the existence of a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy increases the
potential effectiveness of external support. The Government intends to use the PRSP to mobilize
additional resources and plans for this purpose to convene a donors' forum on PRSP
implementation in February 2003. As discussed below, it will be crucial that the bulk of external
financing mobilized through these efforts take the form of grants, in order not to jeopardize
Niger's long-term debt sustainability.

3. 
Impact of new IDA lending
In light of the limited support from other donors and of the relatively high levels of IDA lending
in the past three years, the provision of new IDA financing under the CAS lending program could
have a significant impact on debt sustainability. Although the proposed lending commitment in
the base case is in line with IDA's performance based allocation process, debt sustainability
concerns have been central in the determination of the CAS lending scenarios. For this purpose, a
simulation was conducted to compare the proposed lending commitments with the updated
Decision Point scenario. The results show that in order to return to NPVR levels similar to those
in the updated Decision Point scenario by the end of the CAS period, IDA lending commitments

would have to be reduced to around US$124 million in the period 2003 - 20053. However,
restricting base case lending in such a radical way would (in light of the current pipeline) mean

stopping financial commitments to Niger after FY04, an overly harsh stance for the Bank's
relationship with one of the poorest countries on earth that has been making overall satisfactory

progress on its reform program. In addition, the sensitivity of the NPVR to short-term changes in

export performance suggests that it would not be appropriate to rigidly link the base case lending

volumes to the updated Decision Point projections. Indeed the fact that the updated NPVRs have
improved relative to those in the original Decision Point scenario underscores the importance of
allowing some flexibility in response to cyclical changes in export performance. In light of these

considerations, the Bank would plan to make base case lending commitments to Niger up to a
maximum of US$238 million as long as NPVRs remain below 200 percent. The original

Decision Point scenario projected a trajectory of the NPVR that peaked at 190 in 2003, and the
200 percent threshold would therefore ensure that new IDA lending during the CAS period would
not result in a deterioration relative to the early period in that scenario. Nonetheless, NPVRs
would be expected to evolve in a downward direction by the end of the CAS period in the
absence of a major external shock.

3 This is based on the following assumptions: a) a disbursement rate of 33.8 percent (corresponds to
average rate in 2000-02), b) all CAS lending/grant commitments disbursed over 5 years, c) US$25 million
as grants for HIV/AIDS project, plus 29 percent of remaining commitments as grants over the CAS period.

Annex 13
Page 4 of 5

Figure 2: Impact of lending scenarios on debt sustainability

S ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Base case

_ Updated Decision Point

200

190 

x170 

.'.160 

CO 

c 

stu)E 

Hig cases 

lti 

> 150-

0Lz

140-

C%J C\J CJNC% CU C CM C Cl C\J N CJ C 

C C6J 

(>l

NB: All lending scenarios take into account IDA 13 grant allocations.

A simulation was conducted to examine the impact of a full commitment of base (US$238
million) and high case (US$260 million) lending envelopes on debt sustainability in comparison
to the updated Decision Point scenario. As Figure 2 shows, at no point do the NPVR trajectories
resulting from base and high case lending approach the 200 percent ceiling, even though
committing the full base case lending volume in the CAS period would result in NPVRs higher
than those in the updated Decision Point scenario. The projected increases are nonetheless,
moderate: with base case lending, attainment of the 150 percent threshold would be postponed by
4 years (2018) relative to the updated Decision Point scenario (2014) and the average NPVR of
166 percent for the period 2003 - 2018 would be only slightly higher than the corresponding 157
percent average from the updated Decision Point scenario.

4. Impact of grant financing on Debt Sustainability
The prospect of converting a part of IDA financing into grants in the IDA 13 period has a
potentially positive effect on the sustainability of Niger's external finance situation. According to
the IDA grants guidelines, Niger can receive up to 40 percent of its IDA allocation for the IDA 13
period (FY03-05) in grants, due to its status as a debt vulnerable country4 . However, only the
grant share for IDA commitments in FY03 has been determined at this stage. It is equivalent to
100 percent of the financing for the HIV/AIDS operation (US$25 million), plus an additional
US$17 million (approximately) for the remaining program. Figure 3 shows the impact of
providing a portion of IDA financing through grants on debt sustainability 5 .
If no IDA grants
were available, the average NPV over the period 2002-2018 would increase from 166 percent to
173 percent in the base case scenario and the 150 percent threshold would not be reached even in
2018.

4 "IDA grants: Implementation Guidelines and Allocation (FY03)", FRM/OPCS, September 17,2002
5 It is assumed here that the 29 percent grant component in the IDA allocation as determined in FY03
would be maintained over the IDA 13 period.

Annex 13
Page 5 of 5

Figure 3: Impact of IDA grants on debt sustainability

200

190

180 
180 
170 -

~160 

> 150 -
z 

140 -_ 

130

120

-IU- Base case, no
grants

-

Base case,
grants in CAS
period

_ 

_ 

_

N 

t) st 

U) 

X 

1CO 

0) 

0 

N 

X 

tt 

L)O 

ts 

X.

5. Managing debt sustainability

The Government of Niger is committed to long-term debt sustainability and to progressively
reducing its dependence on external financing. For this purpose, it needs to mobilize more
domestic resources and attract larger amounts of grant financing. Despite recent efforts to
enhance the internal resource base, Government revenue still remains at around 10 percent of
GDP. Through 
its ongoing efforts 
to strengthen 
the fiduciary framework and enhance
transparency and the effectiveness of public spending, Niger has started to improve conditions for
more effective use of external assistance. In addition, the completion of the PRSP has equipped
the Government with a comprehensive strategy to improve the provision of social services and
promote economic growth. Successful implementation of the PRSP can help Niger make
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals, although further refinement of the strategy
is necessary. The Government is working to translate the PRSP into fully costed sectoral
strategies and to develop a comprehensive Medium Term Expenditure Framework based on these
strategies. This would create a framework that is conducive to attracting additional external
financing. The assistance of the donor community in the implementation of the PRSP is
indispensable, both in the form of financial resources as well as technical assistance. 
It is
essential that this assistance takes the form of substantial and predictable grant financing, in order
not to jeopardize Niger's long-term external financing position.
As demonstrated above, Niger's debt sustainability is highly sensitive to export shocks. To avoid
such shocks in the future or smoothen their impact, Niger needs to strengthen and diversify its
export base, which is now predominantly composed of agricultural and livestock products, and
the stagnating uranium sector. However, due to important capacity and resource constraints, the
stronger growth and export performance that Government aims to achieve through implementing
the PRSP might materialize only 
in the medium term. Nevertheless, the Government is
committed to exploring ways of boosting export growth and will assess the export potential of
different sectors in its forthcoming study on sources of growth.

I

WMAGING

Report No.: 
Type: 

CAS

25203 NIR

