d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 25591-ET

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA

March 24, 2003

Country Department 6
Africa Region

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Birr (ETB)
US$1.00 = ETB 8.4 (March 14, 2003)

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
ADLI 

AfDB 
APL 
CAS 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
Agricultural Development Led 
Industrialization
Africa Development Bank 
Adaptable Program Lending 
Country Assistance Strategy 

CBDSD 

Capacity Building for Decentralized 
Service Delivery 
CBE 
Conmmercial Bank of Ethiopia 
CBO 
Community Based Organization 
COMESA Common Market for Eastern and 
Southern Africa
Country Portfolio Performnance 

CPPR 

CSRP 
DAG 
DHS 
DSA 
EPRDF 

EMSAP 
ESW 
EU 
GDLN 
GDP 
HDI 

Review

Civil Service Reform Program 
Development Assistance Group 
Demographic and Health Survey 
Debt Sustainability Analysis 
Ethiopia Peoples' Revolutionary 
Democratic Front
Ethiopia Multi-Sector AIDS Project 
Economic and Sector Work 
European Union 
Global Distance Learning Network 
Gross Domestic Product 
Human Development Indicators 

HIPC 

Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 

ICR 
IDA 

IFC 
IMF 

ISS 
JSA 
LIL 

Implementation Completion Report 
International Development 
Association
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 

Interim Support Strategy 
Joint Staff Assessment 
Learning and Innovation Loan 

M&E 
MCB 

Monitoring and Evaluation
Ministry of Capacity Building

MDGs 
MFIs 
MIGA 

Mlllennium Development Goals
Micro Finance Institutions
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
MOFED Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development
Ministry of Water Resources
Nile Basin Initiative
Non-Bank Financial Institutions

MWR 
NBI 
NBFIs 

NGO 

Non-Governmental Organization

NPV 
ODA 
PPCC 
PPI 
PRGF 

PRSC 
PRSP 
PSCAP 
PSD 
PSR 
SDPRP 

SNNPR 

SPA 
SSA 

TSZ 
TVET 

UNDP 
WDI 
WMS 

Net Present Value
Official Development Assistance
Public-Private Consultative Council
Private Participation in Infrastructure
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility

Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Public Sector Capacity Building Project
Private Sector Development
Project Status Report
Ethiopian Sustainable Development and
Poverty Reduction Program
Southern Nations and Nationalities
Peoples' Region
Strategic Partnership with Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa

Temporary Security Zone
Technical and Vocational Education and
Training
United Nations Development Program
World Development Indicators
Welfare Monitoring System

FY03 - FY05

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task Team Leader: 

Callisto E. Madavo
Ishac Diwan
Jill Armstrong

ETHIOPIA - COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

i

.

.

.................................

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..... 
I. COUNTRY CONTEXT ..................................... 
.1
A. Political and Economic Context 
.
...........................1
B. Poverty Trends and social developments ....................... 
.
.
.
.
3
C. Recent Economic Developments and Performance .................................................... 
.
.
6
D. Public sector management, decentralization and capacity building .............................
9
E. Sources of Growth and Vulnerabilities 
..
11......................................... 
1
1. Private Sector Development ............................ 
11
2. Rural Development ............................ 
13
3. Infrastructure ............................ 
14
4. Vulnerability and Volatility of Growth ............................ 
15
II. ETHIOPIA'S STRATEGY FOR DEVELOPMENT AND POVERTY REDUCTION ......... 16
20
A. IDA-IMF Joint Staff Assessment .
.
.............................................................. 
............................................................. 
20
B. The Harmonization Agenda .
.
mI. WORLD BANK COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FY03-05 
21
A. Lessons from Past Bank Experience and Choice of Instruments 
21
B. Strategic Objectives of the CAS .
.
............................................................. 
25
C. Selectivity and Roles of Development Partners .......................................................... 
27
D. Instruments .
................................................................ 
28
E. Roles of IFC and MIGA ................................................................ 
34
F. Perform ance of the Existing Portfolio ............................................................... 
34
G. Fiduciary Issues .
............................................................... 
.
36
IV. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING AND RISKS ...................................... 36
A. Scenarios and Triggers ............................................................... 
36
B. Debt Sustainability and IDA Support ................................................................ 
39
C. CAS Performance Indicators ............................................................... 
41
V. MANAGING RISKS .
................................................................ 
42
A. Country Risks ................................................................ 
42
B. Bank Risks ................................................................ 
43
VI. CONCLUSION ................................................................. 
44

.... 
.... 

ANNEXES

Annex 1: 
Annex 2: 
Annex 3: 
Annex 4: 
Annex 5: 

Note on Debt Sustainability
International Monetary Fund (IMEF) Relations Note
Ethiopia at a Glance
Statistical Tables
World Bank Support

FIGURES
Figure 1: Sectoral Composition of GDP ......................................................
6
Figure 2: Defense and Poverty Expenditures ......................................................
6
Figure 3: External Resource Mobilization ......................................................
7
Figure 4: Cereal Yields for the Six Most and Six Least Food Secure Zones ............................... 13

TABLES
Table 1: Poverty Data from Household Surveys ......................................................
3
Table 2: Macroeconomic Indicators FY 2000-2005 ......................................................
8
Table 3: Ethiopia's Infrastructure ..................................................... 
14
Table 4: Ethiopia and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) .......................................... 18
Table 5: Partnerships in Ethiopia's Development Framework .................................................... 27
Table 6: AAA and Main Lending Instruments, by CAS Theme ................................................. 29
Table 7: IDA Program, FY03-05, Lending Scenarios ..................................................... 
37
Table 8: Program Triggers ..................................................... 
38
Table 9: Core CAS Monitoring Indicators ..................................................... 
41

BOXES
Box 1: OED Recommendations in the Country Assistance Evaluation ....................................... 21
Box 2: Participatory Preparation of the CAS ..................................................... 
24
Box 3: WBI's Support Program ..................................................... 
31

Map IBRD 31158

i

ETHIOPIA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
Overview. This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Ethiopia is based on
Ethiopia's Sustainable Development and Poverty Reduction Program (SDPRP as the
PRSP is known) and focuses on improving human development outcomes,, enhancing
pro-poor growth, and reducing vulnerability. To assist Ethiopia in meeting the SDPRP
goals, the CAS places heavy emphasis on capacity building, along with PRSCs,
investment lending operations, and analytical and advisory services. The CAS base case
program is consistent with an IDA allocation determined by performance. However, the
CAS also acknowledges the serious issue of Ethiopia's debt sustainability.

ii. 

Issues for Board Discussion.

* Does the CAS adequately support the Government's SDPRP?
* Does the Board consider the proposed mix of instruments, including the
emphasis on capacity building and the introduction of PRSCs, appropriate?
Is the response to debt sustainability concerns appropriate for this CAS
period?

* 

iii. 
Social, Economic, and Political Context. When it assumed office in 1991, the
Government inherited an economy impoverished by years of civil war and misguided
policies, with per capita income lower than in 1960. The new Government embarked on
a wide ranging reform program that moved quickly beyond stabilization to structural
reforms - focusing on the agriculture sector and cautiously yielding economic space to
the private sector.

iv. 
However, the momentum of reforms was interrupted by the outbreak of the
conflict with Eritrea in May 1998. Post-war, the Government resumed its economic
reform program and the poverty focus of public expenditures has improved markedly. In
the decade between FY92-FY01, the period in office of the present Government, annual
GDP growth averaged 5.8 percent. The current severe drought will push this year's
growth significantly below the 10-year average.

v. 
One of the world's oldest continuous civilizations, Ethiopia is also one of the
world's poorest. At US$100, Ethiopia's real per capita GDP is among the lowest in the
world - and only about one fifth of the Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) average. Recent
national household surveys find 44 percent of the people live below the basic needs
poverty line and indicate that improvements since 1995 have only been marginal. Non-
monetary indicators of poverty are equally severe.

ii

vi. 
Not only are poverty levels amongst the highest in the world, but the Ethiopian
population is extremely vulnerable, especially because of its reliance on a rainfall-based
economy. The well-known negative effect of frequently recurring droughts has been
further compounded in the recent past by the cumulative impact of the border conflict, a
deterioration in the international terms of trade (especially the price of coffee), and the
AIDS epidemic. Ethiopia is currently experiencing the effects of a severe drought in
many areas of the country, affecting potentially 15 million people. Given both the
immediate and longer-term implications of the drought, support will be required at least
until the end of 2003 and likely well into 2004. While it is the drought that has sharply
increased the numbers of affected people, underlying causes of vulnerability and related
economic, social and developmental deficiencies have to be addressed.

vii. 
Economic performance was good in FY01, slower in FY02, and collapsed in
FY03 due to the drought. Economic growth of 7.7 percent in FY01 was spurred by an
all-time high food crop which saw agriculture grow by 12.5 percent. Real GDP growth
in FY02 was a more modest 1.2 percent, although non-agricultural GDP grew at 5.5
percent, slightly faster than the year before. In FY03, GDP is expected to fall by 3.8
percent, with agricultural output falling by 12.2 percent. Given that agriculture is the
main sector of this largely rural society (comprising 85 percent of population, 50 percent
of GDP, and 80 percent of merchandise exports), agricultural performance must
dramatically improve if Ethiopia is to meet the growth targets set out in the PRSP. In
conjunction, continuing to remove constraints to the development of the private sector
will be key to achieving Ethiopia's growth potential.

viii. Ethiopia's Sustainable Development and Poverty Reduction Program. The
overarching objective of the SDPRP is to reduce poverty by enhancing rapid economic
growth while at the same time maintaining macro-economic stability. For the first 3-year
SDPRP program, the goal is to reduce poverty by 4 percentage points from 44 percent in
FY00 to 40 percent by FY05. The long-term development vision is to build a free market
economic system which will enable the economy to develop rapidly, the country to
extricate itself from its dependence on food aid and poor people to be the main
beneficiaries of growth.

ix. 
In stressing the importance of rural development in order to improve the lives of
poor people, the SDPRP acknowledges the need for explicit efforts at private sector
development to put the economy on a higher growth trajectory. The SDPRP is built on
the following four pillars: (1) Agricultural Development Led Industrialization (ADLI)
and food security; (2) governance, decentralization, and empowerment; (3) reform of the
justice system and the civil service; and (4) capacity building. In addition, the SDPRP
identifies key sectoral measures and cross-cutting issues, including HIV/AIDS, private
sector development and trade, education, health, roads, water and sanitation, and gender.

x. 
The World Bank Group Country Assistance Strategy. This CAS will provide
support to Ethiopia's SDPRP and thereby assist in the country's program to reduce
poverty and achieve the MDGs.. Bank support will draw on synergies from a mix of
instruments: lending products, including budget support and sector programs and

iii

projects; knowledge-based services, including WBI activities; and leveraging
development partners in the context of harmonization. World Bank support to the four
pillars in Ethiopia's SDPRP can be translated into three inter-related themes:

* Enhancing pro-poor growth
* Enhancing human development outcomes by improving governance
* Reducing vulnerability

xi. 
Scope of Bank Support. The planned CAS comprises a mixture of lending and
analytical instruments which are designed to meet the evolving institutional structures of
Ethiopia and reflects lessons learned from previous experience. First, the Bank's seeks
to support Government's efforts to build a capable and accountable state. Hence,
capacity building within the public and private sector, and in civil society will be a
critical underpinning of the Bank's assistance. Second, PRSCs will support policy
reforms and the financing of essential investments and services. Providing crucial capital
investmentfunds to Federal, regional, and local governments for rehabilitating and
creating new infrastructure is the third main element for achieving CAS objectives. Last
but not least, the analytical agenda will address the fundamental policy questions which
Ethiopia and her partners will need to unlock to successfully move the development and
poverty agendas forward.

xii. 
IDA lending envelope. The FY03-05 CAS presents three lending scenarios: a
low case, a base case (status quo), and a high case. Under the current IDA- 13 period,
which coincides with the CAS, the performance based allocation to Ethiopia is $1.5
billion in the base case, including up to 40 percent in grants for FY03 as a debt-
vulnerable low-income country.

xiii. Debt sustainability. Ethiopia's debt sustainability has deteriorated markedly
since the HIPC Decision Point in October 2001, due largely to exogenous shocks. Even
though Ethiopia qualifies for a high volume of lending under IDA's performance
allocation framework, debt sustainability concems mean that IDA cannot extend the full
amount of this support to Ethiopia. Until a decision can be taken at the HIPC Completion
Point (expected by December 2003), IDA is therefore proposing to restrain credits to
Ethiopia consistent with managing the net present value of the debt-to-export ratio within
the range of 150-200 percent, and to seek the maximum 40 percent of grants under
IDA13. Specifically, for the remainder of FY03, the Bank will extend only grants,
bringing the total support to Ethiopia to about $400 million for FY03 (of which about
$180 million is in IDA loans already committed).

xiv. Managing Risks. Further exogenous shocks, the possibility of intemal and
extemal conflict, and difficulties in implementing and adapting to fiscal
decentralization-as well as risks involving debt sustainability, and the success of the
harmonization initiative-are key CAS implementation risks which the Bank has
acknowledged and will monitor.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA

1. 
Ethiopia's last ful Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), covering FY1998-2000,
was interrupted in May 1998 by a border conflict and replaced in November 2000 with an
Interim Support Strategy following the cessation of hostilities. Since then, peace has held and
the Government of Ethiopia has made progress in maintaining macroeconomic stability. In
March 2001, Ethiopia's Interim PRSP (SecM2001-0214) was discussed by the Board, and in
November 2001 the Board approved debt relief under the Enhanced HIPC Decision Point
(IDA/R2001-0168). In September 2002, Ethiopia's Sustainable Development and Poverty
Reduction Program (SDPRP as the PRSP is called in Ethiopia) was presented to the Boards of
the World Bank and the IMF along with a Joint IDA-IMF Staff Assessment (SecM2002-047 1).
This CAS is aligned with the SDPRP which seeks to build a free market economic system to
enable the economy to develop rapidly, reduce food aid dependence and, most importantly, step
up the pace towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT

2. 
The reforms of the 1990s have produced important gains. When it assumed office
in 1991, the Ethiopia Peoples' Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) Government inherited
an economy impoverished by years of civil war and misguided policies, with per capita income
lower than in 1960. The new Government embarked on a wide ranging reform program that
moved quickly beyond stabilization to structural reforms - focusing on the agriculture sector and
cautiously yielding economic space to the private sector. A flurry of reforns in the first few
years included first steps towards removal of prohibitions and restrictions on the private sector, a
large devaluation of the exchange rate, introduction of an auction market for foreign exchange,
and liberalization of most prices and trade. Simultaneously, taking advantage of peace and
stability, the Government demobilized on a massive scale cutting back defense expenditures
from over 10 percent of GDP in FY891 to as low as 2.0 percent in FY97 with much of the peace
dividend directed to social sectors and other pro-poor expenditures.

3. 
However, the border conflict with Eritrea exacted a heavy economic toll. The
momentum of reforms was interrupted by the outbreak of the conflict in May 1998. The conflict
strained public finances, reduced donor support and undermined investor confidence. The
preemptive demands of defense expenditure, which shot up to 13.2 percent in FY00, resulted in

1 In this CAS, "Fiscal Year" generally refers to the Ethiopian fiscal year, which runs from July 8 to July 7.
References to fiscal years in discussions of the Bank program refer to the World Bank fiscal year spanning July I to
June 30.

2

sharp cuts in capital expenditure, and more importantly, fiscal transfers to the regions for anti-
poverty programs. Heavy domestic borrowing and large military purchases from abroad put the
economy under extreme pressure.

4. 
A post-conflict recovery program was quickly put into place annd peace is
holding. Soon after the end of the conflict in mid-2000, the Government quickly put into place
programs to address demobilization, emergency humanitarian needs and reconstruction. The
peace agreement, signed in December 2000, has resulted in the withdrawal of both countries'
troops from the frontlines, the establishment of a 25 km-wide UN monitored Temporary Security
Zone (TSZ), and the demobilization of over 142,000 troops with IDA support. In April 2002, an
independent Boundary Commission issued its judgment on the location of the border between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the physical demarcation of the border is expected to take place in May
2003.

5. 
The political situation has stabilized. The EPRDF coalition was reelected to office
in the May 2000 parliamentary elections. Even though there was widespread support for the
Government from across the political spectrum during the border conflict, the signing of the
peace accord was followed by vigorous political dissent centered around criticism of the
Govemment's policies on liberalization and globalization and its conciliatory attitude towards
Eritrea. The Government's management of the dissent and protests generated political tension
and brought to the fore govemance and human rights issues. In order to address these issues and
give democratic voice to different opinions within the ruling coalition, the EPRDF conducted
during June-September 2001 structured consultations with party cadres from grassroots upwards.
The process culminated in the Fourth Organizational Congress of the EPRDF which resulted in
an agreed agenda of reforms.

6. 

The Government's democratization agenda has also been intensified. One of the

most decisive and significant actions of the Govermment has been to embark on a program of
rapid devolution. The explicit goals of decentralization are to bring government closer to the
people, give political representation and voice to the diverse ethnic groups, and make governance
and resource allocation sensitive to local needs and preferences. In 2002 a second wave of
democratic decentralization devolved increased authority from the regional to the woreda or
district level.

7. 

Post-war, the Government iresumed its econonmfic reform progr2am and

reconfirmed its commitment to poverty reduction within a framework of macroeconomic
stability. To support this program, the Government sought assistance from the Bank and the
Fund. IDA support was extended in the form of two adjustment credits, totaling $270 million
during FY01 and FY02, to help improve macroeconomic performance, reallocate public
spending to poverty targeted sectors, and address the public sector management and private
sector development reform agendas. IDA also provided emergency assistance of $400 million
for demobilization and reintegration and emergency recovery support. Simultaneously, the
Government entered into a three-year PRGF Arrangement with the IMF.

8. 
En July 2002, the Government fnalized its Sustainable Development and Poverty
Reduction Program (SDRPP). The SDPRP aims at broad ranging institutional and structural

3

reforms to accelerate the pace of growth, to distribute the gains to poor people and to accelerate
progress towards meeting the MDGs (see section III). With the restoration of peace, donors
have now started to return to Ethiopia, in large part aligning their resources around the SDPRP.
In recent months, the Government has re-engaged the private sector in a dialogue on how to
boost private sector development.

9. 
The current drought. Ethiopia is currently experiencing the effects of a severe
drought in many areas of the country, affecting potentially 15 million people. Given both the
immediate and longer-term implications of the drought, support will be required at least until the
end of 2003 and likely well into 2004. While it is the drought that has sharply increased the
number of affected people, underlying causes of vulnerability and related economic, social and
developmental deficiencies have to be addressed.

B. POVERTY TRENDS AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

10. 
The turn of the millennium finds Ethiopia as one of the most destitute of nations.
At US$100, Ethiopia's per capita GDP is among the lowest in the world - and only about a fifth
of the Sub-Sahara African (SSA) average. Its population, estimated at 65.8 million in 2001, is the
second largest in SSA and is projected to grow at 2.4 percent per annum over the next 15 years.
Poverty is paramount and widespread and often
linked to the degradation of the environment and 

Table 1: Poverty Data from Household Surveys

natural resources. Recent national household

surveys find 44 percent of people below the basic 
needs poverty line and indicate that improvements 
since FY96 have been marginal (Table 1). Overall 

income inequality in Ethiopia is relatively low, 

though there are notable urban/rural and 
interregional disparities. For example, by FY00, 
Tigray region had a poverty ratio of 61.4 percent, 
while less vulnerable Harari had a poverty ratio of
only 25.8 percent.

Index (percentage) 
Poverty Head Count
Rural 
Urban 

Total 

Gini Coefficient
Rural 
Total 

FY96 

47.5 

33.2 
45.5 

0.27 
0.29 

FY00

45.4

36.9
44.2

0.26
0.28

11. 
The non-income dimensions of poverty are equally stark, although there have
been pockets of progress. Under UNDP's HDI ranking, Ethiopia ranks 168th, at the near
bottom of a tally of 173 countries. According to the World Development Indicators (WDI),
average life expectancy was 42 years in 2000 and falling due to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Infant
and maternal mortality and child malnutrition rates are among the highest in the world. Nearly
six out of every ten adults are illiterate. Gender disparities significantly hamper female
empowerment. Despite starting from a very low base, progress has, however, been made in
reducing infant mortality from 110 to 98/1000 between FY96 and FY00. And in the same
period, the proportion of severely wasted children declined by 47 percent.

12. 
Access to education has improved dramatically although raising quality and
efficiency are issues. The gross enrollment ratio went from 26 percent in 1991 to 71 percent in
1999, according to WDI. The improvement has been more in favor of rural areas and females.
Yet the rapid expansion has come at the cost of fast deteriorating conditions at the classroom

4

level. The pupil-teacher ratio, averaging about 68 pupils per teacher nationwide, but over 100 in
some areas, is among the highest in the world. There is also concem about the slow progress in
raising the primary school completion rate, the persistence of large regional and socioeconomic
disparities in schooling, the continued inefficiencies in service delivery, and the fiscal feasibility
of expanding the system's coverage under current policies. At the same time, the education
system must also address issues in post-primary education, particularly to ensure that the output
of educated labor, in both volume and skills mix, matches the demand for such labor.

13. 
Although the number of health facilities in Ethiopia has increased over time,
constraints to improving health services lie primarily in the shortage of skilled human resources.
The shortage of health care workers is one of the largest shortages in the world, with health
worker/population ratios three to four times lower than in neighboring countries. The shortage is
particularly severe at the lower levels of the health pyramid, and is exacerbated by high attrition
and out-migration of skilled health personnel. Ethiopia has amongst the lowest levels of per
capita health spending in the region. Govemment will need to increase public spending on basic
health service delivery and improve the training and retention of quality health personnel,
especially in rural areas, while making complementary investments in water, sanitation and
communication infrastructure. Private expenditures on health are 62 percent of total, reflecting
the emergence of the private health sector.

14. 
HIlY/AIDS poses the foremost threat to poverty reduction and is a major source
of vulnerability. Over 6 percent of adults or 2 million people are HIV positive with Ethiopia
ranking third (after India and South Africa) in terms of absolute numbers infected. In addition,
there are already 3 million orphans. The AIDS epidemic is costing Ethiopia as much as one
percentage point of growth each year, and unless reversed, could erode the recent development
gains. Life expectancy, already falling, is projected to drop precipitously by 10 years by 2014 if
the infection rate continues unchecked. The Govermment is aware of the impact of HIV/AIDS
and with the support of the World Bank and other donor agencies, a multi-sectoral HIV/AIDS
prevention and control program was established in January 2001. The organizational structure is
now in place to target high risk groups and emphasize behavioral change. The program has been
successful in involving NGOs and community based organizations (CBOs) in the
implementation of sub-projects to combat HIV/AIDS.

15. 
Population and environment pressures will hinder attainment of MDGs. As
reflected in the SDPRP, Ethiopia has initiated its demographic transition, but rapid population
growth and high dependency continue to affect household welfare. Fifty-one percent of the
population is under age 18, and the fertility rate of 5.9 children per woman is above the average
for sub-Saharan Africa. Although family planning services delivery has consistently improved
and use of modern contraceptives has doubled over the past ten years, there are still significant
variances in fertility rates between regions and between poor and non-poor households. The
national population policy targets are to reduce to 4.0 the number of children per woman and
increase contraceptive prevalence to 44 percent by 2015. Population growth places a strain on
environmental sustainability, particularly on the natural resource base, which is intricately linked
with Ethiopia's long-term development and poverty reduction efforts. Moreover, environmental
factors such as exposure to waterborne diseases, indoor air pollution, and agro-industrial
chemicals contribute to nearly 30 percent of the total burden of disease in Ethiopia.

5

Conservation of Ethiopia's plant bio-diversity, one of the richest in the world, is a high priority
with global implications. Building know-how and absorptive capacity remain top priorities to
improve environmental and resource management.

16. 
Improving access to water and sanitation, in particular, will be made more
difficult by rapid population growth. The rural population in Ethiopia is expected to grow at
2.5 percent from 50 million in 2000 to 75 million by 2015. Over the same period the urban
population is expected to grow at 4 percent from 10 million to 20 million. Water coverage is
currently estimated to be about 20 percent in rural areas and 80 percent in urban areas. To reach
the MDG for water supply of halving the un-served population, at least 10 million more people
would need to be served in urban areas at an estimated cost of $40 million per year and 35
million more people in rural areas at about $95 million per year.

17. 
Gender inequalities are pronounced. The SDPRP notes that on average, women are
poorer, have fewer years of schooling, lower health status and far heavier work load than men.
Women tend to be excluded from control and inheritance of property and are vulnerable to
abuse, domestic violence and deprivation. Women are also susceptible to higher risk of exposure
to HIV/AIDS and are twice as likely to contract the infection from unprotected sex as men. Due
to the nature of their work, women also suffer disproportionately from environmental
degradation. For example, they have to walk longer distances to collect water and firewood as a
result of deforestation. This influences their health, nutritional status and amount of time they
spend on other productive activities. Although the Constitution guarantees gender equality and
supports affirmative action, implementation of the National Policy for Women has been hindered
by lack of capacity and varying degrees of commitment in different regions.

18. 
Labor Markets and Standards. Ethiopia has ratified six of the eight core ILO
Conventions, including both of those related to discrimination and both related to the freedom of
association and collective bargaining. The country has not ratified Convention 29 on forced labor
nor the most recent child labor Convention (182). Ethiopia has in place a framework of labor
laws and regulations, but their enforcement has been weak and inconsistent due to capacity
constraints at different levels of Government. Under the law, the minimum age for wage or
salary employment is 14 years. Unsurprisingly, however, given the pervasive poverty in the
country, WDI figures estimate that 41% of children 10-14 are active in the labor force. Child
laborers are concentrated in the agriculture sector and the informal sector in urban areas. Most
workers have the right to form and join trade unions under the Constitution, but the 1993 Labor
Proclamation specifically excludes teachers and civil servants.

6

C. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PERFORMANCE

19. 
In the decade between FY92 and FY01, annual GDP growth averaged 5.8
percent'. In per capita terms, this translated into an average of 2.8 percent, in the context of a
firn commitment to macroeconomic stability and fiscal responsibility by the Government.
Agriculture, the main sector of this largely rural society (comprising 85 percent of population, 50
percent of GDP, and 80 percent of
merchandise exports) has grown at an 
average rate of about 3.1 percent over this
period. Services (especially government) 
have been growing at a faster rate, mainly 
in urban centers (Figure 1).3 

FY92 - FY01e (perceitage of GDP)

60
50 
40

ncul 

_

Services

30

20 

10

_

Industry

20. 
Economic performance was 
good in FY01, slower in FY02, and 
collapsed in FY03 due to the drought. 
Economic growth of 7.7 percent in FY01 
was spurred by an all-time high food crop 
which saw agriculture grow by 12.5
percent. Agricultural output fell to more
normal levels in FY02, with a fall of 4.5 percent against the previous year. As a consequence,
real GDP growth in FY02 was a more modest 1.2 percent, although non-agricultural GDP grew
at 5.5 percent, slightly faster than the year before. At -7.2 percent, inflation in FY02 was
negative for the second consecutive year, reflecting the bumper FY01. Despite increased
volumes, in FY02, the value of Ethiopia's exports also fell for the second consecutive year,
owing to a fall in the terms of trade by 8.9 percent 4 , while imports rose with higher food
imports. In FY03, GDP is expected to fall

FYOO FY01

FY92 

FY98 

FY94 

FY96 

by 3.8 percent, with agricultural output 

falling by 12.2 percent. Exports of goods 
and non-factor services are expected to 
rise by 5.7% in FY03, with a sharp drop in
traditional agricultural exports offset by 
growth in non-traditional exports and non-
factor services. 

21. 
The poverty sensitivity of 
public expenditures has improved 
markedly. Largely as a result of quick 
demobilization, defense expenditures were 

reduced to 6.4 percent of GDP in FY01 

Figure 2: Defense and Poverty Expenditures
FY98-FY03 (percentage of GDP)

20

15

10

5 

Educaton

Hl=

F
FY98 

FY99 

FYOO 

FYOI 

FY02 

FY03

Data for FY02 are estimates, FY03 data are budget.

and are expected to have declined further in FY02 and FY03 (Figure 2). Poverty targeted
outlays (spending on education, health, agriculture and roads), which had dipped to 8.2 percent
of GDP in FY00, recovered to 11.8 percent in FY01, further up to 14.6 percent in FY02, and are

2 This period does not include the current drought.
3 A significant portion of this growth also reflects a recovery from the civil war era.

4 Reflecting falling coffee prices, Ethiopia's terms of trade have fallen by 44 percent since FY97.

7

estimated to rise to 17.4 percent in FY03. The increased expenditure for poverty-targeted sectors
is expected to come from restraining the growth of non-priority sectors, rising donors' support,
and HIPC relief.

22. 
Domestic resources are being mobilized aggressively. The revenue performance
has improved steadily since the early 1990s when a comprehensive and multi-faceted tax reform
was introduced to increase tax revenue and the efficiency of the tax system. As a result, between
FY92 and FY01, the tax-to-GDP ratio increased from 7.8 percent to 14.3 percent. At the same
time, tariff rates have been reduced and rationalized. The SDPRP aims to increase the revenue-
to-GDP ratio by nearly 1 percent per year from the present level to reach 17.7 percent by FY05.
In order to attain this objective, far-reaching and comprehensive tax reform measures are being
implemented, including the introduction of the VAT in 2003.

23. 
Parallel with the government's effort to raise domestic sources of finance, efforts
are being geared to generate an increased inflow of external finance. These efforts
culminated in a Consultative Group (CG) meeting in Addis from December 7-8 2002. Donors
agreed that the SDPRP provided a

common platform for development and 

poverty reduction and pledged about $3.6 
billion for projects and programs that 

would be initiated during FY2003-05. 

Several donors agreed to finance budget 
support, others indicated support for
sector-wide programs and for projects.
Despite these commitments, Ethiopia's 
level of aid inflows as a percentage of 
GDP remains low. Currently, the level of 
external aid flows into Ethiopia are about 
US$ 13 per capita, which is well below the
sub-Saharan average of US$ 23 per capita
(Figure 3).

Figure 3: OfFicial Development Assistance
1998-2001 (us $ per capita)

25

20 

15

SubSaharan
Africa

Ethiopia

,_
1999 

10 

9 

2000 

2001

24. 
Ethiopia is expected to receive debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative to
supplement the federal and regional governments' own effort to boost social spending. In
November 2001, the Boards of the IMF and the World Bank approved the Decision Point for
Ethiopia under the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (eHIPC) Initiative. Under the
Initiative, Ethiopia will receive debt relief amounting to US$ 1,275 million in NPV terms (or
US$ 1,930 million in nominal terms), with IDA providing $463 million. Despite this relief,
Ethiopia's external debt burden remains high-due to largely exogenous shocks since the
Decision Point (significantly reduced export prices, exchange rate changes, and lower interest
rates). The projections made on the basis of prevailing prices at Decision Point indicated that
even after Completion Point the ratio of NPV of debt to exports would rise from 150 percent in
the base year (FY01) to peak at 174 percent by the end of FY04, falling below 150 percent after
FY08. Updating the Decision Point calculations to reflect the exogenous shocks, the ratio would
now peak at 219 percent in FY04, and remain above 150 percent for another decade, even
without increased IDA support or new borrowing (see section IV B and Annex 1).

8

25. 

Recent macro-economic developments and projections for the period FY2000-05

are shown in Table 2 and include the cost of reaching the SDPDP intermediate targets over the
next three years.

Table 2: MVacroeconomic Indicators FY 2000-2005

FY 2000 

FY 2001 

FY 2002 

estimate 

FY 2003 

est. Feb 03

FY 2004 

FY 2005

Real GDP 
Agrcultural production 
Non-ag. Production 
Services 
Consumer prices 

Gross domestic saving 
Gross domestic investment 
Resource gap 
External current account* 

Total revenue 
of which tax receipts 
Extemal grants 
Total expenditure" 
of which poverty related 
of which defense 
Overall balance (incl. grants) 

Exports 
Imports 
Terms of trade (% change) 

National accounts (percentage change)
5.4 
7.7 
1.2 
2.2 
11.5 
-3.1 
7.9 
5 
4.8 
9.5 
4.7 
4.6 
4.2 
-7.2 
-7.2 

Financial balances (percentage of GDP)
-0.1 
2.2 
2.2 
15.3 
18 
20.5 
-15.3 
-15.8 
-18.3 
-5.3 
-4.2 
-6 

Government finances (Millions of Birr)
11,222 
12,805 
12,833 
6,482 
7,440 
7,926 
1,724 
2,628 
2,425 
17,184 
15,382 
16,680 
4,253 
6,375 
8,544 
6,842 
3,307 
2,610 
(5,961) 
(2,981) 
(4,818) 

External sector (US$ million)
486 
441 
431 
1611 
1556 
1696 
-33.9 
-6.3 
-8.9 

-3.8 
-12.2 
2.6 
2.0 
9.2 

-3.4 
19.2 
-22.6 
-6.5 

17,157 
8,994 
5,457 
21,452 
9,523 
3,000 
(5,277) 

456 
2037 
4.3 

8.0 
11.0 
5.9 
5.6 
4.5 

2.1 
21.3 
-19.3 
-6.3 

17,618 
10,432 
4,479 
20,997 
10,803 
3,000 
(4,021) 

509 
2028 
0.4 

6.4
6.0
6.7
6.3
3.0

5.5
22.8
-17.3
-4.6

19,971
12,038
5,066
23,176
12,014
3,000
(3,627)

557
2058
1.4

Gross official reserves (months 
of import cover)
GDP at current market prices 
(birr million)
Exchange rate (birr/US$) 

Memo items
2 

2.2 

3.3 

3.9 

4.7 

5.2

51869 

51962 

51761 

54586 

61606 

67515

8.15 

8.34 

8.54

Including official transfers
Excluding special programs
Source Ministry of Finance and Economic Development

26. 
Despite strong average economic growth over the past decade, the current
government strategy has started to hit several important structural constraints. Growth and
poverty reduction have begun to taper off. The constraints include limited growth opportunities,
high levels of vulnerability for a large share of the population, and a falling quality of public
services associated with the expansion of these services. Ultimately, poverty reduction can come
only from improved productivity in all sectors of the economy. Yet, agricultural productivity is

9

flat; the scope for further increases in Government spending is limited; and private activity in the
modem sector has not picked up in major ways. Second generation reforms will be necessary to
remove these constraints and continue the progress initiated by the first wave of reforms.
Subsequent reforms have to focus on four inter-related thrusts: (i) creating more robust work
opportunities both in and outside agriculture; (ii) building capacity and human capital; (iii)
initiating long ranging action to reducing vulnerability; and (iv) improving the functioning of the
public sector and empowering communities to take in their own hand the development of
infrastructure and services in an integrated and need-specific manner. The emphasis on the four
inter-related areas requires a cross-sectoral approach in which sector-specific actions are
designed to contribute to the achievement of the overall objective of poverty reduction.

D. PUBLIC SECTOR MANAGEMENT, DECENTRALIZATION AND CAPACITY BUILDING

27. 
Governance and civil service. In the mid-1990s, the Government recognized the
urgent need to address the wide array of capacity constraints that hindered the performance of
public institutions in Ethiopia. Core public management systems at the federal and regional
levels were hampered by outdated civil service legislation and working systems; the absence of a
medium-term planning and budgeting framework; ineffective financial and personnel
management controls; inadequate civil service wages and inappropriate grading systems; poor
capacity for strategic and cabinet-level decision-making; and insufficient focus on modem
managerial approaches to service delivery. In recognition of these constraints, the Government
embarked on a comprehensive Civil Service Reform Program (CSRP) in 1996 which sought to
build a fair, transparent, efficient, effective, and ethical civil service primarily by creating
enabling legislation, developing operating systems, and training staff.

28. 
The CSRP was implemented over the 1996-2000 period, albeit with intermittent
lags particularly during the border conflict. The results of these efforts were mixed. Notable
achievements included the development of new legislation as well as operating systems for
budgeting, procurement, and some aspects of personnel management such as salary surveys and
records management. Training in budgeting, planning, accounting, and procurement also
progressed. These initiatives have had a modest impact in relieving the institutional and capacity
constraints within the Ethiopian civil service. Core functions such as medium-term planning,
accounting and auditing, personnel management remain weak.

29. 
A comprehensive public sector capacity building program was launched in 2001
to respond to these weaknesses. A national umbrella program-the Public Service Delivery
Capacity Building Program (PSCAP)-aims to supporting institutional transformation at the
federal, regional, and local levels. Under PSCAP, technical assistance, training, and logistic
support will be provided for the roll-out of civil service and expenditure management reforms,
woreda decentralization, municipal development, and revenue enhancement.

30. 
Rapid fiscal decentralization is a key element of the Government's
democratization agenda and reflects the desire to bring government closer to the people and
make governance and resource allocation sensitive to local needs and preferences. Fiscal
decentralization in Ethiopia spans two phases. In the first phase of decentralization following the

10

adoption of the 1995 Constitution, the Government created a federal state structure based on
ethnically based regional states with a broad range of responsibilities for achieving political,
economic, and social objectives. Along with the transfer of vast service delivery responsibilities,
the federal government instituted a system of formula-driven, equity-based "subsidies" to
regions, and redeployed of over 300,000 personnel to regional executives. This transformation
process was implemented decisively, and has proven durable.

31. 
The second and current phase of fiscal decentralization, started in 2002, involves
the transfer of significant proportions of regional subsidies (in some cases, between 60 to 80
percent) to woredas or district governments in the form of formula-derived "block" grants
(which are predominantly equity-driven). The devolution of fiscal management responsibilities
has required a massive redeployment of staff, typically from regional bureaus, to woredas to
effectively carry out basic public management functions. This "second wave" democratic
decentralization has come with its share of risks to Ethiopia's widely acknowledged tradition of
administrative discipline in public financial management. The experience-to-date suggests that a
pragmatic approach to block grant implementation has helped stabilize fiscal transition within
regions during this first year of woreda decentralization. Nevertheless, myriad challenges need to
be addressed to ensure the development of financially accountable spheres of government.
These include maintaining momentum on federal reforms related to medium term planning,
budgeting and accounting; renewing efforts to strengthen internal and external audit systems; and
strengthening consolidated budget monitoring and fiscal reporting. In regions, the challenges
include clarifying and costing the detailed assignment of powers and functions between regional
and local authorities; ensuring that adequate revenue sources are available to meet the associated
expenditure requirements; better defining the role of block grants relative to other fiscal support
measures provided to local authorities; as well as strengthening woreda structures and
administrative pooling arrangements.

32. 
A capable and efficient justice system is indispensable to the development of
Etiliopia's democratic federal system. A range of legislative, judicial, law enforcement,
educational, and civil society institutions make up the justice sector in Ethiopia. Acute personnel
shortages, institutional weaknesses, and inappropriate laws continue to hinder the functioning of
these institutions. As a result, the dispensation of justice is delayed, democratic rights are not
adequately protected, the legal framework for the smooth operation of a market economy
remains weak, and law enforcement is inefficient. The Government recognizes this and is
currently developing its Justice System Reform Program. It envisages a holistic capacity
building program designed to strengthen those institutions in the executive, legislative, and
judicial branches of government that are directly involved in the dispensation of justice in order
to deepen implementation of democratic and human rights, and promote public participation at
all levels of the justice system.

11

E. SOURCES OF GROWTH AND VULNERABILITIES

1. Private Sector Development

33. 
The private sector in Ethiopia faces major constraints. Private investments
(domestic and foreign) in manufacturing, agriculture, agro-business and mining, constitute about
10 percent of the GDP (up from about 7 percent in 1994). As in other very poor countries, the
private sector in Ethiopia is fragmented and dominated by the informal economy. Ethiopia is also
a transition economy, with many sectors still dominated by the state. A recent World Bank
survey of the Ethiopian private sector indicate that the sector is characterized by a number of
major constraints including: high taxation, scarcity of human skills, limited access to land and to
finance, government bureaucracy, weak infrastructure and uneven playing field created by the
operation of party affiliated companies. The Government has only recently started addressing
some of the key obstacles to an improved investment climate, including removing regulatory and
operational impediments to exports, fostering more competition in agricultural inputs and
products markets, strengthening and liberalizing the financial sector, and improving the legal
framework for land ownership. Strengthening Ethiopia's technical and vocational education and
training program (TVET) will also be critical to ensure the supply of skilled labor needed for
private sector development.

34. 
Flows of foreign direct investment (FDI) remains relatively low, with an average
of about $60 million in net FDI per year over the past 5 years. FDI is dominated by one large
investor. The Government's efforts to improve the investment climate, supported by IDA
adjustment credits, have included amendments to the investment code (May 2002) to reduce
sharply the minimum threshold for FDI. Foreign investors are prohibited from participating in
the financial sector (except in management contracts). There has been progress in opening the
infrastructure sector (especially in energy production), but urban power distribution and telecoms
remain protected. The Government has made significant progress in resolving expropriation
claims dating from the previous regime, though a few still remain. The privatization program
was launched in 1994 with the establishment of the Ethiopian Privatization Agency. Since then,
approximately 200 enterprises have been privatized. But large enterprises have not attracted
significant interest from potential buyers; privatization of the utilities has just started with efforts
to find a strategic partner for the Ethiopia Telecom Company and liberalize the lower rungs of
the network. As the emphasis shifts to the utility sector, competition policy and regulatory issues
will become central to the successful implementation of the privatization program. It will be
crucial for the Government to build on recent efforts to enhance the country's attractiveness to
foreign investors, especially from the Diaspora.

35. 
Between FY93 and FY02, exports rose fast, but were negatively affected by
external shocks. The ratio of exports to GDP increased from 8 to 15 percent over the period.
Though volatile, commodity exports were the main source of foreign exchange. The
vulnerability of the economy to coffee export prices and weather conditions highlights the
critical importance of diversifying exports in the medium term. Ethiopia has initiated
membership in the WTO. Although it is a member of the COMESA, it has not been very active
yet in implementing regional trade agreements. In addition to the larger efforts towards private
sector development, specific measures are necessary to promote exports. A recent World Bank

12

study 5 defined an agenda covering: (i) sectoral measures to address supply side constraints that
impede further development of agricultural exports; (ii) immediate measures to take advantage of
new market access opportunities such as AGOA, induce new export activities and create new
comparative advantages; and (iii) policies to improve the business environment and accelerate
Ethiopia's integration into the world economy. The challenge lies in operationalizing the policy
measures effectively and in building capacities in both public and private sectors for export
growth. Recent efforts have focused on establishing public-private partnerships to resolve
existing constraints and boost non-traditional exports in the textiles, garment, leather, and
horticulture sectors.

36. 
The financial sector has grown in the past decade but it remains mired by
important structural weaknesses. Net domestic credit as a share of GDP has grown in the past
decade, reaching 53 percent by the end of FY01 - with 22 percent going to the private sector.
Deposits have however grown faster, partly in response to a liberalization of interest rates. The
banking system is characterized by excess liquidity - between 16 and 69 of commercial banks'
deposits in July 2002 (averaging 21 percent for the economy). This reflects in part the under-
development of lending techniques based on balance sheets. In recent years, the quality of banks'
portfolios has deteriorated as a result of poor lending practices, the war with Eritrea, and
fluctuations in agricultural prices. The ratio of non-performing to total loans was estimated at
around 35 percent in December 2002. Higher loan loss reserve requirements have pushed banks
to reduce lending further. The sector is also characterized by a weak level of contestability and a
lack of dynamism. It is dominated by public sector institutions, with the Commercial Bank of
Ethiopia (CBE) accounting for about 80 percent of total deposits 6. The Development Bank of
Ethiopia (DBE), the Construction and Business Bank (both of which are state owned) and the six
private domestic banks account for the remainder. There are also nine insurance companies and
nineteen micro-finance institutions (MFIs). There is no stock market.

37. 
Financial sector reform will be important for PSD and for improving access to
savings and credit for farrmers. The agenda over the medium term includes: reducing the debt
overhang while preserving viable firms; increasing the efficiency of the banking sector through
measures to improve contestability; strengthening the credit environment; broadening access to
financial services; introducing new financial products such as leasing; and finding ways to get
the long term finance and equity finance markets started. Considerably more can be done by the
authorities to expand access to financial services while improving the overall banking sector
through a re-orientation of CBE's business strategy towards the rural and micro sectors. An
ongoing audit is expected to lay the ground for a restructuring of CBE in the near future. The
National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) is also expected to be strengthened and the DBE restructured
in the near term. In addition, strengthening payment linkages between and within financial
institutions will play a critical role in improving access to economic opportunities and the
process of decentralization. Reform of the Social Security Authority should be the starting point
for development of both long term debt and equity markets.

38. 
UJrban Land. High lease rates and modalities of payment, lease tenure
administration, and inefficient markets for leases are constraining private sector development.

5 Developing Exports to Promote Growth , Report No. 23294-ET.
6 Tlus excludes the DBE which is not a commercial bank.

13

Land leases may be freely exchanged and used as collateral, but the level of development of
primary and secondary leasehold rights markets is low and use of leasehold rights as security for
collateral is insignificant. Theses issues are addressed in the Urban Land Lease Proclamation
recently approved by Parliament. The challenge ahead will be to operationalize the law
efficiently and expeditiously.

2. Rural Development

39. 
The moderate growth in agriculture in the period 1991-2001 was mainly due to
population growth, which led to an expansion in the area cultivated, the liberalization of grain
markets, and some opening of trade in fertilizer which led to increased productivity in areas with
predictable rainfall. Utilization of fertilizers and improved seeds improved productivity
markedly in moisture reliable areas. This was done through the ambitious extension program
that reached 4.5 million farmers at the end of 2001 - the challenge will be to modernize and
extend this system further in the future, including to drought-prone areas. The volume of
exports, mainly agricultural goods, have also risen at a fast pace in this period due to the
devaluation of the exchange rate and the freeing up of trade in coffee and other export crops,
though this growth has slowed recently. The total value of exports has declined however, due to
the slump in international coffee market over the past 3 years.

40. 
Agricultural performance must dramatically improve if Ethiopia is to meet the
growth targets set out in the SDPRP. Overall agricultural growth has been slightly below
population growth in the past decade. Agricultural productivity per person remains low by
African standards. Fertilizer use is among the lowest in SSA and only 1 percent of arable land is
irrigated. Environmental degradation and a shrinking resource base also contribute to limited
agricultural production. Available pasture area has declined relative to growing livestock needs,
environmental degradation has affected yields, and lack of productive assets (land, oxen, seeds)
reduces output. Improvement in the road and water infrastructure are necessary.

41. 
Rural Ethiopia is actually made up of three distinct areas: a productive area, a
less productive area, and areas dominated by pastoralism. In the agriculturally productive areas,
mainly in the western and southern parts of the country, farm output has risen, on account of
both productivity gains and increases in area
cultivated (see Figure 4). Fluctuations 

Figure 4: Cereal Yields for the Six Most and Six Least

related to the weather play an important role,

but coping mechanisms allow farmers to 
smooth the effects of rainfall in ways that do
not threaten their long term livelihood 
systems. In many highland areas, as well as 
the large pastoralist area, productivity has
declined, in large part due to increased 
population density and environmental 
degradation. Such areas include about 5
million people that are chronically food 
insecure. In years of drought, up to 10 

million additional people are at risk of going 

Food Secre Zones

/

\sceZes

F/ 

7C

14 

13 
12

11 

9

1994 

1996 

1998 

2000 2001

* cerealyields reflonlythelongranseasonlervesta

14

hungry - and they are too poor to buy food from surplus areas.

42. 
Rural Land. Agricultural land user rights (defined by region) typically provide for
indefinite use and carry inheritance rights, but prohibit sale or mortgage. The Government
believes that a market in rural land would lead to fire sales of peasants' land in times of drought
or shocks, with subsequent massive migrations to urban centers. But the efficiency cost of this
measure is to reduce increase land tenure insecurity. Indeed, a recent survey revealed a high
level of perceived tenancy insecurity and lack of transferability, which discourages vital
investment in land improvement and soil conservation measures. While the Government is
committed to pay compensation in the event of taking repossession of the land, the perception of
tenancy insecurity needs to be dealt with. Recent reforms have tried to increase the length of the
land leases. There are also plans to formalize the lease system and develop a cadastre.

43. 
Growth and sustainability in the rural sector must be addressed in Ethiopia if it
is to meet poverty reduction goals. Rural poverty reduction will depend on increasing rural
production - reducing vulnerability to climatic and terms of trade shocks and improving food
security, raising productivity while fostering sustainable use of land, water forests and other
natural resources. Measures should seek to improve the efficiency of rural grain markets - as
well as provide a policy and institutional environment propitious for private commercial
investment in rural areas, necessary to provide markets for rural produce, enhance value added,
and introduce new technology.

3. Infrastructure

44. 
Infrastructure is extremely 
underdeveloped although rapid progress 
is being achieved, and could be further 
accelerated through increased private 
sector involvement. Past regimes have not 
invested much in infrastructure - and the 
civil war of the mid-eighties destroyed the 
little that existed. As a result, and even 
though fast progress is being achieved, 
infrastructure remains extremely under-
developed compared to neighboring 
countries, representing a large tax on 
development (Table 3). The main issues in 
infrastructure relate to the huge financing 
needs of the various sectors -- the challenge 
is to muster the energies of local authorities
and the private sector alike in supporting the expansion.

Ethiopia 
Uganda 

Ethiopia 

Road density (km/1000 km2)
Ethiopia 

Sub-Saharan Africa 

Per capita power prod. (KWh)

Sub-Saharan Africa 
Access to tap water (% of pop.)
Ethiopia 
Uganda 

Table 3: Ethiopia's Infrastructure
(with selected comparisons)

FY95 

FY01 

FY05
(proj.)

34

32

10

30

21 

26 

2.6 

27 

27 

50

28 
40

4 

14

25 
46

45. 
Ethiopia's water resources pose extraordinary challenges. Ethiopia's natural
endowment appears generous: it has several major rivers and lakes and its water resources are
relatively abundant at 1,711 m 3 /capita. However, rainfall across much of the country is

7 Peasants are also allowed to rent their land for short periods and use hired labor on their lands.

15

exceptionally variable and unpredictable, both in time and space, with year-on-year variation
often exceeding 35 percent around the mean. Yet Ethiopia has only 40 m 3 /capita water in storage
(compare to about 800m3 /capita in South Africa where the variability is much lower). One
consequence of this variability is endemic and unpredictable drought and flood, with enormous
direct social and economic impact. High variability also increases the vulnerability of the
landscape to erosion and desertification. In the highlands, 70 percent of the land is degraded to
the point where livelihoods are no longer sustainable. The Government's water strategy
addresses: water resources development and management - including a rapid extension water-
harvesting techniques, the creation of an enabling environment, trans-boundary rivers, financing,
stakeholder participation, gender mainstreaming, disasters and public safety, and environmental
health standards. The overall investment requirement to achieve program targets is estimated at
US$8 billion over the 15 year planning horizon.

4. Vulnerability and Volatility of Growth

46. 
The current drought is a strong reminder that the growth pattern has been
highly erratic. The wide fluctuations from year to year are in large part due to fluctuations in
agriculture, with growth strong in years of good rainfall (especially 1995, 2000) and collapsing
during droughts (especially in 1993, 1997, and 2002). Agricultural GDP growth per capita has
been negative during 3 out of the past 10 years. The negative effect of frequently recurring
droughts has been further compounded in the recent past by the cumulative impact of the border
conflict with Eritrea, a deterioration in the international terms of trade 8 , and the AIDS epidemic.

47. 
The collapse of agricultural production in the past year and the effects of the
drought highlight the need to develop mechanisms to manage risks better and reduce
vulnerability over time. Paradoxically, the current food shortfall is related to the collapse of
food prices in the previous bumper crop year Because of the collapse in food prices, many
farmers were unable to repay their debt and did not apply modern inputs to this year's crops. It is
estimated that a third to half of the current shortfall is related to the decline in the application of
modern inputs, rather than the drought itself. This points to the need for effective insurance
mechanisms, better food aid management, and improvements in the functioning of the food
markets.

48. 
Reducing vulnerability to drought will require multiple initiatives involving the
creation of off-farm income opportunities for subsistence farmers and the better management of
water resources, soil conservation, and labor mobility away from depleted areas. In addition,
reforming the safety net transfer system will also play a significant role in Ethiopia's poverty
reduction strategy. A major focus of the reforms should be to mitigate the risk that individuals
suffer an irreversible loss of livelihoods and assets in the aftermath of transitory shocks. To
achieve this presents difficulties both in designing the right program instruments to serve the
long-run objectives, while still ensuring the immediately hungry are protected; in ensuring that
Ethiopia does not lose net resource inflows associated with food aid; and in addressing the
domestic capacity constraints-both administrative and financial-to delivering a more
government-owned program. Ethiopia has also to begin to shift away from an understanding of

8 The earnings from Ethiopia's main export, coffee, fell from more than half from $420 million in FY98 to $187
million m FYO1. In the same period, Ethiopia's oil import bill rose from $143 million to $275 million.

16

vulnerability as only "food-insecurity", to a broader framework where households are vulnerable
to multiple sources of risks and the danger of being locked into poverty traps due to repeated loss
of assets, illness, orphanhood and old age.

H. ETHIOPIA'S STRATEGY FOR
DEVELOPMENT AND POVERTY REDUCTION

49. 
The overarching objective of Ethiopia's Sustainable Development and Poverty
Reduction Program (SDPRP) is to reduce poverty by enhancing rapid economic growth while
at the same time improving service delivery. To achieve its aims, the SDPRP aims at second
generation reforms, building on past successes and correcting for weaknesses. Even as it stresses
the importance of rural and agrarian development to improving the lot of poor people, the
SDPRP acknowledges the need for explicit efforts at private sector development to put the
economy on a higher growth trajectory. The SDPRP encompasses an agenda for correcting
incentives, decentralization, capacity building and reliance on competitive forces. The SDPRP is
built on four pillars: Agricultural Development-Led Industrialization (ADLI) andfood security;
governance, decentralization, and empowernent; reforn of the justice system and the civil
service; and capacity building. In addition, the SDPRP identifies key sectoral measures and
cross-cutting issues in the areas of HIV/AIDS, private sector development and trade, education,
health, roads, water and sanitation, and gender. (See CAS Annex Table A5.7 for detail on
actions and indicators).

50. 
The SDPRP targets for the medium and long term are consistent with the
Millennium Development Goals. For the first 3-year SDPRP program, the goal is to reduce
poverty by 4 percentage points from 44 percent in FYOO to 40 percent by FY05, and by half by
FY15. This is predicated on an average growth Ethiopian economy of 5.7 percent per annum in
real terms until FY15 (and an average export growth of 7 percent). The MDG targets for FY05
and FY15 are shown in Table 4, and while ambitious, they are achievable if economic growth is
achieved at the projected level.

51. 
The expected drivers of growth in the SDPRP in the medium to long term are
agriculture and rapid private sector development. The strategy recognizes that agriculture
will require increasing technical progress, output diversification, and greater market interaction
and that industry and services must grow in conjunction with the expansion of agriculture. The
central goal is to go beyond subsistence farming to small-scale market oriented agriculture. This
is to be achieved using a variety of policies and instruments which include: (i) modernizing the
research and extension system and making it demand-driven, including TVET for farmers; (ii)
improving competition and increasing efficiency in agricultural input and output markets; (iii)
improving the rural credit system; (iv) improving irrigation and water management; (v) ensuring
land tenure security; (vi) creating a conducive environment for commercial agriculture; and (vii)
reducing the vulnerability of families living in regions prone to drought.

52. 
The Government has recently embarked on a multi-directional effort to boost
private sector productivity and growth. As previously discussed, reaching the growth targets
will require increased private investment and substantial additional external resources from

17

foreign investment. The Government is committed to significantly improve the business
environment to attract the private sector into agriculture, off-farm activities, and industrial and
service sector development. An ambitious agenda to support the development of the private
sector is being prepared to: improve the investment climate and remove administrative barriers
to doing business; actively diversifying exports and encouraging the development of promising
sectors (especially those that are high-value or export-oriented); reforming and building up the
financial system on a sound basis; and, speeding upprivatization and involving the private
sector in infrastructure services. Relevant policy measures include: reform of the land lease
policy; improvements in the legal framework for infrastructure development, notably in
telecommunications, power and transport; continuing the ongoing reforms in the financial sector
and tax system; and, the enactment of a new competition law. The much improved dialogue
between the Government and the private sector, which has been facilitated by the recently
formed Public-Private Consultative Council, will be expanded. The Government is also
committed to large investments programs in infrastructure, especially for roads and water.

53. 
Civil service reforms, decentralization, and democratization. It is expected that
the ongoing second wave efforts to decentralize decisions and management further down to the
woreda level will enable civil society to participate in public decisions, including decisions over
the most suitable local investments, a better management of public assets, an improved
management of the environment, and a more integrated cost effective service delivery. In
parallel, efforts are being devoted to improve the capacity and motivation of the civil service at
all levels. These efforts will be supplemented by the implementation of a new wave of judicial
and legal reforms, the strengthening of property rights, and strategic mainstreaming of gender
issues. The Government plans recognize that building and nurturing institutions that give voice
to poor people, effectively addressing the needs of vulnerable groups in society, and enforcing
accountability at all levels, will be critical to generating empowerment and fostering democracy.
The government is also committed to establish a public information access policy that ensures
open access to information by civil society, academia, and international community.

54. 
SDPRP implementation. The Government is committed to consolidate the SDPRP
process, synchronizing it with the budget cycle, developing yearly status reports to discuss
performance with stakeholders and donors, leam from experience, and improve policies. To this
end, the existing Welfare Monitoring System (WMS), established in the 1990s, is being
strengthened so it can track SDPRP targets. In the next three years, this system will be gradually
adapted and expanded to address the links between central data collection and analysis and
monitoring inputs, outputs and outcomes at the woreda level. Along with data series from the
Welfare Monitoring Surveys and two Household Income, Consumption and Expenditure
Surveys, a number of other sources need to be brought together, and additional standardized
survey instruments need to be set up to monitor woreda level activities. To achieve this, new
institutional arrangements will need to be put into place, and capacity built in key institutions.
The WMS is committed to share data with relevant stakeholders and to encourage participatory
monitoring and evaluation efforts.

18
TaWbe 4: Ethiopia and the Millennium Development Goals (IfDGs)

MDG 

MDG Indicators 

Eradicate 
extreme poverty 
and hunger 

Reduce population living in 
poverty by half. Intermediate 
SDPRP goal of reducing 
poverty head count from 44% 
to 40% by 2005.

Progress Toward the MDGs 
1---Progress -0Target | 

_ 

Poetd Count 

 

Obstacles to Reaching the MDGs 

I 

o High level of vulnerability to 
drought and extemal shocks 
o Overall lack of opportunities and 
empowerment

Achieve 
universal primary 
education 

Raise primary completion rate 
from 40% in 2002 to 100% by 
2015, 

-

1995 

2000 

2004 

2010 

2015

Gross Primajy Enrollment 

 Dispanties in and between 
regions 
o Weak sub-national capacity 

a 

a 

a 

a 

CAS Strategy to Help Ethiopia Meet
the MDGs

PRSC
Emergency Drought Relief Project
Pastoral Development Project

PRSC block grants to woredas,
PSCAP, Post-Primary Education
Project, Education Country Status
Report (ECSR)

Promote gender 
equality and 
empower women 

Raise level of girls in primary 
and secondary education from 
40% in 2000 to half by 2005. 
Eliminate gender gap in higher 
education by 2015. 

1995 

2000 

2004 

2010 

2015

* 

... f 

o Main difference in gender gap is 
at school entry 
o Four regions account for large 
share of gap 
o Gap more pronounced at higher 
levels of education

o PRSC block grants to woredas
o Post-Primary Education Project
distance education and technology
programs at secondary level
o TA and ESW (e.g. ECSR)

Reduce child 
mortality 

Reduce under 5 mortality rate 
from current rate of 179 per 
1,000 to 63 per 1,000 by 2015. 
Intermediate SDPRP goal of 
160 per 1,000 by 2005. 

1995 

2000 

2004 

2010 

2015

Under-s Child Mortality Rate 

2000 

2004 

2010 

2015

 Low immunization rates 
o Large disparities across income 
groups 
o Weak sub-national capacity 

I 

l__________________________ 

o PRSC block grants to woredas to
expand access and improve quality
of heath care
o Capacity building at regional and
woreda levels to improve service
effectiveness and efficiency
o Mainstreaming sector-related concerns
in the various capacity building
funds

Table 4: Ethiopia and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)

19

MDG 

MDG Indicators 

Progress Toward the MDGs 
|-+-Progress -U--Target 
Improve maternal Reduce maternal mortality rate While reliable time senes data are not 
health 
by three-quarters by 2015 
available, Ethiopia has one of the 
highest maternal mortality ratios in 
the world (estimated by the 
government at 871 per 100,000 live 
births in 2000), and it will remain high 
even if the MDG is attained. 

Obstacles to Reaching the MDGs 

* 

* Access to antenatal care 
Few deliveries attended by 
skilled medical personnel 
* Poor maternal nutntion 
* Gender issues 

CAS Strategy to Help Ethiopia Meet
the MDGs
* See strategy on child mortality
* Also, focus emergency obstetric
care, reproductive health services,
behavioral change/awareness
creation activities
* Mainstreaming gender issues in key
sectors

Combat 

HIV/AIDS, 

malaria, and 

other diseases 

Halt the spread of HIV/AIDS, 

affecting 12% of population in 

1999, by 2015 

-

_ 

HIVI*DS Prevaience 

.

Poor M&E system to monitor 

* Multisectoral HIV/AIDS Project

progress 

0 Weak capacity 

(MAP) II

* PRSC I and ll

* Mainstreaming of HIV/AIDS

2000 

2004 

2010 

2015

Ensure 
environmental 

sustainability 

Increase access to clean 
water from 24% in 2000 to 

61%.in 2015 
Intermediate 
SDPRP goal of 39% by 2005. 
Reverse loss of environmental 
resources.

* 
.

2000- 

2004 

2010 

2015

Develop a global 
partnership for 
development 

Increase ODA received by 
Ethiopia. Harmonization of 
donors' support. Attainment of 
debt sustainability though 
HIPC. Improved access to 
export markets. 

interventions, for example in Roads
11 and other projects

* Water and Sanitation Project
* Country Environmental Assessment

* PRSC I and 11

* Weak capacity 
Lack of cost recovery for water 

* 

and sanitation services 
Poverty exacerbates
degradation of environment

* Obtaining donor consensus on 
harmonization 
* Availability of resources 
Transportation, terms of trade 
shocks, and investment climate 
restrict export growth 

* 

* Encouraging donors' return to
Ethiopia and the alignment of
support around the SDPRP
* Promoting donor harmonization
through the Development
Assistance Group (DAG) in Addis
* Promoting increased exports and
export diversification through TA
and ESW.
selected indicators based on available data

20

A. IDA-IMF JOINT STAFF ASSESSMENT

55. 
The IMF-I1DA Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) acknowledged the SDPRP as an
important step in Ethiopia's fight against poverty. On September 19, 2002, the Executive
Directors of the World Bank considered the SDPRP and the Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) which
endorsed the SDPRP as providing a sound basis for future concessional assistance. The JSA
recognized the wide-ranging set of consultations undertaken by the government, including free
and open consultations held in over 100 districts and attended by independent and donor
observers (in whose view they were open and free of interference by the government or the
ruling party). An independent NGO task force contributed to the process, while the Chamber of
Commerce established working groups to feed into the consultations. The draft SDPRP was also
discussed with the Parliament, civil society, and donors. The JSA recommended increased
emphasis on the implementation of measures to boost private sector development and rural
productivity growth as well as care in the roll-out of the decentralization plans. Other concerns
raised in the JSA, which are now being addressed through dialogue with the Government,
covered the areas of governance and community empowerment, food security and the
sedentarization of pastoralists, ensuring quality of education while rapidly increasing enrollment
levels, implementation of the HIV/AIDS program, and trade policy and exports.

B. THE HARMONIZATION AGENDA

56. 
To support the SDPRlP, the quantity aEnd quality of international aid will be
central. During the post-war period, the Bank has been the key development partner in Ethiopia
due to many bilateral donors withdrawing their support during the war with Eritrea. The SDPRP
provides a strong platform for the government to mobilize broader and greater levels of external
assistance. In addition to mobilizing additional resources, the poverty reduction effort will also
require more effective use of aid. Building on Ethiopia's own national system and procedures, a
comprehensive framework for harmonization is a potentially powerful tool to help Ethiopia, and
her partners, raise resources for the poverty strategy, and ensure they are spent effectively. The
goals of the harmonization work in Ethiopia seek to increase absorptive capacity for aid, while
addressing issues that limit disbursements from current aid commitments (e.g. high transactions
costs) and, in general, improve the aid delivery and management systems.

57. 
The harmonization agenda recognizes that there are mutual obligations and
accountability. In acknowledging the SDPRP as a solid platform on which to base Ethiopia's
poverty reduction efforts, donors, for their part, will need to not only provide sufficient resources
in a predictable and sustainable manner, but also strive to streamline their diverse procedures and
systems and align them to government processes. Government and donors endorsed the
harmonization agenda during the CG meeting and have been actively engaged under the auspices
of the local Development Assistance Group (DAG) in developing the principles for such a
harmonization framework. Such principles include the alignment of development assistance
strategies with the priorities of the SDPRP as well as with the Government budget cycle
following the Ethiopian fiscal year. The Government will be expected to assume a stronger
leadership role in the coordination of development assistance. To enable increasing reliance by

21

donors on national systems, the Government is committed to undertaking the necessary reforms,
including adoption of international standards and best practices, with the capacity building
support of the donors. Moreover, the adoption of direct budget support by a number of donors is
expected to reduce transaction costs, enhance the significance of the national budget, increase
predictability of aid, and augment mutual accountability processes. In order to implement these
harmonization measures on the ground, a Harmonization Task Force has been set up within the
DAG and work has begun to define a time-bound and specific plan of action.

III. WORLD BANK COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FY03-05

A. LESSONS FROM PAST BANK EXPERIENCE AND CHOICE OF INSTRUMENTS

58. 
OED Evaluations. The findings of the last Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE,
Report No. 21450, November 30, 2000) conducted by the Operations Evaluation Department
(OED) for Ethiopia are presented in Box 1. Although the CAE is dated in terms of the period it
reviewed, the findings and recommendations continue to be relevant. OED has also conducted
four evaluations of closed projects in the past several years, all concerning projects approved in
the late 1980s or early 1990s. Due to the border conflict, over-complex project design,
insufficient capacity, and inabilities to extend project benefits beyond isolated enclaves, these
evaluations were largely unsatisfactory.

Box 1: OED Recommendations in the Country Assistance Evaluation

A Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) coriducted by QED in November, 2000 assessed

IDA's assistance to Ethiopia over the 1990s. The CAE concluded that IDA's support has been
effective in a number of respects,- including, among others, supporting the Government's
macroeconomic management-and structural reforms after it assumed office early in the decade,
providing relevant policy advice and sectoral interventionis, delivering relevant and high quality
economic and sector work (ESW), and promoting donor coordination. The outcome and
sustainability of the Bank's projects in Ethiopia over the past decade was also judged to be above
average, and the outcome of the structural adjustmnent credit in the early 199;0s was rated highly
successful.

Areas for improvement. To improvethe quality of its assistance, going forward, the CAE
recommended that the Bank focus on: (i) the development of multi-year programs, with road maps

for the key reformrs, to guide the Bank's.assistance strategy; (ii) a strategy for removing the
remaining impedirments to private sector development,' including faster liberalization of the financial
sector;'(iii) a strategy for pror'oting institutional development.atall'levels:in a.manner consistent
with devolution of power fo the regions; and (iv)' a reyiew of assistance to agriculture and

environment. The CAE also recomrmended that the overall assistance strategy should 'be' sharply'

focused on policy reforms, and providedthat the Government's,commitment-to policy reforms 'is "
sustained, adjustmnent credits should be reintroduced. In addition,.including support'for civil service
reform, TA credits and IDF grants-jn the lending'prograr should be considered. Other suggestions
included targeting the Bank's analytical support to monitor-the e'xtent to which past reforms have
worked in practice and' to deepen the dialogue in key reformn areas.

22

59. 
The Bank's Quality Assurance Group (QAG) conducted Quality at Entry reviews
of the two adjustment operations extended to Ethiopia under the Interim Support Strategy. While
the review recognized the value of these operations in restarting a policy dialogue after the war,
and in supporting some important policy changes in the area of public sector reforms and PSD,
several weaknesses were noted: that single tranche operations that are not based on a medium-
term program do not foster sustainable reformns; that these operations have failed to address
central issues in the financial sector; and that they did not put together a workable monitoring
system to evaluate the sustainability and usefulness of reforms.

60. 
Capacity constraints. The issue of capacity looms large in Ethiopia. The ESDP and
HSDP mid-term reviews found that these operations taxed heavily local capacity by imposing
reporting, accounting, auditing, and procurement requirements that are parallel to existing rules
in the public sector. More generally, while OED reviews of the Ethiopia portfolio in the last
decade were broadly favorable in two areas-evaluations show FY91-02 satisfactory outcomes
at 79 percent and likely sustainability at 53 percent, OED's rating of the institutional
development impact of the Ethiopia portfolio was only slightly above the Sub-Saharan Africa
average at 32 percent. There seem to be two reasons behind this. First, capacity is a scare
resource in Ethiopia that needs to be built up aggressively. But second, the Bank's efforts should
focus on the institutions that are central to the functioning of the state, and therefore IDA should
avoid developing parallel procedures and instead use and strengthen Government procedures.

61. 
Institutional constraints. As discussed before, Ethiopia has undertaken a radical
transformation to deconcentrate power more effectively within a three-tiered democratic
decentralized state, operating within a market environment. The mandate of the Federal
Government include: large federal projects; unconditional budget transfers to the regions based
on equity considerations for basic service delivery; capacity building; and affirmative action
(especially food security). The regions, on the other hand, have mandates for delivery of basic
services such as health and education. The evolving Ethiopian Federal system allows the Federal
Government only to borrow from IDA, but not the regions. Recent Public Expenditure Reviews
have shown that IDA disbursements to the regions (e.g. for health and education), are offset by
reduced budget transfers to these regions. As a result, IDA lending needs to focus largely on
areas of Federal responsibility, while policy dialogue seeks to improve the incentives of the
various actors at all levels to perform.

62. 
Reviews of Sector-Wide Programs. The mid-term reviews of the Health and
Education sector-wide investment projects (HSDP, ESDP) noted that important gains have been
achieved in expanding health and education services, and in creating demand at the local level
for these services. The reviews also highlighted implementation constraints caused by a lack of
capacity at the regional and further decentralized administrative units. Moreover, these "silo"-
projects have also led to inter-sectoral and intra-sectoral imbalances: capital investments are too
high relative to recurrent costs; and improvements in outcomes will require the integration of
other sectors by local decision makers (e.g. water).

63. 
Client Survey. In FY98, the World Bank conducted a Client Feedback Survey for
Ethiopia to gather relevant information to assist the Bank in improving its effectiveness and

23

streamlining procedures in working with clients and partners. While Bank staff were seen as
competent, helpful, and effective, there was thought to be room for the Bank to improve in
several areas. The recommendations drawn from the survey have contributed to address these
concerns and are reflected in decisions to relocate the Country Director to the field, give more
authority to the country office on procurement and disbursement, deepen engagement on PSD
and with civil society, streamline procurement procedures, use more local professionals, and
strengthen the Bank's efforts in technical assistance and building local capacity.

64. 
Board Review of SDPRP. While the Board discussion broadly supported the
SDPRP, three areas were singled out which require support: (i) further articulation of the strategy
for promoting growth and private sector development, including agriculture, with specific policy
measures and a medium term time-table for action; (ii) supporting the movement towards
decentralization with a view to improve the workings of the civil service and improving service
delivery at the local level; and (iii) reducing vulnerabilities and managing risks better.

Application of lessons learned to current CAS

65. 
The current CAS builds on these recommendations and evaluations and takes into
account the lessons of recent experience. In particular, it lays renewed emphasis on policy
dialogue irrigated by analytical work to support a medium term rolling plan of policy reforms. It
focuses on improving the capacity and procedures of the state, instead of developing parallel
islands of quality. And it places particular emphasis on PSD (including agriculture and the
financial sector), decentralization, and reducing vulnerability.

66. 
Choice of Instruments. Lessons leamed have also informed the choice of main
instruments in the CAS. Adjustment credits in the form of PRSCs will be centered around the
objectives and M&E indicators of the SDPRP, and designed to support the implementation of the
government's strategy over the medium-term. A series of PRSCs would: (i) build on recent
structural adjustment loans to support policy reforms which will underpin broad based growth
and effective decentralization and civil service reforms; and (ii) build on the experience with
sector-wide sectoral programs to invest in basic services for poor people in health, education and
water through a decentralized program using the government fiscal transfer system. The use of
PRSCs is warranted for several reasons. First, a multi-sector approach is essential to achieving
the MDGs. Second, and in response to a more decentralized government structure, the planned
lending program will move away from a plethora of investment projects implemented by central
ministry units to fewer instruments which can allow for a more balanced mix of recurrent and
capital expenditures at all levels. Third, PRSCs, together with a parallel emphasis on capacity
building, will economize on the limited capacity available in Government and will contribute
towards a sharp reduction in transaction costs of ODA. In order to foster leaming and a richer
policy dialogue, PRSCs will be augmented by a renewed emphasis on analytical work, especially
in the areas of pro-poor growth, institutional developments (with a focus on performance in the
health and education sectors in order), and risk reduction and mitigation.

24

Box 2: Participatory Preparation of the CAS

PSD. The Bank, in collaboration with the Government and the Ethiopia Chamber of
Commerce, organized the first public national consultation between the Prime Minister, top Ethiopian
Government officials, the organized private sector, and donors (July 3-4, 2002). All participants
endorsed the joint vision that private enterprise is at the heart of development, growth, and poverty
reduction, and agreed on a detailed action plan to build up the market economy through a partnership
to resolve the main constraints to private sector development. The partnerships initiated at this
workshop are being strengthened through the Private-Public Consultative Forum that has been
established by the Ministry of Trade and Industry and detailed follow-up consultations will be held to
solve problems, discuss policies, reach understandings for future actions, and monitor progress.

Capacity Building. In this workshop (March 7-9, 2002), the Government presented its overall
strategy for capacity building in the context of the ongoing efforts to deepen decentralization. A
comprehensive program comprising fourteen specific proposals were presented by the Government
and were discussed by the World Bank team and other development partners. The meeting identified a
number of areas for future lending and analytical activities to support capacity building, which have
since been incorporated into the CAS. Areas of focus included the capacity building needs of the
public sector, the private sector and civil society, in light of their current and future roles in society, as
well as a vision for an expansion of the farmers training, vocational, and higher education systems.

Decentralization. The Bank, Government, and civil society met together during 14-16 May,
2002, to discuss the Government's program of democratic decentralization and its far-reaching
implications for the delivery of essential social and infrastructure services. All parties agreed that
donors will need to adapt the modalities of delivering assistance in ways that are consistent with the
integrity and accountability of the woreda tier of government (for example, moving from projectized
to programmatic support). The workshop also highlighted the need for sectoral strategies in health,
education, and infrastructure to be refined to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the
emerging decentralized system, and for relevant sector ministries and regional bureaus to continue
refining approaches to improve their effectiveness to operate within a decentralized framework.

Rural Development. This workshop was convened by the Ministry of Rural Development
and the World Bank during 13-15 November 2002 in the presence of the PM and representatives from
Government, universities, NGOs, donors, and private sector and civil society representatives dealing
with rural development, food security, rural finance, agriculture, natural resource management, and
cooperatives. The goals were to prioritize key actions needed to implement and perfect the rural
development program espouse in the SDPRP; and to review the state of knowledge in rural
development and delineate a collaborative research agenda. The meeting confirmed the
appropriateness of an agriculture led development strategy, but noted that there was a need for more
attention to actions to improve (i) the demand side and the development of rural markets, (ii) the
reduction and management of risk and vulnerability (including the perception of land tenure
insecurity), (iii) dealing with degradation in the natural resource base, and (iv) creation of off farm
employment opportunities.

DevelopmentMarketplace (DM). Held on February 26-28,2003, the DM offered an
opportunity to consult with over 50 local NGOs on the Bank's CAS. The consultation highlighted the
centrality of strong articulation- between the ongoing reforms in the public sector with a more dynamic
role for civil society. Civil society's role would be crucial in the areas of fostering livelihoods for poor
people, supporting service delivery, strengthening accountability and capacity at the local level, and
participating in national debates. A network of NGOs was constituted and took ownership for the
Bank's proposed Capacity and Empowerment Program for Civil Society.

25

67. 
In the context of decentralization, the PRSC involves commitments by the central
government, but does not have a direct influence on the behavior of regions and woredas.
However, it has important indirect effects in that it seeks to:

* 
* 
* 

* 

* 

stabilize transfers to the regions and hold them accountable to timely transfers to woredas;
improve the incentives for regional and local level performance in the transfers formulae;
clarify the role of the various actors in achieving national targets and disseminate best
practices about what can be achieved at all levels of Government,
establish a system of monitoring of outcomes and refining strategies and instruments to
improve local accountability; and
support institutional development and capacity building to strengthen the performance of
the local actors.

68. 
However, the strategy also recognizes that the decentralized system will need
time to evolve as the roles and incentives of each layer of government are clarified and as
institutions and capacity at each layer are enriched. In particular, over time, the Government's
fiscal transfer system will need to be expanded from one instrument with an equalization focus to
other instruments (such as support for infrastructure) which allow for performance-based access.

B. STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES OF THE CAS

69. 
The FY03-FY05 Bank program will support Ethiopia's SDPRP, thereby assisting the
country's efforts to reduce poverty and achieve the MDGs. The CAS was developed with the
benefit of an extensive consultation process with Government, civil society, the private sector,
and donors. It focuses on pro-poor growth issues (PSD, financial sector development,
agriculture), institutional development and capacity building, and a reduction of vulnerability
and better management of risk. Workshops to inform the strategic direction of the CAS were
held with special emphasis placed on private sector development, capacity building,
decentralization, and rural development (Box 2).

70. 

The three core objectives of the CAS are to:

1. Enhance pro-poor growth, both urban and rural, through:

* Accelerating rural growth by supporting increased rural productivity (effective
technological transfers and skills, the marketization of agriculture, and the
provision of more effective infrastructure and infrastructure services in transport,
energy and water);
* Major stress on urban growth by improving the investment climate, generating
off-farm employment as well as to build labor-augmenting modern sectors of the
economy;

* Support to the development of financial markets (commercial banks, rural

finance, long term and equity finance);

26

o Rapid export growth through production of high value agricultural products and
increased support to export oriented manufacturing sectors; and
o A stable macro-framework and sound regulatory reforms.

2. Enhance human development outcomes by improving governance:

o Supporting the reform of the public sector systems through civil service reform
(including financial management and justice system reforms) and capacity
building that also effectively mainstream gender considerations;
o Deepening and strengthening decentralization to shift decision making closer to
the grass roots;
o Empowering civil society to enhance the responsiveness and accountability of
the public sector.
Improving delivery of education services in terms of coverage, quality and
equity;
o Expand coverage and quality of all health services, especially preventive health
care, including nutrition and H1V/AIDS prevention;
Improve access to clean water supply and sanitation.

o 

o 

3. Reduce vulnerability by:

o Reforming food aid delivery and other safety net programs to very poor
households in ways that enable them to sustain human development and other
assets through the system of inter-governmental fiscal transfers, better
monitoring, surveillance and early warning, as well as increased cost-
effectiveness of safety net programs;
o Assisting Ethiopia better manage the vulnerability of the economy to terrms of
trade shocks through crop diversification and better functioning commodity and
inputs markets;
o Assisting the vulnerable to accumulate assets through expanded access to savings
services and other simple financial instruments;
o Mitigating and reducing risks in vulnerable areas by improving agricultural
productivity, adapting better water management practices including irrigation, and
encouraging off-farm activities and labor mobility;
o Enhancing programs to prevent the spread of HRIV/A]UDS and reduce the impact of
AIDS-related morbidity and mortality;
Increased attention to environmental issues, such as land and natural resource
degradation, and;
Improving the provision of short to medium term interventions that address the
immediate concerns of vulnerable groups such as poor women (e.g. expansion of
literacy/numeracy programs, safety nets including income-generating programs).

o 

o 

27

C. SELECTIVITY AND ROLES OF DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

71. 

Roles of IDA and other development partners. In the hiatus of broad donor

support to Ethiopia, the Bank played an important role, both as financier and in supporting the
transition from laying out the SDPRP to a return of donor support for implementing its policies
and programs. Ethiopia receives at the moment only $13/capita of ODA, of which $8/capita from
IDA. It is expected that ODA will rise to $23/capita in the medium tern (the African average).
Rising levels of donor inflows imply that IDA's share of the aid flows will progressively decline.
However, higher levels of bilateral flows do not suggest that IDA should scale back its support
for Ethiopia's development program. In the short and medium terms, IDA should continue its
leadership role in supporting the transition from the SDPRP vision to strengthening policies,
programs and capacities, and by so doing, facilitate and leverage the return of donors to Ethiopia.
In the medium-to-long term, IDA should move gradually towards financing infrastructure
projects (roads, water, irrigation) which tend to attract less support from other donors.

Table 5: Partnerships in Ethiopia's Development Framework

Development 
Challenges 

Growth 

Human 
Development

Governance 

Vulnerability

C 

C~~~~ 

* 

2 

- w 

.M 

C) 

C 

v~~3 

Piaeetw 

211~a 

c

-

N 

C 

(D 

0a 

C C 
E 
tf -

-.

w 3

Z 

? 

-co~ 

a 

a 

E 

-l 

o 
) 
-a 

0 

C

E

2

> *

C

-2 

j 

0 

l3 

Partner/Activity 

l 

Government

World Bank Group*

UN

Bilaterals

Civil Society

Private Sector**** 

F Little or No Focus 

J

*Planned in CAS

Some Focus 

Significant Focus

28

72. 
In the context of enhanced donor cooperation, the Bank is committed to effectively
implementing the harmonization agenda on the foundation of the SDPRP and will strive to
provide support which is increasingly predictable and transparent. The Bank will undertake to
ensure its support leverages that of other donors in a complementary fashion. Table 5 shows
thematically key areas of involvement of Government and multilaterals, bilaterals, NGOs and
civil society. 9 The Bank is working closely with the IMF to support the Government in
maintaining a sound macroeconomic framework as well as on PSD/financial sector and public
expenditure issues, and with the AfDB to strengthen coordination in the roads and water sectors
and in rural development. The Bank is also committed to coordinating closely its budget support
with a growing set of donors currently providing, or considering in the near future, budget
support (DFID, EU, AfDB, Sweden, Ireland, Canada, among others). WBI will play a strong
role in supporting the capacity building thrust of the CAS. Within the Bank Group, it is expected
that as confidence in the private sector improves, both IFC and MIGA activities will increase.

D. INSTRUMENTS

73. 
Instruments. The CAS comprises a mixture of lending and analytical instruments
which are designed to meet the evolving institutional structures of Ethiopia and reflects lessons
leamed from previous experience. As stressed above, PRSCs will support policy reforms and
the financing of essential investments and services. In the base case, PRSCs account for 22
percent of commitment during this CAS period. Second, and in parallel, the Bank's supports
Government's efforts to build a capable and accountable state. Hence, capacity building and
improvement in governance are critical underpinnings, and nearly 20 percent of the Bank's
commitments in the current CAS period will be devoted to building institutional capacity within
the public and private sector, and in civil society. Providing crucial capital investment funds to
Federal, regional, and local governments for rehabilitating and creating new infrastructure is the
third main element for achieving CAS objectives and represents the balance of commitments.
Last but not least, the analytical agenda will address the fundamental policy questions which
Ethiopia and her partners will need to unlock to successfully move the development and poverty
agendas forward. Table 6 presents the Bank's program thematically by main type of instrument.

74. 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Credits (PRSCs -- FY04 and FY05) support the
implementation of the SDPRP through the government budget on the basis of a medium-term
financing plan. Although PRSCs are not earmarked for any sector, they support the policy
dialogue and provide incentives for good performance in areas associated with national policy
priorities, as reflected in the SDPRP over a multi-year framework, especially those with greatest
impact on the MDGs. The PRSCs will support each of the main three themes. To help stimulate
growth, policy changes that can dynamize rural growth, help improve the investment climate,
strengthen property rights and support the development of the financial system will be identified.
To help reduce vulnerability, the PRSC will identify measures to diversify exports and non-farm
activities; move away from food distribution to more effective safety nets that rebuild livelihoods
and assets; accelerate the fight against HIV/AIDS; and over time, develop a far-reaching agenda
of mitigating risks, especially in most vulnerable regions. To improve human development

9 Annex Table A5.7 provides more details on the Bank's program and those of other partners.

29

outcomes, the PRSC will focus on policies that improve the coverage and quality of basic
services in education and health sectors including the institutionalization of these programs
through the inter-govemmental system of transfers, building local level capacity to manage them,
and the monitoring and evaluation of human development outcomes and intermediate outputs.
The PRSC will be the policy complement to the capacity building support provided by PSCAP
and the other capacity building operations which seek to improve governance, deepen
decentralization and empower civil society.

Enhancing pro- 
poor growth 

a. PSD 

b. Rural growth 

Reaching the

MDGs
a. Improving 
Human 
Development 

b. Improving 
Govemance 

Reducing 
vulnerability 

Table 6: AAA and Main Lending Instruments, by CAS Theme

PRSC 

Infrastructure 

Capacity Building 

AAA Products

* 

Sources of
Growth (04)

* 

* 

* 

* 

Financial market 
development 
Improve 
competitiveness 
and exports 
Improve 
investment climate

Improve workings 
of markets, rural 
credit, and 
transfers of 
technology 

* Roads II(03-04) 

* 

PSD Capacity 
Building (04) 

* 

* 

Financial Sector
Development-(05)*
Investment Climate
Assessment*(03)
* Poverty Reduction in
Cities (05)

* Energy Access 
(03)* 
* Decent. Infra. 
Fund (05)
* Nile Basin (05)

* Rural CB (04) 

* Rural Devt. Review
(04)
* Water Strategy (05)

* Supportng pro- 
poor expenditures 
and policies 

* Water & 
Sanitation (04) 

* Post-Primary 
Education (04) 
ICT CB (04) 

* 

* Supporting the 
reform of public 
sector systems 
Empowering civil 
society 

* 

* More efficient 
safety nets 
* Risk prevention & 
mitigation 

* 

ESRDF Supp. 
(03) 
* Pastoral Devt. 
(03) 
Emerg. Drought 
Recovery (03)** 

* 

* CBDSD (03)** 
* 
PSCAP (04) 
* Civil Society 
CB (05) 

* MAP 11 (05) 

* Service Delivery in a
Decent. Fmwk. (05)*
* Education Ctry
Status-(04)
* Higher Ed. Review-(04)
* Health Ctry Status (04)
* Gender Assessmt (03)

* State
Transformation.(05)*
* PER (Basic
Services)(03)
* M&E support (05)*

* Vulnerability & Risk
Assessment (03)
* Poverty Assessment
(04)
* Country Environmental
Analysis (04)

* Begun in previous FY(s).
**Actual commitments.

30

75. 
Capacity building and improvement in governance are critical underpinnings. A
common underpinning to all themes is the development of effective institutions. Hence, a large
part of the Bank's efforts in the current CAS period will be devoted to a series of operations to
build institutional capacity within the public and private sector, and in civil society. This effort
will encompass institutional reforms, the development of new institutions and systems, and the
improvement of skills. The effort will be delivered according to three important principles: that
capacity is built is sectors where incentives are "right"; that the delivery be demand driven; and
that the supply of capacity-enhancing services be competitive and conducive to building a
dynamic knowledge sector in the country. Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
inputs will be part of most of these operations, and will be coordinated along a recently released
Government ICT Strategy. There are three main reasons for opting for a few rather than one
larger capacity building project. First, adding up too many heterogeneous elements in one
operation would result in complexity costs that out-weigh cooperation gains. Second, most of
these projects are programmatic instruments, and the rules governing access to funds meant for
the private, public, and civil society sectors differ markedly and need to be managed by different
institutions. Finally, there is a need to sequence these knowledge intensive operations according
to revolving available knowledge and synchronization with ESW.

* Given the increasing government decentralization, two capacity building operations are
planned to support the reform of the public sector and improve the delivery of basic
services. The Capacity Building for Decentralized Service Deliverv (CBDSD) Project
(FY03-actual) aims to enhance decentralized service delivery performance by building
public sector capacity building at the federal, regional, and local levels by: (i)
implementing civil service reforms, (ii) restructuring and empowering local governments,
and (iii) strengthening of the Ministry of Capacity Building (MCB). The CBDSD will be
followed by a longer term APL. This larger program, the Public Service Delivery
Capacity Building Program. (PSCAP) (FY04) will seek to build capacity for improved
public service delivery by supporting the deepening of civil service reforms, deepening
district-level decentralization, improving urban management, and reinvigorating justice
sector institutions.

e For the private sector, two operations are envisaged. The Rural Market Development and
Capacitv Building (RCBMD) (FY04)would take a sector-wide approach to support the
transformations required for the "marketization" of agriculture. The Private Sector
Development Program (FY05) would support capacity building at the firm level, sector-
specific institutions and economy-wide institutions including the financial sector.

* Empowerment Program for Civil Societv (FY05) is a highly innovative credit which aims
to improve the voice and influence of civil society on local and national development. It
will be preceded by studies and consultations to build a solid base of knowledge and
ownership.

* 

Information and Communication Technologv (FY04) will support the coordination and
regulation of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) applications, to
improve education, foster civil society empowerment, and better government at all levels.

31

The proposed Post-Primarv Education Project (FY04) will assist government to expand
and strengthen training at the secondary and university level as well as through carefully
targeted interventions in technical and vocational education.

76. 
To support capacity building, World Bank Institute (WBI) activities are fully
integrated with IDA operations. WBI's recently-adopted country-focus approach will assist this
alignment, by supporting the adaptation of knowledge and learning products for national and
regional settings. Ethiopia has also been designated a priority country for the WBI. WBI's
capacity-building measures will be designed to build on, and leverage Bank ESW in order to
maximize the impact of analytical work by widening processes of consultation and dissemination
(including support to improving the effectiveness of the GDLN center and related networks). It
will also include multi-year capacity enhancement for SDPRP implementation, fiscal
decentralization, and basic service delivery. This will be supplemented by support through
regional and global knowledge sharing initiatives on the broader range of CAS priority themes.

Box,3: WBI's Support Program

At the core of the WBI activities for Ethiopia are four main themes:

Decentralization and Civil Service Reform. WBI's capacity buildinig support to Ethiopia's
decentralization initiative is envisaged to include the empowerment of local civil society,
strengthening the media and the Parliameint, training of'civil servants in budgeting and,
planning procedures, designing structures,for accounfability, identifying capacity needs,of
each level of government; 
Capacity for Human Development-Policy. Core health and.education,sector teams will be
introduced to international communities of practice and supported to develop national action
plans which integrate sectoralreforrm initiatives effectively into Ethiopia's SDPRP'. WBI
will also complementtthe CAS 'focus on vulnerability, with,an actionlearning program,in
social protection. _ _"
* Private Sector Development. WBI's ,support will includeAthe areas of financial sector,-,-
development, connecting the local private sector with international partners, especially'in''

the non-traditional export'sectors- and improving-the, private sector's contribution,to the-
national debates and to social development.
ICT- for Development. 
,WBI will.be' leading-the ,effort to advise the Golvernment on its new

* 

ICT-driven training progr,ams, with an enmphasislon the 

,depnt,of 

relevant content'

and the management-of-large knowledge,systems.--WBI is also workiing at connecting the'"
,emerging Ethiopian-eeducation and public secior netwbrks ,with,some of the international'' 
leaders in the field. 
' 
,

,,,

77. 
Infrastructure. As capacity is strengthened and funding through block grants
becomes more stable and predictable, additional emphasis will be given to performance. Early
discussion with the Government has outlined several options to do so in a constitutionally
acceptable way. To complement block grants (which are mainly equity driven), a Decentralized

32

Inffrastructure Fund (DIF) (FY04) will provide grants for infrastructure investment to newly
empowered and restructured local governments-municipalities and woredas -
in addition to the
annual fiscal grants, with the aim of building and/or rehabilitating locally-owned and managed
infrastructure (schools, clinics, local roads, water, small irrigation). The goal is to improve local-
level delivery of services, especially to poor people, by providing crucial capital investment
funds to local governments that are already undergoing a process of restructuring and capacity
building under programs such as the CBDSD (committed in early FY03), PSCAP and RCBMD.
At the moment, the transfer system is very much driven by equity considerations at both the
Federal and Regional levels. The World Bank will seek to encourage the Federal and Regional
Governments to expand their inter-governmental fiscal instruments to include performance
considerations. Early discussions with the Government are focusing on how to base access to
DIF on transparent rules that are not only equitable, but also performance and capacity related.

78. 

Other infrastructure operations:

o Water and Sanitation (FY04). The proposed water supply and sanitation project
would build capacity in the Ministry of Water Resources, Regional Water
Bureaus and woredas (communities, local government, and local private sector) to
manage water resources, and finance improved water supply and sanitation
services/facilities. Special emphasis will be placed on risk sharing among the
main stakeholders (to avoid moral hazard) and fostering the entry of the banking
sector into this sector.
* The Ener2v Proiect approved early in FY03 will help establish a sustainable
program for expanding the population's access to electricity and improving the
quality and adequacy of electricity supply and reduce envirornental degradation
and improve energy end-use efficiency.
* The second phase of the Road Sector Development Program (FY03) will
consolidate and deepen the institutional and policy reforms initiated under Phase I
and to improve transport access to rural and economically productive areas. By
design, the project will provide increased opportunities for domestic contractor
and private consultants participation.
o The support to the Nile Basin Initiative (FY05) would finance activities that are
being developed jointly by the Nile Basin Initiative and focus on irrigation in
parallel with the potential development of hydro energy.
* The Pastoral Communitv Development Project (FY03) would improve the
livelihoods of pastoralists living in the arid and semi-arid Ethiopian lowlands. By
empowering households, communities and local and regional governments to
better manage local development, improve infrastructure, increase and diversify
incomes, increase access to public services, and reduce the risk of pastoral
communities to drought and other natural disasters.
In addition to providing quick disbursing funds to respond to the current drought,
an Emerjzencv Drought Recovera Project (FY03-actual) will also provide
support to affected households and their communities to retain productive assets.

* 

79. 
Analytical and Advisory Activities. The planned AAA program forms an integral
part of the CAS and complements lending products in a strategic manner, providing support to

33

the ongoing national dialogue and seeking to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation of
policies. Key among these questions is a better understanding of the determinants of the sources
and distribution of growth, and the obstacles to tapping those sources including those related to
the financial sector, property rights, rural development, and market structure. Equally important
is a better understanding of the role which vulnerability plays in eroding growth and poverty
reduction achievements. In this respect, the Bank will carry out sector work focusing on the
central issue of water which will integrate the Bank's many water-related activities into an
effective program of support to the evolving Government's water strategy. A major multi-year
study will also review social sector service delivery in a decentralized framework. Finally, the
Bank will also study the evolution of decentralization (State Transformation) and the
effectiveness of the capacity building efforts in real time so as to allow for corrective measures
and support leaming by doing. Although the Bank will bring international experience, it is
important to provide space for debate and allow Ethiopia to find the best solutions that are
locally adaptable. Moreover, AAA should also build local capacity. Therefore, the active
participation of local researchers (and those in the diaspora) will be sought, as well as the World
Bank Institute (WBI). In turn, the analytical agenda supported by the CAS also underpins the
lending program, as shown in Table 6. In some areas (e.g. health, education, rural development,
and financial sector), stand-alone sector lending will be replaced by ESW and policy dialogue in
the context of PRSCs, and further supported by capacity building operations.

80. 
Core Diagnostic Analyses. In FY03 to date, the Bank has completed a Country
Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and a Country Procurement Assessment Report
(CPAR). Building on a series of annual PERs, FY03's Public Expenditure Review (PER) will
focus on basic service delivery, will also be delivered in the fourth quarter of FY03. In FY04,
core diagnostic economic and sector work will include a Country Economic Memorandum
(CEM) on the sources of growth and a Poverty Assessment. Other diagnostic reports planned
over the three-year CAS period are listed in Table 6.

81. 
Existing Portfolio. The planned program of support to Ethiopia is based on previous
ESW and ongoing operations. Prior structural adjustment operations, notably the ESAC, have
laid the groundwork for the growth and private sector development agendas. In the rural sector,
agricultural research, and a fertilizer market support project (recently closed) have set the stage
for productivity growth for subsistence farmers. Sector-wide investment programs in health and
education form the basis for government strategies in health and education and are the departure
point for sectoral priorities in the PRSCs. The Multisectoral AIDS Proiect for Ethiopia was
among the first such program in sub-Saharan Africa; the development of an improved
monitoring system to track the evolution of the disease is under discussion and would help lay
the basis for the follow-on project which would further target the most vulnerable groups. The
Roads Sector Development Program has contributed important lessons: (i) sector studies under'
the Rural Travel and Transport Program have provided the framework for establishing local-
level infrastructure funds; (ii) retrofitting the sector program to include interventions for HIV-
AIDS prevention; and (iii) rallying donor support for program implementation and enhancing
donors' harmonization within sector. The design of the ongoing Energy Sector II focused on
upstream interventions to increase power production, but gave less priority to the distribution and
supply network (which has deteriorated, leading to increased inefficiency and unreliability of
supply). This problem was addressed in the Energy Access Project (FY03). Finally, a Food

34

Security Project approved in late FY02 has begun to build the resource base of poorer rural
households (including asset protection), increase their employment and incomes, improve water
management, reduce real costs of food, and improve nutrition levels for children under five,
pregnant and lactating mothers.

E. ROLES OF IFC AND MEGA

82. 
lInternnational IFinance Corporation (I1FC) has a potentially strong role to play in
supporting private sector development in Ethiopia. To date, IFC's ability to fulfill this role has
been limited by restrictive regulations on investment and foreign financing. It is expected that
with the focus on improving the investment climate in Ethiopia, IFC will play an increasing role
during the CAS period. IFC will seek additional investment opportunities such as those which
can expand and diversify the very low export base, support foreign investors, and support
investment into newly liberalized sectors and activities, thereby strengthening the reform efforts
of IDA.

83. 
llnvestment and Advisory services. IFC has no current investments in Ethiopia,
however, in FY02, EFC made a commitment to a regional expansion of the Coca-Cola bottler, for

which Ethiopia is an important component. IFC will pursue non-investment activity to

strengthen the capacity of the private sector and private financial institutions, in particular to take
advantage of newly achieved reforms. IFC will continue to support the government with
advisory assistance to help implement reforms, such as in the creation of leasing and plant-hire
operations, and financial sector liberalization, and will co-manage ESW related to sources of
growth and the role of PSD in pro-poor growth.

84. 
MIIGA. MIGA does not have any guarantee exposure in Ethiopia, nor does it have
any active applications for investments into Ethiopia from foreign investors. However, the
Agency is playing an important role in supporting the government's efforts to improve its
standing in the international business community by helping negotiate and resolve pending
expropriation claims. These claims resulted from the actions of the Mengistu government 27
years ago, and are impeding Ethiopia's ability to attract foreign direct investment. In October
2000, MIGA entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the Ethiopian government to
formally initiate its mediations activities, which are in accordance with the mandate of the
Agency's Convention. Some of the claims have been resolved, while the rest are expected to be
settled in the near future. MIGA will continue working with the Ethiopian government and the
claimants until the pending issues are settled. MIGA will also be able to help publicize the
resolution of these claims and would start considering guarantee applications for investments
into Ethiopia.

F. PERFORMANCE OF THE EXDSTING PORTFOLiO

85. 
Current Status of the Portfolio. As of March 14, 2003, Ethiopia's portfolio of IDA
credits comprised 18 projects under implementation, representing an aggregate commitment of
US$ 1,795 million (Table A5.6). This compares to 11 projects and total commitments of US$

35

1,237 million for FY00, 17 projects and US$ 1,830 million for FY01, and 18 projects and US$
1,726 million for FY02.

86. 
Improvements in speed of disbursements. From the low disbursement ratios of 15
percent in FY99 and 11 percent in FY00, disbursement ratios have risen to 34 percent in FY01,
29 percent in FY02, and are running at 21 percent to date (not annualized) in FY03. While these
ratios exclude the effects of single-tranche adjustment operations, part of the increase can be
attributed to the quick-disbursing emergency operations provided after the war. At present, the
portfolio's undisbursed balance stands at US$ 835 million. The last several years show a
substantial increase in the level of IDA disbursements to Ethiopia: annual disbursements about
doubled from FY98 to FY99 from US$ 72 million to $148 million, dropped to US$ 105 million
in FY00, then climbed sharply to US$ 270 million in FY01 and US$ 437.9 million in FY02.

87. 
Project Status Ratings. All projects, with the exception of the Learning and
Innovation Loan (LIL) for the Global Distance Learning Network (GDLN), were rated
"satisfactory" or higher on Development Objectives and Implementation Progress. An action
plan has been developed to improve the GDLN project's performance by considering it within
the context of the planned national education ICT infrastructure. Three projects - sectoral
development programs in education and health (ESDP, HSDP) and the Ethiopia Multi-Sectoral
HIV/AIDS Project (EMSAP) - were recently upgraded from an unsatisfactory to a satisfactory
rating for Implementation Progress (IP). These projects had been confronting capacity issues
mainly in the area of procurement and financial management and in the case of the latter also for
project management. In the case of the ESDP and HSDP, implementation had been constrained
by a lack of capacity at the regional and further decentralized administrative units. Efforts
continue to be made to upgrade capacity at sub-national levels under these two programs. These
sectors will be covered in the future by the planned PRSC, and capacity building efforts will
focus on national procedures. In the case of EMSAP, the absence of a pre-existing
administrative structure, dysfunctional bureaucratic procedures, and insufficiently qualified staff
had led to much slower than expected disbursements. However, efforts have been made to build
capacity and streamline the project's administrative structure, resulting in the upgrade of the
project to satisfactory in October 2002.

88. 
Current Portfolio Improvement Efforts. The most recent Country Portfolio
Performance Review (CPPR) was carried out in December 2002 and undertook a candid,
comprehensive assessment of the IDA Portfolio, in order to: (i) remedy implementation
problems; (ii) enhance leaming; and (iii) accelerate disbursements. A related CPPR objective
was to help institute a broad-based, ongoing process for regular "follow-up" and proactive
problem solving. The CPPR showed that, by and large, the portfolio is perforning better than
the sub-Saharan Africa regional average.

89. 
Resolving Portfolio Issues. Based on the project-specific, sectoral, and portfolio-
wide portfolio implementation constraints identified in the portfolio review process, the CPPR
meeting endorsed individual action plans for all respective projects as well as a plan to address
cross-cutting portfolio issues. Remedial actions agreed to be taken by the Bank and the
Government fall in the categories of building implementation capacity, improving the flow of
funds, strengthening the results orientation and monitoring the impact of projects, ensuring sound

36

financial management and timely submission of audit reports, mainstreaming of HIV/AIDS
activities across the portfolio, and promoting increased coordination and information sharing
among the various project implementing units, the Government, IDA, and donors. Mechanisms
for monitoring the progress in implementing the recommendations and agreed actions from the
CPPR workshop were also agreed in the meeting. In the future, the Bank will be working with
the local DAG and the Government to prepare for an annual all-donors CPPR exercise.

G. IFIDUCIARY ISSUES

90. 
Financial Management. A Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA)
for Ethiopia has been prepared with the Government, Bank, and donors. The goal is to assess
how effective the ongoing reforms are at both Federal and Regional levels, how far they had
gone in addressing weaknesses identified in previous assessments (PERs, IMF reports), and
agree on a future action plan. Four regions were also assessed in the CFAA: Anihara, Tigray,
Somali and SNNP Region. If it is not managed well, the organizational and financial devolution
to woredas has the potential of reducing the current 'above average' evaluation of Ethiopia in
terms of financial integrity. Priority should be given to ensure that internal audit and other
functions of internal control operate effectively at both the Regional and Federal level in this
changing enviromnent. The CFAA identified measures, in particular training and capacity
building programs, that could help to strengthen the accountability environment. Although
considerable progress has been made in the rationalization and strengthening of budgeting
processes at the Federal level,more needs to be done at all levels. A number of prioritized
recommendations are highlighted in the draft CFAA Development Action Plan in the context of
original or planned reform initiatives. These include the Expenditure Management Control
Program (EMCP), the Public Service Delivery Capacity Building Program (PSCAP), the
Capacity Building for Decentralized Service Delivery (CBDSD) and the Civil Service Reform
Program (CSRP).

91. 
Procurement. A Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) was also
completed in early FY03. The CPAR reviewed the Ethiopian procurement system against the
generally accepted international principles of sound procurement fiduciary management, meeting
the criteria of transparency, economy and efficiency necessary for an optimal use of scarce
public funds. The CPAR found that these criteria are only partially satisfied in Ethiopia, and that
improvements are necessary in a number of areas, either by starting reform initiatives suggested
in the report or by completing the ones already underway. Such areas include the legal and
regulatory framework, institutional framework, procurement practices and procedures, private
sector, and building sub-national capacity to cope with the demands of the decentralized system.

IV. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING AND RISKS

A. SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS

92. 
Performance-based IDA lending envelope. The FY03-05 CAS presents three
lending scenarios: a low case, a base case (status quo), and a high case. Under the current IDA-

37

13 period, which coincides with the proposed CAS, the performance based allocation to Ethiopia
is $1.5 billion in the base case, including up to 40 percent in grants as a debt-vulnerable low-
income country (see Table 7). The base case IDA allocation translates to about $7.7 per capita
per year.

Table 7: IDA Program, FY03-05, Lending Scenarios

FISCAL YEAR 

PROJECT 

BASE CASE 

2003 

TOTAL FY03 

2004 

TOTAL FY04 

2005 

Energy (A) 
Capacity Building 
(CBDSD) (Al)
ESRDF Supplemental (A) 
Emergency Drought 
Recovery (A)
Pastoral Development 
Roads II 

PRSC I * 

Roads II (supplement) 
Capacity Building 
(PSCAP)
Water & Sanitation 
Post-Primary Education 

Rural CB 

PSD Capacity Building 
ICT Capacity Building 
Education 

PRSC II * 
Decentralized 
Infrastructure Fund
- Nile Basin 
MAP 11 
Civil Society Capacity 

Building

Health 

TOTAL FY05 
TOTAL FY03-05 
A = Actual commitment.
^ Includes support for education and health.
v Indicates likely candidate for grant financing.

132.7
26.2

28.3
60.0 

30.0 
127.0 
404.2 

150.0

170.0
100.0

70.0 
50.0 

60.0 

30.0
20.0

650.0 

150.0 
150.0 

100.0 
30.0 
20.0 

450.0 
1,504.2

ADJUSTMENT FROM 
BASE CASE TO: 
LOW CASE 
HIGH CASE
US$ MILLIONS

OF WHICH:
GRANTS

60.0

30.0
127.0
217.0

V

v

-

v

v

V
V

V

70.0 
50.0 

50.0 

50.0 
220.0

100.0 
30.0 
20.0 

50.0 
200.0 

200.0 
230.0

250.0
30.0 
20.0 

730.0

93. 
Base case lending would consist of about 5-7 projects per year, including PRSC
operations in the second and third years. The base-case scenario is designed to support the
implementation of the SDPRP while maintaining medium-term fiscal sustainability. Ethiopia
would remain eligible for base case support if it: (i) continues to maintain satisfactory
macroeconomic performance, as evidenced, for example, by an IMEF PRGF program; (ii)
implements the SDPRP at a steady pace (iii) shows progress in portfolio performance as
indicated in CPPR (including implementation of action plans).

Low Case 

Policy reversal. Significant 
backtracking on macroeconomic 
and fiscal policy and key policy 
reforms (including 
decentralization, trade policy, 
banking, regulation and 
regulatory activities, privatization, 
and tax policy). 

Decentralization reforms 
significantly off track. Major 
implementation problems in the 
context of the ongoing 
decentralization reforms, 
especially in regard to service 
delivery and financial 
management. 

38

Table 8: Program Triggers

Triggers Leading to...

Base Case 

Macroeconomic stability. 
Solid macroeconomic framework, as 
evidenced, for example, by 
satisfactory implementation of the 
IMF PRGF program and steady 
progress on reforms leading to pro- 
poor growth. 

SDPRP. Strong performance in 
implementing the SDPRP based on 
annual progress reports and 
evidenced by satisfactory Joint Staff 
Assessment of the reports. 
Sabsfactory progress on SDPRP 
indicators on poverty, food security, 
agriculture, health, HIV/AIDS,
education, water, roads, macro.
stability, and public expenditure
management as described in Tables
13.1 and 13.2 of the SDPRP.

Unsatisfactory Portfolio 
Satisfactory portfolio performance. 
Performance. Disbursement 
Largely satisfactory portfolio 
ratio (excluding quick-disbursing 
performance and disbursement 
projects) falling below 10% or 
ratos. Satisfactory implementation of 
percentage of total commitments CPPR Action Plans. 
in problem projects reaching 
20%. 

High Case
Base case triggers, plus:
Private Sector Development.
Demonstrable impact in implementing
policies to improve investment climate as
evidenced by: implementation of urban
land lease policy; increased private
participation in telecom and power
generation; streamlining business
regulations (e.g. decrease time and cost
of business registration by 20%);
resolution of most outstanding foreign
expropriation cases.

Financial Sector Development. Develop
and implement measures to enhance
financial intermediation as evidenced by:
the implementation of a restructuring plan
for the Commercial Bank of Ethiopia; and
reduction of NPLs by Birr 0.8 billion (from
Birr 3.9 billion at end December 2001).

Improved service delivery.
Demonstrable improvement in both
financing and delivery of basic services at
the woreda level as evidenced by:
reduced costs of basic service delivery
infrastructure (e.g. schools); increase pro-
poor spending as a share of total
expenditures from 14.6% in FY02 to 18%
of GDP; restructure 25% of woredas in
'reforming" regions, 30% of municipalities
in all regions; roll-out expenditure
management reforms and accounting
training in all woredas in "refomning"
regions.

Fast export growth: total $US nominal
export growth of at least 8.8% annually (or
otherwise sufficient to keep NPV debt-to-
export ratio w/in manageable limits), w/
increasing share of nontraditional exports
of GNFS in the total.

39

94. 
The high case scenario would correspond to a situation where additional investments
can be maintained in a sustainable fashion - underpinned by high growth of the economy (and
thus of tax revenues and incomes) and where institutional developments would insure that these
additional investments are managed effectively. In addition to triggers to remain in the base case,
triggers for moving into a high case scenario would include demonstrable progress in: (i)
improving the investment climate for private sector development; (ii) identifying key issues and
recommendations for financial sector reform; (iii) improved service delivery of basic services at
the woreda level; (iv) increased exports (Table 8). The high case program would be similar to
the base case, with larger support to investments in infrastructure. However, any move to a high
case would not be anticipated until the last year of the CAS period.

95. 
Low case lending would be significantly reduced from the base case allocation and
would be triggered by significant policy reversal, collapse of decentralization reforms, and/or a
major deterioration in portfolio implementation. Support would be limited to essential social
services, water, and HIV/AIDS.

96. 
Use of IDA Grants. Ethiopia is a debt-vulnerable IDA-only low income country and
is eligible to receive up to a maximum of 40 percent of its IDA allocation as grants (i.e.,
approximately $200 million per year) under IDA-13, provided continued strong policy
performance. However, maintaining 40 percent of Ethiopia's IDA allocation as grants cannot be
guaranteed, as this ratio will depend on overall demand each year for grants and usage. The
grant allocation for Ethiopia for FY03 amounts to $217 million equivalent. The grants are
proposed to be used to fund an Emergency Drought Recovery operation ($60 million, of which
$24 million from the Natural Disaster Facility), the Pastoralist Development Program ($30
million), and the Roads II Project ($127 million).

B. DEBT SUSTAINABILITY AND IDA SUPPORT

97. 
Even at the HIPC Decision Point, Ethiopia's debt situation was fragile. In
November 2001, the Boards of the IMF and the World Bank approved the Decision Point for
Ethiopia under the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (eHIPC) Initiative. Total debt
relief under the Initiative was estimated to amount to US$ 1,275 million in NPV terms (or US$
1,930 in nominal terms), with IDA providing $463 million. The projections made on the basis of
prevailing prices at Decision Point indicated that even after Completion Point the ratio of NPV
of debt to exports would rise from 150 percent in the base year (FY01) to peak at 174 percent by
the end of FY04, falling below 150 percent only after FY08. At the time of the Board
discussion, Executive Directors expressed concern over this hump. Directors stressed the
importance of ensuring long-term sustainability, and the obligations this imposed on Ethiopia
and on the creditor and donor communityl'. 
It was agreed to revisit debt sustainability under this
CAS".

lO IDA/R2001-0168/3.
l A detailed DSA will be prepared at the Completion Point. The results shown here are therefore illustrative for the
purposes of this CAS.

40

98. 
Since then, Ethiopia's NPV debt-export ratio has deteriorated markedly due to
exogenous shocks. Lower discount rates, exchange rate changes, significantly lower coffee
exports and a drought have driven up the NPV debt-to-export ratio well above 200% since
Decision Point. Updating the Decision Point calculations to reflect these exogenous factors, the
ratio would now peak at 219 percent in FY04, and remain above 150 percent for another decade,
even without further IDA support or new borrowing from other concessional sources.

99. 
This exposes a fundamental choice between following the IDA performance
allocation framework and addressing debt sustainability concerns. Ethiopia's level of need
and policy performance merits a high volume of IDA lending in the base case under IDA's
performance allocation framework. Yet, debt sustainability considerations mean that IDA
cannot extend at this time the full performance-based amount to Ethiopia.

100. 
Additional short-term measures are needed to reduce Ethiopia's debt-to-export
ratio to within a sustainable range before IDA can commit to provide Ethiopia's
performance based allocation under this CAS. Possible measures by the international
community to address the overhang at Completion Point include consideration of additional
bilateral debt relief, and topping up of debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. The
conclusion from an updated debt sustainability analysis (see Annex 1) is that on current
estimates 
topping up at the Completion Point would be needed to bring the NPV debt-to-export
indicator below 200 percent for the current CAS period (FY03-05). Ethiopia could be a good
candidate for topping up at Completion Point. This question will be brought for World Bank
Board of Executive Directors' consideration when the country reaches Completion Point.

101. 
Therefore until a decision is taken at the Completion Point regarding topping
up, IDA will need to carefully manage the flow of new support to Ethiopia. To respect debt
sustainability concerns, it is proposed that in addition to seeking the maximum of 40 percent
grants available for debt vulnerable countries within IDA13, IDA will restrain new lending until
the Completion Point. Specifically, for the remainder of FY03, the Bank will extend only grants,
bringing the total support to Ethiopia to about $400 million for FY03 (of which about $180
million is in IDA loans already committed).

102. Once Completion Point is reached, a fresh assessment will be made of the country's
debt situation in light of the Board's decision on topping up, new information on exports,
and the latest estimate of debt stocks. If the NPV debt-export ratio falls significantly and is
well within the range of 150-200 percent, the Bank would then be in a position to seek to commit
the full $1.5 billion base case allocation before the end of the CAS period, while maximizing the
extent of grants within the IDA-13 framework. Annex 1 discusses in more detail the challenges
and options for Ethiopia achieving debt sustainability after this CAS period. On the other hand, if
the fresh assessment leads to the conclusion that Ethiopia's debt situation remains high, then the
Bank would continue to maximize grants under the IDA-13 framework, and staff will work
closely with donors to seek an expansion of bilateral grants to fill the financing gap.

12 Expected by December 2003.

41

C. CAS PERFORMANCE INDICATORS

103. 
The ultimate success of World Bank support to Ethiopia will be measured by
achieving results on the ground based on SDPRP priorities. Accordingly, and in addition to the
tracking of usual measures of the quality of Bank's products, the focus will shift to measuring
the impact of Bank's ESW, policy dialogue, and programs on development outputs and
outcomes. As indicated earlier, the Bank, together with other donors, will support the
Government's efforts to strengthen the national statistics system and the M&E system
underpinning the SDPRP process. As indicated in Table 9, the Bank will track performance
regularly against key SDPRP benchmarks in the following areas: (a) enhancing pro-poor growth;
(b) enhancing human development outcomes by improving governance; and (c) reducing
vulnerability. The CAS will also monitor progress on.key MDG targets as indicated in Table 4.
In addition, several pieces of ESW (and in particular, Sources of Growth, Service Delivery in a
Decentralized Framework, and State Transformation) will focus on measuring the impact of
ODA and IDA interventions with a particular focus on the social returns to the ongoing capacity
building efforts.

Table 9: Core CAS Monitoring Indicators

CAS Pillar 

SDPRP / CAS Goal 

CAS Progress Indlcators*

1. Enhancing Pro-Poor 
Growth 

* 

* Accelerating rural growth 
Fostering an enabling environment for 
urban growth 
* Supporting development of financial 
markets 
Promoting rapid growth of exports 
Ensuring a continued stable 
macroeconomic framework 

* 
* 

* Urban and rural poverty headcount
* Productivity of agriculture
* Road density
* Growth of private sector and
increase in FDI
Private and rural access to finance
Ratio of exports to GDP
Fiscal, monetary and exchange rate
policies

* 
* 
* 

Improving delivery of education services 

* Primary completion rate and gender

* Expand access to health services 

gap

2. Enhancing Human 

Development Outcomes 

by Improving 
Govemance 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Improve access to clean water supply 
and sanitation 
Supporting the reform of public sector 
systems 
Deepening and strengthening 
decentralization 
Empowering civil society 

* Coverage of health services
* Access to improved water source
and sanitation
* Meeting Government's CSRP
targets
* Quality of service delivery at local
level
* Community involvement in
investment decisions

* 

* 

3. Reducing 
Vulnerability 

Improving food aid delivery and other 
safety net programs 
Reducing vulnerability to terms of trade 
shocks 
* Mitigating and reducing risks in 
vulnerable areas 
Enhancing programs to fight against 
HIV/AIDS 
Increased attention to environmental 
issues 
* See Annex 5.7 for more details.

* 

* 

* 

Amount of cash aid relative to food
aid, aid earmarked for asset
protection
* Diversification of exports
* Number of chronically food insecure
people
* Number of HIV/AIDS affected
population
Land degradation (percent of total
land area)

* 

42

104. 
Mutual Responsibility. As reflected in the framework for harmonization, the
principle of mutual accountability is paramount. Therefore, a key factor for judging Bank
performance will be to review progress made on harmonizing procedures with, and thereby
strengthening, government institutions, systems and processes.

V. MANAGlING RJISKS

105. 
There are two types of risks which the World Bank needs to monitor and seek to
manage: country-level risks and those pertaining to Bank performance.

A. COUNTRY 

J1SKS

o EcoInomic anid other shocks. The extended global crisis and continued
deterioration in terms of trade may impede growth and make it difficult for the
Government to remain fully engaged in the reform agenda. The recurrence of
droughts and famines may result in Government focusing on short-term relief
measures. The CAS will, in the short term, support establishing macroeconomic
stabilization mechanisms and improving safety nets. Over the medium and long
term, the goal is to reduce risks and share them better; analytical and sector work
during the course of the CAS will assist policymakers in considering options.
o Regional security. The possibility remains of resumption of regional hostilities
(e.g. Eritrea, especially because of remaining tension over the border town of
Badme). Spillover of insecurity in neighboring countries is also a potential risk.
The Bank's ongoing Emergency Rehabilitation Project is supporting the
rehabilitation of households along the Eritrean border.
o Political. The risk exists for ethnic and regional tensions, especially if the gains of
reforms are perceived to be inequitably distributed. These tensions may result in the
reemergence of internal political struggles, while inadequate progress on
governance and human rights fronts could lead to a deterioration in trust and
confidence of donors. Other development partners, especially the EU and the UK,
are focusing strongly on this agenda within the SDPRP process and their own
budget support operations.
lDecentralization. The evolving mandates and responsibilities across the newly
restructured ministries and weak institutional capacity, especially at the woreda
level, may create implementation problems. 
In the meantime, expectations will be
high and if unfulfilled, could lead to disillusionment. The PSCAP and PRSC
operations are designed to help the government manage these risks, but the
capacity-building program is itself risky and is likely to take time before its impact
can be felt. The Bank will be reviewing results under decentralization and capacity
building regularly and will propose remedies to emerging problems.
o Performance-based aRlocations to woredas. While the government's fiscal
allocation system is largely driven by equity concerns, performance will need to be

o 

43

taken into account and ensure improvements in the capacity of public institutions,
the efficiency of public investment, and in the the quality of service delivery in an
intergovernmental system. The viability and sustainability of any capacity building
and decentralized fiscal support depends the Government's ability/willingness to
establish transparent quid-pro-quo arrangements in which the beneficiary institution
undertakes a set of ex ante and ex post institutional reforms in exchange for
additional financial assistance. The CAS will be seeking to help the government to
establish performance-based rules at the woreda level (especially in the context of
infrastructure finance), and will seek ways to interact directly with the regions to do

so.

* Empowerment. Another risk is whether Ethiopia's citizens and communities will
provide a sufficiently robust demand-side response. Will they take advantage of
democratic decentralization and demand greater voice? Will independent civil society
get organized to demand accountability, due process, and transparency? Will they
demand greater quality in service delivery? The CAS will support the strengthening of
civil society's response, including capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, and
transparency in information.

B. BANK RiSKS

106. 

Given the above country risks, the Bank must manage institutional risks, particularly:

* Managing debt sustainability while providing Ethiopia the performance-based IDA
allocation. The planned financing strategy deals with debt sustainability in the short
term by limiting IDA lending, relying more on grants, and seeking topping up at the
HIPC Completion Point, while helping to improve Ethiopia's creditworthiness in the
medium term by supporting rural, export, and private sector growth. If the Completion
Point is not reached on schedule, and therefore topping-up cannot be considered as
planned in December 2003, the Bank's ability to extend the full IDA allocation will
continue to be called into question. The Bank will continue to carefully manage the flow
of new support to Ethiopia.
* Lending mix. The effectiveness of increased levels of programmatic lending and PRSC
support will be influenced by Government capacity and the ongoing decentralization
drive, both identified above as country risks. The planned mix of new instruments
actually reduces the burden on Government's capacity, especially if they are well
integrated with other donors' efforts. The Bank will closely monitor results during CAS
implementation and, if necessary, move back to more traditional instruments.

* 

Implementing the harmonization pilot will require all partners, including the Bank, to

concretely deliver on expressed intentions around harmonization. The Bank is
continuing to coordinate with Government and other development partners on content,
pace and sequencing of reforms. Synchronizing PRSCs with budget support operations
of other donors around government budget processes will help attenuate risks of
slippages in the global harmonization agenda related to procurement and financial
management.

44

VI. CONCLUS]IGN

107. 
Today's Ethiopia has managed to turn the page from conflict. The SDPRP holds out
the promise of a future of development and poverty reduction on a massive scale and to make
real progress towards achieving the MDGs. Ethiopia's governance structure is intrinsically pro-
poor. Heavy emphasis is now being put on reforming the administration and building its
capacity. A new decentralization drive has started to empower citizens at the grass-root level to
get directly involved in development and service delivery. To achieve the MDGs, Ethiopia
recognizes the need to shift the economy onto a higher growth trajectory. The Government is
now committed to concrete actions to improve the investment climate and foster private sector
growth. At the same time, Ethiopia has also recognized that the vulnerability of her people to
recurring shocks, especially weather, must be dealt with in a systemic and structural way. There
are many challenges and risks looming ahead that need to be overcome. The World Bank has
been a strong supporter of Ethiopia's development. Now, other donors too have signaled their
support for the SDPRP and have indicated their willingness to do so in a harmonized fashion.
The Bank needs to continue to support Ethiopia through financial resources, knowledge sharing,
and engagement with partners, to help the country deliver results on the ground and achieve the
goals of the SDPRP.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
Shengman Zhang

Washington, DC
March 24, 2003

ETHIOPIA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

ANNEXES

Annex 1: 

Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA)

Annex 2: 

International Monetary Fund (IMF) Relations Note

Annex 3: 

Ethiopia at a Glance

Annex 4: 

Statistical Tables

Table A4. 1 
Table A4.2 
Table A4.3 

Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators

Annex 5: 

World Bank Support

Table A5.1 

Table A5.2 
Table A5.3 
Table A5.4 
Table A5.5 
Table A5.6 
Table A5.7 
Table A5.8 

Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
IFC and MIGA Program for Ethiopia
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
IDA Program Summary for Ethiopia
Summary of IDA Nonlending Services
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
CAS Program Matrix: Framework for Country Program
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Debt Sustainability Analysis

Annex 1
Page 1 of 9

This Annex sets out the findings of an updated Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA).
Section 1 is a summary. Section 2 sets out the causes of Ethiopia's debt vulnerability. Section 3
updates the NPV ratio for exogenous price shocks since the HIPC Decision Point, showing an
expected increase in the ratio to over 200% by Completion Point. Section 4 discusses the
implications of this for IDA lending. Section 5 discusses possible approaches for managing
Ethiopia's debt sustainability under this CAS, and beyond. These approaches are presented
purely for illustrative purposes. They are not intended to pre-judge or anticipate any future
Board decision at Ethiopia's Completion Point.

Section 1: Summrar and Conclusions

1. I Ethiopia is a debt vulnerable Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC). This
vulnerability stems from a relatively low export base concentrated on a commodity for which the
price is on a long-term downward trend. Since 1980, exports have averaged just 11.3% of GDP,
with coffee typically accounting for 40-60% of merchandise trade. During that time coffee
prices have been volatile, but have followed a downward trend. They have declined sharply since
the mid-1990s, falling to 20 year lows in 2002, with little prospect of a long-term recovery.

1.2 But Ethiopia is also a very large and poor country relative to others in Africa. This
and the Government's strong pro-poor policies - embodied in the PRSP - mean Ethiopia scores
highly in terms of both need and development effectiveness under IDA's performance allocation
framework - and so qualifies for a high volume of IDA lending. In fact, IDA is Ethiopia's main
development partner. In 2003, IDA accounted for $8 out of Ethiopia's $13 per capita in external
assistance'. Aside from IDA's financing function, the Bank plays a pivotal role in the
international community's efforts to mobilize, harmonize and align external assistance behind
Ethiopia's PRSP.

1.3 Ethiopia's NPV debt-to-export ratio is highly volatile to exogenous factors and has
risen sharply since Decision Point, 2 climbing to above 200%. Application of new exchange
rates, discount rates and export prices to the debt stock at Decision Point increases the ratio of
NPV debt-to-exports in FY04 from 174 to 219 (see chart A2). So even without taking into
account the IDA allocation which Ethiopia qualifies for in this CAS period, external debt after
HIPC Interim relief is estimated to far exceed the 150% NPV debt-to-exports threshold at
Completion Point and to remain at an uncomfortably high level for several years.

1.4 This exposes a fundamental choice between adhering to the IDA performance-based
allocation framework and maintaining external debt sustainability. Projecting exports and
the Decision Point debt profile at these new prices, Ethiopia's NPV debt-to-export ratio would
remain above 150% until 2014. Therefore for illustration, should these prices prevail, and

I Compared with $23 per capita external assistance on average for African countries.
2 Decision Point under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative was reached in November 2001.

Annex 1
Page 2 of 9

should external repayment capacity concems alone strictly bind new IDA lending in line with the
NPV debt ratio, Ethiopia would need to be extremely careful in taking on additional new loan
commitments from IDA (or anyone else) for several years, until the ratio falls to well under 200
percent, and perhaps closer to 150 percent. 3 Even then, government will need to closely monitor
new concessional borrowing, and ensure that foreign loans are used effectively for the highest
priority purposes. A watchful risk-management approach is called for, which balances
Ethiopia's huge demand for future growth and development with the need to monitor and
manage external debt in the face of export volatility.

1.5 This CAS therefore proposes measures to help manage Ethiopia's debt vulnerability
while enabling Ethiopia to access as much of the IDA performance-based lending ceiling as
is prudent. Through policy dialogue, ESW and adjustment lending under the first CAS pillar
(accelerating pro-poor growth), the Bank's program will help Government put in place an
investment climate conducive to export-led economic growth. Additionally, in preparing the
CAS, various options have been considered for reducing the impact of Bank lending on the NPV
ratio. These are discussed in section 5.

1.6 However, an inmescapable conclusion of the updated DSA is that, on current
estimates, the Bank cannot lend the full IDA performance-based amount unless the NPV
debt export ratio falls sharply. One way this could happen is if the Bank's Executive Board
approves topping up when Ethiopia reaches Completion Point. Under such a scenario,
Ethiopia's NPV debt-export ratio remains robust to sensitivity analysis on exports and new
borrowing under all three CAS scenarios. 4

1.7 

In view of this precarious debt position, this CAS proposes two specific measures to

address the tension between the IDA performance allocation framework and concerns about debt
sustainability:

> to prevent a build up of new debt before Completion Point, new IDA commitments
between now and Completion Point should, as much as possible, be on grant terms, and

> 

to limit the impact of the CAS on debt sustainability, Ethiopia should receive up to the
maximum of 40% of new commitments under this CAS in the form of grants under the
IDA 13 agreement.

.1.8 On present estimates, and on the assumption that topping up is provided at HIPC
Completion Point, these measures should be sufficient to accommodate IDA performance-based

3 As noted in the Joint Staff Paper 'The Enhanced HIPC Initiative and the Achievement of Long-Term Extemal Debt
Sustainability', of April 15 2002, "extemal debt sustainability is a comprehensive concept, and no single indicator can fully
inform the assessment of debt sustainability". Management will, in practice, mean tracking a number of indicators across a
range The NPV ratio is therefore used here to illustrate the need to monitor and manage the risk of unsustainable debt on NPV
terms within a sustainable range Debt service ratios for Ethiopia are relatively low. Extemal Debt Service as a % revenue: was
11% in FY02, while as a % of exports it is estimated to be about 8%. Yet since a large proportion of Ethiopia's future debt will
be on IDA ternms, with back-loaded repayment, both stock and service indicators for Ethiopia need to be monitored and managed.
4 This conclusion is based on best-estimates of an uncertain future outcome. It is therefore illustrative. The World Bank and IMF
will carry out a detailed DSA with the Authonties at Completion Pomt.

Annex 1
Page 3 of 9

lending while ensuring that the NPV of debt-to-export ratio stays under 200% during this CAS
period, i.e. between FY03-05. Beyond FY05, Ethiopia would need more assistance on more
concessional terms than IDA. On current estimates, even after possible topping up at
Completion Point, a mixture of grants and loans is needed under all 3 CAS scenarios to keep the
NPV of debt-to-export ratio below 200% during the next CAS period (FY05-07).

1.9 
If topping up is not provided to Ethiopia at Completion Point, then barring any surge in
exports, debt sustainability concerns will require the Bank to keep lending low and to maximize
IDA-13 grants within the current framework. At the same time, the Bank will have to work with
partners to raise additional grants from bilateral sources to meet the external financing gap, to
ensure full funding of the macroeconomic framework supported by the Fund, and to provide
continued support for the Government's reform efforts.

Section 2: Debt Dynamics: Ethiopia's Debt Vulnerability & Volatility of the HIPC Ratio

2.1 Ethiopia's debt vulnerability as defined by the HIPC sustainability measure of the NPV
of external debt stock to exports, is attributable to three main causes: (i) the country's low share
of exports of goods and non-factor services in GDP; (ii) the relative concentration of these on
just one agricultural export crop, coffee; and (iii) falling coffee prices.

2.2 Exports as a share of GDP are currently around 15%. It is not unusual for a large and
land-locked country to have a low export-to-GDP ratio. However since 1980, Ethiopia's ratio
has averaged just 11.3%, well below half the sub-Saharan Africa average of 28.1% for the same
period. This average for Ethiopia masks two distinct periods. From 1980, exports fell gradually
from 12.4% to a nadir of 4.5% in 1992. Since then, with more liberal policies introduced by the
present Government, exports have risen back as a share of GDP, peaking at 15.9% in 1998.

2.3 Coffee prices have had a strong 
influence on debt vulnerability. Export 
variability in Ethiopia is about the same as the
average for sub-Saharan Africa. 6 But as a 
coffee exporter, the outlook for Ethiopia is 
arguably worse than for African exporters of 
other commodities. Coffee prices have risen
slightly in 2003, but are still around 20 year 

lows (Figure Al). Even in the long-term, 

coffee prices are not expected to recover.7

Consequently, Ethiopia's terms of trade are 

forecast to remain lower than any other HIPC 
over the next decade. 8 Whereas it has 
traditionally accounted for around 60%, coffee

30

250 

200

150

100

0

Figure Al World Coffee Prices

1983-2003 (US cents per pound)

Arabica

Robust

Source IMF Commodities Und

5 80% of the variation m Ethiopia's coffee export unit value is accounted for by changes in world prices.
6 Export vanability is the standard deviation m export values in % of average exports, it is 24% in Ethiopia compared with 23%
for SSA, and 30% for oil producing African countries.
7 The most recent WEO update revised down the long-term projection for coffee prnces.
8 See Appendix table 10 in 'The Enhanced HIPC Initiative and the Achievement of Long-Term Extemal Debt Sustainability'
Joint Staff Paper, April 15 2002.

Annex 1

Page 4 of 9

currently accounts for about 40% of merchandise exports and about 16% of exports of goods and
non-factor services. With this heavy concentration on coffee in exports, a 10% change in the
price of coffee would cause a 4-5 percentage point change in the NPV debt-to-export ratio.

2.4 Export expansion and diversification are therefore needed to keep the NPV debt-to-
export ratio within manageable limits. Ethiopia has not traditionally followed export-oriented
policies. But the Government has recently started addressing some of the key obstacles to an
improved investment climate, including removing regulatory and operational impediments to
exports. Through a new focus on long-term finance in public/private partnerships, they are
making new efforts to develop exports in non-traditional sectors, in particular in horticulture,
garment, textiles, hides and skins, and tourism. Deeper structural and institutional reforms are
also needed to achieve higher income growth and fiscal revenue, and to attract non-debt finance
such as FDI and so achieve debt sustainability more broadly. 9 Strengthened capacity in debt
policy, monitoring, and strategic debt management would allow a more systematic assessment of
the impact of new projects on debt sustainability, and help determine the country's optimal
appetite for risk.

2.5 Meanwhile the NPV iratio of debt-to-exports is highly volatile. In addition to the
unpredictable nature of coffee exports, sensitivity analysis reveals that relatively small changes
in exchange rates and discount rates can greatly affect the NPV of Ethiopia's debt. A 20%
appreciation of the SDR against the US dollar, or a 100 basis point change in the corresponding
discount rate would raise the NPV ratio by around 30 percentage points.T

Section 3: Updated Debt Sustainability Analysis - The Effects Of Exogenous Factors Since
Decision Point

3.1 Since the Decisioni Point, the NPV debt-to-export ratio has risen sharply, to well over
200% since Decision Point, due largely to global interest rate and exchange rate

movements. Even at Decision Point, the NPV ratio estimated for Completion Point was 173.5
percent." However, just keeping stock of debt projections as they were when Ethiopia reached
Decision Point under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative, and updating for exchange rate and interest
rate changes since then,'2 the NPV debt-to-export ratio would rise by 33.7 percentage points to
207.2% in June 2003. This amounts to an increase in the NPV of debt by over 19% from
exchange rate and interest rate changes alone during a 12 month period. It is caused by an
appreciation in the value of the Euro relative to the U.S. dollar, and by a reduction in interest
rates. The former raises the value of outstanding loans vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar, while lower
interest rates reduce the discount rate, and so increase the NPV value of long-term debt.

3.2 
In addition export prices are lower. Exports in 2003 are now estimated to be 8% lower
in value compared with the Decision Point forecast. Whereas export volumes in 2003 are now

9 The PRSC under preparation plans to support measures under the PRSP to increase income, exports and revenues to ensure
broader debt sustainability. It will build on past ESW (Ethiopia: Developing Exports To Promote Growth, Report No. 23294-ET)
and planned ESW on Sources of Growth
10 This again underscores the need to revisit the DSA at Completion Point, and the need to maintain a flexible approach to
monitor and manage Ethiopia's external debt sustainability in future.
l Due to new borrowing.
12 Under the HIPC Initiative, debt sustainability is based on pnces in the previous year.

actually expected to be about 2% higher than they were at Decision Point, export unit values
(prices) are expected to be 10% lower. Taken with the exchange rate and interest effects this

means exogenous price changes since Decision Point have increased the NPV ratio by 40.7
percentage points, to 214.6. Based on these new prices, the ratio would not fall below 150%

until 2014. (See Figure A2 and Table Al which illustrate the effect of exogenous factors on the
NPV ratio).

Annex 1
Page 5 of 9

Figure A2: Effects Of Exogenous Factors and New Lending

275

250 

225 -

200 6! 

G;; 

eu 

Decision point projectioon

~~~(June 2002 prices, revised 

CAS Baseline Scenano

Annex 1
Page 6 of 9

3.3 This means that on current price estimates Ethiopia is set to reach Completion Point
with an NPV debt-to-export ratio exceeding 200%. Even before taking into account the IDA
allocation which Ethiopia qualifies for in this CAS period, Ethiopia's external debt after HIPC
Interim relief looks set to remain at alarmingly high levels for many years.

Section 4: The Implications for IDA

4.1 This analysis has fundamental implications for this CAS, and more broadly, for IDA.
More than any country under the HIPC Initiative so far, Ethiopia exposes the potential tension
between the performance-based resource allocation framework for determining country
allocations under IDA, and the constraint imposed on it by debt sustainability concerns. One
option for addressing debt sustainability concerns would be to stop new IDA lending until the
NPV declined to acceptable limits. But in practice, and in the absence of an adequate level of
grants, curtailing IDA lending could be counterprodctive to medium and long-term debt
sustainability, and to achieving the MDGs. IDA's support for Ethiopia's PRSP is critical in
terms of both financing and policy dialogue.

4.2 And even zero new commitments of IDA lending for the next 3 years, would not make
the NPV ratio sustainable. Even with new IDA lending suspended for 3 years,13 Ethiopia's
debt ratio, after a peak at 220% by the end of 2003, would plateau at around 208% until 2011,
and remain above 175% for another decade. Yet given the significance of IDA financing to the
economy'4 , Ethiopia's economy would suffer if LDA withdrew, and so consequently, would
long-term debt sustainability.

4.3 Rn conclusion, there are compelling reasons in Ethiopia's case not to strictly constrain
RDA lending by the NPV debt-to-export ratio. These reasons include: a) a suspension of new
IDA commitments for the entire CAS period would not make debt sustainable in the long-run; b)
the on-going vulnerability of Ethiopia's exports; c) the Bank's potential contribution to
enhancing Ethiopia's investment climate, exports and growth; and d) performance-based
justification to IDA lending. Therefore, an alternative and moreflexible solution to managing
debt sustainability concerns is needed in Ethiopia.

Section 5 : Managing Ethiopia's Debt Sustainability Under This CAS

Possible Solutions: IDA-13 Grants, Interim Measures & Topping Up at CPI5

5.1 An updated DSA took into account the effects on the NPV debt-to-export ratio of IDA
assistance in the three lending scenarios presented in the CAS. The results were very similar for
high, base and low case scenarios, because exports are expected to move commensurately with
lending in those scenarios. For clarity, only the base case is shown in the charts and tables
presented here.

3 This scenano assumes the proposed new CAS would begin m FY07, after a 3 year freeze in new IDA loan commitments.
14 IDA lending exceeds the value of Ethiopia's coffee exports annually.
" Expected in December 2003

Annex 1
Page 7 of 9

5.2 Assuming full IDA performance-based lending, the NPV ratio in the base case would
peak at 258% in 2008 and remain above 200% until 2019.16 (See Figure A3) This represents an
increase by 67 percentage points in the NPV ratio by 2008 when compared with lending
envisaged at Decision Point (see Table Al).1 7

5.3 The provision of up to 40% of the CAS in the form of IDA-13 grants reduces the peak
NPV ratio to 240% in 2008 compared with no grants. But it still remains well above 200% and
does not fall below 200% until 2018. As discussed in paragraph 4.2, even 100% grants for the
IDA-13 period would still not bring the NPV ratio below 200% until 2015.18

Figure A3: The Impact Of IDA-13 Grants1 9

275

250 

225 

200 -

175 E/

CAS Baseline Srenano

with IDA-13 grants

150

125

100

75 -

_ N 

en 

c 

U) ZD r< 

CO a) 

0 

N 

X 

st 

LO CD 

r- 

co 

a) 

a 

5.4 Since there is no realistic flow solution for reconciling IDA performance-based lending
with Ethiopia's higher-than-expected NPV ratio, the DSA assessed whether further debt stock
relief at Completion Point was needed to keep the ratio within manageable limits. Possible
measures by the international community to reduce the stock at Completion Point under the
Enhanced HIPC Initiative include additional bilateral debt relief, and topping up of debt relief

5.5 Additional debt relief is needed. It is premature to anticipate the Executive Board's
discussion of possible topping up at the Completion Point. However, for illustration purposes,
Figure A4 shows the NPV debt-to-export ratio of the CAS under two extremes: (i) with no
topping-up; and (ii) either additional debt relief or topping up at completion point such that the
NPV debt-to-export ratio is brought down to 150% at the end of 2003.

16 This 'no IDA 13 grants' scenano is illustrative. The CAS proposes the maximum use of grants under IDA 13.
17 Lower Bank lending was envisaged at Decision Point
is ie no new commitments on IDA terms during this CAS (FY03-FY05) -mentioned only for illustrative purposes
19 NB: this graph does not presume IDA grants after the IDA 13 period.

Annex 1

Page 8 of 9

5.6 With such additional debt relief and assuming 40% grants under ]IDA-13, the NPV

ratio under the CAS base-case lending scenario stays below 200% until FY07. It peaks at

204% in 2011, falling below 200% in 2015 and below 150% only after 2020 (Table Al). Of
course, Ethiopia's extemal debt would still need to be carefully monitored and managed2 0 to
remain below the 200% NPV ratio even after additional debt relief and the provision of IDA-13
grants at 40%.

5.6 Until a decision is taken at the Completion Point on topping up, 
IDA wil carefuly
manage the flow of new support to Ethiopia. To respect debt sustainability concerns, it is
proposed that in addition to seeking the maximum of 40 percent grants available for debt
vulnerable countries within IDA-13, IDA will restrainet new lending to Ethiopia. Specifically,
for the remainder of FY03, the Bank will extend only grants, bringing the total support to
Ethiopia to about $400 million for FY03 (of which about $180 million is in IDA loans already
committed).

Figure AI.4: The Impact Of Topping Up

Baseline Seenano (no IDA 13 grants)

175 pSe, ^ s *8 ~~~~~~~~~~~~wtth full topping-up'e Xil
,X 
'(and 

IDA 13 grants) 

s 

175 6 

'A

a

FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY FY

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 19 20 21

01 

02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 

10 

11 

275

250 

225 -

200

150 

125

100

75

5.7 
If, by Completion Point Ethiopia receives additional debt relief, or if other exogenous
factors dramatically reduce the NPV debt-export ratio, resumption of support to Ethiopia
as envisaged under the IDA allocation for this CAS period would become possible. The
Bank would then seek to commit up to $1.5 billion base case allocation before the end of the
CAS period, while maximizing the extent of grants within the IDA-13 framework. Beyond

20 For instance, management options might include increased blending with donor grants, IDA grants beyond IDA 13, donor buy-
backs of IDA loans, or restricted IDA lending.

Annex 1
Page 9 of 9

FY05 Ethiopia would need more assistance on more concessional terms than IDA. On current
estimates, a mixture of grants and loans would be needed under all three CAS scenarios to keep
the NPV of debt-to-export ratio below 200% during the next CAS period (FY05-07).

21

5.8 Concerns about Ethiopia's long-term debt sustainability are also relevant to overall
portfolio risk management. Assuming IDA extends the full base-case allocation of $1.5
billion, IDA's exposure to Ethiopia increases by about $0.9 billion (i.e. excluding grants).
Accordingly, IDA's share of Ethiopia's external debt would rise from 50% to nearly 65%. To
offset these newly accrued portfolio risks, the CAS proposes to facilitate Ethiopia's economic
development and long-term stability, and will thereby help to strengthen the country's capacity
to repay all its creditors.

21 Again this is illustrative, the scenario would need to be revisited under a future CAS, and the appropriate measures to manage
debt sustainability would depend inter alia on the amount of topping up granted at CP.

International Monetary Fund (IMF) Relations Note

Annex 2
Page 1 of 3

Public hiformation Notice (PIN) No. 02/113 
October 3, 2002 

International Monetary Fund
700 1 9th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

Ethiopia: Public Information Notice

On September 23, 2002, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (INMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Ethiopia. 2 2

Backg-round
Overall economic performance in Ethiopia during 2000/01 (fiscal year ended July 7) and the first
part of 2001/02 was good, in the context of Ethiopia's steady progress toward peace with Eritrea.
The authorities have been implementing wide-ranging structural reforms and pursuing prudent
macroeconomic policies. However, with per capita income still about US$ 100, Ethiopia remains
one of the poorest countries in the world and continues to face major challenges.

Following a bumper crop, real GDP growth rose to 7.7 percent in 2000/01 but declined to 5
percent in 2001/02, as prices of coffee and cereals continued to fall and the growth of
agricultural output returned to a more sustainable pace. Consumer price inflation remained
negative in 2001/02. However, since July 2002, there has been a drought which is affecting food
production. The authorities have been requesting additional food assistance from donors. The
external current account deficit (including official transfers) widened to 6.6 percent of GDP in
2001/02 from 4.2 percent in 2000/01, on account of higher food imports. Coffee exports, which
account for 40 percent of merchandise exports, were lower than expected, as both volume and
prices fell.

The fiscal deficit (including grants and special programs) increased in 2001/02, as a result of the
accelerated implementation of special programs, capital expenditure, and poverty-targeted
expenditure, the latter of which reached 16.7 percent of GDP. With regard to tax policy
measures, the large taxpayer unit and tax reform implementation task force established in 2001
have been strengthened, and draft legislation for the introduction of a value-added tax (VAT)
was passed by parliament in early July 2002. Defense outlays were cut from 6.4 percent of GDP
in 2000/01 to 5.9 percent in 2001/02.

22 Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually
every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials
the country's economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which
forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the September 23,
2002 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report.

Annex 2

Page 2 of 3

Broad money rose by 10.9 percent in 2001/02 compared with 9.5 percent in 2000/01. Several
measures were taken to improve the soundness of the financial sector. The wholesale foreign
exchange auction began to operate more efficiently before its replacement by an interbank
foreign exchange market in October 2001.

Progress was also made in implementing other structural reforms focused on public sector
management, including civil service and public expenditure policy, and on private sector
development. Revised investment and urban land lease laws were adopted. However,
implementation of the privatization program slowed because the larger companies, including
industrial enterprises, that were being sold attracted fewer potential buyers.

The poverty reduction strategy paper was prepared with full participation by civil society and
development partners, and was submitted to the Fund and the World Bank in August 2002.

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors noted that the authorities have made good progress in the implementation of
sound macroeconomic policies and structural reforms. However, after the bumper crop in
2000/01, real economic growth is estimated to have decelerated from 7.9 percent in 2000/01 to 5
percent in 2001/02. Since July of 2002, Ethiopia has suffered from a drought, which is affecting
food production and causing food shortages in some regions, as well as a rebound in cereal
prices after a two-year decline. The authorities have subsequently requested additional food
assistance from donors.

Directors observed that, as one of the poorest countries in the world, Ethiopia faces major
challenges, particularly the achievement of sufficiently high rates of real GDP growth over the
medium term to help reduce poverty. To this end, Directors encouraged the authorities to
implement decisively structural reforms that enhance the efficiency of the economy and improve
its competitiveness, and to continue with prudent macroeconomic policies, including a
sustainable fiscal policy.

Directors noted that the largely agricultural-based economy is vulnerable to exogenous shocks,
and shared the authorities' concern about the continued drop in producer prices of cereals and
coffee. They encouraged the authorities to take action to mitigate the impact of these
developments. From a long-term perspective, they considered that a key challenge for the
authorities in the medium term will be to diversify the production base of the economy. Directors
underlined that a significant reduction of the fiscal deficit in the coming years is needed for
macroeconomic stability and debt sustainability. They urged the authorities to persevere with
their cautious expenditure policy, and stressed the need to pursue vigorously their efforts to
improve the planning, tracking, and reporting of public spending, especially poverty-reducing
spending. In this context, they shared the view that decentralization of public spending should be
conditional on an improvement in the effectiveness, reporting, and monitoring of local
government spending. Directors welcomed, however, the shift in spending from defense to the
social and economic sectors since the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility-supported program
was adopted in late 2000, and encouraged further steps in this direction.

Annex 2
Page 3 of 3

Directors were encouraged by the authorities' efforts to mobilize tax revenue by strengthening
tax administration and reforming the tax systems, noting the rise in the ratio of collections to
GDP in the last two years. However, they considered that there is room for further improvement
in revenue collection, and urged the authorities to continue to implement the tax reforms in a
timely manner. They welcomed the planned introduction of the value added tax and the tariff
reform in January 2003, and urged the authorities to step up the preparations for these measures.

Directors endorsed a cautious monetary policy stance to maintain price stability, sharing the staff
view that the authorities should keep interest rate policy under review. They considered
appropriate the current exchange rate regime and policy stance. Directors welcomed the
elimination of certain exchange restrictions, and encouraged the authorities to further liberalize
the foreign exchange market and eliminate the remaining restrictions.

Directors urged the authorities to pursue vigorously their efforts to strengthen the financial sector
and enhance its competitiveness, and to improve monetary management. They welcomed the
ongoing efforts to address the difficulties of the largest state-owned bank. Many Directors
recommended that the authorities reconsider the existing policy of not allowing entry of foreign
banks, stressing that foreign banks would bring more diversified lending and enhance bank
efficiency by increasing competition.

Directors stressed the importance of implementing other structural reforms that are conducive to
economic growth and poverty reduction, including agricultural reform, capacity building, export
promotion, the strengthening of the existing legal and regulatory framework, and civil service
reform. They encouraged the authorities to accelerate the privatization program in order to spur
private sector activity.

Directors welcomed the completion of the full Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSP), which
should substantially help Ethiopia's fight against poverty. They commended the authorities for
the wide and full participatory process with civil society and development partners. They
observed, however, that more prioritization is needed and that there are downside risks to the
implementation of the proposed policies and reforms, including the vulnerability of Ethiopia to
exogenous shocks. Some Directors noted that the PRSP projections might be overly optimistic,
particularly in light of the pressures currently facing Ethiopia. Directors agreed that the medium
term macroeconomic framework incorporated in the PRSP should be carefully evaluated once
additional external assistance is identified.

Directors noted the progress being made in improving the macroeconomic statistics in line with
Fund recommendations, and urged the authorities to intensify their efforts in this area. They
welcomed Ethiopia's intention to participate in the General Data Dissemination System.

Contact: Dominique Guillaume, African Department, IMF; tel. 623-8520

Annex 3
Page 1 of 2

Ethiopia at a glance 

3v14103

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

POVERTY and SOCiAL 

Low-
Income 

Ethlopla 

Development diamond-

2001
Populabon, mid-year (miflions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 

65.8 
100 

674 
470 

2,511 
430

Life expectancy

GNI (Ai7as method, US$ billions) 

6.7 

317 

1,069

Average annual growth, 199501
Populaion I(%) 
Labor force (6) 

2 5 
2 2 

2 5 
2.6 

19
2 3 

GNI 
per,l 
capita 

Gross
primary
enrollment

Most recant estimate (latest year available, 1995.01) 
Poverty (16 ofpopulation below natbonal poverty line) 
Urban populabon (6 of total population) 
Ufe expectancy at birth (years) 

44
16 
42 
98 
47 
24 
60 
71 
85 
57 

32 
47 

31
59

infant mortaity (per 1,000 rive borths) 

91 

76
.. 

Child malnutnbon (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (6 of populatfon) 
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+) 
Gross primaryenroilment (1 ofsdhoot-age population) 
Mate 
Female 

Access to improved water source

55 
37 
78 
85 
72 

76
37
96 
103 
88

Ethioo,a
Low-Income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
Fiscal Year 
GDP (US$ bllhons) 
Gross domestc Investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestc savings/GDP 
Gross nabonal savJngs/GDP 
Current account balancelGDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt servicelexports 
Present value of debbGDP 
Present value of debttexports 

1981 
6 2 
13 3 
10.7 
7 3 
8.1 
-4.8 
0.3 
36.6 
10.3 

1991 
9 5 
9 9 
5.7 
2.7 
4.4 
4.5 
0 4 
95.9 
25.2 

2000 
6 4 
14 0 
155 
-0.1 
10 0 
3 
0 8 
86.6 
13 9 
51 3
.

2001
6 2
18 0 
15.4
2.2
13 7
9 
10 
101 6 
10 8

Economic ratios'

Trade

omestc

Daomesc 
savings

Investment

.

.. 

160t0

Indebtedness

Fiscal Year 
(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

1981-1 

199141 

2000 

2001 

200145

10 
-2.1 
0 8 

4 4 
1 5 
11 9 

5 4 
2.3 
23.6 

7 7 
4 6 
-1 6 

28 
0.1 
50

Ethlopa
Low4ncome group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
Fiscal Year 

1982 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of investment and GDP(%)

(% of GDP) 

30

Agnculture 
industry 

53.1 
130 

53 3 
10.5 

43 6 
10.7 

451
10.5 

2-_ 
i
o
-ix I m a7 
-

Nanufacturing 

.

.

Services 
Prvata consumption 
General govemment consumption 
imports of goods and services 

33 9 
79 0 
13 7 
16 7 

36.2 
818 
15 5 
12.9 

45 7 
768 
23 2 
30 6 

44 4 
80.3 
17.5 
31.2

59 oo 
o 
0 GDP

1

GDI 

Fiscal Year 
(average annual growth) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Privateconsumpton 
General govemment consumpton 
Gross domestc Investment 
imports of goods and services 

1981-91 

199141 

2000 

2001 

Growth of exporbt and Imports (%)
40

0 7 
-10 

2 4 
41 

2 2 
18 

11.5
50 

20

.. 

.

26 
08 
3 0 
0.2 
1.2 

63 
27 
13.0 
10.9 
7.1 

9 5 
-19 
29 3 
-1 2 
6 3 

4 7 o
114 
-18.5 
27 4 
-18

so 

07 

oo 

U

-20

Export 

1trq)orts

The diamonds show four key indicators In the countiy (in bold) compared wtth its Income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be Incomplete.

Annex 3
Page 2 of 2

Ethiopia

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflation (%)

Domesffc prices
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

1 
1S
s

61 

20 9 
16 1 

4 2 
1 7 

-7 2 
-70 

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

a

97 

se 

99 

00

16 4 
-0 2 
-4 9 

13 7 
-4 7 
-10 9 

18 3 
-8 2 
-14 8 

196 6 
-0 4 
-10 0

o

-

GDP dolator 

+CPI

TRADE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)

(US$ mlli1ons)

Total exports (fob) 

411 

276 
130 
45 
,
1,029 
152 
102 
466 

486 
262 
35 

441 
175
38 

2000

Coffee 
Leather and leather products 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

1.500

744 

1.611 
116 
213 
755 

1,558 
241 
265 
589 

1.0*0

s**

'] 

*
_
07 

a 

GS 

as 

as OD 

00 

01

Export prce index (1995=100) 
Importpnce index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

82 
112 
73 

77 
99 
76 

64 
116 
55 

59
117 
50

0 

0Exports1 

Ilmports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Currfent account balance to GOP (%)

(US$ millions)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

554 
845 
-291 

543 
1.226 
-683 

984 
1.960 
-976 

957 
1,945 
-987 

2

_

I

-2 

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-7 

-73 
229 

-60 

-59 

|FD 

3J

50 

708 

779 

4-

Current account balance 

-249 

-528 

-335 

-272 

-a

Finanang items (net) 
Changesinnetreserves 

190 
59 

681 
-153 

110 
225 

259 
13 

-s
-o

Memo.
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, Ioca/tUS$) 

370 
21 

106
21 

8 2 

8 3

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(US$ milions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 

Composition of 2001 debt (USS mill)
Shorttenm

1,842 
52 
276 

9,119 
20 
883 

5.481 
0 
1.779 

6,322 
0 
2,026

lORD 

Pe

IDA 

Total debtservice 
lBRD 

58 
7 

138 
9 

138 
0 

104
0

IDA 

2 

1 1 

34 

36ID

Composibon of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private ceditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

ateral

135 
894 
63 
0 
0 

781
145 
212 
6 
0 

122 
-8 
50 
0 

435
-10
0
0

World Bank program
Commitments 

76 
28 
4 
23 
5 
18 

0 
59 
12 
46 
8 
38 

465 
105 
21 
84 
13 
71 

202
271 
22 
249
14
235

Disbursements 

Other Mult
Lateral

Pnncapal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net btansfers 

3/14/03

Table A4.1: Social Indicators

Latest single year 1/ 

FY1970-75 

FY1980-85 

FY00 

33.0 
2.6 
9.5 
5.9 

.. 

.
.. 

.. 

17.0 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

41.6 
40.0 
43.2 

151.4 
239.0 
482.5 
410.8 

.. 

43.4 
2.8 
11.6 
7.0 

.. 

.. 
.. 

120.0 
50.9 

52.3

.. 

.. 

3.0 
1.4

.

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

12.0 
6.0 

.. 

43.6 
42.0 
45.2 

142.8 
213.0 
491.0 
401.0 
58.0 

64.3 
2.9 
15.5 
5.6 

44.2
37.0
45.0

100.0 
98.9 

.28

1.0 

3.2 

33.8
35.8
31.6

24 

.. 
.. 

53.0 
64.0 

47.2

42.3 
41.4 
43.4 

98.0 
178.9 
567.0 
523.0 

..

Annex 4
Page 1 of 4

Same reglonlincome group
Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

Low-
Income

642.8 
2.6 
33.8 
5.3 

2,459.80
2
31.9
3.6

490 
131 

1.7 

4.1 

55 
82 
41 

57 
59 

47 
46 
48 

92 
161 
499 
453 

410
140

1.2

3.4

76
88
70

57
57

59
58
60

76
115
294
261

POPULATION
Population, total 
Population growth (annual %) 
Urban population (% of total) 
Fertility rate, total (births per woman) 

POVERTY

(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount Index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNI per capita, Atas method (current US$) 
Consumer price index (1995 = 100) 

Food price index (1995 = 100) 
Gini index 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 

Education (% of GDP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 

Net primary school enrollment rate

Total (% of age group) 
Male 
Female 

Access to an Improved water source

Total (% of population) 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate
Measles (% under 12 months) 
DPT (% under 12 months) 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth

(years)

Total 
Male 
Female 

Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59) Male (per 1,000 population) 
Adult (15-59) Female (per 1,000 population) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1/ Fiscal year ending July 7.

Annex 4
Page 2 of 4

Tablle A.2: Ethiopia - IKey Economic Indicators

Actual 

Estimate 

Projected

Indicator / Fiscal Year 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 

100 
52 

100 
52 

100 
52 

100 
52 

100 
52 

100 
52 

100 
52 

100 
52 

100
52

Industry 

1 1 

1 1 

1 1 

1 1 

1 1 

1 1 

1 1 

1 1 

1 1

Services 

37 

37 

37 

37 

37 

37 

37 

37 

37

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

93 
17 
8 
9 

92 
17 
8 
9 

92 
17 
7 
10 

99 
16 
8 
8 

100 
14 
5 
9 

98 
18 
9 
9 

98 
20 
13 
7 

96 
21 
12 
9 

94
22
11
11

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

13 
23 

16 
25 

16 
25 

14 
29 

15 
31 

16 
31 

16 
34 

16 
39 

16
35

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

7 
18 

8 
10 

8 
12 

1 
5 

0 
10 

2 
14 

2 
12 

4 
13 

6
16

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product (US$ million at
current prices) 
GNPpercapita(US$,Atlasmethod) 

5993 
110 

6383 
110 

6535 
100 

6434 
100 

6363 
110 

6233 
110 

6059 
100 

6363 
100 

7005
100

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated
from 1981 prices)
Gross domestic product at market
prices 
Gross Domestic Income 

10.6 
8.8 

4.7 
4.4 

-1.4 
0.9 

6.0 
4.6 

5.4 
3.8 

7.7 

1.2 

-3.8 

8.0

..

Real annual per capita growth rates (%,
calculated from 1981 prices)
Gross domestic product at market
prices 
Total consumption 

7.2 
11.8 

1.5 
3.5 

-4.3 
-1.4 

2.9 
14.1 

2.3 
6.4 

4.6 
5.6 

-1.5 
1.2 

-6.3 
-5.8 

5.2
5.8

Private consumption 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers (official and
private) 
Current account balance 

784 
412 
1378 
1144 
-594 

1011 
599 
1589 
1309 
-578 

1037 
602 
1653 
1357 
-616 

915 
485 
1873 
1558 
-958 

984 
486 
1960 
1611 
-976 

957 
441 
1945 
1558 
-1112 

962 
431 
2073 
1696 
-1437 

1016 
456 
2453 
2037 
-1350 

1097
509
2447
2028
-1315

707 
68 

4971 
-416 

552 
-333 

605 
-510 

708 
-335 

798 
-365 

1056 
415 

939 
-439 

979
-349

Annex 4
Page 3 of 4

Actual 
1997 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2003 

Indicator / Fiscal Year 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2001 

2002 

2004

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & omissions) 
Change in reserves (negative indicates
increase in reserves)d 

0 

60 

7 

136 

51 

0 

40 

65 

70

..

211 

104 

75 

154 

122 

374 

419 

469 

355

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

-104 

-163 

-134 

40 

225 

12 

-327 

-116 

-184

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR81 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-9.9 

-9.1 

-9.4 

-14.9 

-15.3 

-15.8 

-18.3 

-22.6 

-19.3

14.5 

36.1 

-9.7 

-2.6 

23.6 

0.1 

8.6 

7.7 

7.2

.. 
3.0 

.. 
18.4 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

9.9 

18.4 

6.3 

18.3 

-2.8 

1.2 

3.3

Public finance (as % of GDP at market

prices)'
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

18.4 
14.7 
3.6 
12.2 
6.6 

18.2 
13.8 
4.4 
10.4 
5.4 

18.1 
15.8 
2.3 
9.5 
4.6 

17.9 
20.9 
-3.0 
9.9 
7.2 

18.3 
26.5 
-8.2 
6.6 
5.0 

19.6 
20.0 
-0.4 
9.6 
9.0 

20.1 
20.4 
-0.2 
13.7 
14.2 

21.4 
21.7 
0.4 
13.4 
18.6 

21.5
21.9
2.4
13.4
13.7

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth i 
total credit growth (%)

42.1 
39.8 
10.8 
3.4 
79.4 1097.6 

41.5 
12.7 
67.8 

40.7 
5.9 
46.2 

43.3 
14.0 
15.9 

47.3 
52.0 
9.5 
12.3 
132.8 294.9 

52.3 
13.0 
67.5 

52.2
9.9
100.0

Price indices( YR81 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)' 

91.1 
103.5 
88.1 
38.3 

97.4 108.4 
100.0 
94.3 
97.3 115.0 
38.7 
38.4 

89.7 
91.5 
98.0 
38.0 

72.7 
89.0 
81.7 
35.6 

64.5 
86.7 
58.5 
35.2

65.8 
86.4 
58.8 

69.7 
87.7 
59.6 

73.4
88.5
60.7

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

0.9 
1.2 

-6.4 
3.9 

3.6 
9.4 

3.9 
2.7 

4.2 
1.7 

-7.2 
-7.0 

-7.2 
-7.0 

9.2 
8.3 

4.5
4.6

a. GDP at factor cost
b. 'GNFS' denotes 'goods and non-factor services'
c. Includes net unrequitted transfers excluding official capital grants
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central govemment.

Table A43 

Key Exposure IEndicators

Annex 4
Page 4 of 4

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)f

Actual 
1999 

1998 

2000 

Estimate 
2001 
2002 

Projected
2003 
2004

10347 5544 

5481 

6322 

7303 

5361 

5987

Net disbursements (US$m)r 

93 

134 

88 

470 

585 

500 

359

Total debt service (TDS) 

(US$m)B

Debt and debt service indicators (%)

TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity f -

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

119 

155 

138 

104 

75 

88 

104

975.9 
160.4 
11.2 
85.1 

586.7 548.1 657.4 718.7 488.6 505.9
86.2 
86.6 
101.6 110.8 
76.1 
77.5
16.4 
13.9 
10.8 
7.4 
8.0 
8.8
86.5 
87.7 
88.8 
89.1 
89.8 
90.4

0 
70.6 

0 
65.9 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
74 

0 
0 

0 
42 

0 
0 

0 
46.7 

0 
48.5 

0
50.8

0 
0 

0 
0 

0
0

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

1632 

1739 

1779 

2026 

2224 

2350 

2409

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 

0 

15f
10l

0 

0 

0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. 'XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional mulUlateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intematlonal Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.
f. Amount represents an IFC regional Investment involving five counties: Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda,
Tanzania, and Mozambique

Table A5.1: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of March, 14, 2003

Annex 5
Page 1 of 13

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a.c 

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a C 

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number at d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount o, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ millions) 
Average Supervision (US$000/project) 

FY 2000 

2001 

2002 

2003**

11 

3.9 
36.4 

24.2 

36.4 
24.2 
10.8 

17 
3.0 
17.6 

14.3 

17.6 
14.3 
34.4 

19 
3.2 
5.3 

3.5 

5.3 
3.5 
29.1 

yes 
$ 1,331 
$ 121 

yes 
$ 1,450 
$ 81 

no 
$ 1,983 
$ 99 

18
3.0
5.3

0.3

5.3
0.3
21.1

yes
$ 991
$ 50

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 
41 
1,495.2 
36.6 
25.8 

Last Five FYs
4
149.3
100.0
100.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

** Through March 14.

Source Wodld Bank

Annex 5

Page 2 of 13

Table A5.2- IFC and MIGA Program for Ethiopia, FY 2000-2003
As of March, 14, 2003

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

IFC approvals (US$m) 

0.0 

0.0 

25.0* 

0.0

Sector (%)

Food and agri-business 

Investment instrument(%)

Loan 
Equity 

-- 

-- 

100

-- 

-- 

60 
40

--

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

Total IFC investment In Coca-Cola SABCO for five countries: Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, and Mozambique

Table A5.3 

Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

As of March, 14, 2003

Year 

Borrower/Purpose 

Original Gross Commitments
Loan 
Equity Participant 

Total

Fully canceled, terminated. written-off, sold, redeemed, or repaid investments
1965-73 
Dire Dawa (Spinning, weaving and finishing) 
Ethiopian Pulp (Manuf. of pulp paper and paperboard) 
1966 
1968 
Metahara (Sugar factories and refineries) 
1989 
Red Sea (Crude petroleum and natural gas) 

2.4 
0.0 
4.9 
0.0 

1.4 
1.9 
3.5 
7.8 

1.1 
0.0 
0.7 
0.0 

4.8
1.9
9.0
7.8

Approvals pending commitmnent

2002 

Coca-Cola SABCO (Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, 
Mozanbique)

15.0 

10.0 

0.0 

25.0

Total gross commitments 1/ 
Less: cancellations, terminations, repayments and sales 

Total commitments now held 

22.3 
7.3 

15.0 

24.6 
14.6 

10.0 

1.7 
1.7 

0.0 

48.6
23.6

25.0

Source: World Bank.

Table A5.4: IBRD/IDA Program-Summary for Ethiopia - Base Case
As of March, 14, 2003

Annex 5
Page 3 of 13

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

Base case - Of Which: 
US$(M) 
Grants 

Strategic Rewards Implementation
(HIAWL) 
Risks (HA'WL)

FY 2003 

TOTAL FY03 

FY 2004 

Energy Access (approved 9/19/02) 
Capacity Building (CBDSD) 
(approved 7/23/02)
ESRDF Supplemental (approved 
12/17/02)

Emergency Drought Recovery 

(Board date 3/27/03)

Pastoral Development 

Roads II 

PRSC I 
Roads II (supplement) 
Capacity Building (PSCAP) 
Water & Sanitation 
Post-Primary Education 
Rural CB 
PSD Capacity Building 

ICT Capacity Building 

TOTAL FY04 

FY2005 

PRSCII 

Decentralized Infrastructure Fund 
Nile Basin 
MAP H 
Civil Society Capacity Building 

TOTAL FY05 

TOTAL 
FY03-05

132.7 
26.2 

28.3 

60.0 

30.0 

127.0 
404.2 

150.0 
170.0 
100.0 
70.0 
50.0 
60.0 
30.0 

20.0 
650.0

150.0 

150.0 
100.0 
30.0 
20.0 

4so.o

1,504.2

H 
H 

M 

H 

M 

H 

H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 

M 

H 
H 
H 
H 
M 

60.0 

30.0 

127.0 
217.0

-

v 

v 

M
H

M

M

M

M

H
M
H
M
M
M
H

M

H
H
H
H
M

vIndicates likely candidate for grant financing.

Table A5.5: Summary of IDA Nonlending Services
As of March, 14, 2003

Annex 5
Page 4 of 13

Product 

Recent completions
HIPC Decision Point 
CB FOR DECENTRALIZED SERV. 
PER 01 
Ethiopia Expenditure Tracking 
INTERNATIONAL INTEGRATION 
CFAA 
CPAR 
WOREDA STUDY 
Land Issues in Ethiopia 
PRSP 
Irrigation Note 
FIRM ANALYSIS 
CPPR 
Consultative Group 
Paramedical Manpower 

Underway
Social Protection Strategy 
PER (on Basic Services) 
Gender Assessment 
Education Country Status Report 
Integrated Trade Framework 
CEM - Sources of Growth 
Health Country Status Report 
Higher Education Review 
Rural Development Review 
Poverty Assessment 
Country Environmental Analysis 
Vulnerability and Risk Assessment 
Investment Climate Assessment 

Planned/Proposed
CPPR 
CG 
State Transformation 
Water Strategy 
Poverty reduction in Cities 
Financial Sector Development 
Service Delivery in a Decentralized Framework 
M&E Support 

Completion Cost*
FY 
(US$000) Audiencea Objectiveb

02 
02 
02 
02 
02 
03 
03 
02 
02 
03 
03 
02 
03 
03 
03 

03 
03 
03 
04 
03 
04 
04 
04 
04 
04 
04 
03 
03 

04 
04 
05 
05 
05 
05 
05 
05 

75 
76 
285 
8 
72 
117 
41 
153 
5 
165 
30 
20 
26 
16 
22 

129 
200 
20 
120 
326 
150 
70 
85 
198 
150 
70 
50 
150 

26 
50 
135 
85 
50 
250 
225 
50 

G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G,D,B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, B 
G,D,B,P 
G, D, B 

G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G,D,B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 

G, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D,B 

D
A, C
A, C
A, C
A, C
A,C
A, C
A, C
A, C
A, B, C
A, C
A, C
C
D
A, C

A, C
A, C
A, C
A, C
A, C
A, C
A, C
A, C
A, C
A,C
A, C
A, C
A, C

C
D
A, C
A, C
A, C
A, C
A, C
C

a. (G) Govemment, (D) donor, (B) bank, (P) public dissemination.
b. (A) Knowledge generation, (B) public debate, (C) problem-solving, (D) donor coordination.
Source: World Bank.

Table A5.6: Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
As of March, 14, 2003

Annex 5
Page 5 of 13

Closed Projects 

IBRDIIDA (US$ Millions)
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

Active Projects

66

950.5
0.0
2081.9
359.8
3032.4
359.8
834.5
4.9
839.4

Project ID 

Project Name 

P000733 
P035147 
P052315 
P057770 
P050938 
P073196 
P000732 
P067084 
P049395 
P000736 
P069886 
P074585 
P050383 
P069083 
P000756 
P000755 
P000771 
P000764 
P050342 

AG. RESEARCH & TRAINING 
CONSERV. OF MEDICINAL PLANTS - GEF 
CONSERVATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS 
CULTURAL HERITAGE 
Capacity Building for Dec.Serv.Del. 
Demobilization and Reintegration Project 
EDUCATION SECTOR INVESTMENT 
EMERGENCY RECOVERY AND REHAB. 
ENERGY ACCESS PROJECT 
ET ENERGY II 
ETHIOPIA MULTISECTORAL HIV/AIDS 
Ethiopia Structural Adjustment Credit 
Ethiopia:FOOD SECURITY PROJECT 
GLOBAL DISTANCE LEARNING 
HEALTH SECTOR 
ROAD SEC. DEV. PROG. 
Social Rehab (ESRDF I) 
WATER SUPPLY DEV&REH 
WOMEN'S DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES 
TOTAL 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 
Development 
Implementation Fiscal Year 
Obiectives 
Progress 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

.. 

S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

.. 

S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

Oriainal Amount In USS m 
IDA GRANT Cancel. 

60.0 

2.6 
5.0 
26.2 
170.6 
100.0 
230.0 
132.7 
200.0 
59.7 
120.0 
85.0 
4.9 
100.0 
309.2 
148.3 
35.7 
5.0 
1,794.9 

1.9 

11.5 

1.9 

11.5 

Expected and
Actual
Disbursements a'
Orig. 
rFm
Rev'd

24.9
0.3
-0.4
0.5
4.2
31.0
23.0
134.1
1.3
52.4
17.7
-7.4
-2.0
3.0
43.7
132.1 
33.7 
9.3
1.5 
502.6 

81.2
9.8

0.5
91.5

IDA 
Undisb. 

31.3 

2.3 
5.4 
27.4 
49.4 
21.3 
145.6 
138.1 
58.0 
44.2 
0.0 
89.7 
4.8 
44.1 
124.4 
38.4 
5.4 
4.7 
834.5 

1998 
2001 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2001 
1998 
2001 
2003 
1998 
2001 
2002 
2002 
2001 
1999 
1998 
1996 
1996 
2001 

Legend: HS = Highly satisfactory; S = Satsfactory; HU = Highly unsatisfactory; U= Unsatisfactory
a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
Source: World Bank

Annex 5
Page 6 of 13

Bank Group lending 
instruments 

Seebelw 

Bank Group non-
lending instruments

See below 

-

. CBDSD 
a 
Emergency Drought 
Rec. 

* 

Pastoral Development 
. PRSC I& II 
.
PSCAP 
* 
ICT Capadty Building 
.
DecentCaized Infra 
Fund 

Post-Prmary Educabon 

* 
* 

Rural CB 

0 ~~Nile Basin

* CBDSD 
. PRSC I & II 
a 
PSCAP 
ICT Capacity Building 
Decentrarized Infra 

* 

.
Fund 
F 
.

Post-umary Educabon 
PSD Capadty Building 
Italian Capacity 
Building Grant 
.
Cities Allianoe Grant 

* 

.
Vulnerability & Risk
Assessment
Sources of Growth
.
Poverty and
Vulnerabiliy
.
Rural Development
Review
R 
Country Enronental
Analysis

o WBI

workshops./capacity building

* 

* 

InvestnentClimate
Assessment
.
Sources of Growth
Financial Sector
Development
IGR on State
Transformaion
* 
Poert Reduclion in
CiBg es
.
WBI
workshopsicapacity building

* 

* 

.
Increase market share 
of private sector banks 
Reduce share of NPLs 
in banks' portfolios 
.
Increase private sector
credi to GDP

EU 
IMF 
United States 

.

* 
* 

PRSC I & II 
Rural CB 
PSD Capacity Building 

.
Financial Sector
Development
WBI
workshops/capacity building

* 

Partner program information is based on indications given at the December2002 Consultative Group Meefing in Addis Ababa, and is not Intended to be a comprehensive listing

Table A5.7: CAS Program Matrix: Framework for Country Program

ObjediDvei7 -
.. . s . ^, , 
-? .'. ..-... 

Achieve te Millennium 
Development Goals by 2015

Dlagnosis -

See below. 

G6vemment 

Sfrategylactions 

See below 

- Benchmarks I 
Meisurement tools 

Seebelow 

. r 2 

_+.> -. :__ 

< 

Accelerating rural growiJi 

.

-

-

1. Enhance Pro-Poor Growth

85%d01 populaton reles on 
tradional, suDsistence 
farming. Lite diversificaton 
to higher value products, and 
low agrcultural productity. 
Rural poverty (45%) Is higher 
than in urban areas (37%) 

.
Supporingeectve 
technological transfers and 
skills 

* 

Marketzabon of 
agnculture 
.
See secton below on 
Redudng Vulnerability for 
actions to reduoe vulnerability 
andpovertyqbraps 

* 
Reduce rural poverty 
headoount 
.
Increased rural access 
to finance 
Increased agricultural 
productvity 
Reduced percepbon of 
tenure insecunty 

* 

* 

Partner programs' 

Seebelow 

AfDB 
Canada 
EU 
FAO 
France 
IFAD 
Ireland 
Italy 
Japan 

d 

United Kingdom 

United Statesm 
Unfted States 

AfDB 
EIB 
European Union 
France 
Itaq 
UNOP 
UNIDO 
United Kingdom 
United States 

* 

Reduce urban poverty 
headcount 
.
Growth of private sector 
value added in GDP, growth 
in domestc investment, and 
Increase In FDI 
* GDP value added/ number 
of finms brought tD the point of 
sale/pnvatrzed 
.
Reduced cost and Ume 
for acquinng urban land 
a 
Reduced cost and time
for registenng new
businesses.

Fosteng an enabfing 
environment for urban growth 

Urban populabon growing 
more rapWily than rural 
populabon Govermment has 
begun productive dialogue on 
PSD and investment dimate, 
but business environment 
remains weak. 

Supporting development of 
financial markets 

Pooriy developed financial 
markets with excess liquidlty, 
high NPLs. Inefficient 
bankruptcy procedures. 
Banking sector dominated by 
CBE. 

-. 

* 

Enhancing the 
investment dcimate and 
access to finance, and 
promoting PSD 
Generatng off-farm 
employment by building labor- 
augmenting modem sectors 
of the economy 
.
Reducing role of public 
sector in commerdal activibes 
* 
Implementing 
compettion policy 
* 
Increased availability of 
urban land 
* 
Reducing
administrative baniers/red
tape
. Increase contestability In 
banking sector 
a 
Reduce NPLs 
.
Reduce excess liquidity 
.
Access to long term 
credit 
* 
* 

Improve rural acss
Pension reform

Ob -IetIvi. 4 

I~i~iSW ~~~Ii' ~. 

5 7 

m_ flL,i,~'i~s..- iBenchniarks'I.~ ~ 

.ner 

programs. 
i 

Annex 5
Page 7 of 13

BankGr 

4 -instruments 

.
PRSC I & i* 
* PSD Capacity Building 

,.io !a.
<.O,-oup1e9di9g 

~ ~~M-nd- 

-fttiins~

Integrated Trade
Framework
Investment Climate
Assessment
* Sources of Growth

* 

Increase in exports-o 
GDP ratio 

European Union 
France 
Netherlands 
United States 

.

.
Reduction in logibcsl 
transportaton costs 
Increase in road
density per RSDP indicators
0 
Access to power,
energy and water
PRGF quantitative 
targets met

* 

EU 
AfDB 

IMF 

.
.

.

Roads 11
Energy Access

PRSC I &1 

* 

Sources of Growth

* 

* 

ESDP 11 indicators induding. 

AfDB 
Belgium 
.
Improvement in prmary 
European Union 
educaton completion rates 
France 
Improvement in grade 1 Gemiany 
and 2 survival rates 
Ireland 
Reduction In primary 
Italy 
education pupil-teacher-atos 
Netherlands 
.
Reduction in primary 
Norway 
educabon pupil-textbook- 
Sweden 
rabos 
UNICEF 
.
Reduction In primary 
United Kingdom 
educabon pupil-classroom- 
United States 
rabos 
* 
Improvement in gender
panty in enrollments and
completon rates
Share of budget to
pnmary education

* 

* 

.
.

* 
* 

CBDSD 
Roads 11 
Water & Sanitation 
PRSC I & 11 
PSCAP 
ICT Capacdy Building 
Deentraleed Infra 

.
.
Fund 
.
Post-Secondary 
Educaton 
MAP 11 

* 

* 

* 

PER (on Basic
Services)
.
Education Country
Status Report
* 
Higher Educabon
Review
Poverty and
Vulnerability
* 
Service Delvery in a
Decentralized Framework
* 
IGR on State
Transformabon
* WBI
workshopslcapacity building

Pmriobrigrap,d grown of 
exports 

Availability of infrastructure 

Ensurng a contnued stable 
macroeconomic framework 

Improving derivery of 
educabon services 

Eth,opiasexports4o-GDP 
rato of 15 percent is among 
the lowest in the world 
Declining terms of trade for 
major exportables 

Low infrastructure penetration 
ratos and low pnvate 
participaton in infrastructure 

Maao-economi conditons 
stable but vulnerabilites exist 
due to weather and temis of
trade shocks (especially
coffee)

GERs have improved steadily 
but dropouts are near 30% in 
Grade 1. Achieving MDGs 
not feasible at present 
recurrent unit cost Pupil 
teacher ratios very high, 
indicating high und costs of 
teaching. Higher educabon 
enrolment is less than 1% of 
age oohon 

.
Drversrlicabon of 
exports 
Stbengthen efforts to take 
advantage of AGOA and EBA 
initatives. 
Building tounsm sector
.
Provision of more 
effectve infrastructure and 
infrastructure services in 
transport energy and water 

.
Adhere to PRGF 
framework 

* Achieve universal 
primary level complebon 
.
Improving quality and 
relevance of schooling 
* Reducing the gender 
gap and regional inequality in 
primary level access and 
compbeon 
.
Sharply increase 
enrollment in secondary 
education, TVET, and higher 
educabon. 
.
Support regions and 
woredas to improve efficiency 
and effectiveness of resource 
use in basic educaton 
through greater flexibility in 
service delivery models 
* 
Deepen 
decentraliation to increase
fical and organizatonal
autonomy of schools
* 
See secton below on
Improving Governance for
actons to (i) build capacity,
(ii) clarify and restructure
roles and responsibilities, and
(iii) improve fiscal
arrangements for service
delivery at different levels of
govemment

I Objective 

Diagnosis 

______ 

Improving delivery of health 
servcs 

Only about 51% of the 
popuvbton have aaoess to 
health facilibes. Strong urban 
bias in allocation of fadlities 
and services Low staff 
performance and capacity 
particularly at lower health 
service levels 

Improving delivery of clean 
water supply and sanitabon 
services 

Poor access to safe water 
and santabon. Access to 
improved sanitation is only 
15% compared with SSA 
average of 54.8%. Access to 
improved water source is 
24% compared to SSA 
average of 55 4%. 

Benchmarks I 
Measurement tools 

HSDP 11 indicatorsinuding 

o 
Improvements in EPI 
coverage 
0 
Inaease in ante-natal 
care coverage 
0 
Increase in 
contraceptive coverage rate 
.
Increase in the 
coverage of health services 
Reducbon in malaria 
cases 
Share of budget to
primary heaflth care

o 

o 

a 

Percent of population 
with aess to improved 
water source and sanitabon 

Government 
Strategylactions 

a 

o 

Expand coverage by 
defimng, oostng and 
promoting altematve service 
delivery models at first level 
referral, primary healthcare, 
and communty levels. 
Strengthen health MIS 
and National Health Accounts 
to enable better perfomiance 
monitoring at every level 
See section below on 
Improving Govemance for 
actions to (i) build capaciy, 
(ii) clarify and restructure 
roles and responsibilities, and
(iii) improve fiscal
arrangements for servce
delivery at different levels of
govemment

o 

a 

DevoMng ownership 
and management autonomy 
to the lowest possible local 
level 

a 

a 

Promotng involvement 
of all stakeholders, induding 
private sector 
Moving toward greater 
cost recovery 
0 
Integrated planning of
sanftation and water supply
improvements

Support empowerment of 
communifies in the utlizabon 
of public resources 

Strengthening the public 
sector enabling environment 
at federal, regional, and local 
levels 

* 

Community involvement in 
Increased local level 
* Improved quality of 
planning, prioritzaton, and 
paricdpation in the use of 
representaton by local 
implementation is limited; 
block grant resoures In 
executives within woredas 
capacity of local executives to 
woredas and own revenues in and municipalities 
support woreda and municipal munidpalities 
Inaeased accountability of 
decentralization is weak 
* Capacity building and fical 
local govemment staff to 
support at communiy and 
elected officials, and 
local levels 
coimrunites dunng budget 
formulabon and execution
Passage of enabling 
legislaton for woredas and 
municipalities (including exp 
and revenue assgnments), 
Legislative 
benchmarks. adoption of key 
legislation on financial and 
personnel mgt (such as new 
chart of accounts, posibon 
dassificabon system) 

o Well sequenced 
planning, budgetng, 
accounting and procurement 
refomrs at at levels (covered 
in CFAAICPAR and PSCAP) 
Improved, timeliness, 
comprehensiveness and 
quality of consolidated fiscal 
data In federal and regional 
budgets 

Core public management 
systems related to 
expenddure and personnel 
management, as well as 
intergovemmental relations 
are undergoing rapid change. 

Inter,ovemmental fiscal 
design is evolving rapidly, 
particurly within regions and 

o 

o 

a 

Annex 5
Page 8 of 13

Bank Group lending 

instruments 

Bank Group non- 

lending instruments

I

o 

CBDSD 
0 
Roads 11 
o Water & Sanitation 
PRSC I & 11 
PSCAP 
ICT Capacity Building 
Decentralized Infra 

0 

o 

0 

a 

Fund 
F 
Post-secondary 
Education 
M

a 

o 

.
PER(onBasic
Services)
HeaKh Country Status
Report
Service Delivery in a
Decentralized Framework
IGR on State
transfomiabon
0 WBI
workshops/capacity building

a 

0 
CBDSD 
0 
PRSC I & 11 
o Water & Sanitaton 
0 
PRSC I & 
a 
PSCAP 
Decentralized Infra
0 
Fund

o 
o 

o 

o 

CBDSD 
Civil Society CB 
PRSC I11 
PSCAP 

a 

PER (on Basic
Services)
IGR on state
a 
transformabon
b1 
Water Strategy

a 

o 

PER (on Basic
Services)
a 
IGR on State
Transformnabon
Service Delivery in a
Decentralized Framework
0 WBI
workshopskapacity building

o 

a 

o 

CBDSD 
PSCAP 
PRSC I & 11 
ICT Capacity Building 
CFAA and CPAR 
Acton Plans 

0 
0 

o 

o 

0 
PER (on Basic
Services)
CFAAICPAR along with
0 
annual updates
Ongoing TA under
PSCAP
IGR on State
Transformaton
* WBI
workshops/capacty building

o 

Partner programs 

AfDB 
Belium 
European Union 
Gemiany 
Ireland 
Italy 
Netherlands 
Sweden 
UNICEF 
United States 
WHO 
UNFPA

AfDB 
Franoe 
Gemiany 
Ireland 
Japan 
Sweden 
United Slates 
UNDP
UNICEF

Germany 
CIDA 
USAID 

Canada 
DflD 
EU 
Finland 
France 
Germany 
IMF 
Ireland 
Norway 
UNDP 

Annex 5
Page 9of 13

Partner programs' 

USAID

Bank Group lending 
instruments 

Bank Group non-
lending.instruments

Objective 

*_ '_. 

Diagnosis -

is currenrly geared toward 
equity and recurrent 
concems, with limited scope 
for performance incentves 
paricularly for meeting 
investment needs of service 
delivery 

Structures and strategic 
staffing at the regional, 
woreda, and muniapal levels 
impose significant costs on 
budgetary resources at aU 
levels 

Justoe system induding 
lawmaking, the judiciary, and 
development of the legal 
profession remain weak, and 
inadequate to meet the 
requirements of a functioning 
democracy and market 
economy 

Poor capacty including cross- 
cuttng, organizabonal, and 
skills-related weaknesses 
undermine the adequacy and 
predictability of resources, the 
indusiveness of planning and 
prioritizabon, and the 
incentive framework at all 
levels of public action 

Govemment 
Strategylactions 

Benchmarks I -
Measurement tools 

* 

Sze and Performance 
of grants or transfers, and
improvements in own revenue
mobilization in munidpalitbes
and woredas
.
Systems development
benchmarks: Acceptance
sign-off and completion of
roll-out of financial and
personnel systems
.
Institutbonal quality
benchmarks: Complianoe wdh
financial calendar, issuance
of interim budget estmates,
submission of expenditure
retums, budget vanance, in-
* year predictabilty of fiscal
transfers, transparency of
personnel redeployments
.
Design of PSCAP as a
federal spedfic purpose multi-
sector capacity building grant
to support all levels of
govermment

* 

Strengthening fiscal 
monitoring of woreda block 
grants and other resources 
down to the local level 
(covered in CFAA/CPAR and 
PSCAP) 
.
Strengthening intemal 
and extemal audit as well as 
legislabve oversight at all 
levels (covered in 
CFAA/CPAR) 
.
Defining expenditure 
and revenue assignments of 
regions, woredas, and 
municipalities 
.
Introducing of ncher 
mix of intergovemmental 
fiscal instruments within 
regions to achieve both equity 
and performance objectives 
.
Reforming and 
strengthening of personnel 
management systems 
including decentralied 
management of frontline
workers
.
Supporting
restructuring and introducing
performance management in
civil service instiutons across
sectors, and the judiciary, at
all levels of govemment
.
Designing a mbust
capacity building system to
rapidly support all aspects of
the pubfbc sector
transfomaibon process at the
federal, regional, and oail
leveb

Empowenng, restructuring, 
and impmving perfomiance in 
ministries, bureaus, woredas, 
and municipalities 

Insttutional structures at the 
regional and sub-regional 
levels contnbute to 
operabonal inefficienaes as 
weU as the costs of 
decentralization. Structures 
and staffing of regional 
bureaus and ocal 
govemments should help 
leverage block grant and 
other budgetary resources. 
Cost effectiveness of

.
Development of f the 
Performance and Service 
Derivery Improvement 
Program, as well as kxal 
govemment organizabonal 
restrucuring programs 
.
Strengthening of CSRP 
monitoring to assess 
organizational change efforts 
and impact on operational 
efficiency 

.
Overall numbers of 
Ministies, Agencies, 
Bureaus, Woredas, and 
Munidpalites partcipatng in 
and completng corporate 
restructunng processes 
Disaggregated 
administratve overhead and 
unit costs 

* 

Canada 
DflD 
EU 
Finland 
France 
Germany 
IMF 
Ireland 
Norway 
UNDP 
USAID 

.
.
.

CBDSD 
PSCAP 
PRSC I & li 

.
PER (on Basic
Services)
.
CFAA/CPAR
.
IGR on State
Transformabon
Ongoing technical
assistance under PSCAP
.
Service Delivery in a
Decentralized Framework
.
Consultative Group

* 

(CG)

Objective 

Diagnosis- * 

-

* Goverrnent 
Strategy/actionsn 

Benchmarks 
Mea 
.urem- 
ent t'- 

' 

Partnerprograms 

BankGrouplending 
r 

Annex 5
Page 10 of 13

Bank Group non-
lendiigtinstruments
.
sWBI
workshopslcapaaty buildmg

Empowering avil society 

Improving Monitoring and 
Evaluaton (M&E) systems 

Reduang vulnerability of the 
economy to terms of trade 
shocks 

govemment departoents 
requires introduchon of 
performance improvement
system across levels of
govemment
Empowerment of civil society 
and poor people is a crucial 
component of development 
Low female participation rates 
in govemanceldecision- 
making acies; low 
lIteracy and numeracy levels 
hinder effectve partcipabon 

Existng Welfare Monitonng 
System and administrabve 
reporting systems in 
educabon and health are 
funcional, limited data on 
private-sector led growth and 
public instubional 
performance. Lack of dear
data disclosure policy leads to
limited data usage by non-
state actors. 

The continuous deterioration 
in export pnces for 
agncultural commodities, 
such as coffee, has resulted 
in falling export revenues, 
there are also penodic shocks 
from large changes in wordd 
pnces 

* 

.
Increased 
responsiveness of local level 
budgets and service delivery 
Increased legislatve 
and extemal scrutny of 
expenditure management 
decisions and processes 
induding oomplance with 
financial calendars, and 
appropriaions processes 
* 
Improve female
partcipabon rates in
decisionmaking acivities
.
Increased use of data 
in PRSP monitoring 

Belium 
Canada 
Ireland 
Italy 
European Union 
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States

EU 
DFID 
Sweden 

.
Promobng involvement 
of communities, especially the 
poor and other 
disenfranchised groups in 
local decisionmaking, 
decentralized delivery, and 
accountability 

Strengthen existing 
informaton systems as 
building blocks for integrated 
PRSP montonng system 
Early approval of data 
and public informabon 
disclosure policy

* 

-

a 
.
.

* 

.

Pastoral Development 
ICT Capacity Building 
MAP 11 
Civil Society CB 
PRSC I and 11 

.
IGR on State
Transfommabon
.
WBI
workshopslcapacity building
.
Gender Assessment

a 

* 

PRSC I and 11 
ESRDF 

* 

* 

Poverty and
Vulnerability
IGR on State
Transformaton
.
WBI
workshopslcapacity building

3. Reduce Vulnerability
.
Reduction in the 
volatlity of export revenues 
.
Increase in the diversity 
of exports and revenues 

.

PRSC I & 11 

Vulnerability & Risk
Assessment
.
Poverty and
Vulnerability
.
WBI
workshops/capacity building

* 

See above section on 
Enhancing Pro-Poor Growth 
for measures to promote 
increased economic 
diversification 
.
See below for 
measures to strengthen
insurance mechanisms and
the social safety net system
Exploring opportunities
for weather-based insurance

.

Reducing riskinduced 
poverty traps for households 
and irreversible losses in 
human capital 

Large share of populaton are 
chronically poor and food 
insecure Repeated droughts 
and other uninsured shocks 
have depleted the asset base 
of the poor, constraining their 
ability to engage in productive 
acivities andlor exposing 
them to long-term 
losses in 

.
Reforming the federal 
food secunty grant system 
into a more effective safety 
net transfer system 
.
Improving availability of 
insurance mechanisms to 
enable households to engage 
in higher productvity 
economic activites 

.
Decrease in chronic 
and transient food insecure 
population as a share of the 
whole populabon 
.
Reducton in the share 
of populabon dependent on 
food aid 
Increase in the number 
of small scale irricaton and

* 

AfDB 
Belgium 
Canada 
Nethenands 
UNDP 
UNHCR 
United Kingdom
United States

* 

Rec. 

* 
* 

.

e 

Emergency Drought 

Pastoral Development 
PRSC I & 11 
Nile Basin 
ESRDF Supplemental 

* 

.
Vulnerability & Risk
Assessment 
N
Poverty and
Vulnerabilty
.
WBI
workshops/capacty building

~~ij~~~iive 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
~~ 

. Diagnosis 

~~~ 

I ~~~ 

-

Birikou.lndiGrb!",'pfnoGro 
-p.jbh 
,..~~

Annex 5
Page 11 of 13

educabson nutmon and 
health outcomes 

Improving food aid delivery 
and other safety net 
instruments 

Redudng child malnutrition 

Enhancing prograrmsto fight 
against HIV/AIDS 

Early waming system well 
developed. Food aid is highly 
variabl bypasses nomial 
govemment channels, and 
can distort local agricultural 
markets. Post-drought 
rehabildabon and non drought 
aspect of shocks not covered. 

Child stunting rates in 
Ethiopia are persistently high 
at around 60%. Food aid has 
had some limited impact in 
preventing malnutrition but 
the continuing high rates 
indicate that complementary 
interventions are required. 
HIVIAIDS affected 12% of 
population in 1999 
Poor M&E system to monitor 
progress. 91% of the 
infecions occur among adults 
between 15 and 49 years and 
the highest prevalence is 
seen in 15-24 years of age 

economic activties 
* 
Establishing 
mechanisms to protect assets 
of the vulnerable during bmes 
of crsis 
* 
Increase Investments in 
water harvesting 
* 
See above section on 
Enhanced Pro-Poor Gowth
for measures to improve
functioning of markets
* 
Exploring mechanisms
to assist particulrly
vulnerable groups such as
widws, the eldedy

B Build ocal institutional 
capacity to deliver assistance 
.
Encourage donors to 
switch from food aid to cash 
aid 
.
In the intenm while food 
aid contnues, encourage 
donors to use food aid for
developmental purposes
* 
Enhance predictabilty
of aid for the chronically food
insecure population

* 
Better 
measurement and monitoring 
.
Increased 
emphasis on community- 
based grwth monitonng and
IMCI
.
.
Increased rural
waler supply (see below)
.
Increasing mult- 
sector, multi-partner support 
to community based and 
community generated 
actvibes. 
.
Improving 
support for orphans and other 
vulnerable children 
* 
Mainstreaming of 
HI/AIDS intervenbons in all 
sectors 
* 
Targetng 
behavior change and other 
programs to populabons at
high risk (e g. commeraal sex

ot small scale irrgabon and
soil conservabon schemes
.
Increase in the
populabon with access to
micro-credit
.
Reduction In the inter-
seasonalrinter-year volabily
of domestc grain prices

* 

.
Increase in amount of 
Nearly all bilateral donors 
cash aid relative to food aid 
EU 
for addressing food insecurnty WFP 
Increase the share of 
UNDP 
food aid eamiarked for long 
term asset accumulaton or 
asset protecton

.
Rec. 
.
.
.

Emergency Drought 

Pastoral Development 
PRSC I & II 
ESRDF Supplemental 

.
Vulnerability &Risk
Assessment
.
Poverty ahia
Vulnerabiliy
.
WBI
workshops/capaaty building

.
Reductions in under-4 
stunting and wastng rates 
* 
Improvement in use of 
gmwth monitonng and IMCI 

UNICEF 
EU 
DFID 
Save the Children (UK) 

.
Rec. 
.
.

Emergency Drought 

Pastoral Development 
PRSC I & II 

* 

Vulnerability & Risk
Assessment
Poverty and
Vulnerability

* 

.

.

* 

Roads 
PRSC I & II 
MAP II 

.1 Vulnerabily & Risk
Assessment
Poverty and
Vulnerability Health Country
Status Report

* 

* 

Halting increase in the 
spread of AIDS 
Orphans as share of an 
children 

* 

Belgium 
Canada 
EU 
Finland 
Ireland 
Netherlands
Norway
OPEC Fund
UNAIDS
UNDP
United Kingdom
United States
UNICEF

| 

jective 

L ______________ 

Diagnosis 

_______ _ 

Increased attenton to 
environmental issues 

Environmental degradabon 
oontibutes to the vulnerabflty 
of poor people 
Environmnental factors are 
important contributors to the 
burden of disease. Lack of 
capacity for sustainable 
environmental management 

Govemnent 

Strateylactions 

workers, transport workers,
youth, etc)

o 

Manstreaming of 
environmental conoers into 
sedoral stategies and 
programs 
.
Strengthening 
regulatory and ishubional 
capacHty 
Strengthening ongoing efforts 
to address land degradation, 
sustainable water resource
management and biodivery
conoems

BenchmarksJ 

Measuranenttools 

PaRnerprogramsI 

Bank Group lending 

Instmnments 

BankGroup non-

lending. Instumens

Annex 5
Page 12 of 13

Increase population 
wffi acoess to clean water 
and sanitaton 
0 
Progress toward MDG 
of reversing loss of 
environmental resources, 

- Belgium 
Gemiany 
Netertlands 
UNDP 

o 

Country Environmental
Analysis and other analytical
work
0 
WBI
workshopslcapacity building

Emergency Drought 

0 
Rec 
0 
Pastoral Developmrent 
o Water & Sanitation 
PRSC I & 11 
Rural CB
Nile Basin
PSD Capacity Building
ESRDF Supplemental

o 
o 

a 

a 

o 

Table A5.8 

CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
perforrnance' 

Major issue 

Country Bank priority 
priority 

Reconciliation of
country and Bank
priorities

Annex 5
Page 13 of 13

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management
Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 

Private sector 
Energy & mining 
Infrastructure 

a Performance ratings adapted from CPIA.

good 
good 
good 
fair 

fair 
fair 
fair 

good 
fair 
good 

poor 

fair 
fair 
fair 

eradicate poverty 
increasing export earnings 
decentralization initiative 
unequal status of women 

high 
high 
high 
moderate 

high
high
high
moderate 

gender mainstreaming
in process

quality indicators 
improved service delivery 
vulnerability to shocks 

high 
high 
high 

high
high
high

marketization of agriculture 
high 
moving from strategy to action moderate 
empowerment and participation high 

high
moderate 
high

CEA underway

lack of competition, NPLs 

moderate 

high 

enabling environment 
inadequate, unreliable delivery 
poor coverage and quality 

high 
high 
high 

high
high
high

policy dialogue
underway

MAP SECTION

U D A N 

/I6 

,oo 

dI 

,~/~hA~K'~H. 

Roki, 

~ -

IBRD 31158

I~ ~ ~ 
~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~ 

R I3-<*

Oh-l- /' 

"'o 

REP ~~OF 

YEME

,Ad,V' N 

D~~boA 
AM~~~0\ 

_ GMon ~~~~~~~L 

~~~~~~~ 

U DAIN 

~~~ 

J 

~~~~S 

F

J~~~~ 

AMHARA 

1 

4 

-

BENS~ANUL~

Tendodho ' 

DJIBO~UT, 

0 

u 

_

GiIB 

OROM..A'' 

SOMALI

S.ono 

Op, 

D~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~M.o 

-

SHLT L-WAHR OD

hMA.w D D-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~3 

EETE 

ON

An. ~ ~ ~ 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~0, 
- ~~~~~~~ 

T~~~~~~~boIo 

INERNTHIONAPBINARE

----------. ---

0 

00 

30

-AS 

, 

H 

LT,AL - EATE R R AD
KI~~~~~~~~~~~~. 

4. 

0 

K 

-

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

Wo!kdBloK.

35- 

SWIM, 
- - - -

-

-

-

Y., 

S 

54 

K 

d 3 

onHep0 

THW Id 
2~~~~~~H 

Doo, n

,ge,nhetgI 

o FOpIp0 

o00

I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

oCCep003000fnOVI3LnOO,3jo3.o. 

NOVEMBER2000~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~KIO-ER

Report No.. 
Type: 

CAS

25591 

ET

