d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 25708-KG

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

April 22, 2003

Central Asia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

The International Finance Corporation
Southern Europe and Central Asia Department

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate in March 2003)

Currency Unit - Soms
US$1 = 46.5

GOVERNMENT'S FISCAL YEAR

January - December 31

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

IDA 
Vice President: 
Johannes F. Linn 
Country Director: Dennis de Tray 
Country Manager: Christopher Lovelace 
Task Team Leaders: Tony Cholst, Sebnem Akkaya

IFC
Vice President: 
Assaad J. Jabre
Director: 
Khosrow Zamani
Task Team Leader: Gorton de Mond, Jr.

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Analytic and Advisory Services
Asian Development Bank
Central Asia Regional Office
Country Assistance Strategy
Community Driven Development
Comprehensive Development Framework
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Consultative Group
Country Procurement Accountability Review
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Development Policy Review
Europe and Central Asia
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Former Soviet Union
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria
Global Distance Learning Network
Highly Indebted Poor Country Initiative
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Joint Staff Assessment
Learning and Innovation Loan
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Non Governmental Organization
National Poverty Reduction Strategy
Net Present Value
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Structural Adjustment Credit
Small and Medium Scale Enterprise
Sector Wide Approach
United Nations Development Program

AAA 
AsDB 
CARO 
CAS 
CDD 
CDF 
CFAA 
CG 
CPAR 
CPPR 
DPR 
ECA 
ESW 
EU 
FSU 
GDP 
GEF 
GFATM 
GDLN 
HIPC 
IDA 
IFC 
IMF 
JSA 
LIL 
M&E 
MDGs 
MIGA 
MTEF 
NGO 
NPRS 
NPV 
PRSP 
PRSC 
SAC 
SME 
SWAp 
UNDP 

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................................................... 

i 

.- 

.

ii

I. INTRODUCTION .......................................................

1

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT .......................................................
GENERAL COUNTRY CONDITIONS .......................................................
SOCIO-POLITICAL CONTEXT .......................................................
2
SCOPE OF POVERTY .......................................................
4
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, PROSPECTS AND DEBT MANAGEMENT ............................ 7

1

1

III. THE NATIONAL POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY ................................... 
MAIN ELEMENTS OF THE NPRS ...................................................... 
ASSESSMENT OF THE NPRS ...................................................... 

12
12
14

IV. BANK GROUP PROGRAM ...................................................... 
14
STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK ...................................................... 
14
LESSONS FROM PAST EXPERIENCE ...................................................... 
16
PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS ...................................................... 
19
LENDING SCENARIOS, TRIGGERS AND USE OF GRANTS ............................................ 26
IDA'S ECONOMIC AND SECTOR WORK ...................................................... 
30
CAPACITY BUILDING ...................................................... 
30
IFC AND MIGA PROGRAM ...................................................... 
31

V. KEY ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTATION ...................................................... 
SELECTIVITY AND PARTNERSHIPS ...................................................... 
CAS CONSULTATIONS AND OUTREACH PLANS ...................................................... 
MONITORING RESULTS ...................................................... 
RISKS ...................................................... 

33
33
35
36
38

Table 1: 
Chart 1: 
Table 2: 
Table 3: 
Table 4: 
Table 5: 
Table 6: 
Table 7: 

Box 1: 
Box 2: 
Box 3: 
Box 4: 
Box 5: 
Box 6: 
Box 7: 

LIST OF TABLES AND CHARTS

Poverty in the Kyrgyz Republic
Sectoral Composition of GDP and Savings-Investment Balance
Kyrgyz Republic: Key Economic Indicators
Main NPRS Poverty Alleviation Targets
FY03-06 Main Operational Scenarios
Triggers for Maintaining the Base Case ; Moving to the High Case
Core Diagnostic Economic and Sector Work
Core CAS Monitorable Benchmarks

LIST OF BOXES

The Case of Health Reform
Core Labor Standards
Gender Issues and IDA Strategy
Debt Sustainability Prospects
Results of the Client Survey
OED Evaluation of Bank Group Assistance
HIV/AIDS in Kyrgyz Republic

LIST OF ANNEX TABLES

Annex I (A2): 
Annex 2 (B2): 
Annex 3 (B3): 
Annex 4 (B3): 
Annex 5 (B4): 
Annex 6 (B5): 
Annex 7 (B6): 
Annex 8 (B7): 
Annex 9 (B8): 
Annex 10(B8): 
Annex 1 l(B9): 
Annex 12(B10): 

Kyrgyz Republic at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD/IDA Programn Summary
IFC and MIGA Program Summary
Summary of Non-Lending Services
Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio - IBRD/IDA and Grants
Statement of IFCs Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Country Program Matrix
Summary of Development Priorities

LIST OF ATTACHMENTS

Attachment 1: 
Attachment 2: 
Attachment 3: 
Attachment 4: 
Attachment 5: 
Attachment 6: 

External Debt Sustainability Analysis
Private Sector Development Strategy
Achieving the Millennium Development Goals
Summary of CAS Discussions with Civil Society and Private Sector
Partnerships in the Development Framework
Kyrgyz Republic: Relations with the IMF

Map of Kyrgyz Republic 31259

Executive Summary

(l) Development Challenges: The Kyrgyz Republic has made good progress to date in
liberalizing prices and exchange rates, implementing a generally equitable land reform agenda,
and initiating difficult reforms in the areas of pensions, energy, and health restructuring. These
reforms have supported an average GDP growth of about 5 percent per annum since 1996 and
the beginnings of a reduction in poverty rates.

(ii) Looking forward, the Kyrgyz Republic faces several key challenges in capitalizing on these
achievements and maintaining growth. First, in the process of transition it has become heavily
indebted, reflecting the significant support received from international financial institutions,
including IDA, the steep decline in GDP measured in US Dollars due to the depreciation of the
Kyrgyz currency, and a limited supply side response to reforms. Second, the geographic
dimension (land-locked, mountainous, difficult trade relations with neighbors, and small market)
continues to make it difficult to attract foreign investment and increase exports. Third, its
undiversified economy makes it highly vulnerable to natural and economic shocks, such as the
1998 Russian crisis or the 2002 land slide at the Kumtor mine.

(iii) These challenges underline the importance of staying on the reforrn course. Commitment
to continuing reforms in key areas such as health, pensions, and energy may come under political
pressure in advance of Parliamentary and Presidential elections in 2005. If the Kyrgyz Republic
falls off the reform course, development activities may need to be scaled back to prevent future
generations from being even more constrained by debt. If, however, the Kyrgyz Republic
deepens reforms, diversifies the economy and limits public investment primarily to increasing
human development and areas which support the pnvate sector, it is likely to be able to maintain
sufficient growth to reduce poverty and move towards debt sustainability. This Country
Assistance Strategy, encompassing the activities of IDA, IFC, and MIGA, sets out an agenda to
help the Kyrgyz Republic maintain a reform and growth course which will both reduce poverty
and enhance prospects for debt sustainability.

(iv) Issues for Board Discussion: 

In its discussions, the Board may wish to consider:

* Does the CAS help the government to implement the NPRS and priontize its development
agenda?
* Does the CAS adequately reflect the fragile external debt situation?
* 
Is the pace of moving towards programmatic support appropriate?

(v) Strategic Priorities The National Poverty Reduction Strategy (NPRS) of the Kyrgyz
Republic emphasizes three categories of interventions: (i) promoting sustainable growth, (ii)
building a fair society, and (iii) developing an effective state. The Boards of the IMF and IDA
considered the NPRS in February 2003 and indicated that it provides an appropriate basis for
development, while emphasizing the need for improved prioritization. The CAS builds on the
NPRS areas of focus, with an aim to help further refine critical reform priorities within them.

(vi) The CAS will give the highest priority to promotimg private sector-led growth, given the
debt burden and difficult geographic situation. There are three key drivers of economic growth -
agriculture and agro-processing, industry and energy, and small and micro enterprises. IDA and
IFC will help the Kyrgyz Republic to implement reforms and attract investments in these areas

Page ii 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Strategy

through reducing bureaucratic barriers, moving to market pricing, rehabilitating key
infrastructure and increasing access to market information and financing. In the financial sector,
IDA and IFC will help to strengthen existing institutions and to create the framework conducive
to attracting investments, capital formation and savings. IFC will continue its technical
assistance directly and through its Private Enterprise Partnership (PEP) to implement the
regulatory framework for micro-finance and leasing introduced recently and may consider new
initiatives in insurance and housing finance. IDA will complement these activities with
Community Driven Development projects which should help to slowly diversify the economy and
increase farm productivity and growth in non-farm jobs outside of the main cities. And IDA will
extend a small Learning and Innovation operation to help develop plans to mitigate against the
potential effects of natural disaster risks which could derail the economy.

(vii) A second key priority will be to help stem the deterioration m key infrastructure and social
services The Kyrgyz Republic inherited reasonably developed, if basic, infrastructure and social
service systems which have been slowly deteriorating since independence. The Kyrgyz Republic
cannot afford to put off this rehabilitation much longer, but also cannot afford to rehabilitate it
all. Selectivity and systemic reforms are critical. IDA's activity in this area will seek to support
overall systemic changes to make provision more efficient, while empowering local communities
to identify priorities, in keeping with the decentralized vision in the NPRS.

(viii) A third priority will be to address governance constraints to growth and poverty reduction
- while recognizing that this is a long term challenge. In IDA's client survey, governance was
identified as among the most important issues limiting returns to structural reforms. Among the
key priorities are increasing transparency and accountability, capacity building at the central and
local levels, and supporting the continued development of the NPRS and the Medium Term
Expenditure Framework (MTEF) as vehicles for government planning and budgeting.

(ix) Lending Scenarios: The four year FY03-06 base case for IDA is US$171 million. The
base case assumes continued reform progress in key areas such as health, energy, and
governance and provides a mix of traditional investment projects, program support, and
continued emphasis on Economic and Sector Work. The Kyrgyz Republic is eligible for a
significant level of grants in IDA. ' Grants will be focused primarily on community development
and the social sectors and will help to limit the growth of debt. Triggers to stay on the base case
include progressive reform implementation and adequate growth and absorptive capacity.

(x) 
If the Kyrgyz Republic falls off of this reform and growth path, the CAS includes a low
case of US$97 million focusing on technical assistance, social sector and community driven
development activities. 
The CAS provides for a high case of US$211 million, if reforms
proceed on an accelerated pace and result in higher than anticipated growth, exports, and foreign
investment. In this event, IDA will return to the Board with a progress report indicating how
funds can be absorbed while maintaining progress towards debt sustainability. 
IDA will closely
monitor the Kyrgyz Republic's prospects for improved debt sustainability. Should such
prospects deteriorate, a progress report would be prepared and submitted to the Board, setting
forth a recalibration of IDA's program necessary to ensure progress towards debt sustainability.

The IDA-13 (FY03-05) guidelines provide for up to 40% to be grants for low income highly indebted countries.

The actual percentage of grants provided for this category in FY03 is 29%. Updated percentages will be

determined each year. The availability of grants in FY06 depends on the next IDA replenishment (IDA14).

Page iii 

Kvrgz Republic Country Assistance Stratezv

(xi) Assuming continued progress in implementing key reforms, the CAS proposes to introduce
programmatic support in the form of a Poverty Reduction Strategy Credit (PRSC) at the end of
FY05 and a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) for health and social protection in FY06. This will
entail intensive work during the next two years in tightening fiduciary controls, sharpening
prioritization and costing of the NPRS, improving institutional capacity, and deepening partner
coordination - which is the govemment's and IDA's intention. However, the CAS builds in
flexibility to adjust this approach according to country circumstances.

(xii) Analytic Work: IDA focused significant attention during FY02 and FY03 on providing a
strong level of ESW and capacity building. The core diagnostic work is now in place (Poverty
Assessment, PER, CPAR, CFAA, FSAP, Governance Survey). The CAS is predicated on
implementing recommendations from these efforts, as well as maintaining a robust package of
non-lending services. WBI has designated Central Asia as a focus area and as such will also
provide increased support for capacity building.

(xiii) IFC and MIGA: 
IFC will continue its technical assistance for institution building,
support additional private involvement in state owned enterprises and banks, increase lending to
micro and small enterprises, help establish leasing and housing finance mechanisms, and provide
financial and technical support for individual pnvate companies particularly in agro-processing,
mining, industry, services and tourism. The IFC will also support investment in Kyrgyz
enterprises through two regional facilities, the EBRD/IFC Central Asia Microlending Facility
and the SEAF-CASEF small equity fund, and will extend funds through intermediaries as well as
provide investment capital and leasing finance. MIGA will provide information resources on
privatization opportunities through its web services, and will continue to identify and support
foreign investment opportunities.

(xiv) Donor and Regional Cooperation: In implementing the CAS, IDA will build stronger
partnerships with donors and the government, as agreed during the in-country Consultative
Group Meeting in October 2002. IDA will also strengthen its regional work in Central Asia, in
close coordination with governments and other donors, particularly in trade, water management,
energy markets, knowledge sharing, and communicable diseases. Initially these efforts will take
the form of non-lending analytic work, combined with national interventions. IDA established a
Central Asia Regional Office in Almaty in July 2002 with a resident Country Director which will
help forge deeper regional cooperation.

(xv) Performance Monitoring: Achievement of development outcomes will be monitored at
three levels: (a) a set of benchmarks related to the MDGs and NPRS objectives covering
poverty, macroeconomic (including debt), and social indicators, (b) specific CAS progress
indicators as intermediate indicators, and (c) improved portfolio management to be monitored in
the context of annual Country Portfolio Performance Reviews (CPPRs).

(xvi) Risks: The proposed strategy assumes the Kyrgyz Republic will sustain reforms within
an election period, overcome weak implementation capacity, keep a tight limit on public
investment to maintain progress towards debt sustainability, and not be derailed by external and
natural shocks. Collectively these risks are significant, but the benefits in terms of poverty
alleviation are also high. The CAS seeks to address these risks by extending significant levels of
grants; a mix of adjustment and investment operations to facilitate reforms, and helping the
government to mitigate the effects of external and natural resource shocks.

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

1. 

Introduction

1. 
This is the third full Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Kyrgyz Republic and
covers the four year period FY03-FY06. It is based on the government's National Poverty
Reduction Strategy (NPRS), finalized in December 2002, which represents the first phase of the
government's ten-year vision described in its Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF).
The NPRS was discussed by the Boards of the IMF and IDA in February 2003, along with the
Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) of the NPRS. The CAS has been prepared jointly by IDA and the
IFC, in consultation with the government of the Kyrgyz Republic and representatives of civil
society and the private sector.

General Country Conditions

II. Country Context

2. 
The development challenges facing the Kyrgyz Republic today must be considered
against the background of a number of constraining factors:

* Geography: The Kyrgyz Republic is land-locked with a small domestic market (5
million people, of which about half are below the poverty line). Most of its land is
mountainous, making it difficult and expensive to develop infrastructure, including road
and rail transport, and geographically dividing the country between the North and South.
These conditions are exacerbated by the many tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade
imposed by neighboring countries, although if such barriers could be addressed, and
domestic and administrative weaknesses overcome, Kyrgyz Republic exports could
benefit from the growing natural resource wealth of the region.

* Loss of Soviet Trade and Subsidy: In 1990, Soviet subsidies accounted for about 10
percent of GDP and 30 percent of the budget in the Kyrgyz Republic. These subsidies
translated into more or less basic but universal health care, education and employment, as
well as basic investment in infrastructure. They were cut off with the break-up of FSU.
Just as important, the Kyrgyz Republic's exports, previously focused on the FSU, have
declined to about one-eighth of their 1990 levels. As a result, GDP declined to about 50
percent of its 1990 level by 1995, although there has been a modest recovery in the past
few years.

* Low Public and Private Investments: Government utility pricing policies are distorted
and the tax base and collection performance is weak. This has limited the capacity of the
Goverunent to adequately provide basic public services and financial support to the
poorest in a targeted manner, and maintain basic infrastructure. Nearly all of the Public
Investment Program (PIP) is funded by donors, which is increasingly under pressure
given the need to control debt accumulation. Private (both foreign and domestic)
investments are low and household savings have only started becoming significant
recently, reflecting the poor investment climate and only gradually improving financial

Paze 2 

Kyrgvz Republic Country Assistance Straterv

sector. These low levels of investment are below those needed just to maintain the basic
infrastructure inherited from the Soviet Union.

* Undiversified Economy: The agriculture and industrial production base is small and
undiversified, which has left the Kyrgyz Republic very vulnerable to natural disasters or
external shocks such as the 1998 Russian financial crisis, too much or too little rain, or
the 2002 landslide affecting the Kumtor Gold mine. Much remains to be done to build on
progress to date in diversifying the agricultural production base, following the
introduction of land reform.

* Continuing Wide-Spread Poverty: The level of poverty remains close to 50 percent,
though some reduction (from about 55 percent to 48 percent) was registered from 1999 to
2001. Growth has been relatively pro-poor with poorer people increasing their income
faster than average. Poverty is particularly entrenched in the rural and mountainous
regions, like Naryn Oblast. Access to basic public services and infrastructure such as
running water, public sewerage, health and education services has deteriorated. Most
pensioners (10 percent of the population) live on less than US$10 per month.

Socio-Political Context

3. 
The socio-political context in the Kyrgyz Republic is more dynamic than many of its
neighboring countries. On the one hand, there is a freer atmosphere, characterized by the growth
of over 4,000 Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), a Parliament that contains many vocal
opposition voices, and an effort to develop rules and regulations in an inclusive manner. The
recent National Poverty Reduction Strategy (NPRS) reflects both the importance the government
places on inclusive dialogue and the intention of the government to further decentralize decision-
making and public services to the local levels.

4. 
At the same time, the Kyrgyz Republic has often struggled to live up to these ideals.
Ineffective governance and significant levels of corruption have been identified as serious
impediments to growth and poverty reduction. Clashes with the opposition in 2001 left 6 dead,
and led to a change in the Prime Minister and cabinet. Since then, the government has attempted
to cooperate with the opposition in developing a new Constitution for the Kyrgyz Republic that
would devolve more power to the Parliament. The constitutional amendments were approved in
a referendum on February 2, 2003, although changes were introduced at the very end of the
process with limited consultation or time to reflect. The next key test of the openness of the
political system will be the Parliamentary and Presidential elections in 2005. President Akaev
has indicated that he would not run for re-election. However, the CAS is built on the assumption
that the priorities indicated in the NPRS will continue beyond the election.

5. 
This political dynamism presents a particular challenge in developing and implementing
a program of reform. To date, the Kyrgyz Republic has made good progress on economic
reform, despite the fact that there was no clear majority in favor of reform, due to the centralized
decision-making process. Most notably, the Kyrgyz Republic has liberalized price, foreign
exchange and trade regimes and has instituted a generally equitable land-reform agenda,
including transfemng about 60 percent of the land to private ownership, which is now available
for rent or sale. It has also progressed in the difficult areas of pensions, energy and health
reforms. Progress towards political pluralism is necessary to sustainable development. And it

Pag'e 3 

Kvrzz Republic Country Assistance Strateg

may in fact strengthen the government's readiness to introduce some reforms including those
related to good governance and decentralization. The potential to obtain further debt relief in the
Paris Club will also provide an incentive for the Kyrgyz Republic to maintain reform
momentum. However, this political dynamnism may also make it more difficult to maintain
momentum in areas like health (see Box 1), pension or energy sector reform, where hard policy
choices are often required.

Box 1: The Case Of Health Reform

The governmentrinitiatedamajor[reformn 
in health,in 1993 (the Manas Health Reform
Program) - supported'by two IDA projects, carefully tuned with the activities of-other donors -
including the establishment-of a Health Insurance Fundj the;iintroduction of an incentive-based
payment-system and new mechanisms for improving t,he quality of care,.the restructuring of
hospitals and of the-Sa,nitary Epidemiological Services (SES) ard of the, workforcej ,tlie
deveiopment of ahealth information system, better pharmaceutical- management, and the 
piloting of cost-effective out-patient4family medicine.=Prelithinary results in the pilot areas
show 'mrked improvement in,health indicators, an increased anpounit of funding available for 
staff salaries and medical suppfies and an initial decrease in informal payments as well as
pos,itive response fr6rn;thepu6lic-and pr6'vidersi ' '

l

.In 2002,reform progress slowed. Funds raised as, contributions for health insurance were
diverted ,by the-Social-Fundito [pay-pensions. Large arrears accumulated and"thus only very
limited funds were transfei-redt,o the Health Insurance,Fund"and in turnto providers. 'This,
combined with a reduction in budg'etfunds to hospitals'throug categorical grants,-putAthe roll-. -
out of the new payment,sstem and the restructuring of hospitals a'nd SES on hold Many
health' care providers re .introduced informal payments inworder to pay,their contractors. 
"
Suggestions,were made to 'recreate Oblast health'departtments,-which could disrupt the-'single -
paye'r system, limit the providers`ability.to respond'to incentives to reduce inefficiencies and
improve quality of-care, and add-to bureaucracy. Increased oversight by Parliament has,
reinforced "delays in the afulrll out of reforms. 
Implemfentation 'of the ll 
finDancd Health.
'Sector Reform '2 project,irnstrumental toithe reformn prograr 
slow,ed-as:a result. 

-

IDA,,in close cooperation with the other donors, responded by raising concerns to the highest
levels 'including at the October`2002 CG, thatfthis slowdownr could'jeopardize progress on
health indicators. Encouragingly, the President and.the,Prime Minister have'publicly confirmed
bypthe end of February 2003 that health=reform will continue and be extenied including to the
m,ajor urbahn ,cent'ers-Bishkek andOsh. Steps are now being take 
to get the "reformrs: back ori'
track and the financing problems solved . The 'proposed IDAfunded,Governance Structural
Adjustm'ent Credit and Governance, Technical Adjustient Credit will furiher support the
hath reor byfcusing, on a p!ermanent lega framewor 
foradequate funding of h ealth
insurance-.and,,o,f hehalth care services and providing-incentives for restructurig of services and.
enhan'ce qualit'y control,of pharmhaceuticals aind targeted health inspections of-SES .tfWhile-it is'
too.early to fullyj'udgge the governgment's renewed'icommitmnent, this case ofprog ss on ,health
.- 'reforms is indicative of,the fragility of reform processesand-the importance of consistentand-'
unified- donor support for reform processes.-

Page 4 

Scope of Poverty

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Stratezy

6. 
About half of the 5 million Kyrgyz population live below the poverty line. Many of the
inefficient Soviet-era factories have shut down and unemployment is widespread. While
changes in the structure of the economy are necessary for long term economic viability, in the
early transition period there was a significant increase in poverty. Nevertheless, there are some
signs that the Kyrgyz Republic is turming the corner. First, the overall percentage of the
population living below the poverty line declined, based on strong GDP growth, from about 55
percent in 1999 to 52 percent in 2000 and 48 percent in 2001 as measured in expenditure per
capita (see Table 1). Second, the growth that has occurred in recent years appears to be
relatively pro-poor, though not in all the regions. Poorer segments of the population had a higher
increase in real consumption than the richer segments of the population. Poverty has declined in
both the rural areas and the urban areas, and has been broad-based across all oblasts, although
Naryn, the poorest oblast which is the most mountainous, has the least access to transport and
markets, and is more reliant on livestock than crop production, benefited the least In 2001, an
estimated nine out of every ten Naryn residents lived below the poverty line.

Table 1: Poverty in the Kyrgyz Republic, 2000-2001

Measure of welfare 

Absolute poverty line,
2001 soms 

Expenditure per capita 
Consumption per capita 
Consumption per adult equivalent 

7491 
6975 
6975 

2000 

52.0 
62.5 
51.8 

2001

47.6
56.4
45.0

Headcount Index of Poverty (%)

7. Poverty is concentrated in the rural communities: In 2001, two thirds of the Kyrgyz
population and almost three quarters of the poor lived in rural areas. The incidence of poverty in
rural areas was higher than average at 62 percent in 2001. Amongst regions, the more rural
Naryn and Talas regions are the poorest. It is in the rural areas that the fight against poverty
must start. Since 1996, the agriculture sector has been a key driver of economic growth.
Agriculture yields remained strong in 2002, resulting in about a 4.8 percent growth. However,
the driving forces of the gains to date-increases in agricultural productivity from land reform
and the growth of the small services sector- will need to be matched by greater access to
markets as well as growth in input services, marketing services, and off-farm rural employment.

8. Employment opportunity is weak. A viable long term poverty reduction strategy must
establish alternative employment for those without access to land. The establishment of such
activities requires the creation of a favorable investment climate to encourage local SME
investments and attract FDI, through the improvement of access to information, development of
an enabling legal environment, improvement of access to credit, the simplification of entry,
licensing, inspections and tax-related regulations, and the promotion of a more transparent
accounting system, as well as development of a qualified and independent judiciary and effective
enforcement mechanisms. Many small businesses operate in the shadow economy given
administrative barriers and high rates of social contributions, but this reduces the incentives for
them to grow and undermines labor standards (see Box 2). The development of off-farm
employment in rural areas and in small towns would be particularly important to limit internal
migration to urban slums.

Page 5 

Kyrzvz Republic Country Assistance Strateq

Box 2: Core Labor Sta'ndards 

-

The Kyrgyz Republic has,many core iabor standards in place. Forced or co'rnpulsory labor by adults or
children is ;illegaj, the Labor Code protects children from economnic exploitaifion and'work efndangering
their health, the Labor Code provides'for the rights of all wbrkers to' formn':and?belohg.to trade, unions,
and legislatior exists in a variety of places to prevent discrimination related.to gender and-ethnicity.
HoWever, thfese legal requireme-n'tare ill-enforced-and most violations go unprosecute'd; incliding
trafficking.in women, child labor on farms, and discrimination against.Russian-only speakers. This
can-be-traced'to the low.capacity within the law enforcement and &court systems, as well as the fact'that
a 'large poftion-of workers, are siriiply not covered byl a written' emp'iloyment contracit 
.is 'officially
registered: Progress''on labor standards'will therefore depend, on'(i)`improving,public sector
governance, and (ii) strengthening the market conditions for the private sector to emerge from' the
shadow economy, enabling their workers to be covered' by' eistinig'laws and,receive' market wages.

9. 
Provision of adequate social services is low. Access to public infrastructure services such
as running water, public sewer, reliable electricity, district heating, or telephone services is very
low. Overall rural and poor households have much less access to these services than others.
Given that these services are subsidized, rich households, who usually consume more, receive
most of the subsidies. In health and education, the quality of services is also a major concern.
Many non-poor are also very vulnerable to falling back into poverty. Sickness, death of a family
member, and natural calamities (flooding, loss of crop or livestock) remain ever-present threats.
Ethnic minonties, pensioners, women, families with many children, and unregistered migrants to
urban areas remain disadvantaged, as well as the disabled and orphans.

10. 
But Growth is making a difference. The recent World Bank/Kyrgyz government joint
Poverty Assessment, which was generally reflected in the National Poverty Reduction Strategy
(NPRS), concluded that growth has been tangibly pro-poor. If the recent pattem is maintained, a
five percent annual growth rate in per capita consumption could reduce poverty levels on a
consumption per capita basis to about 36 percent in 2006. But this assumes no increase in
inequality and continued strong growth. With higher inequality and/or lower growth, the poverty
headcount could remain at about 50 percent. 
It will therefore be important to strengthen growth
at the grass roots, rural, and small and medium enterprise levels.

11. 

And progress is expected on the Millennium Development Goals for poverty reduction:
The international community has established Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to assess
progress towards key poverty-based objectives. The Kyrgyz government has adopted many of
the MDGs into its National Poverty Reduction Strategy (see Table 3) and IDA and other donors
are supporting efforts to achieve them. The status of MDGs, intermediate goals, and activities
of the Bank Group in their support are elaborated in Attachment 3. In addition to the primary
goal of reducing overall poverty levels (discussed above in para 10) other highlights are:

* Primary Education: Primary school enrollment, at over 90 percent, is already very strong in
the Kyrgyz Republic, a Soviet legacy. However the challenge remains to both raise
enrollment rates to near universal, focusing on rural education, and improve educational
quality which has deteriorated. The government has committed to increasing funding for
education, and IDA and the AsDB have agreed to work closely with the Government over the
next few years to establish a strong policy framework to ensure adequate teacher training,
text book and supplies, and community involvement.

Paze 6 

K r vz Republic Country Assistance Stratezv

* Health Indicators: The Kyrgyz Republic is making progress in reducing infant and
maternal mortality through its pilot health reform program, which, with support from
IDA and other donors, is expected to be extended throughout the country over the next
few years (see Box 1). The incidence of HIV/AIDS is still quite low but action is needed
to prevent its growth. However, the incidence of TB is high and growing due to
outmoded treatment techniques and prison conditions. The Global Fund for AIDS, TB
and Malaria (GFATM) has just approved a large grant for the Kyrgyz Republic (see Box
7).

* Gender Issues: Enrollment ratios are essentially the same for boy and girls in pnmary
education and are higher for girls in secondary education. Nevertheless, there are a
number of gender issues in the Kyrgyz Republic, including reducing violence against
women and empowering women through microfinance. Gender issues and IDA's
assistance strategy in this regard are discussed in Box 3 below.

* Environmental Sustainability The Kyrgyz Republic's natural resources are a key
treasure. However, growth areas such as agriculture and mining may begin to place
strains on the environment, particularly in water availability, deforestation, and land
slides. In addition to reducing the quality of life, these environmental concerns may
themselves reduce the potential for growth. For example, land slides reduced the ability
of the main gold mine to operate in 2002 with a senous impact on the economy. A
particular concern is the need to strengthen the management of water resources, for both
irrigation and drinking water, through more effective government policies, empowering
local institutions and water user associations, and selective infrastructure rehabilitation.

' 

- as a whole the GAS Box 3fi Gender Iss6uesand&IDA Strategy-
Taken as a,whole, the CAS interventions should provide strongl continuing support to address-key

outstandihg gender issues-inmthe KKy 

zRgy R&public.

Current, ,S 1,a,n,d,Oo.e,rnmqetStrategy, Gender iss9ues are less pronounced in the Kyrgyz
Republic,than in othencountries notable given!thehig po1yerttyevel. Gender equalit h'as'been 
'
generally achieved'in educati6on,a; gerierally equitable land,ref,orm distributioni s'ys'tem.existswhe,re all
adult,members of househo,lds receive ownership certificates, and there is co6ntinfuing,progress in
maternal and.infant mortality. Nevertheless, the government has mnade,genider an important prionty in
the NPRS Continuing pnirities include: (i) an increase, in women representation in government

positions' (ii)' reater-empowerwrentofWomen through self employment, particularly using

Enicrofinance, 

,(iii) strengthened access to basic, health services and preventing violence 

inst

women, and.(i) increased public8awareness-of gender issues, 
1

C 

IDA Assistance: 
In the recent.Client Survey, respondents indicated that.,gender 
as an area where
IDA was Lperforrning relatively.w,ell 1In lterms of empowermentt,land registration-is a key issue,iand
'IDA is support'inrg the go,ve,rnn=,mennt's land ,registration efforet,through its ongoing land registration
project. The ongoing rural support-through KAFC; the new IFC/EBRD lines of credit"for micro-and
,S s,,.as well as,the, pro,po,sed, Village Investment and 'Srall"Town Infrastructure projectswill also,
contribute t-o empowering bo,th x omen and rmen atithegras"s roots le el 
IDA i's also introducing.
healh trfor ,:trgh irtsg 
' Healtl j',praject'which, if wide 'ad6optedw,,will',help,,-assureincreased acces6s-
6f womeneto:whealth'care 
,Indeedeinithepi,lt,: Oblastsj healthstati'stics such,as Maternal and Child
mortality show, markedi,mprovement.ver other areas Finally civilfservile r'eformiiunder the
GSAC/GTAC should'provide the basis for a nmore professional and gender-~neutral c1ivil service......

combination of tight fiscal and 
monetary policies over the same period 

has resulted in a significant decline in 
inflation to single digit rates since 
2001, with average inflation of just 

over 2 percent in 2002. The exchange 
rate has been relatively stable, and 
dunng the first year of the 
government's program supported by 
the current IMF PRGF, program 
benchmarks have generally been met. 

13. 
The economy's production 
base continues to be narrowly 
defined, but spending.patterns have 

-

N]nalAiAcuns

4 .t7$l 

d 

PaGDP Pgovh(%) 
GDP pea *Tent 
Invet(%ofGDP) 
o/wPnvatehnestenmt 
Cnimn(0/cofGDP) 
GrssDonrstcSaving (0 /oofGDP) 
PbbUc Sector Balanr 
(%of GDP)

Expwdwtitm 
alwPublcInvestrnrt 
Revre 

:. 

4' 

I'i_'' C'3

3.7 

255.0 
18.0 
7.6 
96.8 
28 

-0.5 
326.0 
l&1 

1Z2 
856 
14.9 

5.3 

3450 
180 
125 
84.8 
156 

4.
401.

19.
15.
85.
16.

3Z0 
9.5 
204 

-11.6 
13.5 

28.0 
5.9 
228 

-52 
4.3 

27.
4.8
23.

-3.9
4.1

27.4 
5.5 
2Z6 

4.7 
48 

-28 

Page 7 

Krg.vz Republic Country Assistance Strategy

Economic Performance, Prospects and Debt Management

12. 
The Kyrgyz Republic has made considerable progress in attaining macroeconomic
stability. Strong fiscal, quasi-fiscal and external adjustment efforts, together with structural
measures in areas such as energy and banking, have facilitated a significant improvement in
overall economic performance in the aftermath of 1988 regional financial crisis (see Table 2).
Real GDP grew, on average, at about 5 percent during 1999-2001. Although the impact of a
landslide at the Kumtor gold mine and the reduced external demand for power in 2002
interrupted this progress-with the growth rate turning slightly negative in 2002-growth is
expected to return to its positive trend from 2003 onwards, barring any unexpected shocks. The

Table2. KrzRepubc. KeyEa 
Tal 2. -Ri,bl,in 
, 
--
'E 

cndicators, 1999-20
, 19992007(

ic99 

major, 

inustria 

-3.7 
123 
-3.2 

389 

-13.9 
-11.6 
-14.7 

-14.3 

~~~~~~~~~o/w 

No-goldoqxort gmvAh (%) I/ 

by agriculture and services, and two 

entered into a more viable path. On 
the supply side, growth has been led 

Fisc defidt (cashh bas) 
o/wExtna fincing 
ofP
Trade Balance (%ofGDP) 
major, non-labor intensive industrial 
o'wlghY) 
sectors, i.e. gold mining and power, 
CinTntAcconBalance(%ofCDP) 
with first signs of recovery in 
E 
D
manufacturing over the last decade 
ToW in %ofGDP21 
131.9 
1066 
appearing only in 2002. On the 
Dbserce(in%ofoWls) 
101 
11.4 
&2 
demand side, the recent adjustments in 
Deblseincef(m%ofs) 
24.0 
24.4 
17.3 
the fiscal deficit (from 11.6 to 5.2 
Sac: Ky3gyauothaine,MFandmiBstaffesn-resandxpmjecnai&
percent of GDP over 1999-02) and the Nte I 
ild 
g 
m202ispailydetotheeffe ofthe S
external account deficit (from 14.7 to 
mhtaryl 
ase;2Icldigdebttopnvaecreditcom
3.2 percent of GDP over 1999-02) have resulted in a more sustainable policy stance with an
increase in domestic savings (see Table 2). Improved discipline over externally financed public
investment expenditures have resulted in a reduced reliance on external sources of savings (see
Chart 1). Equally important has been the progress in reducing large quasi-fiscal operations (from
about 17 to 10 percent of GDP over 1999-2002), primarnly through a series of price adjustments
and structural reforms in the power sector. I

-4.8
4.5
-3.8

5 1

.0. 
0.4 

-24 

95.
135
243

127 

' The cost of quasi-fiscal operations is proxied as the sum of (i) the technical and commercial losses and (ii) the
difference between the actual and cost-recovery pnces in key public services such as district heating, gas, public
transport, water, irrigation, and power. The losses imposed are partly financed by the export revenue generated by
Intergovernmental Irrigation Agreements (IGIAs) with neighboring states which provide for the supply of gas and
coal in exchange for water releases, as well as through deferred maintenance.

Page 8 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Strategy

Chart 1. Sectoral Composition of GDP and Savings-Investment Balance, 1999-02 (% of GDP)

heavy burden 

of external debt. Debt sustainabilltv remams an ou 

Totai Isnestment

40~~~~~9 

02

1999 

2000 

201c 

2002 

C 

r 

-. 

, aide

A Aiculture 
sr 
aIndust-Gold&Power 

inrcl ndustrv 

Serm,ces 

d not c25 

v 

t 

s 

s 

r 

T

o 

i 

the

over 370 pecn 

ofbde 

eeuswl 

bv 

h 

IPCtrsodo 

5 

ecn 

)I 

n 

5

02

14. 
However, notwithIstandith 
g thefiscal adjunstent, the Kyrgyz Republic is saddled with a
heavy burden of external debt. Debt sustaind abili 
remains an outstanding issue over the
medium termn with the net present value of public debt remaining over 180 percent of exports and
over 370 percent of budget revenues-well above the HIPC threshold of 150 percent and 250
perccnt, respectively. The March 2002 Paris Club Agreement, although providing favorable debt
service relief over the short-term, did not change the stock of extenal debt. The Agreement,
however, includes a goodwilt clause that allows for a potential stock reduction operation in the
future, subject to good progress in consolidating macroeconomic stability through further
adjustment and reformi. In the period ahead, along with reducing the reliance on external
financing, increased access to grants and concessional financing are critical for the sustainability
of the required external and fiscal adjustment.

15. 
Andfurther reforms and fiscal adjustmtent are nsecessary to conisolidate
mnacroeconomnic stability and mtainitain growth mom entumn. Adjustment in recent years has
been achieved largely on the basis of across-the-board expenditure cuts that are unsustainable
and have often failed to reflect strategic priorities Civil servants are poorly paid and often seek
alternative sources of income, which reduces the quality of public services and promotes rent-
seeking behavior. Reduced maintenance of infrastructure has affected such critical areas as
irrigation networks, transportation and education and health facilities. Public expenditures on
health and social protection, other than pensions, have been severely constrained. Furthermore,
the present level of quasi-fiscal operations, which have continued to be incurred through pncing
public utility services below their economic costs, are far from being sustainable.

16 
In view of the Kyrgyz Republic's low income and high poverty levels, achieving
sustainable growth is the most fundamental requirement for poverty reduction. Sustaining
growth is expected to be more challenging over the medium-term than in the mid-1990s given
Kyrgyz Republic's high external indebtedness. Public investment and consumption-led growth
of 1996-01, financed primarily by external resources, is no longer affordable over the medium
term. While growth performance since 2000 was comparatively more balanced, private
investment and export performance are still far from providing tangible growth stimulus. A
greater effort to reduce the external imbalance and shift its origins from public to private sector
activities should, therefore, be a policy priority in the period ahead. In turn, this shift will need
to be reinforced by an effort to gradually increase domestic savings, as their current level at

Page 9 

Kvrgvz Republic Countrv Assistance Strateev

about 14 percent of GDP, although significantly improved since 1999, remains below the levels
required to sustain significant long-run growth.

17. 
A more vibrant and innovative private sector and strengthenedfinancial sector will be
critical to maintaining the momentum of growth and broadening its base-hence, increasing
its resilience to external shocks. It is equally critical to increasing the economy's access to
diversified inflows of external capital, including foreign direct investment. In the period ahead,
diminishing gold reserves in the Kumtor gold mine are already expected to make it more difficult
to sustain exports and growth. The reforms in the agricultural sector, if broadened and deepened
to create an enabling environment for private sector initiatives and to induce productivity gains,
are likely to play a major role in maintaining a positive trend in export and overall economic
growth. Nevertheless, the agricultural sector alone is not likely to generate growth rates that are
needed for any significant reduction of poverty-i.e., at about 5 percent and above, as suggested
by the most recent poverty analysis. Similar efforts are needed for improving the investment
climate for SMEs, which account for over 36 percent of GDP and are key to employment
generation and diversification of sources of growth. In addition, the authorities should focus on
attracting private investments in large-scale industries, such as hydro-generation as well as
mining-sectors where the economic potential of the Kyrgyz Republic is significant.

18. 
These efforts will need to be complemented by a coherent trade sector promotion
strategy, with an emphasis on trade facilitation and diversification. Despite a liberal trade
regime and WTO membership, international trade has so far failed to boost growth and
productivity. This, in turn, reflects external regional barriers on flows of goods as well as well-
documented intemal barriers to investment, including excessive regulation, through permits,
certification, licensing and inspections, which impedes both domestic and foreign direct
investments and the growth of exports. These difficulties of the business environment are
compounded by the limited financial intermediation capacity of the banking sector, with high
real interest rates and a marginal capacity to provide long-term financing. Building confidence
through improved banking supervision and payments infrastructure, and a strengthening of
creditor rights are also challenges to be addressed (for a detailed discussion see Attachment 2 on
the Private Sector Strategy).

19. 
Continued public finance reforms will also be needed to underpin these efforts.
Notwithstanding the efforts during the last three years to improve the tax system, much remains
to be done to simplify tax structures, to further rationalize tax rates, and to improve tax collection
and compliance. Similarly, despite major efforts to curtail public expenditures, much remains to
be done to increase both allocation-efficiency and cost-effectiveness of expenditures and to
eliminate implicit subsidies to utilities. High poverty levels in the Kyrgyz Republic pose
additional challenges to public expenditure policies in order for the authorities to fulfill basic
poverty alleviation objectives, and adequately fund social services and highest priority public
infrastructure spending.

20. 
These expenditure management challenges callfor a broader and deeper reform
strategy. The IDA's recent Public Expenditure Review suggests that achieving above outlined
expenditure policy objectives in the medium-term require: (i) completing critical social sector
reform initiatives and investments that have already commenced; (ii) further delineating and
reducing the role of the government to avoid the recurrence of broad but incomplete agendas and
the initiation of large projects with public resources (to be reflected in a gradual decrease in

Page 10 

KvrgvzRepublic Country Assistance Strate2

externally financed PIP to below 4 percent of GDP by 2005); (iii) focusing sector policies mainly
on the poor (with a strong regional dimension and strong focus on children), particularly in the
human development areas; (iv) strengthening local govemance with a view to ensure more
equitable and efficient delivery of public services in parallel with empowering communities to
take control of their own future; and (v) complementing policy reforms by institutional measures
that will ensure the efficient management of tight public resources and transparency and
accountability in public sector operations. These measures would not only release economic
resources for providing key basic social programs and maintaining basic infrastructure-hence,
preventing the erosion of key national assets such as education or access to electricity-but
would also create room for private sector growth.

21. 
Confronting medium-term pressures requires a strong reform effort and a well-
designed debt sustainability strategy. Under a base case economic scenario of continued strong
reforms along the lines outlined above, maintaining a per capita growth rate of over 3 percent
and reducing the fiscal deficit below 4 percent of GDP over the medium term would be
consistent with a steady improvement of the debt burden in the period ahead - barring extemal
shocks and adverse regional environment (see Table 2 above). However, reduction of the
external debt burden to sustainable levels through this decade would be possible only if the
ongoing efforts to maintain access to concessional extemal financing and to secure a
concessional debt stock reduction are successful. It should be emphasized that improving the
depth and pace of structural reforms and fiscal management capacity over the medium-term is
critical for maintaining access to strong donor assistance and the realization of the full benefits of
reforms. Falling short of this target may result in a forced domestic and external adjustment,
without addressing the fundamental weaknesses of the economy. As such, it would have a
negative impact on growth prospects, would re-generate fiscal pressures and could undermine
the hard-won gains toward poverty alleviation. (see Box 4 for summary and Attachment I for
detailed elaboration on the base case scenario and parameters of external and fiscal debt
sustainability analysis).

22. 
Weak reform effort will unaffordably delay the achievement offiscal and debt
sustainability. In a low case scenario of weak reform effort, which is developed on the basis of
the risk that forthcoming 2005 parliamentary and presidential elections may create for the depth
and the pace of the reform performance, structural reform pace is slowed; key govemance,
banking system, public finance, and energy reforms are delayed; and improvements to the
business enabling environment are far from advancing, leading to stagnant domestic investments
and marginal foreign investment inflows. As a result, economic activity would slow, as the
private sector would not sustain the economy's growth momentum, when the growth impulse
arising from public investment declines and when the diminishing Kumtor gold production
remains largely uncompensated. Under these assumptions, the GDP growth would average
barely over two percent per annum in the period ahead. As fiscal reforms are deferred,
increasing fiscal fragility and lower donor financial support would severely constrain social and
development expenditures. Furthermore, the strategic reallocation of expenditures and efficiency
gains would be limited, which would further delay prospects for fiscal sustainability and growth.
Altogether these policy slippages could trigger higher inflation, depreciating exchange rates, and
a current account deficit that would maintain the extemal debt dynamics at an unsustainable path
over the long-run (see Attachment 1). The ability to comfortably service debt, as well as to

Page 11 

Kvrvvz Republic Country Assistance Stratezv

address poverty reduction challenges, would be significantly reduced. This sort of low case
scenario might be short lived since both domestic and social pressure as well as pressure from
diminishing external financing would be likely to bring about a correction of domestic policies.
However, if a cycle of weak reforms followed by corrections is repeated over time, the low-case
macroeconomic outlook could be triggered.

-,! 

Box 4: Debt Sustainability Prospects

-

* A base case reforn scenario- -with-continued 
strong macroeconomic management and good
, performance in govermance and banking sector reforms and in elimination,of quasi fi'scal
power sector oe'rati ns, and tang,ible improvem'ents ini business,,enabling environment - could
pave the way for-fiscal siistainability and improved debt burden ratiosby later part of this
decade,and,debt sustainability by early,next decade -barring,external.,shocks and-adverse
regional ehvironment."But,this,assumes: 
.

, 

-'

.> relatiVely high growth rate, averaging 6ver 4 percent per annum
> Further fiscal adjustirent airning at reducing public,sector-deficit to 3.S, ,.percent-of
, .,'GDPthdr6ugh,o0risolidating in the budget the., off budget revenue siources, gradual -
improvement in indirect tax collection, and reducing the foreign';financed public
"investentsprogram 
to below 4 percent ofG-DP 
.
> Continuing&adjutstniefit'of quasi fiscal-operations-pariiculariy,ifirobgh'further
restructuring of the.,powei sector under the currently planned public-private'
pfi 
,panership 
scheme, ensuring eliminati,on of losses.
-Shift frorn public to pnvate sectorled growthwithshare of private, inyestments in..
GDP gradually increasing from the curreht level of 12 percent to l6.5 percent,
supported,by increase= in share of 
hdomestic savings -in GDP'fr,om about '175 p=erc'ent to

> 

- 17rpercent,'-

-

~ 

Gradual increase-in non-gold exports. 
,from an,anhiual average,of 1i percent of GDP
over-the last five -years to4percent of GDP.
> ' Maintaining access tO concessional donor firancing .,involving a combination of
rbidgetaryf grant financing similar'to current levels (about,1,percent'of 
-continued access to highly concessional lending,and further debt relief by'Paris Club 
C fnreditors a"nd-'other bilaterals in Naples termfs

GDP) 
',

; a . 4 , -Crdt s,- 

er bi- 

S 1->~l~~~;i

+' , A low case reform scenario- with inadequate:'4ro6gre,ss ,rxon-key 1structural,.reforns in the 
-
'f
medium-term - Would '6ngenidei wakernecon6rnic, perforranee; stagnant domestic revenue
per,formance and lower levels 6f d6nor -. ssistance.,, The external current account deficit would-
remain,at levels,that would rai,ntain the extermal deb't dynamics at.n unsustainable pathover.
thejong-termn. with extern,d and fiscal,'sustainabilitv indicators deteri&atin-.over'time 

-

.

23. 
Nevertheless, it should also be emphasized that even with good policies, adverse
environmental and economic shocks could lead to a severe deterioration of the
macroeconomic environment, including a depreciation of the exchange rate and sluggish
investment activity. Agnculture, hydropower and mining sectors are vulnerable to weather
related developments and natural disasters. These vulnerabilities make the strengthening of
medium-term reforms aimed at diversifying the economy and strengthening the private sector all
the more critical to reducing growth volatility and improving debt sustainability.

24. 
The limits of national strategies also need to be recognized. Increased harmonization of
Central Asia trade regimes would have a significant impact on the Kyrgyz Republic. Increased
cooperation on the efficient use of water between upstream and downstream countries, and

Pagze 12 

Kvrgz Republic Country Assistance Strategy

agreement on the related potential electricity generated from water for domestic use and exports,
would also have a critical impact on the economy of the Kyrgyz Republic. Similarly,
cooperation in control of communicable diseases, increased knowledge sharing, and
environmental protection could all have positive externalities for the Kyrgyz Republic.

III. The National Poverty Reduction Strategy

25. 
The Kyrgyz Republic participated as a pilot in the Comprehensive Development
Framework (CDF) and prepared an inclusive ten-year Comprehensive Development Framework
for 2001-2010 which provides the broad vision and directions of its development path. The
National Poverty Reduction Strategy (NPRS) seeks to translate this vision into concrete
measures and programs to be implemented during an initial three year period.

26. 
The transition from the CDF, to the Interim-PRSP, to the preparation of the full NPRS has
been helped by the strong support from the President and the establishment of a CDF Secretariat
attached to the Office of the President to coordinate activity in this area. In January, 2002, the
President set out the broad framework and working groups charged with preparing the full
NPRS. A draft of the full NPRS was discussed extensively with donors and civil society,
including during a Consultative Group (CG) Meeting in October, 2002. All of these activities
and products have been prepared in a highly participatory way. The NPRS was finalized in
December 2002 and was discussed by the Boards of IDA and the IMF in February, 2003.

Main Elements of the NPRS

27. The NPRS proposes actions in three broad areas to reduce poverty levels:

* Formation of an Effective State: The overall vision in the NPRS is for a smaller and more
professional state apparatus, that works in an inclusive, decentralized manner, adjusting itself
according to the feedback from civil society and the private sector. Most areas critical to
good governance are covered, including the need to address local capacity and resource
constraints that may emerge from the decentralization process. The NPRS also indicates the
need to address corruption, to build democratic institutions, and to improve the effectiveness
and integnty of the state. This will require greater transparency and professionalism in
public administration, public expenditure management, and the legal system. There is also a
need to eliminate overlapping functions and to improve coordination among the different
agencies. It will also involve constitutional reforms to strengthen the role of Parliament and
Courts.

* Building a Fair Society: The NPRS is candid in its recognition that the levels of funding for
social assistance are inadequate and as an overall approach indicates the need for greater
efficiency and targeting, combined with a gradual increase in the use of cash and in funding
levels. The top priority for education is to improve the overall access to quality education,
particularly for pre-school, primary and secondary institutions and in the rural areas. In
health there is a need for greater attention to streamlining the use of hospital use, specialists,
and family health care, and a stronger attention to public health and combating
communicable diseases, including building a public awareness campaign on health issues
such as smoking, TB and HIV/AIDS. Pension reform, including the long term goal of
moving towards individual retirement accounts, is also noted. The NPRS also recognizes the

Page 13 

Kyr vz Republic Country Assistance Strategv

importance of strengthening gender equality through improved public employment processes,
improved education and health services, and through micro-finance. The NPRS indicates that
the most important priority in the field of labor is job creation, the strengthening of market
based mechanisms for wages, the gradual rise in salaries for social sector workers, and the
inclusion of workers in the official economy

* Promoting Sustainable Economic Growth: The NPRS underlines that the foundation of
sustainable economic growth is macro-stability and outlines goals to achieve this including
keeping inflation to about 4 percent per annum, limiting new debt, and strengthening tax
collection. The plan recognizes the importance of public investments but also the need to
limit this to below 4 percent of GDP by 2005. Financial institutions and the regulatory
framework require strengthening and access to differing types of investments (loans, leasing,
venture capital etc) needs to be increased, with particular attention to increasing access to
micro-finance. The privatization process needs to be continued and the private sector
environment needs to be improved. The NPRS also recognizes the importance of improved
corporate govemance. Improving productivity in agriculture, including agro-processing, is a
key area of focus. Other sources of growth are identified as small-scale industry and services
(telecom, transport, tourism, energy etc). Finally, the NPRS outlines priorities for ensuring
growth is environmentally sustainable, including the need to improve water management and
quality, and reduce the degradation of forest lands and protect endangered species.

28. 
To measure and monitor progress in the fight against poverty, the Govemment has
selected sixteen poverty indicators, including some Millennium Development Goals, setting
time-bound quantitative targets for each (Table 3 below).

Table 3: Main NPRS Poverty Alleviation Targets

Indicators 
Level of population below poverty line (%) 

Primary education coverage (% of total children) 
Infant mortality (under one year) rate per one thousand live births 

Child mortality (under five) rate per one thousand live births 
Maternal mortality Per 100,000 live births 
Mortality from infectious diseases (per 100,000 population) 
Percent of population with access to health care services 
Percent of population with access to safe drinking water 
GDP growth rate (percent change from 1999) 
Percent of private sector in GDP 
Extemal debt as percent of GDP 
External debt service as a percent of public expenditures 1) 
External debt as a percent of total exports 
General unemployment as percent of economically active pop. 2) 
Telephone lines subscribed per 1000 population 
Personal computers in use per 1000 population 3) 

1999 (actual) 
55.3 

89.5 
22.7 

2005 Target
38.9

97.0
22.0

35.5 
42.3 
32.9 
85.6 
85.9 
100.0 
82.7 
134.0 
4.4 
279.0 
7.2 
78 
25997 3) 

28.0
40 0
25.0
90.0
87.8
128.7
84.3
78.0
3.6
231.2
8.4
80
37000 4)

I) Corrected, in consultation with the authorities, to reflect intended reference to debt service/expenditure ratio rather than
debt/expenditure ration as reported in the NPRS
2) Reflects the administrative data for the registered unemployed, which does not adequately capture the full unemployment picture.
The authonrtes explain the increase in the projected unemployment rate by 2005 with improvement in the coverage of the
administrative data by 2005 'herefore, the figures for 1999 and 2005 are not comparable
3) Number of personal computers in legal entities in year 2001
4) Number of personal computers in legal entities
Note: Some IDA projections for macroeconomic indicators differ from the NPRS projections
Source: NPRS

Paze 14 

Assessment of the NPRS

Kyr.vz Republic Country Assistance Strate2v

29. 
The NPRS builds on the strengths of the I-PRSP and the CDF, particularly the inclusive
nature of its fornulation process. The development of a quality data set for basic poverty
analysis, supported by a joint IDAlgovernment Poverty Assessment, is another strength of the
NPRS, as is its candid recognition of human rights issues and the importance of reducing
corruption in the public sector. The NPRS also lays out a vision of empowering local self-
governments, continuing key reform such as in health, education, and the financial sector, and
further developing the agro-processing, energy, and mining industries.

30. 
The NPRS emphasizes the need to maintain real GDP growth at about 5 percent per
annum over the next three years, in order to significantly reduce poverty, although this could be
considered challenging due to fragile growth prospects. The NPRS also clearly recognizes the
severe external debt problem and thus the need for fiscal restraint, including through limits on
the Public Investment Program. In light of these constraints, the NPRS appropriately recognizes
the critical role that private sector investments will have to play for stimulating broad-based
growth. Nevertheless, specific measures needed to reduce corruption and create an enabling
environment for greater private sector participation in agro-processmg, tourism, energy and
mining are not well developed.

31. 
Overall, there remain areas where further progress is needed. Although the basic poverty
diagnosis is sound, it needs to be sharpened further, and the link between the poverty diagnosis,
poverty reduction strategy objectives and priority actions strengthened. Further progress is also
needed in the areas of costing and prioritization of policy actions, and their link with annual
budgets within the recently introduced Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). The
NPRS correctly recognizes the need for improved tax collection and effective decentralization of
service provision, but further work is needed to identify specific actions to improve tax
administration and inter-governmental financial relations. Further work is needed on identifying
specific measures to carry most NPRS policy reforns - including pensions, health, education,
and the respective roles of public and private sector in agriculture, energy and mining - forward
in a sustainable manner.

32. 
Finally, successful implementation of the NPRS will require continued institutional
capacity building within the government for strategy formulation, implementation, and
monitoring and evaluation. Particular attention will need to be paid to ensuring the reliability of
base-lines for indicators, to establishing easy and cost-effective ways of collecting and
measuring data, and to ensuring that this data is effectively used in policy and budget
formulation. Stronger attention will also need to be paid to resource management, including aid
mobilization and coordination on the basis of the NPRS. Progress on all of these fronts will need
to be addressed and monitored through the Annual NPRS Progress Report.

Strategic Framework

IV. 

Bank Group Program

33. 
The CAS focuses on three key priorities, each corresponding to a priority focus of the
NPRS. Within each, the CAS seeks to identify and address the most pressing needs, particularly
taking into account the Poverty Assessment, which stresses the importance of targeting rural

Page 15 

KYrgYZ Republic Country Assistance Strategy

employment and addressing deteriorating infrastructure and social services (see paras 6-1 1), the
PER, which stresses the importance of establishing a realistic and affordable fiscal framework
that focuses funds on high priority social areas while strengthening central and local governance
(see para 20), and the FSAP, which emphasizes the importance of building confidence in the
financial sector (see paras 17-18 and Attachment 2, paras 17-24).

 

Supporting Private Sector-Led Growth: A key focus of the NPRS is to achieve
sustainable economic growth. Within this, private sector-led growth will be essential,
and will be given the highest priority, particularly given the limits imposed on public
investments imposed by the high levels of external debt. There are three key drivers of
private sector-led economic growth in the economy - agrnculture and agro-processing,
energy and industry, and small enterprises - and IDA and the IFC will be active in
continuing to help the Kyrgyz Republic implement reforms and investments in these
areas. IDA and the IFC will also seek to create the conditions for local entrepreneurs to
grow and diversify the economy through Community Driven Development projects. IDA
will also help the Kyrgyz Republic develop plans against natural disaster risks which
could derail growth (see paras 38-45).

* Providing Essential Services: A second key priority within the NPRS is to build a fair
society. Within this, there is an urgent need to help stem deterioration in key
infrastructure and social services. The Kyrgyz Republic inherited a reasonably
developed, if basic, infrastructure and social service systems which have been slowly
deteriorating since independence. The Kyrgyz Republic cannot afford to put off this
rehabilitation, but also cannot afford to rehabilitate it all. Selectivity and systemic reform
are critical, and IDA will seek to empower local communities to identify priorities, in
keeping with the decentralized vision in the NPRS. IDA will also target social services
such as education in the rural areas where they are most needed (see paras 46-51).

* Strengthening the Governance Framework: A third priority of the NPRS is the
formation of an effective state. In IDA's client survey, governance was identified as one
of the most important issues facing the country. A key starting point is the Government's
recent decision to build a public-private partnership in the energy sector and reduce
quasi-fiscal operations, as supported under the ongoing CSAC program. The CAS will
support the government in broadening these reforms through a Governance Structural
Adjustment Credit, which will seek to increase public sector accountability, transparency,
and efficient resource management. The NPRS recognizes the need to combine
decentralization with increased support to build local capacity, and the CAS will also
help the government to introduce necessary measures in this area (see paras 52-54).

34. 
In designing particular interventions within these areas, the World Bank Group program
is based on the following three principles:

* Gradual Shift to Programmatic Operations... with Flexibility: In the first two years of
the CAS, operations will be split between traditional adjustment and investment
mechanisms. However, based on progress in implementing the NPRS framework,
building partnerships particularly in the field of health, and progress in working with the
government in implement strategic plans as per the ESW program, the CAS envisages
introducing programmatic support for the Kyrgyz Republic in the form of a Poverty

Page 16 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Strategv

Reduction Strategy Credit (PRSC) by the end of FY05 and a Sector Wide Approach
(SWAp) in health and social protection in FY06. IDA recognizes that this will entail
intensive work during FY04 in follow through on the NPRS, fiduciary ESW and on
partnership building. The CAS also builds in flexibility to adjust this approach based on
country conditions (see paras 56-58)

* Continued Focus on ESWand Capacity Building: As discussed in the FY02 CAS
Progress Report and consistent with OED's recommendations, IDA focused significant
attention during FY02 and FY03 on providing the Government with a strong level of
analytic work and assisting it with capacity building, including preparing a Poverty
Assessment, a Public Expenditure Review, a Financial Sector Assessment Paper, a
Country Procurement Assessment, and a Country Financial Accountability Assessment.
During this period, IFC also helped the government establish a new framework for
leasing and microfinance, a plan for sustainable tourism, and a study on the potential for
the IT/Telecom sector. Most of the core diagnostic is now in place. However,
implementation will require continued focus on capacity and ESW. A key element at the
national level will be the preparation in FY04-05 of a Development Policy Review,
which will help consolidate strategies in each sector and assess next steps (see paras 65-
70).

* Selectivity and Partnership: The CAS focuses on key areas - including agriculture,
energy, health, pensions, and finance -- in which the Bank Group has already developed
an expertise or where the Bank Group can bnng particular expertise to bear. However,
selectivity will also be strengthened through deepening donor partnership, within the
context of the NPRS and under the leadership of the Government. IDA will particularly
expand partnerships through the shift to programmatic operations. IFC has also begun to
expand its partnership activities, including through the recently launched
EBRD/IFC/Swiss Central Asia Microlending facility with technical assistance support
provided by USAID (see paras 76-85).

Lessons From Past Experience

35. 
Implementation of the FY99-01 CAS and the FY02 CAS progress report were generally
strong. The triggers for the FY99-01 CAS high case, which proposed 9 projects, were
substantively met and most of the proposed projects were delivered within the period noted. The
CAS projects and ESW support contributed directly to reform in a number of key areas. In
some, there is clear and consistent progress. In others, initial strong progress has been marred by
subsequent slowing of reform implementation. Specific areas of focus included:

* Agriculture Reform: The Land Registration Project is playing a fundamental role in
underpinning a well developed and largely equitable land reform program. Over 60,000
small private farms have emerged from this process. The Irrigation, Rural Finance,
Agriculture Services projects have played a key role in transforming the rural economy,
which, along with land reform, have enabled the agriculture sector to become a leading
source of growth in the economy.

* Energy Reform: The Consolidated Structural Adjustment Credit (CSAC) helped the
government to reduce quasi-fiscal operations from 17 percent to 10 percent, and to

Page 17 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Strategv

restructure the energy sector to make it more transparent and sustainable. IDA also
helped to increase social payments to compensate for the affect of higher energy tariffs
on the poorest. Despite some hesitancy on moving further, the government has recently
indicated its intention to continue this restructunng through creating a private-public
partnership in the distribution sector through a concession arrangement.

* Health Reform: The Health I and II Projects have helped pilot and introduce more cost
effective approaches to health care that have made an important impact on health
statistics to date. Notwithstanding the slow down in health reform in 2002, the
government has indicated its commitment to rolling out the reforms on a country wide
basis in the near future (see Box 1).

* Pension Reform: The Social Sector Adjustment Credit (SOCAC) did help the government
to establish a more viable pension system. A more equitable formula for benefits was
adopted, the contribution base was broadened and the retirement age was raised.
Nevertheless, there remain concerns, including pressures to move to a fully funded
scheme without the appropriate economic prerequisites in place.

* Private Sector Development: The previous CAS took as one of its objectives to clear
away the remaining policy and regulatory impediments to private sector activity. While
some achievements have been made such as in the wide adoption of international
accounting standards and some simplification in registration procedures, this is an area
that remains challenging as noted in the private sector strategy in Attachment 2.

36. 
The FY02 CAS Progress Report defined FY02 as a year of assessment through key
documents such as the PER, the Poverty Assessment, the FSAP, the CPAR, and the CFAA.
These key documents have now all been substantially completed and have helped inform this
CAS. The Poverty Assessment, prepared jointly with the government, also served as a key input
into the government's NPRS. These pieces of ESW will provide an important analytic basis for
deepening the reform agenda and effectively implementing the NPRS.

37. 
Notwithstanding generally good implementation, there are a number of lessons learned
and issues associated with implementation under past CASs which are to be addressed in this
CAS. On the policy side, both the OED evaluation of Bank Group assistance and the client
survey (see Boxes 5 and 6) have highlighted the importance of good governance and public
sector management, and this CAS does make this a key focus area. The importance of a having a
realistic economic scenario that adequately addresses the external debt issue has also been
highlighted. On the process side, both point to the need for improved attention to capacity
building and ESW, and this CAS also highlights this as critical. Based on these reviews and
overall lessons from the Bank Group work program, the following lessons have been distilled
that have influenced the CAS:

* Follow-through on past policy actions is as important as initiating new ones: IDA has
extended seven adjustment loans to the Kyrgyz Republic, and supported many policy
reforms through investment loans as well. Experience indicates that continued attention
is needed to prevent dilution of important past reforms, for example in the pension and
health sectors. 
In some cases, ambitious reforms may have outpaced government

Parze 18 

Kvrffz Republic Country Assistance Strategv

commitment and could have benefited from additional and more regular technical,
financial, and outreach support to bolster public support and their sustainability.

* An inclusive policy dialogue is critical to sustaining progress: Over the past year the
increase in tariffs under the CSAC has had difficult social ramifications but IDA was able
to help Kyrgyz Republic move forward through a seminar for Parliamentarians and a
well-publicized Swiss grant to offset the impact on the poorest. The dynamic political
situation in the coming years is expected to require IDA to pay even more attention to
developing an inclusive dialogue on key issues.

* Capacity building should be an integralpart ofprojects and ESW. 
In many cases,
some members of the Government enthusiastically embrace new ideas, beyond their
capacity to implement them and without wide-spread support. Public sector capacity
remains weak, affected by low wages and high attrition. This can lead to poor
implementation or reversals. IDA therefore needs to avoid over-design projects and
ensure policy recommendations are consistent with the country's capacity. Emphasis
should be given to strengthening the knowledge and capacity of the government to
develop good policies on their own. Capacity needs to be built not only at the central
level but at the local level with the stronger emphasis on decentralization.

* Project supervision has proved difficult and time consuming: IDA's portfolio has
suffered from a lack of counterpart funding and micro-management by MOF in the
processing of disbursements. In addition, it has also suffered from limited capacity and
high turnover in operational counterparts, and uncertain commitment on the part of some
government officials. IDA and the government have worked on improving procedures
over the past year, but continued attention is critical. In addition, a move to more
programmatic support with greater responsibility placed with the government for
individual projects and increased donor coordination would help strengthen operations.

* Partnership among donors and between donors and the government needs to be
strengthened: Development activities of various donors often occur in parallel, with
reasonable information sharing but without a strong sense of integration. Particularly in
light of the need to restrain the growth of debt and reduce implementation overload on
the government, there is a need for donors and the government to work more closely with
a shared vision, in both investments and analytic work. The good donor partnership that
has developed in the field of health can be built upon and provide lessons for the other
sectors as well.

* Nationalprojects must be complemented by regional approaches: Past country
assistance strategies have not focused enough on regional efforts. For example,
agriculture and irrigation investments may not achieve their maximum potential without
additional trade facilitation. The development of Kyrgyz Republic's hydro-electric
capacity will depend on improved cooperation with neighbors on water management.
Admittedly, improvements in regional cooperation may be long term and difficult, but
they are a necessary component in the development of the Kyrgyz Republic.

Page 19 

Kvrzvz Republic Country Assistance Strategy

-Box5: lResults'of"th=eClien~t'S'urvey -

Ih Senternbern2002, a 'client survey - the first such sturvey ii'Kyig)4 Republic - was taken'of

approximately 114 individuals knowledgeable about the Bank's program: Government officials,
NGOs, media, academia,anid the.,private sector. Respondents had a rnodestly positive yiew of the
future. 69 percent felt thatiKyrgyz Republic was moving in-the right:direction, btii most raised'
concerns about corruption, the economy, and governm'ent effectiveness. The most positive were.
local officials and the leaist'\we're the media," Respandents were also modestly ptbsitive on,the
effectiveness of the Bank'(6.8 on a 10 point scale)' The Bank:appears:to be mo'stvalued for its work,
on' measuring poverty, financial-systemrs, external debt and' gender. The'Bank-.was seenwas, less -
effective in=,helping 6n,irmproving transparencyirj 'governance, which was also identified as,one of
the.most im,portant areas. The Bank scord-well on treating clientsiwith respect (7.8), coilabdoi'ing
with'othier donors (7.4), and technical -competence, but less well on building capacity inngovernment
ifficiAls (6'.1), empowring pobr people (5 8)'ad 'adapting external know~ledge.to.local,needs.
There-was relatively highagreenient that the Bank should increase,awareness of its activities.in the
Kyrgyz-Republic. The bverall view of the CDF and,NPRS:was.also m,odestly-positi've. There was
widespread knowledge about the CDF and NPRS (8. i.) and agreenenithat the Bank provided)l
effective' support for the,procds (8.1), but there was' imore hesitancybi L-- heth6rthe NPRS laid&out

an effective, 3,-year plan (7.1).,

-r 'Box 6: OED 'Evaluation olf Bank'GroupAssistance

An OED'Cou'ntry Assistance Evaluatioh (CAE)_(CODE2001-,003,2) ,April 2, 2001) covering the
overall assistance prograrns from,1993-2000 and the-l993, 1995'and 1998 CASs found the objectives,
sequencing,- and types 
f prograrm support-were brpadly appropriate, timely and ,sufficiently flexible.

Itf'iauded the participatory nature of the GAS process 

it"developed overti'me.. The'CAE'faulted the'.2

programs for overy op,timistic assessment of econ6i'i,c 
,rospe6ts 
insufficient attrention-to institution,
'bWi'ldihg, overestimatio,n-of Goveimn'ent capacity, and ina,ade,quate assessment of risks',. The report,calls.
for,(i)'strategis "to'be dev,eloped 'in-amore realistic context tai,ng internal and external ~risks,.a-
'inclIuding-economic destabilization, corruption, drugAtrade; into greater account, (ii) la 'stronger6focus6 oni-
governance, institutionai developnifent and capacity building, and. (iii)more analytic work, especially,l
on monitoring and evaluation;, public' expenditure management and public sector managementt "IDA, 
broadly agrees with,,these,recommendations,and'the need for greater-analytic w,vorkl was.reflected'in a
-FY02-Progress Report which focused primarily,,on inproving the analyticQ base and supporting ,theL'
-developrndn6f 
thi e NPRS before-proceeding fi- ther' --

Projects and Programs

38. 
Supporting Sustainable Private Sector Led Growth: The CAS top priority is private
sector-led growth, with a particular focus on three main drivers of economic growth --
agriculture, industry and energy, and the development of an enabling environment conducive to
the growth of small and medium enterprises. The strategy also focuses on measures to ensure an
adequate financial system and infrastructure at both the central and local level to support
entrepreneurs, and on identifying means to mitigate against natural resource risks that could
derail a recovery.

39. 
Agriculture Development: Agriculture is a central element in supporting growth and
poverty alleviation, and is the sector that IDA has traditionally been most active. The extensive
land reform program being supported by IDA is making a significant contribution to

Page 20 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Strategy

productivity. IDA is also supporting the agriculture sector through three ongoing irrigation
projects, as well as an ongoing Agriculture Support Services project and Rural Finance Project.
Most of these operations will remain active during the coming CAS period. However, IDA will
continue to support this sector through a planned Agriculture Modemization and Marketing
Project, which will provide additional irrigation infrastructure support, while also helping
farmers to establish cooperative mechanisms to obtain inputs and market their goods. This
project would be developed in synergy with similar projects by IDA and others in neighboring
countries in the context of a regional approach. IDA also plans to take stock of its ongoing
agnculture activities and policy concerns through an agriculture policy note, an irrigation study,
and a livestock study which would set the stage for future agriculture interventions and explore
the link between these issues and health 2 . The IFC is actively engaged in identifying ways of
increasing agricultural output and providing support to promising agro-processing enterprises.

40. 
Energy and Industry: The energy sector is an area critical to improving the state budget
by reducing quasi-fiscal deficits, improving the business environment, and has the potential to
facilitate export growth. It is also a sector in which IDA has been very active in the past in
increasing efficiency through the CSAC and the Power and District Heating Rehabilitation
Project. These projects will continue-to provide the basis for Bank energy policy dialogue in the
CAS period. IDA, in consultation with IFC, will support the government in its development of
its energy infrastructure, including through a proposed energy sector investment project focusing
on attracting private sector participation in the energy distribution sector through a public-private
partnership approach which would in turn help to further reduce losses and improve service
quality. In one of the key industrial sectors, mining, the Bank has already prepared a
comprehensive mining report and recommendations, which the NPRS has identified as needing
to be translated into a government action plan During the CAS period, IDA will support
continued mining dialogue and a possible IDF grant on the basis of this report to improve
transparency. The IFC is prepared to facilitate the commercialization of Kyrgyz Telecom and
other major state enterprises as they undergo privatization, expand investments in mining,
selectively support the development manufacturing enterprises, and provide support for the
development of the tourism industry. IFC will also collaborate with IDA to develop the structure
for a public-private partnership in energy distribution as noted above.

41. 
Business and Financial Environment: IDA, in consultation with IFC, has also been
active in improving the business environment, including a Financial Sector TA Project which
was recently closed and a Private Enterprise Support Project, due to be completed this year.
Together with the IMF, IDA has just completed a Financial Sector Assessment Paper (FSAP),
which indicated that the main constraint is the need to build confidence through systemic reform,
good business practices and appropriate regulations. This would help mobilize domestic savings,
increase productive investments (banks now invest about 40 percent of their assets in short term
securities and overseas bank accounts) and help to reduce interest rates. IDA plans to help
support the implementation of the recommendations of the FSAP through a proposed Financial
Sector and Business Development Project (FINBUS), which will provide technical assistance to
strengthen the financial sector - including improving the payments system and increasing the
availability of bank accounts to the rural population - and support continued efforts to reduce the
bureaucratic barriers to enterprise growth such as excessive licensing and inspections

2 Particular issues to be explored further are the high level of tobacco farming in agriculture and its impact, and the
relation between livestock diseases and human health.

Page 21 

Kvrgvz Republic Countrv Assistance Strategv

requirements. 3 Business environment reforms will also be included in the Governance Structural
Adjustment Credit (GSAC). This will be complemented by additional support to the financial
sector and corporate governance by the AsDB, and support for privatization by EBRD. The IFC
will provide institution building technical assistance for selected banks with IFC investment as
well as continued support for implementation of the new regulatory framework for leasing and
microfinance developed by IFC and its PEP program in coordination with the National Bank,
other IFI's and bilateral donors such as Seco and USAID. IFC also supports improvements in
the business environment through its PEP program in order to create a more conducive climate
and demand for financing by SMEs.

42. 
SME and Micro-Finance: SMEs and micro-entrepreneurs have the potential to be a key
element in the growth strategy, building from the bottom-up and diversifying the economy. The
Bank Group currently has several operations to extend SME and micro-credit, particularly
through the Kyrgyz Agriculture Finance Corporation (KAFC) via the Rural Finance Project and
the new joint IFC/EBRD Central Asia microlending facility. There are now many operators and
lines of credit, and the new micro-finance law has been passed with assistance from IDA, IFC
and the AsDB. The next step is to take advantage of the clarified legal situation, consolidate
knowledge of best practices and scale these experiences up. During the CAS period, IDA will
sponsor a strategic/partnership review of micro-credit (a FY03 Central Asia-wide study on
micro-finance institutions and seminar). The IFC is expanding micro-finance in the Kyrgyz
through an initial US$1 million investment in FINCA, and the above noted microlending facility,
of which Kyrgyz Republic is likely to receive over US$10 million plus associated technical
assistance. The IFC sponsored SEAF-CASEF small equity fund will also be providing needed
equity and loan financing to Kyrgyz entrepreneurs.

43. 
Infrastructure: IDA will continue to implement a number of ongoing operations during
the CAS period to support the infrastructure needed for local entrepreneurship to grow. This
includes two ongoing irrigation projects, an Urban Transport Project, a Water Supply Project and
a Power and District Heating Project. IDA will seek to supplement these activities during the
CAS period through two proposed Community Driven Development (CDD) projects - the
Village Investment Project and the Small Town Infrastructure and Capacity Building Project.
These CDD projects are designed to empower village and small-town communities to identify
and implement high-priority investments and infrastructure needed to facilitate local enterprise
and thereby generate local employment and growth. They are expected to raise rural and small-
town incomes and living standards, easing the pressure on internal migration to the major cities,
a potential poverty trap.

44. 
Trade and Investment: Increasing trade and investment is a central part of the growth
strategy. The Kyrgyz Republic is relatively competitive, especially in agricultural production
and energy, areas where there is potential for increased trade given the natural resource wealth in
the region. However, expanding trade and investments will be difficult, given the geographic

3 

In working on the financial system, IDA is helping to address the issue of the potential for money laundenng and
terrorism financing (AML/CFT). The National Bank has drafted a law on AML/CFT now before Parliament, which
incorporates extensive comments provided by the IDA/IMF FSAP team. The new payment system to be supported
by the proposed FINBUS (FY04) will help to strengthen transparency, which in turn could help to reduce the
potential for money laundenng and terrorism financing. Finally, IDA is sponsonng a virtual seminar series for
Central Asia in May/June 2003 on money laundenng to raise awareness of best practices on this, as part of its
regional Central Asia Knowledge Shanng Initiative.

Page 22 

Kvr=vz Republic Country Assistance Strategy

situation of the Kyrgyz Republic and the non-tariff trade barriers of some of its neighbors. The
impact of domestic policies and technical standards on exports also needs further study. Many of
the operations proposed in the CAS would facilitate foreign investment, domestic production and
exports. The impediments to growth of trade and investment will be analyzed through a FY04
Trade Diagnostic Study and a FY04 Investment Climate Survey. These country specific studies
are being complemented by an ongoing regional analysis of trade and transport facilitation
systems. Altogether, these studies will help identify actions or programs that could be
implemented through operations proposed under this CAS or other operations in addition to
those being developed by other institutions (e.g., the AsDB's proposed Customs Project).

45. 
Reducing Natural Resource and Environmental Risks. Growth in agriculture and
livestock, in mining, and in other areas can be both seriously affected by natural resource risks
(rock slides, rainfall levels etc) and can themselves lead to environmental concerns relating to
water quality, forest preservation, and pollution. IDA will therefore plan to extend a small
Learning and Innovation Natural Disaster Mitigation Project to enable the Kyrgyz Republic to
develop a program to address key natural resource and environmental risks, including the impact
of rock slides on uranium tailings stored in the Mailuu Suu area, while supporting selected small
investments. IDA would seek to combine this with a GEF project that could be focused on
specific amelioration activities. IDA is also currently supporting two regional environment
projects, the Aral Sea Basin Program and the Central Asia Transboundary Biodiversity
Protection project which seeks to protect a variety of plant and animal species under threat. Both
projects are due to be completed during the CAS period. IDA will prepare an environmental
expenditure and policy note, which would consolidate knowledge on the overall institutional and
budget framework for environmental management and protection. Recommendations could be
included in a future PRSC and could also lead to a possible follow-up regional Biodiversity and
Sustainable Use GEF project.

46. 
Providing Essential Services: The NPRS presents a two pronged approach to improving
essential services. First, it calls for decentralizing government services to the local and
community level. Second, it discusses the future approach to delivering three critical social
services - health sector reform, pension and social protection reform, and education sector
reform. The CAS foresees IDA providing targeted support to the government in these areas.

47. 
Strengthening Community Service Delivery: There is an urgent need to provide services
to the poor. In keeping with the NPRS focus on decentralization, IDA has begun to work
through community driven development initiatives under its recently launched water supply and
sanitation project. The CDD approach is an important vehicle for reaching out to the poorest
regions. The AsDB and the UNDP are also supporting local capacity development and
investment. IDA plans to complement these efforts through a proposed Village Investment
Project and a proposed Small Town Infrastructure and Capacity Building Project. IDA will
consolidate its learning in CDD through a region wide study of CDD activities in FY03-04. IDA
will also prepare an Urban Slums study. Finally, the CAS provides for a local governance and
anti-corruption review to analyze how to effectively support local governance, including through
inter-governmental finance reforms.

48. 
Health Sector: IDA has been very involved in the health sector, helping the government
to pilot health reform through the now closed Health I and rolling it out in the ongoing Health II
project. The goals the Government's medium term goals for the health sector are ambitious -

Page 23 

Kvrovz Republic Country Assistance StrateS

including reducing child mortality from 36 per 1000 to 28 by 2005 and increasing the portion of
population with access to health care services from 86 percent to 90 percent by 2005. To reach
them, the government must continue to deepen reforms. IDA will continue to assist in this
endeavor, including through a proposed Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) to Health and Social
Protection in FY06. Such an approach
would facilitate a cross sector
approach to social funding. However, 
if this programmatic approach is not 
feasible because of fiduciary, 
budgetary programming or partnership 
issues, IDA would consider replacing 
the SWAp with a health investment 
project. IDA will also be deepening 
support on regional health issues 
through a Central Asia regional 
strategv for HIV/AIDS and TB. 
In 
addition, the Kyrgyz Republic has also 

-- ox 7:
H'IIV/AIDS-in Kyrgyz Rep'ublic'-

.

.
As of September 2002; there were 310 officially
reported cases of HIV in the Kyrgyz Republic. The
current centers of risk are in'prisons'(56 percent) and
among intrayenous diug users (85 'percent). The actual
incidence is estinated to-be much larger, and 'the
growth trend appears exponential. However, if the
Kyrgyz Republic acts'resolutely now, it has an
opportunity' to address HIV/AIDS before it becomesan
epidemic. 
With'assistance from the UN'an'dNGOs the
government-has taken measures to promote n'eedle
exchanges and raise awareness among vulnerable
groups. In February 2003, the Glob' Fund Agaihst'
ADS, TB annd Malaria (GFATM) awarded the'Kyrgyiz 
'Republic a US$17 million grant'to deepen its
prevention and control efforts. IDA's regional
initiative on HIV/AIDS (aswell"as TB) will enable"it to
provide advice on the reasuremnnt and areas of risk,
as well as on the utilization of OFATM funds

, a 

obtained a US$17 million grant from 

the Global Fund to Fight AIDS. TB 
and Malaria (GFATM) and has 
requested IDA to play a leadership role 
in managing the TB funds to be 
provided under the GFATM grant (see 
Box 7). IDA will pay particular 
attention to TB in prisons which has 
helped spread the disease, and the 
sustainable provision of TB medicines 
and vaccines. 

49. 
Pension Reform: IDA has worked closely with the Kyrgyz Government through the
now-closed SOSAC to establish a sustainable pension system. Once the SOSAC closed, IDA
did not continue its dialogue intensively with the government on this issue, and pressures have
emerged to move away from a sustainable system. Going forward, building on a recent pension
policy note (FY03), IDA will maintain an active dialogue in this area, focusing on helping the
Government to further refine the existing scheme in a sustainable manner and set the stage for
exploring a fully funded system, but only when the preconditions for sustainability are in place.
A key issue is linked to social taxes, which reduce the incentives for companies to join the
formal economy, but are necessary to fund even the minimum level of pensions now provided.
A related issue is to ensure that the social fund can adequately support both health and social
protection needs. These are among the issues that would be addressed in the above noted
proposed SWAp operation.

50. 
Education: In poverty surveys, one of the main services that the rural poor are concemed
about is the detenorating quality of basic education. As a result, the NPRS has adopted the goal
of stemming the deterioration in quality and increasing attendance in primary schools from 90 to
97 percent by 2005. The Government has requested IDA's involvement, particularly in the area
of rural education. IDA, the ADB, UNICEF and the government, have agreed to work closely
to develop a shared strategy and approach focusing on critical needs such as teacher training and

Paye 24 

Kyr2vz Republic Country Assistance Strateev

textbooks. IDA will prepare a Rural Education Project on this basis, with a particular focus on
the rural communities in the poorest provinces. The development of a shared education strategy
will also help IDA to work towards establishing the Kyrgyz Republic's eligibility for the
Education For All initiative.

51. 
Scaling Up in the Social Sectors: Given IDA's leadership role in health and pensions,
and the increased focus on moving towards programmatic lending in partnership with other
donors, the CAS proposes to pilot a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) to Health and Social
Protection in FY06. Such an approach will build on and deepen the partnerships with other
donors such as USAID, WHO, DFID and Switzerland established under the Health II project,
and provide a vehicle to help ensure that the trade-offs and synergies between pensions and
health policies and funding are considered in a strategic manner. A two-sector approach will
help to build a focus on youth at risk (e.g., the relationship between street children and drug
addiction/communicable diseases) as well as the elderly poor (for whom issues of health and
pensions converge). At the same time, the CAS recognizes the risk that the Government and
other partners may not be ready to implement such an approach in FY06, and in this event IDA
would continue its support in health through a more traditional investment operation.

52. 
Strengthening the Governance Framework: Weak governance, including petty
corruption and state capture, is a major constraint on development and growth in the Kyrgyz
Republic. The importance of strengthening the overall governance framework is highlighted as a
key pillar in the NPRS, as well as at the recent CG meeting and in IDA's recent Client Survey.
This is an area where steady effort over time will be required.

53. 
A centerpiece of the CAS for the next three years will be the Governance Structural
Adjustment Credit, complemented by a Governance Technical Assistance Credit, both
accompanying this CAS. These credits address three key aspects of governance: (i) improving
the efficiency and transparency of the budgetary and treasury process, (ii) streamlining and
increasing the professionalism of the civil service, and (iii) opening space for the demand for
good governance to grow, including requiring senior civil servants to declare assets and incomes.
They will complement the government's public sector governance efforts supported by the
IMF's PRGF, as well as corporate governance efforts supported by the AsDB. The GSAC will
also provide a vehicle to re-emphasize a number of governance concerns in education, health,
social protection, and the business environment.

54. 
These operations are underpinned by key pieces of Economic and Sector work completed
in FY03 including a Governance Survey, a Public Expenditure Review, a Countrv Financial
Accountability Assessment and a Countrv Procurement Assessment. 
In light of the increasing
focus at the community level, IDA will complement these efforts with an in-depth study on
Local Governance and Anti-Corruption. IDA will also support capacity building directly
through IDF grants in financial accountability, procurement, and judicial institutions. In
addition, IDA's regional Central Asia Knowledge Sharing Initiative will help strengthen good
governance on a broader basis. IDA will also build capacity in civil society through the
Innovation Day (a Central Asia Wide competition for the most innovate grass roots programs),
developing a Community Driven Development (CDD) Network, and the Small Grants Program.

55. 
Addressing Regional Issues: The NPRS and the recent donor CG confirm the
importance of the regional dimension of development for the Kyrgyz Republic. While there are

Paze 25 

KyrEvz Republic Countrv Assistance Strate

many regional activities within this, three deserve particular attention - trade facilitation, the
water/energy nexus, and knowledge sharing. 
IDA can play an important role, together with the
AsDB, the EU and others, in strengthening the analytic base and playing the role of "honest
broker" to strengthen coordination among the region's Governments.

* Trade Facilitation: Increasing exports is an essential element of Kyrgyz Republic's
long term growth strategy, but to date this has proved difficult. IDA will provide the
analytic basis for considering ways to improve regional trade via a Regional Trade
and Transport Facilitation Review. This will be complemented by country specific
studies (including for Kyrgyz Republic). These reviews will help identify some
practical next steps that IDA can support. It will be critical to move in coordination
with the ADB, which is supporting customs harmonization and road development,
and the EU, which also has an ongoing program to facilitate trade.

* Water/Energy Nexus: The current system presents water sharing difficulties because
the Kyrgyz Republic needs power generation during the winter, while downstream
countries need water flows during the spring and summer. IDA will continue to work
on strengthening the analytic base for greater collaboration in this area, particularly a
regional study on energv markets in Central Asia. IDA will also study the potential to
improve water storage and flows in Central Asia through the development of the
KambarAta Dam system in the Kyrgyz Republic, and will assist the government as an
"honest broker" in its dialogue on this with neighboring countries.

* Knowledge: Sustained economic reform and growth will only be achieved if the
Central Asian countries themselves strengthen their policy formulation capacity. To
facilitate this, a Central Asia Knowledge Sharing Initiative is setting up regional
distance learning centers in each country enabling them to learn from each other. The
Almaty Hub, together with WBI, will also strengthen its capacity to host regional
forums on key issues like micro-finance in Central Asia.

56. 
Programmatic Activities: The Kyrgyz Republic has made a good start in developing its
NPRS. While more needs to be done particularly in prioritizing, costing and monitoring the
program, IDA expects to play a leadership role in helping the Kyrgyz Republic to strengthen its
strategy and in moving all donors towards supporting the NPRS in a more programmatic way
over the CAS period. Moving in this direction will also reduce implementation difficulties
associated with individual projects and help to strengthen government capacity. A key
instrument will be a proposed Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC). However, the
approach and timing of the PRSC will be flexible, commensurate with the progress of the
government on implementing the NPRS, including deepening fiduciary reforms, strengthening
partnership, and maintaining commitment for a multi-year reform program during an election
period. If these are achieved, the first PRSC will be presented to the Board in late FY05, to be
followed by a possible second PRSC towards the end of FY06. If commitment remains strong
but progress is slower on NPRS implementation, then the PRSC could be substituted with a
traditional structural adjustment credit designed to assist the Kyrgyz Republic to take the
necessary steps that could enable IDA to extend a PRSC subsequently. If reform commitment
lags and the Kyrgyz Republic falls out of the base case, the PRSC would not be extended in
FY05, but an adjustment credit could be considered for FY06 to help assist the country to get
back on a reform path.

Page 26 

Kvrgyz Republic Country Assistance Strateev

57. 
The PRSC will be developed with three main analytic inputs. First, the PRSC will build
on the implementation of the broad policy matrix developed under the GSAC. The GSAC, and
various IDF grants, will also support the implementation of the fiduciary recommendations laid
out in the FY03 CFAA and the CPAR. Second, the PRSC will build on the FY03 PER to
strengthen budget transparency and prioritization within a medium term expenditure framework.
GTAC activities to strengthen budgetary procedures and transparency will also be important
inputs. Third, the PRSC will benefit from a Development Policy Review (DPR) to completed in
early FY05 that will consolidate macro and sectoral policy prescriptions. The FY04 investment
climate and trade diagnostic studies will also help to inform the PRSC.

58. 
As noted earlier, IDA will also plan to extend a separate programmatic operation in FY06
- a proposed SWAp in Health and Social Protection. Moving forward with the SWAp in parallel
with the PRSC will enable IDA to bring focused support on deepening donor and government
partnerships already well developed in the field of health. However, The PRSC and the SWAp
will be developed in a manner that is mutually reinforcing. It is expected that the PRSC will
focus on supporting a sound overall fiscal management and policy framework, including a focus
on expenditure and revenue sharing arrangements between central and local governments.
Within this framework, the SWAp would then provide an instrument for the government and
donors to collectively establish each year an agreed set of specific policies and expenditures in
the field of health and social protection. The SWAp would also provide a vehicle for the
government and donors to explore stronger harmonization of procedures and policy formulation,
which could be utilized under a future PRSC program. In the event that govemment budget
planning capacity and donor coordination has reached a high enough level by FY06, the SWAp
could be integrated into the PRSC.

Lending Scenarios, Triggers and the Use of Grants

59. 
Based on the Kyrgyz Republic's population, poverty, performance and capacity, the four
year base case allocation is US$171 million. The base case provides a mix of traditional
investment projects, programmatic support for the NPRS, and continued attention to Economic
and Sector Work (see Table 4).

60. 
The base case is the most likely case, and has been developed in discussions with the
government on the assumption of continued reform progress in key areas such as health, energy,
and governance. As a consequence, the base case includes several operations which, while high
priority, would not be appropriate without deepening ongoing reforms, particularly in health,
energy and governance. This means that in order to stay in the base case, the Kyrgyz Republic
will need to continue to advance these reforms over the CAS period. Base case triggers have
been defined in a stepped and progressive manner, to benchmark the critical steps in moving
forward on reforms. Individual triggers will be assessed both in terms of their contribution to the
overall reform program and their relevance to the individual project under consideration for
Board presentation. For example, the GSAC presentation to the Board with the CAS is based on
adequate progress having been made on energy reforms under the CSAC. IDA would not go
forward with the FY05 PRSC or the energy project without good progress in ongoing energy
reforms as well as progress under the GSAC. The triggers also include economic growth
indicators to ensure that the Kyrgyz Republic has the absorptive capacity to utilize these funds
effectively (see Table 5).

Page 27 

K_rgvz Republic Country Assistance Strateev

61. 
The CAS provides for a low case for IDA of US$97 million (see Table 4) in the event
that the base case triggers - on reform progress, project implementation, or absorptive capacity
grounds - are not met. In this case, activities would focus on technical assistance, social sector
operations and community driven development activities. Under the low case, the PRSC in
FY06 could be structured as a traditional structural adjustment operation designed to support the
govemment moving to an eventual PRSC and the SWAp could be structured as a social sector
investment operation. IDA would focus more of its resources towards building an improved
policy dialogue than delivering new lending.

62. 
The CAS provides for a high case of US$21 Imillion, triggered by meeting the above
noted based case conditions as well as stronger than anticipated reform progress and economic
performance which would increase the country's capacity to absorb additional resources. The
additional activities in the high case could include (i) increased support for the PRSC, SWAp,
and other investment projects and (ii) a possible Trade and Investment Project. 
In this event,
IDA will return to the Board with a progress report providing an indication that these additional
funds can be absorbed productively while maintaining progress towards debt sustainability.

63. 
The IDA program is built on expectations of continued improvements in macro-economic
and debt sustainability indicators. The projected improvements in debt sustainability are
particularly sensitive to a number of macro-economic parameters including government and
export revenues, and non-debt creating capital inflows. IDA will closely monitor these
indicators. Should such review indicate that the Kyrgyz Republic's prospects for improved debt
sustainability would be jeopardized by the IDA program outlined in this CAS, a progress report
would be prepared and submitted to the Board, setting forth a recalibration of IDA's program
necessary to ensure progress towards debt sustainability.

64. 
As the Kyrgyz Republic is classified as a low income country with high debt
vulnerability, it is eligible to receive a significant level of grants. 5 The IDA grant component
will be allocated primarily for (i) activities that address basic social needs and the environment
and (ii) community driven development (CDD) projects. In accordance with these critena, the
most likely candidates for grants are the education and health/social protection projects, the
Natural Disaster Mitigation Project as well as the two CDD projects. However, each project's
eligibility for grants will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Other projects, like the PRSC,
might be considered for grant allocation if they include a focus on social sectors or CDD as per
the above criteria. As presented in more detail in Attachment 1, IDA operations, including grant
and credit financed operations, are consistent with progress towards debt sustainability.

5 The IDA-13 (FY03-05) guidelmes provide for up to 40% to be grants for low income highly indebted countries.
The actual percentage of grants provided for this category in FY03 is 29% Updated percentages will be
determined each year. The availability of grants in FY06 depends on the next IDA replenishment (IDA14).

Page 28 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Strateev

Table 4:, FY03 06 Main2 Operati'onal Scenarios

((US$ Millions)

Low 
Case 

Base 
Case 

Likely
Candidate for Grants

FY03

Governance Structural Adj Credit 
Governance Technical Asst. Credit 
FY04
Financial Sector & Bus Development 
Village Investment Project 
Natural Disaster Mitigation 
FY05
PRSC a/ 
Rural Education 
Small Town Infrastructure 
Agric Modernization & Marketing 
FY06

PRSC a/ 

Health & Soc Protect SWAp b/ 
Energy Investment Project 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ 

12 
13 
5 

15 
12 
20 

10 

10 
97 

9 7 

20
8

12
15 
5 

15
15
15 
20

15

15

167

17 1 

v

V

v

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ _

a! If progress on NPRS implementation is slower than expected, this could be structured
as a traditional structural adjustment operation designed around the necessary steps to
enable a PRSC to be extended subsequently.
h/ If progress on partnership coordination is slower than expected, a regular investment
project could be considered (likely a Health Sector Investment Project). On the other
hand, if the level of government implementation capacity and donor coordination has
reached a high enough level, this could be integrated into the PRSC.
Note: Two possible GEF grant projects would also be explored, one on specific natural
disaster mitigation issues, and one follow-up to the current biodiversity grant.
Note: The availability of grants in FY06 depends on the next IDA replenishment(IDA14)

Pajze 29 

Kvrgyz Republic Country Assistance Strategv

Table 5: 

-

Triggers for Maintaining the.Base C-ase

Macro-Economic Performance and Absorptive Capacity
Satisfactory macroeconomic performance as evidenced, for example, by satisfactory
implementation of the IMF PRGF, and continued increase in exports and progress towards debt
sustainability in line with annual ratios projected under the base case CAS scenario (Annex B6)
NPRS Implementation
Preparation of 2004-2006 budgets using the MTEF and NPRS framework for expenditure
prioritization. Progress on implementing fiduciary actions under the PER, CPAR, CFAA.
Progressive development of an acceptable approach to improve M&E. As evidenced through
NPRS progress reports.
Governance
Continued wide dissemination of the state budget each year. Progressive introduction of asset
and income disclosure (decree, followed by law, followed by actual publication of income and
assets of civil servants and high level state officials by 2005), publication of annual audits of 10
largest SOEs (starting in 2004), and implementation of civil service reform. As evidenced by
satisfactory GSAC implementation.
Business and Financial Environment
Introduction of Regulatory Impact Assessments (RIAs) on new regulatory acts by 2004. Steady
improvements in the payments and settlement system in the financial system. Establishment of
a review body for setting technical standards. As evidenced by satisfactory agreement and
implementation of FINBUS program.
Health Reform
Adoption by 2004 and subsequent satisfactory implementation of action plan on health reform
including extendmg health reforms into Osh and Bishkek. As evidenced by satisfactory
implementation of the Health II program.
Energy Reform
Preparation of a detailed action plan to move towards a concession based public/private
partnership in energy distribution by 2004 and subsequent progressive steps taken on
implementing this. As evidenced through satisfactory progress on CSAC 3rd tranche triggers.
Portfolio Performance
Satisfactory progress in improving portfolio performance. As evidenced through CPPRs.

Triggers for Moving to the High Case
base case triggers plus:

Enhanced Key Sectoral Reforms
-- Satisfactory progress in phasing out special means funding of regulatory agencies through
fines, license fees etc.
-- Significant reduction in quasi-fiscal deficits in energy.
-- Full expansion of health reforms to country-wide scale and more equitable health funding
across the country.
-- Satisfactory agreement and implementation on deeper education and pension reform strategy.
Increase in Absorptive Capacity
-- Stronger than anticipated growth in GDP (over 7 percent growth per annum on average),
exports (over 10 percent growth per annum on average), and foreign investments

Page 30 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Strateyv

IDA's Economic and Sector Work

65. 
IDA's economic and sector work aims to strengthen the NPRS, underpin IDA projects,
and provide important policy advice. As indicated in the FY02 CAS Progress Report, last year
was a time of rebuilding our knowledge base. As input into the NPRS and the CAS, IDA
prepared a Poverty Assessment (PA), a Public Expenditure Review (PER), a Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA), a Country Procurement Assessment (CPAR), a joint
Bank/IMF Financial Sector Assessment Paper (FSAP), and a strategic review of pension policy
options. IDA expects to complete all of these products in FY03.

66. 
IDA intends to build on this strengthened knowledge base, follow-up on core diagnostic
work (see Table 6) and deepen its analytic work in key areas. A central element is to consolidate
all of the above sector work, as well as a FY04 agriculture sector policy, into a Development
Policy Review (DPR) in early FY05, which will underpin the preparation of the PRSC. In
addition, IDA will maintain a continuous dialogue on social protection, poverty, and
PER/Governance. To complement the latter IDA will prepare a local govemance and anti-
corruption strategy. IDA has also begun work in FY03 on an IDF grant to help strengthen
capacity in the judicial institutions, and in FY04 will launch IDF grants for procurement,
financial accountability, and possibly to facilitate transparency in the mining sector. IDA also
plans to complete a Trade Diagnostic Study and an Investment Climate Review in FY04, and an
Irrigation Review and a Livestock Study in FY05.

Table 6: Core Diagnostic Economic and Sector Work

Type 

,Completion 

' 

' 

^ 

t 

p 

Poverty Assessment 
Public Expenditure Review 
Country Procurement Assessment 
Report 
Country Financial Accountability 
Assessment 
CEM/Development Policy Review 

pateX t 

D 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

FY03 

FY05 

Capacity Building

.

; 

-

F d^^ -.Ello,Up 

WI 

.,_ 

-
Annual Dialogue, GTAC, PRSP Grant
Annual PER Dialogue and MTEF
IDF Grant on Procurement Training,
GSAC/GTAC
IDF Grant on Financial
Accountability, GSAC/GTAC
PRSC

67. 
The World Bank Institute (WBI) is providing support to Central Asia, which is one of the
priority subregions for WBI in the ECA region. Over the past few years, WBI has enhanced its
capacity building and training programs in the Kyrgyz Republic and has intensified its activities
to facilitate and strengthen the process of preparing the National Poverty Reduction Strategy
through a variety of workshops and seminars.

68. 
Looking towards the future, WBI will continue to provide training support related to key
issues of implementation of the NPRS, including the delivery of an Attacking Poverty course in
June 2003 focusing on monitoring and evaluation of the NPRS by civil society and
parliamentarians. 
In addition WBI will organize a three country researcher workshop in Issyk

Paze 31 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Strateg

Kul in July 2003 and will continue to focus its training and course offerings towards key issues
in implementing the NPRS. Rural poverty issues will be addressed in a training course on rural
policies and institutions in transition, covering issues such as trade, finance and farm
restructuring.

69. WBI will also support key elements of the CAS. In particular, WBI will undertake and
implement comprehensive outreach and training in support of the growing CDD focus of the
Kyrgyz Republic. This will include organizing a Knowledge Forum around CDD, a workshop
on CDD for NGOs and civil society participants at the Central Asia Innovation Day to be held in
May 2003 in the Kyrgyz Republic, and a regional distance learning seminar on citizen
participation. WBI has also initiated a Capacity Building Community Empowerment Network
(CEN) to build local capacity through both distance networking and regional workshops. 
In
support of the proposed Health and Social Protection Sector Wide Approach, WBI will provide
training and distance learning opportunities on safety nets and pension reform. Gender issues
will be addressed in a regional course on gender equality and good governance. In the area of
private sector development, distance learning activities and training at the Joint Vienna Institute
on corporate governance are planned.

70. WBI is also participating in the Central Asia Knowledge Sharing Initiative (CAKSI)
designed to utilized distance learning and other knowledge extension tools to facilitate global
best practices in key areas, as well as knowledge sharing within Central Asia. CAKSI has three
components: creation of physical infrastructure, design and development of cntical content, and
building capacity for distance learning. It will target both high level policy makers, as well as
civil society and private sector participants.

IFC and MIGA Program

71. 
The private sector business environment in the Kyrgyz Republic, as well as in most of the
frontier markets of Central Asia, remains difficult with slow reform progress and minimal
investor interest. Issues which impact the development of a more robust IFC investment
program include (i) the small domestic market and neighborng country export barriers, (ii)
limited capital and management skills in small businesses needed in a market economy, (iii) poor
corporate governance in medium and larger enterprises, (iv) weak financial intermediation due to
an underdeveloped banking sector, (v) slow progress in privatizing large enterprises in air
transportation, communication, energy and mining, (vi) limited judicial experience in dealing
with commercial disputes, and (vii) significant administrative bamers. These issues are more
fully described in the Private Sector Strategy attached (see Attachment 2).

72. 
The above issues have implications for IFC's role and operations. In light of the limited
potential for investment without technical assistance and institution building, IFC will continue
to devote significantly more resources to technical assistance than in more developed markets,
necessitating even greater cooperation with IDA, EBRD and AsDB, as well as with bilateral
donors such as USAID, SECO, KfW, DEG, and DFID. The IFC PEP Central Asia program is
developing rapidly and has achieved significant results in the areas of leasing and microfinance,
thus building trust with major stakeholders in the country. IFC's technical skills and facilitating
role, combined with the ability to provide investments once the regulatory framework is
improved and institutions strengthened, has facilitated IFCs activities.

Page 32 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance StrateQv

73. 
IFC's strategy during the CAS period will focus on institution and capacity building,
through investment and technical assistance, that will promote private sector development,
especially SMEs, and support the transformation into a market based economy. Specifically,
IFC's strategy is focused on the following areas:

* Promoting micro/small and medium enterprises (MISMEs) by (i) institution building of
financial intermediaries that can become effective conduits of IFC funding to
microenterprises and SMEs; (n) providing direct financial assistance through pilot initiatives
which can have a demonstration effect and are replicable; (iii) creating sustainable micro-
finance facilities such as FINCA, and support the development of; and, (iv) improving the
business environment. Support for these activities will include both technical assistance
provided directly by IFC or through the PEP program as well as investment capital.

* Assisting the agri-business sector by identifying promising agri-processing entrepreneurs,
and providing technical assistance on linkages, marketing, and project implementation in
order to facilitate their access to investment capital which IFC and other investors can
provide through financial intermediaries.

* Strengthening the financial sector through technical assistance and investment for existing
institutions and in addition to those that will be created. Past IFC support has been given
through investment in Demir Kyrgyz International Bank, and the Kyrgyz Investment and
Credit Bank (KICB), a joint-venture between the Aga Khan Fund and two other IFIs, along
with a small government shareholding. IFC is joining with EBRD and Switzerland on a
US$153 million Central Asian Microlending Facility for Central Asia, of which about US$ 10
million is expected to be invested in the Kyrgyz Republic. The development of housing
finance is another area of priority both in terms of technical assistance on the regulatory
framework and investment.

* Development of leasing, including small business leasing, through technical assistance to
create an appropriate regulatory framework and financial support for creation of model
institutions. A new law on leasing as well as changes to the civil code and tax regulations
were drafted with IFC assistance and adopted by the Kyrgyz Government and Parliament
during the past year. IFC will continue its technical assistance to existing intermediaries to
develop their leasing activities, and work to create new institutions to undertake leasing and
provide them with access to investment capital either directly or through a broader regional
facility under development.

* Provision of equity capital. A regional early stage equity investment fund (Central Asia
Small Enterprise Fund - SEAF - CASEF) was set up in 2002 by IFC, SECO, and SEAF, a
leading manager of small equity funds and will support Kyrgyz entrepreneurs to grow their
businesses.

* Developing tourism. Tourism has potential for SME development as well as foreign
exchange earnings. IFC continues to provide assistance in developing a strategic framework
for tourism, and will continue to provide technical support for tourism development, as well
as financing through facilities provided to intermediaries. Significant increases in
international- tourism will, however, continue to be limited until more regional cooperation in
tourism is developed.

Page 33 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Strategy

* Expanding investment in the mining sector. IFC is an investor in the country's largest gold
mine, Kumtor, a project with significant impact on foreign exchange earnings, GDP and
contribution to the state budget. IFC continues to seek other investment opportunities in
mining although commercial prospects are limited given the relatively poor regulatory
framework and geographical isolation of the country from major markets. IFC will continue
to closely coordinate with IDA to support regulatory reform in this area.

* Assistingprivatization opportunities. IFC will investigate opportunities to support the
privatization of major SOEs and natural monopolies, such as Kyrgyz Telecom. The IFC is
closely coordinating with IDA on the power distribution sector and could review other
opportunities for investment in public-partnerships with international investors through a
concession or other types of operating arrangements for other large monopolies.

74. MIGA has made an important contribution to the development of the private sector in the
Kyrgyz Republic by extending foreign investment guarantees to four projects in the
manufacturing, services and mining sectors. Three are currently outstanding - two related to
airport services at Manas Airport and one related to the Kurntor gold mine. The total amount of
foreign investment facilitated by MIGA guarantees is over US$360 million. MIGA has also
provided capacity building in foreign investment techniques to the State Committee on Foreign
Investments and Economic Development, in an initiative supported by the Swiss government.
MIGA plans to continue to assist the development of the Kyrgyz Republic through its guarantee
program and capacity building. Data on the Kyrgyz Republic is also featured in MIGA's
Privatization Link service, which connects potential investors to information on companies slated
for divestiture via the internet.

75. 
The Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) has been an active partner in the
Kyrgyz Republic as well, providing technical advisory services and reports on how to improve
the investment climate. In recent years, FIAS has worked with the Government in revising its
foreign investment code.

V. Key Issues In Implementation

Selectivity and Partnerships

76. 
As a small country with limited capacity, the Kyrgyz Republic will have difficulty in
effectively implementing a wide range of investments and reforms within a relatively short time
period. At the same time, it has embarked on an ambitious reform agenda with a legitimate
reason - without an ambitious reform program leading to increased growth, it will be unable to
move towards a sustainable reduction in poverty and make progress towards debt sustainability.
The challenge for IDA, rendered more acute since IDA represents a large portion of the Kyrgyz
Republic's development investment, is to maintain selectivity, while ensuring that a broad range
of reforms are supported.

77. 
The CAS proposes to extend 12 projects over four years (on average 3 projects per year).
These interventions have been identified through the primary lens of whether they will contribute
to near term growth and poverty reduction, particularly in support of local entrepreneurs and the
rural poor, as well as providing a sound base for longer term sustainable growth. Many activities

Pagze 34 

Kvrgvz Republic Country Assistance Stratezv

also focus on areas - particularly in agriculture, energy, health, pensions, and finance -in which
IDA has already developed a comparative advantage over the past decade.

78. 
Beyond this, IDA has introduced two approaches into this CAS which should facilitate
selectivity. First, in keeping with the NPRS's increased emphasis on decentralization, IDA will
plan to extend two community driven development projects which will empower villages and
small towns to select their own pnonties based on their on-the-ground knowledge. This will be
particularly useful in the Kyrgyz Republic, where investment and infrastructure priority needs far
exceed financing available. Second, IDA will begin introducing programmatic support to the
Kyrgyz Republic during the upcoming CAS period, enabling IDA and other donors to focus on
key issues within a smaller and more coordinated footprint. If this approach is successful, it is
anticipated that it will become a larger part of the operational framework in the future.

79. 
Another important element in IDA selectivity is donor partnership. Currently, donor
partnership has taken various forms: 
In some areas, there is a division of labor, for example, the
ADB (with others) has taken the lead on areas such as corporate governance and rehabilitating
major roads while IDA (with others) has taken the lead in public sector govemance and the
power sector. In other areas, partnership has taken the form of well-coordinated but parallel
action, for example in irrigation and water supply and sanitation. In a few cases, like health, a
particularly close partnership has developed between IDA, USAID, DFID and WHO, which can
be built upon and extended to other areas. During the CAS period, it is anticipated that donor
coordination will be increased, within the context of the NPRS and under the leadership of the
government (see Attachment 5 for an indication of which agencies or actors are focusing on
individual sectors).

80. A good step in increased donor coordination came during the recent donor Consultative
Group (CG) held in Bishkek and Osh in October 2002. This CG was the first in-country CG
held in Central Asia. As an in-country CG it benefited by the active participation of most high
level govemment officials, as well as of NGO and the private sector representatives. The
President remained at the CG for the entire two days in Bishkek and actively contributed to the
discussion. The CG took as its base a draft of the NPRS, and discussed it frankly between the
government and the donors. The NPRS was then finalized after the CG after taking into account
all of the discussions. In addition to policy discussions, donors agreed to contribute a record
amount towards the NPRS, pledging US$700 million, about half as grants.

81. 
The CG was also important in agreeing on the need to continue to strengthen donor
coordination. Since the CG, Donors and the Government have taken a useful step in this
direction by agreeing to hold more regular working group meetings on particular sectors and to
jointly employ a local staff to maintain a web-based partnership information system to strengthen
knowledge sharing and cooperation. The establishment of the Central Asia Regional Office
(CARO) in Almaty in July 2002 has also provided a platform to not only get closer to national
governments and civil society but also to forge stronger donor partnerships on cntical cross-
cutting issues like community driven development and micro-finance.

82. 
A key IDA partner in this respect is the Asian Development Bank. Together, IDA and the
AsDB provide the bulk of the public investment funds in the Kyrgyz Republic. IDA and AsDB
have a well established coordination approach, particularly in the fields of water supply, finance
and irrigation. IDA and the AsDB have also agreed to jointly develop a framework for

Paze 35 

Kvr z Republic Country Assistance Strategy

educational reform, within which both institutions would operate. IDA and the AsDB have also
been building increased coordination in pension strategy. On governance, the AsDB will focus
on corporate governance while IDA will focus on Public Sector Governance. The AsDB has
also taken the lead on large transport projects (like the Osh-Bishkek Road), while IDA will take
the lead in other infrastructure areas such as energy. The AsDB and IDA have also agreed to
hold joint Country Program Performance Reviews (CPPRs) in the future.

83. 
IDA and the IMF are collaborating extensively on such matters as support for the
National Poverty Reduction Strategy, the Medium Term Expenditure Framework, the recent
Financial Sector Assessment Paper, the approach to external debt, the governance agenda, the
banking payments system and the expected Treasury component supported by the proposed
Governance Technical Assistance Credit. 
IMF relations with the country are further discussed
in Attachment 6.

84. 
IDA, the IFC and the European Bankfor Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) are
also closely coordinating their activities to ensure the additionality of their technical assistance
and investment projects. A notable example is the EBRD/IFC Swiss Central Asia Microlending
Facility with technical assistance support provided by USAID. 
IFC has co-invested with EBRD
in Demir Kyrgyz Ban and the Kyrgyz Investment Credit Bank, and plans to work closely with
EBRD in strengthening existing financial institutions, in addition to providing support for
leasing. IFC's technical assistance directly and through PEP is helping to provide the framework
and environment to enable both IFC and EBRD to provide financing for microfinance, leasing,
tourism, and agri-business. 
IDA will also maintain a close relationship with IFC and EBRD as
plans are developed to privatize existing state owned banks, in addition to supporting private
sector investment in the energy sector.

85. 
IFC and its PEP program, SECO and USAID have developed close cooperation to
support a technical assistance program in Central Asia. Projects undertaken and ongoing in the
Kyrgyz Republic include development of the microfinance regulatory framework legislation
which was adopted in late 2002; support for conversion of FINCA from an NGO microfinance
provider into a regulated microfinance bank; development of a new law on leasing together with
changes to the civil and tax codes; a information program to disseminate information on leasing
together with technical assistance to support the development of leasing in existing financial
institutions. Future technical assistance work funded through this cooperation is anticipated in
agri-processing and marketing and business environment. Another area for cooperation among
the three institutions is in developing housing finance.

CAS Consultations and Outreach Plans

86. 
The CAS has been prepared based on extensive consultations with the Government,
including a series of meetings with a wide range of Ministries in February 2003. 
In parallel,
IDA also held consultations, chaired by the UN Coordinator, with about 44 civil society and
pnvate sector representatives (see Attachment 4). In addition, IDA conducted a client survey of
114 individuals in the Kyrgyz Republic familiar with IDA. These consultations and the client
survey have been particularly important in emphasizing the need to continue to work on
agriculture, energy and SME development, and to bring IDA's expertise to bear on natural
disaster management, rural education, and governance. There was widespread agreement on the
importance of placing the CAS in the context of the difficult debt situation. Finally, the

Paze 36 

Kvrevz Republic Country Assistance Strategy

importance of finding ways to increase trade and foreign investment was widely shared, although
there was less clarity on what could be done to address this. These views have all helped to
shape IDA's operations and ESW programs.

87. 
It is clear from both the client survey and the CAS consultations that IDA needs to increase
its outreach activities. 
It is critical to the sustainability of IDA projects that the public in
general understands the direct link between IDA funds, on-the-ground activities, and a reduction
in poverty. An additional reason to increase outreach is the increasing activity of Parliament in
the run up to the 2005 elections. One element in this will be for each task - project or ESW - to
develop an outreach plan including the preparation of easy-to-understand information packages
and to have each mission spend time discussing the issues outside of the Government or other
donors. IDA will also seek to involve NGOs and other third parties m identifying appropriate
indicators, and in some cases monitoring them. These outreach plans will be complemented by
the recent establishment of a CDD Network in country, the on-going Small Grants Program, and
the upcoming regional Innovation Day.

Monitoring Results

88. 
A key element in monitoring will be for the Bank Group to establish intermediate
monitorable benchmarks for the CAS, linked to both the government's goals and those of the
MDGs. IDA will judge the success of the CAS through its ability to help the Kyrgyz Republic
achieve its targets as noted in Table 7 below.

89. 
A second element in IDA assistance will be to assist the Kyrgyz Republic strengthening
its system of information monitoring and evaluation as part of implementing the NPRS. Such a
system should be based on generating information in the most cost effective manner, through the
National Statistics Agency and the Line Ministries. It should also be linked to developing
appropriate national versions of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 
IDA will support
the Government's efforts to move to this approach through: (i) a PRSP Trust Fund Grant, (ii) the
Governance Technical Assistance Project, (iii) continued dialogue with NatStatCom through
Poverty Work, and (iv) support to the Ministries of Education, Health and Labor and Social
Protection through ongoing and planned projects and dialogue. 
IDA's support will also be
complemented by support from DFID to the National Statistics Agency. IDA also plans to make
the FY03 PER and follow-up work a key element in monitoring progress, with a particular
emphasis on tracking whether resources reach the intended beneficiaries.

90. 
A third aspect to monitoring will be the active development and refinement of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) into the Kyrgyz Republic context. The UN country
team has primary responsibility for assessing progress towards meeting MDGs. At the same
time, progress towards meeting MDGs is closely related to progress under the NPRS, which IDA
will need to closely monitor if it is to move towards a programmatic approach. There are a
number of data issues, including on health, education, and overall poverty monitoring, where
IDA has already or intends to play a leadership role. This will include ensuring that statistics
are reliable and easily monitored in a cost effective manner. To this end, IDA plans to work
closely during the CAS period with the UN (and in particular the UNDP and UNICEF) and the
Government (through the CDF secretariat, the National Statistics Committee, and the line
ministries) in refining work on the MDGs. (IDA's initial assessment of progress towards meeting
the MDGs are set out in Attachment 3).

Pag'e 3 7 

Kyrzvz Republic Country Assistance Strate.v

Table 7: Clore-CAS M6nirtofaledB.eichmakk&s

Objective 

Poverty 
Reduction 
(overall 
objective) 

Key Goals 1/ 
(from 1999 to 2005)
* Poverty Headcount to 
decline from 55 percent to 
39 percent

Intermediate Indicators

* 

Improvement in reliability of national poverty statistics
and clear link with policy decisions.

* Steady progress in meeting NPRS targets as evidenced by
the Annual Progress report, including a reduction 
in
poverty by about 2-3 percent per year

Stimulating 
Growth 

* Debt to decline from 134 * Reduction 
in externally 
financed Public 
Investment
percent of GDP 
to 78 
Program levels to below 4 percent of GDP by 2005 and
percent of GDP 
steady progress towards debt sustainability.

* GDP 
to be 29 percent * Reduction 
in barriers 
to SME growth -
including
above 1999 level by 2005 
unnecessary inspections and licensing - measured through
business surveys and roundtables, and 
the proposed
FINBUS project.

Improving 
Service 
Delivery 

* Primary education 
coverage to increase from 
89 percent to 97 percent

* Under 5 child mortality to 
decline from 35.5 in to
28.0 (per 1000 live births) 

* Mortality from infectious
diseases to decline (per
100,000) from 33 to 25

Improving 
Govemance 

* 

Improve efficiency, 
transparency, and fiduciary 
controls in the Government 

* Growth 
in Agro-processing 
(measured 
through 
the
proposed Agnculture Modermization 
and Marketing
Project).

* Mainstreaming the health pilots as measured through the
ongoing Health II Project

* Establishment of an acceptable education strategy jointly
with the Govermnent and other partners

* 

Increase 
in cash-based funding for the social sectors
(education, health, and social protection)

* 

* 

Introduction of civil service reform and tighten fiduciary
controls successfully through GSAC/GTAC. This would
include annual disclosure of assets and incomes of high
level civil servants.

Improvement in service delivery and corruption incidence
as measured by a 
follow-up 
survey 
to 
the FY03
governance and service delivery survey.

* Steady reduction in quasi-fiscal operations to below 5% of
GDP by the end of the CAS period.

* Empower local communities * 

Increase in the use of local governments and communities
to deliver services and infrastructure (measured through
the VIP and Small Town Infrastructure Projects).

1/ Goals in bold are identified in the list of key monitonng statistics from the NPRS Some differences exist between these indicators and
projections and IDA's indicators and projections which will be clarified during the CAS penod

Page 38 

Risks

Kvrgyz Republic Country Assistance Strate

91. 
The CAS program contains a number of nsk areas noted below, which in combination are
significant. The CAS also lays out a program to address these risks as follows:

* Reform Fatigue and Politics: Perhaps the highest nsk is that there may be pressures to
delay key reforms, particularly in light of the upcoming Parliamentary and Presidential
elections scheduled for 2005. A key cornerstone of the IDA will be its Governance
Structural Adjustment Credit which will help make the civil service more professional. IDA
will also increase its outreach activities so that a larger amount of the population is aware of
the necessity of reform activities. IDA will also continue to work within the NPRS process,
and assist in making the NPRS process an inclusive one.

o External Debt: The level of external debt is currently unsustainable. The Kyrgyz Republic
has worked closely with the international community and the Pans Club to successfully
reduce the debt service burden to more affordable levels in the medium-term. Paris Club
creditors agreed to consider a concessional treatment of the debt stock, subject to successful
implementation of the macroeconomic framework under the ongoing IMF PRGF. 
IDA and
the IMF will monitor debt sustainability indicators closely and support Kyrgyz Republic's
efforts to improve their debt sustainability outlook by facilitating a strong reform
performance. IDA will also begin extending a significant portion of its own support as grants
rather than loans.

e Unexpected Economic Events: The Kyrgyz economy is land-locked and relatively
undiversified, which makes the country very vulnerable to unexpected external or internal
shocks. Poverty reduction rests critically on achieving significant economic growth. During
the CAS period, IDA will work closely with the Government to diversify the economy,
including facilitating growth at the local level. The IDA program also includes a mix of
adjustment and investment lending to respond to both macro and sectoral needs. It will also
extend a Learning and Innovation operation to help the Government address potential
natural disaster risks. Finally, IDA will increase its attention to regional cooperation in
critical areas such as water, trade, and energy.

Paze 39 

Kyrzvz Republic Country Assistance Strategv

Capacity Constraints. The capacity of the Government (central and local) remains weak.
IDA has put key analytic pieces into place in FY02-03 which provide an important building
block - Poverty Assessment, Financial Sector Assessment, CFAA and CPAR. These will
continue to be developed through operations and IDF/PRSP grants. In addition IDA will
extend two technical assistance projects in FY04, the GTAC and FINBUS, in the critical
sectors of governance and finance. At the local level IDA plans to support capacity
development through its two CDD operations. And IDA will continue to provide assistance
on the development of the MTEF, critical to the next stage of the NPRS.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By Shengman Zhang 

Peter Woicke

Washington, D.C.
April 22, 2003

Kyrgyz Republic at a glance 

2/17/03

CAS Annex A2
Page I of 2

Kyrgyz 
Republic 

Europe &
Central 
Asia 

5 
280 
1 4 

475 
1,960 
930 

Low.
Income 

2,511 
430
1,069

Devetopmenl dlamond

Life expectancy

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

2001
Populabon, mid-year (mililons) 
GNI per capita (Atas method, USS) 
GNI (Atas meltod, US$ billions) 

Average annual growth, 19591
Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 
Moat recont estimate (latest year available, 199541) 

Poverty (% of populadon below national poverty line) 
Urban populabon (% of total populabon) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1.000 live brths) 
Child malnutrltlon (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of populallon) 
Illiteracy (% of populallon age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population) 
Male 
Femalo 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 

GDP (USS billions) 
Gross domestic Investment/GDP 
Exports ol goods and services/GDP 
Gross domeslic savingslGOP 
Gross nabonal savings/GDP 

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debl service/exports 
Present value of debtVGOP 
Present value of debVtexports 

1 3 
3 2 

48 
36 
69 
22 
7 
82 
1 
97 
98 
95 

1991 

2 3 
15 4 
35 3 
14 1 
14 0 

19 9 
23 

31
59
76

76
37
98 
103 
88

2001

1 5
18 0 
38.7
17 7
1d8

1 3 
3 1 
1100
32 9

0 1 
0 6 

63 
69 
20 

90 
3 
102 
103 
101 

2000 

1 4 
20 0 
41 8 
14 3 
14 5 

5 8 
5 1 
124 4 
32.5 
83 1
179 9

(average annuel growth)
GDP 
GOP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

1981-91 

199141 

2000 

2001 

200145

4 2 
2 3 

-1 6 
-2 7 
.1 4 

5 4 
4 4 
10 5 

5 3 
4 5 
.3 2 

3 6 
2 8 
7 5

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

GNI 
capIta 

| pt 

G
Gross
pennolmont

e

Access to Improved water source

_ 

KyrgyzrRepublic
Low-Income group

Economic rado.'

Trade

DomestIc 
savings

Investment

Indebtedness

Kyrgyz Republic

Low-ncome group

Growth of Investment and GDP i%i
l:o

100'

5so

ox 

Io 

| 

_

Da 

79
GDI 

:.GDP

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
tndustry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Pnvate consumpUon 
General govemment consumpbon 
Imports of goods and services 

(average annualgrowth)
Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

Pnvate consumptlon 
Genera) govemment consumption 
Gross domestic Investment 
lmports of goods and services 

37 3
28 3 
108 
34 4 
d4 8 
17 5 
37 0

37 0 
35 5 
288 
27 8 
64 2 
21 8 
36 6 

(1981-91 199141 

3 2 
-d 9 
-136 
-3 0 

-4 4 
-4 0 
-1 2 
8 0 

38 8 
29 2 
83 
34 0 
657 
20 0 
47 6 

2000 

2 6 
8 9 
-193 
5 8 

-5 0 
5 9 
22 1 
0 4 

2001 

Growth of exports and Import(%

7 3 
5 2 
-300
3 3 

2 2 
-1 3 
-58 
13 8

30
s

s
1-30
j 

7

Eu pons 

lmirports

Note, 2001 data are preliminary esglmates
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (In bold) compared with its income-group average tf data are missing, lhe diamond wil
be Incomplete

CAS Annex A2
'-ige 2 of 2

Kyrgyz Republic

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflation (%)
is
r0
40

Domestic prices 
(X change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

18 7 
27 2 

8 9 
7 3 

134 7 

20

20-

Government finance 
( of GOP, Includes curemnt grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

-0

o,

18 5 
-2 3 
-9 0 

204 
-1 7 
-5 8

a 
-

?7 98 
GDP defator 

go 

oo o
CPI

...- 

TRADE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Export and Import level (USS milt.)

(US$ fmdlions)

Total exports (lob) 
Electnoty 
Gold 
Manufactures 
Total imports (ctt) 

511 
80 
195 
104 
559 

480 
47 
225 
10H
472 

T

T

7r

Soo

Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

e1 

38 

5. 

d

129 

121

107 

58

os 

oo 

De as s 
minIports

00 o 

Exporttpdcelndex 1995=100) 
Import pnce index (1995.100) 
Terms of trade (1995-100) 

107 
121 
88 

104

95 
110

MExports 

BALANCE ot PAYMENTS
(US$ millions) 

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports o1 goods and services 
Resource balance 

573 
858 
-8 

581 
585 
_5

s5.

Net Income 
Net current transfers 

-80 
82 

-8d 
51 

o 
s 

I 

i

Current account balance 
Financng items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

-80 
95 

-19

37
-18 

-15 

i-25

Memo.
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, tocal/US$) 

263 
47.7 

285
48 4

4 05E-2 

EXTERNAL DEST and RESOURCE FLOWS

(USS millons) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 
1.678
0
389 

ComposItion of 2001 debt (USSimtO)

1,704 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
379 

270 

4 

3ae

Total debt service 
lBOR 

186 
0 

184
0
3

IDA 

,3 

Composition of net resource flows
O7iicial grants 
Official credItors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfoito equity 

57 
95 
-67 
-2 
0 

35 
75 
-79
5
0 

179

4 7

372

World Bank program
Commitments 
Dlsbursements 
Pnncipal repayments 
Net aflows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 

0 

91 
34 
0 
34 
3 
32 

30 
26 
0 
26
3
23

A. IRD 
B-IDA 
C IMF 

E -Bilateral
0 Other mmuttlateret F -Pnvate

0 

0 

0. Shorl-term

Development Economics 

2117/03




CAS Annex B2
Page I of I

Kyrgyz Republic
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

as of 4/10/2003

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Penod (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount ac 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, e 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/prolect) 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

14 
2.7 
143 
137 
14 3 
137 
199 

Yes 
1,360 
97 

15 
2 8 
133 
21 7 
13 3 
21 7 
14.9 

Yes 
1,434 
96 

14 
3 3 
0 0 
00 
0.0 
0 0 
166 

Yes 
1,633 
116 

13
3.6
154
209
15.4
20.9
12 6

No"*
1,388
107

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Prolects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
11 
357 4 
9.1 
3.9 

7
145 5
14.3
9 5

a As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY)
b Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio
c Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year Investment projects only
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the excepbon of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year
** CPPR delayed to August 2003 in order to have it joint with AsDB

CAS Annex B3
Page I of I

Kyrgyz Republic
IBRD/IDA Program Summary

as of April 21, 2003

Proposed IDA Base-Case Operations Program a

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

GOV SAC 
GOV TA 
Result 

FIN SECT & BUS DEVT 
VILLAGE INVST 
DISASTER PREPAREDNESS 
Result 

PRSC 
RURAL EDUCATION 
SMALL TOWN INFRASTRUCTURE 
AGRICULTURE MODERNIZATION & MARKTG 
Result 

PRSC 
ENERGY SECTOR INVESTMENT 
HEALTH & SOC PROTECTION SWAP 
Result 

Overall result 

Result 

Strategic Implementation
US$(M) Rewards b b RisksntHIMIL
(H/M/L)bRsk(HML
H 
H
H 
H

20.0 
8.0 
28.0

M
H
M

H
M
H
M

H
M
H

M 
H 
M 

H 
H 
H 
M 

H 
H 
H 

12.0 
15.0 
5 0 
32.0

15 0 
15 0 
15.0 
20.0 
65.0

15.0 
16.0 
15.0 
46.0

171.0

a/ This table presents the proposed Bank notional program for the next four fiscal years
b/ Project ratings indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M) or Low (L)

CAS Annex B3
Page 1 of I

Kyrgyz Republic
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2000-2003

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

IFC approvals (US$m) 

1 40 

3.40 

6.5 

**

Sector (%)

FINANCE & INSURANCE 
FOOD & BEVERAGES 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other

Total 

100 

100 

100 

100 

29 
71

100 

41 
29 
29

58 

0

100

100 

77
33

10 

0

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

75.15 

50 73 

50.71 41.40

** IFC approved regional investments in SEAF-CASEF ($2.5 million) and the Central Asian Microfinance Facility
($45 million) are expected to make investment in the Kyrgyz Republic.

CAS Annex B4
Page I of I

Kyrgyz Republic
Summary of Nonlending Services

As Of 04/03/2003

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) 

Audience' 

ObJect,veb

FYOI 
FYOI 
FYOI 
FY02 
FY03 

FYOI 
FYOI 
FYOI 
FYOI 
FYOI 
FYO1-02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

FY03 
FY03 
FY04 
FY04 
FY02-04 
Annual 
FY03-04 
FY03-04 

FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY05 
FY05 
FY06 
FY06 
Annual 
Annual 
Annual 
Annual 
Annual 

144 
60 
207 
46 
150 

26 
23 
35 

58 
16 
270 
48 
300 
98 
100 
83 

300 
200 
150 
100 

100 
100 
100 
250 
448 
200 

120 

100 
150 
100 
60 
35 
250 
100 
100 
100 
150 
150 
150 
100 
100 

G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 

G, D, P 
P 
P 
G 
P 
G,P
G 
G, D, P 
G,D, P 
P 
G, D, P 
G, D, P 

G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B 
G,D,B,P 

G,D,B,P -
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,P
G,D,B,P 
G,D, P 
P 

G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 
G,D,B,P 

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS

KG
KG
KG
KG
PS

KG
KG
KG
KG
KG
KG

KG, PS, PD
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS, PD

KG, PS
KG
KG

KG, PS, PD
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS, PD

Product 

Recent completions
Social Sector Finance 
Energy Sector Study 
Forestry Sector Study 
Mining Sector Study 
Pensions Policy Note 

IFC SME Country Map Development 
IFC Kyrgyz Tourism TA 
IFC: Institutional support to Altyn-Ajydar 
FIAS Advisory 
IFC MIS/Accounting Systems in 7 CA SMEs 
SME Mapping Project for K.R.. 
IFC Regional Leasing Study 
IFC Microfinance Study and T/A 
IFC (PEP) Leasing Development and TA 
Kumtor Gold - Monitoring Advisory Group 
IFC Tounsm Development Study 
IFC Information Technology Sector Review 

Underwav
Public Expenditure Review 
Poverty Assessment I 
FSAP 2 
CFAA 

CPAR 
IDF Grant for Judicial Reform 
IDF Grant for Procurement Training 
Trade Diagnostic 
IFC (PEP) Leasing TA 
Support for NSPR/CG 
IFC Leasing TA 
IFC MIS/Accounting Systems at Akun JSC 

Planned
Investment Climate Survey 
Local Governance and Anti-Corruption 
IDF Grant for Financial Accountability 
Agriculture Policy Update 
IFC: Institutonal support to Akun JSC-MIISII 
CEM/Development Policy Review 
Irrgation and Livestock Strategy Notes 
Environmental Expenditure and Policy 
Urban Slums Note 
Dialogue on Social Protection 
Dialogue on PER 
Dialogue on Poverty Assessment 
Dialogue on Mining 
Management of GFATM (TB) 

I Joint with Government
2 JointwithlMF
a/ Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination, private sector, civil society
b/ knowledge generation, public debate, problem solving

Kyrgyz Republic: Social Indicators

Latest si,bl. year 

1970-75 

1980-SS 

1994-01 

3 3 
21 
37 9 
4 9 

4 0 
19 
38 2 
4 2 

65 
62 
70 

42 

296 
131 

,, 

306 
159 

5 0 
1 1 
35 6 
24 

47 6
41 2
51 

280 
310 
275

441
5 0
49 7

1 9 
3 9 
6 6 

96
96
96

77 
98 
66 

98 

99 

II

69 
65 
73 

22 
30 

297 
136 
44
99

CAS Annex B5
Page I of 1

Same region/inome group
Rorape &
Central 
Asia 

474 3 
02 
65 4 
1 6 

Low-
Income

2,459 8
20
31 9
3 6

2,010 
187 

410
140

4 1 
4 4 
88

90 

93 
93 

69 
64 
74 

20 
25 

298 
127 

1 2
3 4

76
88
70

57
57

59
58
60

76
115

294
261

POPULATION
Total popultion, nud-yesa (m,ilons) 
Growth role (% nnual overage for peod) 
Urban populaltin (% ofpopulaion) 
Toini fertiliy mre (buths per -soin) 

POVERTY
(% ofjpapalto-)
Nationsl hcadcount mdea 
Urban hcdcount modcx 
Rural headcuo index 

INCOME
ONI per capita (USS) 
Conoumerprce index (1995-100) 
Food pnce index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
GDn index 
Lowest qumtile (% of come or conrrpl.n) 
HNghest quintile (% of ,aare or consuapion) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS

Pubflc expeaditire

Hculbh (% of GDP) 
Education (0 ofGDP) 
Socul securnty and wclfare (% of GDP) 

Net primary school -arollmcnt rate
/% ofge grouP)
Total 
Male 
Femile 

Acceas to an Improved twater source
(9 qfpopapalaion)
Total 
Urban 
Runl 

Immountutlon mate
136 and,r 12 aonthM)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnuirilon (I% und, 5 years) 

Life etpecetancy at bIrth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 

Mortality
lnfet (pe 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Aduo (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 popul-lior) 
Fmale(per 1,000 populuion) 
Maternol (per 100,000 live births) 
Baths atlended by shilled health sta.f(%.) 

Note 0 or 0 0 mtans zero or less than halfthe unit shown Net eneollmenl ratios exceeding 100 indatle discrepaniets
betwecn the estimates of school-age popubtion and reported enrollment data.

2002 World Developinent tndieators CD-ROM, World Bank

CAS Aninex B6
Pagel of2

Kyrgyz Republic - Key Economic Indicators

As Of 411012003

Nat.Ional 
.. acuts (as %GOP at c-ina markita price.)

Gross dom.sic product 
Agnrulture' 
inu oy wh chwi 

i02 0 
49 7 
18 3 

100 0 
44 6 
22 8 

1000a 100 0 
39 5 
37 7 
22 8 
28 7 

100 0 
36 8 
29 2 

1000 
373 
28 3 

100 0 

103 0 
3 1 
27 ' 

100 0 
3789 
27 8 

100 0 
381 
27 6 

1003 
37 3 
286 9 

1 (00
37 4
20 9

2880 
26 2 

Gold 
Pe-W .,nca 

00 
3 4 
3290 

64 
3 1 
33 6 

71 

11 0 

14 4 

97 
3 7 
34 4 

74 
4 0 
35 2 

92 
41i 
34 2 

06 

74 
4 2 
34 3 

so 
41i 
25 9 

a61
4 2
35 7

19 
37 7 

8 7 

0 4 

4, 

Set-aun 

3588 

34 0 

34 

Tatal Canocrmptian 

0086 
la88 

962 
173 

106 1 
'7 9 

98 8 

85 7 

82 3 

80 6 

84 8 

057 

88 8 

9-08 

83 9
13 2

P,bilc 

19 1 

20 0 

17$5 

12 9 

12 3 

1286 

12 8 

2 8 

Privto 

82 1 

68 9 

8832 

77 6 

65 7 

64 8 

72 7 

72 4 

72 1 

73 1 

7198 

79 7

Gross danalrc fixed nvasst-l 

25 2 

2117 

154 

180 

20 0 

108 0 

181 

180 

18?I 

183 

30' 

21 1

Gaccrr-aM -nvasimen 

368 

39 

0 6 

l 

76a 

5 3 

589 

58 

025 

4 7 

4 5 

485

P-yOtaIm,lcenl t- 

31 4 

17 9 

8 9 

786 

12 2 

12?7 

12 2 

128 

13 4 

1486 

15 7 

18 5

(i,clcden i-,aasn a. vockin
Exponle (GNFS)? 
rnpodtc(GNI'SF 

207 

2823 
46 2 

385 
58 0 

42 2 
87 0 

41 6 
4746 

36 7 
37 0 

3886 
42 3 

39 2 
41 9 

27 3 
41 7 

356& 
4068 

36 1 
4068 

3568
40 7

0806 

Gaccsdomestioc no-0 
G-cno naflo,,ai wv,,gga'I16 

6 

138 
13 9 

-8.1 
789 

3 2 
268 

14 3 
1405 

1t-7 
168a 

-44 
14 9 

10 2 

1463 
15 1 

14 2 

10 4 

161I

15 6 

15 2 

18 5 

17 2

Memrorando,m 
Otcusa dar"nebc Pra-ac 
105$ nOlia', al current paced 
Grain neltonal rorducl Der 

4

ims

16828 1 788 
366 
2354 
260 
260 

1.646 1,248 I 270 
329 
250 
274 
350 
300 
260 

1,525 
200 
280 

I 632 
326 
260 

1,737 1,868 1892 
34? 
274 
366 
320 
270 
280 

2 132 
428 
420 

2 264
452
440

capita fUSS Alas math,it)

Real arrual 9r.,,th Wcas I% caiatined Itom 1990 prIces)
Grecsdornecsaprodccl atnvkt prles 

7 1 

989 

2 1 

3 7 

54 

5 3 

-05 

53a 

4 0 

450 

4 4 

4 5

Gmsc DcmencuIncome 

0 3 

923 

-1 0 

9 9 

7 1 

8 7 

2 0 

5 7 

4 4 

4 2 

4 5 

485

Real anrual per npile. grah .t.rlo f%, caiclalad from '985 pi,cas)
Glans domeflIC Productat market pliCes) 
5 5 
Totlalccoaulpt- 
4 7 
Pncaleconsanptcc 
405 

8 3 
86 a 
-88 

0 6 
11a 

2 2 
1 3 

4 4 
-1 2 

486 
00C 

-1 4 
IS 

4 6 
2 1 

3 1 
4 2 

3 2 
3 6 

3 6 
2 4 

3 6
238

14 3 

0 9 

-2?7 

81 

tOI 

3 7 

4 0 

2 4 

2 2 

2 0

Balance of Paymants (UsSe.)

Eaportn (GNFSI' 

563 

676 

580 

828 

873 

961 

620 

480 

687 

710 

768 

818

Memo'ar-ola FOS, 

lof~c 

82t51 

631 

535 

462 

011 

480 

50l 
22 

553 
31 

567 
35 

876 
46 

629 
48 

683
49

Elnal.rtty 
Gold 
Other 

74 
S 
458 

83 

26 

52 

60 

47 

195 18 

184 

85 

225 

1 62 

21V 
311 

208 
324 

191 
340 

225 
357 

236
376

263 

313 

227 

236 

200 

3i6 

lmpara(GNFS)' 
Mn-hat-thee FOB 
Marchand,ceCIFPo 
ulcac 
con~msr Goods 
Ilem,rnidloateGoods 
POLo'90Other Enarg 
CapitaliGoodc 

1022 
783 
6894 
238 
245 
240 
175 

617 
649 
725 
242 
160 
208 
133 

831 
756 
870 
288 
282 
207 
173 

705 
551 
814 
95 
137 
123 
160 

654 
507 
0589 
210 
112 
128 
107 

565 
440 
472 
172 
121 
131 
09 

681 
053 
584 
188 
127 
151 
14 

736 
577 
825 
287 
1 35 
158 
121 

776 
622 
6889 
221 
149 
163 
138 

912 
651 
700 
326 
158 
167 
149 

670 
658 
758 
2322 
172 
17 7 
178 

822
742
7986
237
85
183
193

Raesorco balance 
Nat aiMe -sat-tra 
(in,clud,ng ailtdal curtrent transfers)
C-ent-aocna Wuat-ce 

-488 
84 

-141 
68 

-323 
49 

-178 
68 

-83 
82 

-5 

-61 
54 

-48 
63 

-81 
67 

-103 
72 

-101 
72 

-11.2

51 

d4

-425 

-138 

-364 

-184 

-60 

-18 

-82 

-42 

-66 

-83 

-76 

48s

(cl'cr aoNcia gnart-t)

Net pc-rle foreign d,rac Ic'nc0ntmcm 
Lon-g-termtlse ats(el 

47 
354 

53 
166 

97 
108 

38 
133 

7 
47 

-1 
17 

I1 
19 

4 
9 

35 
54i 

85 
63 

61 
72 

30
111l

Official 
prt,aln 

118 
191 

132 
16 

133 
-27 

191 
-48 

118 
11 

67 
-89 

55 
-38 

38 
-30 

63 
-8 

78 
-17 

84 
-12 
-44 
8'?7 

118
-7
-49
130 2

ChanrgeIn nelrnenerveof(-i-creaaa)' 

2 

-46 

16 

-46 

-15 

-18 

-34 

-3 

-27 

-19 

Flrnrcrig 908 

89 

080 

71 3 

Mantowndu.m Same
Recourc baiarae(I%alfGDP) 
0Cu-lit occouirt balanlc (%aofCGOP) 
Real ac-sa growt, ratec (8895 prices)
kMerhandis.ex,po'ls(FOB), ofalydlu 
primary 
Marrulcu-uo 

-28 7 
-23 2 

-8 0 
-76a 

-303 
-23 1 

-1389 
-14 7 

-60 
-58a 

-0 3 
-1 3 

-3 7 
-3 2 

-298 
-2.' 

-43 
-2 5 

-SI1 
-41 

-47 
-386 

-50
-3 9

6 7 

21 1 

-8 7 

-18 4 

-04 

-2 2 

-07 

18 4 
14 0 
-0 5 

87 
0 2 
2 5 

-0 5 
-4 
28 

64 
1 6 
325 

4 4
4 5
3 9

Mn,chaindElenlnpasl(ClP( 

689 

20 2 

85 

-489 

-188 

7 9 

4 4 

5 9 

3 1 

5 4 

8 1

(C-oul- ad)

CAS Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

COUNTRY - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

;M 

.'p 

F 

j 

t'i . r -- . te 

i 

*1t-- 9. 1

Pubilc finance (a%s of GOP at curene market plcees)
Revenues 
Current rnenes 
Ta. 
S=,.iP Fvnd Cu'-hbulr 
ior-tueI11 
Flectnory eupcl rev-nues 
Osfo. 
Ccpltareen-eu 
Expeqndture, 
CurrerteuPendt%res 
Consuvrp-iur 
nwWages &aslanes 
Tmrslers&Susidlnes (. SocialPF 
Inbos.Pay"onts 
CaC." llepedilrdt-s 
Ceylul T-ns'e-s urdNslLnnd,ng 
Curren' aocount s-ros (trd Ce,ld -1- 
Oueral ...- nldeflclt 

20 6 
19 3 
127 
4* 

20 4 
20 0 
125 
4 2 
25 
0 0 
00 

22 2 
219 
142 
42 
29 
00 
00 
03 
33 S 
274 
147 
62 
1'i0 
21 

20 4 
201 
122 
36 
37 
20 
06 
03 
32 0 
230 
122 
405 
78 
29 
9 S 
-04 
.2 
.116 

1.5 
10 
I 
'17 
33 
25 
0 0 
009 
00 
281 
20 0 
111 
44 

20 4 
20 3 
124 
33 
37 
0 0 
0o 
0t 
26 2 
221 
122 
49 
32 
17 
0 3 
-I1 
1 7 
-58 

22 0 
22 0 
139 
3 0 
40 
0 0 
I 
02 
2B 0 
232 
129 
58 

22 0 
22 6 
140 
3 4 
3 
0 
0 t 
00 
27 4 
22 0 
123 
S4 
44 
21 
S S 
-.10 
0 2 
-47 

22 9 
22 9 
14 -
33 
38 
00 
009 

231 
23 0 
153 
3 1 
350 
0 0 
0 
00 
27 0 
228 
12 
5 
79 
21 
4 7 
05 
0 3 
-39 

24 0 
24 8 
157 
30 
35 
18 
09 
00 
20 0 
242 

24.0
24 8
102
29
32
' 7
09
a0
28 S
240
132
506
90
18

3 

00 
09 
1 3 
29 8 
250 
123 
57 

G04 

20 

29 3 
250 
136 
03 
1C4 
17 
3 8 
-01 
0 7 
-00 

27 2 
229 

123 

20e 

54 
82 
21 
S 3 
-1 
0 0 
43 

5S 
98 
19 

120 

15 

07 
1a 

12 
3 8 
04 
-0 2 
92 

22 
7 8 
-05 
-.2 3 
-9a 

0 0 

S 9 
-1 
-0 4 
-52 

45 

4S 

-0 
5 S 
-112 

-02 
0 0 
.J7 

00
00 
.37

E0p-ndlu. 
rea le nitlseamov 
Evpevndroes on u duc0lon secn u 

3 1 
2 

3 2 
4 9 

2 8 
4 9 

2 3 
4 

2 0 
1 5 

19 
3 9 

2 0
4 5

M.onetary ivdlcaturl
12/tGDP 'Il unent mkadet pdoes) 
GC-u1ruoU12 I%) 

14 3 
213 

13 0 
2s4 

14 4 
172 

13 S 
339 

113 
121 

' 12 
120 

14 8 
350 

1 4 
140 

 0 
'205 

16 
20 

'71 
15 

170 
110

POc Indliue. 1905 10)
irrh-dl,sse xpuOpn POW lndou 
nruhendn7nrrsprtpPrcw nfet 
'nrhandree Iesut-ofdan .evx 
Real ecirarge .ale iUSS4.CUiI 
Nonmnal Intrest raes (iep) 
Real -t.re..lewas 
Consumer prru ncex 
1 %groh rmte) 
GDP iefalr- l%g'vunraI) 

121 7 
1400 
86d 
114 5 
45 9 

119 4 
1427 
6307 
060 
23 0 
00 
234 
193 

'11 0 

107 1 
1253 

IC7 0 
1213 
682 
101 1 
38 3 

104 0 
049 
1095 
1701 
1 
0 
113 a 
09 
73 

109 2 
9S9 

109 2 
968 

110 0 
978 
133 
.75 i 

112 5 
9808 
1139 
175 1 
5 
48 
3 5 
35 

1142 

1109

1s07 

103 

1030

605 

050 

1139 

1128 

1127 

1120

19S 0 
32 9 
203 
10 5 
91 

1791 
I 
141 
359 
370 

1751 
S 
0 
23 
23 

1701 
a 
43 
4 0 
40 

1751 
0 8 
48 
2 5 
35 

1751

0 
100 

0 

0 

0 5 S

IC0 

48 
35 
35 

48
3 5
35

320 
3523 

18 7 
272 

a GOP corvpnert' dre eslorloed a' factor c-l
b GNFSO onrotes 'gonds n-d nortacleu nersisfs'
c Ind Jds net urrequ'leCo transers exclucing oftiaa captial grants
d Irtudes use of IMF resources
e-Irduaes c,-o,lacted rebub,Ioan lounl ard soaal tuld budgels
I 'LCLr der-les local cw'rnv,y sn9s ' A, Increase In LSSILCU denotes npp'ecr-sr,

CAS Annex B7
Page I of I

Kyrgyz Republic - Key Exposure Indicators

A. Of 04110103

Indicator 

Actual 
1997 
1998 

Estimate 
2000 

1999 

1996 

2001 

2002 

2003 

Projected
2004 

2005 

2006 

2007

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (USSm)'

1,151 

1,356 

1,480 

1,647 

1,704 

1,678 

1,741 

1,784 

1,861 

1,923 

2,009 

2,093

Netdisbursements(USSm)' 

348 

189 

106 

150 

36 

37 

28 

31 

59 

46 

63 

91

Totaldebtservice(TDS) 
(USSm)-

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGS' 
TDO/GDP 
TDSIXGS 
ConcessionallTDO 

IDA exposure indicators (%)
IDADS/publicDS 
PreferredcreditorDS/publicDS(%)' 
IDADS/XGS 
IDA TDO (USSm)d 
Of which present value of 
guarantees (USSm)
Share of IDA portfolio (%)

IFC(US5m) 
Loans 
Equityandquasi-equsiy Ic 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm) 

60 

82 

133 

122 

186 

184 

152 

173 

144 

153 

141 

131

204.6 
63 0 
10.7 
45 1 

200 7 247 6 
76 7 
89 9 
12 1 
223 
46 9 
53 7 

312 3 
1319 
23.1 
58 7 

297 5 299 2 
1244 
110 0 
325 
329 
65.0 
65 2 

276 4 
106 6 
24 1 
69 2 

262 3 
102 7 
254 
73 8 

266 8 
99 6 
206 
76 2 

270 8 
96 5 
216 
79 6 

2612 
94 2 
18.3 
81.9 

258 4
92.4
16 1
84 9

30 
196 
02 
197 

64 
414 
0.2 
250 

.

70 
366 
0.3 
329 

67 
605 
04 
342 

.

..

45 
445 
04 
379 

45 
446 
0.5 
389 

65 
449 
05 
424 

70 
51 1 
06 
467 

94 
578 
08 
513 

69 
581 
1 1 
554 

84 
588 
13 
579 

106
584
15
585

400 
300 
100 

403 
300 
103 

403 
30.0 
10.3 

3545 
250 
1045 

3075 
203 
1045 

2715 
153 
11.85 

1552 
1.67 
1385 

1546
161
1385

59.25 

63 75 

64 65 

75 15 75 15 50 73 

50 71 4140

a Includes public and publicly guamnteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital
b "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, includng workers' remuttances.
c Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Inernational Settlements
d Includes present value of guarantees
eIncludes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments

Kyrgyz Republic
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As Of 04J1592003

CAS Annex B8
Page I of I

Closed Projects 

12

IBRDIIDA-

Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Ciosed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Actve + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closec 

9717
0 00
36313
0 00
460 30
0.00
131 58
212
133 70

Active Prolerts 

Project ID 

P040721 
P069814 
P035810 
P062682 
P051372 
P046042 
P049719 
P049723 
P008519 
P008524 
P064585 
P036977 
P050719 
Overall result 

Last PSR 

Supervtslon Rating 

Original Amount in USS Millions 

Differende Between

Expected and Actual

Disbursements

ProJect Na 

Dveomet 

Implementation 

Fisa Year 

IBRD 

IDA 

GRANT 

Cancel. 

Undisbh 

Orig. Frm Revid

ASSP 
CONSLD TA 
CONSOLIDATION SAC 
FLOOD EMERGENCY 
HEALTHI2 
IRRIGATiON REH-AB 
LAND REGISTRATION 
ON-FARM IRRiGATION 
POWER&DIST HEAT 
PRiV ENT SUPPT 
RUR FIN 2 
RURAL WS & SAN 
URBANTRANS/MAINT 

S 
S 
U 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
U 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

1998 
2000 
2001 
1999 
2001 
1998 
2000 
2000 
1996 
1995 
1999 
2002 
2001 
Result 

1498 
5 
35 
10 
15 
35 
9 42 
20 
35 
15 
15 
15 
22 
246.4 

8.915792 
3151958 
16.69916 
0.728503 
12.68724 
13.78393 
6 078485 
18 48786 
15.37733 
7.1360066 1.826608 
7184416 
15 93698 
1072212 
71360066 1315804 

72
1
17 8 0.854948
1 2 -0.414559
-3
6.6
2.3
4.6
2 18.39027
10.5 0 390023
2 3
2 8
-114
43 8 19 22068

CAS Annex B8
Page 1 of I

Kyrgyz Republic
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 04/01/2003
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

FY Approval Company 
1996 Demirbank Kyrgyz 
2001 
FINCA 
1995 Kumtor Gold 
2001 
SEF Akun Ltd. 
1999 
SEF Altyn-Ajydar 
2000 
SEF KICB 

Loan Equity Quasi 
0 
0.45 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
10 
1.4 
0 
1 
0.21 
0 
0 
0 
1.4 
0 

Partic 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

Loan 

0 
0 
0 
0.4 
0.27 
0 

Disbursed

Equity 
0.45 
0.16 
0 
1 
0 
1 4 

Quasi 
0 
0 
10 
0 
0 
0 

Total Portfolio 

1.61 

2.85 

11 

0 

0.67 

3.01 

10 

Partic

0
0
0
0
0
0

0

Note: IFC's approved investment in Kumtor Gold was $40 million ($30 million senior "A" loan: $10
million subordinates "C" loan) of which the $30 million senior "A" loan has been prepaid.

IFC Regional Projects with Benefit to the Kyrgyz Republic

FY Approval Company 
2002 
Central 

Loan 
Asian 45.0 

IFC Held 
Equity Quasi 
0.0 
0.0 

Partic 
0.0 

IFC Disbursed
Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0

Microlending

Facility
SEAF-CASEF 

2002 

0.0 

2.5 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.06 

0.0 

0.0

Total Portfolio: 

45.0 

2.5 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.06 

0.0 

0.0

Development 
Objectives 

________________ 

;~ 

1.1 
Maintain a stable 
macroeconomic 
framework 

1.2 
Improve the 
business and 
financial 
environment for 
investments 

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC - COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX

CAS Annex B9
Page I of 6

Government Strategy/Action 

] Selected Performance Indicators 

Bank Group Instruments 
and Timing 

| 

Development
Partners

* 

Implement PRGF program 
agreed with IMF 

* Obtain favorable debt 
reduction terms in the next 
Paris Club meeting 

* Eliminate unnecessary 
regulations, inspections, 
licensing requirements on 
businesses 

* Accelerate the development 
of financial markets 

* Expand growth of micro and 
SMEs 

- _ a 

.- -- 

t Slujipbr-f t 

-P 

teSectoi-

* 
* 

IMF PRGF on track 
Inflation below 5% p.a. 
* GDP growth 4-5% p.a. on 
average 
* Debt levels to reduce to 
below 100% of GDP 
* PIP levels below 4% of GDP

Operations: 
* CSAC (FY 00) 
* PRSC (FY 05/06) 
ESW:
* PER (FY03)
* PER support (annual)

* Domestic savings rate to 
increase 

* Growth in micro and SME 
financing 

* Level of annual private sector Operations:
investment (domestic and 
* CSAC (FY00) 
foreign) to increase 
* CTAC (FY00) 
* Rural fin (FY 00) 
* GSAC (FY 03) 
* GTAC (FY 03) 
* FINBUS (FY 04) 
* PRSC (FY05/06) 
ESW:
* FSAP (FY03)
* Governance surveys
* Microfinance seminar
* Microfinance study
* 
Investment Climate

* Reduction m administrative 
barriers to SME as measured 
through surveys 

IFC

* 

Investments

* Micro-finance
* TA in leasing,

* 

IMF (PRGF)
* EU
* ADB

* 

* ADB
* EBRD
* USAID
IMF
* KfW/GTZ
* Switzerland
* DFID

Development 
Objectives 

1.3 
Growth for 
specific real 
sectors 

Government Strategy/Action 

Selected Performance Indicators 

Bank Group Instruments 
and Timing 

housing finance

* 

Agriculture 
Improve efficiency and 
productivity of agricultural 
production through 
expansion of agro-business 
and marketing 

* Growth in agriculture 
production and exports 

* Growth in percent of 
agriculture output that is 
processed 

Expand commercial rural 
credit and mucrofmance 
systems 

* Growth in percent rural 
households covered by 
institutional rural finance 

.

Imrv 

nvironmental 

protection and natural 
resource management 

Energy & Industry 
.
Continue reforming the 
energy sector (power, gas) 

* Accelerate private 
involvement in large SOEs 

.

Reduction in power losses 
(commercial and technical) 

* Reduction in quasi-fiscal 
operations particularly from 
power sector 

* Promote exports by reducing 
regional trade barriers 

* Share of private sector 
contribution to GDP increases 

.

Increased exports and export

Operations 
.
Biodiversity (FY 97) 
.
IRP (FY 98) 
. ASSP (FY 99) 
* Flood (FY 99) 
.
Land Registration
(FY 00)
* Rural fin (FY 00)
. OIP (FY 0 1)
VIP (FY 04)
* Nat. Disaster (FY04)

. Ag. Modern &

Marketg (FY 05)

ESW:

.
Forestry Study
.
Agr. Policy Note
.
Irrigation review
* Livestock Review
* Env Expend Review

Operations:
* District Heating + 
supplemental (FY 97) 
* CSAC (FY 00) 
* CSAC-TA (FY 00) 
a FINBUS (FY 04) 
.
Agr. Modem & 
Marketing (FY 05) 
Energy Project
(FY06)

.

CAS Annex B9

Page 2 of 6

Development
Partners

* EBRD
* ADB
* KFW/GTZ
* USAID
* Switzerland

* 

* EBRD
* ADB
IsDB
* USAID
.
KFW/GTZ
* Switzerland
.
DFID

Development 
Objectives 

Government Strategy/Action 

Selected Performance Indicators 

diversification 

CAS Annex B9

Page 3 of6
Development
Partners

Bank Group Instruments 
and Timing 

ESW:
* Mining Sector

Review (discussion)

* Trade Diagnostic
.
Energy/Water Nexus

.1FC

.
Inform Technology
. Tourism Study

:~~~~~- 

-, 

~~~ ~~~'- 

.~~~~~2.. Buildigng aFairSociety;...Pro%'iding 

t 

Eisen-tii.S"e-M-ies.' 

wT* ' - . r- t ' al 

-

-

-;W 

_Z 4---'

-

2.1 
Decentralizing 

public services to 

the local and 
community level 

* Promote decentralization 

and social mobilization 

* Employment and income 

generation at the local level 

.

Implement local-self 
governnent driven 

approaches 

* Service Delivery Surveys 
showing increases in quality 

of services 

* 

Increase in the use of local 

communities to deliver 
services and infrastructure 

* ADB

* UNDP

* USAID

Operations:
a Rural WS (FY 02) 

* VIP (FY 04) 

* Small Town 
Infrastructure(FY 05)

ESW:

* Local Governance

Study
* Regional CDD Study

* Service delivery and
Governance Survey
* Urban Slum Study

Government Strategy/Action 

Selected Performance Indicators 

Bank Group Instruments 
and Timing 

Development
Partners

CAS Annex B9

Pagc 4 of 6

Development 
Objectives 

2 2 
Strengthening 
health, education 
& pension services 

* 

 

* 

increase per capita 
expenditure for healthcare 
and education 

Improved healthcare and 
education facilities for the 
rural poor and remote 
communities 

Implement hcalthcare, 
education, pension and 
social protection reforms 

.

.

Increase in expenditurc for 
healthcare, education and 
social protection 

Reduction in maternal and 
child mortality 

* 

Increase in population 
receiving basic education 

. Mainstream health reforms 

* Adopt and begin 
implementing acceptable 
education strategy

* 

Inproved access to clean
drinking water and sanitation

._______ _ 

the rural poor. 

_by 

Operations. 
. Health 1T (FY 01) 
.
.

CSAC... co- 
financing grant 
* Rural Educ. (FY 05) 
.
PRSC (FY 05/06) 
* Health & Soc 
Protcction SWAp
(FY 06)

ESW:
.
Pension Note (FY03)
. Regional study on
HIV/AID/TB

* GFATM Mngnut

1--. >& on 
ri?i 

aJ ; 1X 

Effecti'X Stae ... Strengtheni gUthe Go 

rnance'Framewo

* ADB
* USAID
.
Switzerland
a GTZ
* DFID
* UNDP
* UNICEF
. WHO

._.

* USAID
. OSCE

3.1 
Improved 
participatory 
governance 

* Referendum on constitutional 
reform, February 2003. 

* New Parliamentary and 
Presidential Elections in 2005

.

Changes in power sharing 
arrangemcnts between the 
executive, legislaturc and
judiciary

* Free and fair elections in
2005

Development 
Objectives 

3.2 
Improved 
efficiency and 
transparency of 
public 
administration 

Government Strategy/Action 

Selected Performance Indicators 

Bank Group Instruments 
and Timing 

* General administration and civil 
service reform to streamline civil 
service and strengthen 
professionalism and 
accountability 

Separation on commercial, 
administrative, and regulatory 
functions 

Improvement in Service 
Delivery Survey 

.

Declaration of assets and 
incomes by high civil 
servants 

* Publication of annual audits 
of largest SOEs 

* Phasing out of special means 
funding of regulatory 
agencies 

Operations 
* GSAC (FY03) 
* GTAC (FY03) 
ESW: 
* Public service & 
delivery survey 
.
PER (FY03)
* CFAA (FY03)
.
CPAR (FY03)
* 
IDF grant on
financial
accountability
IDF grant on
procurement training
IDF grant on judicial

* 

.

CAS Annex B9

Page 5 of 6

Development
Partners

* TACIS TA
* DFID TA
* UNDP TA
* USAID TA
* ADB Credit
and TA

institutions

.
Innovation Day
* National CDD
Network
Small Grants

.

Program for NGOs

3.3 
Improved and 
more transparent 
public expenditure 
management 
system 

. Use of Medium Tcrm 
financial framework 

.

Improve transparency and 
efficiency in budgetary and 
treasury processes 

a Publishing budget in an 
open forum 

* Preparation of well costed 
and prioritized budgets 
through increased use of the 
MTEF and improved treasury 
system. 

.

 

Timely release of budget 
reports and audits 

Adequate and timely 

Operations: 
* GSAC (FY03) 
* GTAC (FY03) 
.
PRSC ((FY03/04) 
ESW:
.
.
.

PER (FY03)
PERs (annual)
IDF grant on
financial

accountability

* 
IMF
.
USAID
.
ADB
* TACIS/EU

Development 
Objectives 

Government Strategy/Action 

Selected Performance Indicators 

.

* 

Improved donor 
coordination 
Improve the efficiency and 

focus of PIP

disbursement of PIP and 
counterparts financing 

GAS Annex B9

Page 6 of 6

Development
Partners

Bank Group Instruments 
and Timing 

* Annual NPRS 
support
* CEMIDPR

-

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC - SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES

As Of March 24 2003

Network area 

Country 
perfonnance' 

Major issue' 

Country 
prioritjf 

Bank 
prioritf 

Reconciliation of country and
Bank priorities"

CAS Annex B IO
Page I of I

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management

Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

Fair 
Good 
Fair 
Good 

Fair 
Fair 
Good 

Good 
Fair 
Fair 

Rural Poverty 
High Debt 
Governance 

Quality 
Service, TB 
Targeting 

Market extension 
Water, Landslides 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private sector 
Energy & mining 
Infrastructure 

Good 
Fair 
Fair 
Fair 

Confidence 
Administrative bamers 
Subsidies, taxes 
Low investment 

High 
High 
High 
Moderate 

Moderate 
High 
Moderate 

High 
Moderate 
Moderate 

High 
High 
Moderate 
Moderate 

High
High
High
Moderate

High 
High
Moderate

High
Moderate
Moderate

High
High
High 
Moderate

New dialogue

Ongoing dialogue

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate pnncipal country-specific problcms (c g , for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary completion," for environment, "urban air pollution")
c To indicatc priority, use "low," "moderate," or "bigh "
d Give explanation, if pnonties do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the Issue, or there may bc ongoing dialoguc

EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS

Attachment I
Page I of 10

External Debt: A Snapshot View

I .
Against a backdrop of major progress with economic transition throughout 1990s, a
combination of slow progress with structural reforms, weak expenditure management, and 1998
regional financial crisis work toward an unsustainable debt accumulation in the Kyrgyz Republic
by the end of the decade. The extemal debt of Kyrgyz Republic rose to almost 300 percent of
exports and 600 percent of government revenues at end-2001, well above sustainable levels (see
Table 1).

Tahle I Kgrgyz Republic Eternal Debt lndiectors. 1906-2002 (end of penedi
-i-'; f-'-'9, ~': 
8. 

f'. 1.9 

9-,'.j,1 

zF-^-'-7'-'4i<~'~'. 

"gf'I 

:., 

. 1 J993'720F'J .(.. 

............. -0(1~.4' 

.....

2poi

l 

Total E'rternal Debt

In million of USS 

As share of GDP 

1,151 

1.356 

63 

77 

1,480 

90 

1,647 

132 

1,704 

124 

1,678 

110 

1,741

107

External Debt Service Indicators (3l)
External Debt/ XGS 
205 
201 
248 
312 
External Debt] State Gov Rev (w/o Soc Con) 
283 
346 
381 
650 
Sources Ministry of Finance, National Bank of Kyrgyz Republic, IMF and WYB estimates
I/ First half of 2002.

297 
718 

299 
582 

276
474

2. 
The Kyrgyz authorities responded to the constraints imposed by deteriorating debt
sustainability by enacting a debt reduction strategy in mid-2001, which built on strong fiscal
adjustment, to be underpinned by strengthened efforts to reform public finances and to privatize
large, loss-making public enterprises (including telecommunications and energy distribution
companies). These adjustment efforts were supported by the Paris Club Creditors in March 2002
through a flow rescheduling of Kyrgyz debt for 2002-2004.

3. 
The Paris Club debt rescheduling agreement provided the Kyrgyz Republic with about
US$95 million debt service relief due over the course of 2002 through 2004-i.e. the debt
service due was reduced from USS101 million to USS5.6 million1 . But, it did not change the
stock of external debt. Therefore, the debt sustainability remains an outstanding issue for the
Kyrgyz Republic over the medium term with the net present value 2 (NPV) of Kyrgyz public debt
remaining over 180 percent of exports and over 370 percent of budget revenues-well above the
HIPC 3 threshold of 150 percent and 250 percent, respectively (see Box I for the current structure
of the external debt).

1 To date, negotiations with Paris Club creditors have been completed Concerming non-Paris Club creditors, only Uzbekistan,
and Pakistan have not yet rescheduled their claims on comparable terms
2 Net present value is defined as the sum of all future debt-service obligations (interest and principal) on existing debt, discounted
at the market interest rate. In cases when the interest rate on a loan is lower than the market tate, the resulting 'PV of debt is
smaller than its face valie, with the difference reflecting the grant element In other words, NPV is a measure that takes into
account the degree of concessionality of borrowing
3 For example, the threshold for debt sustainability under the Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) initiative framework are
defined as an NPV of debt-to-exports ratio of 150 percent and a debt service ratio of 15-20 percent For countnes with revenues-
to-GDP ratio of 15 percent and exports-to-GDP ratio of 30 percent, the fiscal window is 250 percent NPV debt-to-revenue.

Attachment I
Page 2 of 10

. . .

. -

' 

Box 1. Structure,ofXyrgyz Debt;- 

-

-

The Kyrgyz Republic's total external debt is presently estimated at about 108 percent of GDP of which over 87
percent represents the governrmeht anid govemrnent-,guaranteed debt. About 67 percent of the ouistanding govemment
and governirent guaranteed:debt is owed.to-the multilateral institutions,with IDA-and ADB -are being-the largest
creditors followed by the IMF Reliance on borrow'iiigifrm.ziultilateralEcreditors.has brought a favorable debt -
servicing profile, but these types of debt cannot be rescheduled, leaving little room'for maneuver m the case of an

unexpected shock to the-economy.

Present Structure of,the External,Debt of Kyrgyz Republic, 2002 I/
(in millions of US$: end of penod)
Nominal Value 

Present Value

-

-I Nominal-debt stock (DOD) 
a Multlateral 
of,which IDA 
of which. IMF 
b Offlcial Bilateral 
Paris Club. , 
ow Russia 

, 

Japan 

Non P,anisClub 

,, -

' 

, pw Turkey 

,' -' - ~c-iComrnercial 

"-' 

1,741 
980 
403 
186 
485 
391 
168 
197 

, 

100% 
56% 
,23% 
11% 
28%,l-- 
22% 

MO. 

'lI1% 

S5% 

93 
'44 
,30., 
-31,.,-,.2/o 

-

d. Pnvate and short-term debt-, 
20O/61
ur;c M inistiy of Fim 'NationalBank of Kyrgyz Republic, IMF and WB est
First half of 2002.

14%, 

245- 

-, 

100%
42%
13%
12%
' 36%
*30%

1'3%.,-

'16%`' '' ''' 

- 6%

3%.,

2%

- -

1,245 
521 

166 

148 
447'- 
378 

158 

203 -
69 

32 

30 O'
248 

The net present value' (NP'V) of the total debt stock i's quite-high at about US$1.2-billion, or over 7,0'percent 6fGDP
reflecting the portionj=ofonconcessional debt in' the total' debt portfolio (e.g., debt owed to the EBRD,,Russid and
Turkey). In addition, private non-guaranteed debt owed to commercial cirditors (mainly related;t6othe goldextraction:,
activities) presents about 14 percent of total external.debt and is estiinated at over USS 200'million,

4. 
This picture calls for greater and faster fiscal adjustment then presently ongoing if the
debt sustainability is to be achieved in a reasonable time frame, which in turn might have
negative implications for growth and poverty reduction efforts, making it more difficult to
achieve a sustainable external stance-the fiscal deficit was down to 5.2 percent of GDP in 2002
compared to highs of 11.0 percent in 1999. Steering the country away from a potential debt-trap
requires joint efforts of Kyrgyz policy-makers and donors. On the donor side, the Paris Club
Agreement includes a goodwill clause, which allows for a potential stock operation in the future
at concessional terms. Realization of this potential along with continued availability of
concessional donor assistance would not only create the needed headroom in the budget, but
would also effectively control inflationary expectations and assure stability, given Kyrgyz
economy's high vulnerability to adverse external shocks. Continued access to strong donor
assistance of this sort, requires Kyrgyz policy-makers to strengthen their efforts to build a sound
track record with implementation of economic and structural reforms.

Attachment I
Page 3 of 10

External Debt Sustainability Outlook

5. 
To emphasize the importance of continued progress with implementation of key reforms,
the following discussion evaluates two altemative macroeconomic scenarios, which differ in the
level and/or adequacy of reforn efforts. A base case reform scenario is contrasted with the
downside risk of a weak refonr 
scenano. For each macroeconomic scenario, standard external
debt sustainability indicators are assessed. These are evaluated against the case of debt stock
reduction based on the assumption that the existing goodwill clause embedded into the Paris
Club Agreement would be positively considered 4 . In addition, the impact of harder borrowing
terms on external debt sustainablity is evaluated for base case scenario-i.e. less concessional
funding is evaluated by assuming that the financing gap is bridged at hardened terms 5

Base Case Economic Scenario: Continued Progress with Key Reforms

6. 
Base case reform scenario is built on the assumption of continued strong macroeconomic
management and good performnance in the policy reform areas that are essential to the
improvements in the business enabling environment-particularly strong governance and
banking sector reformns as well as tax refonns-and to the sound management of public finances
and utilities sector. This reform strategy is consistent with the pnnciples of the National Poverty
Reduction Strategy (NPRS), which was finalized in December 2002.

7. 
In this broad framework, fiscal policy goals are set to be such that they are supportive of
difficult transition process towards achieving not only debt sustainability but also more broadly a
market-based growth This requires a fiscal policy framework that meets the following two
criteria First. it is well aligned with availablc financing sources without needing recourse to
explosive borrowing, even if at highly concessional terms, or unviable financing policies such as
arrears accumulation. Second, it meets minimum social needs and highest prionty public
mfi-astructure spending, and it allows for private sector development. Simulations assume that a
combination of strong tax policy and administrative reforms, and expenditure reforms in energy,
social sectors, transport and public administration underpin this framework, bringing fiscal
deficits to about 3.5 percent of GDP over the next four to five years and eliminating quasi-fiscal
operations in the energy sector.6 (see Table 2) 

Table.2: Key Base Case Econotic Indicators

8. 
If key reforms are successfully implemented, 
the Kyrgyz economy could be able to achieve an 
average growth of over 4 percent in the period ahead, 
barring any unexpected external shocks and adverse 
regional environment-a significant yet challenging 
achievement. Under this scenario, per capita income 
could grow by over 3 percent on average and living 
standards could continue to improve. Simulations 
assume that this growth would be gradually driven by 
the private sector-private investment and broad-based 
export growth-as the externally financed Public 

r I 

Real GDP growth 

g

Public sector Balance, % of GDP 

Per capita GDP in current US5 
Pnce inflation (avg in %) 
Export Growth 
Gold Exports 
Non-Gold Exports 
Import Growth 

Current Account Balance, % of GDP 

Net FDI, % of GDP 
Memo Items (2003 vs 2010) 
Investments (% of GDP) % 
Source. WB stafi'projections

iGios Nationai Savings (in % of GD?) 

2003 
[50 

13 6 

4.4

425

40
-3 S
2 5
-2 3
3 9
3 -
2 1
2010
23 0

16 9

-

4 The projections are only ror illustrative purposes and as such they are not intended to pre-judge the future course of Paris Club
Creditots and/or tenns of any further debt relief
A similar analvsis wvas not undertaken for the low case, since the low case indicators depicted an unsustainable pattem even
under favorable borrowing terms
6 For detailed elaboration on specific reform elements, see the World Bank's Public Expenditure Review for the Kyrgyz
Republic "Fiscal Polices for Growth and Poverty Reduction," March, 2003

Attachment I
Page 4 of 10

Investment Program (PIP) gradually stabilized below 4 percent of GDP over the medium term-
translating into a lower public sector imports. To sustain a growth rate of this magnitude, the
investment ratio is projected to increase over time to 23 percent of GDP with public investments
playing a lesser role, as they become more selective, and private investments playing an
increased role in response to a more favorable investment climate. Overall, total factor
productivity is assumed to improve over time, which, combined with a competitive real
exchange rate policy and beginning of improvements in regional trade environment during the
second half of the decade, would facilitate expansion of supply side of the economy and
diversification of currently gold and power dominated economic activity.

9. 
However, it should be noted that given the disproportionably high share of the Kumtor
gold-mine in present economic activity (9 percent) and exports (40 percent), and likely path of
only gradual elimination of regional trade barriers, the expansion of non-gold supply structure
from its present lows alone may not fully compensate for projected decline in Kumtor gold
production through 2008. The base-case scenario assumes that the structural reform efforts will
create incentives for efficient investment and production decisions in the mining sector over the
medium-term, promoting its continued contribution to growth and exports, albeit at much smaller
scale than the Kumtor gold mine, through the second half of the decade7.

7

10. 
Improvements in both public and private
savings will further strengthen domestic savings, which 
is assumed to gradually increase to about 17 percent of 
GDP over time. Banking system reforms is critical to 
both promoting private savings and to channeling them
into credit for private enterprises, and help increase 

Chart I Savings-investment balance projections,

1998-2010, in % of GDP

30 

1

there would be a need to cover a higher budgetary energy bill of hospitals (at least until the
planned rationalization of hospitals in Bishkek is completed), schools, and irrigation facilities for
a transitionary period. The NPRS objectives of civil service, education, health and pension
reforms might also require increased spending, even with increased revenue collection and
savings generated through more efficient public expenditures.

Attachment I
Page S of 10

Table 3. Kyrgyz Republic, Financing Requirenments and Sources, 2005-2010, (In USS million)

a Total Financing Requirements 

1655 

b. Total Financing Sources 

1654

1 Grants 
2. Disbursements (total) 
of which Multilateral (including IMF) 
3 Other (net LT and ST flows) 
4 Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 

I Non-int Curr Acc Deficit 
2 Interest payments (total, cash basis) 
ofwhich Multilateral (including IMF) 
3 Amortization (total, cash basis) 
of which Multilateral (including IMF) 
Bilateral 
Commercial 
4. Gross reserve build up (- increase) 
Sources WB estimates based on the official data
Notes l/ Shows the remaining finance gap after new borrowing and Paris Club debt stock rcscheduling assumption
(at Naples term) are applied 2/ About USS290 million of this gap is projected to be financed through the potential
Paris Club stock rcscheduling 3/ Remaining financing gap is estimated to be about USS309 million in 2005-07 an(
USS 400 millions in 2008-10.

733 
235 
76 
582 
266 
227
89
-105 c. Remaining finance gap (- is surplus) 1/2/3/ 

311
1126
698
-44
262

709

13. 
Table 4 summarizes a detailed set of indicators of external debt sustatnability. Despite
the assumption of a relatively strong export growth along with a favorable external financing
assumptions (a combination of grants and concessional assistance with a grant element of 35
percent on average for the total portfolio), base-case indicators of trends in repayment capacity
remain fairly weak and show a temporary detenoration after 2004 (see Graph 2). The later
mostly explained by the termination of debt flow relief. The debt service will require about 14-
16 percent of total exports (i.e. at the edge of critical external liquidity threshold) and the
servicing of the public debt will require over 20 percent of the revenues over the decade. The
NPV of debt-to-exports ratio starts steadily improving only after 2010, albeit still remaining
above the 150 percent critical external sustainability threshold for the foreseeable period.
Despite attaining a considerable improvement, the debt to revenue ratio also remains above the
250 percent critical fiscal sustainability threshold throughout the decade.

Attachment I
Page 6 of 10

Table 4. K r 

Rep.bik Base and La- Cise Fxernal Debt SusL,insblli,, Indicatori. '003-2013

~~ ~.~~Ki~~2O031 ~~~ 200~4. '_20OS, 12066 

208 

00,t20at0hl'' 6T '.1011 1t*' SO 

lb 1

Base Case Reform Scenario
Total DOD (USS mln) 

1,784 

1 861 

1,923 2,009 2,093 

2,193 

2,3 15 2,405 

2,470 2,531 2 605

Total Debt Scr,icc (USS mln) 
Total DOD to GDP 
NPV to GDP 
NPV external dcbt to XGS 

126 
103 
68 
189 

105 

153 
97 
64 
184 

140 
94 
61 
180 

131 
92 
60 
177 

127 
91 
59 
177 

137 
9i 
57 
182 

128 
89 
56 
183 

129 
86 

133 
83 
52 

137

100 

so
sG

67 
187 

54 
179 

t71 

166

NPV of governrent debt to fiscal rc'.enucs 
TDS external debt to XGS 
TDS prbl extcr-ial debt to ftscal revenues 

366 
8 
17 

359 
9 
17 

336 

293 

283 
14 
24 

275 

268 

260 
14 
20 

25 1 

241 

232
13

16 

15 

IS 

16 

13 

13 

30 

26 

3 

23 

20 

19 

15

Low Case Reform Scenario
Total DOD (US$ mln) 
Total Dct Serv,cc (USS mln) 
TotalDODtoGDP 
NPV to GDP 
NP\' external dcbt to XGS 
NP V ot government debt to riscal reN',eucs 
TDS cxtcrnal debt to XGS 
TDS public cxtcrnal debt to fiscal revenu,cs 
Sources W 8 estimates based on the official data
Note Ratios other than DODIGDP include public debt only, t c priv nonguaranteed and short tr debt dre excludcd from tihese ratios

1,784 
126 
103 
68 

1,861 
105 

1 922 2,012 2,106 
153 
140 
131 
loo 

2,238 
12 8 
102 
65 
200 

2,381 2,520 2,683 
13 8 
129 
132 
106 
109 
66 
67 
225 
234 
356 

2,851 3,057
137 
143
15
70
251

ol 

99 

99 
64 

104 

11 1 

68 
189 

67 

64 
188 

65 
212 

68 
242 
364 
17 
27 

189 

8i' 

192 

369 

3698 348 

335 

335 

330 

325 

347 

373

8 

9 
Is 

17 
32 

16 
37 
70 

15 

17 
27 

19 
29 

17 

1V 

18
27

28 

27 

27 

Low Case Economic Scenario: Weak Reformn Scentario

14. 
Contrasting with the base-case strong reform scenario is a weak reform scenario, which is
developed on the basis of the risk that forthcoming 2005 parliamentary and presidential elections
may create for the depth and the pace of the reform perfornance. In such a scenario, the slow
structural reform pace of the l 990s is renewed; key governance, banking system, public finance,
energy and mining sector reforms are delayed; and much

needed improvements to business enabling environment 
are far from advancing, leading to a stagnant domestic 

Tl 

,e 

L C c 

idcr

' 

ii;4'. 

'iE.

investments and marginal foreign investment inflows. As 
a result, economic activity would slow, as the private 
sector would not sustain the economy's growth 
momentum, when the growth impulse arising from public 
investment declines and when the diminishing Kumtor 
gold production remains largely uncompensated. 
Simulations indicate that, under these assumptions, the 
GDP growth would average about 2.5 percent in the 
period ahead, following higher projected growth rate of 
about 5 percent in 2003, as the gold and power 
production recovers from 2002 downturn. 

Real GDP growth 

2 5

Per capita GDP in current USS 

390

Price Inflation (avg in %) 

7.0

Public sector Balanice, % of GDP 

-5 9

Export Growth 
Gold Exports 

0 4
-6.0

Non-Gold Exports 

1.8

Import Growth 

2 0

Current Account Balance, % of GDP 
Net FDI, % of GDP 

-5 0
I 0

vMemo Items (2003 vs 2010)7 
Inveutmetitta (% of GDP) 
ISO0 
Gros National Savings (in % of GDP) 15 4 
Source WB staffpro3ections

2003 210

16 61
10 3

15. 
Under this scenario, inadequate progress on structural reforns in the near term would
engender a vicious circle of stagnant domestic revenue perfornance along with lower levels of
donor assistance. As fiscal reforms are deferred, low tax revenues would exacerbate pressures
on public finances. The increasing fiscal fragility and lower donor financial support would
severely constrain social and development expenditures. Furthermore, the strategic reallocation
of expenditures and efficiency gains would be limited, which would further delay prospects for
fiscal sustainability and growth. Altogether these policy slippages could trigger raising inflation
and depreciating exchange rates. Simulations indicate that, under these assumptions, the current

account deficit would remain at levels that would maintain the external debt dynamics at an
unsustainable path over the long-term, with external and fiscal sustainability indicators
deteriorating over time (see Table 4 and 5).

Attachment I
Page 7 of 10

16. 
This sort of low case scenario could be short lived since both domestic and social
pressure as well as pressure from diminishing extemal financing might be likely to bring about a
correction of domestic policies. However, if a cycle of weak reforms followed by corrections
could be repeated over time, the above outlined macroeconomic outlook could be triggered.

17. 
Nevertheless, it should also be emphasized that even with good policies, adverse
economic shocks can lead to a severe deterioration of the macroeconomic environment,
including a depreciation of the exchange rate and sluggish investment activity in Kyrgyz
Republic. Agriculture, hydropower and mining sectors are of great importance in the Kyrgyz
economy, and all of them have proven vulnerable to weather related developments and natural
disasters. These vulnerabilities make the strength of medium-term reforms all the more cntical
to avoiding sharp volatilities in growth and undesirable delays in debt sustainability.

Sensitivity of the Debt Indicators to Additional Debt Relief

18. 
The above discussion suggest that debt relief alone will not improve external and fiscal
sustainability and liquidity indicators over the medium-to-long term, even under the strong
reform effort and with continued access to favorable external financing. As a result, the country
will remain exposed to risk of debt-trap, given its high vulnerability to external shocks. Only a
comprehensive stock treatment by Paris and non-Paris club creditors would address issues of
external and fiscal sustainability, assuming a strong reform effort along the lines of the base case
scenario 8 . By contrast, under the weak reform scenario, debt indicators, stock or liquidity ratios,
show a deteriorating trend even with stock reduction. It should however be noted that
notwithstanding the illustrative discussion below, prospects for the country's access to further
strong debt relief could be dismal under the weak reform effort. Growing macroeconomic
imbalances and limited external financing possibilities may, in turn, require a forced domestic
and external adjustment, without addressing the fundamental weaknesses of the economy. As
such, it would have further negative impact on growth prospects, would re-generate fiscal
pressures and could undermine the hard-won gains toward poverty alleviation.

19. 
Table 6 and Chart 2 illustrate trends in external debt and fiscal sustainability and liquidity
indicators under the assumption of stock reduction 9 effective in 2005 for the two reform
scenarios. It suggests the following outcome: First, although for both scenarios the debt-to-GDP
ratio improves over the decade, under the assumption of a weak reform effort, the debt-to-GDP
ratio remains at relatively high level. The assumption of the external borrowing on concessional
terms implies that the projected growth rates are above real external interest rates, significantly
so in the base case, which helps to stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio. Under the base case reform
scenario, total external debt outstanding as a share of GDP declines steadily from 100 percent of
GDP in 2002 to 60 percent of GDP in 2010. Similarly, the NPV of debt relative to GDP

8About 70 percent of govemment and govemment-guaranteed debt is owed to multilateral institutions, which cannot be
rescheduled. The relatively low share of debt owed to Paris Club creditors limits the potential of debt stock reduction even under
the assumption of relatively favorable Naples temis and base case scenario. This raises the issue of HIPC, but no determination
of the need and eligibility for HIPC would bc made until after the forthcoming Paris Club deliberations.
9 Naples treatment under the umbrella of the Pans Club and equal treatment from non-Paris Club bilateral creditors.

Attachment I
Page 8 of 1O

decreases from 70 percent in 2002 to 50 percent in 2010. A weaker reform effort does not result
in improvement in the NPV debt-to-GDP ratio over the long run

Chart 2. A Comparative Analysis of Base and Low Case External/Fiscal Sustainability
Indicators with Potential Debt Stock Reduction

Stock Reduction Option. External Sustainability. NPvlXGS 

Stock reducuon Option External liquidity. TDS'XGS

250 
230 

16-
14

Low Case 

210 

HIC threshold

190 

Baw Case 

12

170 

1 

130 

HIPC threshold 

8-

110 

6

03 

04 

05 

06 

07 

08 

09 

10 

11 

12 

13 

03 04 05 

06 

07 08 09 

10 

11 12 

13

Stock Reduction Option. Fiscal Sustalnabilisy NTP'fBudget 
Revenue 

Stock Reduction Option. Fscal Liquidity TDS/Budget
Rt%enue

LowvCase

3) 

\Low 

Case 

_ 

R 

l 

v.,, 

__

300 

10

HIIPC threshold 

1

| I 

05 oS 05 or 

7 

Os 

0 

5 

It 

it 

ii 

ra 

0' 

04 

04 

07 

Ct 

0 

10 le 

12 

15

Table 6. Kvrgyz Republic: Base and Low Case External Debt Sustaln. Ind. under Stock Reduction Option, 2003-2013
fZ008,, 2(00 9 
'u 
A 
-
..i 
: 
jJuI~ 
Base Case Reform Scenario
Total DOD (USS mlin) 
Total Debt Servic: (USS mii) 
Total DOD to GDP 
NPV to GDP 
NPVexternaldebttoXGS 

.

20031 1' 04 

120A%. i.2006i-., .20o0 

1010 

2011 2tl1 12 

2si15

1,784 
126 
103 
68 
189 

1,680 1,'28 1,805 1, S1 
105 
112 
99 
90 
90 
87 
85 
83 
58 
55 
53 
53 
161 
158 
157 
156 

1,973 2,0 88 2,173 2,233 2,289 2,359
92 
94 
97 
101
87 
92 
82 
82 
80 
78 
75 
73
52 
52 
50 
49 
47 
46
157 
164 
167 
163 
!57 
153

NPV of government debt to fi,cal revenues 
TDS external debt to XGS 

366 
8 
17 

308 
9 
17 

289 
10 
20 

255 
10 
17 

249 
9 
15 

245 
10 
15 

242 
10 
15 

237 
10 
14 

229 
9 
14 

222 
9 
14 

215
9
13

TDS public exterial debt to fiscal revenues 

Low Case Reform Scenario
Total DOD (USS mIn) 
Total Debt Service (USS min) 
Total DOD to GDP 
NPV tO GDP 
NPV external debt to XGS 

.7S4 
126 
103 
68 
189 
369 
8 
17 

1,680 1,726 
105 
112 
92 
90 
59 
5, 
162 
161 
316 
300 
9 
11 
18 
20 

1,808 
99 
89 
56 
164 
292 
10 
19 

,893 
90 
89 
56 
169 
295 
10 
18 

2 018 2,154 2,288 
87 
93 
94 
92 
94 
97 
58 
59 
60 
179 
192 
205 
295 
303 
317 
11 
12 
12 
18 
19 
19 

2,445 2,608 2,81 1
97 
101 
107
99 
102 
106
62 
63 
65
216 
225 
235
328 
338 
345
12 
12 
13
19 
'9 
2C

NPV ofgoverninent debt to fiscal revenues 

TDS external debt to XGS 

TDS piblic external debt to fiscal revenues 

Sources WB estimates based on the official data

20. 
Second, the debt burden indicator (NPV of debt-to-exports ratio) shows a sustainable
trend only under the base case reform scenario. A weaker reform effort translates into a debt
burden profile of above 200 percent for most of the projection period, close to the critical
sustainability threshold. Similarly, a favorable macroeconomic environment and fiscal stance,
puts the fiscal sustainability indicator (NPV of debt to fiscal revenues) at a rapidly improving
path in the base-case scenario. The weak reform scenario, on the other hand, shows an exact
opposite trend.

Attachment I
Page 9 of 10

21. 
Third, debt service burden ratios, both relative to exports of goods and services and to
fiscal revenues, under the base case reform scenario improve over time and remain below
unsustainable thresholds. By contrast, a lower export growth and delayed fiscal adjustment
results in debt servicing ratios remaining at comparatively higher levels, closer to unsustainable
thresholds.

22. 
The current heightened uncertainty about the regional and global external environment
are reflected in conservative projections for the increase in exports of goods and services and
foreign direct investment that the Kyrgyz Republic may achieve especially over the medium-
terrn. Specifically, it is assumed that, under the base scenario, the effect of gold export decline
(currently representing about 40 percent of total exports in goods) due to the expected
termination of Kumtor gold production through 2008 will not be fully compensated and the NPV
of debt-to-export ratio will therefore temporarily deteriorate through the end of the decade. It is
also assumed that the increase in net foreign direct investments (currently less than 1 percent of
GDP) will only be gradual over time. If exports and/or foreign direct investments show more
rapid growth then currently projected, the need for external borrowing would decrease and the
debt ratio would improve, with the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio falling below 150 percent (i.e.
below the HIPC threshold) around 2007.

Sensitivity of the Debt Indicators to Harder Terms

23. 
Presently the authorities limit contracting of new public or publicly guaranteed debt to
loans with grant element of at least 45 percent. For illustrative purposes, it was assumed that
terrns of new borrowing would be hardened in the base case due to adverse effects that would
increase the risk premium. As expected, the external debt position remains sensitive to the terms
of new financing even in case of stock reduction: not only non-concessional lending but also a
relatively favorable blend of concessional lending with non-concessional lending has a
pronounced negative impact on debt servicing ratios, as well as on debt stock ratios (see Table
7).

Table 7. Kyrgyz Republic:Impact of Harder Borr. Terms in Base Case, Avg. 2003-13

Status Ouo (no stock reduction)

30% Nonconcessional gap filling 
100%Nonconcessional gap filling 

178 
210 

Debt Stock reduction

30%Nonconcessional gap filling 
161 
100%Nonconcessional gap filling 
182 
Sources: WB estimates based on the official data.

285 
332 

258 
289 

15 
18 

11 
12 

25
28

18
20

Attachment I
Page 10 of 10

24. 
These results suggest that even with good domestic reform effort, if the availability of
affordable foreign assistance falls short of expectations, the Kyrgyz Republic would need to
accept a temporary deceleration of growth rather than attempting to maintain growth with low/no
concessional borrowing. The results also suggest that given the country's vulnerabilities to
external shocks, present external borrowing strategy with a cautious approach to low
concessionality or non-concessional borrowing is prudent.

Debt Management

25. 
Over the last several years, the Kyrgyz authorities debt management capacity has
considerably improved. The Ministry of Finance (MOF), together with the National Bank of
Kyrgyz Republic (NBKR), is systematically monitoring the monthly information on the
disbursements, principal and interest payment-both actual and falling due-and on contracting
and guaranteeing of medium- and long-term external loans by the state government and the
NBKR. In addition, the Ministry of Finance monitors and reports on the total amount of
outstanding government guarantees and external arrears on a monthly basis. While the NBKR
provides the debt service payment data on private debt, the Ministry of Finance provides data on
debt service on public and publicly guaranteed loans.

26. 
These efforts have been supported under a joint technical assistance (TA) program
provided by the IMF and the Swiss Government since 2000. The TA has been directed at
improving debt management capacity of the MOF through both establishing a sound legislative
framework and a computer system support along with training for better data collection,
registration and analysis, which brought about tangible benefits through late-2002. In October,
2002, the TA program has been refocused and extended for two years in order to assist both the
MOF and the NBKR capitalize on achievements to date and institutionalize the recently adopted
Public Debt Law. The specific objectives of the new program are as follows:

* Assisting continued monitoring and reporting of public and publicly guaranteed external
debt.
* Assisting monitoring of private non-guaranteed external debt.
* Strengthening monitoring and management of domestic debt.
* Assisting analytical capacity building in debt management (covering public and publicly
guaranteed and private non-guaranteed external debt as well as domestic debt), including
systematical debt sustainability analysis.
* Upgrading the present computer system and developing an interim database for all on-
lending now managed by Kyrgyz Fund for Economic Development.

27. 
In addition, as noted in para.2 above, Kyrgyz authorities are actively pursuing debt
reduction strategy since mid-2001 with assistance from International Financial Institution and
other key donors. The debt reduction strategy is based on several key elements: (i) reduction of
general govemment primary fiscal deficit; (ii) streamlining of the foreign financed Public
Investment Project; (iii) limiting the contracting of new public or publicly guaranteed debt to
loans with grant element of at least 45 percent; and (iv) pursuing with interested foreign

investors debt-for-equity and debt-for-nature swaps as compatible with the Paris Club agreement.

Attachment 2
Page I of 13

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC PRIVATE SECTOR STRATEGY

I. 

INTRODUCTION

1. 
Over the lastfive years, the Kyrgyz Government has taken a number of important policy
efforts to support private sector development and move to a market economy. These have been
concentrated on agriculture and land reform, improving the legal, financial and regulatory
framework supporting private sector development, especially in the micro- and small and
medium enterprise (MSME) sector, and in privatizing small and medium businesses.

2. 
Despite these efforts and the improved macroeconomic situation, the country'sprivate
sector is still not growing adequately. ' On the one hand, there are contributing external factors
such as very low levels of foreign investment stemming from the Kyrgyz Republic's difficult
geographic situation and small market and low levels of non-extractive exports due to regional
trade barriers despite joining WTO in 1998. On the other hand, there remains an unfinished
domestic agenda for private sector development that could help to attract investments and
support both domestic-led and export growth.

3. 
The government's National Poverty Reduction Strategy (NPRS) recognizes the private
sector as the drivingforce behind sustainable growth and poverty reduction. The NPRS
acknowledges the need for: continued transformation of economic activity from the public to the
private sector; a sounder and more conducive legal and regulatory framework; improvements in
corporate governance and intensive export and trade promotion; sustaining agriculture growth
and financial sector reform.

4. 
The Government has also established a dynamic process to maintain focus andfollow-up
on private sector concerns. Every six months, the Government issues an updated investment
matrix to strengthen private sector development (the third such one was issued in January 2003).
The most recent investment matrix includes a moratorium on the passage of new regulations
until a regulatory impact analysis system is established, improving the payments system in the
financial sector, providing for enterprises to adopt international accounting standards, and
improving the customs and tax regimes. There are then working groups to develop detailed plans
within this matrix. The Government also meets regularly with an Investors Council, to get
private sector input into recommendations and implementation.

5. 
This annex is divided in two sections. Section II concentrates on overcoming policy-
related, business environment, legal, financial and market impediments to private sector growth.
Section III focuses on key sectoral opportunities and prospects for private sector growth.

II. 

REDUCING CONSTRAINTS TO PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT

6. 
Constraints to private sector development fall into three general categories: (i) constraints
to privatization, (ii) regulatory, legal, and governance barriers to growth, and (iii) and financial

l The EBRD transition report indicates that the private sector share in GDP has remained stable at about 60% from
1997-2001. Alternatively, the NPRS indicates the private sector share at over 80%

sector constraints. There is also the need to focus specifically on Small and Medium and Micro-
enterprises as the engines for development.

Attachment 2
Page 2 of 13

Privatization Constraints and Prospects

7. 
In spite ofsignificant progress in privatizing small-scale enterprise, the privatization of
large state-owned enterprises (SOEs) has been slow. The share of state property in all sectors of
the economy decreased significantly until the late 1990s, then stalled for the past few years.
While about 70 percent of SOEs had been privatized by July 2002, many of the largest SOEs
have not been. On the positive side, the Government has issued a tender for the privatization of
KyrgyzTelecom and has set a June deadline for the submission of bids.

8. 
The state still owns over 200 medium and large enterprises, including monopolies in the
energy, gas, communication and aviation sectors. Only limited progress has been made in
privatizing large enterprises because of frequent changes in government, divergent views on the
need for privatization within the government, and a poor environment for private sector
operations. On a technical level, many issues need to be addressed including that many
enterprises are non-competitive due to imbedded non-market pricing, obsolete equipment,
heavily indebtedness and asset stripping. Other problems relate to the authorities' lack of
experience in case-by-case privatization and the country's weaknesses in property rights,
enforcement of contracts, corporate governance (including accounting and auditing), financial
infornation and information disclosure in general. A third set of issues relates to the
management of, or benefits derived from, these SOEs by various political and social elites.

9. 
The government has approved a state propertv privatization policy to the year 2005,
including a new Law on Privatization. The main goals of the policy are further privatization and
divestiture of state-owned assets through the attraction of strategic foreign investors to
telecommunications, energy, oil and gas, air transport and banking. Other priorities include
improvements in the effectiveness of state property management and rehabilitation of state-
owned enterprises, if viable. The plan is ambitious and involves, among other things: a) a
framework for the further development of the energy sector with private sector involvement in
the distribution companies; b) starting a program of reorganization and privatization of gas
sector distribution; and c) beginning the process of privatizing the national air camer, and d)
completing the privatization of KyrgyzTelecom.

10. 
In implementing this plan, there is a need to maintain a hard budget constraint over
existing SOEs and to restructure or liquidate those problematic SOEs that are absorbing state
budget resources and crowding out the private sector. Restructuring and liquidation should lead
to asset sales and the spin-off of small businesses from the larger state enterprises that are
struggling to survive. A first step is for the major state owned enterprises to have audited
financial statements (an expected condition under IDA's GSAC). The AsDB is helping
authorities assess the viability of enterprises and their potential for sale or
restructunng/liquidation under the Corporate Governance Project. IDA will assist in the
privatization of Kairat bank under the FINBUS project, which may be accompanied by possible
IFC investment together with a technical partner as part of the privatization process. IDA in
consultation with IFC will work for the introduction of a public-private partnership for energy
distribution under the proposed energy investment project. The IFC, in order to facilitate
privatization, may consider providing, on a case by case basis, pre- or post privatization

investmnent to large monopoly SOEs undergoing privatization, particularly those with IDA
assistance.

Attachment 2
Page 3 of 13

Bureaucratic and Administrative Barriers

II. 
One of the most fundamental constraints to private sector development is a poor enabling
business environment, especially the burden of bureaucracy and administrative constraints on
businesses. The removal of administrative barriers is recognized as a high priority in the NPRS
and the Investment Matrix. The bureaucracy has made it difficult for new businesses to enter the
economy and for existing businesses to grow and develop, as excessive bureaucracy increases
transaction costs and pushes businesses into the shadow economy 2 . There are well-documented
problems with respect to licensing, taxation, regulation and control.3 As these areas represent a
source of funding (through special means funding), line ministries and state agencies, in
particular, have resisted developing and enforcing deregulation and
rationalization/harmonization.

12. 
Improving the business environment will require strong commitment on the part of the
government, as the lack of reform has made administrative and regulatory requirements a
mechanism for rent seeking and corruption. The government's agenda focuses on liberalization
and deregulation, improvements in governance and decentralization and local capacity building.
Additional steps include radical reform of the regulatory and legislative process. This would
encompass assessing and eliminating the potential negative economic impact of existing and
new legislation on private sector development, and restructuring the inspection and regulatory
agencies to streamline their activities and eliminate duplicative functions. The government has
already imposed a moratorium on the passage of all regulatory acts until regulatory impact
assessments are implemented.

13. 
The donors are supporting the government in its reform efforts. The AsDB is providing
support for trade and customs, corporate governance and judiciary, including introducing off-
court proceedings and auditing and accounting reforms. The USAID and TACIS, in coordination
with IDA support the government's efforts in revising and improving the legal framework,
reducing administrative barriers to business, and restructuring the functions of regulatory
agencies. IDA will be directly engaged in providing technical assistance to the government
through its FINBUS project to review all new laws for their regulatory impact on the private
sector and to reduce overlap in governmental inspections. IDA is also engaged through the
GSAC in helping reform and streamline the functions and competencies of line ministries and
state agencies. Building on the results of the BEEPS and other studies on governance, corruption
and business climate, IDA is planning an Investment Climate Assessment and a Trade
Diagnostic Study which should help to further identify ways of reducing regulatory and
bureaucratic barriers.

Legal, Accounting and Governance Constraints

14. 
Poor corporate governance and uncertain property, legal and creditor rights remain
major constraints to private sector development. Following the voucher privatization program,

2 Unofficial figures show that the size of informal economy in the Kyrgyz Republic reached 39.4 percent of GDP in
2001, and share of employment of 29 4 percent.
3Earlier problems relating to the registration of enterprises have been resolved.

many businesses passed to managers and workers who lack modem management skills and
disclosure practices are not well developed. The authorities have been trying to develop a
consistent framework for accounting, auditing and information disclosure, but more needs to be
done. Ownership is often unclear as is the division of responsibilities and competencies between
managers and shareholders. Moreover, most enterprises do not use IAS accounting and are not
audited. Businesses also face serious problems when it comes to dealing with the judiciary,
where court proceedings are lengthy and corruption is rampant.

Attachment 2
Page 4 of 13

15. 
The government is trying to accelerate accounting reform, to improve the legal and
regulatory framework and address governance and creditor rights. With the technical support of
the AsDB and USAID, the government has set an ambitious agenda, which includes the
complete conversion of all legal entities to LAS based accounting by the end of 2005. There are,
however, serious doubts over the capability to meet this deadline, especially considering the
shortage of accountants with expertise in IAS The authorities have also passed an amendment to
the Law on Bankruptcy in 2001, as well as a number of supporting laws , and a new Law on
Pledges is now before the Parliament. The AsDB is providing support for the establishment of
Alternative Dispute Resolution mechanisms. With the assistance of IDA, the government has
developed a legal data base in the Ministry of Justice and is now in the process of developing a
data base on court decisions, which will be available to businesses and the public. With a legal
framework largely in place, more attention needs to be paid to the training of the judiciary and
the transparent implementation of the improved framework.

16. 
Continued efforts will also be needed to keep corporate taxes within ranges needed to
stimulate growth. An important step in this direction was the reduction in corporate and personal
income taxes to 20 percent. However, as discussed in IDA's Public Expenditure Review, further
attention is needed to consolidate and phase out smaller "nuisance" taxes, gradually extend VAT
taxes, and gradually reduce payroll taxes (taking into account the need to adequately fund
pension and health programs). Such efforts must also go hand-in-hand with efforts (supported
by the IMF) to expand the tax base and improve tax administration and collections.

Financial Sector and Banking

17. 
The contribution of thefinancial sector to private sector development has been weak.
The banking system is small and fragile, while the capital markets, pension and insurance sectors
are embryonic. As of the end of year 2002, total banking sector assets were equivalent to only 7
percent of GDP. The system is recovering from the Russian crisis in 1998. Since then, the
National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic (NBKR) has closed 9 troubled banks and promoted
consolidation of the system. There are now 17 private commercial banks in the country,
including two started with IFC investment, representing 88 percent of total banking sector assets,
and 2 state-owned banks. The banks' financial situation is improving but bank lending has
remained limited (2.6 percent of GDP), concentrated mainly on short-term lending, with high
lending rates and heavy collateralization. Banking sector outreach is limited with a total network
of only 150 branches. Public confidence in banks and demand for transactions accounts has also
remained low, due to serious weaknesses in the payments system and a narrow range of
payments services. Weaknesses in the judicial framework are undermining financial

4 This includes a Law on Protection of the Rights of Entrepreneurs, Law on Licenses, Law on Microfmance

Organizations that allows for the development of small raicrofinance banks, the new Law on Leasing, and the Land
Registration Program.

Attachment 2
Page 5 of 13

intermediation and the-capacity of the NBKR to effectively perforn its licensing, monitonng,
supervision and resolution functions.

18. 
At the same time, based on NBKR and commercial bank reports, there are signs the
situation is improving. According to NBKR, the banking sector was profitable for the second
consecutive year in 2002. Capital adequacy has improved following the introduction of new
capital requirements in April 2002. The volume of credits to the private sector increased by
about 9 percent in 2002 and household deposits increased by about 12 percent suggesting some
improvement in confidence in banks.

19. 
The government has developed a banking sector reform program aimed at preventing
further deterioration of the banking sector, restoring depositors' confidence and deepening bank
intermediation. This strategy builds on the findings of the IMF/World Bank 2002 Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) and is reflected in the NPRS. It identifies a number of
priority actions, including reforming the payments system infrastructure, strengthening banking
supervision and debt resolution, enhancing the NBKR's authority and independence, and
divestiture from commercial banking. To achieve these objectives, the government will need to
prioritize reforms in the area of banking supervision, transparency, corporate governance and
financial information systems. Full conversion to IAS for banks and the enactment of new
regulations in the area of corporate governance and auditing requirements is being promoted.
Kairat bank will be offered for privatization in 2003. The Savings and Settlement Corporation
(SSC) will be strengthened with a view to improving its efficiency, outreach and effectiveness in
delivering banking services to the rural areas, including considering the use a part of the large
post office network as additional outlets to deliver payments services.

20. 
The government and the NBKR are moving to improve the legalframework to support
intermediation and creditor rights. A new Pledge Law is under review by Parliament and the
amendments to the Bankruptcy Law have been passed by Parliament. In addition amendments to
the Banking Law and the Law on the NBKR have been submitted to Parliament, and all are
expected to contribute to improved governance and accountability. The NBKR is drafting a new
Law on Deposit Insurance Systems (DIS), although implementation of the DIS will be postponed
until the sector is better supervised, sounder and more transparent. The Law on Leasing, and
related amendments to the Tax Code to support the development of a leasing industry, were
developed with technical assistance provided by the IFC. All of these actions will help
strengthen the ability of financial institutions to support the private sector and diversify their
product base.

21. 
The existing, paper-basedpayments system is rudimentary and a serious impediment to
the development ofprivate and banking sector. The government and the NBKR have already
adopted a payment system reform program, supported under IDA's FINBUS project, which
includes the establishment of comprehensive modern, automated payments and settlement
systems for large and small recurring payments, as well as a card system. These are essential for
conducting efficient and transparent business transactions, improving access to banking and
reducing costs'. The strategy should contribute to rebuilding confidence in the banking sector,
making banking and payment services more efficient, transparent and affordable to the public.

22. 
The government is also establishing plans to extend the financial system to the poor and
those in the rural or remote areas. This includes: (a) support for micro finance institutions; (b)

the development of credit unions; (c) the expansion of credit resources to small and micro
enterprises; (d) the development of the leasing industry; and (e) the finalization of the land
registration process. However, it will take time to build a repayment culture, strengthen the legal
processes for taking possession of collateral, and build critical banking skills (especially those
related to credit risk assessment). These constraints, combined with borrowers' lack of skills in
developing and presenting business plans, will limit effective demand.

Attachment 2
Page 6 of 13

23. 
During the CAS period, IDA, through its FINBUS project, in coordination with the IMF, 5
will provide technical assistance and funding for payments system reform, the development and
privatization of the state owned banks and improving debt resolution. The ADB and USAID will
support reforms in corporate governance, banking supervision and revision of the legal and
regulatory framework supporting banking activities. The ADB will also assist the development
of microfinance, credit unions and the Stock Exchange, which is still in an embryonic stage of
development. Through the ongoing Rural Finance Project II, the Bank will continue to support
the development of the Kyrgyz Financial Agricultural Corporation (KAFC).

24. 
The IFC has recently approved an investment to expand an existing microfinance NGO.
It has also provided technical assistance to the National Bank and the government to develop the
legal/regulatory framework, including the Law on Microfinance Organizations which was
approved by Parliament in 2002, to allow privately owned and commercially sustainable
microfinance organizations. IFC activities in the country during the forthcoming CAS period
also envisage support for development of the leasing sector, insurance, housing finance and
development of private pension funds, as well as the provision of micro lending credit facilities
to local commercial banks to support small and micro-enterpnses. The approved SEAF-CASEF,
a regional small equity fund, started operations in late 2002 and is expected to provide needed
equity capital and loans to SMEs in the Kyrgyz Republic.

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises

25. Micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and individual entrepreneurship are key
components of economic growth. The government has emphasized the need to support this
sector which has been growing modestly since 1998, despite the downscaling of industrial
infrastructure which has disrupted trading and supply channels. By 2001, the MSME Sector
accounted for about 61 percent of employment and over 36 percent of GDP, compared to 58
percent and 35 percent, respectively, at end 2000. MSMEs accounted for almost all trade, about
64 percent of construction and almost 60 percent of transportation in 2001.

5 The IMF's PRGF program focuses heavily on privatization, implementation of the financial sector reform strategy
and improving governance.

Attachment 2
Page 7 of 13

Table 1: Small and Medium Entrepreneurship (MSME Sector)

Contribution to the Economy and Employment (% of Total)

Type 

(%) of Total Employees 

End of 

End of 

._________________ 

_ 

2000 

Small Enterprises 
Medium Enterprises 
Individual Entrepreneurs 
Farmers 
TOTAL 

2.2 
3.2 
5.5 
46.3 
57.6 

2001 

2.3 
3.2 
6.0 
49.4 
60.9 

(%) of GDP

End of 

2000 

8.0 
3.5 
15.4 
8.1 
35.0 

End of

2001

8.4
3.7
14.4
9.9
36.4

Contribution to Sectors (% of Total, excluding farmers)

End of 2000 

End of 2001

Industry 
19.4 
Construction 
53.2 
Agriculture 
36.1 
Trade 
99.6 
Transportation 
45.4 
Communications 
42.1 
Source: Bulletin of the National Statistical Comnmittee.

20.3
63.9
41.6
99.7
58.5
43.3

26. 
But MSMEs face considerable domestic constraints and regional isolation due to the
difficult border and transport situation. In the past few years the Government has recognized the
importance of this sector and has taken steps to support MSMEs through adoption of the Law on
Protection of the Rights of Entrepreneurs, the Law on Licences, and recently the Law on Micro-
Finance. MSMEs have little capacity and leverage to deal with poor business environments,
corruption and excessive bureaucracy. They face difficulties in re-establishing trading channels,
and are discouraged by high costs of transportation and information, and weak distribution
channels, quality standards, technologies and packaging. It is also difficult for MSMEs to access
finance and trade financing facilities, due to market conditions and lack of skills by managers in
developing bankable projects. In the absence of these being addressed, the MSME's have
restricted their own growth to avoid bureaucratic barners, or have joined the shadow economy.

27. Much more needs to be done to address MSMEs and private sector growth. The MSME
sector has the potential for growth in agribusiness, processing, packaging, warehousing,
distribution and transportation. Opportunities exist in an array of sectors - textiles and garments,
construction, food processing, and tourism. The government is providing credit support to
MSMEs, through the Kyrgyz Agriculture Financial Corporation (KAFC) but it should also
support and address the development of a more conducive public infrastructure and large-scale
industry, capable of out-sourcing to MSMEs and creating demand for their services.

28. 
The donor community is supporting the government in its effort to promote MSMEs and
private entrepreneurship. The EBRD, the IFC and Switzerland have combined forces to establish
a US$153 million credit line and technical assistance package for micro-credit in Central Asia
(with USAID support for the latter), with about $10 million earmarked for Kyrgyz Republic. In

addition, IFC is supporting the expansion of a micro-credit institution, FINCA, and IDA is
providing support micro-credit support through KAFC under its Rural Finance II project.
Beyond such financing, IDA, IFC, and the ADB have been providing assistance to the
Government in developing a regulatory framework and law for micro-finance and credit unions.
Through most of their other projects, IDA and IFC, along with USAID and TACIS will provide
support in developing SMEs and removing administrative barriers.

Attachment 2
Page 8 of 13

29. 
The IFC Private Enterprise Partnership (PEP), in collaboration with the Swiss State
Secretariat for Economic Affairs, has launched a techmncal assistance initiative in Kyrgyz
Republic, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan to promote the pnvate sector, and MSMEs in particular. 
the Kyrgyz Republic, this has included the Central Asia Leasing Project to increase access to
capital for micro, small and medium-sized businesses. The Leasing Project has already
completed work to improve the legislative framework for microfinance and leasing and make
necessary amendments to the tax code . During the forthcoming CAS period IFC will continue
their work to increase awareness of leasing among entrepreneurs, financial institutions and
government officials and assist banks and non-bank financial institutions to launch leasing
products, the latter to be supported by expected investment from IFC. The IFC and SEAF have
also set up a small equity fund - the Central Asia Small Enterprise Fund - to support SMEs.

6

In

III. 

ISSUES AND INVESTMENT POTENTIAL IN KEY SECTORS

Energy Sector

30. 
Kyrgyzstan is endowed with significant and relatively inexpensive hydropower resources
that provide a strong basis for both supporting private enterprises andfor exporting electricity.
Most of the population is connected to power, and the coverage of gas and district heating is high
in the two most important urban centers (Bishkek and Osh). Many rural inhabitants are
dependent on biomass (dung), coal and wood to cover their heating and cooking needs. Because
household prices of electricity have not risen as dramatically as those of other fuels (coal and
imported gas), consumption of electricity to meet heating needs has been increasing dramatically
in the past decade.

31. 
Despite the country 's potential, the energy sector needs profound reform efforts to attract
the needed investments to modernize the obsolete technical infrastructure, to upgrade
management and to rationalize consumption. A substantial part of the investments needs to come
from private sources, in view of the constraints on the Public Investment Program and limitations
on public borrowing.

32. 
However, significant subsidies and current economic andfinancial losses in the energy
sector (e.g., quasi-fiscal deficits) hinder investment interest and threaten macroeconomic
stability andfiscal prudence. Achievement of financial viability is necessary to fund
maintenance, to restore quality of service to acceptable levels and increase consumer's
willingness to pay, to meet the future demand and to attract private investments. The under
investment is most severe in the distribution sub-sector, where only negligible investments (less
than 2 percent of the total investment outlays in the last 10 years) have been made. The need for
investment in distribution is exacerbated by the increasing shift toward residential consumption

6 Amendments to the Tax Code are currently under discussion before the Parliament.

which puts tremendous pressure on the inadequate and rapidly deteriorating distribution
networks. There are also weaknesses in the management of the distribution network, resulting in
commercial losses and major inter-company payment problems.

Attachment 2
Page 9 of 13

33. 
Without sizeable investments in physical assets and commercial management, the system
may face further rapid deterioration, thus undermining growth and private sector development.
Existing studies indicate medium-term investment in the energy sector to be about US$250
million (five to ten year period), of which US$50 to US$80 million are urgently needed to arrest
further deterioration of distribution assets and to start delivering some tangible improvement in
the quality of service.

34. 
The government has developed an energy policy reform agenda, currently being pursued
under the CSAC reform package that aims at achieving financial viability in the energy sector
through appropriate pricing and enhancement of the operational efficiency of the system through
private sector involvement. The difficulties of attracting private investors to an outright sale of
electricity assets - small size, remote location, continuing risk and subsidies - suggests the need
for a phased and flexible approach to building a public-pnvate partnership through concession
arrangement with an experienced utility operator, with a management contract as a fallback
position. The energy sector agenda should also include reform of the natural gas (transmission
and distribution) businesses since these too are a burden on the government (contribution to
quasi-fiscal deficit, governance issues, long term sustainability issues). New technological
options for distributing renewable energy - such as micro and mini-hydro - should also be
explored

35. 
During the CAS period IDA will support the government efforts to reform the sector. The
main role of IDA would be to support investment policies and attraction of foreign investors,
catalyzing and facilitating the dialogue between the government, the private sector and the IFIs,
and in particular the IFC and the EBRD. The IFC would assist with structuring transactions,
identifying potential investors and support the mobilization of equity and debt financing. Other
donors are also actively engaged in supporting the government: DFID is supporting the Energy
Tariff Policy, the Swiss Cooperation is providing TA in the area of transmission and distribution
and KfW has available resources targeted for the energy sector.

Mining

36. 
There remains potentialforfurther development of the mining sector, particularly,
attraction offoreign investment for gold production. Kyrgyz Republic has reserves, but mining
remains difficult owing to natural disadvantages: high altitudes, difficult terrain, distance and
transportation routes to seaports, and vulnerability to insurgency or terrorist actions.
Development in the mining sector is also hampered by the lack of clarity in mining legislation
and the high level of tax arrangements pertaining to mining. Nonetheless, mining can and does
contribute to economic development and to the reduction of poverty. The sector's share of GDP
was 7.7 percent and exports were US$200 million in 200 17. However, virtually all of the growth
in mining is the result of the Kumtor gold mine (opened in 1997), which has been developed

7 According to the 2001 World Bank Mtning Sector Review note These levels contracted considerably in 2002 due to a
landslide at the Kumtor mine, but it is hoped that production will nse to or exceed 2001 levels tn 2003.

Attachment 2
Page 10 of 13

through investments by Cameco Corporation of Canada. supported by IFC investments and
MIGA guarantees.

37. 
Other smaller gold projects are under study by private companies, but the ability to attract
investment and develop these projects will depend on expectations for the price of gold to
stabilize at a reasonable level. At the same time, private investment in exploration has been
sharply reduced since mid- 1998. Some of the existing mining kombinats 9 are currently, or will
shortly become, economically unviable. On the other hand, there is increased interest among
small entrepreneurs in micro-operations.

38. 
To effectively develop the sector, the Government should seriously address the role of the
State, in particular the role of KyrgyzAltin, and governance and transparency issues. It would be
more effective for the Government to restrict its role to arms-length supervision and to take its
share of the financial benefits from taxes and royalties directly to the Treasury in a transparent
manner rather than through an SOE holding large equity stakes in mining concerns, which has in
turn encouraged generous tax concessions and reduced competition. The recent Government
intention to exchange KyrgyzAltin's equity holdings in Kumtor with debt is a step, but only a
small step, in the right direction. In addition to further restructuring of KyrgyzAltin, including
addressing the conflict of interest issue, the mining legislation should be brought further in line
with international practices. The issue of closure of non-viable existing kombinats should also be
addressed, as should environmental and toxic residue and safety problems.

39. 
The Bank has maintained an open dialogue on mining with the authorities, although in
the absence of operations the dialogue has been particularly difficult. In 2001, IDA prepared a
Mining Sector Review paper and discussed it with the Government. The paper assessed the
existence of investment potentials in mining, but it also stressed the role of the state and the need
to address transparency and governance, which are major constrains to sector's development.
The Government has indicated in the NPRS the need to develop an action plan based on the
findings of the paper, but no serious efforts have followed through. During the CAS period, IDA
will continue to maintain a dialogue with the Government which may lead to further
opportunities, including with the involvement of IFC, other donors and the private sector. IDA
may also explore the opportunity to extend an IDF grant to facilitate increased transparency and
rule of law in this sector if the Government is committed to serious reforms.

Agriculture and Agribusiness

40. 
The Government has made significant progress in implementing a land reform program
that has placed a majority of land in private hands and increased agricultural production
significantly since the mid-1990 's. Agriculture accounts for about 45 percent of GDP, 50 percent
of employment and 30 percent of exports. Since independence, the country has pursued a policy
of supporting private initiatives, through land privatization, abolition of state and collective
farrns, and price and trade liberalization. More than 60,000 small private farms have emerged
from this process and today account for the vast bulk of all crop and livestock production. In
parallel, efforts have been made to maintain important sector infrastructure in workable

8 Since its start-up in 1997, Kumtor has paid $36.4 million in various taxes, $10.5 million in dividends, and $44 5 mllion in
power costs. It also employs about 1,500 employees and contnbutes to a local area social fund
Namely. Kara Baita (uranium oxide, molybdenum), Hyderkhan (mercury) appear to be holding their own. Others - Khadamdjai
(antimony), Orlovka (rare earths) and Makmal (gold).

condition (including irrigation, feeder and main roads) and to establish essential support services
for farmers, including extension and credit provision.

Attachment 2
Page 11 of 13

41. 
However, further reforms are needed if the private sector 's full potential is to be realized.
For the most part, farmers and livestock owners have little access to improved technologies to
farm efficiently and productively and dispose of their output effectively and profitably. Three
major factors pose critical impediments to agricultural productivity and rural income gains: i)
deteriorating irrigation infrastructure, (ii) inadequate agricultural support services, and iii)
ineffective marketing systems for agricultural outputs. The old centralized upstream and
downstream support services have been, appropriately, broken down through the reform process,
but efficient new systems have not yet taken their place. Without efficient output marketing
channels, farms are compelled to engage in barter transactions or are closed out of potential
marketing options. Fostering the development of market-based product chains is proving to be a
challenging undertaking. IDA will continue to work on irrigation, land registration and support
services under existing projects. IDA will also be extending an Agriculture Modernization and
Marketing project which will address critical irrigation infrastructure needs as well as promote
the establishment of new and efficient marketing channels. ADB is also heavily engaged in
providing integrated agriculture services.

42. 
There also is a pressing need to provide non-farm rural employment, particularly in
agro-processing. Agriculture has absorbed excess labor coming from other sectors of the
economy, and thereby has served as a rural social safety net. However, per capita productivity
has actually fallen. If poverty reduction targets are to be met, a substantial share of the rural
population will need to find employment outside farming. At the same time, the post-
independence restructuring of the economy has sharply reduced such opportunities. The country
faces the challenge of increasing agricultural productivity and reducing rural poverty while
creating remunerative off-farm employment.

43. 
Rural micro, small and medium enterprises are critically needed to provide the many
missing links from primary producers to markets and to furnish the employment opportunities
needed to allow people to move out of subsistence farming. Small beginnings of such a
development are evident, as skilled craftsmen fashion hand tools and implements for their
neighbors, women group together to revive handicrafts and sell their products through informal
links to urban and tourist markets, and enterprising mechanics establish small repair shops. But
the scope of these activities is far too small to meet the needs. The primary obstacles to
development of SMEs both upstream and downstream of farms - including bureaucratic,
regulatory, and financial barriers - have been previously discussed along with donor activities to
address them. More directly, the proposed Village Investment Project and the Small Town
Infrastructure and Capacity Building Projects are designed to empower local communities and
towns to identify and address critical barriers for such micro and SME growth at the local levels.
IFC will also be actively involved in supporting agro-processing activities at the local levels with
both technical assistance provided through the PEP program as well as financing provided
through credit facilities provided to local financial intermediaries.

Telecommunications

44. 
There is a significant needfor additional telecom sector reform and investment. The
Government has embarked on improvement of the regulatory framework but work is still

Attachment 2
Page 12 of 13

required to establish an independent regulator and clarify the Government's long-term policies
towards competition, tariff rebalancing and other key issues. Plans for the privatization of the
incumbent fixed line operator have moved forward. KyrgyzTelecom has been tendered for
privatization, and a number of strategic investors have already expressed interest. This sale to a
competent strategic buyer, if successful, will provide a major impetus to reform and
modernization of the sector. The IFC will consider possible investment in the pnvatized
company should the privatization take place with investment by a solid technical sponsor. In
2002, the IFC conducted an Information, Communications and Technology Sector (ICT) review
at the request of the Government to define a possible future strategy for the ICT sector's
development and investment opportunities for it. The results of the ICT sector studies were
presented to the government in October 2002.

Transportation

45. 
The potential for private participation in the transport sector could be classified in three
groups: road transport services for both passenger and freight; railway operations; and
infrastructure construction, maintenance and management. In Bishkek and Osh, the efficiency
and effectiveness of passenger bus and trolley operators could be improved by introducing
competition through private operators to increase service volume and coverage of public
transport. Freight transport would benefit from private sector participation and could be further
improved through better customs operations and transit regulations. The national railway
corporation effectively operates only two parallel lines in the north and south of the country,
connecting in neighboring Uzbekistan. There is a need to restructure the railways and to study
the viability of an internal north-south connection that would provide passenger services and
freight transit access to Tajikistan and on to Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran. The government is
also keen on an east-west rail connection to China, but this would need careful study to
determine its financial viability. Private sector participation in infrastructure should be preceded
by institutional reforms so that construction and maintenance can be carried out by the private
sector.

46. 
Restructuring of air transportation has taken place, and now consists of three distinct
entities, the National Air Carrier, the air navigation company, and the international airport,
Manas. Joint ventures have also been established with private investors for fuel supply, cargo,
and airport services, in part supported by guarantees from MIGA. While there are plans to
privatize the national airline, this is problematic as it is not currently profitable, after being
separated from the service activities.

Tourism

47. 
Tourism holds significant potential for the Kyrgyz Republic, both in terms of eco-tourism
from developed countries, and in terms of local and regional tourism particularly around Lake
Issykul. (including divesting public tourism assets there). The IFC has provided assistance in
developing a strategic framework for tourism development. The recently completed study
outlines a strategy to institutionally strengthen tourism marketing for the Kyrgyz Republic as
well as curricula building for education at both the university and vocational school levels. The
IFC is awaiting government review and concurrence with strategy so that work on implementing
the action plan can commence in coordination with assistance of other IFC's and donors. In
addition, the IFC has provided technical support to local tourist entrepreneurs in developing

business plans and assisted them to access financing through local financial intermediaries.
Other organizations such as EBRD, Helvitas and the Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development
are also working to identify and support business opportunities in the tourism sector.

Attachment 2
Page 13 of 13

Trade and Foreign Investment

48. 
Trade and foreign investment is a critical piece of the private sector puzzle.
Unfortunately, the Kyrgyz Republic has not benefited much from its early adoption of WTO
membership, in part because its neighbors (with the recent exception of China) have taken a
more protectionist approach. The most important element in establishing the basis for trade and
foreign investment will be improvement in the domestic environment for the private sector, both
at a central level and within sectors as already discussed. But beyond this, the Kyrgyz Republic
faces difficulty in increasing trade and foreign investment both because of its geographic
situation (small land-locked market) and because of formal and informal trade barners by its

neighbors.

49. 
IDA will be conducting two important studies in the Kyrgyz Republic FY04 - a trade
diagnostic study and an investment climate review - as well as a Central Asia regional Trade and
Transport Review, that will help to identify other barriers that need to be addressed The ADB
expects to support a customs project that will help facilitate border trade. In the past, MIGA has
designed and implemented a capacity building program for the country's Foreign Investment
Agency. MIGA's online services, IPAnet and PrivatizationLink provide access to extensive
information on investing in the Kyrgyz Republic. In addition, MIGA has provided guarantees
for foreign investors to cover about $41.4 million in foreign direct investment to date, including
in the aviation sector, to modernize and develop facilities in the Manas airport, the soft drink
industry, and the mining sector. The Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) has also
provided support to strengthen the institutional environment for foreign investment. However,
implementation of the associated recommendations has been mixed.

10 For example, FIAS recommended the establishment as an independent agency of a "one-stop shop" for foreign
investors. This was created but within a government agency with limited effectiveness.

Achieving the Millennium Development Goals

Attachment 3
Page 1 of3

Millennium 

Development 
Goal
Halving 
income 
poverty 

Present Situation 

According to the 2001 
Household Budget Survey, 
the poverty rate declined 
from 52% in 2000 to 47 6% 
in 2001 on an expenditure 
per capita basis 

There are large regional 
differences. Poverty is about 
one-third higher in rural 
areas than in urban areas. 
The highest incidence of 
poverty is in Naryn oblast, 
where an estimated 89.1% 
of the population were poor 
in 2001. 

Intermediate Targets and

Prospects for Achievement 

The NPRS has targeted a 
reduction of the poor to 
39% by 2005. 

Achieving this target will 
depend on maintaining a 
GDP growth rate of 4-5% 
per year, and no increase in 
inequality. This in turn will 
depend on continued strong 
progress in key economuc 
reformrs in govemance, the 
business environment, and 
improving the efficiency of
the agriculture sector 

Better delivery of basic 
services through more 
efficient programs for 
education, health, social 
protection, water supply, 
and energy would also 
contribute directly to
reducing poverty 

A focus on rural areas 
which have not benefited 
from economic growth in 
the recent past, would also 
be appropriate. 

Achieving 
universal 
primary 
education 
completion by 
2015. 

Survey and registration data The NPRS has targeted 
show a decline in basic 
raising basic education 
education enrollments, 
enrollments to 97% by 
although they are still over 
2005. 
90%, a Soviet legacy. 

School enrollment is lower 

in the poorer Oblasts and 
learning achievement is 
consistently lower in poor 
oblasts and rural areas 

Achieving this target will 

require focusing on raising 

enrollments in the poorest 
Oblasts and rural regions. 

More generally, it will 
require increased budgets 
and attention to teacher 
training and learning
conditions, including
textbooks and heat.

CAS Instruments

The CAS will strengthen the
prospects for near term growth
as much as possible by
focusing on growth centers -
agriculture, energy - and
strengthening the environment
for local entrepreneurs to
flourish through the VIP and
Small Town Infrastructure
Project and FINBUS. The
CAS will also focus on long
term growth and equity
through the GSAC/GTAC.

The CAS will continue to
emphasize delivery of social
services through the ongoing
health project, the new rural
education project, and the
proposed Sector Wide
Approach in health and social
protection.

The CAS also emphasizes the
need to work at the local level,
including in the most
disadvantaged regions,
through the VIP, the Small
Town Infrastructure Project,
and the rural education project

All these issues will be
addressed in programmatic
support through PRSCs
GSAC/GTAC will include
specific provisions for
improving education financing
and operations. The Rural
Education project raise the
quality of rural education.

The PRSC is also expected to

reinforce the need for an
improved fiscal environment
for education. IDA will also
seek to help Kyrgyz Republic
to obtain support through the
Education for All Initiative.

Gender equality in 
education achieved. 
Enrollment ratios are 
essentially the same for 
boys and girls in primary 
education and are higher for 
girls in secondary and 
higher education. 

The NPRS recognizes the 
achievements made but also 
points to other gender 
concerns, including the need 
to increase women in 
government, empowerment 
through microfinance, and 
access to health services 

Attachment 3
Pa 2of3
The ongomg land registration
project will continue to help
improve women's land rights,
the proposed GSAC/GTAC
will help make government
employment more objective
and the CDD/microfinance
activities will help empower
women at the local levels.

Eliminate 
gender 
disparity in 
primary and 
secondary 
education by 
2005 and in 
higher 
education by 
2015.

Reducing 
under-five 
mortality by 
two thirds. 

Data from various sources 
(MOH, UNDP, UNICEF) 
show that the under-five 
mortality rate in the Kyrgyz 
Republic is declining. 
However, figures are not 
fully reliable 

The NPRS has targeted the 
reduction of child mortality 
from 35 5 (per 1000 live 
births) in 1999 to 28 by 
2005. 

The Kyrgyz Republic's
progress in reducing under- 
five mortality needs to be 
accelerated, which will 
require stronger emphasis 
on making health care more 
efficient and effective. It
will also require increased
budget, assuming this can
be used effectively. 
The NPRS has targeted the 
reduction of maternal 
mortality from 42.3 (per 
100,000 live births) to 40 by 
2005 

NPRS targets are more
modest than the Millennium 
Goals, and are more 
realistic. However, as 
above, continued progress 
in extending health reforms 
will be critical.

The ongoing Health II Project
has achieved significantly
improved results in pilot areas.
It is essential that these
reforms now be extended to
the major population centers.

The proposed Health and
Social Protection SWAp
would strengthen primary and
secondary health care services
and budgets.

_

The ongoing Health II Project
has achieved significantly
improved results in pilot areas.
It is essential that these
reforms now be extended to
the major population centers.

The proposed Health and
Social Protection SWAp
would strengthen primary and
secondary health care services
and budgets.

Projections (World Bank) 
show that without 
prevention, HIV/AIDS 
cases will rapidly increase. 

The ongoing Health Project
and the proposed SWAp will
help improve the overall
efficiency of health systems.

The incidence of TB is 
related to continuing use of 
outmoded treatment 
techniques and prison 
conditions. 

The Global Fund for TB,
HIV/AIDS and Malaria was 
recently approved for $17 
million and will help initiate 
prevention actions. 

An ongoing World Bank
regional HIV/IDS study will
serve as a basis for future
Bank interventions. IDA will
primarily contnbute in
analysis of strategic choices.

IDA has also been requested
to play a management role in
utilizing TB funds provided
under the GFATM grant.

Reducing 
maternal 
mortality by 
three 
quarters. 

Maternal mortality rates in 
the Kyrgyz increased in the 
years following transition, 
but have since stabilized 
and are declining 

Reversing the HIV/AIDS prevalence is 
spread of 
still low As of September 
HIV/AIDS 
2002, there were 310 
and other 
officially reported cases, 
critical 
although unofficial
diseases 
estimates are higher. 

The incidence of TB has 
almost doubled in the last 5 
years (128/100,000) 

Ensuring 
environmental 
sustainability 
(including 
halving the 
proportion of 
people 
without access 
to safe water). 

The Government has 
The proposed Natural Disaster
established the correction of Mitigation Project, combined
the radioactive tailings as a 
with a possible GEF project,
top pnority. 
will help to directly address
the issue of natural disaster
planning with other donors,
including the issue of tailings,

The Kyrgyz Republic's 
natural resources are a key 
treasure. Agriculture and 
mining are placing strains 
on this and are also subject 
to natural disaster risks. The The NPRS has targeted to 
Kyrgyz Republic also 
increase the proportion of 
inherited some 
people with access to safe
environmental problems 
drinking water from 85 9% 
from the Soviet Union 
to 87.8% by 2005 
including the storage of 
radioactive tailings. 

Attachment 3
Page 3 of 3

The ongoing regional
biodiversity project supports
Kyrgyz Republic in protecting
forests and biodiversity.

The ongoing water supply
project provides rural
households with improved
water supply. This will be
supplemented during the CAS
period with the Small Town
Infrastructure Project which
will help the small towns
improve their infrastructure,
including on water supply.

The CAS seeks to support the
development of this
partnership through moving to
programmatic support,
providing Kyrgyz Republic is
ready, through a Poverty
Reduction Support Credit and
a health and social protection

SWAp.

Kyrgyz inherited an 
extensive water supply 
system from the Soviet 
Union which is rapidly 
deteriorating. There is a 
need to urgently identify 
appropriate rehabilitation 

Develop a 
Global 
Partnership 
for 
Development 

The Kyrgyz Republic was Progress under the NPRS 
one of the first CDF pilots, will be measured in annual 
has prepared a full NPRS, 
progress reports Initial 
and has held an in-country 
areas to focus on are the 
CG where donors pledged prioritization of 
to 
strengthen 
their 
interventions, and 
partnership 
behind 
the monitoring and evaluation. 
NPRS 

Minutes of CAS discussions

ROUND TABLE WITH NGOs
February 4, 2003

Attachment 4
Page 1 of 7

The Round Table was chaired by the UN Resident Coordinator. Participants included the World
Bank's Country Manager and Bank staff, 24 representatives of NGOs, and a representative from
the Government.

Introductory Note
The World Bank's Country Manager provided a brief overview about the design and substance
of the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS). He noted that the CAS document is designed in a
participatory manner and is expected to be finalized in May, 2003, after which it would be made
public. He explained that the CAS was based on the three major areas indicated in the Kyrgyz
Republic's National Strategy for Poverty Reduction (NPRS) - economic growth, governance and
social services - as well as regional cooperation.

General Issues

* The Issue of debt and monitoring development effectiveness. Many participants indicated
concern about whether donor funds were being utilized effectively or were unnecessarily
adding to the debt levels of the Kyrgyz Republic. It was felt that stronger institutional
arrangements were needed to bring greater involvement of the civil society in monitoring
both Bank projects and overall NPRS performance. The Bank noted that the new CAS
would seek to strengthen monitoring and for the first time provide a significant amount of
WB support in the form of grants.

* Use of local consultants. Many participants underlined the importance of more intensive
involvement of local consultants in the process of project implementation. This would
help in adopting the best international practice to local conditions, providing more timely
and tangible outcomes and would also contribute to the building of local capacity.
* Public awareness of WB activities. It was emphasized that there was a need to strengthen
civil society's information and knowledge about World Bank activities, both in general
and related to specific projects.

* Project design. The importance of NGO involvement in the design the WB projects was
also highlighted as an area of further improvement. This was justified on the grounds of
the NGOs experience and knowledge at the grass root level.

* Transparency and monitoring. Participants emphasized the importance of disseminating
World Bank project performance indicators to the broad public. Monitoring of these
indicators by representatives of civil society and other interested parties would allow
them to increase the efficiency of project implementation, as well as contribute to the
transparency of WB activities. It would also strengthen accountability in the area of the
international aid.

* Small grant program. Participants suggested that this program should focus more on
capacity building of NGOs rather than providing specific services that substitute for the
state sector.

Attachment 4
Page 2 of 7

Partnership Projects: Participants noted that during the recent Consultative Group
(CG), NGOs had distributed a book on partnership projects and these should be examined
for possible funding by donors.

Economic Growth
* Sources of Growth. Participants agreed that the focus on agro-processing in the CAS was
important as was the focus on reducing losses in the energy sector. They encouraged the
Bank to work with local communities on addressing these issues.

* Micro-financing programs. It was mentioned that micro-credit programs are of particular
importance for poverty alleviation and pnvate sector development objectives, especially
in rural areas. Participants appreciated WB assistance in this important area. At the same
time they expressed the opinion that interest rates on micro-credits of many domestic
financial institutions (e.g. Agricultural Finance Corporation) providing services on behalf
of the WB are too high, despite the highly concessional terms of the IDA credits to the
Kyrgyz Government. In this context it was suggested to introduce some programs of
direct financing of local entities (including non commercial organizations) providing such
services. Greater support for credit unions was also suggested.

* Private sector development. Participants suggested more active involvement of the Bank
in private sector development on the grounds of the importance of the latter to the
economic growth of the country. They encouraged the Bank to provide more funds to the
private sector directly rather than through the government.

* Environmental sustainability: Participants suggested that the Bank include elements in
the CAS which would address key environmental issues. The Bank explained that this
would be the case and several Global Environmental Facility (GEF) projects were
underway or being considered.

Governance
* Civil society voice and participation. Participants were concerned about the lack of civil
society participation in governance, which is partially caused by the lack of information
on operations of the State and involvement in the Budget Hearings process. Budget
performance indicators are also not available for the broad public. A concern was also
expressed that NGOs (as well as civil society as a whole) do not have information on
donor assistance, the targets and beneficiaries of financial aid, and the effectiveness of its
implementation. Also the present mechanisms of social partnership between state and
civil society are extremely weak. The establishment of Community Investment Funds
(formed through the contributions of the state, private sector and civil societies) and their
management in a transparent and accountable manner was suggested as one possibility to
facilitate such partnership. This idea was supported by the Government's representative,
who agreed that foreign credits should be disbursed to local communities. He also
mentioned that supporting social development at the community level would require
strengthening local capacity in budget principles.

Attachment 4
Page 3 of 7

* Governance ofprojects. There was a sense that project governance needed to be
improved and transparency strengthened. Also there should be greater use of local
experts in project implementation.

* Strengthening the use of local self-governments. Given that many CAS projects are
proposed to be conducted at the community level, the importance of strengthening local
self-government bodies in the process was underlined. Such entities are aware of local
communities' needs and are able to facilitate and streamline project implementation, and
insure efficiency. However some measures should be undertaken for further
improvement in the professional level of local self-govemment entities.

Social Services
* 
In general participants endorsed the proposed projects of the social component of the
CAS.
* Village investment program. There was strong support for this project and the
Community Driven Development approach in general. Participants emphasized the need
to help local governments and communities improve their capacity and skills to ensure
good implementation.

* Rural education project. NGOs were particularly supportive of the rural education
project, given the poor state of rural schools and high dropout rates there. They indicated
that an improved approach needs to be applied in order to avoid the shortcomings
experienced during the implementation of education projects financed by other donors in
the past. The project should address the following issues: (i) changing the curriculum to
develop new skills required in the context of a changing environment, (ii) improving
basic infrastructure, (iii) increasing the supply of textbooks and other supplies, and (iv)
providing for more teacher training. The procurement process should be conducted based
on consultations with local communities and civil society to ensure that funds are not
wasted.
* Types of project beneficiaries. Participants appreciated the attention given in the CAS to
the rural population. It was additionally suggested that attention be given as well to the
urban poor, exacerbated by the recently emerged problem of internal migration.
Conditions for internal migrants are extremely difficult in the absence of employment
opportunities and lack of basic living conditions. NGO representatives suggested
addressing this issue through WB activities.

* Use of NGOs in delivering services. Participants indicated that the Government is
responsible for many functions but is often not able to deliver satisfactory results due to
the lack of financing and low capacity. Therefore it was suggested to delegate some of
these functions to non-governmental organizations if found appropriate. There are many
high-qualified specialists in such entities who could help the state to fulfill its functions
and provide certain services to the society. WB funds could be used for financing such
activities.

Regional Issues

* Regional micro-credit conference. Participants supported this Central Asia wide
approach and encouraged NGOs to be involved.

Attachment 4
Page 4 of 7

* Involvement of NGOs in regional activities. The participants suggested that the
involvement of NGOs from the participating countries in regional project implementation
would be one of the key elements in determining the success of regional projects. They
also encouraged the Bank to find ways of bringing NGOs from different Central Asia
countries together.
* Additional suggestions. Participants suggested including in the CAS regional analysis on
preventing conflicts over land, borders and water issues. Other issues suggested included
drug trafficking and human trafficking.

Attachment 4
Page 5 of 7

Minutes of CAS discussions

ROUND TABLE WITH PRIVATE SECTOR REPRESENTATIVES

February 4, 2003

The Round Table was chaired by the UN Resident Coordinator. Participants included the World
Bank's Country Manager and Bank staff and 20 representatives of the private sector.

Introductory Note
The World Bank's Country Manager provided a brief overview about the design and substance
of the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS). He noted that the CAS document is designed in a
participatory manner and is expected to be finalized in May, 2003, after which it would be made
public. He explained that the CAS was based on the three major areas indicated in the Kyrgyz
Republic's National Strategy for Poverty Reduction (NPRS) - economic growth, governance and
social services - as well as regional cooperation.

General Issues
* Public awareness of WYB activities. Representatives of the private sector advised the WB
to provide the Kyrgyz population and the private sector with more information on the
WB's general role and objectives, and the activities that it conducts in the KR in specific.

* Pilot projects. It was suggested to conduct small pilot projects prior to launching
proposed projects. This measure would allow taking into consideration potential
weaknesses and conflicts.

* WB project monitoring. It would be advisable to establish a set of performance indicators
for each WB project. This would allow civil society to monitor project implementation,
and the WB and KR government to increase efficiency in the use of funds.
* Private sector involvement in project design. Participants suggested that the WB
consider involving private sector representatives in project design and preparation.
* Coordination with other donors. It was suggested that the WB cooperate more closely
with other international donors in prioritizing activities. The WB mentioned that one of
the main CAS principles is partnerships with other donors, which includes not replicating
other donor activities, but complementing them in areas where the WB possesses
expertise and knowledge.

Economic Growth

* Agriculture. Some participants agreed that agro-processing was an important area that
should be supported. At the same time, one participant indicated that given that only 4
percent of the land was arable, the future of Kyrgyz Republic was not in agriculture but
in trade and services. Another participant noted that there was already overproduction in
agriculture and what was needed is for help in agriculture marketing and trade.

* Micro-finance. Participants agreed that this was an important area, and appreciated IFC's
support through commercial banks, but also noted that there was growing competition

Attachment 4
Page 6 of 7

among micro-finance agencies. It was suggested that the Bank should support the growth
of micro and small businesses in remote areas.
* Trade. The majority of participants regarded the issue of trade barriers as a major
constraint to economic growth. Therefore, they suggested implementing a project on
Trade Facilitation as early as possible. The World Bank representative clarified that
while the CAS agrees that increasing trade is critical it is not clear how this can be done,
given the policies and practices in some of Kyrgyz' neighbors. Therefore, the World
Bank is undertaking a Trade Diagnostic this year, before considering the design of a
future project. One participant suggested that a future project could help entrepreneurs
display goods at trade fairs. Another suggested that the answer would be to help
neighboring countries join the WTO. A third suggestion was to set up Kyrgyz
Information Centers to provide a one-stop shop of information on Kyrgyz regulations for
foreign investors, and also to provide Kyrgyz companies with information about laws and
customs of other countries.
* Creation offavorable business environment. Participants also agreed that the business
environment needed urgent attention. Some participants indicated that the process of
initial capital accumulation in the Kyrgyz Republic was completed. However, the
cumbersome regulation and taxation systems (as well as fear of being inspected by tax
authorities) prevents businessmen from entering into the formal economy and encourages
them to move to other countries. Establishment of legal rules allowing businessmen to
legalize accumulated capital would allow the Kyrgyz Republic to retain such funds and
increase the country's economic growth. There was also a need to simplify business
procedures, particularly for the rural population. 
It was also suggested to support the
development of business associations in order to help train entrepreneurs.
* Strengthening the banking system. The participants underlined the importance of
strengthening the banking system and encouraging the citizens' and private sector's
confidence in the Kyrgyz banks. The absence of deposit insurance was highlighted as a
major constraint toward the attraction of savings to banks. In the absence of adequate
levels of domestic savings mobilization, the price of loans provided to the private sector
is extremely high, and there is an over-reliance on international donor funds. In addition
it was also suggested to include in the FINBUS project support for the improvement of
banking legislation, including a law on payment systems.
* Effect of WB activities on the sustainability of the Kyrgyz domestic market. Participants
mentioned that all players in the domestic market should be in equal positions. But some
projects of international donors create new entities which have privileged rules of the
game. This can create distortions in the domestic market, undermine the development of
local commercial entities and erode the sustainability of the domestic market. For
example, World Bank projects, by providing free consultations and inexpensive
agriculture services to farmers, put local consultancy and service firms in an unfair
position. Such firms will not have adequate motivation for development and when the
WB projects close, the local firms may not be developed enough to substitute for it.

Governance

* Transparency in Government activities. Many participants expressed concern regarding
the lack of information related to activities and expenditures carried out by the

Government. This information vacuum limits the ability of the private sector to take
strategic decisions. Participants suggested that the Bank should support the flow of
information, including rating how the Government is performing in each sector.

Attachment 4
Page 7 of 7

* Local communities. According to participants, the current fiscal system and
intergovernmental relations do not stimulate the economic and social development of
local communities. It was suggested to reduce the circulation of funds between the central
and local authorities by reducing tax obligations on the regions as well as expenditure
liabilities on the state.

Social Services

* Reforms in the social sectors. Participants were not impressed so far with the
Government's performance on reforms in health, pension and education, and supported
further World Bank efforts in these areas. The slow pace of the reform and the
weaknesses in reforms were due to inadequate consultation with civil society and other
shareholders. It was suggested that business people should be involved in the reform
process. Bolder reforms were needed, particularly in health and education. As the social
sectors have already developed a practice of informal payments, it is important to
consider ways of formalizing such informal payments. This has to be accompanied by the
establishment of better ways to monitor the use of such payments.

Regional Issues
* Program of regional collaboration. Participants suggested that there was little real
regional cooperation in the Central Asia region, and this was an area where international
donors could provide value added.

* Intergovernmental trade agreements. Usually multilateral and bilateral trade agreements
are prepared by government officials, many of whom lack understanding of the real
situation. Therefore, the involvement of the representatives of business associations in
this process is of utmost importance.

* Information sharing. Businessmen experience a lack of infornation on taxation,
regulation rules and legislation in neighboring countries. It was proposed to consider the
establishment of a Regional Information Center to equip businessmen, who are involved
in international trade, with the relevant knowledge and information.

PARTNERSHIPS IN THE DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK

Development Challenges 

Growth 

Human Development 

Governance

Attachment 5
Page I of I

-o 
Govemmen 

.

) 

a) 

coCDF 

(0 

* 

.' 

LE 

- e l 

IsDB 

Blea 

-

V 

E 

.r 0 

CU 

, 

-- W 

| 

-

(U~~~~~~~~~) 
-

-

0.. 

0) 

w

C.a 

0 

2 

-

0.

.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~E

:,

- 0 E

o

Q 

0 
E 

-

.

L

__

_

__ 

~ 

PartnEr/ActivitU 
TC 

Government

World Bank Group* 

IMF 

ADB 

UN 

IsDB

EU TAGCIS 

Bilaterals

Civil Society

Private Sector

EiJ ~~~~~ 

F 1Little or No Focus 

O 

C 

FOCUS ~~~~~*Inclu4dinlg as proposed in CASFou
Sm ou 
ou

infcn 

Attachment 6
Page I of 4

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC: RELATIONS WITH THE IMF

I. 
The Kyrgyz Republic joined the IMF on August 5, 1992. Its quota' is SDR 88.8 million
(about $120 million). The Kyrgyz Republic's outstanding use of IMF credits at end-
November 2002 totaled SDR 137.9 (about $186.4 million).

2. 
The third three-year arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) was approved on December 6, 2001, with access of SDR 73.4 million or 82.6 percent of
quota. On February 20, 2003, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation 2 with the Kyrgyz Republic and approved the second-year
program of the current arrangement. Three loans of SDR 11.72 million each have been
disbursed.

3. 
Program conditionalities include quantitative and structural performance criteria. The
second year program's quantitative performance criteria targets a net international reserves (NIR
of the Central Bank) floor and a net domestic assets (NDA) ceiling in line with a projected
inflation rate of 4.4 percent and real GDP growth of 5.2 percent. Several criteria are designed to
monitor the fiscal performance: the state government fiscal deficit, a floor on the state
government cash tax collection as well as a ceiling on the stock of the central government budget
arrears. Targets are also set for the Social Fund's performance. These include a zero ceiling on
the pension arrears, a floor on the payroll tax collection in cash and a declining ceiling on the
stock of Social Fund arrears to the Medical Insurance Fund. Finally, two ceilings are imposed on
the contracting and guaranteemg of new non-concessional external debt.

4. 
On structural reforms, the program focuses on four areas: governance, the banking sector,
the quasi-fiscal deficit of the power sector, and privatization of strategic enterprises. A new
governance initiative aims at increasing the efficiency of public administration and the
transparency of the judiciary. The banking reform, drawing on the recommendations of the
recent Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), aims at strengthening bank supervision,
divesting state-owned banks, and computerizing the payments system.

Background

5. 
After two years of real GDP growth above 5 percent, output stagnated in 2002. It was
adversely affected by a large landslide at the Kumtor gold mine-the country's major exporter-
and weather-related contraction in hydro-electric energy production. On the other hand, real
GDP excluding gold and energy recorded a 3.5 percent growth rate. Price stabilization has
continued: the 12-month inflation fell to 2.3 percent at end-2002, the lowest level since
independence.

1 A member's quota in the IMF determines, in particular, the amount of its subscription, its voting weight, its access
to IMF financing, and its allocation of SDRs
2 Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually
every year. At the request of the authorities, a Public Information Notice (PIN) is issued following the conclusion of
the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This annex is
based on the PIN issued after the February 20, 2003 Executive Board meeting of the IMF.

Attachment 6
Page 2 of 4

6. 
The proposed program is consistent with the country's National Poverty Reduction
Strategy (NPRS) presented to the IMF and the World Bank on December 9, 2002. It projects a
real GDP growth of 5 percent a year in 2003-2006 supported by productivity gains through
structural reforms and more efficient use of capital and labor. The key policies include a
continuous fiscal adjustment and a modest growth of som broad money of 15 percent in 2003
after rapid remonetization of the economy observed recently. The National Bank will continue its
exchange rate policy of a managed float, which has served the country well. It will intervene in
the foreign exchange market to smooth temporary market fluctuations and to accumulate
reserves as appropriate. The program aims at a 4 percent inflation in 2003 and the medium term.

7. 
Total factor productivity is expected to be the main source of growth resulting from
structural reforms, including in the areas of governance and the banking sector. As gold
production is expected to start declining in the medium term, other industries will need to offset
its negative growth impact which calls for strong cost competitiveness of exports. Export
volumes are projected to grow 4.5 percent per year.

8. 
The continuation of fiscal adjustment is necessary for the success of the foreign debt
reduction strategy launched in 2001. To strengthen the tax base, the government has introduced
the 2003 budget with several new tax measures including an extension of VAT to cover large
agricultural producers' sales in the domestic market. Overall, the general government tax-to-
GDP ratio is expected to increase to 18 percent in 2003 from 17 percent in 2002. The authorities
intend to streamline the Pubic Investment Program to 4.5 percent of GDP in 2003 so that the
overall cash deficit will decline to 4.6 percent of GDP down from 5.6 percent of GDP in 2002. In
the medium term, the fiscal deficit is targeted to fall to 3 percent of GDP. The proposed second-
year program is fully financed through a combination of debt reschedulings from the Paris Club
and balance of payment support from multilateral institutions.

9. 
The need to reduce trade restrictions in Central Asia is crucial to reap the benefits of
foreign trade. The Kyrgyz authorities already maintain a liberal and low tariff trade regime.
Recently, in line with WTO recommendations, the top import tariff has been further reduced and
the number of tariff bands cut from six to four. The authorities also agreed to refrain from
introducing new tariffs or nontariff barriers on agricultural or other imports.

Executive Board Assessment

10. 
Executive Directors commended the Kyrgyz authorities for their prudent monetary and
fiscal policies. While real GDP contracted somewhat in 2002, partly owing to one-time factors, it
was set to grow again in 2003 at about the strong pace of the preceding five years. Inflation has
fallen significantly over the same period and remains well contained, and intemational reserves
are growing, supported by broad exchange rate stability of the som. Importantly, economic
growth has reduced poverty, especially in the rural areas, and income distribution has improved.

11. 
Directors emphasized that, despite the encouraging progress seen in those areas, many
challenges remain. The level of external debt remains high, more needs to be done to reduce
poverty and improve social conditions, and in light of the decline in gold resources, greater
diversification of the economy is needed, built on stronger small- and medium-scale enterprises.
More progress in reducing corruption and state capture and improving governance is also
essential to encourage private sector investment and economic diversification, and to instill
greater public faith in state institutions. Directors welcomed the authorities' determnination not to

Attachment 6
Page 3 of 4

repeat the uneven policy implementation of previous Fund-supported programs, and to move
ahead with a realistic and pragmatic policy and reform agenda.

12. 
Directors commended the authorities for meeting the current PRGF-supported program's
fiscal targets despite the shortfall of revenue from the Kumtor gold mine. At the same time, they
stressed that achieving a sustainable fiscal position over the medium term will depend crucially
on further reforms in tax administration and broadening the tax base. In this context, Directors
welcomed the submission to parliament of legislation to extend the VAT to large agricultural
producers, while also having included in the budget measures to protect the poor from potentially
higher food prices. On the expenditure side, Directors supported the authorities' intention to use
the scope created by a further streamlining of the Public Investment Program and cuts in
spending on less essential items to increase spending on social and poverty reduction prograrns.

13. 
Directors noted that the central bank's monetary policy has contained inflation while
allowing for a remonetization of the economy. In view of the strong growth of the monetary
aggregates, they urged the authorities to react quickly to any sign of rekindling inflation by
tightening monetary conditions through open market operations. The recent issuance of
marketable government securities by the Ministry of Finance to the central bank provides room
for maneuver in this respect.

14. 
Directors considered that the exchange rate policy of managed floating has been
successful in preventing excessive appreciation of the nominal exchange rate and thereby
supporting competitiveness. They commended the authorities for their liberal trade and foreign
exchange regimes.

15. 
Directors emphasized that, in light of steadily declining gold resources, diversifying the
export base will be essential if the authorities' medium-term growth and poverty reduction
objectives are to be attained. Improved cost competitiveness in the non-gold sector through
increases in productivity, along with continued low inflation, would be important in that regard.
At the same time, Directors noted that trade restrictions and other non-tariff barriers constrain
Kyrgyz export prospects in the region, and hamper the realization of the country's comparative
advantage and export potential. They emphasized the importance of addressing these restrictions
in the context of intensified regional cooperation.

16. 
Directors agreed that the implementation of the external debt strategy was on track, and
they encouraged the government to adhere strictly to its objectives, in particular by further fiscal
consolidation and by avoiding fiscal slippages in the run-up to the 2005 parliamentary and
presidential elections. Directors welcomed the completion of all bilateral debt reschedulings with
Paris Club creditors, and encouraged the authorities to pursue agreements with all remaining
non-Paris Club creditors on comparable terms. Strong implementation of the PRGF-supported
program would be the best way to encourage Paris Club creditors to exercise their goodwill
clause for a debt stock relief in 2004.

17. 
Directors believed that more should be done to push forward the structural reform
agenda. They stressed that strengthening governance, the legal system, and the banking sector is
crucial to improving the business climate, attracting foreign direct investment, and boosting
productivity. The authorities should take a firm stance against corruption and state capture,
which undermine private investment and the opportunities of small and medium-size enterprises.
Directors underscored the need to continue developing the still small banking sector, and address

bank vulnerabilities. They urged the authorities to apply strictly the prudential regulations in
order to improve public trust in banks. They welcomed the submission to parliament of a draft
law on anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism, in line with the
recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Program. Directors stressed the importance
of restructuring and privatizing public enterprises.

Attachment 6
Page 4 of 4

18. 
Directors commended the authonties for the broad participatory process employed in
preparing the NPRS, which provides a comprehensive approach to poverty reduction and
medium-term macroeconomic strategy. However, Directors underscored the need to strengthen
costing, prioritization, and sequencing of policy measures in the NPRS, and to finalize
implementation plans and monitoring and evaluation mechanisms in the NPRS Secretariat.

