d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 25329-TJ

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO

THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF TAJIIUSTAN

February 3, 2003

Central Asia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate in January 2003)

Currency Unit= Somoni
US$0.3294 Somoni
3.0355 Somoni/US$

GOVERNMENT'S FISCAL YEAR

January 1 - December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development
Asian Development Bank
Central Asia Regional Office
Country Assistance Strategy
Community-driven development
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Accountability Review
Europe and Central Asia
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Former Soviet Union
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Fund
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
Global Development Learning Network
Institution Building and Technical Assistance
International Development Association
Institution Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Labor Organization
International Monetary Fund
Joint Staff Assessment
Low Income Countries Under Stress
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
National Environment Action Plan
Non-Governmental Organization
Net present value
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Structural Adjustment Credit
Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises
United Nations Development Program

IDA Team
Vice President: Johannes F. Linn
Country Director: Dennis de Tray
Team Leaders: Lilia Burunciuc, Cevdet Denizer

AAA 
AKFED 
AsDB 
CARO 
CAS 
CDD 
CFAA 
CPAR 
ECA 
ESW 
EU 
FSU 
GDP 
GEF 
GFATM 
GDLN 
IBTA 
IDA 
IDF 
IFC 
ILO 
IMF 
JSA 
LICUS 
MIGA 
NEAP 
NGO 
NPV 
PER 
PRSP 
PRSC 
SAC 
SME 
UNDP 

REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUtMMARY ............................................................... 

I. INTRODUCTION ...............................................................

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT .............................................................. 

-jli

1

1

INITIAL CONDITIONS: SEVERE SHOCKS AND A COLLAPSE OF LIVING STANDARDS .......... 1
POLITICAL ECONOMY AND GOVERNANCE CHALLENGES ............................................. . 2
RECENT ECONOMIC AND POLICY DEVELOPMENTS ......................................................... 3 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES .............................................................. 

5

MEDIUM-TERM GROWTH PROSPECTS AND EXTERNAL DEBT .......................................... 9

III. THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM .............................................................. 

MAIN ELEMENTS OF THE PRSP PROGRAM .............................................................. 

ASSESSMENT OF THE PRSP .............................................................. 

IV. LESSONS FROM EXPERIENCE .............................................................. 
AT THE PROGRAM LEVEL .............................................................. 
AT THE PORTFOLIO LEVEL .............................................................. 

V. IDA STRATEGY AND WORK PROGRAM (FY03 - 05) ....................................... 
FORMULATING THE STRATEGY .............................................................. 
COUNTRY STRATEGY FRAMEWORK .............................................................. 
PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS .............................................................. 
LENDING PROGRAM SCENARIOS ........................................ 
REGIONAL AAA PROGRAM ........................................ 

WBI PROGRAM ........................................ 
IFC PROGRAM ........................................ 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND MONITORING ........................................ 

VI. KEY ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTING THE CAS ........................................ 
PARTNERSHIPS AND DONOR COORDINATION ........................................ 
CAS PARTICIPATORY PROCESS ........................................ 
RISKS ........................................ 

11
11
13

14
14
15

16
16
18
19
21
23
25
26
26

28
28
29
30

LIST OF TABLES

Table 1: 
Table 2: 
Table 3: 
Table 4: 
Table 5: 
Table 6: 
Table 7: 

Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 1998 - 2002
Alternative Macro Scenarios for 2003 - 2005
PRSP Poverty Alleviation Targets
Core Diagnostic Economic and Sector Work
Tajikistan-IDA Lending Program, FY03-05 (million US$)
CAS Triggers FY03-05
Core CAS Monitoring Benchmarks

LIST OF BOXES

Box 1: 
Box 2: 
Box 3: 
Box 4: 
Box 5: 
Box 6: 
Box 7: 
Box 8: 

Review of reforms to date
Millennium development goals
HIV/AIDS in Tajikistan
Gender, poverty and human development in Tajikistan
Environmental and natural resources management issues
Community-based activities in Tajikistan
Ferghana Valley water resources management program
Client feedback survey

LIST OF ANNEXES

Annex 1 (A2): 
Annex 2 (B2): 
Annex 3 (B3): 
Annex 4 (B3): 
Annex 5 (B4): 
Annex 6 (B5): 
Annex 7 (B6): 
Annex 8 (B7): 
Annex 9 (B8): 
Annex 10 (B8): 
Annex 11 (B9): 
Annex 12 (B 10): 

Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program Summary
Summary of Non-lending Services
Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio - IBRD/IDA and Grants
Statement of IFCs Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Country Program Matrix
Summary of Development Priorities

LIST OF ATTACHMENTS

Attachment 1 
Attachment 2 
Attachment 3 
Attachment 4 

Debt Sustainability and IDA Lending
Tajikistan and MDGs
The PRSP and Donor Coordination Matrix
Tajikistan: Relations with the IMF
Map of Tajikistan 
28400R

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
Development Challenges. Tajikistan is a low-income country where poverty is
widespread and deep. Infrastructure is deteriorating rapidly. And the prospect for a lost
generation is increasingly real as the education system continues to deteriorate. The
country suffered widespread physical damage and heavy human losses from a civil war
that broke out soon after independence. Combined with the break-up of the Soviet Union
and the concomitant losses in subsidies and trade, the war left the country politically,
socially and economically vulnerable. Only after signing and implementing the peace
accord in mid-1997 was the Government able to turn its attention to the economic and
social development agenda.

ii. Good progress has been achieved since 1998 - economic growth reached double

digits in the last two years. But, as outlined in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP), the country's development agenda remains daunting. A large external debt,
which absorbed almost 50 percent of fiscal revenues in 2002, complicates economic
management and affects Tajikistan's ability to reduce poverty. Weak institutions and
poor governance are serious constraints on development. Deficiencies in the legal
framework and judicial system and an unreformed public administration hamper
development of an investment climate necessary for private sector development. The
political and security situations add to uncertainty. This country assistance strategy sets
out an agenda for International Development Association (IDA) assistance that tries to
serve the country's critical needs, as outlined in its recent PRSP, while recognizing its
financial and institutional constraints.

iii. 
Issues For Board Discussion. In its discussions, the Board may wish to consider the
following:

* 
* 

Is the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) consistent with Tajikistan's PRSP?
Is the change in strategy's focus on community-driven development, while continuing
institution building efforts in the medium term, an appropriate strategy for Tajikistan?
* Does the strategy make use of appropriate elements of the "Low Income Country under
Stress" (LICUS) approach?

iv. Strategic Priorities: PRSP and CAS. The Government's poverty reduction
strategy, outlined in its first full PRSP, was discussed by the IDA and IMF Boards in
December 2002. The PRSP comprises four elements: sustainable growth, improved
governance, better provision of basic social services, and targeted support for the poor.
While the Boards considered the PRSP's overall direction to be appropriate, the lack of
prioritization was identified as a major weakness. The CAS recognizes this concern by
emphasizing selectivity. The CAS.focuses on three key objectives that are consistent
with the PRSP:

* 

to improve community-based support of public infrastructure and services, especially
health and education;

Page ii 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

* 

* 

to foster economic activity through a program of micro and small scale credit,
transferring land user rights to farmers and lowering the cost of doing business;
to strengthen the institutions needed for a market economy through a long-term
program of institution-building scaled to Tajikistan's modest present implementation
capacity.
v. 
As such, the CAS is taking a new approach that has evolved from the past
experience: as it works to build a foundation for better institutions in the medium term,
the CAS program will support the immediate needs of the population, especially the poor,
through a strong commitment to community-driven development. The institution-
building program will be strengthened by the World Bank Institute's selection of
Tajikistan as a focus country for its capacity-building program in Central Asia.

vi. Lending Scenarios. Tajikistan is in the Base Case Scenario. Continued support
under this scenario would depend on macroeconomic performance, particularly good
external debt management, and continued progress with structural reforms supported by a
possible Structural Adjustment Credit (SAC) in FY04 (US$10 million). Under this case,
IDA would provide up to US$80 million. This level of lending is lower than in the past
due to the phasing out of Tajikistan's status as a transition country in a post-conflict
situation. Tajikistan is eligible to receive 29 percent of its IDA allocation as grants in
FY03.

vii. A move to the High Case Scenario could include an additional US$20 million in
lending and would depend on accelerated progress in fiduciary and institutional reforms.
Under this scenario, IDA could consider a Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) in
FY05 (US$20 million). If the country fails to show adequate progress in meeting the
Base Case triggers, or the security situation deteriorates significantly, the country
program would be moved to the Low Case Scenario, which involves a lending program
of up to US$45 million with projects limited to basic social services.

viii. In view of the sensitivity of Tajikistan's debt sustainability profile to the future
uncertain evolution of government revenues and exports, developments in these areas
will be kept under review. Should developments indicate a material deterioration in
Tajikistan's debt sustainability profile, the calibration of IDA assistance outlined in the
preceding paragraph would be reviewed and revised as necessary in a progress report to
the Board to ensure continued progress toward debt sustainability.

ix. Analytic Work. Consistent with the LICUS approach, IDA will accelerate its
investment in a knowledge base for Tajikistan. An expanded ESW program will be
completed in the first part of the CAS period, centered on core tasks (PERs, CPARs,
CFAAs), analyses of barriers to progress in key sectors, and development of consistent,
medium term (10-year) institution-building programs.

x. Donor and Regional Cooperation. Donor coordination continues to be critical for
Tajikistan. As IDA's own resources are constrained, increased donor coordination,
clearer division of labor and additional grant funds are emphasized by the CAS. In
addition, the CAS underscores the importance for Tajikistan of strengthened regional
cooperation. IDA is actively strengthening its regional work in Central Asia through a

Page iiir 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

series of regional initiatives in such areas as trade and transport facilitation, water
management issues, energy markets in Central Asia, knowledge sharing, communicable
diseases (HIV/AIDS, TB), and micro-enterprise lending. Tajikistan will be a major focus
of all of these initiatives.

xi. Performance Monitoring. Achievement of development outcomes will be monitored
at three levels: (i) overall performance against a set of benchmarks related to the MDGs
and PRSP objectives covering poverty, macroeconomic (including debt) and social'
indicators; (ii) specific performance on progress indicators linked to each of the three CAS
objectives; and (iii) improved portfolio management by satisfactory implementation of
agreed-upon action plans in the context of annual Country Portfolio Performance Reviews.
In support of the Government's PRSP monitoring and evaluation program, the CAS will
provide support to build the government's capacity to produce reliable baseline data and
measurement tools for monitoring and evaluating program outcomes.

xii. Risks. IDA's ability to implement the strategy outlined in this CAS will be
determined in part by developments in regional security, by our collective ability to offset
institutional weaknesses and by the impact of external events. Stable regional and domestic
security will be a key precondition for successful implementation of the CAS. In some
respects events in Afghanistan have had less effect on Tajikistan than originally
anticipated, but in others, most notably drug trafficking, the impact has not been good. A
significant worsening of the security situation would reduce the ability of IDA to pursue its
strategy.

xiii. Tajikistan's institutions will remain weak throughout this CAS period and, indeed,
well beyond. The CAS deals with this constraint by emphasizing selectivity and is designed
to keep the Government and IDA focused on a set of activities commensurate with the
existing financial and capacity constraints.

xiv. External shocks, which can be exacerbated by large foreign debt levels and highly
concentrated exports, are being mitigated by the Government's implementation of a debt
management strategy, including ongoing discussions on debt restructuring with Tajikistan's
largest creditors and export diversification programs. Any derailment of these talks or
deterioration in the environment for exports would pose a significant risk to-the CAS. As
noted above, these risks will be carefully monitored.

TAJIKISTAN
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

I. 

INTRODUCTION

1. 
The last Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was discussed by the
Board on July 21, 1998 (IDA/R98-105/1). This Country Assistance Strategy, covering
FY03 - 05, is the third CAS prepared for Tajikistan and the first taking into account
Tajikistan's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). Given weak institutional
capacity, limited investment resources and governance concerns, this CAS emphasizes
selectivity, focusing on three areas: providing local social services and infrastructure
through community involvement, developing local private sector activities, and an
appropriately scaled program of long-term national capacity building.

II. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT

Initial Conditions: Severe Shocks and a Collapse of Living Standards

2. 
To understand Tajikistan's development prospects, one must understand its recent
history. Like most other Soviet Republics, the country suffered greatly from the breakup
of the Former Soviet Union (FSU).

* 

* 

* 

* 

In 1990 Tajikistan's per capita income was estimated to be around US$1,050.
Two years later, it dropped by half (to US$480 in 1992) and 10 years later it was
US$150 - an 85 percent decline. More than 80 percent of the population now
lives below the national poverty line, with women and children the most affected.
In 1990 Tajikistan's pensioners received the equivalent of US$70 each month,
teachers an average of US$100. Today pensioners are expected to survive on
US$2, teachers on US$7.
In 1990 Tajikistan's exports to the Soviet Union amounted to US$2.4 billion.
Two years later its exports to the FSU dropped to less than US$100 million.
In 1990 half of Tajikistan's total state revenues came in the form of subsidies
from the Soviet Union; two years later, there were no subsideies.

3. 
Other FSU countries experienced these same problems in varying degrees, but
Tajikistan faced - and faces today -country-specific problems that make its development
road even more difficult:

* Between 1991 and the end of hostilities in mid-1997, Tajikistan fought a civil war
that took 50,000 lives and destroyed much of the country's inherited infrastructure,
with losses estimated by the Government to be US$7 billion.
* Tajikistan's exports must travel 5,000 kilometers over land to get to the nea;est
ports (Baltic), and nearly 4,000 kilometers to get to a market with a per capita
income above US$10,000.

Page 2 of32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

* Tajikistan shares 1,200 kilometers of border with Afghanistan and has become an
important route for the drug trade that has created a culture of corruption, which
remains a serious roadblock to development and possibly to future donor
assistance.
* Almost the entire government investment budget now comes from official
development assistance.
* Starting with no external debt at independence, Tajikistan has accumulated a very
large debt stock (US$1,034 million at end-2001, equivalent to 100% of GDP).
The debt service is projected to absorb over 40 percent of fiscal revenues in the
next three years.
* Tajikistan is 93 percent mountainous.

4. 
These facts give a sense of the enormity of the tasks that the government and the
donor community face in creating a new Tajikistan. Every aspect of the country needs
rebuilding - from public sector institutions to local communities, from physical
infrastructure to human resources. Indeed, the very culture of Tajikistan is being rebuilt -
from dependency throughout the system to a growing realization among communities and
individuals of the need to take charge of the future.

Political Economy and Governance Challenges

5. 
A complex political economy. The peace accord, signed in 1997 with the United
Tajik Opposition, was fully implemented by March 2000, following presidential and
parliamentarian elections. Since then the country has been for the most part stable,
allowing the Government to consolidate its authority across regions. It is important to
mention that Tajikistan has a functioning Parliament and a functioning opposition in
Parliament. But the fragility of the situation is never far from the surface. Although there
were security concerns after September 11, 2001, the ensuing events did not affect
Tajikistan. Indeed, the chances for future stability were enhanced with the prospects of a
lasting political settlement in Afghanistan. There is now more scope for regional
cooperation with regard to water resources, energy, trade, transport, and controlling drug
trafficking and the spread of communicable diseases, though the challenges remain
enormous.

6. 
Weak institutions and governance. To end the war and achieve political
stability required the demands of disparate groups to be accommodated. Many of these
groups are now a part of the Tajikistan power base and exploit the rent-seeking
opportunities that status brings. This is especially visible in local govermment, hindering
locally-based reforms, including those in agriculture.

7. 
As discussed in the PRSP, weaknesses in public administration, financial
management, and the legal and judicial system are key governance challenges. At the
same time, the departure of many qualified civil servants during the civil war and the
difficulty of attracting new talent with the current civil service wage scale means that the
recovery of key policy institutions is likely to remain very slow. In addition, barriers to
entry as well as excessive licensing and inspections of private businesses lead to

Page 3 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

corruption and represent a major constraint for private sector development. There is also
a need for greater transparency of the accounts of large state owned enterprises - like the
giant aluminum smelter TADAZ - that play a crucial role in Tajikistan's economy.

8. 
Tajikistan's governance and institutions are being further tested by a fallout from
events in Afghanistan: while drug trafficking and drug use have both been on the rise
since 1995, there is little doubt that the rates of increase have accelerated substantially
since the war in Afghanistan. Despite the ongoing international efforts under the
leadership of United Nations to combat drug trade in the region, drug trade remains a
major risk factor in Tajikistan's effort to improve its governance.

Recent Economic and Policy Developments

9. 
Notwithstanding the difficult environment, the economy has shown surprising
resilience. During the past five years, the economy has recovered from its immediate
post-civil war difficulties, despite several droughts, deteriorating terms of trade and the
effects of the Russia crisis.

10. Macroeconomic performance. Macroeconomic stability and structural reforms
contributed to an average 7 percent GDP growth during this period, reaching 10 percent
in 2001 and expected at 8-10 percent in 2002. Growth since 1999 has been driven by
increases in aluminum and cotton production, domestic demand fuelled by growing levels
of workers' remittances and the Government's reform agenda. On reforms, the farm
privatizations program began to show results; privatization of cotton-ginneries and small-
scale enterprises were completed in 2000 and 2001 respectively; and there was progress
in the privatization of medium and large enterprises. Productivity gains were realized in
agriculture as private farm yields reached two to three times those of public fanns. In the

Table 1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 1998 - 2002
1998 
1999 
2000 

2001 

2002a

Nominal GDP (US$ mil) 
Real GDP (% change) 
GDP per capita (in US$) 
Consumer prices (12-month change, e.o.p.) 
Consumer prices (year-on-year) 
Budget deficit (% of GDP) 
Merchandise exports (US$ mil) 
Merchandise imports (US$ mil) 
Current account balance (% GDP) 
Gross international reserves (months of imports) 
External debt outstanding/GDP (%) 
NPV-of-external debt/exports (%) ) 
NPV-of-external debt/fiscal revenues (%) 
Debt service ratio (% exports)c) 
Official exchange rate (average, in Somoni/US$) 
a) Projected.
b) Computed as a three-year moving average of exports of goods and services, less aluminum imports.
c) Exports of goods and services, less aluminum imports.

1056 
10.2 
170 
12.5 
38.6 
0.1 
652 
773 
-7.0 
1.9 
98 
140 
514 
25.6 
2.4 

991 
8.3 
161 
60.6 
32.9 
0.6 
788 
834 
-6.3 
2.1 
105 
176 
579 
17.5 
1.8 

1320 
5.3 
215 
2.7 
43.2 
3.8 
586 
725 
-9.1 
1.5 
95 

... 

... 
... 
0.8 

1087 
3.7 
177 
30.1 
27.5 
3.1 
666 
693 
-3.3 
1.7 
118 

... 

... 
11.9 
1.2 

1135
8-10
180
13.0
12.2
0.2
723
819
-4.1
2.3
95
126
408
21.0
2.76

Page 4 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

industrial sector, most of the output growth derived from increased capacity utilization of
the aluminum smelter TADAZ. Small firms, which now form the core of the light
manufacturing sector, expanded their production significantly in 2002 by making better
use of their assets, as shown by two enterprise surveys undertaken over the past two
years. Productivity gains achieved through privatization are estimated to account for
about half of the 10 percent growth in 2001 and 2002, as investment has averaged less
than 4 percent of GDP.

11. Monetary policy has tightened since 2000. As a result, end-year inflation fell from
over 60 percent in 2000 to about 12Y/2 percent in 2001 and 2002.

12. 
Improvements in expenditure discipline and, in particular, in revenue collection
led to a narrowing of the budget deficit from 3.8 percent in 1998 to near-balance in 2001
and 2002. However, the fiscal situation is expected to remain difficult since revenues
were only 15 percent of GDP in 2001, and were derived largely from cotton and
aluminum export taxes. Moreover, quasi-fiscal deficits in the energy sector are currently
estimated at 5-6 percent of GDP.

13. 
The current account deficit worsened from about 5 percent in 1997 to about 7
percent in 2001 as a result of declining cotton and aluminum prices, the Russia crisis, and
droughts necessitating food imports. An improvement in Tajikistan's terms of trade,
fueled by significant exchange rate depreciation, is expected to narrow the current
account deficit to about 4 percent of GDP in 2002.

14. 
In terms of extemal debt sustainability, Tajikistan's fiscal capacity to service its
debt is the major source of concem. The nominal value of the external public and
publicly guaranteed extemal debt of Tajikistan amounted to US$1,034 million at end-
2001. While the net present value (NPV) of debt-to-exports was 140 percent, the NPV of
debt-to-revenues was 514 percent at end 2001 and will remain above 300 percent during
this CAS period. Extemal debt service is projected to absorb more than 40 percent of
government revenues from 2003 to 2005. (Debt sustainability is discussed in more detail
in paragraphs 27 and 28 and Attachment 1).

15. 
Structural reforms. Tajikistan is a late reformer among the transition countries -
its structural reform program began in earnest in 1998. Initial interventions focused on
first-generation reforms, including stabilization measures, restructuring the real and
financial sectors, and providing budget support for social sectors. More recently the
Government has focused on reforms aimed at govemance improvement, social sector
delivery, the effectiveness of poverty alleviation programs and the development of
market institutions to support private sector growth. While there has been some notable
supply response to these reformns, implementation has been uneven and much remains to
be done. Weak administrative capacity and a lack of market experience remain major
constraints to successful public and private sector reforms. Box 1 reviews recent policy
developments, which in part were supported by SAC I and SAC2.

Page 5 ,of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

Box 1. Review of reforms to date

Trade regime. Tajikistan continues to have a liberal trade regime - the most liberal trade regime in the
Customs Union (other members are Russia, Kazakhstan, Belarus, and Kyrgyz Republic. However,
Tajikistan's regional trade suffers from formal and informal restrictions at the borders with Uzbekistan
and Kazakhstan.
Public sector management. The Govemment has continued to modemize the public sector through
establishment of a national Treasury, enactment of Laws on Public Finances and the State Financial
Control Office, functional reviews of key ministries, and establishment of the Department of State
Services. However, low public sector wages and weak govemance have limited progress.
Private sector development. Although reforms were introduced over the past two years to improve
the business climate, recent surveys show that small and medium-sized firms continue to suffer
excessive interference by Government agencies. In response, the Govemment created an Anti-
Monopoly and Entrepreneurship Support Agency in early 2001-but the agency has yet to be effective.
Privatization of medium and large enterprises has been slow - by end-2002, about 500 enterprises (40
percent of the total) had been sold to the private sector.
Financial sector. Restructuring of the financial sector has proceeded at a slow pace and the banking
system remains extremely weak. Recent policy measures are aimed at developing the regulatory
framework and restructuring or closing the weakest banks. The Government has begun developing a
legal framework for improving the availability of medium-term credit for the private sector and for
promoting the establishment of non-bank financial intermediaries, especially credit unions for SMEs
and rural credit programs. Recent reforms notwithstanding, the agenda for the financial sector reforms
remains significant.
Agricultural sector. Land use rights were transferred to about 14,000 individuals and families as a
result of restructuring 300 state and collective farms, representing about 30 percent of the arable land.
The results have been encouraging, with yields reaching 2-3 times those on public farms. To further
support the private sector in agriculture, the Government reduced land registration costs and taxes on a
pilot basis in three districts. However, the viability of the irrigation sector is at risk due to heavily
subsidized energy prices.
Energy. Operating conditions in the energy sector have deteriorated significantly, resulting in high
network losses and the need to import energy to meet demand. Per capita domestic energy consumption
is very high due to extremely low tariffs, which translate into quasi-fiscal losses of 5-6 percent of GDP.
In the gas sector alone, below-cost tariffs and low collection rates led to quasi-fiscal subsidies of about
2 percent of GDP.

Human Development Challenges

16. 
Tajikistan is in danger of losing cne of the most important assets it has on which
to build its future: its human capital. High levels of poverty, an inadequate system of
social protection, deterioration of health and education services, raising concerns about
the quality and access to drinking water and growing gender disparities are identified as
key human development challenges in the PRSP. Continued economic growth and easing
the debt burden - discussed in par. 26-29 and Attachment 1 - are key to enabling the
government to deal with these challenges.

17. 
Poverty. As stated in the PRSP, poverty remains Tajikistan's central challenge.
Even before the breakup of the Soviet Union, Tajikistan was one of the poorest republics.

Page 6 -of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

The economic collapse of the early 1990s caused poverty to both intensify and become
more widespread. Despite the turnaround in growth in 1997, the country remains one of
the poorest in the world, with an estimated per capita Gross National Product (GNP) of
US$180 in 2001 (Atlas methodology). Generally accepted figures (based on the 1999
household survey data and the poverty line of 20,000 Tajik Rubles) place over 80 percent
of the country's population in poverty. Using $2.15 PPP, the poverty rate was 65 percent
in 1999. As elsewhere, poverty in Tajikistan is a multidimensional phenomenon
encompassing low levels of income and consumption, limited income earning
opportunities, and restricted access to economic assets and to basic public services -
education, health care, water supply, and heat. What particularly distinguishes Tajikistan
from most other poor countries is that for many of its citizens, poverty is a relatively new
phenomenon.

Box 2. Millennium development goals

For Tajikistan, there are two important questions with regards to the MDGs: (i) Is the country on track
to reach the MDGs by 2015? and (ii) Is the "average" progress that is being made really benefiting the
poor? Tajikistan has experienced steady economic growth in recent years, and if economic growth
continues at 5 percent annually up to 2005, the extent of poverty (using $2.15 poverty line) would drop
from 65 percent to 45 percent (assuming an unchanged income distribution). Continued progress could
enable income poverty to be halved by 2015.

In the education sector, however, overall enrollments are declining rather than rising. The enrollment
rates in primary education remain high, but lower secondary enrollment was only about 85 percent in
1999 (from near 100 percent before 1990). The country's high birth rate and declining standards in
education increase the likelihood that Tajikistan will not maintain universal primary education.
Regarding the gender balance, at the primary level it remains high, but economic hardship and social
changes during the transition years have led to falling enrollment rates in post-basic education for girls,
especially from poor families. This gender gap might increase further, making it difficult for the
country to achieve this MDG.

For some MDG targets, such as infant mortality, maternal mortality, and prevalence of HIV, progress is
difficult to evaluate. Administrative and survey data tend to disagree about the extent to which infant
and maternal mortality have been reduced since the 1990s. However, the available data suggest that it
is unlikely that either the under-5 mortality target or the maternal mortality target will be met.

Finally, the actual situation with regard to the spread of HIV/AIDS in Tajikistan is difficult to assess
due to uncertainty about the accuracy of the official data. In general, though, the situation is expected
to worsen and HIV/AIDS rates are expected to rise due to the ever-increasing use of narcotic drugs in
recent years and despite the new national HIV/AIDS strategy that will focus mainly on prevention.
Attachment 2 provides more detailed information on MGDs in Tajikistan.

18. 
The 1999 household survey paints a stark picture of Tajikistan's poor. They are
likely to live in households with many children, to be elderly (age 75 or older), to be
single and to be disabled pensioners. They are less well educated than the non-poor.
Fewer than half of all households have access to piped water; nearly a quarter rely on
water from rivers or lakes or ponds; 85 percent rely on an outside latrine. The survey also
shows that substantial numbers of households have difficulty obtaining sufficient food.
Food is the principal household expenditure for most poor households, and one-third of

Page 7 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

households had to incur debt to buy food. 72 percent of households reported having to
grow food to supplement what they could buy. About 25 percent thought they would
have to sell household assets to survive. And more than 25 percent said they would have
to borrow to make ends meet.

19. 
As analyzed in the PRSP, the exogenous shocks of the Soviet disintegration,
floods and droughts are important causes of Tajikistan's poverty. In addition, poor
governance, unemployment, and the inadequacy of coping measures are other important
causes of poverty. Although Tajikistan's economy has been growing recently and is
predicted to continue growing, Tajikistan will face difficulties meeting the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) on poverty as well as on other indicators (Box 2 and
Attachment 2).

20. 
Education. The PRSP raises the issue of quality and access to education.
Damaged infrastructure and a sharp decline in public spending have dramatically lowered
school attendance. Education quality is poor, with outdated teaching materials and
methods, and teachers are leaving the system for economic reasons. Economic necessity
also keeps many children out of primary school, with informal fee payments for basic
education often proving an insurmountable barrier to children in poor households.
Declining quality and access is also reducing attendance beyond primary schooling.
Education is highly regarded by the population, but the government, together with
donors, is struggling to keep the system from deteriorating further.

21. 
Health. Quickly deteriorating health indicators are another immediate
government concern brought out in the PRSP. The government is especially concerned
about increasing respiratory and gastrointestinal illnesses and re-emerging diseases, like
diphtheria, malaria, and tuberculosis. There are major questions regarding the accuracy of
the data, but it is believed that life expectancy has declined since independence. Although
the survey and administrative data are often inconsistent, the infant mortality rate, under-

Box 3. HIV/AIDS in Tajikistan

Officially, there are 58 HIV and one AIDS cases in Tajikistan, most revealed in the past year and a half
as a result of targeted work with risk groups by the Ministry of Health and international organizations.
But the Government and its international partners acknowledge that official data do not reflect the real
situation. According to UNAIDS, the real number of HIV infected is probably 10 times higher. The
main source of HIV infection in Tajikistan is the use of injectible drugs. Drug trafficking and drug use
have been increasing since 1995, especially since the war in Afghanistan, while drug prices have been
decreasing. Unsafe sex, insecure medical treatment, and population migration also contribute to the
deteriorating situation. According to preliminary estimates by the Bank, the number of HIV infections
may grow 24-fold by the end of this decade in Central Asia.

The Government is aware of the need for prompt action. The second national program of HIV/AIDS
prevention was approved by the Government in 2000; a new law on combating HIV/AIDS has been
drafted; and a strategic plan has been drafted with the assistance of UNAIDS. That plan includes
appropriate measures to tackle the epidemic, but there is not enough local capacity to implement it.
UNDP/UNAIDS and Open Society Institute (SOROS Foundation) are the main donors supporting anti-
HIV activities. The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM) recently
approved a grant to fund HIV/AIDS prevention activities in Tajikistan.

Page 8 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

five mortality rate, and maternal mortality rate are very high and worse than in most
countries of the region. The spread of HIV/AIDS is also becoming a problem (Box 3). At
the root of the health system's problem is a collapse of public spending on health (now
down to about US$1.50 per capita), an increase in poverty and increasingly poor
sanitation and unhealthy nutrition.

22. 
Social protection. In the past decade Tajikistan's "traditionally poor" --
pensioners, families with many children, and single-parent families -- have been joined
by the "working poor." As the number of vulnerable people has increased, the ability of
the Government to fund social protection, which still has many of the pre-transition
features, has decreased dramatically. It offers a wide array of different benefits and
services (more than 500) for which more than 90 categories of population are eligible. In
practice, however, benefit levels are extremely low and provision to remote areas is
difficult. Benefits are poorly targeted to the most vulnerable groups in the population. As
noted in the PRSP, the Government has started to reform its social assistance program
through a pilot cash compensation program focused on those most needy, but resource
constraints and the lack of employment opportunities are making progress difficult. In
addition, the deterioration in local infrastructure is putting an increasing burden on the
poor, who have no alternative to state-provided basic services.

23. 
Gender. As recognized in the PRSP, the last decade has seen a sharp increase in
women's disadvantage in a number of indicators. This has raised concern that failure to
address growing gender inequality will act as an impediment to a successful poverty
reduction strategy and to the
achievement of the MDGs and will
impede economic growth. Indeed,
the limited data available on this
issue reveal worrying emerging
trends (Box 4). The welfare
implications of these trends are only
just beginning to be felt but are
likely to become increasingly severe

Box 4. Gender, poverty and human :¶evelopment i 

Tajikistan 

* The risk of falling into poverty for female headed 
households is over 25 percent higher than for other 
households (Poverty Assessment, 2000). 
* This higher poverty risk reflects a combination of: 
o 
lower labor market participation,
o 
higher unemployment and under-employment 
o 
barriers to access to land, credit and markets 
(Gender in Transition,2002). 
* According to the Poverty Assessment, girls are just 
over half as likely to be enrolled in secondary 
education as boys (Gender in Transition, 2002). 
* Only just over half of women have access to 
antenatal care and only around two thirds of births 
are attended by trained medical staff. 

as women's human capital
deteriorates. The ongoing Poverty
Assessment will provide a unique
opportunity to quantify the extent of
gender inequality in the country,
evaluate its potential welfare costs
and establish an adequate baseline
against which future trends in gender
equality may be assessed.

24. 
Labor standards. Since
joining the International Labor Organization (ILO) in 1993, Tajikistan ratified 45
international conventions and 20 ILO recommendations on labor standards, including
conventions on abolition of forced labor, employment and occupation discrimination; the
right to establish associations; principles of collective treaties; legislation against child

Page 9 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

labor; ceiling for working hours per week; and equal remuneration for men and women.
A new labor code was adopted in 1997 and a public labor inspection was established
under the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection to ensure appropriate observance of
labor laws in 2001. Trade unions in Tajikistan are independent, with voluntary
membership.

25. 
Environment. Enviromnental degradation and unsustainable use of natural
resources are serious constraints to sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction
mentioned in the PRSP. As Tajikistan tries to increase its agricultural production, it is
particularly vulnerable to land slides, soil erosion, deforestation, and water logging.
Deterioration of drinking water quality creates additional challenges for meeting the
MDGs (Box 5).

Box 5. Environmental and natural resources management issues
Natural disasters. Partly because of deforestation and soil erosion, and partly because of natural
geological and climatic features, Tajikistan is periodically affected by seasonal floods, landslides,
mudslides, rock falls, avalanches, heavy and destructive rains, droughts, and earthquakes. Water-
related natural disasters in the past five years have killed more than 200 people and caused several
million dollars in damage. Institutional prevention and response capacity is very limited.
Widespread desertification and deforestation. Thousands of hectares of forests have been cleared, and
forested land covers only 4 percent of the territory, compared with 20 percent a century ago. This
degradation has caused land to become more prone to natural disasters, increasing soil erosion,
desertification, and sedimentation. Extensive sedimentation has affected the productivity of
hydrological control infrastructure. For example, the Nurek reservoir's capacity has been reduced by
67 percent over the past 26 years.

Deterioration of drinking water quality. Drinking water has become unsafe with the risk of waterborne
illness. Dushanbe has one of the highest rates of waterborne illness among Central Asian cities.
Inadequate maintenance of water supply systems, insufficient water treatment, and cross-contamination

from sewage (due to lack of permanent pressure in the deteriorated water networks) are among the main

causes of the outbreaks of typhoid fever in the past few years.
Land quality degradation. Soil erosion, water-logging and salinization are reducing land productivity.
Soil erosion affects more than one third of arable land, or about 290,000 hectares. More than 115,000
hectares (16 percent) of irrigated land suffer from salinization and water logging. The high water tables
and salinization are the result of poor irrigation management practices and inadequate drainage systems.
Poor water resources management practices. On average, more than 70 percent of the water diverted
for irrigation is lost before it reaches the farm. There obviously is scope for substantial increases in
water use efficiency through rehabilitating and modemizing water facilities and internal networks,
introducing water-saving technologies, and implementing demand management measures.

Medium-term Growth Prospects and External Debt

26. 
Growth scenarios. The CAS's base case scenario assumes that reforms would
continue during this CAS period, with no policy reversals, and that macro stability would
be sustained, as evidenced, for example, by satisfactory implementation of the IMP's

Page 10 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

PRGF, approved in December 2002. Future growth is expected to come from three main
sources:

* 

* Continuing productivity gains, mainly from yield improvements in privatized farms,
better use of the country's assets by small and medium enterprises, and growing
aluminum production;
Increased aggregate demand, driven by expansion of consumption financed by
continued growth in remittances and, to a lesser extent, by investment;
* Expansion of private sector activities, especially of Small and Medium Enterprises
(SMEs) in services and manufacturing, in response to an improving policy framework
to encourage the formation of new businesses and to support the existing firms.

Under this base case scenario, annual GDP growth is projected to be about 5 percent for
the next three to five years (Table 2).

Table 2: Alternative Macro Scenarios for 2003 - 2005

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

Growth rates
Real GDP 
Exports GNFS 1.2 
Imports GNFS 1.2 
Share of GDP (%)
Exports GNFS 
Imports GNFS 
Current account balance 
Net FDI 
General government revenues 
General government balance 
Nominal TJR/$ exchange rate change
(%,"-" -Depreciation) 
External debt sustainability indicators

5.3 
-19.7 
-11.5 

48 
57 
-9.1 
1.9 
12.0 
-3.8 

3.7 
11.2 
-4.2 

64 
66 
-3.3 
1.9 
13.5 
-3.1 

8.3 
18.3 
21.5 

83 
87 
-6.3 
3.1 
13.6 
-0.6 

10.2 
-15.9 
-5.5 

64 
76 
-7.0 
2.5 
15.2 
-0.1 

8-10 
11.2 
7.3 

66 
-75 
-4.1 
2.0 
16.4 
-0.2 

-37.8 

-59.3 

-47 

-30.8 

-13.3 

... 
11.2 
... 
16.4 

176 
7.7 
579 
4 

140 
25.6 
514 
46 

126 
21 
408 
68 

... 

21.9 

Base 

Case 
2003-05 

Low

Case
2003-05

5.0 
8.2 
7.7 

70 
74 
-3.8 
2.4 
17.8 
-0.2 

-7.0 

109 
12 
338 
42 

2.5
5.0
4.3

105.1
109.1
-6.7
2.0
15.0
-0.2

-16

114
13
395
49

(%)

NPV/Exports GNFS 3
Total debt service/ Exports GNFS 4
NPV/General government revenues 
Total debt service/General 
government revenues
'GNFS stands for "Goods and non-factor services"

... 
14.3. 

2Value growth

3Computed as a three-year moving average of exports of goods and services, less aluminum imports.
4Exports of goods and services, less aluminum imports.

Source: HATF and World Bank staffprojections

27. 
Economic growth would be significantly slower-cut in half-if reform
momentum is not sustained, especially in land reform. In addition, without improvements

in governance, progress in the environment for private sector development and at least

minimal financial sector restructuring, services and light industries will not expand as

Page11 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

expected. Tajikistan's volatility to export price fluctuations on its major commodities -
aluminum and cotton -
is captured under risks (par. 94).

28. 
External debt. Under the base case scenario, the net present value (NPV) of
Tajikistan's debt would average 338 percent of government revenue during this CAS
period. Debt service payments would also drop, but remain a significant fiscal burden at
an average 42 percent of government revenues through 2005. Under the low case
scenario, the NPV of Tajikistan's debt would average over 395.5 percent of government
revenue from 2003 to 2005, while debt service requirements would continue to absorb
half of budget revenues (Attachment 1).

29. 
A debt sustainability analysis was carried out by Bank staff in November 2002 in
order to determine Tajikistan's long term debt sustainability prospects and eligibility to
IDA grants. This analysis shows that Tajikistan is currently not eligible for assistance
under the enhanced HIPC Initiative under the fiscal/openness criteria because of its low
revenue collection level. Nevertheless, Tajikistan is eligible for the maximum grant
component under current IDA 13 grant guidelines (29% in FY03). Strong growth
performance, restructuring of Tajikistan's debt and continued concessional lending,
preferably in the form of grants, from the IFIs and donor community are important
preconditions for reaching the debt sustainability indicators assumed under the base case.
The Government is actively negotiating a debt restructuring strategy for a possible debt-
stock operation with its bilateral creditors. It has already reached a restructuring
agreement with Russia in December 2002, which includes a grace period on principal
payments and partially offsets interest falling due in 2003-2006 by using a claim of
US$49.8 million on the Central Bank of Russia. IDA grants, will contribute positively to
fiscal and debt sustainability (Attachment 1).

III. 

THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM

Main Elements of the PRSP Program

30. 
In 2002, the Government outlined its vision for poverty reduction in its first full
PRSP. The strategy was developed through a broad participatory process that involved a
wide range of government-officials, civil society, non-government organizations,
representatives of the private sector and the donor community. It has been endorsed by
Parliament. The PRSP has four primary elements:

* 

* 
* 
* 

to encourage equitable, labor-intensive economic growth, with an emphasis on
exports;
to support efficient and fair provision of basic social services;
to target support to the poorest groups of the population; and
to improve governance and security.

31. 
To measure and monitor progress in the fight against poverty, the Government
has selected nine poverty indicators, including some Millennium Development Goals,

Page 12 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

setting time-bound quantitative targets for each (Table 3).

Table 3: PRSP Poverty Alleviation Targets

Indicator 
Percentage of population living below poverty line 
Primary education coverage (percentage) 
Infant mortality rate per one thousand live newborns (2000) 
Matemal mortality rate per one hundred thousand live 
newborns (2000)_
Percentage of adult population with access to reproductive 
health services
Share of private sector in GDP 
Percentage of population with access to pure drinking water 
Employment rate among able-bodied citizens 
Number of telephones per one hundred residents 

Source PRSP

2001 
83 
77.7 
36.7 
43.1 

21.8 

30 
51.2 
56 
3.6 

Target for 2006
75
82
32
40

24

40
58
59
4

32. Macroeconomic strategy. The Government recognizes that maintaining
macroeconomic stability is key to reducing poverty. It aims to achieve real GDP growth
of about six percent annually over the next three years and reduce inflation to about five
percent annually. The strategy emphasizes that further improvements in revenue
collection will be necessary as the economy diversifies and reliance on export taxes
declines. In addition, the effective provision of social services will require improved
expenditure management.

33. 

External debt. The Government is aware of debt sustainability issues and has

developed a debt reduction strategy based on four key elements: (1) effective debt
management and monitoring; (2) greater fiscal adjustment; (3) bilateral debt
rescheduling; and (4) limiting the foreign-financed public investment program in light of
constraints in implementation capacity. The authorities have decided to restructure debt
with creditors through bilateral negotiations rather than approach the Paris Club.
Tajikistan has reached restructuring agreements with its major creditors, including
Russia, Uzbekistan, and Kazakhstan since 1998.

34. 
The social sectors. The Government is committed to,an increase in the social
sector budgets over the next three years. For education, it intends to improve quality by
upgrading the curriculum and introducing new student-oriented approaches to teaching.
In health, the Government's reform program emphasizes primary health care, especially
prevention, improving the quality and cost-effectiveness of medical care, strengthening
the financing system, and monitoring and evaluating progress. The recent government
report entitled "Restructuring Program for the Health Sector in Tajikistan" provides a
good basis for further reform, though institutional capacity will continue to be a
challenge.

35. 
The Government has also acknowledged the need to reform the pension system by
strengthening institutional capacity, rationalizing payments and gradually developing a
multi-tier system - with a minimum pension guaranteed by the state, pensions granted

Page 1 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

through compulsory pension insurance, and pensions granted out of private pension
funds. However, the reform process is at a very early stage and requires external support.

36. With regard to gender issues, Tajikistan has joined all international conventions
and declarations on women's rights and has a legal system that protects the rights of
women. The government adopted the "National Plan of Actions for Advancement of
Women for the Years 1998-2005" in 1998, a presidential decree "On Advancement of
Women" in 1999, and more recently a decree providing educational quotas for poor
women from remote rural areas. There is a parliamentary committee on women, health
care, social protection and ecology and a government unit on "Women in Development,"
established with financial support from the United Nations Development Program
(UNDP). In the context of the PRSP, IDA is implementing a Post Conflict grant project
on "Empowering Women: Socioeconomic Development in Post-Conflict Tajikistan."
This project aims to reduce poverty among poor women and youth, build women's
associations, increase social cohesion and stability among these groups, and reduce the
potential for conflict in war-torn areas.

37. 
Structural reforms. The PRSP sets the structural reform agenda for the next
three years. It focuses on public sector reform and improvements in governance through
civil service reform, improvements in business environment as well as in the legal and
regulatory framework, and continued public expenditure reform. Agriculture reforms,
especially access of the poor to land, water, financial and other resources, and elimination
of government intervention in private farm decision-making are expected to play a central
role in the government's efforts to reduce poverty. The PRSP recognizes the key link
between growth and infrastructure as well as the need to reform the energy, water, and
telecommunications sectors.

Assessment of the PRSP

38. 
The PRSP and a Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) were discussed by the IDA and
IMF Boards in December 2002. As the JSA notes, Tajikistan's PRSP represents an
acceptable initial strategy and provides a broad framework for poverty reduction in line
with medium-term development needs. The main strengths of the PRSP are: (1) an
appropriate macroeconomic framework; (2) a multi-sector approach to reducing poverty;
(3) increased and improved targeting of social spending; and (4) an outline of the first
steps for monitoring implementation.

39. While the overall direction of measures and programs proposed in the PRSP is
appropriate, the strategy does not set forth a framework of policies and investments that
are within the Government's financial and institutional means. The JSA notes that the
PRSP is optimistic about external financing, particularly for social protection, and that it
does not set realistic development priorities. With tax revenues of about 15 percent of
GDP and large debt service requirements, limited domestic resources will continue to be
a major constraint on meeting the PRSP targets. As the JSA notes, the government needs
to more fully develop the strategy to improve governance and combat corruption, take
more aggressive measures to improve the business environment, deepen reforms in
agriculture, clarify its priorities in the social sectors, accelerate reforms in the financial

Page 14 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

sector, and move to a more transparent market-based approach in the energy sector. It
also needs to strengthen monitoring and evaluation.

40. 
Strategic priority setting. Within the PRSP's overall objectives the
Government-and donors-will need to focus on a limited set of critical interventions to
avoid overstretching resources and implementation capacity. By emphasizing selectivity,
the CAS aims to be a vehicle for strategic priority-setting. It emphasizes the need to (i)
strengthen governance through reducing excessive business regulation, reforming public
expenditure management (including improvements to the fiduciary aspects of public
financial management) and increasing community oversight; (ii) support private sector
development and export diversification through continued transfer of land ownership into
private hands and the support of SME development through provision of micro-credits;
and (iii) improve the quality of basic health and education services by rationalizing the
existing systems, improving the system of their financing and seeking greater
involvement of communities. The CAS will complement these activities with efforts to
strengthen monitoring, evaluation and regional cooperation.

41. 
Data deficiencies. As noted in the JSA, there exist significant deficiencies in the
quality and availability of data on poverty and other social indicators. Many of the
official statistics differ widely from independent surveys, and their quality is hindered by
severe capacity constraints, definitional problems and the inherited budgeting and
reporting approaches. For example, infant mortality differs by a factor of three among
different surveys. Until reliable baseline figures can be established, and capacity for data
collection and especially analysis can be enhanced, Tajikistan's statistical base will
continue to be less than adequate to develop appropriate national economic and social

policies.

At the Program Level

IV. 

LESSONS FROM EXPERIENCE

42. What worked well. Starting from an extremely difficult base, Tajikistan managed
during the last CAS period to stabilize its economy, restart growth, albeit from a low
base, and begin the long process of structural reforrn. IDA support through two structural
adjustment credits and nine investment projects contributed to these successes by
providing the Government with financial and technical resources needed to institute basic
macroeconomic reforms and to start the process of improving public sector management
and the environment for private sector development.

43. What worked less well. Tajikistan's experience during the last CAS period
reflects the development community's experience over the past four decades - building
new institutions proved far more complex than anticipated, due in part to a civil service
that is desperately underpaid. Governance remains a serious constraint to public sector
management and to private sector development. The basic services needed to underpin a
functioning market economy remain elusive.

Page 1 5-of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

44. 
In developing this CAS, IDA has attempted to reflect the following lessons from
the experience of the last CAS implementation:

* That building ownership and support for sector reforms through active
engagement and participation at the central government level is key to the success
of these programs.
* That institutional weaknesses and poor governance require much-greater-than -
average project supervision. Regular Country Portfolio Performance Reviews are
critical.
* That knowledge of specific country circumstances is especially important for
effective project and strategy design and economic and sector dialogue.
* That in a country subject to frequent natural disasters, IDA's lending program has
to be sufficiently flexible to respond to emergency situations.
* That community participation improves governance and public service delivery,
but it can be difficult to implement.
* That attracting more experienced staff to work on Tajikistan is an important
precondition for success in the country's difficult environment.
* That with too few overall resources and an enormous reform agenda, donor
coordination must move beyond information sharing to establishing partnerships
and supporting joint programs.

At the Portfolio Level

45. 
Tajikistan's portfolio has been steadily improving from a difficult situation a few
years ago, when it was among the worst rated in the Bank. Following several fast-
disbursing and emergency reconstruction operations in the latter part of the 1990s, the
1998 CAS proposed a series of increasingly complex investment operations to develop
capacity in support of sector policy reforms. Often these lending operations proved
overly optimistic, plagued by delayed policy reforms and an increasingly difficult project
implementation environment marred by corruption, procurement and management
problems.

46. 
A Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) held in early 2002 resulted in
an Government Action Program designed to reduce corruption and governance problems,
not just in donor-financed projects but in Government-financed activities more generally.
As a result, project staff are better shielded from external pressures; payment of
counterpart funds has become more predictable; project financial management has
improved; instances of misprocurement have been reduced; and the Government has
established an Aid Coordination Office, with support from the Asian Development Bank
(AsDB), to improve portfolio monitoring. As a result, IDA's portfolio performance
ratings have steadily increased, with all projects currently rated as satisfactory on
implementation performance.

47. 
Even with these improvements, implementation capacity at the central
government level remains extremely limited. Recent experience in Tajikistan suggests
that community-based development initiatives can generate substantial local

Page 16 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

implementation support. Moreover, a growing number of national and intemational Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) are active in Tajikistan, and could be used to
supplement govemment and donor implementation capacities (Box 6). The program
described in the next section builds on these findings.

Box 6. Community-based activities in Tajikistan

Many donor and NGO groups are already supportng community-based development in Tajikistan.
Among the more prominent are the Aga Khan Development Program, Counterpart, Merci Corps,
UNDP, and USAID. IDA's own experience is primarily through the Tajikistan Social Investment
Fund and other pilot CDD activities that have demonstrated the viability of this approach in
Tajikistan. The Farm Privatization Support Project has been successful in actively involving the
emerging private farming community in the formation of Water User Associations, which were
empowered to collect water charges and to operate and manage the irrigation infrastructure. The

Post-Conflict grant on Empowering Women is being implemented together with poor women in a

war-tom area at the outskirts of Dushanbe. It has helped to nurture social cohesion by encouraging

the development of women's associations and providing training for small business development, in

addition to organizational and humanitarian assistance, to poor women.
What is lacking is a coordination of these efforts that will allow them to be expanded to reach a
majority of Tajikistan's poor. IDA is actively seeking partners in developing a conmnon approach to
community empowernent and development. In addition, the Bank has created a Central Asia CDD
working group and is conducting a regional review of the best approaches to CDD. This approach
will seek to identify the critical bottlenecks to scaling up community-driven development and to
design and organize the necessary programs to remove these bottlenecks.

48. 
Even with strong community and NGO involvement, Tajikistan's environment for
portfolio implementation will remain difficult for the foreseeable future. In recognition of
this fact, IDA is undertaking a series of actions to strengthen project management,
including:

* Active support by Bank staff to build national and local supervision capacity, with
supervision coefficients that reflect this objective and Tajikistan's difficult project
implementation environment;
Increased attention to the fiduciary aspects of project implementation from
specialized staff based in the Central Asia Regional Office in Almaty;
* Annual country portfolio reviews, carried out jointly with other key donors.

* 

V. 

IDA STRATEGY AND WORK PROGRAM (FY03 - 05)

Formulating the Strategy

49. 
Guiding principles. In designing a strategy for Tajikistan, IDA looked not only at
in-country experience, but also at the emerging lessons and guidance from the LICUS
initiative and from ECA's CIS-7 work. Several principles that influenced the design of
this strategy emerged from these reviews. First, a clear lesson from the Bank's institution
building experience is that building effective institutions, while essential to sustainable

Page I 7.of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

development, takes time - years, even decades. Capacity building, knowledge creation
and knowledge sharing will play a central role in Tajikistan's development for many
years to come.

50. 
Second, currently weak institutional capacity and the prospect of a long process of
institution rebuilding imply that communities will necessarily have to do more for
themselves. Harnessing the energy and drive of Tajikistan's communities will not be
easy. One legacy of the Soviet era was the erosion of community social capital - of
community cohesion. In the coming years, comnmunities will have to relearn how to rely
more on their own resources.

51. 
Third, while export-led growth will be needed to pull Tajikistan's people out of
poverty, serious infrastructure deficiencies, unfavorable geography and a difficult
regional trade environment mean that Tajikistan will have to pay increased attention to
the development of its internal markets, that is, on improving local economies during the
CAS period. At the same time, it will continue implementation of export diversification
programs, but the pay-offs from these programs are likely to come only in the long run.

52. 
Fourth, given the country's limited absorptive capacity (weak institutions, budget
constraint, high indebtedness), setting manageable priorities and focusing on
implementation will be essential to the success of any strategy. Proposed IDA programs
reflect the constraints the country faces.

53. 
Alternatives considered. In discussion with the Government, civil society and
development partners, several alternative strategic options for Tajikistan were considered.
There was broad agreement that IDA future strategy should focus on a strong
community-driven development (CDD) approach and key structural reforms identified in
the PRSP, supplemented by a realistic medium-term capacity building program.
Therefore, the CAS program is built around a set of critical "demonstration" investment
projects, supplemented by policy-based lending to consolidate earlier gains and keep the
reform momentum going. Policy-based lending would focus on governance and public
sector management reforms, at both the national and local levels. At the same time, the
investment projects would support basic health education, farm, micro and small-scale
enterprise reforms, employing a CDD approach where appropriate.

54. 

Two other options - on opposite sides of the spectrum -- were considered on the

strategy design. One was an even more modest program of community-based lending,
with the main emphasis being on implementing existing projects and building up a stock
of knowledge on the country (a "full LICUS" approach). This option was not followed
because it did not address the long-term needs of the country and did not provide
adequate support for the implementation of the PRSP. The other option considered was a
program that placed primary emphasis on institution building, governance and economic
reform, accompanied by a strong program of technical assistance and a series of Poverty
Reduction Support Credits (PRSC) as the main instruments. This option placed heavy
focus on overall government resource and program management as well as reforms
identified by the Public Expenditure Review (PER). This option was also rejected

Page 18 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

because of the weaknesses in institutional and fiduciary environment and the need to
strengthen those before proceeding with a full programmatic approach.

55. 
The selected IDA strategy is in line with implementation capacities and is the
most likely of the three to improve the lives of the poor in the near term. This is a new
approach that has evolved from the experience in the last CAS period: as it works to build
a foundation for better institutions in the medium term, the CAS program will support the
immediate needs of the population, especially the poor, through a strong commitment to
community-driven development.

Country Strategy Framework

56. 
Overview. Although program specifics are built around a conventional three-year
CAS period, the strategy takes a medium-term 5 to 6 year perspective. Its primary
objectives are (i) to improve community-based support of public infrastructure and
services, especially health and education, (ii) to foster growth through private sector
development, and (iii) to strengthen the institutions needed for a market economy. These
objectives are in line with the PRSP objectives of supporting efficient and fair provision
of social services, encouraging labor intensive economic growth and improving
governancel. The key instruments for achieving the first two goals are ongoing loans plus
an intensive program of community-based development. The third goal will be pursued
through a longer-termn and carefully sequenced and sized program of capacity building
and policy-based operations. These objectives are designed to be mutually reinforcing, as
small community successes can be scaled up, and stronger communities can better
implement overall reforms.

57. 
One of the great challenges facing donors in Tajikistan is how to operate at a scale
that improves the lives of the country's citizens. Given the enormity of this task, IDA will
work in partnership with other donors to provide a structure in which Tajikistan can itself
"scale up" successful interventions. IDA will help identify and provide practical,
replicable models, help communities organize to adopt those models, and explore ways,
in a corrupt environment, to channel financing to those communities that want to adopt
these models. The fact that donor agencies like Aga Khan Fund, UNDP, USAID, and
others are taking the CDD approach with considerable success is encouraging (Box 6).

58. 
IDA's strategy includes: (i) a series of community-based projects, designed to
take into account the need for simplicity and replicability; (ii) a policy lending-driven
reform program that will support local private sector development and improved public
sector governance; and (iii) a strong program of partnership with donors and NGOs to
provide the technical support communities will need to shape their own futures.

59. 
A strengthened program of ESW tasks has provided inputs into the present CAS
and will contribute to strengthening the policy dialogue during the CAS period. A set of
core diagnostic economic and sector work, has either been completed or is underway. It

' The forth PRSP objective -- to target support to the poorest groups of the population - will be addressed
by the CAS indirectly through the social sector reform and private sector development programs.

Page 19 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

includes a Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) (FY01), a Poverty Assessment
(FY03-04), a Public Expenditure Review (FY03), a CPAR (FY03), and a CFAA (FY03)
(Table 4). Consistent with the LICUS initiative, the non-lending program will be
strengthened to focus on building institutional capacity, improving governance, and
intensifying the policy dialogue with the country.

Table 4. Core Diagnostic Economic and Sector Work

Type 

Poverty Assessment 

Country Economic Memorandum 

Public Expenditure Review 

Country Procurement Assessment Report 

Country Financial Accountability 
Assessment

Projects and Programs

Most Recent 
Completion Date 

Next Planned
Completion Date

FYOO 

FYOI 

FY04

FY05

FY03

FY03

FY03

60. 
A limited focus. Consistent with the need for prioritization stressed in the JSA, as
discussed above, the IDA program has three overarching objectives:

* To address the most critical social needs of the poor through greater community
involvement;
* To generate growth through private sector development; and
* To continue building the institutions needed for a market economy.

61. 
Addressing the most critical social needs of the poor through greater
community involvement. This objective is designed to keep Tajikistan's basic
community infrastructure, both physical and social, functioning. It will support the
schools, health services and basic community infrastructure that most affect the lives of
the poor. And it will do so through heavy engagement of communities and NGOs. Two
proposed projects will support basic social services (Education Support and
Empowerment (FY03) and Community and Basic Health (FY04)) and three projects will
support community-level infrastructure (Community Agriculture and Watershed
Management (FY04), Ferghana Valley Water (FY05), and Municipal Infrastructure
(FY05)). These projects will build on the successful experience of the ongoing
operations, like Pilot Education, Primary Health Care and Farm Privatization Support.

62. 
Several ESW tasks will provide the basis for formulating appropriate policies and
developing appropriate activities in this area. A Utility Reform Study (FY03) and a
Health Sector Note (FY04) will provide recommendations on institutional, regulatory and
operational changes in these sectors. Several tasks - such as the Social Dimension of

Page 20 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

Regional Differences (FY05), Gender Assessment (FY05), and the World Bank
Institute's (WBI) CDD programs - will review emerging trends in social inequalities and
gender, identify possible policy options, and suggest a better integration of these issues
into assistance from the Bank Group and other donors. The ongoing AsDB study on
gender issues is an essential element of the gender work in Tajikistan. In addition, a
CDD network is being set up in Tajikistan to support community building, and an IDF
grant on Empowering Mahallas (FY04) will focus on the development of social cohesion
by strengthening the capacity of those formal and informal socio-cultural institutions that
form the basis for social development. Finally, the CDD work at the Central Asia
regional level, including the CDD Review (FY03), the CDD Working Group and the
Innovation Day (May 2003), will complement the country-level programs.

63. 
Generating growth through private sector development. A joint Business
Environment and Investment Climate Review (FY04) will focus on emerging
institutional and regulatory constraints for business development. Policy-based lending -
SAC3 (FY04) and PRSC (FY05, High Case) - would support critical macroeconomic
stability and policies to improve the environment for private sector development and
transfer of public assets to the private sector. Jointly with the IMF, IDA will continue to
support reformns in the financial sector, namely improving the regulatory framework,
bank restructuring and capacity building. Special emphasis of investment projects will be
on the support of micro and small enterprises and private family farms as well as on
enabling the private banks to channel funds. For IDA, two investment projects, the (1)
Community Agriculture and Watershed Management (FY04) and (2) Banking and
Private Sector Support (FY03) are proposed. A review on Future Directions in
Agriculture (FY05) will provide the basis for future reforms in agriculture. The regional
Study on Microfinance (FY03) and a multi-donor conference on Expanding Access to
Microfinance in Central Asia (April 2003) will help identify constraints to the
development of microfmance in Central Asia and develop best-practice approaches.

64. 
For IFC, a number of ongoing activities will continue under the CAS. These
include: strengthening the financial sector, promoting micro enterprises and SMEs,
assisting the agro-business sector, supporting rural development, developing business
infrastructure and tourism facilities, and expanding investment opportunities in the
mining sector. IFC work on the development of the leasing industry and assistance with
development of an adequate regulatory framework for microfinance institutions would
also support this CAS objective (See par. 79-80 on IFC activities).

65. 
Continuing building institutions needed for a market economy. The agenda
in this area is large and of the long-term nature. Therefore, the CAS will be selective and
continue IDA's ongoing focus on public sector management reform -- including civil
service reform, strengthening the customs and tax departments, and improving the budget
process. The PER, CPAR, and CFAA will provide the diagnostics for the design of
future policies to improve governance and public sector management and to reduce
corruption. Currently, IDA is cooperating with the AsDB on its Governance and
Institutional Review. This collective public sector assessment work will form the
analytical base for the proposed adjustment operations under this CAS - SAC3 (FY04)

Page 21. of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

and PRSC (FY05, High Case). The proposed IDF grant on Public Procurement (FY05)
will help to reform the legal basis of the public procurement system.

66. 
In addition to ongoing institution building projects, all new investment operations
will include capacity building activities both at the national and local level. It is important
to note that the design of these projects would take into account the need for the CDD
activities to provide inputs into policy and institutional reforms. These will be
complemented with WBI capacity building programs, as described in more detail below
(par. 74-78). Finally, a special effort will be made to use each of the ESW tasks for
developing joint products, sharing knowledge, and maintaining permanent policy
dialogue.

Lending Program Scenarios

67. 
Lending scenarios and triggers. The level of IDA engagement with Tajikistan
will be based on macroeconomic performance, progress on governance and structural
reforms, and status of the portfolio. These programs and associated triggers are presented

in Tables 5 and 6. Tajikistan is in the Base Case Scenario. Continued support under this

scenario would depend on macroeconomic performance, particularly good external debt
management, and continued progress with structural reforms, as reflected in the base case
triggers (Table 6). This reform agenda would be supported by SAC 3 (FY04 - US$10
million). Under this case, the CAS would provide up to US$80 million, consistent with
the IDA allocation. This level of lending is lower than in the past due to the phasing out
of Tajikistan's status as a transition country in a post-conflict situation (Table 5).

Table 5: Tajikistan-IDA Lending Program, FY03-05 (million US$)

Low Case 

- ` ' 

r 

Base Case 

FY03: 
Education Support and 
Empowerment (20) 

FY03: 
Education Support and 
Empowerment (20) 
Banking and Private Sector 
Support (10) 
FY04: 
SAC 3 (10) 
Community Agriculture and 
Watershed Management (10) 
FY05: 
FY05: 
Community and Basic Health (10) Community and Basic Health (10) 
Ferghana Valley Water (5) 
Ferghana Valley Water (5) 
Municipal Infrastructure (15) 

FY04: 
Community Agriculture and 
Watershed Management (10) 

,HighkCase

FY03:
Education Support and
Empowerment (20)
Banking and Private Sector
Support (10)
FY04:
SAC 3 (10)
Community Agriculture and
Watershed Management (10)
FY05:
PRSC (20)
Community and Basic Health (10)
Ferghana Valley Water (5)

.____________________________ 

_______________________________ Municipal Infrastructure (15)

Total (45) 

Total (80) 

Total (100)

68. 
The IDA lending program outlined in the preceding paragraph and the projected
improvements in Tajikistan's debt sustainability profile over the CAS period (Attachment
1) are sensitive to a number of uncertain parameters, but most crucially sensitive to
growth of government and export revenues. IDA will, therefore, monitor indicators of

Page 22 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

outcomes with regard to these key parameters. Should such review indicate that
Tajikistan's prospects for improved debt sustainability would be jeopardized by the IDA
program outlined here, a progress report would be prepared and submitted to the Board,
setting forth the recalibration of IDA's program necessary to ensure progress toward debt
sustainability.

69. 
Steady macroeconomic performance and satisfactory progress on fiduciary and
structural reform would allow Tajikistan to move to the High Case Scenario, which
would include up to US$20 million in additional lending. The macroeconomic
performance would be assessed, for example, by consistent implementation of the IMF
PRGF program. Progress on strengthening the fiduciary framework will be measured by

Table 6. CAS Triggers FY03-05

Outcomes 

Base Case, 

-

I -

-

Monitoring indicators

Continued macroeconomic stability 

Satisfactory progress on PRSP 
implementation 

Improved governance and business 
environment 

.

Satisfactory macroeconomic performance as evidenced, for
example, by the IMF PRGF on track.
Improved external debt management, including completion of
debt inventory

.

Creation of an institutional mechanism for expenditure
pnoritization (Budget Commission)
* Agreement on a plan to improve M&E and its satisfactory
implementation

.
Regular annual budget audits by the State Audit Agency
* Acceptable IAS audit of the largest public company, aluminum
smelter TADAZ
* 
Improved business environment as evidenced by reducing
excessive business inspections and licensing (measured through
firm surveys)

Satisfactory portfolio performance 

High casef 

Satisfactory macroeconomic 
performance

* Adherence to CPPR action plans
, pasecasef lgg4irpls 

-p

.

Same as Base Case

Good progress in implementation of 
structural reforms 

* Good progress with land reform, as evidenced by the increased
share of private land ownership from 30% to 40%
* Further improvements in business environment by reducing
business registration time and further reducing cost of doing
business (measured through firm surveys)
* 
Improved healthiness of the banking system by
restructuring/closing at least two banks that do not satisfy
prudential requirements

* Satisfactory progress in improving the fiduciary framework,
including (i) carrying out regular audits of large public enterprises
like Tajik Air and Tajik Gas and (ii) the revision of the
procurement law in line with the CPAR recommendations

Page 23 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

adopting action plans for the implementation of the CFAA and CPAR recommendations
and by satisfactory progress with their implementation. Key triggers are presented in
Table 6. The CAS envisions providing programmatic support under this case through a
PRSC (FY05 - US$20 million), which assumes Tajikistan makes strong progress on
institutional and fiduciary issues.

70. 
If the country fails to show adequate progress in meeting the Base Case triggers,
or the security situation deteriorates to the point that it would impede normal project

work, the country program would be reduced to the Low Case Scenario, with a lending

program of up to US$45 million and projects limited to basic social needs.

71. 
IDA grants. As Tajikistan can be classified as a debt vulnerable country
(Attachment 1), it is eligible to receive 29 percent of its-allocation as grants for FY03 2 .
The IDA grant component would be used according to the following criteria: (i) activities
that address basic social needs, (ii) institution building components and (iii) community
grants. Managing the grant component of Tajikistan's IDA allocation according to these
guidelines would make it easier for the government to pass on IDA resources to
communities. It will also help support capacity building/technical assistance components
that do not result in a direct financial return. In some cases, entire projects would be
financed in the form of grants and in others selected project components would be grants,
depending on how well they satisfy the above-mentioned criteria and on the availability
of grant resources. In the case of the Education Support and Empowerment Project
(FY03), the community grants and capacity building/technical assistance components
would be grant - US$7 million out of total US$20 million.

72. 
Table A in the Attachment 1 shows the positive impact of IDA grants on debt
sustainability ratios. The NPV of debt-to-revenue ratios would average 338 percent from
2003 to 2005 with the base case lending and macro scenario, without IDA grants. With
IDA grants, this average would fall to 336 percent. In the low case scenario, the NPV of
debt-to-revenue ratios would average 395.5 percent from 2003 to 2005 without IDA
grants. With IDA grants, this average would fall to 391.6 percent. The relatively small
impact of IDA grants is explained by the level of IDA lending with grants that represents
only 3 percent of the total NPV of debt during the CAS period.

Regional AAA Program

73. 
The Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA) in Tajikistan will be complemented
by regional work covering Central Asia, to be undertaken by the World Bank Group.
Improved regional cooperation is central to the success of Tajikistan and, indeed, Central
Asia more generally. The Regional AAA work program will include: (a) trade and
transport facilitation; (b) water management issues; (c) a study of energy markets in
Central Asia and the potential for increased energy exports; (d) a regional program for
strengthening knowledge sharing (GDLN, WBI), (e) a program of action for
communicable diseases (HIV/AIDS, TB), (f) development of a regional approach to
micro-enterprise lending, and (g) civil society building. While these activities are part of

2 IDA grants allocation and eligibility for fiscal years 2004 and beyond have not yet been determined.

Page 24 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance-Strategy

a separate regional program, they are fully integrated into this CAS. Box 7 on the
Ferghana Valley Water project is an example of how IDA is trying to serve both national
and regional needs even under the constrained circumstances present in Tajikistan.

* Trade and transport facilitation. The Bank will provide the analytical basis for
considering ways to improve regional trade through an ongoing Regional Trade and
Transport Facilitation Review. From this review, the Bank intends to identify some
practical next steps that it can support, including the potential for a regional trade
facilitation project in the future. Improved ability of Tajikistan businesses to sell their
products to their regional neighbors is key for the country's long-term growth
prospects.
* Water management issues. The Bank will encourage the five Central Asian countries
to work together closely in this essential area. It will continue to work on the Aral Sea
Basin Program, which provides a good foundation for further initiatives by the
international community in helping to develop regional approaches to water policy
and management. The proposed Tajikistan Ferghana Valley Water project (FY05) is
part of a larger regional program on Water Resources Management in Ferghana
Valley (Box 7).

Box. 7 Ferghana Valley water resources management program

The Ferghana Valley is the most densely populated part of Central Asia. It comprises 10 million people,
of whom 66% live in rural areas, and 2.6 million ha of the most fertile soils in the region. It-includes
parts of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyz Republic, and the high population density and land
shortages, combined with an obstructive border, trade restrictions and ethnic differences, have led to

tensions in the area.

The Ferghana Valley is rich in water resources, including groundwater resources, and drainage is an
increasing problem, reducing soil fertility and the potential for double cropping. Improved water
management in specific countries in the Valley would benefit local populations by increasing
productivity and incomes, and increase water management in other countries of the Valley.
Discussions have begun on developing a Ferghana Valley Water Resources Management Improvement
program. Projects in all three countries would be conceptualized on the basis of their regional and
national benefits, and developed under a regional strategic umbrella, but specific interventions would be
designed for national implementation, each project being quite modest in scope.

The proposed intervention for Tajikistan, the first in the program, would involve investing in improved
dam safety of the Karrakum Dam, and rehabilitating associated dykes and irrigation and drainage
systems. The investment would benefit overall water management in the lower Syr Darya basin through
improved operation of the reservoir, in particular by permitting additional storage of water in the
winter, and additional releases for irrigation in the summer. It would also permit better land and water
management within Tajikistan, increasing farm productivity and incomes. The investment would
require feasibility studies, and would comprise a mix of IDA, other multilateral and bilateral funding.
Total costs are likely to be in the range of US$20 million.

* Energy sector. The Bank would conduct a Study of the Electricity Export Potential
from Central Asian Republics, looking at regional supply options and potential

Page 25 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

markets. Tajikistan is planning new investments in hydropower that should take into
account the regional context and the existence of stable export markets.
* Communicable diseases. The Bank is carrying out a regional study that will serve as
a basis for our future interventions in this area, particularly in HIV/AIDS and
tuberculosis.
* Knowledge sharing. A central element will be the Central Asia Knowledge Sharing
Initiative, which will set up regional distance learning centers in each country,
enabling them to learn from each other. This will be an essential part of Tajikistan's
capacity building program.
* Microfinance. The Bank is preparing a paper on microfinance and a multi-donor
conference on Expanding Access to Microfinance in Central Asia, which will bring
together experts and practitioners within and outside the region to identify
opportunities and constraints to the development of microfinance in Central Asia.
* Strengthening civil society. Building bottom-up demand for better governance and
better public services is an integral part of the Bank's strategy in Central Asia. In May
2003 the Bank will hold a regional competition -- Innovation Day -- to identify
innovative ideas in CDD. Through the Innovation Day, Tajikistan civil society
organizations will get the opportunity to advance their CDD ideas, learn and share
experiences with civil society organizations from other Central Asian countries, and
establish regional networks.

WBI Program

74. 
The WBI has selected Tajikistan as focus country for its capacity building
programs. It intends to focus on a number of activities, including:

* Development of new activities in the area of public sector management and
continuation of WBI activities in the area of decentralization and
intergovernmental finance; and
* Further development of the CDD program.

75. 
The proposed program would be gradually developed over the next three years
with the understanding that new activities in public sector management and CDD would
be prepared and (to the extend possible) launched in FY03:

76. 
Public sector management. WBI would play a special role in the area of long-
term institution-building. It is currently providing training in the area of
intergovemmental finance and decentralization with the help of two initiatives -- the
creation of change networks on local governance by the Fiscal Decentralization Initiative
and the network for intergovernmental relations in Central Asia -- and would continue its
activities in this area. To further support the institution-building agenda outlined in the
CAS, WBI will support a training activity on budget process and policy making that
would build on the diagnostic work performed by the PER. Over the medium term, WBI
is exploring the possibility of providing support on civil service training through
development of a core curriculum and basic training materials.

Page 26 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

77. 
Community-driven development. This fiscal year, WBI would launch a
thematic needs assessment in the area of community empowerment and social inclusion,
which would be intended to foster a cohesive strategy among donors and other actors
working on capacity enhancement initiatives. The methodology consists of a baseline
survey and the identification of gaps to be addressed by a comprehensive learning
program, which will be developed and delivered in close consultation with other Bank
Group partners. The baseline data would allow progress to be monitored over time. As
part of the knowledge forum of the Central Asia Innovation Day, WBI will also organize
a regional workshop on CDD in late May. This will be complemented with the
establishment of a community empowerment network, which is part of a 2-year program
that will work mostly at the country level, with some selected regional knowledge-
sharing and networking activities. WBI will also design a cross-cutting training program
in Tajikistan with a focus on health topics at the community level -- e.g., community
health financing, family medicine and health promotion -- involving the National Social
Investment Fund in Tajikistan and other sectors as appropriate. The delivery of this
program is slated to start in FY04.

78. 
In addition to country-specific work, WBI would enhance its regional work in
Central Asia. It would continue to organize regional poverty seminars in order to provide
a platform for national PRSP teams to share their experiences. The objective of
promoting economic growth and enabling an environment for private sector development
will be supported by the Corporate Governance and Business Ethics program and by
courses on Global Integration and Macroeconomic Management. Human development
issues will be addressed through training in Education Reform and Social Protection.
WBI plans to offer its Intergovernmental Fiscal Relation and Public Resource Policy
programs to support the envisioned reforms in the area of public sector and governance.
Environmental concerns and rural poverty issues will be incorporated in the new course
in Rural Development and Natural Resource Management. The Global Development
Leaming Network (GDLN) initiative, supported by WBI, would provide additional
training and knowledge-sharing opportunities to Tajikistan.

IFC Program

79. 
The IFC and IDA strategies are closely coordinated and leverage each other on
the policy and investment fronts. The strategy reflects the mostly rural nature of the
economy and focuses on the development of micro and small business enterprises as well
as agricultural production and processing, the key areas for economic growth in the short
to medium term. IFC's continued significant efforts toward capacity and institution-
building in the financial sector, through technical assistance and investment, will be
required to support these goals, accompanied by support for improving the business
environment.

80. 
IFC has approved ten investments totaling US$32 million, in mining,
hydropower, textile, agriculture, financial and SME sectors. Its portfolio includes two
innovative projects to fight the poverty: (i) the pilot Farm Ownership project - a model to
support the development of farmer-owned cooperatives that was jointly funded with
Swiss Government; and (ii) the first private power company in the country (Pamir region)

Page 27 of 32 

.

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

developed by IFC and the Aga Khan Fund - a public-private partnership that combined
private financial investments with those provided by IDA and Swiss Government.
Through such pilot initiatives, IFC intends to demonstrate that the private sector can
successfully operate in Tajikistan. The IFC investment program has been accompanied
by significant technical assistance efforts in support of the financial sector (banking,
leasing, and micro-finance), agriculture, privatization, and the business environment.
The technical assistance program is carried out through the IFC's Private Enterprise
Partnership as well as through consultants funded by the IFC Donor Trust Funds.

81. MIGA. Tajikistan became member of MIGA in December 2002. MIGA will
explore business opportunities in Tajikistan during this CAS period. In addition, it will
continue its training programs on investment promotion.

Performance Indicators and Monitoring

82. 

Achievement of development outcomes will be monitored at three levels:

* Overall performance against a set of benchmarks related to the PRSP objectives
covering poverty, macroeconomic (including external debt) and social indicators.
* Specific performance on progress indicators linked to each of the three CAS
objectives.
Improved portfolio management by satisfactory implementation of agreed action
plans in the context of annual CPPRs.

* 

83. When measuring the results, it is important to keep in mind that the community-
based strategy is built on a longer-term vision, expected to be active for the next decade.
What IDA expects in the near term (during this CAS period) are some clear signals that
the strategy is paying off. A set of such intermediary CAS benchmarks and their
relationship to the intermediate PRSP targets is shown in Table 7. However, as
mentioned in the JSA, a great deal of realism is needed if monitoring and evaluation are
to be effectively utilized. It is simply not possible to assess to what extent Tajikistan is
moving towards meeting some of the PRSP goals at the current time because, as
mentioned before, data quality and availability is a major issue. Future targets need to be
refined, and further work is needed to understand the relationships among policies,
growth projections, and poverty reduction indicators. The baseline for the indicators on
business environment would be established through the ongoing Business Environment
Review.

84. 
In support of Government's PRSP monitoring and evaluation program, IDA will
provide support to build government capacity to produce reliable baseline data and
measurement tools for monitoring and evaluating program outcomes. IDA will also aim
to improve the Government's monitoring and evaluation ability, which will be critical to
implementing its PRSP and initiating a more programmatic approach. The PRSP has
established nine key indicators, based in part on the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). The centerpiece of IDA's efforts to help the Government monitor these and
other indicators will be the Poverty Assessment Update, and related strengthening of the
state statistics committee, in part through an IDF grant. The AsDB is also providing

Page 28 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

Table 7: Core CAS Monitoring Benchmarks

Increase share of private 
sector as % of GDP from 
30% to 40% 

PRSP Indicators by 2006 
Intermediate CAS Output and Outcome Measures
* Reduce poverty headcount * Steady progress in meeting the PRSP targets as
from 83% to 75% 
evidenced by the Annual Progress Report
e National Poverty statistics with reliable data
baselines and disagregated by gender in place
* Private land ownership increase from 30% to 50% as
a share of total land ownership
* Barriers to SME growth - including time and cost of
business - reduced, to be verified by surveys
* Regulation framework for microfmance adopted
* Budget allocations to health and education increased
by 0.2% annually
* More cost effective health and education delivery
systems by switching from norm- to activity-based
costing
Increased community participation in service
delivery, particularly through expanding water user
associations
* Strategy to contain spread of TB and IIIV/AIDS in

Increase primary 
education coverage from 
77.7% to 82% 
* Reduce infant and 
maternal mortality** 
Increase percentage of 
population with access to 
pure drinking water from 
51.2% to 58%*** 

* 

place

Objective 
Poverty 
Reduction 
(overall 
objective) 
Stimulating 
Growth 

Improving 
Social 
Service 
Delivery 

Improving 
Governance* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Improve transparency in the 
accounts of key SOEs 
Strengthen competition for 
government procuremnent 
and increase competition 
Improve efficiency and 
transparency in public 
sector management 

* Tax breaks and subsidies in key large SOEs
eliminated, to be verified by IAS audits
* Action plan to make the aluminum smelter TADAZ
viable approved and implementation underway
* Budget prepared based on a prioritized PIP
* Quarterly reports on budget execution published
regularly
* Revised legal basis for a transparent and competitive
public procurement system in place

Note: *Govemance indicators are proposed by the Bank staff.
** Numerical targets are not provided because reliable data are not available (par. 41)
* This Government indicator is overoptimistic in the staff's view.

support to the state statistics committee. The UN is taking the lead on measuring
progress towards meeting MDG goals, and IDA will work closely with the UN in this
effort. In addition, IDA will put in place a PRSP grant which will focus on building the
government's PRSP monitoring capacity. Finally, IDA plans to complement these
national efforts with a Central Asia-wide effort to ensure that national monitoring and
evaluation plans are developed and implemented in the context of the MDGs, and that the
countries within the region are cross-fertilizing ideas and assisting each other in this area.

VI. KEY ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTING THE CAS

Partnerships and Donor Coordination

85. 
Donor coordination continues to be critical for Tajikistan. As IDA's own
resources are constrained, increased donor coordination and additional grant funds are

Page 29 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

essential to the country's future. Tajikistan still has very few active donors and security
concerns limit in-country representation. Until quite recently, donor support for
Tajikistan's economic development was limited to multilateral donors, with few active
bilateral donors. Together with the NGO community, bilateral donors have been largely
involved in humanitarian assistance. This picture began to change-after the last
Consultative Group (CG) meeting (Tokyo 2001) and more recently since September 11
and the events in Afghanistan. However, the realization of donor commitments made at
the Tokyo CG has been slow. Attachment 3 gives an overall picture of key development
partner involvement in Tajikistan.

86. 
To date, AsDB, EBRD, UNDP, Swiss Government, and USAID have been the
most active donor partners in Tajikistan. While there is no formal division of labor
between these agencies, coordination has been close. In the area of poverty, IDA and
UNDP have taken the lead, both in the diagnostic work (poverty surveys) and project
lending (Social Investment Fund). In the area of governance, AsDB is taking the lead in
the diagnostic work. It has carried out a Governance and Institutional Review, upon
which IDA and other partners will draw while designing their programs. In education,
IDA and AsDB are in the front line, and in health, IDA and UNICEF have been most
active. IDA and the IMF have taken the lead in strengthening the banking system -
enforcing the prudential requirements, restructuring banks (including liquidation), and
strengthening the bank supervision and the payment system. EBRD and IFC have
provided technical assistance and equity to private banks; and EBRD has financed credit
lines. In the private sector, EBRD and IFC have been active in supporting private sector
development (through equity investment, lending and technical assistance). In the area of
infrastructure development, AsDB and IDA are active in the energy sector, AsDB and
EBDR in transport, and EBRD has taken the lead in telecommunications.

87. 
Tajikistan's limited financial and institutional resources and huge development
needs make cooperation and coordination among donors and NGOs essential.
Cooperation has grown through the PRSP process, the co-financing of specific projects,
and the CIS-7 initiative. IDA plans to strengthen its efforts in this area over the CAS
period. The first-ever in-country CG meeting will be held in early May 2003 and a CPPR
(to be carried out jointly with AsDB) is planned for FY03. Donor coordination within the
country will be intensified though the expansion of the Dushanbe Country Office and
through support from the new Central Asia Regional Office (CARO). IDA will continue
to be active in providing information to new and potential donors based on its in-country
presence, and to mobilize grant funds to assist in institution and capacity building. The
introduction of programmatic support based on the PRSP would provide an additional
vehicle for donor coordination.

CAS Participatory Process

88. 
The CAS is based on the PRSP, which was developed through a highly
participatory process. During the early stages of the CAS preparation, the World Bank
Country Office conducted two workshops in Dushanbe in early May 2002, one with key
government officials and another with local donors and key NGOs. Forty participants

Page 30 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance, Strategy

attended the workshops, and various ministries submitted written comments. Following
are the main messages received:

* Government officials, donors, and NGOs broadly endorsed the CAS findings as
consistent with the PRSP.
* The emphasis on analytical work, community development, and piloting projects
was particularly welcome.
* Government officials, donors and NGOs agreed on the need for growth, job
creation and human development.
* Opinions diverged about the emphasis on governance, energy and infrastructure.
Government officials felt they had done a lot on governance while donors and
NGOs felt that much remained to be done. Government felt that energy
development (particularly hydro-power projects) and infrastructure
(telecommunication, roads) were essential for growth; donors and NGOs felt that
the commitment to economic reform and to improving security was still too weak
to make these investments possible.
* Government officials argued against the proposed decline in IDA allocations,
particularly with the PRSP in place.

89. 
These early discussions were followed by several rounds of discussions and
written comments at different stages of the CAS preparation. As a result, the final CAS
enjoys full client support.

90. 
In addition, IDA conducted a client survey to learn about the client's perceptions
of its programs. This survey confirrns the importance of governance, education and the
private sector in the Bank's program. It also confirms the importance of increasing the
Bank's attention to the community at large (Box 8).

Box 8. Client feedback survey

In November 2002, a client survey - the first such survey in Tajikistan - was taken of approximately 120
individuals knowledgeable about the Bank's program: Government officials, NGOs, media and academia,
and private sector representatives. Respondents overwhelmingly (82%) felt that Tajikistan was moving in
the right direction overall, though ratings were lower in particular areas, such as corruption. In general,
stakeholders were also fairly positive about the overall work of the Bank in Tajikistan. On a scale of 1-10,
stakeholders rated the Bank's overall effectiveness at 7.4, relevance at 7.5, and strengthening capacity at
8.0. Stakeholders also agreed that the Bank treats clients with respect (7.7). The World Bank appears to
be most valued for its financial resources as well as "lending when others won't." While the Bank
received fairly high ratings for the knowledge it creates, the ratings drop when asked about the Bank's
ability to apply that knowledge to the country's need. It is interesting to note that NGOs and staff of
implementing agencies rated "helping to strengthen the private sector" as the most important area in
which the Bank should be involved, while staff of the Office of the President, PM, and Parliament
identified education as the most important sector for the Bank's involvement. The Bank was seen as being
most effective in strengthening the education sector and in monitoring poverty, and least in encouraging
greater transparency in governance and gender issues.

Page 31.of 32 

Risks

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

91. 
The CAS faces six significant risk factors: (i) fragile security - both regional and
domestic; (ii) weak institutional capacity; (iii) vulnerability to external shocks; (iv)
potential capture of CDD activities by local elites; (v) frequent natural calamities; and (vi)
weak portfolio implementation.

92. 
Regional and domestic security. Stable regional and domestic security is a key
precondition for successful implementation of the CAS. While the situation in
Afghanistan has so far had limited effect on Tajikistan, any deterioration of regional
security could have implications for Tajikistan's domestic security. In addition, drug
trafficking could continue to undermine governance reform efforts. Furthermore,
although the Govemment has consolidated its control of the country, sporadic incidents
could affect political stability. If security considerations worsen, IDA would limit its
support to core social sector programs and non-lending services.

93. 
Institutional weakness. Weak institutions and weak governance continue to be a
source of concern. The deficiencies arising from a poorly developed judicial system, a
weak legal framework, an unreformed public administration, and lax financial
management are listed as problematic areas in the PRSP. Recognizing the long-term
nature of institution building and the existing capacity constraints, the CAS is designed to
focus the Government and IDA on a limited number of key priority areas.

94. 
External vulnerabilities. Large foreign debt and highly concentrated exports are
also potential risk factors. The foreign debt risk depends in large part on ongoing debt
restructuring discussions with Tajikistan's largest creditors. Export prices of aluminum
and cotton have been highly volatile in the past few years, hurting Tajikistan's terms of
trade. These risks are being mitigated by the Government's implementation of a debt
reduction strategy (par. 33) and will be monitored carefully during CAS implementation
(par. 68).

95. 
CDD risks. There is a risk that the shift in IDA strategy to stronger focus on
community driven development may not bring the anticipated results. Potential capture of
public services by the local elite may reverse the positive impact on poor people that
CDD is supposed to have. In this regard, CDD activities will be carefully designed, based
on experience from the ongoing pilot CDD activities, to ensure that local elites do not
capture the benefits of decentralized development projects, so that participation is not
manipulated in favor of these elites' interests.

96. 
Natural disasters. Tajikistan is periodically affected by seasonal floods,
landslides, mudslides, rock falls, avalanches, heavy and destructive rains, droughts, and
earthquakes. While IDA has provided assistance to establish early warning systems for
natural disasters, these remain a source of unpredictable risk for the, future.

Page 32 of 32 

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy

97. 
Portfolio issues and counterpart funds. Weak institutional capacity,
deficiencies in financial and procurement management, and shortages of counterpart
funds continue to pose risks to portfolio implementation. These risks are being addressed
by closely monitoring portfolio implementation through regular CPPRs and have
improved as a result of the Government's recently adopted Action Plan, but they remain a
serious threat to successful project implementation.

By Shengman Zhang

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Washington, D.C.
February 3, 2003

CAS Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Tajikistan at a glance 

] 

2/303

Europe &
Central 
Asia 

POVERTY and SOCiAL 

Low-
Income 

Tailkdstan 

Development dlamond-

2001
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method US$) 
GNI (Alas method US$ billions) 
Average annual growth, 1995-01
Population (%) 
Labor force (96 
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1995-01) 

62 
180 
1.1 

475 
1,960 
930 

2511 
430
1,069

Life expectancy

1.1 
2.3 

0.1 
0.6 

1.9 
2.3 

A 

GNI 
per 
capita 

Gross
pnmary
enrollment

Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 

83
28 

63 

31

Life expectancy at birth (years) 

69 

69 

59

Infant mortality (per 1, 000 live births) 

21 

20 

76

Child malnutribon (I% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 

Access to tmproved water source

.. 

90 

76

tiliteracy (I% of population age 15+) 

1 

3 

37

Gross pimary enrollment (% of school-age populatIon) 
Male 
Female 

105 
109 
101 

102 
103 
101 

96 
103 

Tai,kistan
Low-income group

-

88

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

EconormIc ratios

GDP (US$ billions) 

.. 
.
.. 

1.2 
19.1 
33.2 
20.1 

0.99 
6.9 
82.6 
2.7 
3.2 

1 1
4.8
63.8 
3.0
4 0

Gross domestc lnveshrenVGDP 

Exports of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestic savings/GOP 
Gross nabonal savings/GDP 

Trade

Current account ba1ancelGDP 

-6.3 

-7.0 

DornestIC 
saings

Investment

Interesl payments/GDP 
Total debtlGDP 
Tota debt servcelexports 

2.2 
105.1 
7.7 
78.1 

1.8 
98.0
1t 1

Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debtexports 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

78.2
106.2

94 6 

Indebtedness

1981-91 1991-01 

2000 

2001 

2001-05

(average annual growth)

GDP 

0.6 

-7.2 

8 3 

10 2 

5.3 

Tajikistan
Low-inco.ne group

GDP per capita 

-2.3 

-8 4 

8.1 

9.2 

2 7 

Exports of goods and servces 

.. 

-2.0 

7.8 

-9.1 

..

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)

(% of 3DP)

Agriculture 

*- 

37.9 

27 0 

26.7 

20 I

Industry 
Manufactunng 

.. 
.. 
.. 

37.5 
26.5 

27.3 
23 9 

26.7 
22.6 

of
-20 

sj7 

7 

9'8 

99 \o00g]

Services 

24.6 

37.4 

37.5 

-40
4tO .

Private consumption 

.. 
.. 
.. 

70.8 

89.1 

4.8 

General government consumptlon 

9.1 

8.2 

8.8 

GDI 

a GOP

Imports of goods and services 

32.2 

86.9 

75.9

(average annual growth) 
Agncuture 
Industry 
ManufacturIng 
Services 
Pnvate consumptiorn 

1981-91 1991-01 
-3.7 
4.6 
3.8 
-12 5 
4.6 
-11.9 

2000 
12.4 
9 0 
10.2 

2001 

Gro 

of exports and Impot (IN

40
20

7.9 

.. 

o
-20

2.1 

0.8 

0.8 

10.3 

Z3 

-13.3 

30.1 

-94.1 

40

General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic Investment 
Imports of goods and services 

3.0 
-10.7 

-14.2 
-22.3 
-3.0 

-10.6 
-56.8 
10 6 

18.8 
-24.3 
-5.0

4iO

-

Exports 

0 

Imports

.. 

Note: 2001 data are preliminary esUImates.
The diamonds show four key Indlcators In the country (in bold) compared 

iWth its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond vill

be incomplete.

CAS Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Tajikistan

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflation (%)

(9 change) 
Consumer pnces 
Implicit GDP deflator 

2,500
2,000

.
.. 

203.6 
99.7 

32.9 
24 0 

38.6 
26.2 

1o500
1,000

Government finance 
(% of GDP, Includes crent grants) 

50

0 = 

S 

3 

_

Current revenue 

.. 
.
.. 

.. 
.. 
.

13.6 

15.2 

4D0 

96 

97 

98 

99 

00 

01

Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/defcH 

2.1 
-0.6 

2.9 
-0.1 

-

GDP deflator 

CPI

TRADE

(JJS$ Millions) 

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)

Total exports (fob) 
Cornmodity 
Commodity 2 

.. 
.
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

788 
424 
92 

652 
398
72 

l,OD0

am

Manufactures 

.. 

.. 

49 

.. 

eo-
400

Totel Imports (ch) 

.. 

.. 

861 

801 

Food 

.. 

.. 

68 

52

Fuel and energy 

.. 
.

.. 
.. 

302 

203 

20

Capital goods 

53 

.. 

o0_.

Ewpartpriceindex(19951400) 
Import price Index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

.. 
.

.. 
.. 

124 
68 

113 
68 

95 

Be 97 98 
*Expots 

go 
oo 
sinports

ow

.. 

.. 

181 

165

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1981 

1991 

2W00 

2001 

Current accotnt balance to GDP fiG)

(US$ nnil/ions)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

819 
861 

673 
801 
-128 

0-
-2 - -
-*

-42 

Net income 
Net currenttnsfers 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

-57 
0 

-30 
0 

4
410

Current account balance 

.. 

.. 

-62 

-74 

-10

12

Financing items (rnet) 

.
.. 

.. 
.. 

91 

82 

-14

Changes in net reserves 

-29 

-8 

-16

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (SomonVUS$) 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

87 
1.8 

96
2.4

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(US$ 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 

il/lions) 

Compositlon of 2001 debt (US$ mill.)

.. 

.. 

1,042 

1,034

IBRD 

.. 

.. 

0 

0

IDA 

.. 

.. 

143 

172 

G 80 

8.172

Total debt service 

.. 

.. 

63 
0 

79 
0

F: 107

IBRD 
IDA 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

1 

1 

c: 110

Compositon of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Prvate creditors 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

33 
20 
-11 
24 
0 

81

58 
17
9

24

Foreign direct investment 
Pofolio equity 

0 

E 541

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.
.. 
.

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

26 
23 
0 
23 

53 
35 
0 
35
1
34

A - IBRD 
B -IDA 
c - MF 

E -Bilatera
F -Pivae
G - Short-term

D -O0 mutblatiral 

1 
22 

Net transfers 

Development Economics 

2/3/03

CAS Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

Tajikistan
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 0111312003

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation B 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number 8 ' c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount Bs c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) @ 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousand) 
Average Supervision (US$ thousand/project) 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

10 

1.3 
10.0 
39.6 
30.0 
52.8 
23.8 

yes 
640 
64 

9 
1.9 
22.2 
14.7 
22.2 
14.7 
18.5 

yes 
756 
84 

10 
1.7 
10.0 
0.3 
30.0 
12.7 
18.3 

yes 
817 
82 

11
2.2
0.0
0.0
30.0
19.0
5.4

yes
995
90

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
7 
5
145.4 
86.3
28.6 
20.0
37.1 
5.2

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Tajikistan
Bank Group Program Summary
As of 01/0712003

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program'

CAS Annex B3
Page 1 of 1

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(HIMWL) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

2003 

2005 

2004 

Education Support and Empowerment 
Banking & Private Sector Support 
Result 
Community Agriculture and Watershed Management 
SAC 3 
Result 
Comnunity and Basic Health 
Municipal Infrastructure 
Ferghana Valley Water 
Result 
Overall Result Result 

20.0 
10.0 
30.0
10.0 
10.0 
20.0
10.0 
15.0 
5.0 
30.0
80.0

H 
M 

M 
H 

H 
M 
H 

H
H

H
H

H
H
M

a) This table presents the proposed Bank notional program for the next three fiscal years.
b) Project ratings indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M), or low (L).

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M),
or low (L).

Template created on 2/3/2003.

Tajikistan

IFC and MIGA Program
FY 2000-2003

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

AGRICULTURE & FORESTRY 
FINANCE & INSURANCE 
INFORMATION 
OIL, GAS AND MINING 
PROF, SCIENT, & TECH 
UTILITIES 
WHOLES. & RETAIL TRADE 
Textile, Apparel & Leather 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other 
Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$m)** 

CAS Armex B3
Page I of I

2000 2001 2002 

2003

1.39 0.55 8.60 

3.00

... 
36 
... 
35 
... 
*- 
29 
... 

73 
... 
... 
... 
27 
... 
... 
... 

3
... 
4 
... 
... 
93 
... 
... 

100 100 100 

64 
91 
56 
36 
9 
41 
... 
... 
3 
... 
... 
... 
100 1oo 100 

0.00 0.00 0.00 

...
...
...
...
*-
...
100

100

0
100
0
...
100

...

* - 1 project under textile, apparel & leather for 2003 has ben added
** Tajikistan joined MIGA in December 2002.

TAJIIUSTAN
Summary of Nonlending Services
As of 01/13/2003

CAS Annex B4
Page I of I

Product 

Completion FY Cost (US$000) 

Audience' 

Objective b

Recent comaletdins
CEM 
Poverty Assessment 
Lake Sarez Mitigation 
Banking Sector Restructuring 
Consultative Group (CG) 

Underway
Public Expenditure Review (PER) 
Country Procurement Accountability Review (CPAR) 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) 
IDF Grant for Strengthening Statistics Department 
Micro-enterpnse lending (Seminar & Paper) 
Energy Sector Note 
CDD Review 
AIDS/TB Regional Review 
Consultative Group (CG) 
Utilities Reform 

WBI Courses/Seminars on Education Reform and Social Protection 
Continued Support for PRSP Implementation 
Trade & Transport Work 
Knowledge Management (GDLN, WBI, Gateway) 
Regional Work on Water/Energy 

Planned
National Environmental Action Plan TA 
Health Sector Note 
Poverty Note Update 
Business Environment Study 
IDF Grant on Empowenng Mahallas 
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) 
Social Dimensions of Regional Differences 
Gender Assessment Study 
Future Directions in Agnculture 
Social Protection Ref TA 
IDF on Procurement 

FY00 
FY00 
FY 00 
FY00 
FYOI 

FY 03 
FY 03 
FY 03 
FY 03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY 03 
FY 03 
FY 03 
FY03 

FY 03-05 
FY 03-05 
FY 03-05 
FY 03-05 
FY 03-05 

FY04 
FY 04 
FY 04 
FY 04 
FY04 
FY 05 
FY 05 
FY 05 
FY 05 
FY05 
FY05 

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination, pnvate sector, civil society
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving

195 
133 
69 
25 
139 

258 
103 
83 
41 
150 
100 
80 
50 
50 
100 

100 
100 
80 
70 

120 
200 
230 
210 
50 
310 
150 
130 
150 
50 
30 

G, D, B, PS 
G,B,D,CS 
G,B,D,CS 
G, B, D 
G, B, P 

G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G,B,D 
G,PD,D,B 
G,CS,D 
G,D,B 
G,D,B 

G, CS, B 
G, CS, D 

G, CS, D 
G, B, D 

G, CS, B, D 
G, CS, B, D 
G, CS, B, D 
G, CS, B, D 
G, CS, B,, PD 
G, B, D 
G, D, CS, B 
G, D, CS, B 
G, D, CS, B 
G, PD, CS 
G, B 

KG, PS, PD
KG, PD
KG,PS
KG, PS
PD,PS

KG
KG
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG,PD
KG,PD
KG,PD
PS
KG, PS

KG, BD
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
PS
KG, PS

PS
PS
KG,PS
KG
PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

Tajikistan Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same reglonflncome group

CAS Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of populabon) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Share of income or consumpbon
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumpbon) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social secunty and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female 
Access to an Improved water source
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrtion (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 populaton) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1970-75 

19804-5 

199o00 

3.4 
3.1 
35 5 
6.3 

4.6 
2 9 
33.2 
5.6 

.. 

..

..

.

.. 

.. 

.

.

.

.

.. 

.. 
.

64 
61 
67 

, 

.

217 
153 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.

.

.. 

..

.. 

.. 

61 
82 

69 
67 
72 

47 

., 

190 
129 

.. 
.

.

6.2 
1.2 
27.5 
3 1 

180 

.

34.7
8.0
40.0

5.2 

.. 

2.2 

.. 
.

79 
81 

69 
66 
72 

21 
30 

236 
142 
120

Europe &
Central 
Asia 

474.3 
0.2 
65.4 
1.6 

Low-
Income

2,459.8
2.0
31.9
3.6

2,010 
187 

410
140

4.1 
4.4 
8.8

90 

.
.

93 
93 

69 
64 
74 

20 
25 

298 
127 

1.2
3.4

76
88
70

57
57

59
58
60

76
115

294
261

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratos exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estmates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.

2002 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

CAS Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Tajikistan - Key Economic Indicators

Estimate 
2002 

Projected
2004 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2003 

2005

100 
25 
24 
51 

100 
25 
27 
48 

100 
27 
27 
46 

100 
27
27
47

100 

100 

100 

100

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

94 
2 
48 
57 

96 
5 
64 
66 

97 
5 
83 
87 

97 
3 
64 
76 

97 
4 
66 
75 

96 
5 
68 
72 

96 
5 
68 
72 

95
5
75
79

Gross domestic savings 

6.3 

4.0 

2.7 

3.0 

3.5 

4.0 

4.5 

5.0

Gross national savings 

.. 

.. 

3.2 

4.0 

4.5 

5 0 

5 5 

6.0

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current pnces)
GDP per capita (US$) 
215 
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1997 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
5.3 
3.7 
Gross Domestic Income 
35.8 
7.2 
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1997 pnces)
Gross domestic productat market pnces 
3.4 
3.2 
Total consumption 
45 9 
-3.6 
Pnvate consumption 
55.8 
-4.5 
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 

1320 

1087 

991 

1056 

1135 

1219 

1244 

1270

177 

161 

170 

180 

187 

201 

217

8.3 
8.0 

10.2 
1.4 

7 5 

6.0 

4.0 

4 0

.

8.1 
19.3 
22.1 

9.2 
8.1 
7 5

59 

3.7 

1 1 

0.5

.

636 
586 
756 
725 
-120 

698 
666 
714 
693 
-16 

819 
788 
861 
834 
-42 

673 
652 
801 
773 
-128 

745 
723 
855 
819 
-110 

834 
805 
879 
843 
-45 

902 
870 
957 
916 
-55 

952
917
1001
959
-49

Net current transfers 

.

.. 

.

.. 

..

Curren. account balance 
Net private foreign direct investment 

-120 
24 

-36 
21 

-62 
24 

-74 
9 

-47 
22 

-48 
22 

-47 
22 

-48
27

Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, inc. errors & ormmssions) 

102 
18 
84 
30 

-! 

63 
20 
43 
4 

26 
58 
-32 

2 

-I 

8 

-1

42 
-43 
9 

..
..

47 
-8 

40 
-17 

59 
-32 

56 
-39 

31
-9

Change in reservesd 

-36 

7 

-29 

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR97 pnces)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 

-9.1 

-1.5 

-4 2 

-12.1 

-9.7 

-3.7 

-44 

-3.9

-43.3 

20.9 

7.8 

-9.1 

.. 

..

Primary 
Manufactures 

-43.3 
-50.3 

28.4 
19 6 

14.4 
-2.8 

.. 

.

..

.. 

.. 

..

Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-3.9 

-5.6 

5.6 

-7.1 

6.0 

2.9

(Continued)

CAS Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Tajikistan - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Indicator 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

Estimate 

2002 

Projected

2004 

2003 

2005

17.7 
14.7 
3.0 
3.5 

-2 4 
-0.5 

9.0 
17.2 

17.8 
14.3 
3.5 
3.5 

4.1 
0.0 

9.0 
9.2 

17.9
14.5
3.5
3.5

2.4
0.0

9 0
9.2

16.4 
13.9 
2.5 
2.8 

1.4 
-0.2 

8.8 
38 7 

.

..
..

98.0 

98.0 

98.0 

98.0

6.9 
30.7 

.. 

138.7 
94.3 
147.0 
112.4 

130.3 
94.4 
138.1 
109.4 

143.0 
107 8 
132.7 
97.9 

130.1 
108.0 
1205
97.6 

43.2 
54.1 

27 5 
26.5 

32.9 
24.0 

38.6 
26.2 

12.2 
16.0 

9.5 
8.5 

5.3 
5.0 

5.0
5.0

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
12.0 
Current expenditures 
13.3 
Current account surplus(+) ordeficit(-) 
-1.3 
Capital expenditure (excluding extemally 
2.5 
financed PIP)
Foreigp financing 
Overall Public Sector Balance (excluding 
externaliv financed PIP)
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 

1.7 
-3 8 

13.5 
13.2 
0.3 
3.4 

2.5 
-3.1 

13.6 
11.5 
2.1 
2.7 

3.1 
-0.6 

6.8 
28.4 

.. 

8.3 
64.5 

.

15 2 
12.3 
29 
3.0 

0.4 
-0.1 

7.9 
33.5 

.. 

Private sector credit growth / 

total credit growth (%)

Price tndices( YR97 =100)
Merchandise export pnce index 
Merchandise import pnce index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)/ 

Real interest rates
Consumer pnce index (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

a. GDP at market pnces
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central govemment.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units " An increase in USS/LCU denotes appreciation.

CAS Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Tajikistan - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator 

1998 

Actual 
1999 
2000 

Estimate 
2002 

2003 

Projected
2004 

2005

2001 

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net disbursements (US$m)' 

Totaldebtservice(TDS) 

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)Y
IBRD DS/XGS 
Share of IBRD portfolio(%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity /c 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

1249 

1281 

1042 

1034 

1075 

1138 

1192 

1243

76 

91 

78 

78 

25 

63 

78 

119 

41 

152 

63 

130 

54 

51

111 

120

196.3 
94.6 
14.3 
50.1 

183.6 
117.9 
11.2 
41.6 

127.2 
105.1 
7.7 
52.4 

153.2 
98.0 
17.7 
24.0 

144.3 
94.7 
20.4 

.

136.5 
93.3 
15.6 

132.2 
95.8 
12.3 

130.6
97.9
12.6

0.0 
3.3 

0.0 
0 
92 

0.0 
28.8 

0.0 
0 
126 

0.0 
38.5 

0.0 
0 
143 

0.0 
34.9 

0.0 
0 
172 

0.0 

..

0.0 
0 
191 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

0.0 
0 
204 

0.0 
0 
217 

0.0
0
230

0.00 
12.06 

0.00 
0.00 

0.35 
0.50 

0.00 
0.00 

5.10
3.50

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Tajikistan - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 01/0712003

CAS Annex B8
Page 1 of 1

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

Oriainal Amount in USS Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a

DeveloDrnent 
Obiective-s 

Implementation Fiscal Year 
Pcgroaes-s

IBRD 

IDA GRANT Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. Frrn Revd

FARM PRIV SUPPORT S 
IBTA 2 
S 
LAKE SAREZ RISK MITI S 
PAMIR PRIV POWER 
S 
POV ALLV 2 
S 
PRIM HEALTH CARE 
S 
RURAL INFRA REHAB S 
SAC 2 
S 

S 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

2002 

1999 

1999 
1999 
2000 
2002 
2002 
2000 
2000 
2001 

Result 

17 

5 

23.1 
6.7 
0.47 
10 
13.8 
5.4 
20 
50 

151.5 

17.9228455 

0.42419441 

11.9226046 
2.88949964 
0.42106816 
10.66816 
14.4621688 
3.15038846 
18.3492972 
26.480937 

106 691164 

-0.1

0.6

5.9
1.2
0.2
0
-0.5
1.3
6.1
38.6

53.5

Closed Projects 

7

IBRD/IDA 
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Actve) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Actve + Closed) 

47.36
0.00
145.42
0.00
192 78
0 00
106 69
0.00
106.69

Active Prolects 

Project Name 

DUSHANBE WS 

EDUCATION 

S 

S 

Project ID 

P057883 

P057953 

P049718 
P059755 
P067610 
P075256 
P008860 
P049894 
P058898 
P046047 

Overall result 

a Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal

CAS Annex B8
Page I of I

Tajikistan

Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of December 31, 2002
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1997/98 
Zeravshan Gold 
2000 
SEF Holland 
2000 
SEF TSB 
2002 
SEF Telecom Tech 
2002 
SEF FOM 
2002 
Pamir Energy 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0 
1.2 10.86 
0 
0 
1.2 10.86 
0
0.35 
0 
0 
0 0.25 
0 
0 
0
0 
0.5 
0 
0 
0 
0.2 
0 
0
0.35 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
0.25 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
4.5 
3.5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0

Total Portfolio: 

5.45 

5.2 10.86 

0 0.25 

1.4 10.86 

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

2003 Giovani SA 
2001 SEFFinconsult 
Total Pending Commitment: 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0 
3 
0 
0
0.1 
0 
0 
0
0.1 
3 
0 
0

Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy
Country Strategy Matrix, FY03-05

PRSP Objective and Diagnosis 

Strategic Direction 

mentLendingAACASP

World Bank Group Activities 

Develop- 

Partners 

1. Poverty Reduction (Overarchin Objective)
The overall objective is to make 
Momtor and evaluate ADB 
progress on key poverty indicators 
PRSP 
IDA 
including the poverty headcount 
implementation 
IMF 
ratio, estimated at 83 percent m 2001 
progress 
UNDP 

ZJ 
2. Enhancing Macroeconomic Stab ility and Debt Sustaina ility
The PRSP recognizes that macro 
Strengthen fiscal 
IMF 
stability is key to economic growth 
policy and budget 
IDA 
and poverty reduction. Good 
management 
ADB 
progress has been achieved so far in 
SECO 
macro stability, but the situation 
remains fragile, largely because of 
the narrow tax base and heavy debt 
burden 

Improve external 
debt management 

CAS Annex B9
Page 1 of 5

PRSP Benchmarks

Lending 

AAA 

*CAS Performance Indicators

a SAC 3 (FY04) 
* PRSC (FY05) 
* Commumty and 
Basic Health 
Project (FY05) 
Education Support 
and Empowerment 
(FY03) 

* Poverty Note Update 
(FY04) 
* Social Dimensions of 
Regional Differences 
(FY05) 
* CDD Review (FY03) 
* IDF grant for 
strengthemng the 
Statistics Department 
(FY03) 

* Steady progress m meeting the PRSP targets
as evidenced by the Annual Progress Report
* Reduce poverty headcount ratio to 75 percent
by 2006*
* National Poverty statistics with reliable data
baselines and disagregated by gender in place
* New national survey of living standards
completed*
* Data baseline established and reliable
measurement tools developed for monitoring
and evaluating outcomes of the 9 MDG targets
indicated m the PRSP*
* Further development of intermediate poverty

__reduction goals

.im-ST-iA.ATNpCROW

* PRSC (FY05) 
* SAC3 (FY04) 
* IBTA2 (ongoing) 

* Public Expenditure 
Review (FY03) 
* Country Economic 
Memorandum (FY05) 
* Macro Monitoring 
* Consultative Group 
Meeting (FY03) 
* CIS-7 Initiative 
(FY03) 

* Inflation maintained at a single-digit level
* Imnproved fiscal sustainability by increasing
tax collection (by strengthenig tax and
customs administration), reducing quasi-fiscal
deficit (particularly In the energy sector) and
maintaimng tight expenditure control. Budget
balance (excl. PIP) targeted at 0.7 percent of
GDP by 2005.
* Directed credit eliminated
* Imnproved external debt management -
elimination of debt arrears through
rescheduling.

| 

Develop- 

ment 
Partners

IDA 
IFC 
EBRD 
Switzerland 
USAID 
IMF 
AKF 

PRSP Objective and Diagnosis 

Strategic Direction 

3. Private Sector Development and Financial Sector
The share of private sector in the 
* Develop a sound 
economy is still small (about 45 
business and 
percent m 2001), an indicator of the 
investment climnate 
poor investment climate. While some 
for SME sector 
progress has been made in reforming 
* Improve 
the legal and regulatory framework 
governance 
as well as tax policy, enforcement 
* Improve access to 
remains a major constraint. 
micro-credit and 
Limited progress has been made in 
credit to SMEs 
the financial sector reform. The 
* Strengthen existing 
sector is far from playing its financial 
and create new 
intermediation role. 
banking institutions 
* Develop Leasing 
Develop Micro- 
lending 

CAS Annex B9
Page 2 of 5

World Bank Group Activities 

PRSP Benchmarks

*CAS Performance Indicators

* SAC 3 (FY04) 
* Banking and 
Private Sector 
Support (FY03) 

* Business 
Environment & 
Investment Climnate 
Review (FY04) 
* Regional Seminar on 
Micro-enterprise 
lending (FY03) 
* IFC: Development of 
the legal framework 
for leasing and 
institution building 
* EFC: TA to Micro- 
enterprises and SMEs 
* IFC: Development of 
legal framework for 
micro-lending and 
institution building 
* IFC: TA for SME and 
agricultural 
development in rural 
areas
* Future directions in
agriculture (FY05)

* Barriers to SME growth - including time and
cost of business - reduced, to be verified by
surveys
* Improved financial transparency and
accountability of key SOEs (Barki-I Tajik,
Tajiktelecom and Tajik Gas) through the
elimination of tax offsets and directed credits*
* Annual IAS audits of key SOEs (Tadaz, Barki-
I Tajik, Tajiktelecom and Tajik Gas) carried
out*
* Reduced court fees on settlement of claims to
2%
* Full tax deductibility of loan loss provisions
for banks allowed
* Restrict tax authorities access the accounts of
individuals and firms only with a court order
* Regulation framework for microfinance
adopted*
* Adoption and implementation of an action
plan to achieve economic viability of Tadaz*

PRSP Objective and Diagnosis 

4. Agriculture and Environment

Growth in agriculture will be 
stimulated by privatization of 
collective and state farms and other 
reforms to boost sectoral 
productivity. 
Success of agricultural reforms will 
critically depend upon improving 
governance and eliminating 
interference by local administrations 
in the decision-rnaking process of the 
farmers. 

5. Infrastructure

Imnprove access to, and affordability 
of, basic infrastructure services to the 
poorest groups; and lay the 
foundation for ensuting the 
availability of adequate infrastructure 
as an essential element in achieving 
satisfactory economic growth, which 
in turn provides the means for 
reducing poverty. 

Strategic 1 Develop-. 
iStrategc Direction 
ment 

rorld eanr 

* Increase 
agncultural 
productivity 
* Conserve 
biodiversity and 
strengthen 
environmental 
protection 

ADB 
IDA 
EU 
FAO 
UNDP 
WFP 

CAS Annex B9
Page 3 of 5

Group Activities 

] 

PRSP Benchmarks
*CAS Performance Indicators

* Private land ownership increase from 30% to
50% as a share of total land ownership
* Reduced land registration fee to US$6 or less.*
a Simplified tax system (a single tax) for private
farms extended throughout the country*
* NEAP in place

* Community 
Agriculture and 
Watershed 
Management 
(FY04) 
* Farm 
Privatization 
Support 
(ongoing) 
* Rural 
Infrastructure 
Rehabilitation 
Project (ongoing)
* Ferghana Valley

* IFC: TA on SME 
development in rural 
areas 
* TA on the National 
Environmental Action 
Plan (FY04) 
* Future directions in
agriculture (FY05)
* Regional Ferghana
Valley Water
Management
Initiative

___________ 
___ 

Water (FY04) 

___ 

___

* Municipal 
Infrastructure 
(FY05) 

* Prevent collapse of ADB 
basic infrastructure 
IDA 
* Enhance private 
IDB 
sector participation 
EBRD 
in infrastructure 
Arab Fund 
provision with 
OPEC Fund 
Government 
IFC 
playing a catalytic 
AKFED 
role 
* Improve conununal 
service delivery by 
improving 
management of 
urban infrastructure 
service through 
greater community 
participation 

* Energy Sector Note 
(Utility Reform 
Review) (FY03) 
* Social Dimension of 
Regional Differences 
(FY05) 
* Large Hydroprojects 
Review (FY03-04) 
* Regional Study on 
Trade and Transport 
(FY03) 
* Regional studies on 
the water/energy 
nexus and energy 
markets 

* Implement an action plan to achieve full cost
recovery in the electricity sector by rising
idustrial tariffs to US$1.03 by 2003 and
residential tariffs to US$1.5 by 2005.
* Rehabilitate the power sector to meet existing
domestic demand by (i) transferring the
Gomo-Badakshan electricity network to,
private Concessionaire (Pamir Energy Corp.),
and (ii) reducing electricity losses (technical
and commercial).
* Improved safety, reliability and efficiency of
water service provision m Dushanbe (detailed
indicators are being developed as part of WB
project)*
* Strengthened institutional and financial
capacity of Dushanbe Vodokanal*
* Develop and imnplement a program for
rehabilitation of municipal infrastructure
services at the sub-national governnent level*

CAS Annex B9
Page 4 of 5

* Strategy to contain spread of TB and
HIV/AIDS in place *
* Immunization survey and a strategy for
strengthening the immunization program
completed*
* Preparation of the education and health budget
based on activity/population costing*
* Budget allocations to health and education
increased by 0.2 percent of GDP annually*
* Scaling-up the reformed cash compensation
program for public servants
* More cost effective health and education
delivery systerns by switching from norm- to

activity-based costing*

* Increased community participation in service
delivery, particularly through expandmg water
user associations
* Increased delivery of services through NGOs

6. Human Development
The delivery of basic social services, 
namely education and health, has 
nearly collapsed, though some 
progress has been made on a pilot 
basis. What is needed now is the 
scaling up of these achievements and 
the increased involvement of local 
communities in the delivery of social 
services. 

7. Community Driven Development
Build the civil society's capacity to 
voice its concerns and become a 
more important partner in the 
country's development process. 

* Achieve the MDG 
ADB 
targets indicated in 
IDA 
the PRSP 
IDB 
* Allocate adequate 
UNICEF 
resources to 
UTNFPA 
education and 
UNDP 
health and improve WHO 
the delivery of their 
Switzerland 
services 
USAID 
T Contain 
DFID 
Tuberculosis and 
JAPAN 
HI-V/AIDS 
Germany 
endemics 

IDA 
UNDP 
USAID 
Japan 

* Government willing 
to embrace 
participation and 
inclusion as 
demonstrated by 
the PRSP 
consultation 
process. 

* Education sector 
strategy note (FY03) 
* Health sector note 
(FY04) 
* Gender Assessment 
Study (FY05) 
* AIDS/TB Regional 
Review (FY03) 
* WBI programs on 
human development 
(FY03-05) 

* Regional Innovation 
Day and follow-up 
activities (FY03-05) 
* Regional CDD 
Working Group
* Civil society activities
(FY03-05)
* IDF grant for
empowering mahallas
(FY05)

* Education Support 
and Empowerment 
(FY03) 
* Community and 
Basic Health 
(FY05) 

* Education Support 
and Empowerment 
(FY03) 
* Community and 
Basic Health 
(FY05) 
* Municipal 
Infrastructure 
(FY05) 
* Community 
Agriculture and
Watershed
Management

(FY04)

PRSP Objective and Diagnosis 

| Strategic Direction 

Development 

World Bank Group Activities 

*CAS Perfomance Indicators

=:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~W WW=D 
a 
bl! 

k

CAS Annex B9

Page 50of 5

o Public Sector Management and Governance
Public adminustration performance IS * Improve 
weak and in need of major 
effectiveness and 
restructuring. This would entail 
efficiency of public 
functional reviews and restructuring 
resources 
of ministries and public agencies as 
* Increased fiscal 
well as salary review. 
transparency and 
Budget planning, execution and 
accountability 
expenditures tracking are also weak 
* Improve delivery 
and could be made more transparent. 
of public services 

IDA 
IMF 
ADB 
Switzerland 

* SAC 3 (FY04) 
* PRSC (FY05) 

* Public Expenditure 
Review (FY03) 
* Country Financial 
Accountability 
Assessment (FY03) 
* Country Procurement 
Assessment (FY03) 
* IDF grant on 
Procurement (FY05) 

Strengthening insttutional capacity 
is a PRSP prionty. Being able to 
access worldwide knowledge is an 

important resource in achieving that 
goal. 

9. Knowledge Transfer (not directly reflected in the PRSP)

* Improve access to 
worldwide 
knowledge 

* Build stronger 
institutional 
capacity 
* Improve knowledge 
sharing with civil 

society

orgamzations

IDA 
WBI 

UNDP 

* No Bank 
lending 
directed 

specifically at 
this area 

* WBI Knowledge 
assessment (FY03) 
* Regional Knowledge 

Programs, including
GDLN, WBI
* Regional Innovation
Day and follow-up
activities (FY03-05)

* Functional reviews of central ministries
carried out and restructuring plans
implemented*
* Civil service salary review carried out and a
merit-based salary system mtroduced*
* Budget prepared based on a prioritized PIP*
* Quarterly reports on budget execution
published regularly
* Publish budget execution on a regular basis*
* Implementation of CPPR action plans*
* Implementation of agreed recommendations
under the CFAA and CPAR
* Improved financial transparency and
accountability of key SOEs (Barki-I Tajik,
Tajiktelecom and Tajik Gas) through the
elimination of tax offsets and directed credits*
* Annual IAS audits of key SOEs (Tadaz, Barki-
I Tajik, Tajiktelecom and Tajik Gas) carned
out*

* Actiop plan to make the alummnum smelter

TADAZ viable approved and implementation
underway*
* Revised legal basis for a transparent and
competitive public procurement system in
place*

* A knowledge sharing mechamsm for Civil
Society Organizations established
* GDLN centers operational

CAS Annex BIO
Page I of I

Tajikistan - Summary of Development Priorities

As Of Date 01/0712003

Network area 

performance' 

priorityC 

priorityC of country and
Bank priorities d

Country 

Major issue b 

Country 

Bank 

Reconciliation

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

poor 
fair 
poor 
fair 

fair 
fair 
poor 

fair 
fair 
poor 

high rates 
sustainability 
governance/corruption 

high 
high 
high 
moderate 

high
high
high
moderate

decreasing attendance 
infectious diseases 
targeting 

high 
high 
high 

high
high
high

accelerate privatization 
high 
water resource management moderate 
high 

high
moderate
high

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private sector 
Energy & mining 
Infrastructure 

poor 
poor 
poor 
poor 

lacking infrastructure 
hostile environment 
controlled prices 
lack of investment 

moderate 
high 
moderate 
high 

moderate
high
moderate
moderate ADB in the lead

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair,' or poor."
b. Indicate prinapal country-specific problems (e g., for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty;" for education, 'female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use low,' "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanabon, if pnoribes do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Template created on 2/3/2003

Attachment I
Page 1 of 4

Debt Sustainability and IDA Lending

A loan by loan debt analysis was carried out by Bank staff in November 2002 in order to
determine Tajikistan's long term debt sustainability prospects and IDA grants eligibility.
The analysis was done on the basis of end 2001 data and did not take into account the
rescheduling agreement signed with Russia in December 2002, which partially offsets
interest falling due in 2003-2006 by using a claim of $49.8 million of the NBT on the
Central Bank of Russia.

Tajikistan's external public and publicly guaranteed debt grew rapidly since the
independence in 1991. Tajikistan had no foreign debt at independence. The
accumulation of debt during the 1 990s was due to a delay in adjusting to the loss of
budget transfers after 1990 and borrowing associated with energy imports and the civil
war. Tajikistan also borrowed to finance imports of grains and consumer goods. In
addition, during this time, the authorities extended government guarantees to state-owned
enterprises for borrowing abroad. In many cases, these obligations were not serviced by
either the enterprises or the budget and gave rise to external arrears. The nominal value of
the external public and publicly guaranteed external debt of Tajikistan amounted to
US$1,034 million at end 2001. Its Net Present Value (NPV) was US$826 million.
Multilateral creditors represented 26 percent of the NPV of debt (of which IDA
accounted for 9 percent); Paris Club creditors represented 44 percent (of which Russia
accounted for 41 percent); and other bilateral and commercial creditors represented 30
percent.

External debt is not sustainable from the fiscal point of view but Tajikistan is
currently not eligible for enhanced HIPC assistance because of low tax revenue.
Government revenues amounted to US$160 million and the NPV of debt-to-revenues was
514 percent at end-2001. This ratio is projected to stay above 250 percent up to 2007
under the base case scenario. To qualify under the fiscal/openness window of the
enhanced HIPC Initiative, a country should meet three criteria: (i) have strong revenues,
i.e., the three-year average of revenues to GDP should be at least 15 percent; (ii) have a
very open economy, i.e., the average of the most recent three years' exports-to-GDP
should be at least 30 percent, and (iii) have an unsustainable debt, i.e., a NPV of debt-to-
revenue higher than 250 percent after full application of traditional debt relief
mechanisms. Tajikistan has a very open economy: the three year average of exports of
goods and services represented more than 50 percent of GDP at end-2001. After
simulating the full application of traditional debt relief mechanisms', the NPV of debt-to-
revenues would fall to 319 percent in 2001 and would remain above 250 percent until
2007. Nevertheless, Tajikistan is not eligible to enhanced HIPC assistance due to its low
ratio of tax revenues-to-GDP (excluding grants and other revenue), which was about 14
percent in 2001.

Tajikistan is qualified as a vulnerable debt country under IDA grant guidelines and will
receive 29 percent of its IDA allocation in grants in fiscal year 2003. IDA grant

1 A Naples terms stock-of-debt operation by Paris Club creditors involving a 67 percent NPV reduction and
at least comparable treatment by other bilateral and commercial creditors.

Attachment I
Page 2 of 4
guidelines specify that those among the poorest IDA-only countries that are particularly
vulnerable to longer-term debt sustainability problems may receive additional grant
support. Under this framework, a country with high export concentration such as
Tajikistan is deemed to be particularly vulnerable to such problems, if the expected long
term NPV debt/exports ratio is 120 percent after the country has exhausted all available
debt relief options. Tajikistan is heavily dependent on three main exports: aluminum,
electricity and cotton that account for more than 60 percent of exports. The three-year
average of exports of goods of services was US$590 million in 20012. The NPV of debt-
to-exports was 140 percent at end-2001. Currently IDA-only countries of the Former
Soviet Union are not eligible for a Naples stock-of-debt operation when negotiating a
first-time debt rescheduling with the Paris Club because of the lack of a track record. A
debt rescheduling comparable to the terms granted to the Kyrgyz Republic was
considered as more realistically available debt relief option for Tajikistan 3 . After such a
scenario, the NPV of debt-to exports would fall to 132 percent at end-200 1, above the
120 percent threshold set by IDA grants guidelines. As a consequence, Tajikistan can be
classified as a debt vulnerable country. The NPV of debt-to-revenues would fall to 484
percent at end-2001 and would remain above 300 percent up to 2007.

Analysis of the impact of IDA commitments shows that grant component of IDA
lending will be beneficial. IDA lending will be based on macroeconomic performance,
progress on governance and structural reforms, and status of the portfolio. The base case
scenario assumes that real GDP growth would average 5 percent , export growth would
average 8.2 percent and government revenues would average 17.5 percent of GDP
(Table 2, page 10). Under the base case scenario, Tajikistan's IDA allocation would be
US$80 million (base case IDA lending). Depending on satisfactory macroeconomic
performance (i.e., consistent implementation of the IMF PRGF program), as well as
accelerated progress with fiduciary and institutional reforms, IDA lending could reach
US$100 million. The low case scenario assumes that real GDP growth would be 2.5
percent, exports growth would be 5 percent and government revenues would average 15
percent-of GDP (Table 2, page 10). Such scenarios illustrate the impact of lower exports
due to price volatility and of less satisfactory fiscal reforms. Under the low case scenario,
IDA lending would be limited to US$45 million. Table A4 shows the impact of IDA
lending scenarios on the NPV of debt-to-revenues and on the NPV of debt-to-exports.

Projections show that IDA lending with grants would support the improvement of
Tajikistan's debt sustainability outlook. The NPV of debt-to-exports would average 109
percent in the base case and 114 percent in the low case macro scenario, below the 200
percent figure which is deemed to be an important indicator of sustainability. The staff
will monitor the debt indicators closely to ensure that prospects for long-termn debt
sustainability are not jeopardized by adverse shock or excessive borrowing. In the event

2 This number represents Tajikistan's exports of goods and services net of alumina imports, which are
required to produce aluminum.
3 The Kyrgyz Republic benefited from a flow rescheduling with the following conditions: ODA credits
were rescheduled over twenty years with ten years of grace at a concessional rate and commercial credits
were rescheduled over twenty years with five years of grace at market rate. Part of interest on this
rescheduling was capitalized.
4 Table A takes into account IDA grants.

Attachment 1
Page 3 of 4

that there is an increasing probability that the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio could exceed
200 percent in the future due to exogenous shocks, IDA would undertake a closer review
of its lending program in order to mitigate debt sustainability concerns. At the same time,
IDA would make a strong effort to convince other donors to increase grant financing to
Tajikistan. Projections also suggest that debt to GDP ratio, which was 100 percent at the
end of 2001 and 93 percent in 2002, would stabilize around 90 percent in 2003. If IDA
grants are included then debt to GDP would decline to 85 percent of GDP by 2005.

Table A: Impact of lending scenarios on debt sustainability (%)

NPV of debt to revenues 
Base case lending 
High case lending 
Lowcaselending 

NPV of debt to exports 
Base case lending 
High case lending 
Low case lending 

2001 
2002 
514.0% 408.1% 
514.0% 409.0% 
514.0% 452.6% 

2003 
2004 
2005 
2006
356.6% 339.6% 313.0% 277.0%
358.0% 342.8% 316.8% 
280.6%
422.2% 391.5% 361.1% 
335.1%

2001 
140.1% 
140.1% 
140.1% 

2002 
125.8% 
126.1% 
126.5% 

2003 
122.4% 
122.9% 
126.0% 

2004 
2005 
2006
107.8% 96.0% 
85.6%
108.9% 
97.2% 
86.7%
113.5% 
102.4% 91.3%

The NPV of debt-to-revenues would remain above 300% until 2006 in all cases. The low
case lending IDA scenario would partially adjust to a deteriorated situation because
projected IDA lending is not the main factor of high NPV of debt-to-revenues ratio in
Tajikistan. The NPV of debt-to-revenues would remain significantly higher than in the
base case lending with base case scenario, at 391.6 percent during the CAS period
compared to 336 percent in the base case. In the low case scenario, the improvement of
the fiscal debt sustainability would be mainly slowed down by the absence of reforms in
revenue collection in a context of low growth. 

-

Measures to improve debt sustainability are being pursued. Tajikistan's debt
sustainability depends on strong economic growth and revenue collection, robust export
growth, sound external debt contracting and management strategies, continued
concessional lending by IFSs and other donors, and a stock-of-debt reduction operation.
The Government has improved revenue collection (the revenue to GDP increased from
13 percent in 1999 to 15 percent in 2001) and further improvements during this CAS
period are expected. Since 1999, any new borrowing from the Government or state
enterprises is examined by an external debt committee set up to limit new borrowing.

Furthermore, the Government is actively discussing a possible debt-stock reduction
operation with its bilateral creditors, and these efforts should be continued. While debt
rescheduling would provide temporary relief, a reduction in debt stock would greatly
contribute to the achievement of lasting fiscal sustainability as debt stock will continue to
be around 85-90 percent of GDP during this CAS period. Technical assistance provided
by the Swiss Government is expected to improve the debt management system. With the
assistance of the IMF, a debt inventory has been prepared; the Government needs to pay
close attention to external debt management to avoid late payments and accumulation of
arrears. Building a track record of sound debt management will be important for

obtaining additional debt-relief. Ensuring fiscal debt sustainability would also require
mobilizing more grants if Tajikistan is to fully implement the PRSP and make progress
towards meeting the Millennium Development Goals.

Attachment 1
Page 4 of 4

Attachment 2
Page I of 3

Tajikistan and MDGs

Present Situation 

Millennium 
Development 
Goal
Halving income According to the 1999 
poverty 
household survey data 
and the poverty line of 
TR 20,000 (State 
Statistical Agency), 
slightly more than 80 
percent of population in 
Tajikistan lived in 
poverty in 1999. Using 
the Government's 
minimum consumption 
basket of TR32,068 
(1998), the poverty rate 
in 1999 was even 
higher at 95 percent. 
Using $2.15 PPP, the 
poverty rate was 65 
percent. 

Achieving 
universal 
primary 
education 

Overall education 
enrollments are 
declining rather than 
rising. Enrollment rates 
in primary education 
remain high, but lower 
secondary enrollment 
was only about 85% in 
1999 from near 100% 
before 1990. Data are 
not always reliable. 

Prospects for 
Achievement by 2015

CAS Instruments

Tajikistan has 
The proposed Living
experienced steady 
Standard Assessment of
economic growth in 
Year 2003 will update
recent years, and the 
the poverty indicators.
World Bank is 
In addition, the Banking
projecting that 
and Private Sector
economic growth will 
Support, Ferghana
continue. If economic 
Valley Water and
growth increases at 5 
Community Agriculture
percent annually up to 
and Watershed
2005, the extent of 
Management projects
poverty (using $2.15 
will support economic
PPP) would drop from 
development in the area
65 percent to 45 percent of small and medium-
(assuming an 
sized enterprises and
unchanged income 
the agricultural sector.
distribution). 
Investments will be
Therefore, despite the 
focused on poor
expected continued 
communities to try to
economic growth, 
make as much impact
Tajikistan would not 
as possible on poverty.
halve income poverty
by then. However,
continued progress
could enable income
poverty to be halved by
2015.
A high birth rate and 
The proposed
declining standards in 
Education Support and
education service 
Empowerment Project
delivery increase the 
will help to reform the
likelihood that 
education sector.
Tajikistan will not 
Tajikistan has been
maintain universal 
proposed for an
primary education. The 
Education for All grant.
school age population is The Bank will also
likely to increase by 
work closely with other
50% by 2015. Lack of 
donor agencies to try to
resources to improve 
maximize the impact
this situation means that 
towards the education
the country may not 
MDG.
meet this MDG.

Present Situation 

Attachment 2
Page 2 of 3

Prospects for 
Achievement by 2015

CAS Instruments

The proposed
Education Support and
Empowerment Project
will provide thematic
grants through which
schools will prioritize
needs and make plans
to encourage enrollment
and attendance by girls
and vulnerable students.

The Community and
Basic Health Project
would help improve the
basic health services in
selected districts,
especially in remote
areas where the poorest
are located, as well as
strengthen the
institutional capability
(both at the center and
district levels) to carry
out health care reforms.
Same as above

Millennium 
Development 
Goal
Gender equality Gender balance at 
in primary 
primary levels remains 
education 
high, but is changing to 
the detriment of girls 
and is below the 
girlboy ratio of 1. 
There is also evidence 
in both urban and rural 
areas that poor boys are 
either not enrolling or 
not attending school. 

Though education is 
still highly valued in 
Tajikistan, economic 
hardship and social 
changes of the 
transition years have led 
to falling enrollment 
rates, especially for 
girls from poor 
families. This gender 
gap might increase
further, making it
difficult for the country
to achieve this MDG.
Reducing under- Despite official 
Progress on this 
five mortality by 
statistics that show 
indicator is difficult to 
two thirds 
falling U5MR rates, the monitor due to lack of 
most recent survey data 
reliable data in the 
for Tajikistan show that 
country, but the 
U5MR continued to 
available information 
increase in recent years, 
suggests that Tajikistan 
from 120 per 1,000 in 
is not likely to meet this 
1997 (PA, 2000) to 126 MDG. 
per 1,000 in 2000 
(MICS, 2000). 

Reducing 
maternal 
mortality by 
three quarters 

Maternal mortality rate 
Progress is difficult to 
increased sharply in the measure in Tajikistan
early 1990s from 42 per 
due to great uncertainty
100,000 births in 1990 
about the accuracy of
to 87 per 100,000 in 
the official data.
1994 (TransMONEE). 
However, it is unlikely
given present trends
that this goal will be
met.

Millennium 
Development 
Goal
Reversing the 
spread of 
HIV/AIDS 

Ensuring 
environmental 
sustainability 
(including 
halving the 
proportion of 
people without 
access to safe 
water) 

Present Situation 

Prospects for 
Achievement by 2015

CAS Instruments

Attachment 2
Page 3 of 3

The real situation about The situation is 
An ongoing regional
the spread of 
expected to worsen and HIV/IDS study will
HIV/AIDS in Tajikistan HIV/AIDS rates are 
serve as a basis for
is difficult to assess due 
expected to rise due to 
future Bank
to uncertainty about the 
ever-increasing use of 
interventions in this
accuracy of the official 
narcotic drugs in recent 
area.
data. The most recent 
years. The new national
2002 official statistical 
HIV/AIDS strategy
yearbook reports that 
(Global Fund) will
the number of HIV- 
focus on prevention,
infected persons 
including public
increased from 5 in 
education of youths,
1999 to 33 in 2001 (or 
and prevention and
0.5 per 100,000 people 
reduction of
in 2001), and Tajikistan 
transmission among
in 2001 had just one 
high-risk groups
case -- the first -- of 
(intravenous drug users,
AIDS in the country. 
commercial sex
workers).
To advance toward the 
The Ferghana Valley
achievement of this 
Water, Community
particular MDG, the 
Agriculture and
Government needs to 
Watershed Management
give high priority to 
and Municipal
water investments, 
Infrastructure projects
especially in rural areas, would focus on water
in its public investment management and water
program. 
quality issues in
selected regions.

UNICEF 2000 data 
shows that 93 percent 
of the urban population, 
and 47 percent of the 
rural population had 
access to an improved 
water source. The 2000 
MICS report showed 
that 40 percent of the 
population uses 
drinking water that is
piped into their
dwelling, yard or plot.
The quality of drinking
water in Tajikistan is
very low, and unsafe
water is one of the main
causes of many diseases
in the country.

Attachment 3

The PRSP and Donor Coordination Matrix for Tajikistan

:The Pillars of Development inTajikistan 

L 

;

I 

-.. 

-

-..- 
--...

d 

-

; 

Building Good 

Creating a Supportive Climate for Invest_nr_t 

Enhancing Hunan Capacity- 

Provding Efficient Infrastucture; 

Improving 

Transfirming 

Post Conflict

-

' Governance 

-

Services 

-

Environ.- 

the Rural 

Rehabllitatio
n

,, 

,E.c.o.n.o.- 
_ 

*.- 

--- .l 
-, 

-

l 

, 

| 

.

.- , 

.

z 

ult 

.

__. X _ 

Lead- -- 

'Lead, 

_ 

_ 

"Lead 

Lead 

ead 

' 

ead 

eada- '-Lead 

Lead 

,Lead 

Lead 

Lead' 

LeadAgency. 

-LeadAgency

i --

AAgency, 

ec 

Agny 

Agny,-gnAge 

genc 

--Aenc 

Agny-:-Aec 

gency 

- Agency -

-Agency; 

> Oncy- 
-.IDA

'DAIAsDB-- 

'.UNDP 

--

ID/siB 

ASB 

--MF- 

IM_D-- ,_; IDJ 

ID'_ r, - -. i''DASDB 

.

-DAAsDB 

UNESCO 

,- 

-

'ID- 

_AsDBi 

EBRI 

Agnculture & Poi Re.rcns
Rural 
and Economic
Deveopment 
Rehabilitation

Pubic 
Admtnistrtio 
n rRem 

Legal Sector 
Reform 

Macro 
Stability 

Fmani 
Sector 

Social 
Safety 
Net and 

Prvate 
Sector 
DeV't 

Education 

iieaih and 
Populai7on 

Cultural 
Issues 

Watr and 
Sandation 

Power 

Transport 
& 
CommurEati

Environment 

Prlority 
Amas 

social 

on

Programs

ASDB 
UNDP 
IDA 

ASOB 
UNDP 
IDA 

ASOB 
EiU 
iUF 
IDA 

ASDB 
EBRD 
IMF 
IDA UFC) 

ASDB 
UNDP 
IDA 

EBRD 
UNDP 
IDA fFC) 

ASDB 
0B 
OPEC fund 
UNCEF 
IDA 
WFP 

ASOB 
EU 
IDB 
OPEC Fund 
UNFPA 
UNICEF 
WHO 

UNiESCO 

ASOB 
108 
UNICEF 
IDA 

ASDB 
IDB 
IDA IFC) 

ASDB 
Arab Dvt 
Fund 
EBRD 
IDB 
OPEC Fund 

ASDB 
UNDP 
IDA 
OSCE 

ASDO 
EU 
FAO 
UNDP 
IDA 
WFP 

ASDB
OSCE
UN
UNOP
UNHCR
WFP
IDA

Multi- 
laerai 

IDA

Seitnld 
USA 

Swesund 
USA 

Japan 
S' 
d 

Swzedard 
USA 

w 
rimtd Gemry 
USA 
Jap- 
Saerard 
USA 

Jm 
Swterad 
UK 
USA 

Swtsrand 

GtYren 
S*arlud 
USA 

It 
jar 
Fir7da 
Nor* und 

mar 

stzit 
USA 

USA 

Swrzeitnd
Jap
UK
us

BilatenI 

Jian 

Kuwat Ftnd 

I_ 

_ _ _ _ _ 

_ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ 

_ _ _ _ _ 

__ _ _ _ _ _ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _Russan

(FES 
AaA 
Irnewn 
ICNL 

AKF 

Counkirpa CAAEF 
t 
MCi 
AKF 
CARE 
MCI 
CARE 

ACTED 
AKF 
CARE 
IFRC 
MCI 

AKF 
CARE 
IFRC 
MERUN 
MSF 

IFRC 
Ma 
AAH 
ACTED 
Mi4uss Ost 

AKF 

CADA 

FOCUS 
REC 
ISAR 

ACTED 
AKF 
CARE 
MCI 
GM 
AAMH 
GP 

AKF
Cowr7pa1
Eurasia
IFES
ABA

NGOs 

ACTED 

ORA 

ORA 

MCI

AAH 
CARrrAS 
FOCUS 
ICRC 

OSI 
SC-UK 
SC-Us 
CADA 

OSI 
PSF
ZDRAVPLUS

OSI

GP
AA

IFRC 

AAH - Action Agaanst Hunger 
ABA - Amencan Bar Association 
CAAEF - Central Asian Amencan Enterprnse Fund 
GAA -German Agro Acton
GP - Gbtbal Partners

ICNL - International Center for Non-profit Law
ISAR -Irebabve for Social Acton and Renewal in Eurasia
REC - Regional Environmental Center

Atachment 4
Page 1 of 3

Tajikistan: Relations with the IMF

1. 
On December 11, 2002, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with the Republic of Tajikistan.'

I. BACKGROUND

2. 
During 2001 and the first half of 2002, Tajikistan's real GDP growth continued to be
strong. Although growth was derived largely from increased agricultural output, some
evidence suggests that growth is becoming more broad based. Domestic demand continues to
be supplemented by remittances from seasonal workers employed in neighboring countries.
Inflation was moderate during much of 2001 and 2002 except for occasional spikes attributed
to regional trade factors and lapses in monetary discipline. The nominal exchange rate
depreciated by 33 percent since end-2000. The current account deficit widened during 2001
as prices for the main exports (cotton and aluminum) fell to a three-year low.

3. 
Macroeconomic management generally improved during 2001 and the first half of
2002. The implementation of monetary policy was, however, sometimes uneven. Strong tax
revenue collections and continued expenditure restraint contributed to a near balanced budget
in 2001. Weaknesses in debt management contributed to several incidents of misreporting
and noncomplying disbursements in the last 18 months. The authorities have, however, taken
steps to address these weaknesses, including the establishment of a debt inventory, to
improve debt monitoring.

4. 
Uneven progress in structural reform prevented the conclusion of the third and fourth
reviews of the third year program under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF).
Progress was particularly slow with respect to regularizing relations between the NBT and
the government, improving the operation of the treasury and tax administration, and
enhancing fiscal transparency. The implementation of structural reforms improved during the
Staff Monitored Program (January-June 2002) and subsequently. The creation of a Ministry
of State Revenues and Duties contributed to improved tax and customs administration in
2002. Measures to enhance fiscal transparency were implemented and governance was
enhanced by the issuance of a resolution that restricts the involvement of local authorities in
the agricultural sector. The authorities have also taken initial steps to reduce quasi-fiscal
activities in the energy sector. The banking system has been strengthened with the
implementation of restructuring agreements.

I Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. At the request of the authorities, a Public Information Notice (PIN) is
issued following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the
views of the IMF to the public. This annex is based on the PIN issued after the December 11, 2002
Executive Board meeting of the IMF.

Attachment 4
Page 2 of 3

5. 
Tajikistan became a member of the Fund in 1993, and since then has had a number of
Fund-supported programs. A three-year PRGF arrangement was approved on June 24, 1998
covering the period 1998-2001. After successful implementation of a staff monitored
program in January-June 2002, the Executive Board approved a second three-year
arrangement under the PRGF on December 11, 2002.

II. EXECUTIVE BOARD ASSESSMENT

6. 
Directors welcomed Tajikistan's steady economic progress in recent years based on
strengthened ownership and commitment to reform, despite adverse exogenous shocks and
domestic constraints, as evidenced by a decline in inflation and continued strong economic
growth that is becoming increasingly broad-based. Nevertheless, they noted that Tajikistan's
economy remains extremely vulnerable, with low per capita income, a narrow export base,
high external debt, and limited capacity to undertake reforms. Directors agreed that the
authorities' new medium-term economic program constitutes an appropriate response to these
problems, and that success in achieving the program's objectives will hinge in considerable
part on the authorities' determination in implementing the program.

7. 
Directors welcomed the focus of monetary policy on reducing inflation and increasing
exchange rate stability, but regretted the recent lapse in monetary discipline and the
resumption of directed credits by the National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT). They urged the
authorities to adhere to their commnitment to refrain from issuing such credits and to pursue a
firm and consistent monetary stance. They also urged the authorities to address the
administrative weaknesses at the central bank identified by the safeguards assessment and the
recent international audit report, to formulate a comprehensive restructuring strategy that will
enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy, and to take steps to reinforce the independence
of the central bank. They also stressed the importance of developing an interbank market.
Continued restructuring of the banking system was also considered important to reduce the
demand for directed credits from the NBT. Directors encouraged the authorities to take
further action to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism.

8. 
Directors welcomed the authorities' plans to maintain the managed floating exchange
rate regime, with no pre-determined path, as the best protection against external shocks. They
welcomed the intention to prepare the ground for acceptance of Article vm obligations.

9. 
Directors commended the good fiscal performance in 2001 and 2002, when the
budget-excluding externally-financed investment spending-achieved near balance.
Directors supported the emphasis on continuing fiscal discipline in the authorities' economic
program, as they considered this crucial to achieving macroeconomic stability and reversing
the adverse debt dynamics. They stressed the need to eliminate lingering quasi-fiscal
activities, and to restructure civil service wages in the context of civil service reform.
Expressing concern about the low level of spending on education and health, they endorsed
the reallocation of budgetary resources toward the social sectors. Noting the relatively low
revenue effort, Directors advised that the revenue base be broadened, and hoped that the

Attachment 4
Page 3 of 3

efforts underway to strengthen tax administration and reform the tax system will help
generate the resources needed for poverty alleviation. They were encouraged to seek further
technical assistance by the Fund to support these efforts.

10. 
Directors noted that the medium-term outlook could be complicated by Tajikistan's
external debt burden. While welcoming the fiscal consolidation projected for the next few
years, they stressed that additional measures will be necessary to further enhance debt
sustainability. In this context, Directors welcomed the recent progress with bilateral debt
restructuring agreements, but stressed that a lasting improvement in Tajikistan's debt service
profile will require more comprehensive debt restructuring and improved debt management.
A few Directors noted that, for such further restructuring to be considered, it would be
important for the authorities to stay on track with the Fund program and build up good
relations with creditors. While acknowledging the authorities' efforts to strengthen debt
management, they believed that additional measures are urgently needed, especially to
streamline the public investment program and to limit new borrowing- to concessional loans.

11. 
Directors noted that progress with structural reform improved in 2002, following an
uneven pace in 2001. In particular, they welcomed the regularization of financial relations
between the NBT and the government, the steps taken to reduce quasi-fiscal deficits in the
energy sector, and the progress in bank restructuring and in strengthening financial sector
regulation. Nevertheless, they noted that the structural agenda remains large, and encouraged
the authorities to redouble their efforts to implement key reforms. Directors considered
institution strengthening and capacity building to be a major priority, and advised the
authorities to work closely with the Fund, Bank and other international donors in this area.

12. 
In view of the limited implementation capacity, Directors underlined the importance
of appropriately pacing and sequencing the reforms. They considered farm privatization to be
a key reform for future economic growth and poverty reduction. They noted the decline in
foreign direct investment, and recommended that action be taken to improve the business
climate, strengthen governance, and revise the legal and judicial system in order to reverse
this trend.

13. 
Directors welcomed the completion of the authorities' Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP), noting that it was developed through a broad participatory process and has
been endorsed by the Parliament. They looked forward to its further refinement in the context
of the Annual Progress Report, noting the need for costing and prioritization of measures.

14. 
Directors noted that while data availability and quality are adequate for surveillance
purposes, there are several weaknesses that hinder policy implementation. They encouraged
the authorities to continue their efforts to improve data quality.

15. 

The IMF's Mission Chief for Tajikistan is Mr. Robert Christiansen (202-623 6727).

i/~IP, 

STA 

~ 

, 

.TAJIKISTAN

\-> 9< r r +<0 <<¢,> A~~SHT 

-

-- - - -- 

-

SeleCed Cities 

Roads

_ KHUJANO 

\ 

|0 Autonomous Oblost Centers 

*-----Railroads

T. G.hrwn 
ZArAROD.O 

T.KNO- 
KONtBOM 

Oblast Center 

-- 
-=-4Autonomous Oblast Boundaries

Rural Districts

11 

6. 

c 
National Capital 

1, 

-- 

b cldm--~~~~~~-4-f' 

~~~~~~Oblast 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~ 

Boundaries"

I RA ~ ~ 

~ 

-International 

Boundaries

U Area with no oblosi-leoel odmmrsoatroe d-slons, where royons ore under direci repubic 1 urisd,ciion
*- A n oblost is nom ed on ly w hen i,s nam e differs from that of ats odm in,stroti ve center

U Z B E K IS T A N 
, -

j / l T y m el / -

~\ 
_ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ - ~~~KYRGYZ 

| 

> 

t1 

< 

4 Z O(< j, 

r 

>NREP. 

72 

.Oh7- 

~~~ 

= 

t 

* 

< 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~\~~~~~ 
~~~~~~GHARM 

~C 

H 

I N A 

29 

_ 

X 

1 

AtNf 

r_. 

} 

_ 

_ 

' \_S-' 

'XB 

i~~~~V KOFARNIHONo 
o/, 

ABJtGAf 

.

Kararrkul,%rsh 

3-

SHIAHRINAs 

', 

s 

TAVILCDARA 

5 

(- 

Dds~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~9

b MURGAB ~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

YRYZRE 

do no-t tn"p slyt, \ 

t t 4rpoot-> |

\. 

tat 

. \l -> ~KHA 

tKULYA

k s 

ISHKOSHtMZ .ir = Kwx 

ADAKHSHAN

6t~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

~~~~A0 

RA

SHAHRTUZ ~ 
I 

~ 

i 

A 

I. 

',~~

Ths~~~~~~~ ~ 

eo 

o rd,db 

h 

/| 

~ 

ZEITN'

Mep 

fvesignVn/s 

of TbeWortd 

J H5H

To TnPr 
eo r.Zrnadnmn 

ug 

.

; 

f

-8 

oroccepsonceofsucht70undonal 
69-j 

~ 

77- 

rzf-tRAN 

1 

~ ; y 1 -R- 

CTKAAA

Report No*: 
Type: 

CAS

25329 TJ

