Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 21326-BD

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON THE
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

February 8, 2001

The last Country Assistance Strategy for Bangladesh was discussed on March 31,1998
and a Progress Report was discussed on July 20,1999
CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
Taka (Tk)
US$1.00 = Tk. 54
GOVERNMENrS FISCAL YEAR

JuLY 1-JuNE 30
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ADB
ADP
BRAC
BWDB
CBO
CDF
CG
CIDA
DANIDA
DFID
GEF
GTZ
HIES
HPSP
IDA
IDB
IDF
IFAD
IFC
IGR
IMF
KfW
LCG
LIL
MFA
MIGA
NCB
NGO
NORAD
OED
PA
PER
PRSP
SEMP
SME
SOE

Asian Development Bank
Annual Development Program
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Commission
Bangladesh Water Development Board
Community-based Organization
Comprehensive Development Framework
Consultative Group
Canadian International Development Agency
Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Department for International Development, UK
Global Environment Facility
Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (Germany)
Household Income and Expenditure Survey
Health and Population Sector Program
International Development Association
Islamic Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Finance Corporation
Institutional and Governance Review
International Monetary Fund
Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (German Development Bank)
Local Consultative Group
Learning and Innovation Loan
Multi -fiber Arrangement
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Nationalized Commercial Bank
Non-governmental Organization
Norwegian Agency for Development
Operations Evaluation Department
Poverty Assessment
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Sustainable Environmental Management Program
Small and Medium Enterprises
State-owned Enterprise

The World Bank
Vice President
Country Director
Task Leader

Ms. Mieko Nishimizu, SARVP
Mr. Frederick Temple, SACBD
Ms. Chingboon Lee, SACBA

| The International Finance Corporation |
Mr. Assaad J. Jabre, CIOVP
Mr. Bernard Pasquier, CSADR
Mr. Neil Gregory, CSASC

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................

i

I. THE COUNTRY CONTEXT ...........................................................
.1
A. INTRODUCTION
............................................................
1
B. POVERTYAND SOCIAL ISSUES............................................................
1
C. POLITICAL ECONOMYAND THE CHALLENGE OF GOVERNANCE ........................................ 3
D. RECENTECONOMIC PERFORMANCEAND MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS.......................... 5
MacroeconomicManagement ........................................................... 5
Medium-term Prospectsand External Environment..........................................................
7
II. THE DEVELOPMENT AGENDA
........................................................... 8
A. GOVERNMENT VISION ............................................................
8
B. DEVELOPMENTPPJORITIES............................................................
9
Human Development............................................................
9
Rural Development...........................................................
10
Private Sector Development ...........................................................
11
Aid Effectiveness ...........................................................
12
III. PROPOSED WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
..
13
A. FORMULATING THE STRATEGY ...........................................................
13
Learning ............................................................
13
CAS Consultations...........................................................
14
Partnerships............................................................
15
B. OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGY ...........................................................
18
C. IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY ...........................................................
19
Assistance Program...........................................................
19
i. Due Diligence Economic and Sector Work ...........................................................
19
ii. Strengthening Governance...........................................................
20
iii. Addressing Social and EnvironmentalIssues ......................................... ................... 21
iv. Sustaining Human Development Gains...........................................................
22
v. An IntegratedApproachto Rural Development
..........................................
23
vi. Accelerating PrivateSector-led Growth ...........................................................
23
Portfolio Management...........................................................
25
Co-location of Work ...........................................................
26
D. CAS SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS ...........................................................
26
E. MONIORING AD EFFECTIVENESS...........................................................
28
F. MANAGING THE RISKS ...........................................................
29

CHARTS
Chart 1

Recent Macroeconomic Performance ............................................

Chart 2

Trend in Aid Disbursements ...........................................

6
12

BQXES
4
Corruption and its Underlying Causes ............................................
4
Private Sector Development ............................................
What was heard at the CAS consultations ...........................................
15
Partnerships in the Health, Nutrition and Population Sector ..................................... 17
25
Poverty-focused Interventions ...........................................

Box 1
Box 2
Box 3
Box 4
Box 5
TABLES

Table 1

Selected Social Indicators ............................................

Table
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table

Consolidated Public Sector Deficit ............................................ 5
8
Macroeconomic Projections ............................................
Government-Donor Partnership in Sectoral Investment ........................................... 16
Proposed Base Case Program at a Glance ...........................................
20
2,
Indicative FYOI-03 Lending Scenarios and Triggers ...........................................
Proposed CAS Core Benchmarks ............................................
28
Intermediate Milestones ...........................................
29

2
3
4
5
6
7
8

ANhNaE
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Annex 9
Annex 10

Bangladesh at a Glance
Bangladesh - Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bangladesh - Bank Group Program Summary and IFC and MIGA Program
Summary of Non-lending Services
Bangladesh - Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Bangladesh - Key Economic Indicators
Bangladesh - Key Exposure Indicators
Status of Bank Group Operations in Bangladesh: IDA Credits & IFCs Held and
Disbursed Portfolio
Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
Bangladesh - CAS Summary of Development Priorities

ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1

CAS Consultations

2

2

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
MISSION

1.
The World Bank Group concurs with the Government that poverty reduction must be Bangladesh's
overarching objective. Despite encouraging progress in reducing poverty and improving human
development during the 1990s, the average growth of 5% in recent years, while respectable, has not
fulfilled the economy's potential nor been strong enough to reduce poverty substantially. The ambition to
eliminate absolute poverty within a generation requires a greater effort: fostering an environment that
would promote faster, more broadly distributed growth and more effective delivery of public services.
Since Bangladesh lacks strong, accountable institutions to match its rich human and natural resources,
the Government's poverty reduction strategy needs to address these institutional weaknesses, particularly
poor governance, and the slow pace of policy and structural reforms. The World Bank Group's mission in
Bangladesh is to help the Government in implementing such a strategy.
DEVELOPMmENT CHALLENGES

Bangladesh's prudent macroeconomic management and progress in improving opportunities for
the poor during the past decade have been notable. The success of the program has been enhanced by
participation of NGOs acting independently or as contracted service delivery agents of the Government.
These achievements notwithstanding, weak institutions and poor governance adversely affect the quality
of life of ordinary citizens and are mainly responsible for pervasive corruption, deteriorating law and
order and inefficient and often unresponsive public administration. The persistence of confrontational
politics - notwithstanding recent decline of its intensity - and the strength of entrenched vested interests
that oppose reform have weakened attempts to address these concerns. Inaction on policy reforms has
hampered public sector performance, leading to high costs of conducting business and making economic
activity and private investment risky. Extensive consultations with civic society, political leaders and the
Government during CAS preparation lend support to these conclusions.
2.

3.

The broad development challenge of accelerating and broadening growth can be met by
* reversing recent erosion in macroeconomic performance,
* sustaining and building upon human development gains,
* increasing the pace of agricultural and non-farm rural growth and
* enabling private sector-led growth through regulatory reform and structural reforms in the
financial and infrastructure sectors.

Meeting this challenge successfully depends on mustering the political will to overcome the vested
interests that block reforms. A growing public 'voice' in favor of fundamental reforms, the emergence of
capable and accountable institutions and improved governance would all facilitate this process. In
parallel, the efficient use of public resources, both foreign and domestic, is necessary not only to bring
about pro-poor growth but also essential as aid levels decline and domestic resource mobilization remains
weak. Aid effectiveness could be improved if the Government were to exercise greater ownership of its
development programs, commits to policy reforms and strengthens project implementation.
STRATEGIC PRIORIES

4.
The Government has articulated a poverty reduction strategy centered on fostering private sectorled growth and promoting integrated rural development, improving social and human development
services and strengthening safety nets for the poor. In line with these strategic priorities and the expected
contributions of other development partners, the CAS identifies four main thrusts for the Bank Group's
assistance to Bangladesh.

*

Helping to build stronger institutions and governance across development programs.

*

Consolidating gains in human development and supporting initiatives to address the next
generation of development challenges in education, health and nutrition.

*

Implementing an integrated approach to rural development, including supporting growth in
agriculture and non-farm activities, making opportunities and assets available to the poor and
improving rural infrastructure.

*

Accelerating and broadening private sector-led growth by helping to: (i) remove structural
impediments and establish an environment conducive to private investment (IDA); (ii)
strengthen the financial sector (IDA and IFC); and (iii) support private investments in energy,
infrastructure, manufacturing and services (IFC and MIGA).

5.
In addressing these priorities, the CAS reflects lessons learned, consultations with stakeholders
and an increased potential for strategic partnerships. CAS implementation will be in accord with the
Comprehensive Development Framework principles of partnership and government ownership. In
Bangladesh, there has been good progress in areas where strong partnerships based on sharing of
resources and expertise have been forged, such as in health and nutrition programs. Donors have many
opportunities to build on such successes and to partner with the Government, private sector, NGOs and
community-based organizations to increase aid effectiveness. To strengthen government ownership of
development programs, IDA and other development partners have begun a dialogue with the Government
on restructuring their relationship. This dialogue will intensify as the Government prepares the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) that, when completed in late 2001, will provide the basis for a
Government-led, donor-assisted program of poverty reduction.
LOW, BASE, AND HIGH CASE SCENARIOS
6.
The intensity of Bank Group engagement with Bangladesh would be predicated on macroeconomic
performance, progress on governance and structural reforms and status of the portfolio. The Low Case
scenario is characterized by negligible progress on structural reform, no improvement in portfolio
performance, and continued slippage in macroeconomic performance from pre-FYOO levels. In this
environment, the one that currently prevails in Bangladesh, IDA believes that selected interventions in
health, education, rural development and governance improvement (e.g. judicial/legal reform) comprising a core poverty program - would protect progress achieved in these areas and help to maintain
dialogue with the Government. The core poverty program would be delivered utilizing community-driven
approaches to bring opportunities to the poor and to deliver essential social services. Successful models
that already exist in micro-credit and rural infrastructure can be scaled up and replicated in other sectors.
Low Case IDA lending over the FY01-03 period is expected to be about US$800 million. Since IFC's role
in promoting private sector development also depends on the policy environment, its Low Case
interventions would focus on limited investments and advisory services in support of small and medium
enterprise development.
7.
IDA support of analytical work, policy dialogue in key sectors and outreach activities to build
consensus behind reforms will take on added prominence under the Low Case scenario. A key element of
the non-lending program will be collaboration with the IMF, the Asian Development Bank and other
donors to provide analytical support and advice to the Government in preparing its PRSP. Specific inputs
include a public expenditure review, a poverty assessment and an analysis of safety-net programs, the
findings of which will be available to the Government during its PRSP preparation.
8.
The Base Case scenario is characterized by restoration of macroeconomic balances to the preFYoo levels, progress in addressing govermance and structural reforms and improvements in project
implementation. In these circumstances, in addition to financial support for the core poverty program,
lending could be extended to a few key sectors where significant reform is initiated, private sector
participation is growing and where the Bank Group has an existing or emerging comparative advantage.
ii

The extent to which the Government acts to advance reform in these sectors will determine the magnitude
and sectoral composition of Base Case lending. If the policy and institutional obstacles to an expanding
private sector presence in the infrastructure and gas sectors were removed, IFC and MIGA could play a
significantly larger role in mobilizing financing in these areas.
9.
Base Case lending over the CAS period would be about US$1.4 billion, a composite of Low Case
lending in FY01 (around US$300 million) and higher levels in FY02-03 that would be closer to the
indicative annual IDA allocation. Given the lower lending level in FYO1, the average per capita IDA
program for Bangladesh would remain below that of other developing countries with similar levels of GNP
per capita and policy performance. Bangladesh could have access to more IDA funding if tangible steps
were taken to address institutional weaknesses and improve governance so that the country raises its
capacity to absorb larger amounts of aid and use resources more effectively.
10.
The High Case scenario assumes comprehensive reform, with the government adopting and
initiating implementation of a broad-based reform agenda covering governance, institutional and
structural issues in many of the key sectors - energy, banking/finance, water resources, agriculture, urban
development, public administration, health, education and the cross-cutting area of decentralization.
Bank Group support under this scenario could be substantially higher (up to US$2.0 billion over the
three-year period) and would include adjustment support in addition to financing for technical assistance
and project investments. In the event that Bangladesh moves to a High Case scenario, a CAS progress
report would accompany Board presentation of adjustment operations, which could include a Poverty
Reduction Support Credit and/or lending to support structural reforms in strategic sectors such as
finance/banking and power. The CAS progress report would outline actions taken by the Government to
advance its development agenda, and indicate the areas where adjustment lending would accelerate the
implementation of reforms. In the High Case scenario, IFC could play a larger role in financing private
investment, developing financial markets and providing advisory services related to privatization.
PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT

11.
Overall performance of IDA's Bangladesh portfolio has been below the Bank-wide average. The
percentage of projects evaluated by the Operations Evaluation Department as having unsatisfactory
outcomes remained persistently high at about 19% during the past five fiscal years. To address these
problems, IDA's portfolio management strategy will focus on quality at entry and improved supervision.
A portfolio improvement action plan that draws on lessons learnt has been formulated and agreed with
the Government. These lessons include the need for increased government ownership, beneficiary
participation in decision-making, greater involvement of the private sector, NGOs and local governments
in project implementation and greater attention to sustainability issues such as recurrent expenditure
requirements for operations and maintenance, cost recovery, and policy reforms. The plan, which
proposes better supervision planning, timely portfolio performance reviews and a further judicious
shifting of portfolio supervision to the Dhaka field office, will be implemented during the CAS period.
PERFORMANCE MONITORING

12.

Achievement of development outcomes will be monitored at two levels:
*

Overall performance against a set of core benchmarks - poverty, macroeconomic and social
indicators.

*

Specific performance on progress indicators linked to each of the four CAS priorities governance, human development, rural development and private sector-led growth.

RISKS

13.
CAS implementation is subject to significant political and economic risks. A general election is
due in mid-2001. The next government's willingness to invest political capital in implementing reforms is
iii

likely to depend on the decisiveness of the election outcome. The CAS is flexibly designed to increase
support if the new Government adopts a more reformist stance. However, if the current situation of
stalled or slow reforms persists, the World Bank Group would focus only on supporting direct antipoverty and social sector programs and non-lending services for analytical work and consensus building
on governance reforms.
14.
Macroeconomic slippage presents another major risk. The Multi-fiber Agreement phase-out
along with sustained oil price increases could exacerbate the situation. This risk is being mitigated
through ongoing policy advice on export diversification and assistance to the Government in closely
monitoring the balance of payments. Bangladesh will also continue to be vulnerable to natural disasters.
IDA will help the Government to implement a longer-term disaster mitigation strategy and, if necessary,
provide post-disaster recovery assistance, as was done following the 1998 floods.
ISSUES FOR BoARD DISCUSSION
15.

In its discussions, the Board may wish to consider the following:
*

The appropriateness of the proposed assistance strategy in the context of Bangladesh's
economic and political environment, recognizing that Bangladesh's complex development
challenges require the Bank Group to be flexible to respond to the presence or absence of
clear Government progress in addressing constraints in key sectors.

•

The feasibility of low-key engagement and of pursuing mechanisms to deliver alternative nongovernment aid for core poverty needs in the face of increased political risks and
uncertainties.

*

The appropriateness of triggers underlying the lending scenarios.

iv

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON THE COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH
I. THE COUNTRY CONTEXT
A. INTRODUCTION
1.
Bangladesh's development is a mosaic of achievements and disappointments. The
country's achievements - an inspiration to development practitioners worldwide - are many, but so are
the profoundly disturbing signs of performance falling far short of potential. Thanks to prudent
macroeconomic management and generally sound policies during the past decade, indicators of economic
and social well being have improved steadily. Real per capita income grew by about 3% per annum
during the 1990s; rice - the main staple - and other food items became more available and affordable.
Similarly, life expectancy, infant mortality, literacy and access to safe water improved appreciably. The
reduction in population growth and fertility rates and the rise in literacy levels and gender parity in
school enrollment rates all represent important gains. Bangladesh has continuously strengthened its
disaster management capabilities. This enhanced capability, as well as the resilience of its long suffering
people, was in ample evidence during the country's resolute and effective response in 1998 to one of the
century's worst floods.
2.
The Government has made very effective use of Bangladesh's sizeable and globally
respected NGO community to bring opportunities, services and social awareness to its
poor millions. NGOs have introduced such renowned innovations as micro-credit and a highly
acclaimed non-formal model of school education and promoted social mobilization. Both the
Government and donors readily acknowledge the NGOs' positive role and their contribution to grassroots
empowerment.
3.
Nevertheless, many daunting development challenges remain. First, despite relatively
strong economic performance in the late 1990s, massive poverty, particularly in rural areas, and
inequality persist. GDP growth rates averaging 5% per annum appear to be well below Bangladesh's
potential. Second, confrontational politics, the recent decline of its intensity notwithstanding, weakens
the political will and social stamina needed to challenge the self-serving elite, bureaucracy, military, labor
unions and corrupt business forces - the vested interests that block reforms widely recognized as critical
for accelerating and broadening growth. Third, poor governance, weak institutions and mediocre public
sector performance inhibit growth and reduce the access of the poor to public services and benefits.
Fourth, aid has been less effective than it could be, reducing the impact of development assistance on
growth and poverty reduction.
B. POVERTY AND SOCIAL ISSUES
4.
While progress in reducing poverty in recent years has been encouraging, poverty
continues to be deep and pervasive. Bangladesh has the highest incidence of poverty in South Asia
and the third highest number of poor in the world after India and China. Nearly half of its 130 million
population lives below the poverty line (1998 poverty assessment) with nearly 90% concentrated in the
rural areas. Poverty reduction was slow during the mid-1980s due to limited progress in reduction of
rural poverty, but accelerated in the early 1990s. The national poverty headcount declined from 59% in
1984 to 53% in 1996, while the incidence of extreme poverty declined from 41% to 36%, respectively. A
more complete and updated picture of the poverty trends should emerge from the analysis of the 2000-01
Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES).

5.
Data from earlier surveys suggest that income inequalityl has risen mainly due to differential
patterns of growth between rural and urban areas. While agriculture - the mainstay of the rural economy
- grew only at an average annual rate of 2% between 1986-96, growth in the urban sector - fueled by
garment exports - averaged 20% per annum. In addition to different urban and rural poverty rates, the
incidence varied considerably in different areas of the country. Poverty was lowest in Chittagong division
(45%) and highest in Rajshahi (62%). Since these regional disparities were largely due to differences in
area rather than household characteristics, investments to overcome geographically specific deficiencies
could play an important role in poverty reduction, particularly in rural areas.
6.
Although agricultural output, especially foodgrain production expanded rapidly during the last half
of the 1990s, the lack of a coordinated approach to rural development has resulted in lost opportunities in
accelerating growth of the rural economy through greater diversification and faster growth of rural nonfarm activity. Overall rural growth has been slower than it could have been, reducing the rate of rural
poverty reduction. A high proportion of the rural poor who rely on agricultural labor or petty informal
sector activities - despite Bangladesh's extensive safety net system - remains highly vulnerable to
seasonal fluctuations and to natural disasters. The low levels of human capital and skills as well as lack of
access to productive assets, inputs and credit further handicap the rural poor. Land ownership and
education are key determinants of living standards in the country. While the potential for reducing
poverty through land redistribution is limited in a densely populated country like Bangladesh, investing
in human capital offers significant possibilities for improving living standards.
7.
Gains in social development indicators, while impressive, still require maintenance
and follow-up. Increased emphasis accorded by the Government and the donor community to the
social sectors as well as the

contribution made by NGOs have

Table 1: Selected Social Indicators

resulted in significant improvements

South

Low-

Bangladesh

Asia

Income

GNP per capita, 1999 (Atlas method, US$)
Population Growth Rate (%)

370
1.6

440
1.9

410
1.9

Infant mortality rate, (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Access to Safe Water (%of population)
Illiteracy (%of population aged 15+)

73

75

77

56

51

43

59
84

62
77

60

49

46

39

96

100

96

100

90

86

in welfare indicators, many of which
now compare favorably with those of

other South Asian and low-income
countries at higher GNP per capita
levels (Table 1). The success of the
Government's
intervention
in
improvements in life expectancy,
infant mortality, fertility, literacy

and school enrollments have been
enhanced by more communitydriven approaches
to service
delvery. NGOs, worKing in an

Gross primary enrollment (%school-age pop.)

Of which Girls' enrollment

64

enabling environment with support Source: Annex 1- Bangladesh at a glance.
of the Government, have introduced
globally renowned innovations to reach the poor, such as micro-credit, a highly acclaimed non-formal
model of school education and social mobilization of women. Micro-credit, initiated with government
assistance is supported by the Government through the Palli Karma Sahayak Foundation (PKSF). These
advances, in turn, contributed to significant progress in improving gender equity in education
and at the work place in the past decade.
Much remains to be done, however, to reduce

discrimination and increase women's limited decision-making power, phenomena that persist despite
constitutional guarantees on gender equity.

8.
Bangladesh has ratified six of the eight International Labor Organization conventions on core
labor standards, but not the two pertaining to child labor. Despite the formal ratification, the
Government still restricts freedom of association in export processing zones to attract foreign investment.
Discrimination against women and religious minorities in the labor market and extensive trafficking in

'As measured by the Gini coefficient.

2

both women and children primarily for forced prostitution continue,2 notwithstanding efforts by the
Government to address these social problems. The issue of child labor is particularly worrisome because
6.3 million children below 14 years of age, constituting 12% of Bangladesh's labor force, are working and
out-of-school. Improvement is, however, expected in the future as a result of the growing support of the
Government, civil society and international organizations for efforts to abolish child labor and provide
working children with alternatives that would allow them to resume schooling.
C. POLITICAL ECONOMY AND THE CHALLENGE OF GOVERNANCE

9.
Bangladesh's politics remain confrontational and inimical to reform. Although the
popular movement that overthrew the military government in 1991 restored democracy, the Governments
that followed both the 1991 and 1996 elections came to office with only narrow pluralities, receiving
around 35% of the popular vote. Since 1994, Bangladesh's transition to democracy has been impeded by
confrontational politics, particularly when the opposition parties (the Awami League in 1995 and the
Bangladesh Nationalist Party in 1999-2000) attempted to oust elected Governments through street
agitation and "hartals,"3 rather than through parliamentary debate or other non-violent processes.
10.
Along with acute political conflict and consequently weakened Governments, the
powerful influence of vested interests has prevented the implementation of reforms widely
recognized as necessary to accelerate growth and reduce poverty. First, confrontational
politics have led to frequent hartals. The business community estimates that each day of hartal costs
US$60 million. Second, the political environment has bred violence in labor and student politics and
contributed to an overall climate of lawlessness in which life and property are both insecure. Third, the
rampant politicization of economic and technical decisions has bred a conservative, risk-averse outlook.
Policy and institutional reforms, seen as politically risky in the short term, have stalled. Fourth, the
strong presence of vested interests discourages reforms because politicians fear loss of both campaign
financing and the ability to mobilize supporters for political objectives. The political leadership has thus
perceived the short-run political costs of reform to outweigh longer-term benefits. Consequently,
progress on policy reforms stagnated in the second half of the decade.

11.
Inaction on policy reforms has left deep-seated structural problems in place,
weakening institutional capacity and insuring that poor governance undermines
Bangladesh's ability to achieve development objectives. Weak, minimally accountable
institutions, pervasive corruption, deteriorating law and order and an inefficient and often unresponsive
public administration hurt performance across all sectors and the quality of life of ordinary citizens. 4
Political debate in Parliament that scants discussion of issues reflects these factors, as do Parliament's
weak oversight of public affairs, a highly centralized political and administrative structure and poorly
functioning legal and judicial systems. Given the State's dominant role, average Bangladeshi citizens
experience these constraints every day as they cope with the mismanaged banking system, persistent
power shortages, inefficient and bankrupt state-owned enterprises, and poorly regulated and managed
ports, telecommunications and roads. Endemic corruption, especially at the interface between the public
and the state, and decline in the quality of the civil service have led to very low expectations of public
services. As a result, the high cost of conducting business makes economic activity risky and deters
private investment. Reversing the institutional decline caused by neglect and civil war prior to
independence and years of military rule thereafter and improving governance are thus major challenges.
12.
Public consultations carried out for the CAS support this assessment. People and
grassroots organizations repeatedly cited instances of the ways that institutional weaknesses, especially
Source: Internationally recognized Core Labor Standards in Bangladesh -A Report for the World Trade Organization General
Council Review of Trade Policies of Bangladesh (Geneva, May2-4, 2000).
3Hartal is a local term for a forced total shutdown of the fornal economy, often accompanied by violence among political groups.
4 These observations are consistent with Bangladesh's Public Administration Reform Commission's Report of June, 2000. The
Report states in page 7, Volume 1: 'Public agencies have been generally characterized as being rigid, unresponsive, inefficient and
ineffective, pre-occupied with process rather than results, driven by outdated rules and regulations...."; and on page 83, Volume 1:
'Corruption pervades public life and public administration in Bangladesh. Corruption takes place at both political and bureaucratic
levels, occasionally independent of each other, sometimes in collusion."
2

3

poor governance and corruption, affect their daily lives. In particular they stressed the urgency of
assuring the life and property of common citizens and also emphasized the need for government
decentralization, seen as essential for greater accountability and effectiveness in delivery of services to
communities, particularly the poor. They reflected the emerging hope that community 'voice,' assertive
institutions like the Supreme Court, an independent media, a growing class of young entrepreneurs and
vocal NGOs will energize the public to demand better governance.
Box 1: Corruption and its Underlying Causes
Corruption in Bangladesh exacts such a heavy toll that econometric analysis suggests its reduction to levels similar to
those in countries like Singapore and Sweden would raise GDP growth by about 2.5% per annum. This achievement
would contribute significantly to poverty reduction.
Corruption imposes a disproportionate burden on the poor. They are forced to go without access to power and water
because they cannot afford the illicit payments necessary to secure connections. They receive lower quality health and
education services since they cannot pay bribes to those who control access to medical services, education materials and
credit. They also suffer because roads and embankments in their areas are allowed to deteriorate while government
funds are allocated to newer projects that provide more opportunities for kickbacks.
The effects of corruption are compounded by the structure of Bangladeshi society. The rules of social interaction at the
household, community, market and state level are still often expressed through client/patron relationships and
determined by kinship, lineage status, regional and sub-regional identity and gender. Although Bangladesh's legal
framework enshrines equality, the rule of law that treats all citizens equaDly, operates very unevenly. Therefore,
inequalities embedded in traditional hierarchical household, community and market institutions continue to exert a
powerful impact, allowing political and personal power to play dominant roles. In this environmnent, individual
challenges to the system are highly risky; no institutions guarantee impartiality or predictable outcomes. Thus, until a
"critical mass" drawn from both the poor and the middle class emerges to demand a rule-based society that can actually
support equality for all citizens under the law, progress on reforms will be slow and pervasive corruption will continue.

Box 2: Private Sector Development
The private sector in Bangladesh is dominated by a few sectors. Outside of agriculture, export-oriented garment and
knitwear manufacturing is the largest area of formal private sector activity, accounting for about 70% of total exports.
Power and natural gas have also been important areas of private investment. Much of the rest of the private sector is in the
informal sector, including small-scale manufacturing and trading.
Although a modem, outward-looking group of entrepreneurs has begun to emerge in Bangladesh, the privilege-seeking
tendencies characteristic of the older industrial sector persist. The many long-established domestic enterprises that
depended heavily on protected markets, government interventions and defaulted loans from public banks stand to lose
from liberalization. A group of newer entrants, both domestic and foreign, with a greater orientation toward export
markets, however, view government intervention as a hindrance rather than a help.
Structural and trade reforms in the 1990s had a positive impact on private sector development, especially in the export
and manufacturing sectors, and in attracting foreign direct investment in the 1990s. Private investment as a percentage of
GDP increased from 9.8 %in 1990 to 15.5% in 1999. Net foreign direct investment increased from US$14 million in 1990
to US$192 million in 1999, mainly in power generation and natural gas production. Garments and knitwear exports were
the driving force behind the last decade's export boom growing at 22% per annun until 1998. The manufacturing sector
also recorded an impressive annual growth rate of 7.7% during the 1990-98s.
Poor governance, heavy taxation, inadequate infrastructure (especially power, telecommunications and transport) and
social and political instability have raised the costs of doing business to very high levels. Access to finance is limited, due
to the weak commercial banking system and underdeveloped capital markets. Together with slow trade reforms and
appreciation of the exchange rate, this has undermined Bangladesh's fundamental competitive advantage in laborintensive manufacturing, and deterred foreign investment. As a result, private sector growth has slowed in the past two
years, as shown by average manufacturing growth of below 5%.
The Government has emphasized the private sector's role, especialy in export-oriented industries, as the engine for
sustained growth and employment generation in the current five-year Plan (1997-2002). However, it has taken few
concrete steps to lower the costs of doing business, strengthen the financial system and complete the trade policy reforms.
State-owned enterprises continue to dominate key markets, including gas production, power and telecommunications.

13.
Unless the underlying institutional and governance issues are addressed, neither
foreign nor domestically funded programs will achieve their potential for accelerating
economic growth and reducing poverty. During the Bangladesh Development Forum in Paris in
4

April 2000 and recent donor meetings in Dhaka, governance and institutional issues have moved toward
center stage as the fulcrum of development assistance. At these meetings, the donors also encouraged the
government to assert stronger leadership in formulating the country's development agenda, and an effort
to restructure the Government-donor relationship along lines consistent with the comprehensive
development framework (CDF) principles has been initiated.
D. RECENT ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE AND MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS
Macroeconomic Management
14.
As noted earlier, Bangladesh's economic performance in the past decade - particularly in
the recent past - has been relatively strong. Annual GDP growth averaged 5% during the 1990s

(Chart-1A). Manufacturing and construction were the main sources of growth during the first half of the
decade, while agriculture and trade services led during the second half. Bangladesh, the most densely
populated non-city state in the world, has attained near self-sufficiency in food production, thanks to
sustained growth of agriculture in the second half of 1990s. Sizable foreign direct investment flows have
started in infrastructure, energy and export-oriented manufacturing. These achievements were
underpinned by relatively high rates of investment (about 22% of GDP), increased public spending on
social sectors and the emergence of progressive entrepreneurs. Good macro management kept inflation in
the single digits during the 1990s, which further declined in the last few years (Chart-IB). The overall
central government budget deficit averaged around 4.7% of GDP during FY90-98, with domestic
financing averaging a modest 1.1% of GDP. In the external sector, where export growth averaged nearly
14% per annum and remittances grew at over 5.5% per annum, Bangladesh kept the annual current
account deficit below 2.5% of GDP on average during the 1990s. Macroeconomic soundness has,
however, weakened in 1999 due to a decline in manufacturing growth (Box 2) and weaker fiscal and
external sector management, warranting corrective action by the Government.
The 1998 floods
contributed to the deterioration.
15.
Improving the quality of public expenditures and increasing domestic resource
mobilization are Bangladesh's main fiscal management challenges. While the level of public
spending is not high relative to international norms, the quality of public spending is low and has been

deteriorating. Successive public expenditure reviews have emphasized the need to improve the
effectiveness of public spending. The Annual Development Program (ADP) continues to include projects
of questionable rationale and priority. The share of interest payments in recurrent expenditures has also
increased rapidly. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) have continued to accumulate sizable losses,
markedly increasing the quasi-fiscal deficit (Table 2). Contingent liabilities have also risen sharply due to
Government guaranteed power purchase agreements negotiated with foreign investors and to greater
reliance on suppliers credits - up by nearly 1%of GDP in FY00. Revenue collection, among the lowest in
the world at about 9% of GDP, slipped further during the last two years, with actual collections suffering a
large shortfall against ambitious budgetary targets. Improving revenue collection, historically a priority,
has now assumed greater urgency.
Table 2: Consolidated Public Sector Deficit
Total Revenue as % GDP
Total Expenditure as % GDP
Central Government Deficit as % GDP
SOE losses as % of GDP
*NCB losses as % of GDP
Consolidated Deficit as % of GDP

FY97

FY98

FY99

FYOO

9.2
13.1
4.3
0.8
0.8
5.9

9.3
13.3
4.1
0.3
0.9
5.3

9.0
13.8
4.8
0.4
1.5
6.7

8.1
14.3
6.2
1.3
0.1
7.6

*NCB - Nationalized Conunmercial Banks

16.

With no adjustment in expenditures, the Central Government's fiscal deficit

increased from 4.8% in FY99 to over 6% of GDP in FYOO (Chart-IC). Domestic financing of
the deficit increased from 2.3% of GDP to 4.6% (Chart-ID). Fueled by the sharp increase in

5

Government borrowing from the banking system, broad money growth accelerated to 19% in FYOO from
around 13% in FY99. Bumper agricultural harvests, the slack in non-agricultural activity, delays in
adjusting artificially low administered prices and the Taka's real appreciation (Chart-IF), however, have
so far kept inflation from increasing. As of the end of August 2000, the annual rate of inflation had
declined to 1.7%. Continued monetization of the fiscal deficit, however, will inevitably create inflationary
pressures, as will recent increases in administered energy prices and the rise in international oil prices.
Restoring fiscal and monetary prudence is therefore a high priority. Although the upward adjustment to
domestic gas and oil prices in August 2000 will marginally reduce the quasi-fiscal burden, it is unlikely to
cut SOE losses significantly.
17.
Official foreign exchange reserves have continued to decline in recent years, recently
reaching less than two months of imports (Chart-lE). Since the floods of 1998 and until recently,
export growth has been modest. Insufficient exchange rate adjustment has contributed to lower export
earnings. The low reserves position, the increased injection of liquidity into the economy and the
relatively large devaluation of the currencies of competing countries in the region have increased pressure
on the exchange rate. The Government responded with a 6% devaluation of the Taka vis-a-vis the US
dollar in mid-August 2000, the largest single devaluation in 25 years. A delayed response to declining
external competitiveness, the move was too limited to reverse the Taka's real effective appreciation over
the past three years. The capital account has come under increased pressure with the decline in official
aid disbursements and an increase in unaccounted outflows, as evidenced by the rise in balance of
payments 'errors and omissions", which warrants improvement in statistical data and reflects perhaps an
increase in uneounted outflows. In the medium-term, pressures on the exchange rate and the external
account will increase further due to the developments in the external environment described below.
Chart 1: Recent Macroeconomic Performance
Chwot-I J GP and AWICultUa Gmwth

Chat-LB: Idlation

TIm
welveniontymv10.0
Iy m g av,

t2_________________________________

000

16.0

_00

~-_

_

o -z

-ZOO

0.0 ._

a

a s s~~~~~t
(Jl 10Jura

4.0c

D . . . . .0.. . . . . ..

E_p ftn

i15.0

05.0

&O
Chwt-1.CE

PavGnueDnnces
a60d

Curnt G:count

so Foreign Exchang Reserve

H[

I
SOato G

of

s

it [

_n

/

_1O.N

4P0

50

*&O

Naonal CPI 1985/86=100)

$;jj

Chwr-1F: Exchmpo

.=

VI!

World ail and
IMF sll limales.

6

Rst.

Uofnit

|*|..

(MoFlthl

18.

The IMF, through its annual Article IV consultations, and the Bank have been urging

the Government to strengthen macroeconomic management by improving the country's
revenue effort, prioritizing expenditures, containing the losses of state-owned enterprises and
implementing much needed structural reforms, particularly in the financial sector.
Medium-termn Prospects and External Environment

19.
While the global environment offers promise, several factors complicate
Bangladesh's external position and could adversely affect medium-term prospects. The
projected increase in the growth of income, trade and financial flows of OECD countries and India,
Bangladesh's main trading partners, and the rapid expansion of new information technology suggest a
promising climate for Bangladesh's exports and terms of trade, notwithstanding higher petroleum prices.
Foreign direct investment in power, gas and export-oriented manufacturing -- projected to increase from
US$470 million per year in 1996-2000 to over US$750 million in 2001-2005 -- could also improve longterm growth and export prospects. Bangladesh's gas reserves are a major potential source of foreign
exchange earnings, if opposition to their export can be overcome.
20. To take full advantage of emerging global opportunities, Bangladesh will need to
address weakness in its domestic policy environment and manage downside risks. During
the early 1990s, the Government lowered tariffs, eliminated quantitative restrictions and used the flexible
exchange rate mechanism effectively to promote exports. This substantial progress in trade reforms has
not been maintained, and the lack of complementary reforms to improve the provision of power,
infrastructure, telecommunications and financial services has meant below potential benefits from
increased openness. Bangladesh's increased domestic borrowing and growing imbalances have weakened
its external position and become a potential source of instability.
21.
Pressure on the external sector could increase further due to foreign exchange denominated
obligations to foreign investors in the energy sector resulting in an increase in debt servicing
requirements. External debt management has so far been prudent and, given the high grant element of
Bangladesh's loan portfolio, the debt-service ratio has remained under 10% of export earnings. The
export sector however, faces uncertainty over the medium term because it relies heavily on ready-made
garments that account for three-quarters of its export earnings 5. These exports, hitherto benefiting from
quota allocations under the Multi Fiber Agreement (MFA) or Generalized System of Preferences (GSP),
will face greater competition after 2005 when preferential programs are phased out. Unless Bangladesh's

exports become more competitive, foreign exchange earnings growth is likely to slow. Bangladesh could
turn the threat arising in the twilight of the MFA and GSP to its advantage by accelerating the pace of
domestic policy reforms directed towards increasing external competitiveness.
22.
Quickening the tempo of policy reforms would enable Bangladesh to take advantage of favorable
external developments and raise its annual GDP growth to 6% or higher, with double digit manufacturing
growth (High Case, Table 3). These reforms would create the climate for raising the level of investment
from the present 22% of GDP to around 25% of GDP within the next three to five years. Having achieved
near 5% GDP growth in the past decade and having moved through progressive liberalization of the
economy and adoption of market-friendly policies, under a reformed policy environment, Bangladesh
should be able to attract sufficient foreign direct investment to finance the needed investment growth.
Attracting foreign investment will be important because the potential for increasing national saving from
its present 21% level appears rather limited, particularly because a disproportionate increase in private
consumption is necessary if growth is to be significantly poverty reducing.

5The garment export industry has helped create 1.5 million jobs, of which 90% are taken by women.

7

Table 3: Macroeconomic Proections
Mac=

,~~~~~bkw
Gross domestic product at market prices (real
annual growth rate, %)
Gross domestic fixed investment (%GDP)
Gross domestic savings (%GDP)
Gross National Savings

Basedcan iv ,

1999
200020011l 2002 l 2003 200 1l20021l 2003 .2001 1
4.9
5.5
5.2
5.7
6.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
4.5

WU0 I 200-3
4.4

4.1

22.2
16.7
21.3

22.6
17.6
22.6

22.6
17.1
21.5

24.3
18.6
22.6

25.3
19.5
23.3

22.5
17.2
21.5

22.5
17.1
20.9

22.6
17.3
21.3

21.7
16.2
20.5

20.5
15.5
19.3

19.5
15.1
18.7

External Current account Balance (%of GDP at
market prices)

-0.9

0.0

-1.2

-1.7

-2.0

-0.9

-1.4

-1.3

-1.2

-1.1

-0.8

Revenue (%GDP)
Central Government deficit (%GDP)
Domestic financing (%GDP)

9.0
4.8
2.3

8.1
6.2
4.6

9.0
6.1
4.0

10.1
5.0
2.6

10.9
4.2
1.6

8.8
6.3
4.7

9.2
6.0
4.1

9.8
5.6
3.6

8.1
7.0
5.7

8.1
7.1
5.8

7.9
7.5
6.5

Inflation (CPI, %change)

8.9

3.8

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

6.0

7.0

8.0

Having demonstrated that it can sustain a current account deficit ranging between 2% to 3% of
GDP, Bangladesh should be able to continue to do so in the medium term. However, this performance
would require reversing the recent slippage in the central government deficit and domestic financing to
the average levels of less than 5% and 1.5% of GDP, respectively, achieved during FY90-98. Improved
quality of public expenditures, stronger revenue effort and a reduction in SOE losses should make this
turnaround possible.
23.

II. THE DEVELOPMENT AGENDA
A. GOVERNMENTVISION
24.
Bangladesh's development planning envisions a substantial reduction in poverty
within a generation. The Fifth five-year Plan (1997-2002) embodies this vision and aims to achieve a
non-inflationary growth of over 7% per annum to realize it. The Government's Poverty Reduction
Partnership Agreement with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and a paper presented to the
Development Forum in April 2000 further articulate its poverty reduction objectives and strategies. The
Government visualizes the numbers of the poor shrinking by roughly 2% a year until the end of this
decade and the following outcomes by 2010:
*
*
*
*

a 50% decline in the number of people below the poverty line;
universal primary education;
reduction of maternal mortality rates by 75% and infant and 'under 5' mortality rates by 65%, and
the proportion of malnourished children 'under 5' by 40%; and
availability of reproductive health services to all women.

25.
The Government's strategy focuses on accelerating economic growth, ensuring basic
welfare and strengthening safety nets. Planning emphasizes policies to promote non-inflationary
economic growth and a greater private sector role, as well as increased expenditures on education,
nutrition, health and water and sanitation. To cover these outlays, the Government intends to improve
domestic resource mobilization, reduce the fiscal deficit and implement financial sector reforms. In
addition, it proposes to address growing income inequality through more effective targeting of social
expenditures and safety net programs that are among the largest in the world. Costing more than US$
300 million per annum, Bangladesh's targeted food transfers are relatively well targeted to the poor at the
household level. Nonetheless, considerable scope remains for improving the regional targeting of
benefits, as well as improving cost-effectiveness through streamlining operations and considering more
seriously the option of switching to monetized benefits.
26.
The Government's strategy, though sound, is limited in scope. It focuses primarily
on promoting growth, giving less attention to the priorities, sequencing and
interrelationships among government programs and policies to maximize their poverty
8

reduction impact. It has neither fully articulated sector-specific priorities nor described a
comprehensive framework for reforms. The HIES and related poverty assessment work that the
Government proposes to undertake will address this gap by providing an empirical basis to link programs
and poverty outcomes. The strategy needs to be refined in order to address implementation issues, both
in terms of formulating policies and following a process that enables the Government to marshal the
resources, resolve and capacity to realize its vision.
Strong institutions and improved governance are requisites for accelerated
development. While acknowledging the need for good governance, the Government has been unable to
address pervasive corruption and institutional weaknesses effectively. The agenda is substantial. Besides
addressing the deteriorating law and order situation, tackling corruption in banking, power and customs
and tax administration are urgent priorities. Other areas of reform include local governments, the civil
service, public audit and accounting bodies, public procurement and the civil justice system. Targeted
policy interventions, decentralization, privatization of SOEs and vigorous public sector reform aimed at
providing incentives for increasing efficiency, accountability and transparency are key priorities in any
effort to reduce corruption and promote greater accountability and effectiveness in delivery of services to
communities, particularly to the poor.
27.

B. DEVELOPMENT PRIORMIIES

Human Development

The impressive gains recorded in education in the past decade notwithstanding,
improving quality remains the principal challenge. Adult literacy rates rose from 25% in 1990 to
over 50% in 1998, as gross primary enrollment rates went from 76% in 1991 to 96% in 1999. Primary
dropout rates fell by a third - from nearly 60% in 1991 to 40% in 1998. These gains must be sustained to
achieve the goal of universal primary enrollment by 2010, even as new measures to extend access to the
secondary and higher levels of education are initiated. Despite growing access to education, the
large number of working and out-of-school children, currently constituting 12% of the
labor force, is a matter of concern. Although the Government has committed to abolishing child
labor, a concerted effort would be needed to find alternative income support for poor parents so that their
children could stop working and resume schooling. In parallel, steps to enhance the quality of learning
and revise curricula to equip students with marketable skills are required to create an educated
workforce. The unfinished agenda, therefore, includes formulation of a National Education Policy,
owned by all stakeholders. Besides directing future development, the new policy should acknowledge and
address the rampant politicization of students, teachers and administrators and the lack of transparency
and accountability of educators and administrators to their clients (i.e. parents and students.)
28.

29.
The 1990s saw marked improvements in life expectancy, immunization coverage
and fertility rate, among other health indicators. Maintaining these gains is essential to further
progress against tremendous remaining challenges: reducing the incidence of child malnutrition,
lowering infant and maternal mortality rates, controlling the population growth rate, reducing the
prevalence of endemic and infectious diseases and increasing access to safe water and sanitation. In
addition, new challenges have emerged that will require considerable attention and resources. Primary
among them is arsenic contamination of ground water, affecting at least 24 million people. To mitigate
the adverse health impacts of arsenic poisoning and to develop alternative, safe drinking-water supplies,
a concerted effort by the Government, local communities, donors and the private sector will be absolutely
critical. A second new challenge is to avert a potential HIV/AIDS epidemic by raising public awareness
and outreach to high-risk groups. Even though the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the country is still low
(less than two hundred HIV positive cases have been reported), the Government has initiated preemptive
actions with the help of donors including IDA.
30.

Bangladesh has achieved remarkable progress in reducing gender discrimination in

education and at the work place. Rapid progress in increasing girls' enrollment in primary schools
and the increase in the female-to-male ratio in workforce participation to around the same level as in
western countries are notable successes. As increasing numbers of women have found jobs in the rapidly

9

expanding ready-made garment industry, their income-earning opportunities and participation in
household decision-making have both expanded. The awareness of the perceived high returns to
investments in girls' education has caused a shift in social attitudes towards the role of women in society.
Nonetheless, a serious concern remains the virtual inability of law enforcement and social practices to
prevent violence against women, the incidence of which is reportedly on the rise. As a signatory of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the Government has committed to undertake affirmative
actions to remove legal, economic, political and cultural/social barriers that prevent women from
exercising equal rights. The process should be accelerated, given the centrality of women's empowerment
to poverty reduction in Bangladesh. The evidence shows that where women have access to education,
health, assets, and a voice in local decision making, the living standards of poor rural families have
improved significantly.
Rural Development

31.
Since 80% of Bangladesh's population and 90% of the poor live in rural areas,
accelerated growth there and development of agriculture and non-farm economic
activities are crucial for achieving faster, sustainable poverty reduction. Nearly two million
rural workers enter the labor force each year, a large proportion of them going into foodgrain production,
an area of dramatic change, where output has nearly doubled over the last decade. A combination of
factors - good weather, efficient and timely distribution of inputs, expansion in rural credit and a
consistent shift towards high-yield seeds and technologies - is responsible for the growth in production.
The growth was generally limited to rice, in which Bangladesh attained self-sufficiency in the early 1990s.
During the second half of the 1990s agriculture stagnated due to a slowdown in the demand for rice
caused by low income elasticity of demand and lower population growth rates. Given the importance of
agriculture to poverty reduction, policies to spur crop diversification and non-farm production and better
water management are critical. Complementing such policies, steps to deregulate input and output
markets, improve rural infrastructure, enhance credit access and strengthen domestic/export marketing
and distribution channels are necessary to derive a greater poverty impact.
32.
Effective management of water resources is a key priority. A new national water policy
has been recently formulated but not yet made operational. The main issues in the water sector are poor
institutional performance and lack of community-driven development models for water use. The
Government has recognized that these problems have to be addressed through restructuring of the key
water agencies, particularly the Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB), to improve their
efficiency and decentralize management of smaller water schemes to local water users' associations.
Progress in implementing these institutional reforms has so far been slow.
33.
Investments in rural electrification, roads and micro-credit have yielded highly
satisfactory results. Nevertheless, rural access to electricity remains low at 10% (against 18%
nationwide), and a larger role for the private sector will have to be developed in order to move toward the
Government's extremely ambitious target of universal coverage by 2020. To catalyze growth of non-farm
activities and rural industry, continued investment to expand and maintain the rural road network is
important. Although the reach of micro-credit has benefited many poor families, the instrument needs to
be adapted to improve its effectiveness for the extreme poor and extended to micro-enterprises and to
small and marginal farmers to create more employment opportunities.
34.
Protecting Bangladesh's rural population, especially the poor, from natural
disasters such as cyclones, storms and tidal surges, floods, arsenic contamination of water
and environmental degradation is critical to sustaining development outcomes. Improved
information and early warning systems have reduced public vulnerability to natural disasters, as
evidenced by the minimal loss of life during the 1998 floods. Nonetheless, ensuring the sustainability of
disaster mitigation efforts remains an important challenge. In this regard, the operation and
maintenance of defensive infrastructure like embankments, cyclone shelters and river training works is
critical. Also, the Government's disaster mitigation efforts increasingly emphasize greater participation
by affected communities and NGOs in operating and maintaining defensive infrastructure. Massive

10

arsenic contamination of groundwater has emerged as a new national challenge. The Government is
responding by developing community capacity to test wells on a continuous basis, finding alternative,
safe drinking-water sources and strengthening the public health system.
35.
Environmental problems in Bangladesh range from widespread resource depletion
and ecological degradation, to urban and industrial pollution and natural disasters. These
environmental problems are linked to poverty in three distinct ways: by reducing people's livelihood, by
affecting their health, and by increasing their vulnerability to the destructive impact of natural disasters.
Natural resource degradation affects the livelihood of nearly half the rural poor by reducing yields of
agricultural, fisheries, and timber and non-timber forestry products. The public health impacts of
pollution -- including dirty and arsenic-laced water, lack of sanitation, and urban and indoor air pollution
-- account for nearly 20% of all illness and death. Over the past 30 years, Bangladesh has suffered 25% of
all disaster-related damages in South Asia, the most disaster-prone region in the world. The country is
also particularly vulnerable to the projected impact of flooding, increased cyclones, and sea level rise
being brought about by global climate change. Progress in addressing these environment-related issues
has been generally slow. Some successful steps have, however, been taken with regard to air pollution in
Dhaka, industrial standards, cyclone early warning systems, and localized ecosystem management where
there is both adequate research and local participation. Nonetheless, addressing environmental concerns
is essentially a governance issue - not a financial one - and Bangladesh's environmental problems are
likely to worsen without improved information, policy reform and public sector accountability.
Private Sector Development

36.
Sustained private sector-led growth is essential to accelerating poverty reduction in
Bangladesh. To nurture such development, Bangladesh will need to foster a stronger, more competitive
domestic private sector, expand the capacity of its infrastructure (especially power, telecommunications,
roads and ports) and strengthen domestic financial markets. In addition, the Government has to step up
its efforts to improve the environment for foreign investment, raise the quality of the labor force and
reduce the costs of doing business by reforming the legal and judicial system, increasing public
transparency and arresting the deterioration in law and order.
37.
Increased private participation is needed to alleviate infrastructurebottlenecks. The
inability of publicly managed infrastructure utilities to generate adequate revenue for maintenance, let
alone for new investments, has led to energy consumption, telecommunication and road penetration
rates that are among the lowest in the world. The inefficiency of Chittagong port, the country's main port,
costs the economy close to a billion dollars a year. Furthermore, the public utilities' poor management
has resulted in large financial losses that add to the fiscal burden. In the power sector, for example, only
18% of the population have access and shortages and unreliable supply are the norm. Power shortages
are estimated to cost a billion dollars in lost industrial output a year, while the two major power utilities
post annual financial losses in excess of US$100 miMion. The utilities' huge financial losses subsidize a
narrow section of the population that, in many instances, does not even pay its power bils and thereby
perpetuates the cycle of corruption and poor management. The underlying causes go back to the vicious
cycle of vested interests - in this case, sections of the trade unions, management and businesses - that
block reforms and blunt the political will to bring about changes in the status-quo. In these
circumstances, the need is compelling to promote the private provision of infrastructure services, initially
and crucially through government actions to open markets with appropriate regulation and to reform the
SOEs' roles in these sectors.
38. Foreign direct investments are needed to develop gas production. Bangladesh has had
some success in attracting foreign investors to the gas sector, but progress in implementation has been
hampered by the continuing involvement of Petrobangla. Prospects for further investment depend on the
Government's willingness to allow gas exports without which the limited domestic market demand wil
hold back exploration and production.

39.
The financial sector requires reform and institutional strengthening to meet the
needs of private business. Poor people's good repayment records under micro-credit programs
contrast sharply with the slow progress being made in recovering the massive amount of bad debt in the
banking system. During the late 1990s the Government began to take steps to attack the default culture
by introducing new courts responsible for debt recovery, by tightening loan classification and
provisioning requirements and by restricting defaulters' access to credit. The private commercial banks
have begun to respond, and the proportion of classified loans in their portfolios has been reduced from
40% in 1995 to about 27% in 1999. In contrast, the NCBs' performance deteriorated somewhat over this
period; non-performing loans still account for over 50% of NCB portfolios.
40.
Unless the poor performance of the NCBs, which hold over half of banking assets, is reversed, and
the private banks' promising trend of improving performance is sustained, lack of credit from the banking
sector will continue to hinder private sector-led growth. The NCBs' drag on the banking system could be
reduced by the introduction of professional management, real autonomy and, eventually, privatization.
In addition, a healthy and well-functioning banking sector would depend on the central bank's autonomy
and capacity to regulate and supervise the entire banking system effectively, as well as on a better
functioning legal system. Beyond commercial banks, domestic capital markets are limited in depth and
range of services. Regulatory reforms are required to encourage the development of new markets, and
the entry of new institutions.
Aid Effectiveness
41.
Consistent with global trends, aid flows to Bangladesh have been declining.
Bangladesh still depends on development assistance to finance about half of its development needs
(Chart 2). Since aid will continue to play an important role in the future, its efficient management is a
major concern. Aid flows have declined due to a combination of factors - lowered availability of donor
assistance worldwide, growth in private financial flows and Bangladesh's reduced access due to
inadequate policy performance, absorptive capacity and linkage with policies, consensus on which takes
considerable time to be reached between the Government and donors. Therefore, the Government has to
manage aid more effectively by playing a stronger leadership role in managing assistance programs. In
addition to assuming greater ownership, the Government has to address the weak policy and institutional
framework in which projects are implemented.
Chart 2 - Trend in Aid Disbursements
|

VmIV e ofAid Disb-nsemet inDollahs

d .s % fADP

2.5

100

\DisBrsmer*aXfADF
80

2.0
*

Aid Disbursemest
Aid Di.b.,.
.tne

/

-60

i-

40
1.5

(Curen
pr

cs)

^trie)

Aid Dsns

s

e,20

1.0

0
1990/91

1991/92

1992/93

1993/94

1994/95

12

1995/96

1996/97

1997/98

1998/99

g

III. PROPOSED WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
A. FORMULATING THE STRATEGY

42.
Continuing the focus of its FY98 precursor, this CAS emphasizes institution building
since the underlying systemic conditions in the country have not changed substantially. To increase the
impact on poverty, however, this CAS proposes a realignment of priorities, based on learning,
consultations with stakeholders and the increased potential for strategic partnerships. The
strategic priorities of the CAS are aligned with the Government's development vision described earlier.
Learning

43.
In line with the OED's 1998 Bangladesh Country Assistance Review, the last CAS explicitly
recognized the importance of supporting institutional development. The Bank's recent
(FY00) Bangladesh Institutional and Governance Review (IGR) also highlighted the long-term nature of
engagement required from the Bank Group and other development partners to tackle institutional
reforms. Any near to medium-term successes are likely to be small because building sustainable
institutions requires a major overhaul of the public sector, while resistance from vested interests limits
progress. Strengthening partnerships and building ownership of reforms are therefore critical.
What worked:
44.
The Bangladesh IGR proposes that lessons for future IDA-financed operations should be drawn
from the gains in capacity building during the past decade. Prominent among the success stories are the
PKSF (a financial intermediary for micro-credit) and the Rural Electrification Board. These 'islands of
excellence' in the micro-finance and electricity sectors share common attributes (listed below) that are
consistent with CDF principles and point to useful lessons for replication in other sectors. The operating
principles include:
*
*
*
*
*
*

project objectives that are aligned with demands of the community at the grassroots level;
implementation by autonomous agencies that follow a community-based or cooperative model
accountable for achieving community-owned development solutions;
financial discipline and accountability;
visible political commitment together with strong championship in the civil service;
home-grown project designs, suitably tested in pilots and scaled up nationwide; and
partnerships among donors, government and NGOs.

What did not work:
45.
The July 1999 CAS progress report indicated limited progress on policy and
structural reforms in key sectors such as banking, power and public administration. This outcome
has been attributed to several factors:
*

*
*
*
*

Despite a widely acclaimed report on "Government That Works" and the attention given to
institutional issues in the last CAS, little tangible progress has marked public sector reforms. More
innovative dissemination of report findings is needed to build public awareness and support for
governance reforms.
Weak government commitment to address difficult issues limited the impact of development
assistance programs, particularly in areas where donors were unable to coordinate effectively.
Projects requiring complex institutional reforms and coordination across many public agencies
proved very difficult to implement, and several of them became problem projects.
Uneven quality and inconsistent involvement of the Government in the preparation of several major
analytical reports, such as the Rural Development and Energy Sector Strategies, reduced their
effectiveness in convincing the Government to adopt the recommended changes.
IFC has had limited success in supporting private investment in Bangladesh. Many investment
opportunities, particularly in the power, gas and financial sectors have not been realized due to the

13

poor policy environment. The large proportion of approved IFC funds that have not been committed
evidences this.
CAS Consultations
46.
In preparation for the CAS, the country team comprising IDA and IFC staff carried out extensive
in-country consultations during January-June 2000, meeting with Government, civil society
representatives and various stakeholders, including villagers and urban slum dwellers. Feedback from
these consultations added to the knowledge base of analytical work and past consultations undertaken by
the Bank and other institutions, providing a grassroots "reality check" on Bangladesh's development
priorities.
47.
The consultations took place in several urban, semi-urban and rural locations outside Dhaka. The
methodology and findings of the consultations are described in Attachment 1. The overriding, acrossthe-board concern centered on the extremely high costs that poor governance, especially
corruption and a decline in law and order, and weak institutions exact from individuals
and the private sector. Participants also identified economic growth and job creation, gender equity,
rural development, safe water and sanitation, better quality health and education services and the arsenic
contamination crisis as priorities for the development agenda. Toward the end of the consultations,
feedback from participants validated the preliminary CAS framework proposed by the Bank Group to
address widely perceived development priorities. Participants expressed a strong desire to continue
engaging the Bank Group in dialogue on the country's development agenda. They were informed that the
Bank Group would be working in partnership with other donors within the CAS framework to meet the
concerns expressed during the earlier consultations.

14

Box 3: What was heard at the CAS consultations....
1.Participants in the CAS consultations indicated that they are proud of the gains made by their country in recent years.
"The Jamuna Bridge is a milestone in ourprogress."
-- Village representative near Sylhet
Primary health care andfamily planning is improving.'
- City of Rajshahi representative
"Women's leadership is increasing in both politics and economic areas."
-- City of Chittagong representative
2.These achievements notwithstanding, concern was expressed about the many challenges that remain. These fall into three
broad areas:
(i) Institutions and Governance: The predominant theme across all groups was Bangladesh's ineffective and inefficient
institutions. In particular, the conflict between political parties, an ineffective Parliament, a public bureaucracy that does not
serve the people well, corruption and the deterioration in law and order, were concerns.
'The hidden costs of doing business are hurting our aility to make profits in every area."
-- Dhaka businessman
"Law and order is decreasing, especially there is rise in violent crimes."
-- City of Sylhet representative
"We sleep with our belongings packed - we never know ifsomeone will come and demolish the
slum."

-- Dhaka urban poor representative
"We need more effective dialogue among the political parties."
-- NGO leader
(ii) Employment and Economic Growth: Both urban and rural groups spoke about the lack of jobs and the critical roles
that improved infrastructure, particularly power and telecommunications, and skilled human capital could play in creating
economic opportunities.
'Roads, ports, telecommunications and Internet connections require much more attention."
-- Govermment Secretary
'Both literate and illiterate people can'tfindjobs."
-- Villager near Sylhet
"Our investment in technology is weak and we don't have well-trained managers.'
Dhaka businessman
(iii) Basic Needs: A common refrain stressed that despite considerable progress and improvements in social indicators,
more progress in the area of Basic Needs is required. While access to basic education and health care had improved, many
groups talked about the need for improving quality and suggested that better data collection and performance monitoring of
social services should be undertaken, particularly in basic education and health.
"More children are in school, but the quality is not good."
-- Villager near Rajshahi
'In our haste to cover a lot of people in a short time, we have sacrificed quality."
-- Government Secretary
"Water, electricity and sanitationfacilities are inadequate."
-- Dhaka urban poor representative
"We need the help of donors, NGOs, the Government and everyone to solve the arsenic problem."
-- Villager near Sylhet

Partnerships
48.
Bangladesh's large and active donor community, reflecting the country's
tremendous development needs, is expected to continue to provide significant external
assistance. As indicated in Table 4, during the past three years (i.e. FY 98-00), resources (i.e.
commitments) equivalent to 50% or more of the ADP came from donors, of whom IDA, ADB and Japan
were the largest. Major investments took place in the agriculture, rural development, water resources
management, water supply and transport sectors. Although the ADB and Japan have been the primary
donors for power, and IDA and the United Kingdom, the lead donors in health, a large number of
bilateral donors - Germany, United Kingdom, Netherlands, United States Agency for International
Development (USAID), Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA), Swiss Development Corporation (SDC) - are also active in

15

many sectors. The financing shares of the largest donors have not changed significantly over the past
three years; the ADB, IDA and Japan have provided on average, 11%, 10% and 4%, respectively, of ADP
resources. Since the ADB, Japan and other bilateral donors are providing significant support to the ADP,
IDA will be able to be more selective in its interventions in accordance with its comparative advantage
and strategic CAS priorities.
Table 4: Government -Donor Partnership in Sectoral Investment
Sectoral Financing Share in the Annual Development Program
(Average %Sectoral Allocation during FY98-00)
bfj

0~~~~~~~~~~~~

Source Of Aid

g

0

;

;

.

ADB

12

12

22

15

15

13

14

Japan

1

1

2

1

x

3

10

United Kingdom

1

2

x

6

x

4

9
x

8

1

11

4

8

4

8

x

2
10

IDA

19

8

23

8

17

3

12

6

15

1

Other Donors*

25

26

10

16

10

15

7

13

25

12

15

Counterpart Funds*-

16

15

18

13

16

10

15

9

20

9

13

Notes:

* Other Donors include CIDA, DANIDA, European Union, Germany, IDB, IFAD, Kuwait, Netherlands, SIDA, UN

System and some Suppliers' Credit from China, India and Korea.
**The ADP does not indude private sector investments for oil and gas through IPPs and production sharing contracts.
Counterpart Funds refer to the sale proceeds from Food and Commoditiy Aid which are used for local cost financing
of ADP projects.
x indicates some donor financing in the sector.

49.
In areas where donors have established strong partnerships, pooled resources and
expertise have strengthened the positive impact of aid. Examples of successful partnerships
abound. IDA and several bilateral donors including the Department for International Development,
United Kingdom (DFID) and CIDA, share a common approach on micro-finance, which enables them to
coordinate the provision of resources for credit, technical assistance and institutional strengthening.
Collaboration between the ADB and the Bank Group has been and will continue to be strategically
important for engaging the Government in the power and financial sectors. Continued adoption of a
common stand by these two partners on structural reforms is critical for convincing the Government that
unless reforms are undertaken, sector performance will not improve.
50.
Partnerships on governance are gaining momentum. IDA's efforts to strengthen public
sector management and amplify the "voice" of civic society in demanding better governance are
complemented by the work being undertaken by UNDP, Danish International Development Agency
(DANIDA) and DFID on decentralization, local capacity building and law enforcement. A consortium of
donors led by IDA is pooling resources and expertise to support a sector-wide health and population
program fully owned by the Government. More can be done to align support effectively in other areas in
a manner similar to the experience in the health sector. The absence of such an approach in primary
education has been an impediment to achieving intended outcomes despite the inputs of numerous
donors including ADB, Norwegian Agency for Development (NORAD), Gesellsehaft fur Technische
Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), UNICEF and IDA. The challenge ahead is for donors and the Government to
seek ways of applying the sector-wide programmatic approach more broadly.

16

Partnerships with non-government stakeholders in Bangladesh are essential for
consensus building on reforms to improve the quality of policies and institutions, a key
determinant of aid effectiveness. While it is unlikely that the Government will implement any bold
measures before elections, the period following elections could offer a window of opportunity for
accelerating reforms. Among the several positive forces at work that could facilitate a period of faster
reform are:
51.

*
*
*

an increasingly proactive Supreme Court
the NGOs' continuing growth and activism
emergence of a young generation of entrepreneurs with social conscience, who increasingly demand a
more supportive and ethical business environment
growth of independent research organizations
rapid expansion in basic education
a thriving and increasingly independent press
change agents within government who can catalyze reform
public discontent with inadequate provision of services by public agencies

*
*
*
*
*

Over time and with support, these interest groups are expected to become increasingly vocal in
demanding reforms and better performance from the Government. Donor support to these forces of
change (e.g. for capacity building) could make an important contribution to increasing aid effectiveness.
Box 4: Partnerships in the Health, Nutrition and Population Sector
IDA's strong partnerships with donors and NGOs in supporting the Govermment's HNP program have produced some
remarkable outcomes.
* The IDA-led Bangladesh Health and Population Consortium has been financing the sector since 1975. It started with
Australia, Canada, Germany, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom joining the Bank in supporting a population project.
The number of donors and scope of activities have since expanded to cover all the donors financing the sector through a
single sector-wide program. Donor financing has increased several fold from $45 million then to $1 billion for the
present five-year program. Bangladesh's fertility decline and immunization program are international success stories.
Currently, extensive policy and institutional reform is being implemented to improve the health of the poor. The multidonor partnership has enabled a large amount of resources to be focused on key issues including how to achieve more
balanced development in the sector and more efficient aid management
•

IDA-supported Bangladesh Integrated Nutrition Project has developed nutrition interventions that have significantly
reduced malnutrition in the project area. The success is owed to effective partnerships among the Government, BRAC,
UNICEF and IDA. While IDA led the process, UNICEF provided strong technical support to project preparation and
BRAC contributed lessons from its in-country experience. This resulted in the development of a project known for its
technical soundness. The partnership has continued and grown with BRAC participating in project implementation, and
UNICEF in project supervision. The Bangladesh Integrated Nutrition project model will now be replicated nationwide
through the National Nutrition Program that will be launched in December 2000.

*

The Government has initiated actions to address HIV/AIDS before it becomes an epidemic in Bangladesh. In preparing
an HIV/AIDS project to be financed by IDA, the Government collaborated with UNAIDS and other NGOs including
CONCERN, CARE and VHSS. While the NGOs' experience in working with high-risk groups was critical for defining the
project's main thrust, UNAIDS has contributed valuable technical assistance during project preparation. Although the
implementation of the project will not begin until early 2001, the partnerships have created the momentum for the
Government to begin training 65,000 HIV/AIDS field workers.

52.
Improving the Government's management of aid and more effective donor
coordination will both be necessary to facilitate and generate more opportunities for
strategic partnerships among donors, the Government and civil society. The Government has
little involvement in the activities of the Local Consultative Group (LCG), the primary mechanism for incountry donor coordination. Consequently, the LCG's function has been limited to information exchange,
with few instances of effective alignment, and the LCG, to remedy the situation, has begun to engage the
Government in restructuring the Government-donor relationship based on CDF principles. The LCG has
conducted a review of its objectives and organization and concluded that it should include the
Government more systematically in its deliberations and find mechanisms to increase Government
ownership. The Government will intensify its dialogue with the LCG to seek greater convergence of views
on key thematic areas - such as development assistance issues, regulatory reform and governance - to
underpin donor support for Government-led development assistance programs.

17

53.
It is generally agreed that the current piecemeal approach to institution building,
the proliferation of donor-supported project management units and varying
administrative procedures, particularly for procurement and disbursement, are not
working well and strain the Government's capacity. In parallel, and following up on the concerns
raised at the Bangladesh Development Forum in April 2000, IDA has taken the lead in engaging the
Government to identify ways to harmonize the aid policies of donors with the country's development
needs. Among the proposals being considered is a broader application of successful partnership
approaches such as those used in the Health, Nutrition and Population sector (see Box 4).
B. OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGY

54.
The CAS's overarching objective is to help Bangladesh realize its aspiration of
reducing poverty substantially within one generation. In line with this aim, the Bank Group will
support poverty reduction by focusing on the three most powerful lines of attack against poverty:
*

consolidating gains in human development and supporting initiatives to address the next
generation of development challenges in education, health and nutrition;

*

implementing an integrated approach to rural development, including supporting growth in
agriculture and non-farm activities, making opportunities and assets available to the poor, improving
rural infrastructure and strengthening local institutions; and

*

accelerating and broadening private sector-led growth by supporting governmental efforts
to remove structural impediments and establish a conducive environment for private investment
(primarily IDA); by strengthening the financial sector (IDA and IFC) and supporting private
investments in energy, infrastructure, manufacturing and services (IFC and MIGA).

The crosscutting issues of institutional capacity building, governance, macro-economic
stability, social concerns such as gender equity and empowerment and environmental
protection will be treated as integral elements within these strategic objectives.
55.
An important element of the CAS wiUl be collaboration with ADB, IMF and other
donors to help the Government sharpen the design and improve the implementation of its
comprehensive anti-poverty strategy. Assistance will take the form of knowledge transfer in
developing analytical and monitoring tools to track poverty indicators and disseminating global best
practices on determinants of poverty and anti-poverty policies. Support may also be provided for
consultations on the strategy.
56.
From a strategic perspective, IDA's involvement would be selective, based on exploiting
comparative advantages and performance-based lending. In supporting improvements in
policies, institutions and governance, the Bank Group wil engage the Government and other
stakeholders through analysis and dialogue in areas critical to growth even if reforms
continue to be slow, but provide financial assistance only when the pace of reform picks up.
Examples would be banking, power and water resource management, where the Bank Group would
increase engagement if and as the Government tackles underlying governance and other structural issues
and achieves progress in implementing agreed policy reforms. IDA would not seek involvement in areas
where the other donors or the private sector have a long history of engagement and/or comparative
advantage. Examples include in building law-enforcement capacity (DANIDA and DFID), urban health
services (ADB and USAID), technical education/vocational training, gas exploration and production
(private sector).
57.
In delivering assistance in areas where IDA is selectively involved, the strategy
proposes community-driven approaches, private sector-led solutions and partnerships.
Both donors and the Government recognize NGOs' strength in delivering social services in health,
education and rural development and the record of excellent performance by community-based

18

organizations in rural infrastructure and micro-credit. The relevant strategy, therefore, will seek to
promote and scale up such NG0-led and community-driven development models. These models would
also take into account, the importance of resource transfer to regions with the highest poverty incidence.
IDA will focus primarily on policy, institutional and structural reforms to promote private participation in
the financial sector, infrastructure and gas production, with IFC and MIGA facilitating the financing of
private investments. The strategy will emphasize forging partnerships with donors to tap existing and
emerging comparative advantages and achieve synergies. The successful approach of the Health and
Population Sector Program, for example, would be more broadly applied and adopted in the power sector
(ADB, USAID and JBIC), gas (ADB and USAID), finance/banking (IMF and ADB) and education (several
bilateral donors).
58.
The CAS will be adapted to Bangladesh's political cycle. General elections are due around
mid-2001. The CAS will therefore coincide with the pre-election period and the new Government's initial
years. As little progress is expected on reforms during the pre-election period, non-lending services (i.e.
analytical services, formulation of sector strategies, dialogue and consultation on reforms) will take on
added prominence in FY01. The strategy will be flexible, stepping up engagement and financial
assistance to respond to the possibility of a more reformist stance in FY02-03 or maintaining a minimum
level of engagement and addressing core poverty needs if reforms are not forthcoming.
C. IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY

Assistance Program
59.

The Bank Group's proposed assistance program has been designed to support the strategic areas

and crosscutting themes described above. Key components of the proposed Base Case program are
summarized in Table 5. Instruments will include a balanced mix of non-lending and lending
interventions. Substantial non-lending activities are proposed to expand on and update the rich

analytical work already done, with a view to further improving the quality of the policy dialogue,
enhancing the impact of the Bank Group's lending interventions, and building consensus on reforms. In
respect of lending interventions, financial support would be provided through IDA technical assistance
and investment credits, Learning and Innovation Loans (LILs), IDA guarantees, IFC equity investments
and loans and MIGA guarantees. Contingent on the policy environment and client needs, adjustment
operations (e.g. Poverty Reduction Support Credit, lending in support of structural reforms in strategic
sectors such as finance/banking and power) would be considered.
i. Due Diligence Economic and Sector Work
60.
A key element of the Bank Group's Economic and Sector Work program during FYO1-02 is
assistance to the Government in preparing its PRSP, a process already initiated and expected to be
completed by the end of 2001. Selected analytical and advisory services will be provided in consultation
and collaboration with the IMF and ADB. In addition, a public expenditure review (PER), a poverty
assessment (PA) and an analysis of safety net programs are planned as inputs into the Government's
PRSP. The last PER and PA were completed in 1997 and 1998, respectively. Preparation of the new PER
and PA has started, and the findings will be available to the new Government in mid-2001. In the past
few years, annual reports equivalent to traditional Country Economic Memoranda have been prepared for
the Bangladesh Development Fora. The last, "Challenges for the New Millennium," was delivered in April
1999. Bangladesh was one of the pilot countries to carry out IGRs. The Bangladesh IGR has been
submitted to the Government, and its findings are being disseminated during FYo1. A Country
Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) was completed in FYoo while the first Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA) is underway with completion of the report expected in March 2001.
In addition to these institutional/fiduciary assessments, the Bank Group is undertaking a rich program of
diagnostic work on governance and public sector accountability/anti-corruption that will feed directly
into a Communication for Reform Initiative to build public awareness on and support for reforms.

19

Table 5: Proposed Base Case Program at a Glance
FYO1
*
*
*
*

7

Communication for Reform
Initiative to promote public debate
on reforms
Capacity building for developing
Governance Indicators/Citizen
Report Cards
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment
WBI activities (power workshop,
globalization training program)

*
*
*
*

Air Quality Mgmt. LIL (approved)
HIV/AIDS Prevention
Legal/Judicial Capacity Building
Micro-credit 11
* Post Literacy &Continuing Education

FY02

FY03

1.Anablyc and Advowry Atlvitles
Poverty Assessment, Public
Expenditure Review and analysis of
safety net programs as inputs into
the Government's PRSP
*
Analytical work and policy dialogue
on removing the constraints to
private provision of infrastructure
*
Capacity building for strengthening
public financial management
*
IDF for reforming public
procurement rules and procedures
* WBI activities (demand driven)
*

*
*
*
*
*
*

IDF for poverty monitoring
Non-farm Employment Opportunities
Post-MFA Implications for Bangladesh's
Ready Made Garments Industry
Urban Governance
Capacity building for aid management
WBI activities (demand driven)

2 MA n
USI.4 bilo
IDA Core Poverty Program: US$800 million
* Female Sec. School Assistance 11
* Rural Infrastructure Improvement
* Social Investment Program
* Water &Sanitation Sector Improvement
* Rural Credit LIL
* Early Childhood Development
* Rural Electrification: Grid &Off-grid
Development

IDA Performance-based Program: US$600 mllon 6
* Water Sector Improvement
* Gorai River Restoration
* Public Sector Modern-iztion TA
* Coastal Zone Management
* Khulna Urban Services
IFC Investments, MIGA guarantees
*
*

Consultative Group (CG) +
thematic group meetings
HPSP coordination meetings

*
*
*

i_________________

*
*
*
*

Procurement Training
Financial Mgmt. Training
Project Mgmt. Training
Quarterly &Annual Portfolio
Performance Review

*
*
*
*

3. Aid Coordination
CG + thematic group meetings
Development Forum
Govt.-donor sector program review

| *

meetings

I

4. Portolo
Manamentnt
Procurement Training
Financial Mgmt. Training
Project Mgmt. Training
Quarterly &Annual Portfolio
Performance Review

*
*

*
*
*
*

CG + thematic group meetings
Development Forum
Govt.-donor program review meetings

Procurement Training
Financial Mgmt. Training
Project Mgmt. Training
Quarterly &Annual Portfolio
Performance Review

ii. Strengthening Governance
61.
IDA's objective is to create a powerful nexus for positive movement toward stronger, accountable
institutions, improved governance and a greater voice for the people. Development partners in this
regard include the Australian Agency for International Development (AUSAID), CIDA, DANIDA, UNDP
and USAID.7 The specific areas of engagement on governance are:
*

Support interventions to strengthen civic society's voice in demanding reforms. IDA would support
analytical work and effective dissemination of the findings that will enable more informed public

Lending in this category is dependent on demonstrable progress on reforms. In addition to the projects shown in the FY02-03
program, several other standby operations - Central Bank TA, Health &Population Sector Program II, Power Reform II (Dispatch &
Transmission), Power Sector TA, and Local Government Support - could be considered for IDA support contingent on reform
progress in these sectors. They are candidates for replacing any of the operations in the regular program that may be delayed due to
unforeseen circumstances.
7 A coalition for positive change called the 'Bangladesh Initiative for Good Governance' and consisting of donors, NGOs and civil
society stakeholders (e.g. Transparency International, Bangladesh), has emerged. The alliance is sponsoring several dissemination
activities.
6

20

debate on governance issues, greater outreach to civil society groups and other stakeholders, as well
as local capacity building for developing 'citizens' scorecards' to monitor public sector performance.
•

Promote public sector reforms to improve the quality of the civil service and the efficiency and
accountability of public administration. IDA in partnership with DFID and UNDP will provide
technical assistance through a proposed Public Sector Modernization Project. The project would
support strengthening of parliamentary oversight committees and the Auditor General's Office,
upgrading financial and management accounting systems and reforming procurement procedures.
These project components are based on the recommendations of the FYo0 CFAA and the FYOO CPAR.

*

Assist in legal and judicial reform. The Legal and Judicial Capacity Building Project (FY01) will
support reform and strengthening of the civil justice system to enable it to perform more efficiently
and fairly.

*

Promote decentralization and local capacity building. IDA will support analytical work to underpin
advocacy on decentralization and will finance pilot operations to develop replicable models of local
governance (Local Government Support project). The emphasis will be on capacity building and
fostering partnerships among local governments, community-based organizations and NGOs. IDA
would complement UNDP's ongoing efforts in the area of local capacity building.

*

IFC investments will provide models for new ways of doing business with strong, transparent
corporate governance, high social and environmental standards and orientation to international
competitiveness rather than domestic protection. The growth of businesses of this type will also
strengthen the domestic constituency for economic reform and improved governance.

iii. Addressing Social and Environmental Issues
62.
In partnership with other donors, IDA will support implementation of the government's social
development agenda. These activities include:
*

Identification of performance indicators for gender outcomes and capacity building of project staff to
undertake gender analysis.

*

Incorporation of gender and social inclusion concerns into the Group's assistance program, and
knowledge sharing and capacity building for research and policy formulation related to social
development.

*

Advocacy on the importance of achieving national targets for elimination of child labor. In addition,
rehabilitation of minors forced to work in the commercial sex industry will be an objective of the
proposed HIV/AIDS prevention project.

63.
IDA would continue to ensure effective implementation of safeguard policies and address
environmental concerns during project preparation. In addition, IDA has assumed chairmanship of the
local consultative group on environment and is endeavoring to focus donor and government priorities on
those environmental problems with the greatest poverty impacts. IDA will:
*

Support alleviation of air pollution through the recently approved Air Quality Management LIL.

*

Execute a UNDP-funded component of the Sustainable Environmental Management Program
(SEMP), emphasizing improved information, legal systems, monitoring and compliance, and public
disclosure in pollution control and environmental management.

*

Promote better environmental assessment procedures across all Government line agencies for donoras well as private sector-financed investments.

21

*

Implement the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP)-funded advocacy program
for reducing vehicle emissions.

iv. Sustaining Human Development Gains

64. The Bank has sought to help Bangladesh improve the health of its people by supporting important
investments in education, water supply and sanitation, and health. IDA's aim in the health sector has
been to help Bangladesh reduce fertility, infant and maternal mortality and the burden of health
conditions, such as malnutrition, that affect the poor the most. IDA has also sought to assist the
Government in strengthening the coverage, effectiveness and efficiency of its health system. Consistent
with this focus, the Bank has helped Bangladesh formulate a sector-wide approach to health sector
development - the five-year, three billion-dollar Health and Population Sector Program (HPSP) - of
which about one-third is being financed by the Bank and a number of other partners (see Box 4).
Continued support to the HPSP through a follow-up operation is envisaged if satisfactory progress on
reforms is achieved under the ongoing operation. Other health-related activities are:
•

Co-financing the National Nutrition Program with the Netherlands and CIDA, an undertaking being
implemented with significant NGO participation (BRAC) and with technical support from UNICEF.

*

Helping Bangladesh establish effective capacity to prevent an HIV/AIDS epidemic through the
implementation of a new HIV/AIDS project in association with UNAIDS and such NGOs as
CONCERN, CARE and VHSS.

*

Assisting in arsenic mitigation in close conjunction with UNICEF and bilateral donors such as SDC.

*

Promoting a dialogue on health financing reform, contributing through analytical and advisory work
toward the establishment of a more coherent and sustainable health system.

*

IFC will consider investments in private health facilities.

65.
IDA and other donors would continue advocacy and support for improving access to and the
quality and efficiency of primary education and for achieving gender parity at the secondary level. IDA
along with its development partners--NORAD, GTZ, UNICEF, ADB, SDC and DFID-will continue to
support the following initiatives:
*

Disseminating analytical work on improving the quality, efficiency, management and governance of
the education system and facilitating debate and public support for education reform.

*

Implementing the Primary Education Development Project more effectively to achieve intended
outcomes.

*

Supporting post-literacy and continuing education designed to expand coverage and quality of nonformal education (Post-Literacy and Continuing Education project).

*

Building on the gains made in gender equity at the post-primary education level through follow-up
support for the Female Secondary School Assistance Program to improve program design, targeting
and outreach.

*

IFC will consider investments in private education and training services.

IDA and other donors would consider additional financial support if the Government were to undertake
medium-term reforms to modernize higher education and vocational training and make it more marketoriented. As noted in the Bank's recently completed review of Bangladesh's educational system, public
provision of these services is at present inefficient, inflexible, inequitable and not designed to meet the
needs of a modernizing economy. Reforms, such as giving the institutions more autonomy, targeting

22

subsidies to the truly needy and aligning public provision with private initiatives, would go a long way
towards addressing these shortcomings.
v. An Integrated Approach to Rural Development
66.
The goal of sustained rural development would be served by linking future investments to key
reforms in agriculture, the non-farm sector and governance. In addition to reforms, investments in
essential rural infrastructure and disaster mitigation will be necessary. To ensure meeting the needs of
poor communities, highly participatory approaches would strengthen the linkages between investments
and poverty reduction. Within this framework, the Bank Group's assistance program would consist of the
following activities:
*

Scaling up micro-credit to increase access by the poor and to reach such new groups as microenterprises and small and marginal farmers (Micro-credit II project and Rural Credit LIL) and
establishing a social investment fund to finance community-based infrastructure (Social Investment
Program project). A central feature of these initiatives would be collaboration with NGOs such as
PROSHIKA and BRAC and with donors (DFID, CIDA).

*

Using data from the 2000-01 HIES to examine the targeting effectiveness of the food assistance
safety nets. Findings would provide the basis for recommendations on improving regional benefit
targeting and on the potential use of cash transfers to improve food consumption and nutrition.

*

Improving rural infrastructure such as grid and off-grid electrification and roads (Rural
Electrification and Rural Infrastructure Improvement projects). IDA, together with the GEF and
USAID, would support the Government's strategy to increase electricity penetration in the rural areas
through multiple providers, expanding cooperatives in grid and off-grid areas and introducing
renewable energy and local private sector systems in remote areas. In parallel, IFC and IDA are
developing pilot schemes that would demonstrate the feasibility of private sector participation in
rural electricity. The community-driven approach that has performed successfully under the Rural
Roads and Markets Improvement project (co-financed by SDC) will continue to be used.

*

In partnership with the FAO and several bilateral donors, support implementation of the recently
approved National Water Policy. This would include assistance for the formulation of the National
Water Management Plan to address institutional reform in key institutions like the BWDB, promote
decentralized, participatory and multi-sectoral approaches to water resources management and
improve the effectiveness and sustainability of irrigation programs. The vehicles for such support
would be the proposed Water Sector Investment project and the Gorai River Restoration project.

*

Support the Government's disaster mitigation efforts by emphasizing greater participation of affected
communities in achieving better preparedness and in operating and maintaining defensive
infrastructure. IDA will consider financing infrastructure for cyclone and riverbank protection and
natural resources management projects if satisfactory progress is made in implementing fundamental
institutional reforms in the water sector (Coastal Zone Management project).

*

IDA will strengthen its collaborative efforts with bilateral donors, NGOs and communities to assist
the Government in the arsenic mitigation effort. A follow up operation to the ongoing Arsenic
Mitigation project is envisaged, going beyond assistance for testing tube wells and screening affected
populations to finding community-based solutions for alternative sources of safe drinking water and
improved rural sanitation (Water and Sanitation Sector Improvement project).

vi. Accelerating Private Sector-led Growth
67.
IDA will support government efforts to maintain macro-economic stability and implement
structural reforms to improve the environment for private sector-led growth. In parallel, IFC and MIGA

23

will support private investment through equity, loans and political risk insurance. The specific areas of
support include:
*

IFC will make direct investments in companies that have strong growth prospects and can compete in
open markets without special treatment from government. Support for SME development would be
provided through a Project Development Facility.

*

IDA will continue to collaborate with the IMF and ADB in providing advice on financial sector
reform, the banking system in particular. IDA technical assistance to strengthen Bangladesh Bank's
capacity will depend on reforms to extend the central bank's authority for prudential supervision and
to rationalize its staffing (Central Bank TA project). IDA would consider substantial adjustment
assistance if the Government were to adopt a more comprehensive banking reform program,
including measures to move toward privatization of the NCBs. IFC will focus on building strong
domestic commercial banks and non-bank financial institutions to expand the range of services and
depth of markets, especially to meet SMEs' needs. Since market development depends on
appropriate regulatory frameworks, IFC will work closely with IDA to promote necessary regulatory
and legal reforms.

68.
IDA's dialogue with the Government and other stakeholders in the energy and infrastructure
sectors is intended to promote improved regulation, the private provision of services and privatization of
poorly managed state assets. IFC investments will aim to increase the availability of telecommunications,
power, water and transportation services to businesses and consumers. These investments will be closely
coordinated with IDA policy dialogue and technical assistance on sector reforms. Specific activities
include:
*

In collaboration with the World Bank Institute and ADB, IDA is promoting initiatives to build
consensus on policy reform and legislative action in the power sector. 8 IDA and ADB would be
willing to support a multi-year program (Power Sector TA and Power Reform II projects) if the
government initiates actions consistent with the Government's Power Sector Policy announced in
January 2000. IFC is exploring further involvement in both national and rural private power
investments, following its successful participation in two power generation projects. IFC and MIGA
would have an important role to play in financing or guaranteeing future projects if the policy and
institutional environment improves.

*

To promote dialogue on and support for reforms to remove constraints to private sector involvement
in infrastructure, IDA and IFC will engage key stakeholders through a highly participatory process of
preparing a country framework paper on private provision of infrastructure.

*

Contingent on commitment to urban governance reforms, IDA will support an Urban Services project
in Khulna to privatize the city's water and sanitation services and improve the living conditions of
slum dwellers. The pilot studies underpinning this operation are financed by SDC.

*

IFC will consider further investment in cellular telephones if the Government undertakes regulatory
and policy actions to make the telecommunications sector more competitive.

*

The Government is negotiating a private container port project that could be financed by IFC as well
as by the IDA-supported infrastructure development fund (ongoing Private Sector Infrastructure
Development project).

*

To promote gas sector development and possible gas exports, IDA will continue to collaborate with
other donors such as ADB and USAID to provide analytical, advocacy and advisory services. IFC
would support investments in gas production and transportation, subject to progress on reforms.

8A successful 3-day workshop was organized in September 2000 in which over 150 stakeholders drawn from government, the

power industry, various utilities and trade unions participated. This initiative has promoted greater understanding of and support
for reforms.

24

Portfolio Management

69.
As of November 2, 2000, the Bangladesh IDA portfolio comprised 26 operations (25 credits and
one GEF operation) and one partial risk guarantee, with a total IDA net commitment of US$2,509
million, of which US$1,111 million (44%) was disbursed. Overall portfolio performance has been below
average. The percentage of projects evaluated by OED as having unsatisfactory outcomes has remained
persistently high at about 19% during the past five fiscal years. Efficiency is also below Bank averages in
terms of project completion and supervision costs. Presently four projects (17.5% of net commitments)
are at risk.
70.
IDA has learned important lessons in recent years and has increased emphasis on ownership,
beneficiary participation in decision-making and greater involvement of the private sector, NGOs and
local governments in project implementation. More attention is being paid to sustainability issues,
including recurrent expenditure requirements for operations and maintenance, cost recovery and policy
reforms. As a result, the FY 98-00 period saw a continuation of support for primary education and
primary health care, and a shift in IDA lending away from Government-led infrastructure projects to
community-based, demand-driven and poverty-focused interventions (box 5).
Box 5: Poverty-focused Interventions
Rural Electrification: Nearly 90% of Bangladesh's rural population, mostly poor, do not have access to electricity. By
expanding electricity access opportunities, the proposed Rural Electrification project (FY02) seeks to increase opportunities
for economic growth and social well being for this target group. Following previous successful IDA project support, the new
operation will not only build on the past success of rural cooperatives, but also go beyond conventional grid-based electricity
provision. It proposes to expand the menu of provision options by supporting low-cost decentralized and dispersed off-grid
systems and renewable energy like solar home systems. The project would also seek to involve the rural private sector,
community-based organizations and NGOs.
Micro-credit II: Findings of an impact study show that micro-credit in Bangladesh has been an effective tool in mitigating
poverty among the rural poor, especially women, leading to increased incomes and asset accumulation, improved
acceptance of health, education and sanitation faclities, enhanced mobility and efficient use of time. The first IDA-financed
micro-finance project (1996), has helped to scale-up the industry's operations and increase outreach at a time when grant
financing was declining. In the face of even less grant financing, the second planned IDA-financed micro-credit project
(FYo0) will help the industry achieve sustainability by improving its creditworthiness and its ability to access funding from
the formal financial sector. The second project will also extend assistance to employment generating micro-enterprise
activities since income generating micro-credit activities will remain a poverty-mitigating instrument. Only wage
employment generated by faster and more broadly based economic growth will reduce poverty.
Rural Infrastructure Improvement: IDA will build on the successful experience of an earlier Rural Road Maintenance
and Improvement Project to further expand and improve rural roads, bridges and river jetties. The proposed Rural
Infrastructure Improvement project (FY03) will also support the development of rural markets that play a significant role in
improving incomes in the rural areas, particularly for women. Project preparation, prioritization of project components and
project implementation will be done in a highly participatory fashion. This participatory approach has been particularly
successful in the earlier project in empowering local communities to make decisions on rural infrastructure development
that is critical for facilitating the movement of goods and services, particularly in poor and remote areas.

71.
IDA, in partnership with ADB, has made consistent efforts to address generic issues affecting
portfolio performance. A CPAR and a CFAA were carried out during FY00 and FY01, respectively. These

reviews identified the root causes of poor performance as inadequate ownership and commitment of
Government to project objectives, particularly as they relate to institutional and policy reforms, weak
implementation capacity, protracted decision-making and implementation procedures, poor
procurement management and inadequate public sector accountability. Report recommendations have
been discussed with the Government with the result that it has instituted actions aimed at reforming
public sector procurement policy and processes and improving public sector financial accountability.
IDA's portfolio management strategy will focus on quality at entry and improved supervision. A portfolio
improvement action plan has been formulated that draws on lessons learned, better supervision
planning, timely portfolio performance reviews and a further judicious shifting of portfolio supervision to
the Dhaka field office.
72.
Recognizing that fundamental reform of the civil service and governance is likely to take time,
controlling fraud and corruption within IDA-financed projects will be a critical operational priority.
IDA's efforts to strengthen the prior review process and intensify ex post reviews have sent a clear signal
25

to the borrower and implementing agencies. In FYoo, 24 contracts were declared as misprocurement
and US$3.1 million canceled from various credits. This supervisory discipline will continue in FYO1-03.
73.
As of September 30, 2000, IFC had outstanding committed investments in 7 companies in
Bangladesh with total exposure of US$64.3 million including US$ 62.8 million for its own account and
US$1.5 million for B loan participants (Annex 8). Total disbursed portfolio as of the same date was
US$49.4 million, including US$ 3.4 million of equity investments, for US$46 million of A loans and
US$1.5 million of B loans. The portfolio includes projects in financial markets, infrastructure, cement,
and textiles. Portfolio performance is good, with the exception of one textiles company, which is in
arrears. The interest collection rate as of September 30, 2000 is 94.3%.
74. To date, MIGA has facilitated an estimated US$580 million of foreign direct investment into
Bangladesh. As of September 30,2000, MIGA's gross exposure in Bangladesh stood at US$79.5 million,
approximately 1.8% of MIGA's total gross exposure and approximately 6% of MIGA's IDA portfolio. The
portfolio consists of five guarantee contracts for projects in infrastructure and manufacturing.
Co-location of Work
75. The Bank Group will continue to deliver its assistance program in Bangladesh in a decentralized
fashion. The Bank's Country Director has been resident in Dhaka since 1997. The Bank and IFC have
shared office premises since the establishment of an IFC presence in Dhaka in 1995. The number of Bank
staff in the Dhaka office has grown from 91 in 1997 to 123 in 2000, primarily due to expansion of national
staff. At present, 40% of team leaders and just over 50% of task team leaders, two-thirds of whom are
national staff, are based in Dhaka. The Dhaka office procurement team is authorized to review and clear
contracts up to US$ 500,000 for goods and works, and US$ 300,000 for consultant services. The
disbursement team's responsibilities include full review of all withdrawal applications for projects taskmanaged by Dhaka office staff and partial review of all other applications. The decentralization of
program management, expansion of the Dhaka office and decentralization of program responsibilities
have deepened appreciation of conditions in Bangladesh, strengthened local relationships and
partnerships and helped to increase the responsiveness of the Bank Group's assistance program to local
needs. IFC's Dhaka office functions as a satellite to the regional hub in Delhi, which maintains full
processing capacity for manufacturing and service projects and supports the processing of financial
sector, infrastructure, oil, gas and chemicals projects.
D. CAS SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS

76. The level of Bank Group financial assistance to Bangladesh will depend on the Government's
ability to remove the governance and other structural constraints impeding growth and poverty
reduction. The extent and depth to which the Government undertakes reforms to remove these
constraints will trigger different levels of support under the low-, base- and high-case scenarios.
Indicative triggers for the three scenarios are summarized in Table 6.
77.
The Low Case scenario is characterized by negligible progress on structural reform, no
improvement in portfolio management and continued slippage in macroeconomic performance from preFYoo levels. In this environment, which currently prevails in Bangladesh, IDA believes that selected
interventions in health, education, rural development and governance improvement (e.g. judicial/legal
reform) - comprising a core poverty program - would protect progress achieved in these areas and help
to maintain dialogue with the Government. IDA support for the core poverty program would be about
US$ 800 million over the 3-year CAS period. Since IFC's role in promoting private sector development
also depends on the policy environment, its low case program would focus on limited investments and
advisory services in support of SME development.
78.
The Low Case scenario assumes that the Government will not accelerate the pace of reform during
the period before the elections expected in mid-2001. However, following the elections, a Base Case
scenario could emerge if progress is made on macroeconomic performance, structural reform in a few
key sectors and portfolio performance. In addition, this case assumes the new Government will initiate
26

some measures to improve public sector governance, especially in procurement and financial
accountability. Under this scenario, in addition to assistance for the core poverty program, financial
support will be extended to the sectors that demonstrate satisfactory progress on reforms.

The extent to which the Government takes actions to achieve reform goals in these sectors will determine
the magnitude and sectoral composition of base case lending. If the policy and institutional constraints
hindering a greater private sector role in the infrastructure and gas sectors were removed, IFC and MIGA
could play a significantly larger role in mobilizing financing in these areas.
79.
Base Case lending over the CAS period would be about US$1.4 billion, a composite of Low Case
lending in FY01 (about US$300 million) and higher levels of lending in FY02-03 that would be closer to
the indicative annual IDA allocation. Given the lower lending level in FY01, the average per capita IDA
program for Bangladesh would remain below that of other developing countries with similar levels of
GNP per capita and policy performance. Bangladesh could have access to higher IDA funding if tangible
steps were taken to address institutional weaknesses and improve governance so that the country raises
its capacity to absorb larger amounts of aid and use resources more effectively.
80.
The High Case scenario assumes comprehensive reform with the government adopting and
initiating implementation of a broad-based reform agenda covering governance, institutional and
structural issues in many of the key sectors - energy, banking/finance, water resources, agriculture,
urban development, public administration, health, education and the cross-cutting area of
decentralization. Bank Group support under this scenario could be substantially higher (up to US$ 2.0
billion over three years) and would include adjustment lending in addition to financing for technical
assistance and project investments. In the event that Bangladesh moves to a High Case scenario, a CAS
progress report would accompany Board presentation of adjustment operations, which could include a
Poverty Reduction Support Credit and/or lending to support structural reforms in strategic sectors such
as finance/banking and power. The CAS progress report would outline actions taken by the Government
to advance its development agenda, and indicate the areas where adjustment lending would accelerate
the implementation of reforms. In the High Case scenario, IFC could play a larger role in financing
private investment, developing financial markets, and providing advisory services related to privatization.
Table 6: Indicative FYOI-03 Lending Scenarios and Triggers
HIGH CASE

BAXE CA.RF

TlnW CASE

Base Case Lending Triggers, pliu:
•

*
*

Maintenance of macro
stability at current levels
- domestic government
borrowing at the current
3.5% of GDP, stable
ratio of external
commercial debt to
GDP, foreign exchange
reserves at 6-8 weeks of
imports.
No significant progress
on structural reform.
No improvement in
portfolio performance
(currently portfolio has
about 15% problem
projects).

Strong macro performance, particularly in terms of
resource mobilization, quality of public spending
and reduction in SOE losses.
*
Implementation of governance reforms that are
deeper and more extensive than the actions taken
under the base case.
a
Structural reforms expand to cover most of the key
sectors - energy, banking/finance, water,
*
agriculture, health, education, decentralization and
urban. Indicative actions include:
i.
Energy Sector: Opening-up of power
management.
distribution to private sector participation.
*
Progress on reforms in a few key sectors
as evidenced by actions such as:
ii.
Financial/Banking Sector: Program
launched to privatize NCBs.
i.
Energy Sector: Passage of
iii.
Water Sector: Commercialization of BWDB's
legislation creating an
dredging and mechanical equipment
independent power sector
regulator.
organizations.
iv.
Agriculture Sector: Elimination of subsidies
ii. Finance/Banldng: Bangladesh
in fertilizer industry.
Bank rationalizes staffing and
v.
Social Sectors: (i) Health - adopt a longextends and enforces its regulatory
term strategy to modernize the health sector;
function on all banks.
and (ii) Fuation - formulate a medium-term
iii.
Water Sector: Formulation of a
strategy to modernize higher and
satisfactory National Water Mgmt
technical/vocational education.
Plan and steps taken to reorganize
Significant improvement in portfolio performance:
*
and reform the BWDB.
* Satisfactory portfolio performance:
less than 10% problem projects and disbursement
ratio over 20%.
less thanl5% problem projects.
*

Progress in macro performance domestic borrowing below 3.5% of
GDP, improvement in the composition
of public spending, stable ratio of
external commercial debt to GDP,
foreign exchange reserves increasing
to over 8 weeks of imports.
Improvements in governance with
specific actions taken to strengthen
public procurement and financial

27

*

E. MONITORING AID EFFECIVENESS

81.
The effectiveness of development assistance should be judged against its ability to deliver the
desired results in reducing poverty. Hence, rigorous monitoring of development assistance and
close tracking of progress in the Government's reform program are guiding principles of the
CAS. To ensure this supervision as well as the adequate focus of joint efforts with the Government and
other development partners, a two-tiered monitoring framework is proposed. The first tier is a set of set
of core outcome benchmarks (Table 7). The specific quantitative targets are based on relevant historical
data for Bangladesh, the performance of other low-income countries and macroeconomic growth
projections under the base case scenario. These will be discussed with the Government and other
development partners and finalized during formulation of the PRSP. The objective is to gain the
agreement of all key stakeholders on a full set of indicators and make the monitoring process transparent
and participatory. The Government is expected to take primary responsibility for monitoring these
indicators for which data can be readily obtained through the HIES and smaller surveys and from project
implementation databases. Adequate monitoring and evaluation systems are in place in the Bangladesh
Bureau of Statistics, the Ministry of Health and, to a lesser extent, in the Project Monitoring and
Evaluation Department and other public agencies implementing IDA-financed projects.
Table 7: Proposed CAS Core Benchmarks
Year

1995/1996

1999/2000

2003
(Projected)

333
6.4
7.2
53

355
3.2
7.2
43-47
47.8
4.3
82

400*
7.0
8.2
34-40
36
3.5
87

COUNTRY PERFORMANCE

GDP per capita (US$)
Manufacuring growth (%annual)
Tax revenue (X of GDP)
Poverty Headcount Ratio (X)
Prevalence of Child Malnutrition (% of children under five)b
Matemal Mortality Rate (per 1,0oO live births)'
Net primary enroDment (%):
Of which gender parity is to be maintained

..
..
..

a. Numberof persons below the poverty line as a percent of the total population. The 1999/2000 figure is a
forecast that will be restimated whenever data from the 2000-01 HIES becomes available. Similarly, the
projected figure for 2003 will also be re-estimated with a lower margin of error.
b. Percent of children under five whose weight by age is less than minus two standard deviations from
the median of the reference population. The 2000 figure is based on preliminary government estimates and
is significantly lower than the comparable figure for 1997 given in Annex 1.
c. Number of women who die during pregnancy and childbirth, per 1,000 live births.
* Figure is in 1999 dollars

82. The second tier of indicators comprises intermediate milestones. These are indicators directly
related to the Bank Group's dialogue with the Government that would contribute to the achievement of
desired outcomes under each of the main CAS themes. They have been defined through a four-step
process. First, the key issues or constraints were identified through problem diagnosis. Second,
strategies and measures to address these issues/constraints were proposed. Third, appropriate Bank
Group lending and non-lending services, aimed at achieving desired development outcomes were defined.
Fourth, to assess implementation performance, self-evaluation and country performance indicators have
been identified. The results of this process are summarized in the CAS performance matrix (Annex 9).
Although intermediate milestones linked to sectoral or cross-sectoral programs under development are
outlined in this matrix (a sub-set of which is presented in Table 8), these will need to be further refined

and quantified as the programs evolve. They could also be amended during the CAS period if priorities
change or if more action is required in certain areas to accelerate poverty reduction. These monitoring
and evaluation processes will feed into the formulation of the Bank Group's annual business plans for
assistance to Bangladesh.

28

Table 8: Intermediate Milestones
AREA
Macroeconomic
Management

*
*

Governance and Public
Sector Reform

*
*

*
Power Sector Reform

*

Financial Sector Reform

*

Education Sector

*
*

*

*
Health Sector

*

MILESTONES
Identify a core and non-core ADP and limit the number of new projects included annually
Release quarterly estimates of key macroeconomic data, including fiscal, monetary and balance
of payments accounts
Publication of annual reports by Ministries within 6 months from each financial year's end
Appointment of an Ombudsman and establishment of an Independent Ombudsman's office
Opening parliamentary committee meetings to the media/public - particularly meetings of the
Public Accounts Committee, the Public Undertakings Committee and the Estimates Committee
Collection/Generation ratio for BPDB increased from 64 to 70 in FY03
%of power generation by private sector increased from 4%in FY99 to 28% in FY03
Legal reforms that enable Bangladesh Bank to enforce regulations on all banks, protect the
NCBs from undue interference, and strengthen the money loan courts to pursue default cases
Preparation of strategy for restructuring and privatizing NCBs
Adoption of policy linldng salaries of registered non-Government primary school teachers to
training received
Completion of the revision of the Certificate-in-Education curriculum by June 30, 2001
Unification of line services and directorates completed at all levels

F. MANAGING THE RISKS

83. The CAS faces political and economic risks. The election could result in a weak coalition,
or the new Government may not be willing to invest political capital in reforms. In such a
case, the current unsatisfactozy situation of stalled or slow reforms would be likely to prevail in the nearto medium-term, and the Bank Group assistance program would continue to be constrained by weak
political will. The resulting Low Case lending could lead to a deterioration in Bank Group relations with
the Government, which has already complained that IDA assistance levels in FY00 and planned for FY01
are too low to sustain the investments needed for growth and poverty reduction. There is little that IDA
can do to mitigate political risk. However, in terms of managing country relations, IDA could engage the
new Government through non-lending services to foster debate and build consensus on reforms. To
maintain core poverty assistance programs, IDA would increasingly rely on community-based
approaches. This would involve NGOs and community-based organizations working in partnership with
local governments to deliver services to the poor.
84. Macroeconomic slippage as a result of revenue colection shortfalls and mediumterm balance of payments pressures presents another major risk. The MFA phase-out and
sustained oil price increases could exacerbate this situation. To mitigate this risk, the CAS provides
technical assistance to support export expansion and diversification and to help the Government closely
monitor balance of payments position.
85.

Bangladesh's economy is also vulnerable to natural disasters of catastrophic

proportions. In recognition of this, IDA must be prepared to consider additional assistance for postdisaster recovery through operations similar to those provided in the aftermath of the 1998 flood. This
would be incremental to the investments for coastal embankments and riverbank protection that have
been proposed to strengthen disaster mitigation capacity. IDA would support building the Government's
capacity in managing these disasters and implementing a long-term flood control action plan.
James D. Wolfenshon
President

By:
Shengman Zhang

Peter L Woicke

November 17,2000

29

Annex I
Page I of 2

Bangladesh at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
Bangldesh

South
Asia

LowIncome

127.7
370
47.0

1,329
440
581

2,417
410
988

1.6
2.9

1.9
2.3

1.9
2.3

24
59
73
56
84
49
96
93
100

28
62
75
51
77
46
100
110
90

31
60
77
43
64
39
96
102
86

1979

1989

1998

1999

15.6
14.9
4.5
5.9
10.2

27.0
17.2
5.7
9.6
12.3

44.1
21.6
13.3
16.7
20.4

45.7
22.2
13.2
16.7
21.3

-1.8
0.3
21.1
26.6

-5.1
0.5
41.1
21.3

-1.2
0.4
37.1
9.1
22.9
134.6

-0.9
0.4
37.1
9.3

1998

1999

1999-03

4.8
3.4
14.2

5.2
3.6
12.4

4.9
3.3
6.0

5.1
3.4
5.9

1979

1989

1998

1999

..

34.6
20.9
13.5
44.5

25.6
25.8
16.2
48.6

26.2
25.2
15.5
48.7

92.2
1.9
13.5

86.2
4.1
13.3

78.6
4.7
18.3

78.7
4.6
18.7

1979-89

1989-99

1998

1999

1.6
7.3
7.2
5.1

1.6
8.3
8.5
5.8

3.3
4.9
3.2
6.0

so .
50-

Manufacturing
Services

2.7
4.1
2.8
5.0

Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic Investment
Importsofgoodsandservices
Gross national product

4.6
4.9
2.2
4.6
4.2

3.0
5.6
8.4
10.0
5.1

1.3
13.2
12.1
-0.3
5.2

2.6
-0.2
9.8
5.0
5.0

10
0*

1999
Population, mid-year (nhlions)

GNP per capita (Alas menod, US$J
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billons)

DewbpmentdbmondLife expectancy

Averag annual growth, 1993-J9
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estmabt (latest yer avallable, 1993499

Povertv ( ofdpopulation below national poverty line) Urban population (%of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to improved water source (%of pop,ulation)
IlUteracy (%of population age 15+)
Gross prinmary enrollment ( of school-age popIdation;
Male
Female

/

\

GNP

Gross

per
capib

pinmary
enrollment

36

Access to safe water
-

Low-income group
1

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

GDP ((1S$ billions)
Gross domestic investment/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savinas/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debVGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of deb/GDP
Present value of debtexports

..
..

1979-89 1989-99

(average annual growth,'
GDP
GNP per capita
Exports ofooods and services

4.4
1.6
6.1

..
..

Economic ratlos
Trade

Domestic
Savig

Investment

Indebtedness
Bangladesh

Low-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(%of GDP)
Auriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General govemrnment consumption

IrnPortsofgoodsandservices

..
.
..

(average annual growth,
Agriculture

Industry

Growth oflnvestnnt and GDP (%)
is
10_
s
94

w8
0-GDP

07

w

-GDI
-

99

Growth of xport and Imports (%)

4/
30
30

-10

95

-Exqon

I
96

97

so

9

-- *0 Inorts

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. It data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.
-Represents population living in absolute poverty (below the lower cost-of-basic needs line) as defined in the 1998 Poverty Assessmeni

Annex I
-P- 2 of 2

Bangladesh
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prIces
(%change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1979
-

10.9

1989
8.4
7.7

1998
7.0
5.3

1999

Inflation(%)
10
8

8.9
4.6

Govemment finance
(%of GDP, includes current grants)

2

0
o
9.5

Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

9.3

-5.3

-4.1

9.0
1.9
-4.8

1989

1998

1999

1,286
97
137
871

3,390

5,172
108
190
4,531
7,525

5,301
72
168
4,756
8,017

555
285
1,070

373
506
1,342

997
38
1,684

2.1

94

95

-

97

9e

9S

99

-0--CPI

GDP deflator

TRADE
(US$ millions)

1979

Total exports (fob)
Raw jute
Leather and leather products
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goaods

..
..
..

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=-O1
00)

62
93

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)
10000
r

8,000
8,000
o

11r.rIrI

4,000
2,000

1

ilIl

93

67

109
101
108

107
99
108

1979

1989

1998

1999

724
1,675
-951

1,603
3,716
-2,113

5,879
8,049
-2,170

6,031
8,526
-2,495

-l

Net income

-22

-166

2

696

-108
835

-100

Net current transfers

1,750

2,268

Current account balance

-278

-1.386

-520

-393

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

425
-147

1.452
-66

651
-131

175
218

..

1111

4

I

94

95

9S 97

0 Exports

98

99

1O
Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(S$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

Current account balance to GDP (%)

H

0
93

94

95

97

9

.s

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)

Conversion rate (DEC, locaWvS$)

33.2

1,739
45.4

1,543

15.2

1979

1989

1998

1999

3,282
55
770

11,118
62
3,441

16,376
36
6,163

16,957
33
6,352
728

..

48.1

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service

237

522

683

IBRD

5

6

6

7

IDA

6

35

105

112

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct Investment
Portfolio equity

0
533
9
0
0

673
975
-25
2
66

589
359
-23
252
-54

739
248
-10
192
10

World Bank program
Commitments

202

417

646

595

Disbursements

163

299

347

461

0

13

66

70

Net flows

163

286

281

391

Interest payments
Net transfers

10
152

28
258

45
236

49
341

Principal repayments

Development Economics

| Composition of 1999 debt (USS mill.)
G
G
: 250 A
1
6
E: 5,097

B:6,352

c: 290
D:4,566
A - JBRD
B - IDA
C-IMF

E-Bilateral
D- Other multilateral

F -Private

G -Short-term

'

2/&/01

Annex 2
Page 1 of 1

Bangladesh
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number ^ C
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount

4C

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number ^ d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva] by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

1998

1999

2000

20
3.2
15
7
15
7
35.1

23
3.2
17.4
11.2
17.4
11.2
39.6

25
3
16
17.5
16
17.5
20.4

26
3.2
15.4
17.5
15.4
17.5
N/A

Yes
2,414
86

Yes
1,742
67

No
3,482
116

Planned
N/A
N/A

Since FY 80
114
4713.9
29.8
28

2001

Last Five FYs
16
1127.3
18.8
15.2

N/A - Not available

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation. progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio
at the beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* Al] indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

SAP generated: November 02,2000

Annex 3
Page 1 of 2

Bangladesh
Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscalyear

ProjectName

2001

Air Quality Management LL *
HPSP HIV/AIDS Prevention
Legal & Judicial Capacity Building
Microcredit II
Post-Literacy & Continuing Education
Total
Female Secondary School Assis. II
Social Investment Program
Rural Credit LW
Rural Electrification: Grid and Offgrid Dev.
Water Sector Improvement
Public Sector Modernization
Total
Rural Infrastructure Improvement Project
Water & Sanitation Sector Improvement
Early Childhood Development
Gorai River Restoration
Coastal Zone Development Program
Khulna Urban Services Project
Total
Total

2002

2003

FY01-FY03

*

US$(M)

4.7
40.0
30.6
151.0
53.3
279.6
100.0
50.0
5.0
175.0
55.0
40.0
425.0
150.0
75.0
50.0
180.0
200.0
60.0
715.0
1,419.6

StrategicRewards
b (HIMIL)

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

H
H
H
H
H

L
M
M
L
L

H
H
M
H
H
M

L
M
M
M
M
M

H
H
H
H
H
M

L
M
L
M
M
M

Approved by the World Bank Board of Directors in July 2000.

a/ In addition to the projects shown in the FY02-03 program, several other standby operations - Central Bank TA, Health &Pop Sector II,
Power Reform II (Dispatch &Transmission), Power Sector TA, and Local Government Support -could be considered for IDA support
contingent on reform progress in these sectors. They are candidates for replacing any other operations in the regular program that may
be delayed due to unforeseen circumstances.
bl H- High, M - Moderate, L - Low.

Annex 3
Page 2 of 2

Bangladesh - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1998-2000
IFC approvals (US$m)

1998

2000

103.3

107.8

10.0
44.0
47.0
0.0

5.0
9.0
49.0
37.0

101.0

100.0

85.0
15.0

Sector (%)
FINANCIAL SERVICES
INFRASTRUCTURE
GENERAL MANUFACTURING
OIL & GAS

Total

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

Data as of November 06, 2000

0.0

79.0
3.0
13.0
5.0

100.0

100.0

1998

1999

2000

59.2

83.1

83.1

Annex 4
Page 1 of 1

Bangladesh: Summary of Non-lending Services
Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audience a

Objective b

Recent completions
Bangladesh: Financial Sector & Growth
Corruption in Bangladesh
Education Sector Strategy & Dissemination
Nutrition Study
Study of Land Issues
Trade Policy Study & Dissemination
Bangladesh Urban Strategy Workshop
Judicial Reform Strategy Paper
BD-Gender Strategy
Country Procurement Assessment
National Institutional Review

FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY01

29
86
300
100
190
188
156
37
60
33
109

G,B,O
G,D,B,P
G,D,B
G,D,B,P
G,D,B,P
G,B,P
G,D,B,P
G,D,B
G,D,B
G,D,B
G,D,B,P

KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS
KG,PSPD

Underway
Financial Accountability Assessment
Fiscal Strategy for Parastatals
Climate Change Study
BD-Labor Issues
Periodic Economic Updates FY01
Communication for Change Program
Safety Nets Policy Note

FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01

103
56
192
55
21
80
39

G,D,B,P
G,D,B,P
G,D,B,P
G,D,B,P
G,D,B
G,D,B,P
G,D,B

KG,PS,PD
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS,PD
KG
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS

FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02

75
63
86
87
74
31
94
59

G,D,B
G,D,B
G,D,B,P
G,D,B,P
G,D,B
G,D,B,P
G,D,B,P
G,D,B,P

KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS,PD

35
120
135
90

G,D,B
G,D,B
G,D,B
GD,B

KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS

Planned *

PRSP Related Work
Policy Briefs for New Govt (AGFA-II)
Governance Indicators / Citizen Report Cards
Bangladesh - Health Financing
Private Provision of Infrastructure
Governance & Institutional Quality Report
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Assessment

Ongoing and Planned Policy Dialogue/Advisory Services/Donor Coordination
Preparation and Supervision of IDF Grants
FY02-03
Coordination of Activities (Donor/NGO/Aid)
ongoing
Sectoral Advisory Services
ongoing
Strengthening Procurement Capacity
FY02-03

a. G - Government, D - Donor, B - Bank, P - Public dissemination.
b. KG - Knowledge generation, PD - public debate, PS - problem-solving.

* Figures only represent FY01 budget allocation for the activity.

Annex 5
Page 1 of 1

Bangladesh Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same reglonIncome group

1970-75

1980-S5

1993-98

South Asia

Lowincome

76.6
2.8
9.8
7.0

98.0
2.5
17.0
6.0

125.6
1.6
23.4
3.1

1,304.6
1.9
27.7
3.4

3,536.4
1.9
30.5
3.1

350

430

520

119

131

136

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (%annual average)
Urban population (%of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY

(%of population)
..

35.6

..

..

..

..

14.3
39.8

National headcount index
Urban headoount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$)

200

Consumerpriceindex(1995=100)

..

Food price index (1995=100)

..

200
..

52

117

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index

Lowest quintile (%of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%o GDP)
Education (%of GNP)
Social security and welfare (%of GDP)

..

33.6

..
..

8.7
42.8

..

1.6

0.8

1.3

2.2

3.1

3.2

56
65
47

75
80
70

77
83
70

86
89
82

40
29
43

84
47
85

77
83
75

..

1

97

2
68

98
56

81
87
53

80

..

45
46
44

50
50
49

59
58
59

62
62
63

63
62
64

140
239

117
173

73
96

75
89

68
92

473
486

383
388

283
306

220
213

235
208

..

6.8
42.2

..

0.8
..

1.4
..

Net primary school enrollment rate
(%of age group)

Total
Male
Female
Access to safe water
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

50
66
33

..
..
..

ImmunizatIon rate
(%under 12 months)
Measles

DPT
Child malnutrition (%under 5 years)
Lite expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)
2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, Wodd Bank

..

..

..

440

82

Annex 6
Page I ot 2

Bangladesh - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as %of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

100.0
26.2
24.9
48.9

100.0
26.1
25.1
48.8

100.0
25.6
25.8
48.6

100.0
26.2
25.2
48.7

100.0
27.1
26.4
46.5

100.0
26.9
27.1
46.0

100.0
26.2
27.5
46.3

100.0
25.5
27.8
46.7

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

87.6
20.0
6.4
13.6

85.4
20.7
7.0
13.7

83.3
21.6
6.4
15.3

83.3
22.2
6.7
15.5

82.4
22.6
6.8
15.8

82.8
22.5
6.5
16.0

82.9
22.5
6.2
16.3

82.7
22.6
6.3
16.3

Exports(GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

11.1
18.7

12.0
18.1

13.3
18.3

13.2
18.7

13.6
18.7

14.3
19.6

14.3
19.7

14.3
19.6

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

12.4
16.0

14.6
18.6

16.7
20.4

16.7
21.3

17.6
22.6

17.2
21.5

17.1
20.9

17.3
21.3

40666

42319

44092

45713

48575

50540

53578

57330

340

360

360

370

390

400

410

430

Real anmual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
4.6
Gross domestic product at market prices
4.3
Gross Domestic Income

5.4
4.8

5.2
4.9

4.9
4.3

5.5
5.2

5.0
4.2

5.0
5.3

5.0
5.3

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
3.7
3.0
Gross domestic product at market prices
2.8
0.4
Total consumption
2.8
0.5
Private consumption

3.6
0.2
-0.4

3.2
0.8
0.9

3.8
1.7
1.7

3.3
3.0
2.2

3.3
3.9
4.0

3.2
3.4
3.5

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)d
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors &ommissions)d
Change in reservese

4508
3882
7614
6881
-3106
1475
-1637

5083
4427
7655
7162
-2572
1770
-909

5879
5172
8049
7524
-2170
1750
-520

6031
5301
8526
8017
-2495
2268
-393

6611
5762
9060
8403
-2449
2670
7

7213
6316
9900
9224
-2687
2387
-487

7660
6684
10550
9835
-2890
2249
-853

8207
7151
11241
10486
-3033
2314
-985

-14
426
782
-355
163
1062

-116
575
326
249
130
320

252
383
359
24
16
-131

192
389
452
-63
-406
218

652
1057
459
598
-1546
-170

602
1463
522
941
-1229
-349

513
1246
699
547
-725
-181

329
1261
790
471
-454
-152

-7.6

-6.1

-4.9

-5.5

-5.0

-5.3

-5.4

-5.3

7.0
14.7

16.2
6.7

9.8
4.5

8.8
10.4

8.7
2.7

8.8
2.0

2.2
5.1

3.5
5.8

Memorandum items

Resource balance (%of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

Annex 6
Page 2 of 2

Bangladesh - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Y

Public finance (as %of GDP at market prices)f
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M21GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Privatesectorcreditgrowthl
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR90 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise importprice index
Merchandiseterms of trade index
Real exchange rate Index (US$SLCU)g
Consumer price index (%change)
GDP deflator (%change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.

,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I 4..

.,I)

- .0F

..

DM

2D

9.0
6.8
2.2
6.8
2.8

9.0
6.9
2.1
6.2
2.7

9.3
7.1
2.1
6.2
2.2

9.0
7.1
1.9
6.7
2.6

8.1
7.6
0.5
6.7
1.5

8.7
8.8
0.0
6.3
1.6

9.0
9.0
0.1
6.2
1.8

9.7
9.2
0.5
6.3
1.9

27.5
8.3
75.3

28.0
10.8
76.1

27.8
10.1
95.7

28.7
13.1
67.9

31.1
18.6
51.4

32.3
14.5
64.6

32.3
10.3
79.8

32.3
10.2
80.2

193.9
130.7
148.4
86.9

190.4
126.7
150.2
87.0

202.6
128.1
158.1
90.9

190.8
123.7
154.3
87.7

190.7
126.2
151.1
86.5

192.1
135.8
141.4
90.4

198.9
137.8
144.4
92.8

205.5
138.9
147.9
93.4

6.7
4.2

2.5
3.1

7.0
5.3

8.9
4.6

3.8
3.8

5.0
5.0

5.0
5.0

5.0
5.0

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes suppliers credit disbursements, repayments are shown under the errors&omissions line.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$9LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex 7
Page I of I

Bangladesh - Key Exposure Indicators

*>'~
~

~ ~.19~~~~~19

Total debt outstandingand

19I199201orW

20

16007

15125

16377

16957

17553

18027

18151

18228

Net disbursements (US$m)a

644

197

344

442

965

773

523

544

Total debt service (TDS)

698

705

674

801

776

898

959

940

271.0
39.4

227.6
35.7

218.5
37.1

216.7
37.1

202.9
36.1

190.4
35.7

181.7
33.9

171.8
31.8

11.8
69.1

10.6
69.8

9.0
68.9

10.2
94.3

9.0
92.2

9.5
91.0

9.6
92.0

8.9
93.4

1.1
41.8

1.0
46.8

0.9
48.2

0.9
45.7

0.9
46.5

1.0
47.3

0.9
46.4

0.9
44.7

0.1
47

0.1
38

0.1
36

0.1
33

0.1
28

0.1
22

0.1
16

0.1
10

0.0
6614

0.0
6723

6808

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

..

0.0
5713

0.0
5701

0.0
6163

0.0
6352

0.0
6471

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

3.0
2.0
1.0

3.0
2.0
1.0

19.0
17.0
2.0

36.3
34.4
1.9

52.8
49.3
3.4

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

50.0

59.0

59.0

83.0

..

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex 8
Page I of 2

Bangladesh
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Cbsed Project

141

Actve Proecta

DiSerr Between
Expected and Acbt

Last PSR
Supervision Rating b/
Project ID
P058468
P009484
P057833
P049587
P050745
P009496
P009549
P009524
P009482
P049790
P009555
P044811
P009470
P009468
P009533
P069933
P037857
P041887
P050751
P009560
P009550
P044789
P009545
P009518
P040713
P037294
Total

Project Name
Agncultural Serv. Innovation &Reforn
Agnculture Research Management
Air Quality Management Project
Aquatic Biodiversity Conservation
Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply
Bangladesh Integrated Nutntion
Coastal Embankment Rehabilitation
Dhaka Urban Transport
Dhaka Water &Samtation IV
Export Diversification
Female Secondary School
Financial institutions Development
ForestResourcesManagement
Fourth Fisheries
Gas Infrastructure Development
HIV/AIDS Prevention
Health and Population Program
Muncipal Services
National Nutntion Program
Non-Fornal Education
PnnaiyEducationDevelopment
PrivateSectorlnfrastructureDev
RiverBank Protection
SecondRuralRoads&MarketsImprovement
Silk Development Pilot Project
Third Road Rehabilitation &Maintenance

Lending Summary Table

PSDev

O

Disblrsents

Yea

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

S
S

S
S

S
S
S
S
S
U
S
S
S
S
S
U

S
U
S
S
S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
U
S

S
S
S
S
U
S
S
S
U
S

2000
1996
2001
2000
1999
1995
1996
1999
1997
1999
1993
2000
1992
2000
1995
2001
1998
1999
2000
1996
1998
1998
1996
1997
1998
1999

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

5
50
4.7
0
32.4
59 8
69.5
177
80.3
32
68
469
49.6
28
0
40
250
138.6
92
10.5
150
235
166.9
153
11.4
273
2223.6

0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.0

0
1.4
0
0
0
0.6
0
0
0.3
0
0
0
3.3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
11.9
0
0.9
0
0
0
18A

3.1
10.1
4.4
4.7
29.6
20.3
6.8
148.2
43.3
23.4
29
35.6
7.1
25.4
0
39.7
125.2
128.3
84.9
2.8
111.3
212.6
17 1
29.9
8.7
223
1348A

Active Loans
861.5
2,205 2
1,348.4

Cled
6,072.2
525.3
5,564 4
04
0.4
12.8

* ICS data is as of September 30, 2000.
a/ Intended disbursement to date mmnus disbursement to date as projected at appraisal.

SAP generated: November 2,2000

Amount in USS MHlbas

Imd. Preress

*

Total Disbursement (IBRD and IDA):
of which has been repaid:
Total now held by IBRD and IDA
Amount sold:
of which repaid:
Total Undisbursed:

ri

oal
6,933 7
525.3
7,769.6
0.4
0.4
1,361.2

Orig. Frm Rev'd
0.7
16.2
0
1.4
20.3
20.1
-3.5
40
44 2
7.6
2.6
12.5
9.2
10
0
0
-0.6
132.6
-1.9
1.9
47.2
170.6
-1.3
-3.9
57
86.1
617.7

0
2.7
0
0
0
0
8.8
0
0
0
2.6
0
-07
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
-1
0
16.3
17.5
0
0
46.2

Annex 8
Page 2 of 2

Bangladesh - Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
(In US Dollars Millions)
Held
FY Approval

Company

1997
1991
1998
1985/95
1980/98
1998
2000

DBH
Dynamic Textile
Grameen Phone
IDLC

IPDC
Khulna
Scancem

Total Portfolio:

Loan

Disbursed

Equity Quasi Partic Loan

1.86
16.67
10.00
20.81
10.00

0.65
1.58
0.15
1.05
-

-

-

-

59.34

3.43

-

1.48
-

-

-

0.65
1.58
0.15
1.05

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1.48

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan
2000
2000
2000
2000
1998
2000
1998

ULC - Bangladesh
USPCL
Haripur
Jalalabad II
Khulna
Lafarge B Loan
Lafarge Surma

Total Pending Commitment:

Data as of August 31, 2000

5.0
40.0
30.0
35.0

110.0

Equity Quasi Partic
-

3.0
3.3
10.0

16.3

-

4.0
10.0
-

Equity Quasi Partic

1.86
13.33
10.00
20.81

-

14.1
30.0
-

-

15.0

-

-

14.0

59.1

46.00

3.43

-

-

1.48

-

-

-

-

-

1.48

Annex 9:
Page I of 10

Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
LIsues and Problem Diagnosis

Development I World Bank Group Program
Partners
L Improving Governance
A. Strengthening Public Sector Management
* Support the strengthening of financial
* UNDP
* Fin. Accountability Assessment
1. Financial Management
* Lack of effective internal financial
management in Ministries.
* UK-DFID
* Country Fiduciary Assessment
* Support establishment of an independent * ADB
* National Institutional Review
management in Ministries, failure to
.
establish an independent audit institution National Audit Office and a separate
li
and the lack of follow up on the reports Accountant General's office; build
* Publc Sector Modem. Project
of parliamentary oversight committees
capacity in both these offices.
* Communic. for Change progrm
all weaken accountability.
* Strengthen PAC and other oversight
* Governance Survey
* Procurement process is noncommittees.
* Governance Score Cards/Citizen
Report Cards
transparent, subject to long delays, and * Develop and agree with the govemment,
* IDF Grant for Procurement
based on antiquated laws.
an action plan to implement procurement
* Budget process and implementation is reforms based on Procurement Assessment
Policy and Rules
* Training program for
non-transparent.
report.
Comptroller and Auditor General
and project staff
2. Civil Service Reform
* Erosion of senior officers' salaries,
inadequate number of qualified officers,
and lack of incentives for good
performance undermine performance and
leads to cormption.

1. Judicial/legal reform
* Due to lack of capacity to plan and
implement its own affairs, the Civil
Justice system is subject to excessive
delays with a major negative impact on
economic activity and impedes people's
access to justice.
* The Civil Justice system is inequitable
as it widens the gulf between the wealthy
litigant who can cope with the system,
and the poor who cannot.

Proposed Strategies and Measures

* Conduct studies on civil service size and * UNDP
composition, job evaluation, and
* UK-DFID

* Policy Dialogue and technical

support for preparation of civil
service reform plan

functional rationalization.
a ADB
* Help the Govemment develop a civil
service reform action plan.
* Promote consultative process on civil
service reform to ensure participation of
women and civil society.
B. Strengthening Civil Justice Administration
* Improve the legal and judicial
* CIDA
* JudicialLegal Reform Project
environment for economic activity.
* DANIDA
* Improve access to justice, especially for * UNDp
women and the poor.

Self-Evaluation
Indicators

F

Country Performance
Indicators

* Degree to which debate

* Publication of annual reports by

and discussion is evident in
the press on the importance
of strengthening public
financial management.
* Board approval of the
Public Sector Mgmt.
(PSM) project.
* Agreement on action
plan to improve the
procurement process.
* Progress on drafting of
Procurement Policy and
Rules, standard bidding
and contract documents.
* Agreement with
government on Action Plan
for Civil Service Reform
Enhanced public knowledge and particip. in
reform process.

Ministries within 6 months from
each financial year's end.
* Establishment of a Procurement
Policy Unit and preparation of
Procurement Policy and Rules;
standard bidding and contract
documents issued.
* Separation of the audit and
accounting functions; the office
Comptroller and Auditor General
is given an administrative
independence.
* Cabinet approves Action Plan

for Civil Service Reform.

* Accessibility of legal
* Improved effectiveness,
information.
efficiency and service delivery
*Effective National Legal standards of the judicial system.
Aid program in place.
* Increased user satisfaction with:
(a) the accessibility and efficiency
of the small causes courts and
family courts; (b) the shalish
system as administered by legal aid
NGOs; and (c) availability of legal
aid.

Annex 9:
Page 2 of 10

Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
Proposed Strategies and Measures

Deveopen
World Bank Group Program
Self-Evaluation
Indicators
Partns
C. Emowering Communitles and Vulnerable Groups
* Local government in
* Decentralization Study
* UNDP
* Support key recommendations of the
1. Decentralization and Local
pilot operation has greater
* Pilot operation to strengthen
Local Government Commission Report. * USAID
Capacity Building
local governments
capaciq to deliver public
* Slow progress on devolution of power * Support establishment and develop. of * ADB
services to the conmmunity.
* Water and Sanitation Sector
* NEDA
strong accountable local govenmment
to local governments and weak local
Improvement Project (WASSIP - * Development of skilled
institutions, with equal participation of
govenmment institutions.
local agencies to undertake
proposed)
women.
Communities are not able to organize
Social Assessments.
* Social Investment Program
themselves in selecting priority projects * Support empowerment of communities
* Greater capacity of local
Project
through supporting local programs and
and assisting in implementation.
communities, especially
* Water Sector Improv. Project
capacity building.
women and poor at the
* National Water Mgmt Plan in
grassroots to participate in
decision making &
River Bank Protection Project.
Issues and Problem Diagnosis

of projects.
* Increased voice and

Country Perfomance
Indicators
* Improved services due to greater
capacity of local govemments and
communities to select and
implement projects.

implem

2. Socal Incusion
* Social exclusion of poor and

* UNDP
all Bank-assisted activities, particularly in * USAID
terms of empowerment of wonmen and the* ADB
* Improved attention to poverty issues in

* Action research on capacity

building of women representatives
of local govemment institutions
vulnerable groups; community not able
* Comm. driven dev. Approaches
* NEDA
poor.
to demand good govemance.
adopted in all new activities
* Advocate the guidelines on stakeholder
* Women face socio-ec. and cultural
* Social assessment of tribal
obstacles resulting in gender disparity. participation in the National Water Policy.
groups to identify their special
* Provide opportunities to tribal
* Need to safeguard and preserve
needs and suggest intervention
representatives to participate in project
tribal livelihoods and cultures.
Working
. children in uban areas
design.
* Activities aimed at reducing
number of working children
not attending school.
n. Developin H an Capabilities
* Primary Education
* ADB
* Investing in improving the quality of
1. Poor educational outcomes
Development Program (PEDP * EU
teaching and classroom practices.
Ouaitv :
* UNICEF
ongoing)
* Instituting incentive-based school
* Low learning achievements at the
* Post-literacy and Continuing
performance monitoring system.
primary and secondary level; obsolete
Education (PLaCE) program
teacher training programs; lack of labor * Increased reliance on non-govemunent *
(proposed)
* UK-DFID
market orientation at the post-primary
institutions for service delivery.
* Non-Formal Education (NFE-I,
* GTZ
levels lowers effectiveness of education * Increased transparency of decisionongoing)
* KfW
making processes and institutional
sector.
* Female Secondary Stipends
* IDB
* Lack of monitoring and learning
accountability.
Assistance Program (FSSAP * Increased public spending on inputs that * NORAD
assessment in non-formal education.
* SDC
ongoing)
produces quality outcomes (e.g. better
Governance:
* Teacher absenteeism and delayed
textbooks, design and application of
.
* FSSAP II (proposed)
payment of teacher salaries; relatively
student assessment, in-service teacher
* Norwegians
* Marketable Skills Development
* SIDA
for underprivileged Youth
low budget allocations to education
training, etc.).
* Reorientation of the cufficulum at the
* UNFPA
(proposed)
decreases performance.
post-primary level.
EfficiIcy:

* Improved inclusion and equity.

benefits to tribal groups.
* Bank's gender strat. and
action plan implemented.
* Decrease in number of
working children;
increased enrolment and
retention of disadvantaged
children in school.

* Reduction in gender violence
and other forms of discrimination

*Implementation
performance of: PEDP,
NFE-1, FSSAP.
*Board approval of
PLaCE.
* Early Childhood
Development report
completed and discussed
with clients and
stakeholders in FY01.
*Successfully engaging
stakeholder in dialogue on
institutional and systemic
refoms in higher
education.

* Quality: Reformed curriculurn

against wonen.
* Gender disparity reduced in all
sectors.
Representation of women in all
elected bodies and decision
making process.

for teacher training; increased
teacher attendance at primary
level; and improved learning
achievements.
*Govemance: Reduced delays in
payment of teacher salaries;
increased proportion of education
budget allocated to basic/primary
education.
* Inmprovement noted in Citizens'
Report Card.
*Effidency: Increased net
enrollment rates, better
performance in public
examinations.

Annex 9:
Page 3 of 10

Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
Issues and Problem Diagnosis

Proposed Strategies and Measures

Developnent

_______________________

World Bank Group Progamm

Partners

High drop-out at the primnary level, low * Increased cost-recovery in public higher
cost-recovery in technical and higher
education institutions and technical
education wastes resources.
education.
* Low enrollment at the primary and
secondary level.

Sedf-Evaluation
Indicators

Country Performance
Indicators

* Analytical work on Early

* Access: Increased gender

Childhood Developrent
* Advisory services to higher
education

parity in technical and higher
education, and increased access of
low-income groups to postprimary education.

Acces:

* High gender disparity and inequity in
technical &higher education.
2. Improve sector wide approach in
Health, Nutrition and Population:
* Government of Bangladesh (GOB)
weak implementation capacity and
centrlized rnanagement.
* Change from Project to Program
approach caused Procurement problems.
* Upstream accountability system
focused on inputs.
* User fees are not be retained at point of
collection.
* Low level of service quality and
utilization at district and Thana level.
* Patients' rights with respect to public
health services not defined.
* Reducing Malnutrition as a public
health issue.
* HIVIAIDS prevention has to be
intensified.

* UNDP
4 HPSP (ongoing)
Unit, Project Coordination Cell and
* UNICEF
4 HPSPO (ongoing)
management &Accounts Unit.
* UNAIDS
* NNP (ongoing)
* Build capacity of Min. of Health &
* European
* HlV/AIDs Project (proposed)
Fatrnily Welfare (MOH,FW) Procurernent
Commnission
* Implement District level reorganization . USAID
and support team building.
CIDA
* Develop performance indicators.
DFID
and downstream accountability system.
.
* Introduce quality assurance policy.
* SIDA
* Introduce '"marketing model" of service *Netheriands
planning and delivery, and train staff in
* KfW
client centered communication skills.
* GTZ
* Expand community based nutrition
* UNFPA
interventions.
* Focus on behavior change
* Focuson behaviorchange
communication of high risk groups.
* Empowerment of women as a strategy to
improve matemal and child health.
* Support stakeholder participation at all
levels in planning and monitoring HPSP.
* Operationalize Change Management

* Number of procurement

* Increased GOB leadership
packages approved.
support.
* Formulation of district
* Improved local accountability.
Health Plans.
* hnroved service utilization
* New job descriptions
* Increase in cost recovery and
issued.
number of retainment schemes.
* New organogrom and
* Improved matemal health and
Accountability framework decreased matemal mortality.
set up.
d Service delivery and training
* Agreement between
moSre customer oriented.
MOHFW
Fmood
on and
r d Ministry
inment ofmoecsmroint.
* Improved consumer (patient)
Fooe on a retasm,
nnt
mechanism.
protection.
fa lumber of deliveries at * Severe and de
clity v
* % of satisfied clients.
Commission
of the status
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Women
and intravenous
drugof
* Level of commumity
users targeted.
involvement.
* Patient charter of rights adopted
* Staff transfer to capacty and promutgated.
bldg. Coordinating
committee.
* Extent of contracting of
NGOs.
* HPSP Gender Strategy
adopted and implemented.

IIL Promoting an Integrated Approach to Rural Development
1. Slow progress on institutional
development
* Improve land records and
administration systems.
* Bangladesh Water Development Board

A.
*Advocate streamlining of the land

Proc otlng Pdlky and Institutional

* DFID
recording system and regular updating of * ADB
records, involving local governnents.
* Netherlands
* Restructure BWDB to operate as an
* Pn a

autonomous and decentrai organization,

roa

Reforms

* Study of Land Issues
* Advisory services on Land
Titling
* Water Sector Improvement
Project (proposed)

* Preparation of a Lands

Record Improvemnent
Project.
* Agreement on a an action
plan on restructuring of

* Streamlined land administration
and improved land records in pilot
sites.
* Satisfactory National Water
Mgmt. Plan (NWMP) prepared

Annex 9:
Page 4 of 10

Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
Development
Partners
separating mgmt for policy and operation. Commission
(BWDB) lacks autonomy and its track
* CIDA
* Improve O&M of large schemes
record on O&M of water schemes is
* USAID
affected by erosion, floods and tidal
unsatisfactory.
* FAO
surges; transfer small schemes to local
* Bangladesh Agriculture Dev. Corp.
Water Mgmt. Assocs. and local govt.; and *
(BADC) and Bangladesh Shipla Bank
(BSB) are loss making entities and are privatize commercial activities of BWDB. * SDC
* Pursue finalization of Water Sector
engaged in activities better done by
Development Strategy and Water Mgmt
private sector.
Plan in consultation with stakeholders.
* Community based approaches to
development are limited by weak local * Restructure BADC and BSB to
institutions resulting in inefficient use of enhance: (i) efficient public goods
and
natural resources.
provision; and (ii) their regulatory roles.
natural resources.
of CBOs and encourage
capacity
* Build
* CBOs lack institutional, financial,
partnerships with government and NGOs
technical, and legal support.
and raise awareness about conservation.
* Poor and women are not partners in
* Promoting comrnunity driven
decision making and creating enabling
development in all activities.
environment for themselves.
* Facilitate drafting of national R&R
* National resettlement and
rehabilitation (R&R) policy to safeguard policy and framework.
involuntary displacement is lacking.
Issues and Problem Diagnosis

2. Lagging policy reforms
* Government pursues trade and
exchange rate policies discriminating
against rural development.
* Policies discourage rural financial
developmenit; small and marginal
farmers;lack access to credit.
farmers lack access to credit.
* Intervention in production, pricing
and distribution of urea and seed prices
deter private entry.
3. Develop the small and medium
enterprise (SME) sector
* SMEs lack access to financing and
know-how to grow and get into export
markets.

Proposed Strategies and Measures

* Use studies to advise against anti-

rural bias in macro-economic policies.
* Restructure two Govt. agricultural
banks based on portfolio audits.
* Create organization for accessing
credit by small and marginal farmers.
* Remove in phases, all Government

control and subsidies on production,
pricing, distribution of urea and seeds.
* Develop and support specialized

institutions for SMEs.
* Lower transaction costs and find
replicable mechanisms for instruments
to help SMEs.
* Develop credit enhancing techniques.

*
*
*
*
*

USAID
UK-DPID
ADB
Netherlands
CIDA

* DANIDA
*

Self-Evaluation
Indicators
BWDB agreed between
* Agric. Research Management
IDA and GOB.
Project (ongoing)
* Approval of BWDB Act,
* Agric & Rural Development
2000 by Parliament.
proposed)
Program (ARDP
* Satisfactory
Forest Research Management
irnplementation of an
Project (ongoing)
action plan on reform of
(ongoi
P
National Agriculture
* Fisheries IV Project (ongoing.
* Building capacity of women and Research System (NARS)
agreed between IDA and
the poor to influence decision
GOB.
making
* Agric & Rural Devt
* Undertake policy dialogue and
* Undertake policy dialogue and * Agnc & Rural Devt
Program agreed with
capacity building for R&R.
government leading to a
budget support operation.
* Greater awareness on
R&R among stakeholders.
World Bank Group Program

Country Performance
Indicators
and adopted.
* BWDB restructured based on
the agreed action plan.
* Water Resource Planning
Organization's capacity
Otrengthened.
l National Water Resources
Database established and
Operational.
*
Client-responsive NARS
blitabliheddleadinggto
system estaen
increased agricultural production.
* BADC and BSB restructured
and functional.
* SatisfactoTy implementation of
agriculture policy reform package
agreed between IDA and Gov. of
Bangladesh.
* National R&R framework in
place.

* ARDP (proposed)
* Rural Credit LIL (proposed)
* Water Sector Improvement

Project (proposed)
* Study on Rural and Markets
* Pilot community participation
in mral development programs
t
e
n

* IFC investments in some non-

banking finance comp. (NBFCs)
- Industrial Pfromtion and
Development Corp., Industrial
Development Leasing Co., etc.
* South Asia Facility for
financing support to SMEs
* New SME Trade Enhancing
Facility to promote exports
* Proposed TA for leasing
companies

* Preparation of ARDP

followed by Board
approval.
* Satisfactory
mentation of policy
i
reform package agreed
between IDA and GOB.

* Number of successful
investments.
* Extent to which
Facility is being
accessed.
* Access of SMEs to
financing increased.

* Increased agricultural and
Rural Non-Farm production due
to better incentives, increased
supply and better utilization
agricultural inPuts, further tade
lieaztonmdpvsonf
rural finance.

* Larger and more vibrant SME

sector.
* Increased exports by SMEs.

Annex 9:
Page 5 of 10

Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
Issues and Problem Diagnosis
4. Micro credit needs to be scaled
up
* Coverage of poor households has to
be extended.
* Limited outreach of micro credit to
hardcore poor and micro enterprises.
* Financially unsustainable microfinance institutions and absence of
adequate regulations to protect savings

Proposed Strategies and Measures
* Expand outreach and increase loan

size of micro credit.
* Design innovative credit delivery
scheme for hardcore poor.
* Encourage commercialization of
Multinational Financial Institutions
(MFIs), develop adequate regulatory
framework, and set-up APEX institution
to enforce regulations.

of the poor in certain institutions.

_
1. Inadequate Rural Infrastructure
* Transport: Access to transport
services in rural areas has to be improved
through community involvement in
development of roads and other rural
infrastructure.
* Water and Sanitation: Lack of or
poor access to water and sanitation
infrastructure.
(i) Lack of institutional capacity at
community and local govermment level
(ii) Broad-based subsidies for water and
sanitation reduce available funds for
more poverty targeted interventions.
(iii) Weak agencies and inadequate
policies, ill-defined refonn agenda to
promote demand driven and
decentralized delivery of safe water and
sanitation in small towns and rural areas.
* Energy: Lack of govemment strategy
on rural energy supplies leading to low
access, poor service and load shedding in
rural electricity.
* Information gap on role of women in
rural energy.

B

Development
Partners
* NGOs
* CBOS

ua

nrsr

World Bank Group Program

Self-Evaluation
Indicators
* Micro credit 11 Project
* Board approval and
(proposed)
launch of Micro-credit 11
* Invest in NBFCs such as BRAC Project.
Bank (pending resolution of legal
issues) and Assoc. for Social
Advancement (ASA)
* Potential securitization of
microcredit (with BRAC Bank)
eeomn

_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~B.
Rural Infrastructure Development
* Invest in rural roads, bridges, jetties and * ADB
*Second Rural Roads &Markets
other important infrastructure.
* SDC
Improvement Project (ongoing)
* Mainstreaming community participation * KfW
*Rural Transport Improvement
in project planning, implementation and
Project (proposed)
maintenance.
DfID
*Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply
* Use of rural women groups in
* UK-DFID
Project (on-going)
construction and maintenance of rural
*UNICEF
*Water and Sanitation Sector
roads and other transport related
* DANIDA
Improvement Project (proposed)
infrastructure.
* NEDA
*Pilot Project on Local
* Mainstream community participation in * JICA
Govetrment Strengthening
planning, implementation and
GTZ
G
(proposed)
maintenance, and community-contracting
*Rural Electrification Project
as empowermrent tool for water and
* NOs
( rsed)
sanitation projects.
* Private Sector propo
* Define strategies, systems and proceGroups
*ESMAP-funded studies on Rural
dures through pilot demand-responsive
Erergy
services delivery under the ongoing
*IFC is supporting smatl scale
Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply Project.
distributed generation for rural
* Formiulate a detailed National
electric cooperatives
Framework for well-governed
* FC-suppored rural
decentralized service delivery, strengthen
electrification initiatives which
local capacity through assigning
address off-grid markets
responsibilities to local stakeholders, and
technical assistance.
*Research on opportunity for
* Establish process to measure improved
women and poor n RET.
govemance and enhanced private sector
services delivery.
* Establish transparent poverty and needs
based criteria for targeting assistance.

*

Target community and private sector

Country Performance
Indicators
* 1.5 million new borrowers
reached and loan size increased
by about 50%.
* Design of program to reach
hardcore poor.
* Agreement with 75% of MFls
on business procedures for
commercialization; devt. and
implem. of regul. Framework.

* Increased community

* Increased provision of rural

participation in planning
and implementation of
rural transport mfrastr.
* Gradually increasing
local contribution for
improving rural transport
infrastructure.
* Satisfactory
implementation of new
Arsenic project strategy.
* Number of CBOs with
capacity to implement
water supply schemes.
* Number of small towns
serviced by private sector
agencies.
* Dialogue on addressing
ualenergy needs. s
* Epansion of the rua
electricity system increase
in Gwh consumed in the
rural sector, non-grid mega
watt (MW) established etc.
* Increased access to RET
by women and poor.

transport infrastructure with
mobilization of local resources for
provision of rural transpon
mfrastructure.
* Increase in communityimplemented and maintained
water and sanitation schemes
* Percentage increase of poor
households with access to water
and sanitation services.
*Local Government Ministry
approves and implements Arsenic
mitigation strategy.
* Refined and improved National
Policy for rural water supply
sector by the Local Government
Ministry.
PMivate sector-based delivery
mechanisms mainstreamed under
the National Framewomrk for
decenatalized service delivery
* Greater coverage of rural areas
with respect to energy access.
* Adoption of appropriate rural
energy strategy.
* Increase in economic activity in
the rural non-farm sector leading
to higher employment and rural

incomes.

Annex 9:
Page 6 of 10

Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
Issues and Problem Diagnosis

World Bank Group Program
Development
Proposed Strategies and Measures
l
I
.Partners
__________________________ .
provision of energy services in rural areas.
* Increase access of women and poor to
renewable energy technologies (RET).
C. Reducin the Poor's Vulnerability
* Study on food-assisted safety
* IFPRI
* Advise government on how the
nets and possible operation for
* CBOs
targeting and incidence of social safety
enhancing food security
* NGOs
net programs can be improved.
* Possible new IDA instrument to
reduce macroeconomic
vulnerability to natural disasters

1

1. Social safety net programs have
to be more efricient and effective in
reaching target groups

2. Disaster Mitigation
* Inadequate defensive infrastructure
and poor operation & mgmt of existing
infrastructure.
* Lack of voice of local
communities, women, and the poor in
planning and implementation of
disaster mitigation efforts,
* Inadequate response to arsenic

* Support investments in defensive

contaminationl of ground water.

initiatives.

oUnsustainable access to safe water
azd sanitation services due to lack of
participation and ownership by users.

3. Environmental Issues
a High environmental health risks to
which the poor are particularly
vulnerable.

infrastructure -coastal embankments,
cyclone shelters, and revetments.
* Advocacy for greater role of users in
planning and implementation of disaster
mgmt of community infrastructure.
* Screen tube wells for arsenic
contamination and provide tools and
resources for community self-help
* Raise public awareness of the problem,
particularly the public health impacts.
* Build partnerships among govt., NGOs
& CBOs to find alternatives for safe
drinking water.
* Address priority issues through specific
investment and TA activities, and through
collaboration with other sectoral agencies.
* Promote decentralized and longer-term

*Loss of livelihood of the rural poor due resource management incentives.

to resource degradation, and poor
environment-related governance and
accountability'.
* Poor land use planning has increased
vulnerability of poor to natural disasters.
* Salinity intrusion due to cessation of
upstream flows has ruined habitats and
livelihoods, particularly of the poor.

* Promote greater public disclosure of
environment data, and public education
and participation.
* Promote changes in land use planning,
disaster preparedness, and community
involvement and education.
* Restoration of wet and dry season flows.

* Netherlands

* River Bank Protection

* UNDP
* DANIDA

Project (ongoing)
* Coastal Zone Mgmt Program
(CZMP - proposed)
* Arsenic Mitigation Project
(ongoing)
( WASSIP (proposed)
* Study on the public health
impacts of Arsenic Contamina-

* UNICEF
WHO
* UK-DFID
* SDC

tion, followed by a potential
project to address the problem
* Stuoies on transmission of
arsenic through the food chain

Self-Evaluation
Indicators

* Study on food assisted

safety nets completed;
progress on follow-up
work on disaster coping
strategies of poor.
* Preparation of a
disaster insurance credit.
* Preparation of CZMP.
* System for O&M of
protective infrastructure
established.
* Increase in public
awareness of Arsenic
cont
anination.
a Improved response to
public health impacts. t

Country Performance
Indicators
RET mainstreamed in the
national energy program.

Improved targeting and
incidence of social safety net
programs.

. Lives saved, particularly the
poor who live in vulnerable
areas, through protection
afforded by defensive
infrastmcture.
e Ate-ives for safe drinking
water introduced for affected
comrmirnties.
- . health
* Nega,; .

pactsmiof~ ksnc itged

a Increase in capacit of
local communities to test
for arsenic contamination
of tube wells.

cts of
particulariv
co, MUrIs.

..-

ral

_ __
|
laid in improving both
Environment and (AQMP)
public and private sector
SEMP (TA program)
Forests and f
environ-mental mgmt.
Private
ertme of h
Prvtseorpgamtoedc
Environm.;
* Approval of Gorai River
emissions in Dhaka
GovernmentLocal 2-stroke
Extensive cross-support andProject.
UNDP and
* Min. of

d
o
* Civil society
organizations
* NEDA
* Belgium

ty
..ith timely
monitonr.g s .
public access t* Improved ./c.'ic' :spection and
maintenince in Dihaka.

Air Quality Management Project * Essential building blocks * Fur.ti c

o
a
* GoraCRiver Restoration Project

mgmt systems implemented with
measurable pollution source
reductions; full public disclosure
of environmental indicators.
* Amendments drafted for the
Environmental Protection Act.

Annex 9:
Page 7 of 10

Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
Issues and Problem Diagnosies

Annl Dvelpe and
P Mt

Development
Partners

World Bank Group
adonr
i

f

Self-Evaluation
Indicators

| m ovnt Performance
P
Io
cators

[V. Acceleratine Private Sector-led Growth

A. Stre* Bterng Macrs erinomic Manageme
st
1. Achieve faster econoc growth
* Implement policy framework for rapid
IMF
* Policy dialogue in collaboration * Impact ofjust-in-time
and improve macroecononhastability growth of export-led
insufactuing and * ADB
with IMF and preparation for
policy notes in shaping

Higher average saving,
investment rates to drive faster

* GDP growth of 5% over 1990s is

rural non-farm sector.

possible Poverty Reduction and

public opinion and

GDP growth.

inadequate fort
significant poverty
reduction.
* Recent fiscal and monetary slippages
cause concem. Low tax/GDP ratio and

Raise public saving for use in priority
UNDP
areas, improve project approval process in UNICEF
Annual Development Program, improve * WFP
revenue collection and reduce incentives
ala

Growth Facility (PRGF) s
t Annual econo
,
updates
fic
for
Development Forums and donor
coordination
tByolai

goverment policy.
* Collaboration with IMF
for potential PRGF and
readiness to provide

problems in tax policy and
administration.
* Trade liberalization has slowed;
Garment-led export perfonnance stTong,
but concems about sustainability in postMFA era. Real effective exchange rate

* Faster manufacturing and rural
non-farm sector growth.
* Improvement in the revenueGDP ratio.

for corruption in tax administration.
* Restrain monetary growvth to prudent
levels; use miarket-based instruments and
avoid direct controls.
* Manage the exchange rate system
flexibly and monitor capital flows to

Periodic economic updates for
macroeconomic monitoring
* Just-in-time policy notes on
high-priority policy areas such as
the budget, balance of payments,
&poverty orientation of specific

substantially Iarger or
adjustment support for
accelerated institutional
and structural Teform.
* Impact of ongoing trade
policy dialogue.

* Reversal of rising trend in fiscal
deficit and its domestic financing;
monetary expansion within prudent
program targets; low inflation.
* Real effective exchange rate
appreciation avoided, good export

*

te

has appreciated and may be undermining
export competitiveness.
* Private capital inflows/outflows
growing rapidly and require monitoring
in terms of debt sustainability.

ensure debt sustainability
* Progressively lower maximum tariff rate
to 25% and adopt three-rate schedule;
replace remaining quantitative restrictions
with tariffs.
* Support diversification of exports.
2. Strengthen poverty monitoring
* Monitor poverty trends and mainstream * ADB
* Poverty incidence fell in early 1990s poverty analysis in policies and programs. * UNDP
but remains very high, particularly ral * Assistance to govemment on PRSP
IMF
poverty and inequality has increased.
preparation and on mainstreaming poverty *
concems in line ministries.
* DFID
* Prepare a participatory poverty
assessment in partnership with NGOs.

3. Improve quality and accountability
of public expenditures to improve
poverty impact.
* Fiscal allocations to social sectors and
infrastructure have continued increasing,
but the quality of considerable public
spending is questionable..
* Govt. support for loss-making stateowied enterprises and increasing noncommercial banks create substantial
quasi-fiscal and contingent liabilities.

* Improve screening of ADP projects to

* IMF
* ADB

ensure consistency with sector strategies
in key sectors.
* Implement recommendations of
DFID
ongoing RIBEC project on budgetary
* Bilaterals
controls, accounting, classification and
monitoring; incorporate quasi-fiscal
outlays in budget.
* Accelerate SOE reform to reduce quasifiscal deficit, and improve efficiency.
* Improve transparency and

accountability through application of
IMF's Code for Fiscal Triuisparency.

programs

performance, debt service at
sustainable levels.

* IDF-financed Household

*Poverty assessment

Income/Expenditure Survey; other
possible IDF for local capacity
building on poverty analysis
* Participatory Poverty
Assessment covering both urban

completed based on 2000
/2001 Household Survey.
*Progress in monitoring
impact of micro-credit
*Annual monitoring of

and rural poverty

poverty index.

. Public Expenditure Review.
* Public Sector Modemization
Project in part to follow through
w recommendations of PER
with
* Assistance for PRSP to be
prepared by new govemment and
assistance for preparation of sector
strategies
* Follow up on Country Financial
Accountability Assessment and

* Completon of PER and

* Preparation of a sound PRSP

its impact in terms of
expenditure priorities of

with good pro-poor expenditure
prioritzation.

Country Procurement Assessment
* IDF on Developing Accounting
arid Auditing Standards

sector reform program.
* Improved financial
* Support for activities
accountability ard project
aimed at publicizing of the implementation.

* Poverty analysis incorporated in

sector programs.
* PRSP completed by end-2001.

new government and
* Prioritization of ADP consistent
priority actions.
with sector strategies.
* Impact of PER and
* Improvements in project
poverty assessment in
implementation, including
guiding the preparation of improvements in accountability
a PRSP by new Govt.
and efficiency.
* Support for a public
* Better project approval system.

Annex 9:
Page 8 of 10

Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
Issues and Problem Diagnosis

Proposed Strategies and Measures

Self-Evaluation
World Bank Group Program
Development
Indicators
Partners I
* Chair Local Consultative Group budgeting process.
of Development Partners to
coordinate sector strategies
* Gender assessment of national

Weak project implementation and
management constrain development
impact; financial management,
procurement, and accountability is weak.
* Gender assessment of budget and
expenditure is not available.

* Improve targeting and efficiency of

1.. Business environment is costly for
the private sector
* Inefficient infrastructure services
provided by the public sector.
* Public sector dominance dampen
competition, efficiency.
* Inadequate civil justice system cause
weak enforcement of contracts and
property rights.
* Labor issues are not properly
addressed in the reform measures.
2. Anti-export bias in trade regime
* Un-diversified export base and antiexport bias of trade policy.
* Inefficient tax and customs
Admninistration.

* Analytical and advisory work to set the

3. Poorly performing commercial
banking sector
a High real interest rates, high levels of
non-performing loans in banks and
difficulty in collection cause disintermediation; lack of transparency and
accountability in bank governance.
* Central Bank's legal charter lack
authority to enforce regulations.
Perfornance is also hampered by low
level of staff skills.
* Non-Bank Financial Institutions lack
adequate term funds. There is crowding
out by Government Saving Schemes.

* Engage GOB in dialogue on reforms to * IMF
* ADB
reduce operating costs through

public expenditures, particularly safety
nets for the poor.
* Gender desaggregation of budget and

budget and expenditure

expenditure in different sectors.

B. Removing Pnlicy, Institutiona
* UK-DFID
* ABD
stage for reforms after the election to
improve the business enviromnent, expand * OECF
energy supplies, enhance transport
facilities, and tackle urban management. * KfW
* Provide TA to improve efficiency of
Court Administration and access to justice.
Information and communications
campaign to raise public awareness on the
benefits of privatization.
* Continue support for export

diversification, trade liberalization, and
strengthen Government's trade policy
analytical capacity.
*
Further steps to reform Tax and
Customs Administration.

restructuring; reconstituting NCB boards
and use of management contracts for
eventual privatization.
* Improve collections by serious followup of Money Loan Courts cases.
* Amend Bangladesh Bank Order and
provide Advisory services and TA to
effect downsizing and restructuring of
Bangladesh Bank and training of staff.
*
Facilitate development of term funds
for financial intermediaries. Develop
infrastructure for issuing of bonds, other
commercial paper, and housing finance.

Country Performance
Indicators
. Gender budget statement by the
Ministry of Finance.

* UK-DFlD
* CIDA
* DANIDA

and Structural Constraints
Country Framework report on
'rivate provision of infrastructure
Conduct a study to identify
trategies for addressing labor
ssues within reform measures
Communication for change
rogram
Legal and Judicial Reform
oject

* Extent and scope of

* Announcement of policy

policy dialogue to include
labor unions.
* Degree to which debate
and discussion on
privatization is evident in
the Bangladesh press and
mass media.

changes in infrastructure sectors to
allow private participation;
participation started in key
infrastructure sectors.
* Increased user satisfaction with
timeliness and service delivery
standards of civil justice system.
* Implementation of a strong
privatization program.
Export diversification through
use of matching grants.
Tax &Customs Adm. Moder*
nized, export clearance procedures
streamlined, imports pre-shipment
inspection implemented.

* Export Diversification Project

* Implementation progress *

* Public Sector Modernization
Project (PSM)

of the Export
Diversification Project.
Board approval of the
*
PSM project

* Continuing policy dialogue and * Extent to which policy

advisory services for banking
* Central Bank TA Project
proposed if GOB commits to
right-sizing of the institution
* Ongoing- Financial Institutions
Development Project
* Proposed IFC collaboration
with regional partner

dialogue translates into
adoption by GOB of
recommended actions.
* Board Approval of
Central Bank TA project.
* Progress on
implementation of the
Financial Institutions
Development Project.
* IFC initiative on housing
finance launched.

* Bangladesh Bank restructured

with 30% less staff, permnanent
staff training program established.
* Bangladesh Bank Order
amended to provide the Bank with
sufficient legal authority.
* Cash collections from court
cases raised by at least 50% and
classified loans of NCBs reduced
to 25% of their portfolio..
* Management contracts signed
with NCBs.
* Increased market sources of
funding by well performing Fls.

Annex 9:
Page 9 of 10

Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
Issues and Problem Diagnosis
4. Increase supply, access, and
reliability of energy supplies
* Power sector characterized by large
subsidies, weak management, poor
governance, unacceptable quality and
service standards.
* Government utilities are financially
weak.
* Constraints in adopting gas exports
policy; lack of willingness to reform
Petrobangla; infrastructure bottlenecks.

Proposed Strategies and Measures
* Promote institutional reforms in
particular unbundling and privatization,
better regulations, and the Government's
role focusing on policy formulation and
implementation.
* Continued support and advice on
managing the Indipendent Power
Producers (IPP) program and financing
support for IPPs through available
instruments.
* Develop knowledge base and
information to facilitate an informed
discssio onrasd xorsanee.oa

Development
Partners
* ADB
* DflD
JBIC
* UK-DFID
* USAID
* Energy
companies

energy trade.

_____________________________

S. Transport Sector Reforms are
Required
* Limited institutional capacity of
transport sector organizations to
manage investments, to increase
efficiency and reduce costs.
* Insufficient focus on planning and
budgeting for maintenance.
* Insufficient role of private sector in
the transport sector.
. pollufon
Air
relatedproblemsare
* Air pollution related problems are
increasing with improved road
infrastructure.
* Atthelvel,ther
egioal
oor
*At the regonal
level,
there is
is poor
connectivity and access to markets due
to poor transport and logistics systems,
and poor implementation of regulatory
and bilateral protocol related to
tramsport and transit.
* Access and ability of women to
utilize transport remains a problem,
which hampers their mobility and
access to opportunities.
6. Inefficiency of ports
Current inefficiencies at Chittagong
Port are a bottleneck to trade.

* Reorganize transport sector
organizations, rationalize staffing,
provide needed additional training,
improve planning capacity, including
considerations of nulti-modal aspects.
*
Improve financial management and
audits. Increase funding for maintenance
gradually and consistently; and use
HDM model for maintenance.
* Develop appropr. policies and regul.
for increased role of the private sector.
* Encourage govemment to set up Road
Fund with appropriate role of the private
sector
setriin itst operation.
prto.impediments
* Strengthen role and influence of the
National Road Safety Council, and
integrate safety related features in all
transport related investments.
* Improve policies on transport related
air pollution abatement and axle load
and enforce regulations.
* Include women's needs in developing
transport sector.
* Promote private sector participation to
improve services..

* ADB
* JBIC
* DANIDA

I

World Bank Group Program

* Non-lending services, such as

supporting change agents and
developing performance
indicators for utilities
*KfW
IDA and IFC lending through
Private Sector Infra. Dev. Proj.
(PSIDP); IDA and MIGA
Guarantees for priority areas
* Possible Adaptable Program
Loan if there is sufficient
progress in reforms
. Participate in gas sector
initiatives where World Bank
(WB) has comparative advantage

Self-Evaluation
Indicators
* Timely start of IPP
plants.
* Government adopts
policy for energy trade.

Country Performance
Indicators
* New power sector policy setting
up independent regulatory
authority and unbundling of
BPDP.
* Improved service standards
* Reduce level of unaccounted
electricity usage.
- Power sector no longer relies on
government support (except for
rural electrification).
investment resources to establish
new generation.

* Implement ongoing projects

* Improved admninistrative and

RRMIMP 11, Second Road
Rehabilitation & Maintenance.
Project; Third Rural Road
Rehabilitation. & Maintenance
Project; Dhaka Urban Transport
Project; Third Inland Water
Transport Project; PSIDP
*
Rural Transport
Infrastructure Improvement
Project (proposed), AQMP
* Analytical and advisory
activities (AAA) to address
transport and in
logistics
regional and
impemetin regionaland
interational transpoTt and
transit.

financial management systems
installed; timely and acceptable
audit reports.
* Improving travel times, bus
services, and reducing vehicle
operating costs, and pollution
from two-stroke engines in
Dhaka.
* Expansion of rural road
network and improvements in
maintenance; inclusion of
communities and women in
management
of the road
network.

* Finalize reorganization
plan for Roads &
Highway Dept. (RHD).
* Improved coordination
* UK-DFID
between RHD, Local
* NGOs
Govemment Engineering
* Private
Department, Railways,
sector groups
Inland Water and Port
* UN ESCAP
sector agencies.
* Bilateral
*
Assistance
provided in developing
policies and regulations
for private sector
involvement
sub-sectors. in transport
sub-sectors.
Project prepared for
PSIDP funding.
* Improving metropolitan transport planning
and coord. in Dhaka
* Women have
participation in decision
making process.
* Private
* Potential investment by IFC in * Private container facisector groups
partnership
lity
Stevedoring
DevelopmentwiCo.Infrastruct
Ltd
lt built
ul byySeeoig
* Local infrastructure fund
Services of America
_ ______________ - financed hv the World Rink
_

* Improvements in port servicing

including
reduction in freight
icuigrdcini
rih
unloading time.

Annex 9:
Page 10 of 10

Bangladesh - CAS Performance Matrix
Issues and Problem Diagnosis
7. Lagging Information &
Communication Technology
.
Weak management, poor
govemance, unacceptable quality and
service, low rural access.
* Lack of comprehensive national
Information &Communication
Technology (ICT) plan.

Proposed Strategies and Measures
* Push for institutional refomis, better
regulation with minimum govemment
role and private ownership/
management.
* Review alternate sources of service
delivery (private/NGOs).

* Develop a strategy and policy
8. Urban development impeded by
framework for urban services provision,
structural constraints
identifying roles for the public, private
* Lack of a policy framework in the
and altemate service providers, and
urban sector with greater role for the
which emphasizes O&M and cost
private sector, NGOs and civil society.
recovery issues.
* Weak institutional and financial
* Improve the nationwide local
capacities of urban local govemments
govemment finance system. Improve
and other institutions. Legal
local level capital budget planning,
framework does not encourage strong
andAfinancing.vles
loa deetaieprgamn
~ local
auoomu
and~~~~~~~~~~~
programnming and frmancing.
autonomous
and decentralized
* Promote greater private sector
self-govemance.
. Limited access to urban services due participation in land and housing
markets.
to inefficient service provision and
* Reduce regulatory, institutional and
lack of focus on urban poverty.
procedural delays affecting land
* Inefficient land and housing
transactions and land development.
markets.
* Develop housing finance systems
* Poor institutional coordination.
with greater private sector participation.
mechanisms between various entities
servicing the urban sector.

Development
Partners
* Community
and rural based
NGOs,
* Local and
Foreign
Business

* ADB
* NGOs/CBOs
* UK-DFID
* UNICEF
* UNDP

* DANIDA
* SDC
NEDA
* JICA

* Elected local

bodies
* Private
Sector

nSelf-Evaluation

World Bank Group Progam
I
* Build support for refomis

outside govemment, prepare
for dialogue on reforms
* Focus on commercial ICT
services and poor in partnership
with communities and NGOs
* Promote liberalizing
international telecom services
* National Urban Strategy dialogue with GOB, civil
society and donors
*Dhaka Water Supply &
Sanitation Project IV
*City Development Strategies
(CDS) for Dhaka and Khulna
cities - follow up dialogue
Services Project
a Municipal
.
roe
(MSP), Dhaka Urban Transport
Projectrcoordination
Infrastructure
rKhulna
Development Project (propos.);
AQMP, analytical and advisory
activities on govemance and
urban poverty
* Partnership with IFC to
develop housing finance

Indicators
* Degree to which debate
and discussion is evident
in the press on ICT issues.
* Increasing support for
reform among key
government officials and
politicians.
* Progress on dialogue

and reform agenda for
improved urban
governance.
* Progress on instituting
inter-agency
coordination for better
urban management in
Dhaka and Khulna.
*Status of planning and
of Dhaka
metropolitan transport.
* Build pourashavas
under MSP.
* Progress on
institutional and financial
strengthening of Khulna.
* Improved land and
housing finance systerns.

Country Performance
Indicators
* Private investment rises
rapidly and reduction in public
investment resources for ICT.
*Increase in economic activity
in rural areas through greater
coverage of ICT.

Preparation and
*
implementa-tion of a time-based
reform agenda for improving
urban local govemance.
* Legislation ratifying Greater
Dhaka Transport Planning and
Coordination Board, and
allocation of resources for it by
the Parliament.
*Preparation of a policy,
regulatory and institutional
framework for strengthening
private sector driven housing
finance sector.

Additional acronvims used in the Matrix:
AQMP
ARIDP
ASA
BADC
BSB
CDS
CZMP
FSSAP
GOB
ICT
IPPs
JBIC
MFI

Air Quality Monitoring Project
Agriculture and Rural Development Program
Association for Social Advancement
Bangladesh Agriculture Development Cop.
Bangladesh Shilpa Bank
CiBgDeve Strah t
Coastal Zone Management Program
Female Secondary Stipends Assistance Program
Govemment of Bangladesh
Information &Communication Technologies
Independent Povwer Producers
Japan Bank for Interational Cooperation
Maltinational Fpancial Institution

MOHFW
MSP
NARS
NBFC
NWMP
OECF
PEDP
PLaCE
PRGF
PSIDP
R&R
RET
RHD
RRMIMP 11

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Municipal Services Project
National Agriculture Research System
Non-banking Finance Companies
National Water Management Plan
Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund
Primary Education Development Program
Post Literacy and Continuing Education
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Private Sector Infrastructure Devel. Project
Resettlement and Rehabilitation
Renewable Energy Technologies
Roads and Highways Department
Second Rural Roads &Markets Imp.& Maint. Proj.

SDC
UN ESCAP
USAID
UNAIDS
UNDP
UNFPA
UNICEF
WASSIP
WFP
WHO

Swiss Development Corporation
UN Ec. and Social Commission for Asian Pacific
The U.S. Agency for International Development
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS
United N Development Program
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Children's Fund
Water and Sanitation Sector Improvement Proj.
World Food Program
World Health Organization

Annex 10

Page 1 of 1
Bangladesh-CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Major issue
Country
performance
Poverty Reduction & Economic Management
Rural poverty, excluded marginal
Fair
Povaty
Network
area

Bank
priority

High

High

-

Moderate

High

Ongoing dialogue based on rcently
completed and new ESW (IO(R report
Governance Score Card exercise, etc.)

gop

Teducdton

Pubtic
sector

Reconciliation of country and Bank
priorities

Country
Priority

Poor

Governance/SOE privaiizatiin.
corrntion

Human Development Department
Quality & efficiency of education
Fair
Education

High

figh

Low

High

science and technolo

Social

Poor

Vulnerability of poor and

Based on active NGO community and WFP
activitnes. more parnership between govt.,
donors and civil society is bcing faciliated;
expansion of safety ne and lgal aid; Social

margiralized groups, victims of
natural disasters; landless labor,
child labor

protection

Fund Projctbeing developed
Environmentall) & Socialhv Sustainable Deielopment

Big
~~~ ~
Environment

Poor

Water polluuon, urban air quality

~
Low

~
Moderate

~

~

~

~

~

~~l

Ongoing dialogue to highlight gravity of the
situation; mainstream environment issues in

IDA credits

Disaster
mint

Fair/
Good

Frequcent floods and cyclones

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Finacia

Poor

'

Loans default, capital inadeuacy,

High

High

Low

Hfigh

Fair

Attracting and mnuraging private
forein investmet overnance

Wavanin politcal commitmuent, jpowerfu~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

imterests. T n oiydaou
~~~~~~~~~~~~vested

sector
bad governance
Energ &
mnn

-

High

Hfigh

-

Attachment 1
Page 1 of 4
CAS Consultations - Main Findings

1.
Inpreparation for the CAS, the country team comprising IDA and IFC staff carried out extensive incountry consultations during January-June, 2000, with the Government, civil society representatives and
other stakeholders. A new approach differed from previous consultations in two important ways. First,
staff invited a broad array of new groups and individuals to contribute their ideas, and second, the
discussions focused less on the Bank Group and its specific projects and more on the national objectives
and priorities for Bangladesh. This approach allowed the Bank Group to listen to the people of
Bangladesh set out their priorities and solutions for promoting prosperity in the country. The information
is used as one of several sources (e.g. analytical work, previous consultations undertaken by the Bank
and other institutions) to determine the best role for the Bank Group in addressing the primary concerns
expressed by the groups consulted.
2.
The Consultations were carried out in two phases over a period of about six months. Phase 1,from
mid-January through mid-February was the 'Listening Phase."
Academics, businesspeople,
parliamentary committees, Government ministers and secretaries, trade unions, NGOs, donors and the
media, as well as representatives from the urban slums in Dhaka, and villagers and city leaders from the
Rajshahi and Sylhet regions took part. The Bank met with groups of 20-30 representatives from these
segments of society to hear their views on the recent achievements of Bangladesh, the current
challenges, the future vision and priorities for the country and specific suggestions on how to achieve that
vision. A short survey was carried out as part of the process.
3.
Phase two had two objectives. In addition to providing feedback to phase one participants on the
priorities that emerged from the consultations, it shared with them preliminary ideas on the CAS in
workshops that brought different groups together.
4.
Highly interactive, the January-February consultations provided valuable feedback on development
priorities and strategic responses. The feedback summarized in the section below confirms the findings of
previous consultations and analytical work carried out by the World Bank Group, such development
partners as the UNDP and ADB and Bangladeshi institutions. The cumulative knowledge from these
efforts has helped to shape the strategic thrust of the CAS. The participants in the consultations
expressed a strong desire to continue the dialogue with the World Bank Group and to have further
opportunity to engage the Government in dialogue about Bangladesh's priorities and development.
Feedback on Bangladesh's Development Priorities
5.
Bangladesh has achieved a great deal in recent years, and the people consulted are proud of
those gains. They noted the progress made in social indicators such as reduced population growth rates,
improving access to health care and increased school enrollment of children, especially girls. They also
noted improvements in infrastructure, citing the Jamuna Bridge, and improved disaster management.
There are more opportunities for women in both government and the workplace, and Bangladeshis are
proud of the international recognition given to the National Language Day.
6.
Those consulted also expressed concerns about the many challenges that remain. The
predominant theme across all groups was Bangladesh's ineffective and inefficient institutions.
Specifically, people mentioned the conflicts between political parties, an ineffective Parliament, a public
bureaucracy that does not serve the people well, corruption and the deterioration in law and order. Other
common themes included the nation's inadequate infrastructure, particularly telecommunications, the low
quality of basic education, inadequate skill preparation in relation to the job market and continued gender
disparities. A number of other concerns raised in affected groups included the problem with arsenic in the
water. In general, water and sanitation issues drew more pronounced comments from rural villagers and
slum dwellers; slum demolition was a key concern among the slum dwellers; businesspeople expressed
anxiety about managing the negative effects of globalization.

Attachment 1
Page 2 of 4
7.
The remaining challenges can be grouped into three broad areas: Governance and Institutions,
Employment and Economic Growth and Basic Needs. The detailed issues in each of these categories
are summarized below:
Institutions and Governance
8.
One of the top concerns, raised in different ways by the participants, was in the area of
governance. Villagers, for example, were concerned about increased crime and violence; slum dwellers
were worried about law and order, slum demolition and unreliable police; and businesspeople were
concerned about unnecessary bureaucracy slowing down their ability to get things done and adding to the
costs of doing business. The ministers suggested that the Bank could play a role in training and capacity
building to strengthen government.
Employment and Economic Growth
9.
The theme of employment and economic opportunity was raised in all groups consulted. The
villagers and urban poor spoke more about the lack of jobs, while the businesspeople spoke of the lack of
skilled manpower and the challenges of managing businesses and dealing with competitive pressures
resulting from trade liberalization. All groups spoke of the critical role that improved infrastructure,
particularly communications infrastructure, could play in creating economic opportunities.
The
perspectives of those consulted correlate closely with perspectives found in previous consultations. For
example, the Consultations with the Poor done by the World Bank in late 1999, and the UNpromPT
Process in 1996 found that "not able to find work' was the top priority in rural areas for both men and
women.
Basic Needs
10.
A common refrain stressed that despite considerable progress and improvements in social
indicators, more progress in the area of Basic Needs is required. While access to basic education and
health care had improved, the groups talked about the need to focus on improving quality. As one
villager put it quite simply, "More children are in school, but the quality is not good." A Government
minister acknowledged, "In our haste to cover a lot of people in a short amount of time we have sacrificed
quality." One of the key action steps raised in several of the groups consulted involved increasing the
coordination and cooperation between government and NGOs to ensure that Basic Needs are addressed
effectively. Additionally, the groups suggested better collection of data and monitoring of performance
related to the quality of social services being offered, particularly basic education and health.

Attachment 1
Page 3 of 4

Opinion Survey Results: National Prioritiesand Institutions

11.
In addition to listening to the participants' perspectives during the consultations, the World Bank
also carried out a written survey with selected groups designed to elicit views on prosperity and wealth
creation, national priorities and the role of the Government and other organizations. Survey results reflect
the views of those 188 individuals consulted, and indicate a strong belief that larger organizations such as
multilateral agencies, the national Government and big business are too powerful, while such entities as
small and medium-sized businesses, local governments, average citizens and particularly women do not
have enough power.
Influence of Various Groups within Bangladesh
How much Influence does each group have on

decisions conceming Bangladesh's prosperity?

Distribudon of Responses

Foreign Organizations (World Bank, UN, etc.)
The national govemment

_=

Larger private sector businesses
NGOs
Local govemments
Small and medium-sized private sector businesses
Average citizens
Women
0%

25%

* Too much

50%

El Just right

75%

100%

[: Too little

Attachment 1
Page 4 of 4
12. Top priorities expressed by the participants in the survey seem to reinforce quantitatively the
general priorities articulated by the participants during the consultations. Key issues such as eliminating
corruption and ensuring all children have access to quality health and education emerged as the priorities
most widely shared by all the groups consulted. Other top priorities differ by group, but most tend to
include ensuring that citizens have a meaningful say in political decisions, dramatically reduced
unemployment, personal security and effective govemment institutions.

Bangladesh Will Reduce Poverty and Increase Prosperity When ...
Percentage otRespondwnts Picking Rom
as One of Top-Flvo
Every chld has acceas to heakh care and good educanion
Corruption and unnecessary bureaucrmcy in the public "seordiuppeer

-_|

82'

-_1_80:

iUscitiens have a meaningful say In political decision-nuking

S2 -

Its govenmmental Insttutions can deliver euentlal srvices to the malority of

I'4.3

It has dramatically reduced unemploymenst

39;

its cntuens live wih IUe htei DI sudden economic shocis and permonel
violence
heu a stable economry with low infaUon and good batance-oymentm
year after year
11has steadily increasing real wae

3S
2en

and worker productivity year afler year

1.

All business ownen understnd and employ sophslicaed business
srategies

28',

It hs a system in place lo protect ntsnatural environment for the long term
All is citizens participate meaninghfuly In the mai ket sconomw
The majority of its compnies are world-clasa In tnrmc of productivity
The rritLorny of Its exports are created using specialIzed customer
knowledge and skills

2:c
22%
22%
17%

Soun Monior Conolty Cornpolitness - Coratoiion Svsy on Naional Ot*ec
snd Ecomnic Opiions, ImnWnenred
hi Banglndsh Jamuay 2000
as part oftheWoddBank'sCASGonsuflative
Pnoow. Rsult we basedon 188parpant.

MAP SECTION

IBRD 24206R1

>

y

.

'.

1 1l <

L?l

......

~~BANGLADESH

:.'

..

KILmETES

~~~' DrNAJPUR ; ; J; ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

F
i

AD

NAOGA0P

,;- ,;- Iq
"t I

:|Lrl

rr

tr.........

It

CPU

}1

|i

-re:

* R@ A J S HA"H il'2
)~~~~~~~~~

9

:u.;

A

-'arr
.4;

:6;:s 3

lraew

|-H

,

'"9'''

)

SYLr.;
,HEcT

;a-r 6

H A K

yO't''lD

'1,-F,AJjPe1

o1llEralNLb'b4-r

INDIA

>. ".,.s,1,, !, ,. ;-29:
L1^^>
,.@
t>r

P.ttF;,

-_-^adrX4l
-

! --

Wo;

;1r.

N4W-L` X -

l

<
)

-

F;ArwjiaS

-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'e
l
1

I!

r.

Dll< ;;

-- ,

_Uj

eJ,:.s~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I

., l.

JA
J>

.z

-J?-;-

a11

]1

Pj t
CHITTAG

BAY~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~iY
OFBEGA

J

