Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICL4L USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 22111-AM

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATGEY
OF THE WORLD BANK
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA

APRIL25,2001

Armenia,Azerbaijan
andGeorgiaCountryUnit
EuropeandCentralAsiaRegion
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization

CURRENCYEOUIVALENTS
(ExchangeRate EffectiveMarch 31, 2001)
CurrencyUnit = Dram
Dram = US$0.0018
US$1.0 = 551.8Dram
GOVERNMNT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December31
WEIGHTS ANDMEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONSANDACRONYMS
BOD
CAS
CEM
CFAA
COD
CPPR
DFID
EBRD
ESMAP
EU
FAO
FDI
FIAS
FSU
FY
GDP
GEF
GNP
GOA
GTZ
IBTCI
IDF
IFC
IGR
IMF
I-PRSP
JBIC
KfW

Biological
OxygenDmand
CountyAssistaneState
CountyEcnomicManondum
Cotmy FirancialAccuntabilityAssessment
ChenicalOxygenDemand
CoimnyPortfolioP ermaneReview
Depatnent forItraonal Developmet,UK.
Eurpean BankforRecosction & Devebpnent
Eney SectorM _ngmetAssistance
Pogram
EuropeanUnion
FoodandAgriculture
Ornizatio
Foign Direc Invesment
Foreign veont AdvisoryService
FonmrSovietUnion
FiscalYear
GrossDomesticProduct
G"bal Envimet Facilty
GrossNationalProduct
Governent ofAnnenia
Germa TechicalCooperati
Intatonal Busin andTechnical
Consultmts
Ituional Development
Fund
Intemational
FinanceCoporation
InstiutionalandGovemance
Review
International
MonetaryFund
hterimPovertyReductionStategyPapr
JapanBankforlneationi Coopaion
GennanFinancialCoopertion

VicePresident:
CountryDirector:
TeamLeader:

LIL
MIGA
MTEP
NGO
NPV
OED
OSCE
PER
PRGF
PRSC
PRSP
PSD
SAC
SATAC
SME
SIDA
STD
TA
TACIS
TB
TDS
UNDP
UNHCR
UNICEF
USAID
WB
WFP
WTO

Leamning
andInovationLon
MultlateralIvesimetaGuaanteeAuthor
Mediuur-TenEpetdire Progm
Non-GovenmnalOrganization
NetPresentValue
Operations
Evalaion Depariment
Organizadon
forSecurity& Coqeation in Europe
PublicEMeditureReview
PoveryReucti andGmwthFacilty
PovertyReductionSppot Credit
PovertyReductionStaeg Pape
PrivateSectorDevelopmaet
StrucuralAjustmientCredit
StrucnualAdjutnent Technical
Assistance
Credit
SmallandMediumEntmpises
SwedishItnationa DevelpmentAgeny
SexualyTransmitedDiseae
TechnicalAssistance
TechnicalAssistance
to dieCIS(EU)
Tuberculosis
TotalDebtSevice
UnitedNationsDevelpmt Progm
UnitedNaons HighCmmissionerforRefigees
UnitedNationsntemational
Childe's Fund
UnitedStatesAgencyforltrmationalDevebpment
WorldBank
WorldFoodPrgrn
WorldTradeOrganzatio

JohannesLinn
JudyO'Connor
PeterNicholas

FOR OFFICIALUSEONLY
Armenia Country Assistance Strategy
Table of Contents
Pare
Executive Summary ..............................

1.
II.
111.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.

iii

Context.1
Economic Trends.
Economic Reform Successesand Risks
Paradox of Armenian Economic Growth
Continuing Widespread Poverty
The Government Reform Agenda
Growth and Financing Prospects .............................
CAS Consultations.............................
World Bank Assistance Strategy.14
A.CreatingJobsthroughPrivateSectorDevelopment
.15
B. ImprovingGovernanceand PublicSector.17

X.
XI.

.2
.5
.6
.7
10
12

C. RebuildingHumanCapital.19
World Bank Business Plan.21
Managing the Risks .25

Chart 1:
Chart 2:

GDP and Export Growth.
Net Present Value of Debt .12

Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4

Macroeconomic Trends and Baseline Projections
Downside Risk Scenario.12
Proposed Lending Scenarios.21
Work Program Summary.24

Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:
Box 5:
Box 6:
Box 7:

Poverty in Armenia
Gains from Re-Opening Borders
Govemance in Arenia
Consultative Group Meeting.13
Base Case Triggers.22
Outcome Indicators.23
Melding Local and International Expertise.24

.2

.3
.5
.8

Attachment 1: IDA Portfolio ...................................
Attachment 2: Partner Groups...................................
Attachment 3: Longer-Term Outcome Indicators ...................................

Annex1:

Countryat a Glance.30

Annex 2:
Annex 3:
Annex 4:
Annex 5:
Annex 6:
Annex 7:
Annex 8:
Annex 9:
Annex 10:

Portfolio Indicators.32
Bank Group Program Summary.33
Summary of Non-Lending Services.34
Social Indicators.35
Key Economic Indicators.36
Key Exposure Indicators.38
Operations Portfolio.39
CAS Program Matrix.40
Development Priorities.49

27
28
29

Map..50

This documenthas a restricteddistribution and may be used by recipientsonly in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

-111-

Armenia Country Assistance Strategy
Executive Summary
i.
Armenia's economy has suffered from several shocks in recent years: a severe
earthquake in 1988,the break-up of the SovietUnion in 1991,the Nagorno-Karabakhconflict
in 1988-94, the 1998 Russia crisis, and the assassination of the top leadership in October
1999. Despite these problems,the Government's commitmentto a market-orientedeconomy,
and its considerable success in advancing structural reform, have helped generate growth
averagingover 5% a year since 1995.
ii.
Although macroeconomic performance has been strong, Armenia has not benefited
from commensuratejob creation or poverty reduction -- 55% of the population still live below
the poverty line. Part of the reason is lack of large-scaleentry of private enterprises, and little
restructuring of existing enterprises. New investment has been limited by interference in
business activities by government officials, a serious shortage of appropriate skills, and
investors' perception of high political risks. Human capital has deteriorated, in part through
migration. This has had deleterious effects both on quality of life and on the economy as
Armenia's once abundant skill base has eroded.
iii.
To address these constraints the Government has articulated in its Interim Poverty
Reduction Strategythe need for progress in three key areas:
* Improvingthe business environmentby reducing administrativebarriers to investment
and new entry, especially of foreign firms, building effective public-private
consultative mechanisms, and enforcing a level playing field for new and existing
companies.
* Strengtheningpublic sectormanagement and reducing corruption, so as to improve the
provision of public services and the conditions for private sector growth. This
requires streamlining public administration, including the civil service and key
regulatory agencies, and advancingjudicial reform.
* Rebuilding human and physical capital, with an emphasis on ensuring additional
financing of school education, basic health, and infrastructure maintenance, and
improvingthe targeting of expenditures for social protection and education.
iv.
The World Bank's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) supports reforms and
investments in these three key areas. Base Case lending is envisaged to be US$150 million in
FY02-04. Should the Government accelerate its reform program, a Poverty Reduction
Support Credit (PRSC) of US$40 million could be added in FY04, bringing total lending to
US$190 million. With good performance, IDA partial risk guarantees for privatizations and
for new export-orientedinvestments could also be considered.
v.
In the Low Case, the focus would be on capacity building to improve the institutional
ability to implement future reforms, as well as on human development, rural development,
and environment initiatives which can contribute to long-term poverty alleviation even with
poor governance. Total IDA lendingwould then be about US$80 million.
vi.
Triggers for continuing in the Base Case focus on satisfactory development and
implementation of: (i) the macroeconomic program, as evidenced for example by
implementation of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Program; (ii) the Poverty Reduction

-iv-

Strategy Paper (PRSP); (iii) the reform agenda, including social service delivery and the
business climate (with a tangible reduction in corruption and government interference in
private sectoractivity); and (iv) IDA-financedprojects.

Risks
The CAS faces several political and economic risks. The Caucasus have historically
vii.
been a region buffeted by competing political forces. In the event of renewed conflict, the
Bank would endeavor to focus on the most poverty-oriented investments, but a temporary
cessation of new lending, and perhaps even disbursements,might be unavoidable, and the
Board would be updated in this event. On the other hand, there are prospects for a peace
agreement on Nagorno-Karabakh. In this case, the Bank would update the Board on proposed
support for post-conflictreconstructionand development.
viii. The CAS could be undermined by unexpected loss of momentum in judicial and
public administration reform, reduced overall levels of external financial and technical
assistance, lower population estimates, or by a failure to improve the business environment.
Any of the these outcomes could move Armenia toward a scenario in which the debt burden
becomes unsustainablerelative to exports and/or revenues. Key factors in the downside risk
scenario are: the level of overall economic growth and investment,especially export-oriented
investment, and the grant element of new development assistance. This reinforces the
importance of Bank support for reforms which foster broad-based economic growth and
private investment,and improve the tax base and tax collection. It also suggests a continuing
role for the Bank in assisting the Governmentmanage and coordinateexternal assistance.

Issues for Board Discussion
ix.

In its discussion,the Board may wish to consider whether:
* The Base Case triggers and outcome indicators are adequate;
* The Bank should step up the regional focus of its analytical and technical assistance
before a peace settlement on Nagorno-Karabakhis reached;
* The proposed combination of lending and non-lending services is appropriate to
Armenia'sdevelopmentneeds.

MEMORANDUMOF THE PRESIDENTOF THE
INTERNATIONALDEVELOPMENTASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVEDIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATGEYOF THE WORLD BANK FOR
THE REPUBLICOF ARMENIA

I. Context
1.
Background to the CAS. This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) is being
presented to the Executive Directors alongside the Government's Interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy (I-PRSP), and the Joint Staff Assessment of that strategy prepared by
the staffs of the IMF and the World Bank. The CAS supportsthe Government'sstrategy as
defined in the I-PRSP. The Bank will update the CAS as necessary once the full PRSP,
which is expected during FY02, is completed.
2.
Country Background. Armenia is located in the Caucasus Region, neighboring
Georgia, Azerbaijan,Iran, and Turkey. The official population estimate is 3.8 million people, and GNP per capita was measured at US$490 in 1999. Because Armenia is small,
landlockedand mountainous,with few natural resources, it faces intrinsic economic disadvantages compared with many of its neighbors. To some extent this has been mitigated by
generous official developmentassistance of about 11%of GDP over the last five years.

II. Economic Trends
3.
Sharp Economic Decline since Independence. Following the break-up of the
Soviet Union in the early 1990sArmenia's economy suffered one of the severest contractions among transition economies. The main causes were: the conflict in NagornoKarabakh and the related blockade of major transportation routes; an inherited economic
structure which proved to be

uncompetitive; the hyperinflation of 1992-93 and the

Chart 1: GDP and Export Growth
30%T

continuing effects of thewt
massive 1988 earthquake. In
20%

1993 the country was in
very serious difficulties,
with more than 300,000
refuees
nd
ntemlly
refugees and internally
displaced people, electricity

available, if at all, for only

10%

Rate
*

'*
_

0%
lo% 1995 1996 X1997
-10%<
20% --

I.1998

1999

2000

*

Source:Government
of Armenia

2-3 hours a day, and perhaps

two-thirds of the population surviving on humanitarian assistance. While the economy has
since recovered significantly, output in 2000 was still less than 70% of Armenia's pretransition peak. More importantly,recent economic growth has not brought many tangible
social gains. Poverty and unemployment remain extremely high (Box 1), and surveys
suggest that the public does not have enough confidence in the benefits of market-driven
economic reforms. Emigration, particularly among the younger and better educated,
continues at a fast pace for such a small economy.
4.
Six Years of Economic Growth. Armenia's economy has grown for each of the
last seven years, at an average annual rate of 5.4%. Economicperformancepeaked in 1998
(see Chart 1 and Table 1), when GDP growth exceeded 7%, the budget deficit declined to

-2-

4.8% and inflation fell close to zero by year end. This improvement resulted from a
convergence of factors: the successful stabilization program that began in 1994/95; a
Government committed to structural reform, including in core sectors such as power
generation and agriculture; an expansion in private transfers from the Diaspora; and an
extraordinary program of international assistance, which helped finance a large current
account deficit.
5.
Resilience in the Face of Economic Shocks. Armenia's economic growth showed
a remarkable degree of resilience in the face of two major shocks of the late 1990s. First,
following the Russia crisis, Armenia avoided both an exchange rate crisis and an
acceleration of inflation, and, after a brief slow-down, the economy continued to expand.
Then in October 1999 several leading Armenian politicians, including both the Prime
Minister and Speaker of Parliament, were assassinated. The political aftermath of the
assassinations led to a significant deterioration in fiscal and investment performance.

Nonetheless, economic growth resumed by mid-2000. For 2000 as a whole, GDP growth
reached 6% despite a severedrought.

Table 1: Macroeconomic Trends and Baseline Projections

RealGDPgrowthrate
Consumerpr'ceindex
Exptsgro
ratea
Imnots groth rate

(in percent)
Actual
I
Proiected
1996e01997 1998 1999 2000 2001
2004
5.9 3.3
7.2 3.3 6.0
6.5 6.0
610 5.0
18.7 14.0 8.7 0.7 -0.8 4.5
3.0
30
3.0
4229 -10.3 8.9 6.5 15.0 18.5 9.8
9.9 9.7
3.9
10.8 3.2 4.3: 73
17.4t 7.2 5.0 -8.1

As percent of GDP

Statebudgetrevenue
State budgetexpendwiture
Fiscalbalane, accrualbasis
Cuent accountbalane
C/A balne, ex. trasfers

Foreign
directinvestent
Extnl debt

17.6
26.3
-8.7
-18.2
-25.5
1.1
32.6

19.7
25.7
-6.0
-18.7
-27.8

171
21.9
-4,8
-21.2
-27.1
3.2 11.6
39.0 41.4

19.3
26.5
-7.2
-16.6
-21.7

16.3
23.4
-7.1
-14.4
-19.0
66 6.4
46.
450
o

n/a
n/a
5.0
t10.2
639

153.6
167.7
14.3
167
855

IT172 17.6
21.2 20.2
-4.0 -2.6
-14.1 -12.1
-18.9 -46A.
6.7 6.1
47.3 46.8

18.0
21.0
-3.0
-10.s
-14.5
5.6
45.2

185
21.0
-25

-10A4
-14.2

5.6
44.5

In percent

NPV/exeb
lq V
le
'
TDS/exports
TDcal revenueC
TOtaldebtoutstkinWdisbwsed
($m)4

/a
arevenec
ea,
9.3
20.8
521

143.8
165.4
19.0
22,3
797

135.6 132.7
178.6 178.7
10.7 i5.0
15.M723.5
862 988

122.3 115.1 12i.9
157.8 1449J 1430
12.2 12.2 i3A
17.6 17.3: 18,5
1068 1125 1198

a Goods and services.
b. Three year moving averagecenteredon the precedingyear is used for the denominator.
c. Central governmentrevenue eNduding rants.
d. Includes governmentand governmentguaranteedmedium and long-tenn debt
Source: Government of Armenia and World Bank and IMF estimates

III. Economic Reform Successes and Risks
6.

Reform Commitment in the 1990s. Since independence in 1991, the Armenian

authorities have been committed to democracy and market-oriented principles.
Furthennore, Armenia has been more successful in implementing structural reforms than

most other former Soviet Union countries. Reform progress was most noticeable in the
followingareas:

-3-

Box 1: Poverty In Armenia
Poverty is widespreadin Armenia.Preliminaryresults from the 1998/99IntegratedHousehold
Surveysuggest55% of peoplelivebelowthe nationalpovertyline (definedin termsof nutritionand
otherbasicneeds). Thesurveyand othersourcesreveala numberof featuresof povertyin Armenia:
* Povertyin Arnenia is particularlyprevalentamongthe uneducated,unemployed,disabled,and
familieswith severalchildren,as wellas in ruralareasamongthe landless.In urbanareas58%of
the populationis belowthe povertyline,comparedwith 51% in ruralareas. Povertyis especially
severein townsin theearthquakezone,with75%of peoplein urbanShirakdistrictbeingpoor.
* However,absolute poverty(defined in terms of minimumnutritionalneeds) appears to have
declinedsincethe 1996HouseholdSurvey,especiallyin urbanareas. In 1998/99extremepoverty
wasonlyhalfa percentagepointhigherin urbanthanin ruralareas.
* Introductionof the new targetedfamily povertybenefit(whichtransferred1.5%of GDP to the
poorest40%)wasone factorthatreducedextremepoverty.
* Survey results indicate relativelylow consumptioninequality:the consumptionGini is 0.37,
indicatinga moderatelevelof inequality,whilethe expendituresof the richestdecileare estimated
at eleventimes that of the poorest. The povertyand inequalitysituationwill be furtherexplored
and updatedin the forthcomingPovertyStudy(FY02).
* Overallindicationsare that povertymight be becomingentrenchedin Armenia,with early signs
that the poor may have started disinvestingin humancapital. Poor familieshave difficulties
maintainingtheirchildrenat school- in somecases choosingto placetheir childrenin residential
institutions. There are also some indicationsthat poor childrencannot attend school regularly
becausetheyhaveto workto supporttheir families.
* Withvery limitedsupplyof free of chargehealthservices,accessof the poor to basic healthcare
hasdeteriorated,notwithstanding
effortsto providea basichealthbenefitpackagefree of charge.
Source:1996and 1998/99Integrated
HouseholdSurveys
* Market environment. Successive Governments have pushed ahead with a

comprehensive liberalization of trade, prices and currency regulations, improved
tax and customs administration, strengthened commercial bank supervision, wideranging judicial and accounting reforms, a new Civil Code, and reform of tax,
company,banking, land and bankruptcy laws.
* Privatization. The authorities have divested about 85% of small and medium
enterprises, 75% of large companies, most agricultural land, and all but one
commercial bank (also offered for sale). The Government has issued tenders for
sale of the electricity distribution companies, and introduced private management
of the Yerevan Water Company. Telecommunications has been in private
ownership since 1998, but this has so far resulted in limited improvements in
access or reliability.
* Social Sector Reform. The Government has replaced most poorly-targeted
assistance benefits and privileges with better focused means-tested family benefits.
Aggregate poverty benefit payments have been sharply increased since 1999, and
administration improved.Comprehensivepension reform is now under preparation.
* Health and Education Restructuring. Armenia has initiated the first steps in
improving the efficiency of service delivery in both general education and public
health. The Government has begun rationalizing existing capacity, through both
consolidation and closures. Efforts are also underway to improve financial
management in schools and hospitals, and create stronger incentives and accountability mechanisms. While the first outcomes are encouraging, these reforms are

-4-

still at the pilot stage, and more decisive steps are needed in order for there to be
tangible results over the next 2-3 years.
7.

Political Context and Risks to Reform The political environment for economic

reforms in Armenia remains fragile. While there is a strong consensus among the major
political factions on longer-term economic reform objectives, Armenia's political elites
remain less cohesive on a number of important issues, such as sale of the electric power
distribution companies. Indeed Armenia's external security and the Nagorno-Karabakh
conflict, not economic growth, remain their main preoccupation. There have been six
Prime Ministers since the 1997 CAS was presented to the Board, and the reform
momentumhas seen significantfluctuationsas a result. Uncertaintyand loss of confidence
following the October 1999 assassinations affected the economy through two main
channels: a drastic reduction of investment activity, including delays with finalization of
severallarge investment projects; and a 10% fall in tax collections.
8.
New Reform Momentum. The latest political crisis waned in May 2000 when
President Kacharyan appointed a new Government, led by Prime Minister Andranik
Margaryan, committed to full cooperation with different branches of power. The current
political environmentis generallysupportiveof the accelerationof reform. Recent reforms
have included a WTO compliant customs code, a new Law on Inspections that severely
limits discretionary audits of private businesses, simplified taxation of small businesses,
and establishment of a High Level Business Council to advance improvements in the
investment climate. The Government has persisted with its intention to sell the power
distribution companies, despite strong resistance from entrenchedinterest groups.
9.
Continued Investor Caution. Both domestic and foreign investors have been
alarmed at the existing and potential political uncertainties and risks, both from domestic
political instability and from the unresolvedNagorno-Karabakhconflict. This caution has
been undermining investmentperformance and eroding incentives for corporate restructuring. As importantly, the Government needs to address the legitimate concerns of private
investors in a timely manner.
10.
The Benefits of a Peace Settlement. The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict which
erupted in the period preceding the break-up of the Soviet Union ended in a cease-fire in
May 1994. As yet no peace settlement has been reached. This is a significantconstraint to
economic growth (Box 2). Political uncertainties surrounding resolution of the conflict
have depressed investment levels, especially of FDI. The conflict has also enhanced the
role of the military and other national security agencies, thereby compromising the Govermnent's ability to confront key vested interests. Defense and national security together
absorb 20% of central Governmentexpenditures, and this severely constrainsthe availability of public resources for other needs such as education and health. A peace agreement
would thus have three major economicbenefits. It would:
* Allow the opening of Armenia'sborders with Azerbaijanand Turkey.
* Increase the confidenceof investors, especially foreign investors.
* Enable the Government to free up resources for key development needs such as
health and education.
The Bank is working with the concerned South Caucasus countries to help devise ways to
reduce the cost of transport and trade disruptions, as well as help the Governments be
better prepared to secure the potential gains from peace. In the event of a peace agreement
the Bank would present an updated strategy to the Executive Directors.

-5-

Box 2: Gains from Re-Opened Borders
Theunresolvedconflictover NagornoKarabakhhasclosedmost of Armenia!slandborders,
cuttingoff rail links to the east and west. As a resultArmeniais heavilydependenton transshipmentof goodsthoughGeorgia. This has significantlyraisedits trade costs,giventhe high
costs of all modesof transport(road,rail and port) in Georgia.A recentreportsuggeststhat reopeningof Armenia'sborderswithTurkeyand Azerbaijancouldresultin a reductionin transport
costsof 30-50o, a doublingof exports,andan increaseof 30-38%in GDP.
Whenthebordersdo open,Armenianeedsto be ready. Of particularimportancewillbe:
* Improvedroad,rail, telecommunications
and air infrastructure.
* Fosteringinternationallycompetitiveexporters,for examplein agriculturalprocessing
* Greatlyreducedcorruptionand theftat bordercrossingsand on transportroutes.
* Better integrationof customs and tax rules, proceduresand practicesamong the three
Caucasuscountries.
Source:Trade,Transportand Telecommunications
in the SouthCaucasus:CurrentObstaclesTo Regional
Cooperation(WorldBank 2001)

IV. Paradox of Armenian Economic Growth
11.
Little Link between Growth and Poverty Reduction. Why has growth and
reform not lead to stronger poverty reduction outcomes - nor to more positive public
perceptions of reforms? The answer lies in the structure of recent growth, which has had a
narrow base and a limited impact on job generation and, hence, on poverty. Preliminary
results from the forthcoming (FY01) Growth Study suggest that manufacturing and
services growth has been heavily concentrated in Yerevan, and in only a few sub-sectors
(such as diamond polishing). Investment has also favored large enterprises (such as in
power) with a limited potential for new employment. At the same time most traditional
enterprises have continued to downsize, while creation of new private enterprises -particularly labor-intensive small and medium-sized enterprises -- has remained weak and
unable to absorb excess labor. Overall, most growth has taken place outside the
manufacturingsector -- the very sector where Armeniamay have the strongest comparative
advantage,particularly through its educated labor force. Agriculture and construction have
been the main contributors to GDP growth, but even in these sectors real labor incomes
have grown relatively slowly.
12.
What Went Wrong? Armenia's transition to a market economy was more
difficult and more prolonged than originally anticipated. In contrast to some of the
transition economies in Central Europe, Armenia has yet to see large-scale entry of new
private enterprises or investment. This is the root cause of Armenia's failure to reduce
poverty. Until new investment and restructuring accelerate, the current growth patterns
will not be sustaineddespite the successes of the last seven years. The summaryindicators
of industrial renewal - such as trends in merchandise exports and private investment suggest stagnation. Merchandise exports in 1999 were 10% lower than in 1995, and
amounted to just 13% of GDP. While Armenia has expanded its exports to the EU, North
America, and other new markets, the volumes have not yet compensatedfor the collapse of
traditional markets in the former Soviet Union countries. The prevailing business
environment has remained hostile to a stable inflow of new investment, including FDI.
For existing enterprises, the perceived riskiness of the business environment has unduly
favored short-term gains from asset sales over restructuring and investment. Even
establishment of new companies, backed by Diaspora investment, has been surprisingly

-6-

weak. Another strongly inhibiting factor is weak managerial skills, resulting from decades
of market isolation, and exacerbatedby a decade of border closures.
13.
Major Constraints to Faster Growth. Overall, three main factors appear to
reduce the employmentimpact of existing growth:
* Business environment. Excess interference in business activity by poorly paid
government officials has increased significantly the perceived costs of doing
business as well as made it difficultto attract new entry, including FDI. The fifteen
year monopoly granted in 1998 to Armentel, the telecommunication company
owned by the Hellenic TelecommunicationsOrganization(OTE), has not resulted
in significantlyimproved service, furtherreducing the attractivenessof the business
environment.
* Capacity of the private sector. The isolation of the Armenian economy has left a
serious shortage of management skills in the private sector, limiting the economy's
export potential and integration in the world economy.
* Political risks and blockade. Without resolving the regional conflict and removing the blockade, investment will continue to be constrainedby high transport costs
and perceptions of political risk.

V. Continuing Widespread Poverty
14.
Poverty Profile and Policies to Alleviate Poverty. Poverty in Armenia is
widespread and persistent (Box 1). A number of factors are responsible: (a) high
unemployment (according to the 1998/99 Household Survey, more than 25% of the labor
force), because of very limitedjob creation; (b) low wages for those jobs that are available;
(c) low productivity,with agriculture -- mostly subsistence -- accounting for a high share
of employment (over 40%). Extreme poverty, however, appears to have declined since the
1996 Household Survey, in part because of improved targeting of social assistance
benefits. Even in the face of severe fiscal constraints the Government has succeeded in
maintaining the poverty-oriented family benefit. In addition to restructuring safety nets,
the Government has been working to improve pension administration and strengthen the
public pension system to make it sustainable. Except during the second half of 2000, the
Government has been paying pensions and family poverty benefit on time and avoiding
accumulationof arrears. Additionally,the Social InsuranceFund managed to clear most of
last year's pension arrears, and with EU Food Security Program assistance has managed to
make regular family poverty benefit payments.
15.
GenderDimension of Poverty. By most measures gender inequality is relatively
low in Armenia. Educational enrollment is higher for girls than for boys at all levels of
education, from primary through secondary and secondary-professional to higher
education. Female life expectancy is over 78 years for women, as against less than 71 for
men. However, there is emerging evidence that the quality of life and opportunities for
women have deteriorated:64% of the registered unemployed are women; their labor force
participation rate is 55%, as against 77% for men; they bear the burdens of maintaining
families in times of economic hardship and of increased seasonal labor migration; they
have been badly affected by the decline of social services such as reproductivehealth and
child care. And women's role in public life at senior levels is relatively small, with female
representation in Parliament only 3%.

-7.-

16.

Poverty and Environment. Rising prices and falling incomes have forced many

people -- especially the poor -- to overuse Armenia's natural resources, continuing a trend

which started in the heavy industry days of the Soviet Union. Since independence a
number of problems have become especially severe: water scarcity, depletion of forests
and fisheries, land degradation, urban pollution and inefficient use of resources such as
drinking water. Improved management of environment and natural resources base is
crucial for long-term development. The Government has begun, in the context of a
recently completed National Environment Action Plan, to address the most serious and
immediate environmentalproblems, including the degradation of water and other natural
resources and threats to biodiversity.
17.
Capacity to Monitor Poverty. Armenia's capacity to monitor poverty remains
weak, mostly because there is no regular household income and expenditure survey, which
would be a vital data source on the economic and social conditions of the population (the
integrated household surveys of 1996 and 1998/99 were financed by donors). For these
reasons, the I-PRSP includes a commitmentto establishinga regular program of household
income and expendituresurveys.

VI. The Government Reform Agenda
Facilitating Export-Driven Job Creation in the Private Sector
18.
The Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy. The I-PRSP has three main pillars: (1)
sustainable and equitable economic growth, driven by a more dynamic private sector; (2)
public administration reform and an anti-corruption program; and (3) enhanced human
development.
* The I-PRSP commits the Government to improving the business environment
through reduced administrativebarriers to investment and new entry, especially of
foreign firms, building effective public-private consultative mechanisms, and
enforcing a level playing field for new and existing companies.
* The Government's strategy also focuses on improved public sector management
and reduced corruption,with the aim of improving the provision of public services
and the conditions for private sector growth. Strengthened public sector management will require streamliningthe civil service and key regulatory and controlling
agencies, advancingjudicial reform, and improvingdomestic revenue collection.
* The I-PRSP emphasizes rebuilding human and physical capital. This will require
additional financing of school education, basic health and infrastructure
maintenance(assuming improved revenue performance, and savings in financingof
lower priority items such as utility subsidies), and improving targeting of social
protection and educationexpenditures.
19.
Improving the Business Environment. There is a broad agreement that the next
stage of reforms needs to focus on improvements in the business environment in order to
facilitate investment, new entry and job creation. The Government is committed to
addressing this problem, and specificallyto:
* Lower the administrativebarriers to investmentand new entry mentionedabove.
* Improvethe transparency and technical quality of strategic privatizationprocesses,
with the objective of attracting strategic investors into the largest state-owned
companies.

-8-

* Support financial deepening by advancing policies (such as enforcement of
collaterallegislation)that would reduce lending risks and hence costs of borrowing;
continue the policy of consolidating the banking system, by requiring banks to
increase their capitalization.
* Improve the quality of infrastructure, especially in telecommunications, urban
water supply, and road, rail and air transportation;strengthen regulatory capacity to
supportprivately-ownedoperatorsin energy and infrastructure.
* Facilitate a revival of private agriculture through development of land markets,
improved irrigation and availability of rural credit, and promotion of agricultural
practices for sustainable use of energy, water, soil and pasture resources.
* Expand managementtraining and business developmentservices.
20.
Anti-CorruptionEfforts and Public AdministrationReform. The I-PRSP puts
improvedpublic administrationand reduced corruptionat the center of its strategy.
* Independent surveys suggest that corruption is a severe hindrance to sustained
growth and effective management of public services. Armenia appears to suffer
from a relatively low level of state capture (defined as firms influencingthe "rules
of the game" in their favor by bribing government officials), but very high
administrativecorruption,such as harassment by public officials.
-

To reduce corruption's ill-effects Armenia needs to: (i) enhance the transparency,
accountability, and capacity of its public administration; (ii) develop and
implement clear criteria for personnel management decisions in the civil service;
(iii) develop adequate institutional capacity for financial management, including
effective agencies for internal and external audit, the treasury system, and for
public procurement; (iv) advance implementation of the ongoing judicial reforms
program; and (v) encourage a larger role for civil society in policy making and
implementation (see also Box 3). In any event, expanded trade and private sector
ownership should lessen the opportunitiesfor corruption.

Box 3; Governance in ALrSmenia
ArMen;ia,like otherFSU countries,founditself in 1991withtthe tk of uildingmanynew
governancestructuresand mechanisms.While achievementshave been considerable,
policy
capacityis unvent and accountabilitystructuresundereveloped.Thereare shortcomingsnb
thesupply andthe demandfor goodsectorpolicy.
On the supplyside,the capacityto generategoodpolicyOptionsis limitedby the endowment
of institutionalstutures and skills Armeniawas bequeathedat independence,unsuitedto the
nees o a natiostateand a mareoriented economy,and by the predominanceof defenseand
security concerns.

n the demandside, accountabilityis constrainedby close personallinks betweenpolitical
and businesselites,and by the Executves pre-eminenceoverotherbranhes of state. The'roleof
civil society,N
and theimediais still developing.Formaland infotral checksand balances
are pooly developed. This, togetherwith pervasive'control' activitiesof governmententities,
weakensthe Govemmenfsresponsivenessto public and busiinessesconcerns.0The civil service
needsto become
;-more professionaland meritocratic,and lesstinfluencedby powerfulinterest
groups.
Surce iat

an Governance Review (World Bank. 2000)

-9-

* Public administration reform will need to include a particular focus on improved
fiscal management given Annenia's low level of domestic revenues. A central
instrument is the Medium-Terrn Expenditure Program (MTEP), which will be
updated and mainstreamed,based on the initial draft prepared in late 1999. The full
MTEP will be built on: a) realistic macro-economic projections; b) strategic
prioritization of public spending;c) broad participation of respective agencies, and
d) performance evaluation, enhanced accountability and control over public
expenditures. Further development of the PRSP and the MTEP will need to be
coordinatedto ensure consistencybetween the Government'spoverty reduction and
expendituremanagement efforts. In connectionwith the MTEP, the Governmentis
beginning to strengthen the budget execution process, including improving budget
classification, expanding budget coverage of public expenditures,and streamlining
Treasuryfunctions.
Enhanced Human Development. Much remains to be achieved in the social
21.
sectors, particularly health and education. Much also remains to be done in the area of
social protection, so as to provide appropriateassistance, both in cash and kind to the most
vulnerablegroups, including those living in absolutepoverty, children and the elderly.
* Education. Enrollment rates in general education remain fairly high, indicating
still good access to public education. Nonetheless there are some indications that
enrollment rates may have started deteriorating, especially for the very poor. In
addition, the quality of education has substantially deteriorated. Public education
suffers: (a) severe government under-funding (2.1% of GDP, less than half the
lower middle-incomecountry average), which has caused deterioration in facilities,
lack of modem teaching aids, and low (and often delayed) teacher pay; (b) low
notional pupil-teacher ratios, but in practice class sizes close to the international
average; (c) rigid curricula and teaching methodology; and (d) inefficient and
distorting central financialmanagement control.
*HealthCare. Health care indicators are mixed, but life expectancy for both
women and men appears to be increasing, despite a higher incidence of both
communicable and non-communicabledisease. However, both infant and under
five mortality rates are high at 30 and 25 per 1000 respectively,and there has been
no improvement during the last few years. Immunizationrates are fairly good, but
only 7% of immunization costs are currently covered by the Government,
indicating high vulnerability to fluctuations in donor financing. The prevalence of
tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS is increasing rapidly - while data on the incidence of
HIV/AIDS is very partial, the trend is nonetheless clear and alarming. The health
system suffers from: (a) severe governmentunder-funding(less than 1.4% of GDP,
as against a lower middle-income country average of 3.3% of GNP); (b)
overcapacity of the infrastructure, leading to wasteful resources use, especially in
hospitals; (c) relatively under-developed primary health care; and (d) increasing
out-of-pocket costs and worsening quality of services.
* Health Insurance. The Ministry of Health is considering introduction of
mandatory health insurance, which the Bank would caution against, as analysis
suggeststhat it would not improvehealth sector financing, but would increase labor
costs and further distort labor markets. The Bank believes that a more effective
course of action would be to focus on providing equal access to essential, costeffective preventive and primary health care services, while improving health
facilities.

-10-

Social Protection. In the short term further efforts to reduce poverty need to focus
on measures to improve social programs' administration, on targeting of poverty
benefits, and on the elimination of remaining badly targeted implicit subsidies in
public service and utility provision. The resources released through these two
measures could be allocated to increase the level of povertybenefits and pensions,
as well as to the development of social care services at the local level. The
Government also needs to avoid broad new social programs, which may be
unaffordable, especially in the area of unemployment support. Another barrier to
efficient prioritization of social assistance programs is the lack of a reliable census
which would show where the greatest needs are. This is a particularly important
issue given the large-scale emigration. A new census, currently planned for
autumn of 2001, is a major short tern priority.
22.
Priority Setting. While the I-PRSP focuses on the major challenges facing
Armenia, the Government will need, in the full PRSP, to focus more on how budget
priorities will be set. The I-PRSP does not discuss what the potential sources are for the
planned increases in spending on priority items such as primary health, general education,
old age pensions, and critical infrastructuremaintenance. Only part of this increase could
derive from improved revenue collection, and some further cuts in low priority sectors will
be necessary, with savings reallocated to priority sectors. An additional reduction in
subsidies in energy and infrastructureis especially important. The authorities also need to
undertake a critical evaluation of the current high level of military expenditures. The
World Bank and the Government plan to work together in preparing the Public
Expenditure Review.
23.
Labor Market Issues. The authorities need to implement decisive steps to change
labor legislation as an important part of the overall efforts to improve the business
environment. Reform of labor market institutions and policy would require: (i) replacement of the poorly targeted unemployment insurance with more modest, but more
equitable, unemployment assistance, thereby enabling the Government to lower payroll
taxation; and (ii) rationalization of employment services, with a focus on job search and
counseling services to the unemployed with some limited, demand driven, re-training
programs.
24.
Core Labor Standards. Armenia has a good record on core labor standards,
including:(i) eliminationof all forms of forced or compulsorylabor; (ii) effective abolition
of formal use of child labor; (iii) equal opportunityand non-discriminationin employment;
and (iv) freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining. Laws regulating
trade unions and collective bargaininghave substantiallymet the core labor standard goals,
and the Confederation of Trade Unions of Armenia has negotiated agreements on job
security, salaries, pensions, and social assistance. Binding contracts between workers
(with representation from grass-roots union organizations) and employers are common in
large enterprises,but have not yet taken firm root in smaller enterprises.

VII. Growth and Financing Prospects
25.
Growth Prospects. The Bank shares the view of the I-PRSP that Armenia could
grow by about 6% a year as the reform program deepens and initiatives to expand regional
cooperation develop. In the short term, these high levels of GDP growth are expected to
result primarily from higher capacity utilization. Over the medium term, as the potential
for increased capacity utilization is gradually exhausted,investment in new capacity could

-11-

play an increasing role in generating growth. This will require increased private sector
confidence, both domestic and foreign, and a financial sector that plays a more effective
role in channeling saving into investment. Thus, the gross investment rate, estimated at
17% in 1998, is targeted to rise to about 18.3% by 2003. The I-PRSP also includes an
optimistic scenario of GDP growth accelerating steadily to 9.0% a year in 2003; this
scenario assumes progress towards a peace settlement in Nagorno-Karabakh, greater
foreign investment and tourism, and reduced emigration. If this scenario is realized, the
Bank would providethe Executive Directors with an updated strategy.
26.
Export-Led Growth. Growth is expected to be led by export demand from both
traditional markets, and increasinglyalso from non-traditional markets, such as the Middle
East and Western Europe. So far, export trends have been quite volatile, reflecting both
the specific nature of some of Armenia's main export products (e.g. jewelry and processed
diamonds),weak capabilities of the local private sector, as well as the volatility of several
of Armenia's main export markets. Export growth of about 10% a year (in volume terms)
is projected throughoutthe 2001-05 period, assuming continued improvementsin both the
business environmentand relations with Armenia's neighbors. Infrastructure investments
designed to rehabilitate Armenia's transport and communications with neighboring
countries will significantly facilitate growth in external trade and the development of the
country's transit potential. Armnenia'shighly-educatedand entrepreneuriallabor force will,
despite recent erosion in education standards, remain a source of potential comparative
advantage. Nonetheless, export-growth will be significantly constrained as long as
Armenia's main export route remains costly and unreliable(see paragraph 10 above).
27.
MacroeconomicPolicy and External Financing. Currently, trends in merchandise export represent the weakest element of Armenia's macroeconomicperformance, and
a major source of macroeconomic vulnerability. Armenia's trade deficit is large and
amounted to 29% of GDP in 1999. While Armenia continues to benefit from the
considerableinflow of remittances and private transfers (7-8% of GDP a year) and official
transfers (on average 6% of GDP a year in 1998-2000),it still has considerableresidual
requirements for external financing. The current account deficit after official transfers is
projected to average 12% of GDP over the next three years. A residual financing gap of
about US$210 million is estimated for 2001-03. As indicated in paragraph 2, Armeniahas
over the last five years received generous external assistance, and about US$240 million
(equivalent to about 11% of GDP) is projected for 2001 -- about US$75 per capita (based
on a populationestimate of 3.1 million).
28.
External Debt and Debt-Servicing Capacity. Armenia's public external debt
stood at US$862 million, or 45% of GDP, at the end of 2000. The debt's relatively large
grant element (36%) reflects the large share of highly concessional IDA credits, and the
small share of non-concessionalcommercialdebt. Less than one fourth of total debt carries
variable interest rates. This composition of debt protects Armenia reasonably well against
higher international interest rates, or significant shifts in value of the major international
currencies. Although the current overall debt burden is modest in terms of the size of the
economy, it is high relative to expected export earnings. In terms of net present value,
external debt was estimated at end-1999 at 153% of export of goods and services and at
167% of fiscal revenues. The high debt-to-export ratio represents a constraint for
improvementsin Armenia's creditworthiness.
29.
Debt Trends. Debt ratios improved in 2000, after a 15% expansion in exports in
the course of the second part of the year. The medium-term scenario envisions further

-12-

gradual improvementsin the debt profile over the next several years, based on a stronger
export performance and a
Chart 2: Net Present Value of Debt

continued moratorium on non-

concessional borrowing.
..

..

In

addition, the authorities have
been negotiating a restructuring
of
Armenia's
large
nonconcessional debts with several

(DownsideRisk Projections)
~~~~~250%
^--^----200%
150%

100% 41

creditors (Russia, Turkmenistan,
50%
ren
e
and EU), which could result in
_
2001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10
further improvement of the debt
profile. Overall Armenia's debt
Source:IMF andWorld Bankprojections
should remain manageable as
export performance continues to improve, but the Bank does not envisage that Armenia
will become creditworthyfor IBRD lending during the CAS period.
30.
Downside Risk. The baseline macroeconomic scenario assumes that continued
prudent macroeconomicpolicies and a more market-friendlyinvestment environmentwill
elicit a strong private sector response. However, a less favorable external environment
and/or a loss of reform momentum,leading to weaker-than-expectedforeign and domestic
investment, poses serious downside risks (Table 2). Under a downside risk scenario,
export growth is assumed to be about a 1/3 lower and GDP growth 2 percentage points
lower than in the base case. Both the current account deficit and financing gaps are much
higher and lead to a more rapid build-up of external debt. The debt profile deteriorates
considerably and debt ratios
sustain-.Table
2: Downside Risk Scenario
exceedexceedthresholds
thresholds of
Of sustain-::;::
7o,::y;;r.\;:
ability in about 2007 (Chart 1). GP0dw?Ues (on%
0
20
03
20
D ;a
6.5
4
.
3.0
By 2010 the net present value of
9;
7.
1 71
6.1
the debt reaches around 180% Nind GDP
res i18W
7.70
0
7.8
6.1
of exports and 220% of fiscal Exportsof goodsand,se
revenues. This underlines lmports of goods and services
10.8
2.3
2.5
5.9
Armenia's debt service sustain-

ability problems, especially the
vulnerability to lower non-debt

financing flows, such as FDI
and grant support.

The Bank

As %f

GDP

r

t baIancetextransfers

Curr;n aon

b
Ct investtncnt
Debt indicators

..18.8
-14.1
6 .7
6.7

will be pressing the need for Totaldebt outst'ing&*ibursed(US$m) 987.6
serv
f gtoodsetas
%o
rs of god an w ices

continued substantial levels of

productive investment and grant iNP
assistance at a major investor
conference in May in New York
(see paragraph 42), and at a
Consultative
Group Meeting
Consultative Group Meeting

planned for Paris in July (see
paragraph 57).

s

NPV!flscalrevenue

4.3e
132.7
178I.7
15.0
23.5

-16.8

12.3

-148
1
-10.

49.
--11.0

4.8
05
1094.3

48.9b
16A
165.0
12.4

1170.0

48,8

4.5

1277.8
0.2

1.
127.9
128
164.1
12.8
147
18.3
20.1

TD&fia
0
1 .9
a includesgovernmentand governmentguaranteedmedium and long-termdebt.
b. Exportsarethreeyearmovingaveragecenteredonthe precedingyear.
c. Central government revenue excluding grants.
Source: IMF and World Bank Staff Estimates

VIII. CAS Consultations
31.
Consultations. Both the I-PRSP and the CAS have been discussed with a wide
range of stakeholders in Armenia. The Bank's own discussions included focus groups

-13-

comprising members of civil society throughout Armenia, including NGOs, the foreign
and domestic private sector, development partners, and trade unions. The Sociology
Department of Yerevan State University and an NGO, Armenian Democratic Forum,
helped organize meetings in seventeen urban and rural locations. Every group was
enthusiastic about the chance to express their views, with some groups even deciding to
keep meeting on a regular basis. NGOs, the private sector and other representatives of
civil society were also active participants at two recent meetings in Yerevan -- the
discussion of the Institutional and Governance Review, and the Consultative Group
Meeting (Box 4). There were a number of recurring themes at each of these discussions.

Box 4. The October 2000 ConsultativeGroup Meeting In Yerevan
A ConsultativeGroup Meetingwas held in Yerevan in October,2000. At the Meeting,
participantsemphasizedthe needfor: (a) continuedmacrostability,(b) improvedenvironmentfor
privateinvestment,domesticand foreign,and(c) measuresto ensurethat the vulnerablesectionsof
the populationare adequatelyprotected.The Meetingalso discussedthe importanceof broadparticipationin the formulationof the PRSP.Threethemeswereemphasized:
* BusinessEnvironment,specificallythe need to: (i) deregulateand remove administrative
barriersto investment;(ii) strengtheninvestmentpromotion;(iii) improvebankingsupervision
and regulation;(iv) advancedevelopmentof the capital markets;(v) privatizethe remaining
largestate-ownedenterprises,includingin energy.
* GovernmentRevenues,particularlya broadenedand increasedlevelof revenuecollection,as a
followup to recentreformsin tax and customadministration,includingtax evasionmeasures,
particularlyaimedat the 'shadow"economy.
* Governance,including:(i) institutionalreform;(ii) designand implementation
of an effective
anti-corruptionprogram;and (iii) consolidatingthe democraticprocess. More resoluteaction
was neededto improvethe "rule of law" and anti-corruptionactivities,and to ensure well
targetedpublicservices,especiallyhealth,educationand socialprotection.
GroupMeeting(SecM2000-733.
Dewemer202000)
Source:
ReportotheExecutive
Directors
ontheConsultative

32.
Job Creation. Faster private employment generation was consistently seen as
critical to sustained poverty reduction. Participantspointed to a number of pressing issues:
* Small and medium businesses -- the most likely source of productive new jobs -are hampered by increasingly out-of-date skills and training, unpredictable and
burdensome enforcement of regulations, and especially what was seen as
unwarranted harassment by tax officials. Many small business owners said that
small enterprises are hampered by lack of market knowledge and market access,
with even simple informationsuch as on prevailingmarket prices hard to obtain.
* Distortions in the banking system were mentioned, with the private sector insisting
that there was strong demand for loans, which was tempered by a narrow definition
of allowable collateral, and notional interest rates being inflated by demands for
bribes. High interest rates, and lack of credit and associated collateralmechanisms,
were mentionedat grass-rootsmeetings.
Poor Governance and the Public Sector. Corruption and theft of public
33.
resources were also mentioned repeatedly. In the face of these problems most participants
sought greater local control over Government funds and over decision-making. Many
focus groups wanted more directly-elected local officials who could be held accountable

-14-

for administration of public monies. But they also acknowledged that low pay among
public officials made eliminating corruptionhard to achieve.
34.
Deteriorating Human Capital. The decline in social services was a major concern, affecting people's health, the education of their children and their ability to live with
dignity. Many participants perceivedthere to have been a steady decline both in the quality of education and health services, and in their availability. A deterioration in social
protection was also repeatedly mentioned. While participants saw inadequate funding of
social services as part of the cause of this malaise, a much larger problem was poor
administrationand lack of implementationof reforms.
35.
Follow-Up. In conjunctionwith Governmentand other stakeholdersthe Bank will
hold follow-up meetings, focusing in particular on the developmentpriorities of the poor,
and developinga close interaction with the PRSP process.

IX. World Bank Assistance Strategy
36.
The Last CAS. The objectivesof the Bank's assistance strategy, as defined in the
last (FY98) CAS, were to:
-

"Foster the rapid development of the private sector by promoting further structural
reforms, strengthening the financial system and the legal and regulatory framework,
and alleviating key infrastructurebottlenecksin energy, transportand water".

* "Support social sustainability and the alleviation of poverty through the strengthening of the social safety net, and through improvements in the quality of, and
access to, basic health and educationservices".
37.
Progress in Implementing the Last CAS. The Bank has successfullysupported
progress towards most of these goals, especially investments and reforms to improve
energy, transport, irrigation and water supply services, strengthening of the judicial and
financial systems, rationalization and targeting of social benefits, and improvements in
educational quality and access. Poverty remains high, but most of the other progress
indicators in the last Country Program Matrix were met, especially in the areas of
macroeconomicreform, financial rehabilitationof the power sector, restructuring of social
protection,and introduction of new financial mechanisms in general education- indeed the
macroeconomicbenchmarks were over-achieved. The area where the Bank has been least
successful is in promoting broad-based private sector development. In addition to
somewhatuneven implementation of structural reforms, dynamic private sector growth has
been more hampered by Armenia's isolation and political instability than the Bank had
anticipated. In addition, it was more difficult than expected to address the institutional,
bureaucratic, and legal obstacles to private sector investment (as recently detailed in a
Foreign Investment Advisory Service report). In the health sector the Bank was, in
retrospect, too optimistic that health financing reform would catalyze sectoral
rationalizationand downsizing. In particular the Bank did not anticipatethe difficulties the
Government had in reducing over-capacity, and in realistic budgeting in the face of
continuing revenue shortfalls. Recently,however, the momentum of health sector reform
has picked up considerably (see paragraph 6 above).
38.
The CAS Strategy. The Bank's strategy supports the I-PRSP approach, and
deepens elements of the previous CAS, including a more explicit emphasis on private
sector development as a pre-requisite for poverty reduction, as well as on governance and

-15social sustainability. The I-PRSP focuses on improving policy fundamentalsto create a
better environment for private sector growth, streamlined management of public goods,
and an increased stock of human capital. This would facilitate sustainablejob creation, a
larger tax base, and better government services, particularly in the social sectors. This
should in turn improve incomes and quality of life, and reduce poverty. Notably, the IPRSP progresses significantly beyond the Government's -- and the Bank's -- previous

strategy,by emphasizingmore the institutional barriersto private sector development. The
Bank particularly welcomes the I-PRSP's focus on consultationand monitoring, ensuring
that new policies are developed and assessedby a broad group of stakeholders,using welldesigned and measurable indicators. The Bank's support for the I-PRSP would focus on
three fundamental policy issues identified above: creating jobs through private sector
development; improving governance and public sector services; and rebuilding human
capital. While the span of the planned assistanceis relatively broad, the Bank believes it is
manageable as: (i) it is in areas where the Bank already has substantial knowledge and
involvement;(ii) the scope and size of the individualoperations is relatively modest, and in
most cases complements support from other donors; and (iii) these are areas where the
Bank already has substantial experienceof working with the Governmentand civil society,
and where the Bank has a good understandingof the institutionalcapacity.

A. Creating Jobs through Private Sector Development
39.
PRSP Focus. The I-PRSP emphasizes the vital need for job creation through
further improvement of the trade regime, further downsizing of the state enterprise sector,
more realisticpricing of government services, flexible labor markets, modernizationof the
legal and bankruptcy framework, improved infrastructure maintenance, and carefully
managed promotionof private sector investment. The Bank intendsto continue supporting
these reform efforts through a mix of lending and non-lending services.
40.
Improving the Entrepreneurial Climate. The Bank's strategy will build on
lessons from previous adjustment credits, which supported, inter alia, privatization,
enterprise and banking restructuring, capital market developmentand property rights. The
Bank will also build on the existing support for enterprise development,which has helped
to strengthencommercialbanks, the capital market, and enterprises' investmentand market
development capacities, and has financed a credit line for enterprise fixed investmentand
working capital. Effective implementationof the Fourth Structural AdjustmentCredit
(being presented to the Board along with this CAS) should promote improvementsin the
business climate and reduced corruption through: support for deregulation (liberalization
of licensing, registration, inspection, and reportingrequirements); reforms of the legal and
regulatory framework, and of tax and customs administration; improvements to land
markets; and strengthening of institutions and mechanisms that support strategic
privatizationand bankruptcy. The Governmentplans to establish a mechanismfor regular
monitoring of the costs of doing business, and of major bottlenecks for investments.
Lessons from the Bank's draft Growth Study (FYO1)have already been factored into the
design of SAC IV. To continue to support Armenia's structural reform program the Bank
is processing SAC V for FY03 Board presentation (or late FY02 if performance warrants).
The Credit would support further core reforms in the business environment and social
sectors. In addition, a Labor Market Study (FY03) would advise the Government on
removing impediments to labor market flexibility. IFC has made only one equity
investment to date (Hotel Armenia), and no loans, reflecting in large part a scarcity of
suitable investment opportunities. Throughoutthe CAS period, IFC will continue to seek

-16-

investments possibilities, and to offer the advice of the Foreign Investment Advisory
Services to further improvethe business environment.
41.
Promotion of the Private Sector. The forthcoming Growth Study (FY01) is
expected to develop a better understanding of the constraints to private investment in
promoting balanced and equitable growth, including the expected role of the rural
economy. In addition to ongoing support for infrastructure maintenance and enterprise
development, the proposed Private Sector Development LIL (FY02) builds on existing
analytical and project work, and would, together with SAC IV, support improvementsin
the policy and business environment. The project should also help strengthen local
managerial capabilitiesthrough expanding business services to private SMEs and secondment abroad of some of the best private sector managers. This LIL could be followedby a
fuirtherPrivate Sector Development Credit (FY04), to help improve business linkages.
The Bank is working with private business, as well as other donors and the Government,
on a strategy and action plan for the infornation technology and software industry. The
strong expansion of this industry over the last two years shows the potential for much
broader growth in various high-skill sectors. The Bank also intends to co-sponsor a
combined South Caucasus Trade Facilitation Workshop for Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia later in 2001.
42.
Direct Support for Foreign Investment. For foreign private investors, Armenia
remains a high-risk country. Economic and political uncertainties are great, and the legal
aspects of doing business remain largely untested. IFC opened an office in Armenia in
February 1999, and is seeking private investment opportunities in this difficult market.
Three initiatives are under way. Along with a group of American-Armenianinvestors, IFC
is investing in the modernization of a hotel in downtown Yerevan. IFC is also developing
a Risk Capital Fund, which will use innovative financial instruments (quasi-equity/equity)
to target small and medium-size enterprises. Non-bank financial intermediariesmay offer
the best means by which to finance SMEs because Armenia's banks are weak and
undercapitalized, making financing through credit lines difficult. Also with the aim of
strengthening the SME sector, IFC is in the process of identifying a foreign technical
partner to establish Armnenia's first leasing company. Complementing its financing
activities, IFC has, under the newly established Private Enterprise Partnership, initiated a
Technical Assistance program designed to improve corporate governance practices and the
legal and regulatory environment for business development by working directly with
government officials and company managers, directors, and shareholders. In addition, a
new Technical Assistance Facility may be established in conjunction with the Risk Capital
Fund to support the Fund's investrnent initiatives. IFC is also working to encourage
foreign investment in Armenia by sponsoring a major international investors' conference,
with support from the World Bank, the U.S. Trade and Development Agency and the
Armenian Government. The conference is planned for New York in May, 2001 and will
bring together entrepreneurs developing a range of private sector projects, and leading
investors from around the world with an expressed interest in Armenia.
43.
Guarantee and Advisory Support for Foreign Investment. The World Bank
Group is also catalyzing foreign investment through MIGA and FIAS. MIGA recently
provided a guarantee for an investment in the InternationalCommercial Black Sea Bank in
Armenia. FIAS has prepared a detailed and analysis of the barriers to investment in
Armenia. The recommendations of this report were highlighted and strongly endorsed at
the recent Consultative Group in Yerevan. A joint FIAS/MIGA initiative has been
providing short-term assistance to the Armenian Development Agency (ADA) in

-17-

preparation for the New York Investors Conference, and MIGA has been assessing the
possibilities for mounting a long-term technical assistance program to build ADA's
capacity to promote Armenia as a location for foreign investment. MIGA is currently
working with Bank Group to encouragethe Armenian Governmentto give greater priority
to the work of ADA, and with donor agencies to develop a partnership-based funding
approach to ADA's work program.

B. Improving Governance and Public Sector Services
44.
PRSP Focus. The I-PRSP emphasizes the need for restructuring public administration, further anti-corruptioninitiatives, more cost-effectiveadministration of urban and
rural public services where outright private ownership is not foreseen, and sustainable
management of natural resources. The Bank proposes to continue to provide support in all
these key areas.
45.
Governance. The Bank plans to deepen its broad focus on governance and corruption issues. One central element will be a Public ExpenditureReview (FY02), that will
cover not only institutional reforms, but also the development priorities for available
expenditures, given the weak revenue base and high level of defense expenditures. The
Bank's work on institutionaland govemanceissues, widely discussed at a workshop in
Yerevan in October 2000, is to be followed up with a Public Sector Reform Credit
(FY03), which will also build on the ongoing Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (FY02), and could include further technical assistance for structural reform.
The Public Sector Reform Credit would support strengtheningof public administrationand
executive decision-making, rightsizing and modernizing the civil service and making it
more accountable, improving public expenditure management and procurement
procedures, reforning intergovernmental finance, and strengthening the internal and
external audit functions. Periodic surveys of households and firms will be carried out to
benchmark and assess the progress of public sector reforms, especially in respect of
delivery of public services. Recently-approvedInstitutional Development Fund grants
aim to improve policy capacity and the quality of national accounts statistics, and
strengthen the capacity to plan, prioritize and implement the PRSP. Grant support is also
envisaged from the Public-PrivateInfrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) to support
the Government's request to create a single public services regulatory body in Armenia to
regulate monopoly aspects of energy (electricity, natural gas and network-basedheating),
telecommunications, and water and sanitation services, and to improve access to
communications. The regulatory body is to be created by enlarging the role of the Energy
Regulatory Commission to also cover other sectors which have significant natural
monopoly elements. Through the recently approved Judicial Reform Project (FY01) the
Bank is supporting a redesigned court administration and case management system,
improved court infrastructure, strengthened judicial training and enforcement of court
decisions, a comprehensive legal information database, and improved judicial public
relations capacity.
Utilities. The Bank proposes to continue to support the I-PRSP's emphasis on
46.
reforming the public sector's regulatory capacity of key services, such as energy, water,
sanitation, and telecommunications - including management contracts with private
operators.
Water and Sanitation. The Bank's focus is improving water service at lower cost
(but with increased cost recovery) to households -- especially the poorest
households. This is expected to bring significant health benefits, and reduce

-18-

responsibility of government for service provision, and strengtheningits regulatory
capacity. The Bank's existing municipal developmentcredit is helping improve the
reliability, quality and cost-effectivenessof water service by shifting management
of Yerevan's water company to an internationalprivate operator, and the Bank will
help introduce similar management contracts in other cities across Armenia under
the planned Municipal Water and Sanitation SectorCredit (FY02).
* Power. Electricity is the dominant source of energy for the economy. Through
adjustment and investment operations, the Bank has been supporting the technical
and financial rehabilitation of the power sector, its restructuring into a transparent,
independently regulated, market-based system, and the sale of shares in the
electricity distribution companies to strategic investors. Power privatization would
eliminate a quasi-fiscal burden of about 2% of GDP, improve the efficiency and
reliability of power supply, and secure private financing for the substantial
investments needed over the next ten years. An IDA partial risk guarantee is under
consideration to support privatization of the power distribution companies, and
further risk guarantees might be considered. The Bank has provided investment
support for electricity transmission and distribution through a credit which
constitutes the first installment of up to $53 million available over the next five
years under the Power Sector Restructuring and Development Program. SAC V
(FY03) could include a component for Energy Sector Adjustment,notably financial
rehabilitation and debt restructuring to facilitate the post-privatized electricity
market, and IFC could potentially co-finance further energy investments. The EU
and USAID are assisting Armenia develop an investment strategy to facilitate the
safe and early closure of the nuclear power plant at Medzamor, and the Bank would
support this through complementarylending (for example support for phasing out
electric heating through the proposed Heating Credit).
* Heating. The I-PRSP emphasizes the importance of improving the availability,
and reducing the cost and the environmentalimpact of heating. Household heating
is expensive (often second only to food in the household budgets of the poor).
Existing state-supporteddistrict heat suffers from non-payment of the order of $1012 million a year, but this "subsidy" benefits only about 10% of the population, not
always the poorest. Other urban consumers either use relatively costly electricity,
or use wood (causing an alarming pace of deforestation)in poorly ventilated apartments (causing indoor pollution resulting in respiratory ailments). Gas supply to
apartment buildings is being slowly restored, and is likely to be the main energy
source for home heating. Given the economies of scale and communal nature of
heating services in high population density urban areas, the Urban Heating
Strategy (FY02) is intended to propose mechanisms to create associations to take
"ownership" of building-level heating services, thus contributing to community
driven development. Support for implementation of the Strategy is possible
through an Urban Heat Credit (FY04). Given that Armenia has substantial
geothermal reserves, the Urban Heat Strategy will also examine this resource's
potential, as a cost-effectivealternative to traditional fossil fuels.
47.
Rural Services. The 2000 drought has had a devastating impact in some parts of
Armenia, with rainfed wheat and potato production down by 60-70% in the affected areas,
and the Bank is supplementingand restructuring the ongoing Dam Safety Credit (FY99) to
provide field preparation and tubewell rehabilitation for the spring planting. More broadly,
the Bank is supporting the Government's rural reform program, which promotes further
cost recovery in irrigation, strengthens land property rights and land markets by

-19-

acceleratingtitling of individualplots, enforcing collaterallegislation,and promotingsmall
credit associations. The Bank has helped to strengthen the operation of the irrigation
system and to reduce leakage, and further support is envisaged in the proposed Irrigation
Development Credit (FY03). The Bank would -- in close collaboration with the EU --

include support for decompression of tariffs and the development of water users
associations. This would help meet the new cost-recovery targets to be defined in the
forthcoming Medium-TermExpenditure Program. The Bank has also been helping raise
small farmers' productivity through finance for better support services, easier title
registration, and better access to credit (credit access is also being improved for mediumscale agro-businesses).
48.
Environmentand NaturalResourceManagement.The Bank's planned NaturalResourceManagementand PovertyAlleviationCreditlGEFGrant(FY02) would help reduce
rural poverty and natural resource degradation by supporting: participatory watershed
management and community development,environmentallysustainable farming activities,
and improved forest and protected area management. Through direct community involvement the project will integrate biodiversity conservation into sustainable natural resources
management. The Urban Heat Credit (FY04) would also help reduce consumption of
polluting and scarce fuels, specifically if zero-polluting geothermal resources could substitute for fossil fuels. The Bank is also completing work on an Integrated Water
Resources Management Plan (FYO1) based on sustainable and rational utilization,
protection, conservation and management of water resources. It will be important to
monitor the cross-sectoral impact of reforms, including the inter-relationship between
energy sector reforms and trends in fuel-wood consumption (and thus deforestation and
indoor pollution). Also important will be continued support for improved environmental
policy, institutional strengthening, building public-private partnership for environmental
protectionand compliance with internationalcommitments. The Bank will consider future
assistance to help the Government introduce new incentive structures and regulatory and
financial instruments for environmental management, and may also support efforts to
mainstream the environment and incorporate global environmental concerns in transport,
agriculture, and energy sectors by promoting development of non-traditional energy
sources.
C. Rebuilding Human Capital
49.
PRSP Focus. The I-PRSP stressesthat it is critical to expand budget allocations to
the social sectors, and to push forward with a comprehensiverationalization of existing
facilities, better training and re-training, more focus on results and on using output
indicators, and greater focus on preventative health, housing conditions, indoor pollution
and water and sanitation. The Bank's support will focus on:
* Education. The Bank has been supporting more prioritized, efficient and stable
financing for general primary and secondary education, including increased
budgetary allocations for general education, sustainable textbook supply, and a
greater community involvement in schools. Teaching quality is being addressed
through improvements in the curriculum,teacher assessment and examination, and
better access to modern technologies,including informationtechnologiesand more
relevant textbooks. School budgets are to be made more transparent and more
poverty-focused, with budgets and other relevant documents being made public.
The Government is tackling lack of access of the poor to schooling through free
textbook loans and other targeted initiatives. The Government still faces major

-20-

challenges in combining underutilized schools, and addressing the poor quality of
education, and the proposed Second Education Credit (FY04) would likely focus
on these continuing challenges.
* Health. The Bank has been supporting better access to health services,particularly
for poorer groups and regions, reallocation of the health budget towards primary
health care, concentration of funding on core services, improved financing of the
health system, and health service rationalization,including closing excess capacity.
The Bank will continue to support the Government in developing appropriate
strategies and mechanisms for achieving the above-mentioned goals, as well as
follow-on project funding. The Bank is also helping the Government develop a
comprehensive HIV/AIDS strategy, that could be supported under the possible
Health/SocialProtection Credit (FY04), which would also deepen the health and
social protectionreforms being implementedin the first health sector credit.
* Social Protection and Labor Markets. Social protection continues to be a key
concern. Social insurance is crucial to protect the elderly against extreme poverty.
A SocialProtection Study (FY02) would contributeto the design and implementation of fiscally sustainable public pensions reform. In the area of social safety nets
the Bank expects to continue to support better targeting and administration of the
family poverty benefit, since it is one of the key poverty coping/alleviationinstruments. The main objective in the medium term is to rationalize social insurance.
The Bank will also help develop Armenia's legal framework, institutions and
policies for social protection, and especially community-basedsocial assistance and
care services for the most vulnerable. In the area of employment the Bank's
support for flexible and broader labor markets is expected through policy reforms
in labor legislation and institutions, and modest, affordable public protection for
unemployment. Support in some of these areas is possible through the
Health/Social Protection Credit (FY04), as well as future adjustment program
supportedby SAC V (FY03).
G
Gender
Issues. Women's earnings are a crucial component of household income,
and the implications for economic and social development will be addressed in the
SocialProtection and Labor Market Studies (FY02 and FY03), and in the design
of the Household Survey. The Bank's second Social Investment Fund Credit
(FY00) has a particular focus on gender issues, including support for: evaluation of
the project's impact on women, as well as mitigatory steps where needed;
strengthening the active participation of women in development activities; and
collectionof gender disaggregateddata for evaluation and future project purposes.
* Community-DrivenDevelopment. Armenia pioneered social investmentfunds in
ECA, though the internal and external shocks have made it more difficult to reap
large-scale benefits from this work to date. The Bank will continue to support
appropriate scaling-up of community-driven development by expanding community access to information on Bank-assisted projects -- for example the planned
Natural Resource Management and Poverty Reduction Credit/Grant(FY02) -and promotingcommunities' systematicinvolvementin design, implementationand
monitoring of watershed management. The Urban Heating Credit (FY04) could,
as mentioned above, focus on community ownership of heating services. The
Bank's community-driven development approach -- which the Bank is working
with Armenian stakeholders to develop -- will have important implications for the
ongoing second Social Investment Fund Credit, education and health sector
reforms, natural resource management, and planned anti-corruptionprograms.

-21-

X. The World Bank's Business Strategy
50.
World Bank Portfolio. Following the closure of three credits in the first three
quarters of FY01, the World Bank's portfolio now consists of thirteen credits totaling $261
million. Recent portfolio performance has been good (see Attachment 1 and Annex 8),
although there have been some systemic problems, especially procurement delays,
counterpartfunding arrears, and delays in parliamentaryapproval of grants.
*

Counterpart funds are sometimes insufficient - four projects are currently rated
unsatisfactoryfor counterpartfunding.

* Parliamentary ratification for PHRD/IDF/GEFGrants has often been slow, and at

one point in FY00 thirteen Grants totaling almost $5 million were pending.
* Procurement is often delayed by problems with tender evaluation, and by delays in

award of contracts and handling of procurementcomplaints.
Following an intensive portfolio review in early 2000 the Governmenthas been addressing
these issues. Counterpart backlogs are being cleared, a comprehensive Law on
International Treaties has streamlined grant ratification, and procurement delays are now
significantly less than they were in FY00. To improve responsiveness and day-to-day
oversight of the portfolio, the Bank has devolved authority for portfolio management to
Yerevan, and is working to streamline and improve project audits. In addition, the Bank
intends to place in Tbilisi an International Financial Management Specialist covering the
three Caucasus countries.
51.
IDA Base Case Assistance Program. Annenia is currently in the Base Case,
which assumes continued good policy reform performance. Lending is envisaged to be
US$150 million (see Table 3), which is consistent with the IDA Lending Allocation. The
Base Case includes three projects a year (four in FY04) -- including SAC V in FY03.
There are few other donors providing development assistance, so the lending program
covers a relatively wide spectrum (other donors are mostly involved in technical assistance

Table 3: Proposed Lending Scenarios
(US$ million)
FY01
Project

Judicial
Reform*
SACIV

Base Case
FY02
FY03
FY04
FY02-04
Sm
Project
Sm
prSject Sm Project Sm No. Sm
11.4 Nat Resource 10.0 SACV
40.0 PrivateSector 10.0
(1l),GF)
Develop't
3_
50.0 Municipal

20.0 lihigation

20.0 Health/Social I5.0

Watert
I
Protection*
Priv. Sec. Dev2' 5.0 PublicSec. Ref. 10,0 Educaion 2'

10.0

10.0

Urban Heat
Total Base

61.4

35.0

45.0 1

70.0

150.0

Low Case
FY01
Project
Judicial

FY02

FY03

Sm
Project
$Sm Project
11.4Nat Resource 110.0Municipal

Reform*

(IA/GEF)
=_____
Public Sec. Ref.

wTotalLow-1.
I0
T Follow-up operation
*Approved

ll

Watert
10.0 Irrigaiion

FY04

FYO2-04

Sm Project
Sm No. Sm
15.0Health/Social 15.0
Protection"
20.0 Education

3.
.0

0

.0
25.0

6

8a.0

-22-

and humanitarian relief), covering structural reform, the social sectors, sustainable rural
development,governance, private sector development and urban utilities. Nonetheless, as
indicated in Table 3, most of the proposed credits follow up on earlier successful
operations, so the risks of a relatively diverse portfolio are substantially reduced. Given
the work program and intentions of other donors (see Attachment 2), we envisageno direct
support for culture, tourism, housing, mining, telecommunications or aviation infrastructure,although the two latter areas are possibilities for IFC investment.
52.
IDA Base Case Triggers. For Armenia to remain in the Base Case progress would
be needed on all the triggers shown in Box 5. The triggers focus on satisfactory development and implementationof: (i) the macroeconomicprogram, as evidenced for example by
implementationof the Poverty Reduction and Growth Program; (ii) the Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper (PRSP); (iii) the reform program, including measures to improve social
service delivery and the business climate (with a tangible reduction in corruption and
governmentinterference in private sector activity); and (iv) the IDA-financed projects.
High-Base Case Triggers and Assistance. Should the Government accelerate its
53.
reform program, particularly in the areas of energy reform and privatization, the Bank
could consider bringing SAC V forward to FY02, and extending its scope to include
further strengthening of reforms in the energy sector. Under these circumstances, a PRSC
of US$40 million could be added in FY04, bringing total lending up to US$190 million.
With good performance, IDA partial risk guarantees for privatizations and for new exportoriented investments could be considered,in addition to the US$150-190 million envelope.

Box 5: Base Case Triggers
Base Case assistance would be conditined on progress in all of the following areas:
Overall Development/PovertyReduction
* Developmentand implementation ofthe PRSP
. A satisfactory macro-economicenvironment, as evidenced for example by the implementation of the
Poverty Reduction and Growth Programn
* No new arrears in counterpart funding, pensions, poverty benefit, and other socialsector expenditures
* Fewer lhan
15%of IDA projects rated unsatisfactoryon implementation
PrivateSector
* Satisfactory progress with the Action Plan for improving business environment/removing
administrativebarriers for investments
* Progress in implementingthe legal framework for private sector development, including amendments
toJot stock and limited liability companies laws as well as to bankruptcy legislation
Governance
. Progress in tax/customs administration, court infrastructure, training, and working of judicial
system/procuracyshow improvement,as measured by business and client surveys
* Enactment of Civil Service Law; implementation of income/asset declaration for senior public
servants
Social Sectors
* Satisfatory implementationof school rationalization,initially in three pilot zones in 2001.
* Satif
ry implementationof hospital rationalization, initially in two districts in 2001.
* Progress in completing the first phase of pension reform and improvedtargeting of social assistance.
Energy
* Adoptionof a ComprehensiveHeatingStrategyand ActionPlan, coveringlegal, regulatory,market
structure and financing issues, including progress in phasing out Government involvement in the
provision of district heat, and in imposition of a hard budget constraint on heat providers.

-23-

54.

Low Case Triggers and Assistance. If there is little progress on any of the Base

Case triggers, Armenia would move to the Low Case. In the Low Case, the focus is
expected to be largely on projects in human development, rural development, and
environment that can contribute to long-term poverty alleviation even with poor
governance, or for capacity building. No lending is envisaged for private sector development, or energy. Also in the Low Case there would be no adjustment lending. Total IDA
lendingwould then be about US$80 million.
55.
Outcome Indicators. Well-designed and monitored outcome indicators will be
crucial to judging the success of the poverty reduction strategy. Box 6 gives the mediumterm outcome indicators to be monitored over the CAS period. Longer-termindicators are
being developed in the context of the PRSP (see Attachment 3 and Annex 9, drawing on
the I-PRSP. The Bank will work with the Governmentand civil society to further develop
these indicators, and to create monitoring procedures at the community, district and
national levels. Where feasible, the Bank will try and ensure that the indicators and
monitoring mechanisms capture the social impacts of anti-povertymeasures, and that the

Box 6: OutcomeIndicators for CAS Period (FY02-04)
Overall Development/PovertyReduction

* Pooras percentof total populationreducedfrom55%to 50%
 Regularpaymentof socialinsuranceand socialassistancetransfers
* At least 15%real increasein averagepensions
Private sector

* Reducedaveragetimefor businessregistration
* Reducedtime for customsclearanceby importers
* Reductionand streamlining
of licensingrequirements
Governance

* Greaterrelianceonthejudicialsystemto resolvebankruptcycases
* Publicperceptionof progressin improvinggovernance,and reducingcorruption
SocialSectors
^ Girls' schoolenrollmentmaintainedat at leastthe sane levelas boys
* Realaveragesalaryteachersalaryup by 40%
^ Enrollmentratesin elementaryeducationat least95%
* Maternalmortalityreducedfrom47 to 22 per 100,000livebirths.
* Increaseor at leastmaintainpercentageof fullyimmunizedoneyearolds at 95%or more(TB
currently93%,DPT88%,measles84%,polio96%.
* Reduceunder-5mortalityfrom25 per 1,000to 20 per 1,000
Energy

* Quasi-fiscalcostof energysectorreducedto a quarterits currentlevel
* Resumptionof naturalgassupplyto additional40,000households
Agriculture

* Completionof titlingof ruralland-- all farmershavetitles
* 20% increasein Water UserAssociationsreceivingat least 5,00Om3 of irrigationwaterper
hectare
* 25% inprovementin costrecoveryin irrigationwatersupply
InfrastructureServices
* Decreasein proportionof drinkingwaterwith aboveallowablecontaninantlevelsfrom 14%
to 8%(urban),and from22%to 15%(rural)
* For householdswith pipedwater service,increasein numberhavingat least 12hours supply
from 10%to 200/o(urban)and from40%to 55%(nral).

-24-

indicators are regularly published and disseminated throughout Armenia. The Bank will
also work with communities,local governments and civil society organizationsto develop
a "social audit" of Governmentprograms and policies.
56.
Work Program. The Bank's work program -- including supervision and nonlending services -- is summarizedin Table 4. The due diligence economicand sector work
will be addressed through the PER/CFAA (FY02), a Poverty Study (FY02), a
CEM/GrowthStudy (FYO1),an Institutionaland GovernanceReform Study (FYO1),and a
ProcurementAssessment (FY02). An informal Client Survey was undertaken in FYOO,in
preparation for the CAS, and a Client Survey will also be undertaken in FY02 and later
years as necessary.
Table 4: Work Program Summary
:_____:__
PSD

T
I

AAA Product
Supervin Product
Lo g Produ&ct
EnterpriseDevelopment (PSDI) PD
M2 (FY8)
Financial Sector TA (FY02)
CEMIrowth Study(FYOI)
PSD 3 (FY04)
PSD 2;PSD 3

SAC4; SAC5;SATAC
Hi_hway, tansport
Governance
and Agric. Reform Support
PublicSector pant Safety

SAC 4(FY01)

LaborMarket(FY03)

(0FY)
Nat. Rcs. & Pov. Rid'n
(FY02) [with GEF]

TradeFacilitationWoFhop FY0O)
CFAA (FY02); Client Survey (FY02)
R (0Y0)YIR Workshop (FY01)

_SACS

Irrigationt
I
PublicSectorRef,(Y03) PER (FY Ati-CorruptionIDF(FY01)
Nat.Resoure & PovertyRed'n Municipal
Water(FY02) UrbanHeatStrategy(FY02)
:Tit'eRegistration
UrbanHeat(PY04)
WaterResourcesPlan(FYO)
Cultural Heritage IDF (FYO0)
Strengthn Policy Cap. IDF (FYOI)
ProcurcmentAssement (FY02)
Stren tenStaisticsIDF ()

JudlicialReforn

PublicSectorRefom
ElectricityTraqs'/Urban Heat
Municipal i and It

:ub.,Priv.Infra'reAdvisoryFac'y (FY02)
Prty
ove Study(FY02)
Healh/SocialProtection RestruturingEducation(FYOI)
]Children'sInitiativeIDF(FY98)
(FY04)
Chid WelfareNote(FY02)
Irrigation 2 (FY03)
__Judiciail
Re (FY01) So Prtion St* (FY02)

umgan
Capital EducationI and I, HealthI and1 Education2 (FY04)
H4elth/ScialProtection
SlP
___________

57.
Coordinationwith Development Partners. While IDA is the largest donor to
Armenia, there are a number of other agencies active in Armenia, mostly but not exclusively focused on Technical Assistance. The USAID, DFID, KfW, major UN agencies
(including WFP), EU/TACIS,IFC,
IMF, EU/TACIS and the Lincy tBoi 7.:MeldingLocal andlIntFrnationalExpertise
Foundation have representatives:tt ;;:C : ;0;t
in
resident
Yerevan. Gese any,
To improvethe developmentimpact as well as the
resident ind YEBRealsoGerma,
cost-effectiveness
of tie Bank'swork,it was recognizedthat a
pvide
s
nmore
substaitiverole for fnationalstaff in the countryoffice
Japan,t.and EBan alsoffic
support. The Bank office has nine would help.0 Aoringly managementof a number of
operational staff, who have an activities is beingdevolvedtotheBank'sofficein Armenia. In
increasing range of responsibilities Otober 2000 the Bank's Country Manager in Armenia
management.Sincethen,
(Box 7), including managing key assumedresponsibilyoprtflio
partnerships, and donor coordina- portfolioquitybhs started to show some improvements.In
tion. There are fourteen sector- FY02 national will managea varietyof tasks, initiallyin
based Partner Groups, and an um- sonmecases as comanagers with internationalstaff. National
brella Donor Coordination Group staff will also take the lead inwanumberof supervisiontasks
chaired on a rotational basis by the and some analytical and advisory work, including the
Bank, UNDP, and USAID. In
eparation stageof the Public
E xpenditureReviewand the
October, 2000, the Government
fAnt-Corruption
Stragy. The intentionis to locate work
and the Bank co-chaireda Consul- ;where it can best benefit from synergiesbetweenthe Bank's
tative Group Meeting in Yerevan I globalexPertise
and localknowledgeand4experience.

-25-

which included an open and very substantive dialogue with the private sector and NGOs
on a range of institutional and economic issues (Box 4). The donors have been closely
involved in the development of this CAS. The Bank expects to co-chair a Consultative
Group Meetingin Paris in July, 2001.
58.
Civil Society. Most of the Bank's consultation will continue to be directed towards
supportingthe Government'sparticipatory process for the PRSP. The main goal will be to
help "internalize"PRSP participation process within the Armenian Government and civil
society, and in that sense the role of the Bank will become more advisory. Leading roles
are being played by USAID, EU/TACIS, the Lincy Foundation and other international
NGOs in supporting the evolution of local NGOs, strengthen Parliamentaryprocesses, the
press and other democratic institutions.

XI. Managing the Risks
59.
Geo-Political Instability. The CAS faces several political and economic risks.
The Caucasus have historically been a region buffeted by competing political forces. In
the event of renewed conflict, the Bank would endeavor to focus on the most povertyoriented investments, but a temporary cessation of new lending, and perhaps even
disbursements,might be unavoidable,and the Board would be updated in this event. On
the other hand, there are prospects for a peace agreement on Nagorno-Karabakh. In this
case, we would update the Board on proposed Bank support for post-conflict
reconstructionand development.
60.

OtherRisks. The CAS faces a number of other risks.
- Governance. The Bank's strategy relies on judicial and public administration
reform (and deregulation) as the best way to help reduce corruption and improve
the quality of government services. There is a possibility that the reformn
momentumin these areas will be affected by political changes, and in this event we
would need to reassess our strategy, possibly placing more emphasis on nonlending services.
* Population. A new census is planned, which may reveal a much lower population,

with a resulting risk of reduced assistance from donors. The Governmentneeds to
plan ahead for this eventuality, and the Bank will work with the authorities to
ensure that the MTEF and PRSP include a downside risk scenario of reduced donor
assistance.
. Business Environment. The Poverty Reduction Strategy relies on the
Government's commitmentto move rapidly to support a level playing field for the
private sector, thus encouraging employment-creatinginvestments. There is a risk
that this commitment may be derailed by interest groups that benefit from the
existing business environment of limited competition and high effective barriers to
new entry. If this were to happen, the Bank would need to postpone its planned
support for private sector investment,and reconsider its adjustmentlending.
* Debt Sustainability. Any of the these risks mentioned above could move Armenia
toward the downside macroeconomic scenario outlined in paragraph 30 above, in
which the debt burden becomes unsustainable relative to exports and/or revenues.
Key factors in determining whether the downside risk scenario is realized are

-26-

overall economic growth, the level of exports-orientedinvestment, and the grant
element of new development assistance. This reinforces the importance for the
Bank of supporting reforms which foster private investments, particularly exportoriented investments, and which improve the tax base and tax collection. It also
underlines the importance of the Bank continuing to help the Government manage
and coordinateexternal assistance.
61.
Minimizing the Risks. The Bank will try to minimize these risks to the CAS by
working closely with Government, civil society, the domestic and foreign private sector,
and donors to ensure that reformnot only gains momentum,but is owned and supported by
all the key constituencies necessary for Armenia to succeed in its poverty reduction
strategy.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
by Sven Sandstr6m
Washington,D.C.
April 25, 2001

-27-

ATTACHMENT1

IDA

PORTFOLIO

The Bank has financed 23 projects for a total of US$693 million (all except the first
were Credits). Ten have closed. The Bank's current portfolio consists of a Structural
Adjustment TA Credit and twelve investmentcredits in support of infrastructure,the social
sectors and community development, rural development and agriculture, private sector
development and law and justice. As of March, 2001, none were rated unsatisfactory for
either Development Objectives or Implementation Progress, but four were rated
unsatisfactoryfor CounterpartFunding.

Sector
EconomicPolicy
PrivateSectorDevelopment
PublicSectorManagement
Environment

RuralDevelopment&Agriculture
ElectricPower& Energy
WaterSupply&Sanitation
Transportation
Health
SocialProtection
Education
Total

Number NetCommit Share
Projects
(Sm)
(%)
1
5.0
1.9
1
16.8
6.4
1
11.4
4.4

Av.Age
(Yts)
3.4
4,2
0.5

1

8.0

3.1

2.4

3
1
1
1
1
1
1
13

84.1
21.0
30.0
40.0
10.0
20.0
15.0
261.3

32.2
8.0
11.5
15.3
3.8
7.7
5.7
100.0

3.7
2.0
2.8
0.8
3.6
0.8
3.3
2.7

-28-

ATTACHMENT2

Partner Groups
Mini ConsultativeGroup

Ministry of Financeand Economy

Poverty Reduction

PRSP Steering Commission

Governance/Corruption

Public Sector Reform Commission

Health

Ministry of Health

Roads

Ministry of Transportand
Communications
Ministry of Education and Science

Education
Agriculture/
Food Security
Decentralization
Energy

Ministry of Agriculture

Private Sector

Ministry of Industry and Trade,
Armenian DevelopmentAgency

Rural Development

Ministry of Territorial Admin'n
Ministry of Energy

Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of
Territorial Administration
Water
Committeeon Water Resource
Management,Yerevan Municipality
Natural Resources/Envir't Ministry of Nature Protection
Refugees/Housing
Department for Refugees/Urban
ConstructionMinistry
Central Bank /Ministry of Finance &
Financial Sector
Economy/SecuritiesCommission

WB/IMF/UNDP/USAID/
EU
WB/IMF/UNDP/USAID/
UNHCRJNGOs/EU
WB/IMF/EU/DFID/
USAID/GTZ/OSCE
WB/USAID/UNDP/WHO
UNICEF
WB/Lincy Foundation/EU
Japan
WB/UNDP/UNICEF/EU
UNHCR/USAID/
EU/WB/FAO/WFP/IFAD/
USAID
USAID/EU
WB/EBRD/JBIC/EU
USAID/KfW
WB/USAID/KfW/GTZ/
UKlEBRD/EU/Eurasia
Foundation
WB/UNHCR/WFP
WB
WB/UNDP/EU
UNHCR/WFP
WB/IMF/USAID

-29-

ATTACHMENT3

Longer-Term Outcome Indicators
(See also Text Box 6 and Annex 9)
(Numericaltargets to be developed in context of full PRSP)

PovertyReduction
Absolute numbers of poor and very poor

.

Private Sector
.
*

Private sector credit as proportion of GDP
FDI as a proportionof GDP

Governance
*
.
.

.

Proportionof householdsreporting paying any kind of bribes during the last year
Proportionof time firms' management spends dealing with bureaucracy
Reduction in the number of activities subject to licensing and similar controls
Proportionof users satisfied with access/qualityof general public services(e.g. courts)
Proportionof users making informal payments for education and health services

Social Sectors
.
.
.
.
.
*
.
.
.

Student learningachievement outcomes
Public spending on general education as a share of GDP and total public budget
School enrollment and attendance ratios
Number of children in institutions
Infant mortality
Under-fivemortality rate
Child stunting and wasting rates
Maternal mortalityrates
Incidenceof respiratory infection, infectious/communicablediseases, including TB and STD.
* Immunizationrates
Energy Services
^ Proportionof population with accessto pipeline gas
. Decline in wood, coal and other solid fuels for urban household heating
Agricultureand Natural Resource Management
Averagesize of farms
Proportionof Water User Associationsreceiving at least 5,000 m3 of irrigationwater per hectare
* Ratio of harvest forest to net natural growth
. Nationallyprotected areas as proporfion of total land
. Water quality (BO13,COD, heavy metals)
*

.

InfrastructureServices
^
.
.
.

Proportionof population with accessto safe water (urban/rural)
Proportionof population with accessto adequate sanitation (urban/rural)
Road accidentdeatis and serious injuries
Averageroad user cost, including travel time

-30-

Annex 1
Page 1 of 2

Armenia at a glance
Europe&
Central
Arnenia
Asia

POVERTYandSOCIAL

Lowincomtt

9'7Q00

Development
diamond'

1999

Populabon,mid-year(millions)
GNPDercaita (AtlasmeMtod,VS$J
GNP(Atlasmethodx
USSbillions)

38
490
1.9

475
2150
1.022

2,417
410
988

0.1
0.6

1.9
2.3

67
69
22
8

Life expectancy

Averageannualgrowth.1993-99
Population(%)
Laborforce(%

na
-15

Most racmntetimate (atst year available,1993-99)
Poverty(% ofpopulation
belownationalpovlyVline)
Urbanpopulabon(%oftotalpopufation)
Lifeexpectancyat birth(vears)
lnfantmortality(Per1,00/ivebirths)
Childmalnutrdion
(9 ofchildrenunder5)
watersource(% ofpopulation)
Accessto imDroved
Illiteracy( ofpopuationage 15+)
Grossrpnmaryenrollment
(6ofschool-agepopulation)
Male
Female

55
67
73
15
3
85
1
90
88
93

3
100
101
99

31
60
77
43
64
39
96
102
86

1989

1998

1999

1.9
16.9
19.0
-14.7
-5.9

1.8
17.3
20.7
-9.3

-21 2
10
41.4
19.0
26.7
143.8

-16.6
1.0
46.3
14.3
29.7
153.6

Gross
primary
enroPiment

GNP
per
capta

Accessto safe water
-

Armenia
Low-income
group

KEYECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS
1979
GDP(US$billions)
Grossinvestment/GDP
Exports of oodsandservices/GDP
Grossdomesticsavings/GDP
Grossnabonalsavings/GOP

-.

Currentaccountbalance/GDP
InterestpavmentGDP
Totaldebt/GP
Totaldebtserce/exports
Presentvalueof debtWGWP
Presentvalueof debexPorts
(averageannualgrowth)
GW
GNPPercaoita
Exportsofgoodsand services

1979489 1986-99

1998

1999

-3.2
-3.0
-18.2

72
6.3
8.9

3.3
3.0
6.5

13.3

1979

1989

Economicratios'
Trade

Domestic
/e
SavinInvestment

n

Indebtedness

1999043
61

-A

rmiernia
Low-incomegroup

STRUCTURE
of the ECONOMY
1998

1999

Growthof investment
andGDP%)

(% of GDOF
Agriculture
IndustrY
Manufacturing
Services

34.0
308
219
35-3

28.7
326
230
387

10

Prvateconsumption
Generaloovemmentconsumrption
Importso goodsandservices

103.6
11.1
52.8

98.5
107
49.7

-20

1998

1999

Growthof exportsand imports(%)

12.6
1.0
-2.7
5.6

1.3
59
52
30

4.3
-2 4
50
4.4

04
-0.7
11
01
2.7

1979-49 1199-99
(averageannualgrowth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturnn
Services
Privateconsumption
Generalgovernment
consumotion
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsof goodsand services
Gross nationalproduct

-

.

6.5

9s

-

GDI

97

Be

0c3DP

1

3

3

so
Exports -

mports

Note 1999dataare preliminaryestimates
The diamondsshowfour keyindicatorsin the country(in bold) comparedwithits income-groupaverane Ifdataare missing,the diamondwill
be incomplete.

99

-31Annex 1
Page 2 of 2

Armenia
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1979

1989

1998

1999

Domestic prices
(%change)
Consumer prices
ImplicitGDP deflator

..
..

..
..

8.7
10.8

0.7
0.1

Government finance
(% of GDP,includes cunrentgrants)
Current revenue

..

..

17.1

19.3

.

.

..

..

1.2
-4.3

0.1
-5.2

1998

1999

229
9
8
102
808
201

247

Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

Infatlaton(%)
s,000
4000
3

2,00
1ooo
0
94

95
9e
GDP deflator

98
CPI

97

0

TRADE
exports(fob)
Total merchandizeexpors (fob)
Copper mineral, concentrate
Molybdenummineral,concentrate
Manufactures
Total merchandizeimports(cif)
Food
Fuel and energy

1979

1989

..

..

.
..

..
..

.

.

Capital goods

Export and import levels (US$mill.)

721
129

203

113

80

o
93

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

94

95

96

97

98

99

..
..

..

.

.

..

..

|

Exports

UImports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
1979

1989

1998

1999

Current account balance to GOP(%)

Exports of goodsand services
Imports of goodsand servicres
Resource balance

..
.
..

..
.
.

360

383
919
-536

0

1,000
-40

Net income
Net current transfers

.

.

60

..

177

55
174

-10

..

-403

-307

20

.

.

..

..

406
-4

311
-4

-25

.
.

..

298
505

305
535

1998

1999

787
10
293

855
94
352

68
1
2

55
1
2

113
148
0

94
84
0

221
-16

122
2

125
43
0

48
66
0

43
2
40

66
3
63

(USS millions)

Current account balance
Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS mWillions)
Conversion rate (DEC,locaLUSS)

.

'Ii',
*

15

-

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCEFLOWS

1979

1989

(US$ nmilions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Composition d 1998debt (USSmill.)

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resourceflows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

.
..

..

.

.

..

.

10
133
293

129

190

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments

Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C-IMF

D - Othermultilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G -Short-term

-32-

Annex 2
Selected Indicators*

of Bank Portfolio Performance

and Management

As of 03/09/2001

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
NumberofProjects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years)b
Percent of Problem Projects by Numbera"'
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a.
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number ad
Percent of Projects

at Risk by Amount

ad

Disbursement Ratio (%)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision

Resources

(totalUS$)f

Average Supervision (USS/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U orHU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U orHU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

1998

11
1.8
9.1
7.7
9.1

1999
14
2
0
0
0

2000
15
2.5
6.7
1.4
6.7

2001
13
2.7
0
0
0

7.7

0

1.4

0

20.2

27.7

25.1

12.1

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1,112

1,192

1,500

1,218

101

85

100

94

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
6
5
223
163
0
0
0
0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance ofthe Bank's portfolio at the
beginning ofthe year: Investment projects only.
f. Adjusted for FY01 dollars
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,

-33-

Annex 3 - Bank Group Program Summary
As Of 03/09/2001

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal
year
2002

Proj ID

USs(M)

Strategic Rewards
(H/IAL)
M
M
H

Implementation
Risks (HIMIL)
L
M
H

Natural Resource Management
Municipal Water & Wastewater
Private Sector Development2
Total

10.0
20.0
5.0
35.0

2003

Public Sector Reform
Irrigation Development
SAC V
Total

10.0
20.0
40.0
70.0

H
M
H

M
M
H

2004

Health/Social Protection
Urban Heat
Private Sector Development3
Education 2
Total

15.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
45.0

M
M
H
H

H
M
M
M

IFC and MIGA Program
IFC Approvals (US$m)
Hotel Armenia (FY01)

Loan Equity Quasi
0
3.6
0

Partic
0

MIGA Guarantees (US$m)
Inter'l Comrm'lBlack Sea Bank

1998

1999

2000

2001

0

0

2.7

0

-34-

Annex4 - Summaryof NonlendingServices
As OfWO912001

fPrduct

Completion
FY

Recent completions
Institutional Governance Review
Workshop
Social Dimensionsof Utility Price
Changes
Institutional GovernanceReview
Banking Sector Vulnerability
Poverty and Targeting Strategy
Civil Service Assessment
Judicial Assessment
Financial Sector Review
Private Farms Study
Underway
RestructuringEducation Expenditures
Growh Study
Water ResourcePlan
Reg Eco Int/Trade FacilitationWorksho
Urban Heat Strategy
Children's Initiative IDF
Cultural Heritage IDF
StrengtheningStatistical System IDF
Macro Monitoring
Planned
Poverty Study
Country FinancialAccount' & Auditing
ProcurementAssessment
Public ExpenditureReview
Child Welfare Note
Financial Sector TA
Labor Market
Social Protection Study
Anti-Corruption Strategy IDF
StrengtheningPolicy Capcity IDF

Cost(US$000) Audiencea

Objectiveb

FY01

$31

G, D, B, P

KG

FY00

$40

G, B

KG, PS

FY00
FY00
FY99
FY99
FY99
FY99
FY99

$172
$39
$191
$67
$60
$41
$15

G, D, B, P
G, B
G, D, B, P
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, B, P

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG
KG
KG
KG

FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY02
FY01
FY02
FY02

$100
$220
$150
$40
$100
$40
$65
$60

G, B
G, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, B
G, B
G, B

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

ongoing

$200

G, B

KG, PS

FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY03
FY02
FY03
FY03

$80
$50
$50
$175
$60
$50
$130
$130
$60
$60

G, D, B, P
G, B
G, D, B
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B
G, D, B

KG, PS
PS
PS
KG
KG
PS
KG
KG
PS
PS

a. Govemment(G), donor(D),Bank(B), publicdssemination(P).
b. Knowledge
Generation
(KG), publicdebate(PD),problernsolving(PS).

-35-

Ar=x 5

Armenia SocialIndicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Totalpopulation,
rid-year (niHlions)
Growthrate(%annualaverage)
Urbanpopulation
(%of population)
Totalfertilityrate(birthsperwornran)

Same region/income group
Europe&
Central Asia

Lowincome

1970-76

1980-85

1993-98

2.8
2.3
63.0
2.8

3.3
1.5
66.6
2.5

3.8
0.3
69.4
1.3

474.7
0.1
66.2
1.6

3,536.4
1.4
30.5
3.1

460
147

2,200
155

520
136

1.3
3.2

POVERTY
(% ofpopulation)
Nationalheadcount
index
Urban
headcount
index
Ruralheadcount
index

..
..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

INCOME/CONSLMrPTION
USTFIBUTION
Gni index
Lowestquintile
(%of incorre
or consunption)

..

..

Fighest quintile(% of incorre or consunption)

..

..

..

..

3.1
2.0

..

..

..

4.0
5.1
8.8

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

100
100
99

86
89
82

I\iasles

..

..

92

91

80

DPr

..

..

89

82

..

..

87
3

72
69
75

73
71
76

74
71
78

69
65
74

63
62
64

..

25

15

22

68

18

26

92

INCOME
GNPpercapita(US$)
Consunrerpriceindex(1995=100)
Foodpriceindex(1995=100)

SOCIALINOCATOFS
Public expenditure
Flealth (% of GDP)1...
Education(% ofG
Socialsecurity and welfare (% of GD)F

Net primary school enrollment rate
(%of agegroup)
Total
bb-

Feniae
Access to safe water
(% of population)

Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% under12months)

Chid nelnutrition(% under 5 years)

Life expectancyat birth
(years)
Total
Nble
Ferrale
Mortality
hIfant(perthousandlivebirths)
iknder5 (per thousand live births)

..

.

-36-

Annex 6: Key Economic Indicators

Nationalaccounts
(as% of GDP)
Gross domesticproduct3
Agriculture

100
37

100
32

100
34

100
29

100
29

100
28

100
27

100
26

100

Industry

33

33

31

33

35

36

38

39

..

Services

31

35

35

39

35

36

35

35

..

118.9
16.9

114.7
16.9

110.6
16.8

103.7
17.8
4.0
13.8

100.2
18.3
4.0
14.3

...
..
..

25.7
45.4

Total Consumption
Gross investment
Governmentinvestment
Private investment
ENports(GNFS)b
Irports (GNFS)

112.7
17.9

109.3
17.3

..

..

..

..

4.1

..

..

..

.

12.7

108.0
17.2
3.8
13.4

23.2
56.0

20.3
58.3

19.0
52.8

20.7
49.8

23.0
49.9

25.0
50.6

25.1
47.9

25.3
45.8

Gross domestic savings

-13

-19

-14.7

-9.3

-13

-10

-6

-2

..

Gross national savings

-4

-9

-5.9

1

4

6

8

..

1597

1639

1899

1847

1915

2089

2280

2489

2693

620

520

480

490

529

543

569

613

686

3.3
3.4

7.2
7.0

3.3
2.9

6.0
6.0

6.5
5.7

6.0
5.1

6.0
5.3

5.0
4.4

6.9
3.5
4.0

2.9
-0.1
0.0

5.7
6.9
6.9

6.2
3.7
4.0

5.7
1.5
1.9

5.7
2.1
2.3

4.7

iMemorandumitems
Gross domesticproduct
(US$millionat currentprices)
GNPper capita (US$,Atlas method)

Realannual growth rates (%,calculated from 1994prices)
Gross domesticproduct at niarketprices
5.9
Gross NationalIncome
5.9

Real annual per capita growth rates (%,calculatedfrom 1994prices)
Grossdomesticproduct at narket prices
5.5
3.0
Total consumption
2.2
7.9
Private consumption
2.7
8.9

.

Balance
ofPayments
(US$millions)
Exports(GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports(GNFS)b
Merchandise CIF
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

368
290
888
760
-520
185
-291

330
234
952
793
-622
217
-307

360
229
1000
806
-640
177
-403

383
247
919
721
-536
174
-307

441
307
955
774
-514
187
-276

522
356
1058
848
-536
189
-294

573
392
1092
870
-519
197
-275

630
432
1139
908
-509
206
-261

691
475
1222
944
-531
216
-281

Net private foreigndirect investment
Long-termloans (net)
Official

18
173
113

52
184
101

221
34
34

122
85
85

122
69
69

140
112
112

140
75
75

140
60
60

150
94
94

-37-

Armenia - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)
Revenues
17.6
Expenditures
26.3
Fiscal balance, accrual basis, deficit (-)
-8.7
Fiscal balance, cash basis, deficit (-)
-9.3
Foreign financing
6.5

19.7
25.7
-6.0
-5.9
6.3

17.1
21.9
-4.8
-4.3
2.6

19.3
26.5
-7.2
-5.2
4.7

16.3
23.4
-7.1
-4.2
1.5

17.2
21.2
-4.0
-4.6
4.3

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth
Total credit growth (%)

8.3
35.6
-2.9
37

8.7
28.7
25.5
-12

10.0
36.0
60.7
51

11.0
13.6
5.8
-0.8

14.6
38.7
24.2
9.0

14.7
12.0
8.6
9.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

180.0

169.2

176.0

163.6

157.2

22.2
18.7
19.6

35.1
14.0
17.7

33.4
8.7
11.2

52.9
0.7
0.1

23.6
-0.8
-1.4

Price indices(
Merchandise
Merchandise
Merchandise

YR94 =100)
export price index
import price index
terms oftrade index

Real exchange rate (USS/LCU)f
Real interest rates 9
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator(% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.

GDPatfactorcost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
State budget
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.
For 1996-1999: 91-day T-bill yield. For2000 average yield of T-bills with 182-day maturity.

17.6
20.2
-2.6
-3.8
3.3

18.0
21.0
-3.0
-3.0
2.4

18.5
21.0
-2.5
-2.5
2.0

157.2

157.2

157.2

157.2

4.5
4.5

3.0
3.0

3.0
3.0

3.0
3.0

-38-

Annex 7 - Key Exposure Indicators

521

639

787

855

862

988

1068

1125

1198

Net disbursements(US$m)a

163

144

148

84

7

126

80

57

73

Total debt service (TDS)(US$m)'

43

24

68

55

47.1

78.4

69.7

76.6

92.3

Totaldebt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO)(IS$ma

Debt and debt serviceindicators(%)
IDXYSb

141.5

193.4

185.5

184.5

164.3

161.7

159.4

152.9

148.9

32.6

39.0

41.4

46.3

45.0

47.3

46.8

45.2

44.5

NPV/XGSd

143.8

153.6

135.6

132.7

122.3

115.1

112.9

NPV/Fiscalrevenue'

165.4

167.7

178.6

178.7

157.8

149.7

143.0

'FDO/CDP

9.3

5.0

19.0

14.3

10.7

15.0

12.2

12.2

13.4

IlDS/Fiscalrevenue

20.8

10.2

22.3

16.7

15.7

23.5

17.6

17.3

18.5

ConcessionalITDO

38.8

40.5

44.2

67.3

73.7

81.6

85.4

87.6

88.9

PreferredcreditorDS/publicDC(%)C

38.0

77.8

73.9

64.2

65.1

39.7

58.4

58.7

51.5

IBRDTDO(US$n)

10.3

11.2

10.6

10.2

9.7

9.2

8.6

8.1

7.5

IDATDO(IJS$m)

174

240

293

352

417

482

558

613

657

Share of IBRDportfolio(%)

2.0

1.8

1.3

1.2

1.1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

Share of IDAportfolio(%.)

33

38

37

41

48

49

52

54

55
1.3
5.7

TDS/XGS

IBRD/IDAe.xosure indicators

0.9
1.8

2.6
5.1

1.1
2.4

1.7
3.9

1.8
5.8

1.5
3.7

1.7
5.3

1.6
6.0

Loans

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Equityand quasi-equity

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

3.6

3.6

3.6

3.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

2.7

2.7

2.7

2.7

2.7

IBRDDS/publicDS (%)
IDA DS/publicDS (%)
IFC(l JS$m)

MIGA
MIGAguarantees (US$m)

-39-

Annex 8
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
As of 03/09/2001

Closed Projects
IBRD/IDA
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed(Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed(Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

Total Undisbursed
(Active)
Total Undisbursed
(Closed)
Total Undisbursed
(Active+ Closed)

10
93.30
0.00
341.90
0.90
435.21
0.94

158.03
0.12
158.15
13

ActiveProiects

LastPSR
SupervisionRating
ProjectName

Obiectives

poaton

Amountin US$M
Fiscal

IDA Undisb

AGRREFSUPPORT
EDUCATION
ELECTRANSM& DISTR

S
S
S

S
S
S

1998
1998
1999

14.5
15.0
21.0

ENT DEVT

S

S

1997

16.8

HEALTH
IRRIGDAMSAFETY
IRRIGREHAB
JUDICIALREFORM
MUNDEVT
SATAC2
SIF II
TITLEREG
TRANSPORT
Total

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

1998
1999
1995
2001
1998
1998
2000
1999
2000

10.0
26.6
43.0
11.4
30.0
5.0
20.0
8.0
40.0
261.3

3.5
4.6
18.1
1.2

6.0
23.8
2.3
11.1
21.6
2.2
18.8
5.6
39.2
158.0

-40-

Annex 9
CAS Program Matrix
(Based on I-PRSP; to be refined for full PRSP)
Bank Assistance

Objective

Measure

______________

I.

Partner

~~Programs
T

Monitorable Result

Economic growth

1. Creationof a high-levelBusiness
1. Creation
Businessby
of a high-level
Introductionof public-privatedialogue
Councilon investmentpromotion
and businesssupport,and approval for investigationand eliminationof
of a programfor investmentclimate barriers for businessdevelopment
improvement

Analyticalwork
FIAS/MIGA,
and support
UNDP
through SAC
processand under
SATAC2;PSD
projects

2. Organizationof the intemational
of the internationa Presentationof investmentprojectsto
s
Orgnizaion
internationalfinancialcommunity
bsNess onfreneokrmnai
NewYork

Supportfrom IFC
and WorldBank

3. Adoptionof all legal statutes
Contributionto establishingstable
environmentandfavorable
Weconomic
3.sAdophn
for accessionstattes
climatefor investments
necessaryfor accessioninto WTO

SAC IV

EU/TACIS/
OSCE

4. Adoptionof a new privatization
programn
for 2001-2003
Ensuringeffectiveeconomicgrowth
programfor 2001-2003

SAC preparation
SAC preparation

(IBTCI)
(IBTCI)

Supportthrough
SAC preparation

IMF/USAID Establishmentof prioritiesfor the
use of privatizationproceeds
and DFID
TA

5. Approvalof a medium-term
strategyfor the effectiveuse of the
privatizationproceeds

Effectiveuse of privatizationproceeds

6. Adoptionof a legal statuteon the
transfer of landto privatized
enterprises

Ensuringappropriateconditionsfor
operationof privatizedenterprises
o

Improvementof the investment
climate,as measuredby e.g. business
surve, as customs
court infrastructure,
sudrvenistration
training, and working of judicial
system,procuracy
system/procuracy

as
~~~~~~~Support
from Attraction of foreign investmnents,

JudicialReform
Project

US Trade and measuredby e.g. increasingratio of
Development Foreign Direct Investmentto GDP

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Agency

USAID

WTO membership
Sale or liquidationof state

enterprises Increase in economic
~~~~~~~efficiency

Increase in the efficiencyof
privatizedenterprises

-41-

Measure

Objective

Bank Assistance

7. Adoption of laws on "Joint-stock
companies", "Limited liability
companies", "Registration of legal
entities".

Consolidation of the legal economic
framework

IFC/Judicial
Reform Project
and from
SATAC2

8. Adoption of changes in Civil
Code and/or Civil Procedures Code

Increased efficiency in companies'
operations, financial rehabilitation

Judicial Reform
Project

Partner
Programs

MonitorableResult
MntrbeRsl

USAID

Business climate improvement

USAID/
German TA

Full operation of bankruptcy
procedures
Institutional restructuring of the

9. Implementation of Irrigation
Development Schemes

Increased efficiency and financial
rehabilitation of the irrigation sector

access
10. Expand
n-frm
bth on-farmn
cces off both
IO.Expnd

of micr-credits
to farmersEstablishment
Availability
Projects-mcaisinldg
to farmers, Irrigation
micro-credits
Availability
iriainPoet;USAIDproduction,
promotion ofofagricultural
of agricultural

machione

Irrigation Projects

Financial Sector

and off-farm credits to rural

promoty

population

TA
affordability of agricultural machinery
and fertilizers

11.Initiating public discussions on
the tax and customs reforms
program

Formation of more effective tax and
an
Fusorma ytioefmor fetv

II.

SAC IVIPRSP

IFAD

sector, strengthen Water User
Associations, conversion from
pumping to gravity irrigation to
increase efficiency.
of new lending
crceit
mechanisms including micro-credits

UnD-

for on-farm investments,

funded NGOs

agroprocessing industry, and selfemployment activities

USAID!

AgAID
reed program on tax and customs
rforms. Reduced time for customs
clearance.

StateGovernanceand combatingcorruption

12. Adoption of draft law on "Civil
Service"

State governance system improvement

of draft
on
13.
lawAdoption
13. Adoption of draft law on
State governance system improvement
Financial disclosure for high-level
public officials

Support from
DFID
IDFs and
analytical work for
IGR
work
~~~~~~~Analytical
DFID/
for IGR. Public
fSectorReform
Credit.

IMF

___
___ _____ ____
_____
_ _____ __
___ __
____________

Reduced bureaucracy, as measured
by business and other surveys

Establishment of a system of
financial disclosure for high level
public officials. Reduced public
perception of corruption as measured
by surveys

-42-

Measure

Objective

BanikAssistance

Partner
Programs

MonitorableResult
MntrbeRsl

14. Adoption of draft law on
"Changes to Laws on Territorial
administration and Local
governments"

Clarification of state, territorial and
mandates
and
localon
odie,
local governance bodies mandates and
interrelationship

Strengthening
Policy Capacity
IDF; Public Sector
Reform Project

DFID/
USAID

Better balance between roles of
central and local Governments

OSCE/Lead
Donor Group
(UK, UNDP
German
Embassy,
USAID,
UNDP,

Reduced corruption as measured by
business and other surveys

15. Design of an anti-corruption
program

Combating corruption

SAC IV; IGR;
Anti-Corruption
IDF; Public Sector
Reform Project

EBRD)

16. Adoption of legal statutes
necessary for implementing the law
onon"rcureent
"Procurement"

Ill.

Regulation of the state procurement,

Strengthening

ensuring transparency of procurements

Policy Capacity
IDFefilny
D

Reduced corruption and increased
USAID

efficiency in procurement.

USAID

Improved targeting of assistance to
vulnerable groups and verification of
number of recipients

rcueet

Labor marketand socialprotection

17. Re-registration of vulnerable
families, assessment of the support
program for vulnerable families,
adoption of a new methodology for
poverty level based on information
received from re-registration and
survey of households, creation of
database on vulnerable groups and
assistance rendered to them
18. Adoption of laws on "State
pensions" and "Social security
identification code system"
19. Development of draft Labor
Code and other related labor
legislation, as well as the Law on
Social Assistance Provision

Increased efficiency of assistance
reas
programs

Completion of the first stage of pension
reforms
Introduction of identification code
system
Reduction of poverty through
improvements in the legal framework
and increased labor markets flexibility
and employment opportunities

SAC IV; SATAC
II, Poverty Study;
Social Protection
Social
Study;
Protection Project

SAC IV; SATAC
II; Social
Protection Study;
Health/Social
Protection Project
Labor Market
Study

EU

Unified regulation of state pensions
Legislative regulation of introduction
USAID
of identification code system
Better targeting
Adoption of the mentioned drafts.
Increased labor markets flexibility
and employment opportunities

-43-

Measure

Objective

BankAssistance

Partner
Programs

MonitorableResult
MntrbeRsl

20. Establishment of proportionality
amongst sizes of all types of
pensions

E

a
f
pensuringadequacy for varous types of

Social Protection
Study;
Protection Project

USAID

Abolition of unjustified differences
amongst various types of pensions.
Reduced sever poverty

21. Establishment of21.
differentiatedSoilPtein
differentiated
Establishment of
family allowances based on the
Efficient use of state funds

Social Protection
Study;
Health/Social

level of vulnerability of a family

Protection Project

22. Increased targeting in social
assistance programs towards the
children (below 16 years)

Efficient use of state funds

23. Formation of proportionality
amongst wages, pensions,
allowances and stipends

Reduction of social tension

24. Restructuring of State Fund for
Social Insurance and increasing
efficiency of funds accumulation

Reduction of social tension

Poverty reduction, especially sever
poverty

Child Welfare
Study;Health/Social UNICEF
ProtectionProject

Improved social conditions for the
children, especially those from very
poor families
Elimination of existing obvious
difference

SAC IV

USAID

Timely payment of pensions

Child Welfare
25. Improved assessment of family
vulnerability
level
vulnerability level

Increased targeting of social policy

Study; Social
Protection Study;
Health/Social

Assistance to the poorest

Protection Project
26. Ensuring economic and social
protection of the families, and
development of state programs for
this purpose

IV.

Reduction of social tension

Social Protection
Study; Health/
Social Protection
Project

Increased level of economic and
social security of the families

Health

27. Introduction of viable health
insurance system

Improved efficiency of financing the
health care system

28. Approval of a program for
further reforms in health financing
sphere

Improved efficiency of financing the
health care system and targeting in the
system

Health Projects;
Sa t

Netherl's/
USAID

Attraction of additional funds, more
efficient use of budgetary funds

-

Decreasing need for budgetary
financing, development of voluntary
medical insurance.

44-

Measure

Objective

BankAssistance

29. Introductionof familyhealth
care system

Improveearly detectionand prevention HealthProjects
of diseases

Partner

Programs

MonitorableResult

Make the first chain of healthcare
more affordablefor the public.
Better health indicators

.
.
~~~~~Progressive
developmentof
30. Establishmentor reconstruction
of rralamblatrie
ambulatory-polclinilcsystem in
of rural ambulatories
districts

HealthProjects

UNDP

Reconstructedand re-equippedrural
abltre,hge
ult
n
ambulatories,higher quality and
affordablefirst-aid.
Better health indicators

31. Establishmentof free of charge Increasein the affordabilityof medical
health care systembased on several care for most vulnerablegroupsof
hospitals
population

Study

32. Inclusionof persons in the
targetedhealthcare programsbased Increasingin the targetingof the social
on the vulnerabilitylevel of their
policy
families

Health Projects

V.

The highestpossiblecentralizationof
free of chargemedicalcare
guaranteedby the state
Better health indicators,especially
amongthe very poor
USAID

Assistanceto the poorest
Better health indicators,especially
amongthe very poor

Education
EnsuringeducationsphereeRestructuring
Parliamentapprovalof the state
EducationStudy; UNDP
programfor the developmentof
Education
education
Projects;SAC IV
Better use of scarce educationfunds

33. Designof state programfor the
developmentof education

and developmentthroughtargeted
.
budgetaryfinancing

34. Modernizationof teaching
methodsand essence of pre-school
education

Renderingassistanceto familiesin
teachingand educatingchildrenat preschoolage

EducationProjects UNICEF

Organizationof short-termcourses
for preparingfor the schoolfor
childrenof the age of 6 years and not
includedin the pre-school
educationalinstitutions

35. Increase in wages of public
schoolteachersas stipulatedin the
law on Education

Increasein the efficiencyof education

Restructuring
EducationStudy;
EducationProjects

Improvementin the social conditions
of teachingpersonnel
Better qualityteaching

-45-

Measure
36. Increase in wages of scientific
workers in scientific institutions as
stipulated in the law on Scientific
and Scientific-Technical Activities

Objective

.

BankAssistance

.

.

Partner

Programs

MonitorableResult

Improvement in the social conditions
of scientific personnel

37. Ensuring free of charge supply
of textbooks to elementary level

Improvement in the social conditions of
children (especially those from

Financing
Managemen

Provision of free of charge textbooks
to all first grade pupils and socially

pupils

vulnerable families)

Project

vulnerable elementary level pupils

Improved mechanisms for

38. Introduction of financing
scheme based on the number of
pupils

Increased efficiency in the operations of
secondary education schools and
opportunities for autonomy at the
ools, estautonomal
schools, ablishmentvofvoptimal
teaching and administrative vacancies
ratio

Restructuring
Education Study;
Education Projects

management and financing of public
education, decentralization of the
management in the system and
introduction of financing scheme
based on the number of pupils,
providing for differentiated approach
to understaffed schools of frontier,
remote and isolated areas

39. Design and implementation of a
program for rural schools
development

Improved premises for rural schools,
provision of personnel, inclusion of
young specialists

40. Design and implementation of a
methodology for additional
compensation for long-term
pedagogical experience

Ensuring social protection of
educational system employees

41. Inclusion in the free of charge
educational schemes at the state
educational institutions based on the
level of family vulnerability

.
.
.
Increased targetig of social policy

Restructuring
Education Study;Education Projects

Targeted preparation of wide profile
teaching personnel for understaffed
rural schools
Improved education outcome
indicators
Introduction of an additional
pedagogical experience

Poverty Study;
Child Welfare
Study; Education
Projects

Assistance to the poorest
Improved educational outcomes,
especially for the poorest

-46-

Measure

Objective

BankAssistance

42. Designof the special education
system rationalizationprogram

Imprvemet
inthe rganzatin of
whor ne o
in
Improvnt
educationfor childrenwho need special
teachingconditions

Children's
InitiativeIDF;
Child Welfare
Study

43 . .secondary
43. Rationalizationof
and higher educationalinstitutions
accordancewith the
network
h
nacrdnewt
newr. in
requirementsof labor market and
social order

44. Designof a state programon
highereducationdevelopment

VI.

.
Studyof the need for specialistsfrom
and highereducational
institutionsand basedon this study
stateorder, introctin o
fortnation and
of
of
state order,introduction
formation
development
contractualrelationships,
scheme
of
a
new
and implementation
for settingstipendlevels,establishment

Partner
Programs

MonitorableResult

UNICEF
SIDA

Implementationof structuralreforms
in commonand boardingschools
reformingpart of institutionsinto
two-day schools,organizationof
supportservices for childrenwho
need specialteaching conditions
of secondaryand
~~~~~~~~~~~Optimization
higher educationalinstitutions,

.

mig egal sta t utional
makg lega statusof educatonal
with existing
consistent
i nstitutions
legislationand market relationships,
optimizationof free of chargeand
paid educationschemes,

Market
L abor
Study;
Prjet Education
Projects

of a unified discountsystem for tuition.

developmentof programsfor staff

Bringinghighereducationin line with
existingscientific,economicand social
needs,as well as intemational
educationalpractices,further
developmentof multi-leveleducational
system.

Design and approvalof draft law on
Higher Educationand other legal and
proceduraldocuments
Graduates' skills more suited to the
job market. Higherrate of
employmentof graduates.

training

Utilities

45. Designand approvalof a
approvalmofoa
financial
rehabiliystai
finerancial
waterand sewagesystem

Final financialrehabilitationof the
water and sewagesystem

Rehabilitationof water and sewage
46. Implementaton of Municipal
systemnMunicipalWte
Waterand SanitationProgram
supportedby the World Bank credit

Municipal
Development/
MunicipalWater
Project
Development]
Proje
unctpa Wtrareas

Kf W

Financialrehabilitationof the system

Improvementof municipalwater and
sanitationservicesin the most needy

-47-

Measure

Objective

Bank Assistance

Partner
Programs

MonitorableResult
MntrbeRsl

47. Design and approval of a
aclean
financial rehabilitation

Facilitating access to affordable and
heating services by the urban

Heating Strategy

ESMAP

Financial rehabilitation of the system

the heating system for 2002-2004

population in a fiscally sustainableGrn
manner

VII.

Environmentalprotection

48. a) Reduce losses and improve
forest cover

National Forest Program Developed and NaturalResource
Managementand
implemented (2002 and onwards);

b) Maintain forest resources as a
source of tradable carbon

Reforestation of destroyed and
degraded forests;

49. a) Improve management of land
and forest resources and pastures to
increase productivity of crop and
livestock systems and non-timber
forest products to improve household nutrition and cash surpluses;

Programs for management of natural
resources through better planning and
involvement of all levels stakeholders
implemented in selected watersheds;

b) Provide rural poor with choices
that enable them to use grazing,
arable land, forest and waters
resources in more sustainable
manner;

Complex of measures oriented towards
reducing pressure on forests, water,
land resources implemented;

Improve management and

PovertyAlleviation
Project

conservation of forest resources

NaturalResourceSustainal
Managementand
PoverlyAlleviation GEF
Project

an
develo
mountainous and forested areas
through improved management of
natural resource base.

Soil erosion from arable land reduced;

c) Promote environmentally friendly Improved inter-sector dialogue and
policy co-ordination to avoid further
and ultimately sustainable
deterioration of natural resources.
agriculture practices aiming at
increased productivity and conservation of landscapes
50. Pursue conservation of
biodiversity and critical habitats
through integrated ecosystem
management with direct
involvement of local communities

Protected area management improved;
Public involvement and awareness
increased;
Biodiversity in forests, pastures and
meadows maintained and improved.

NaturalResource
Managementand
PovertyAlleviation
Project

Improve protected areas management
and conserve globally important
biodiversity

48-

Measure

Objective

Bank Assistance

Partner

Monitorable Result

51. Increase public involvement in
decision making, co-operate with
society groups and mass media
about environment issues

Environment assessment regulations
improved;
A system for transparent dissemination
of environmental information to policy
makers and general public developed
and implemented.

Supportto PRSP
Process;Natural
ResourceManagement and Poverty
AlleviationProject

UNDP

Raise public awareness and release

USAID

Improve management of water

Dutch
Government

resources.

DFID
UNDP

Monitoring of social and poverty
indicators, analysis of social policy
and socio-economic situation.

UNDP

Data describing poverty and standard
of living

52. a) Manage water resources in
such a way to provide equitable
access to all users.
b) Secure water to meet basic
human needs (drinking, sanitation,
cooking, washing).

VIII.

Elaborate policies for integrated water
sector management and implement a
National Strategy for Integrated Water
Resources Management;

Water Resources
Plan

Institutional and administrative
framework for water resources
management rationalized and optimized

Mun
mnciPal Develo

Water resources planning and allocation
of water resources carried out in an
integrated way through wide
participation of stakeholders (users,
planners and policy makers) at all levels
and stages of planning and
implementation.

Programs

NaturalResource
Managementand
PovertyAlleviation
Project

Monitoringof indicators

53. Design of monitoring and
analysis system

Ensuring efficient design and
implementation of PRSP, development
of proposals in collaboration with
territorial and local goverance bodies

f
Bank support or
PRSP preparation

and the civil society

54. Survey of households

Information necessary for the
development of poverty reduction
strategy

Bank support for
PRSP preparation

-49-

Annex 10

Development Priorities
Country
.performance
Poverty Reduc'n & Economic Manag't
Poverty reduction
Fair
Economic policy
Public sector

Good
Fair

Gender

Good

Human Development Department
Education

Fair

Health, nutrition & population

Fair

Social protection

Fair

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development
Fair
Environment
Poor
Social development

Fair

Finance,Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
Moderate
Private sector

Fair

Energy & mining
Infrastructure

Fair

Fair

Major issue

Country
priority

Reduction in overall
High
poverty
Business climate
High
Administrative
Moderate
Corruption
High burden on women, Moderate
low labor force participa'n

Bank
priority
High
High
High

Ongoing dialogue, including
IGR discussions

Moderate

Quality,increasedfunding, Moderate High
efficiencyof resourceuse
Quality, cost-efficiency Moderate High
Improve targeting,
effectiveness& admin'n

Reconciliation of country and
Bank priorities

Ongoing dialogue in context of
education credit
Ongoing dialogue in context of
health credit

High

High

Irrigation improvements High
Deplet'n/ deg'n nat.
High
resources

High
High

Civil society
participation

Fair

Moderate Dialogue in context of I-PRSP/
PRSP

Consolidation, better
regulation
Liberalization, less
administrative corruption
Fiscal
Water supply

Moderate Moderate
High

High

High
High

Moderate Availability of private finance
High

IBRn29952

GEORGIA

ToGShuEue4

46

A

I

T3
Alover
t

SI yember)on

29

IOAZAKHASTAN

Al.

i~

~~ ~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~~~~...;z~~u
RUSSIANSTA

A

0RI~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~C

-40

liA

4

;
4

/.

64

aAf

\

/

JermuA

t

;^>fJ

<

PRIMARYROADS

2,

>

40

-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~AA.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
OLOV
IN E NAINA

B UDEATIES

z

T. R.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

kh

FIA

EINMR)CPR

7-

AT
5YRI~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

0NA CAPMI
TAUL

R
AI RAB
REGINP60 BOUNDARIES

TURKEY
o

DilitEthtt,C

Amik/T

1.Vz

OTN

'

~~~
SoIrSI

Akhu~~

79is

tkhkl

;e

RESERVOIRS

N .'8

Sio
po,

ol Thoodd

7Sok

-'

'

-

Vo

<+

A

RSROR

Angkhko

A,,I

:;yt7i

9

X

pTARAKv
, REPUBLIC

R
4'

)

t

--

-o

0:n

20

TWiVIAt

30

40

50

60SKiIoolo,,eer

39

V.4er

ToOo,JobooI.

'Kn
.
e

44.

X

OF ARMENil
SLT

-hv
*osh

<rhoRjj,.Go

ERB

.

R6 ooooD,iooayh
hoodoooo

>

(NACHITCj
EV<Nf

1>*
t0IA

ropJ,,p/

)

AZERBAIJAN

kd-

As

NTA,

LaA

r

h

F

A

t8-h

OFIRAN~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1

-.

I

o

RA
PRIMARY ROADS

41991

