Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 22115-MOR

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE
WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE KINGDOM OF MOROCCO

May 7, 2001

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Unit of Currency = Moroccan Dirhams (DM)
Period Average Exchange Rates (DM per US dollar)
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001*
8.72 9.52 9.60 9.80 10.63 10.73
* Rate for 2001 is average January 1- April 20
FISCAL YEAR
January I - December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AfDB
CAS
CAE
CBD
CDF
CDR
CPPR
EA
EIA
EIB
EU
FIAS
FM
FSAP
GDLN
GDP
GEF
GOM
ICR
IDF
IFC
IGF
IMF
IT
LIL
LMI
METAP
MIGA
MNA
MOU
NER
NGO
OED
PER
PHRD
PPI
SME
SSR
UN
UNDP
WBI

= Analytic?,l and Advisory Activities
= African Development Bank
= Country Assistance Strategy
= Country Assistance Evaluation
= Community Based Development
= Comprehensive Development Framework
= Comprehensive Development Review
= Country Portfolio Performance Review
= Environmental Assessment
= Environmental Impact Assessment
= European Investment Bank
= European Union
= Foreign Investment Advisory Service
= Financial Management
= Financial Sector Assessment Program
= Global Distance Learning Network
= Gross Domestic Product
= Global Environmental Fund
= Government of Morocco
= Implementation Completion Report
= Institutional Development Fund
= International Finance Corporation
= Inspection G6ndrale des Finances
= International Monetary Fund
= Information Technology
= Learning and Innovation Loan
= Lower Middle Income Countries
= Mediterranean Environmental Technical Assistance Program
= Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
= Middle East and North Africa Region
= Memorandum Of Understanding
= Net Enrollment Rate
= Non-Governmental Organizations
= Operations Evaluation Department
= Public Expenditure Review
= Policy and Human Resources Development Fund
= Private Participation in Infrastructure
= Small and Medium Enterprise
= Social and Structural Review
= United Nations
= United Nations Development Program
= World Bank Institute

Jean-Louis Sarbib
Vice President:
Christian Delvoie
Director:
Task Team Leaders: Olivier Godron/Pedro Alba

Vice President:
Director:
Task Team Leaders:

Assaad Jabre
Sami Haddad
Margaret Henderson/
Joamana Cobein

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
KINGDOM OF MOROCCO
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .........................................................

I

1. BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS ........................................................

1

A. Poverty Trends .......................................................
B. Economic Developments ........................................................

2
4

II. KEY DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ........................................................
A.
B.
C.
D.

III. MOROCCO'S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM ........................................................
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

The Growth Agenda ........................................................
Improving the Poverty Focus of Public Policies and Expenditures ........................................
The Reform of the State ........................................................
Reducing Agricultural Vulnerability and Environmental Threats .........................
Bank Assessment ........................................................

IV. MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS .......................................................
A. Base Case Scenario (Partial Adjustment) ........................................................
B. High Case Scenario (Full Adjustment) ........................................................
C. Exogenous Risks and Vulnerabilities ........................................................

V. BANK GROUP STRATEGY .......................................................
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

7

The Growth Challenge .......................................................
8
Improving the Poverty Focus of Public Policies and Expenditures .......................................... 8
The Reform of the State ........................................................
9
Reducing Agricultural Vulnerability and Environrmental Threats ......................... ................ 10

New Challenges and Opportunities for the Bank Group ........................................................
CAS Approach and Key Objectives ........................................................
Assistance Levels and Triggers .......................
The Bank Group's Base Case Program: The Core Component .............................................
The Bank Group's Base Case Program: The Sector Reform Component ...............
...............

10
11
11
11
11
1................
12

13
13
16
18

19
19
21
25
27
32

VI. PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT .......................................................
33
A. Portfolio Management .......................................................
33
B. Fiduciary Provisions and Safeguards ....................................................... 35

VII. COUNTRY RISK MANAGEMENT ...............

........................................

A. Country Creditworthiness .......................................................
B. Performance Indicators and Monitoring .......................................................

36
36
38

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

PAGE
TABLES
Table 1. Morocco: Selected Poverty Indicators .......................................................
Table 2. Partial Adjustment Scenario - Selected Macroeconomic Indicators ................................
................................
Table 3. Morocco - Financing Plan (US$ million) ......................
Table 4. Bank Assistance Levels and Triggers ......................................................
Table 5. The Bank's Program .......................................................
Table 6. Portfolio Summary ......................................................
Table 7: Time and Resource Costs of Bank Operations ......................................................
................
Table 8. Morocco -World Bank Lending Flows and Exposure(Base Case) ..................
Table 9: Morocco Core Performance Indicators .......................................................
Table 10. CAS Monitoring Indicators .......................................................

FIGURES AND BOXES
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Box 1
Box 2
Box 3
Box 4

Average GDP Growth of Selected Regional Comparator Countries, 1991-1998
Average Annual Growth of Manufacturing Exports, 1986-1991 and 1991-1998
Privatization Revenues, Government Savings, 1999-2004
Rising Poverty in Morocco
The Country Assistance Assessment by OED
The CDF
Participatory Process

ANNEXES
Annex A2
Annex B2
Annex B3
Annex B4
Annex B5
Annex B6
Annex B7
Annex B8
Annex B9
Annex B10
Annex B Il

Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
Summary of Non-Lending Services
Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio
CAS Program Matrix
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
World Bank and Civil Society

2
14
17
26
31
34
35
37
38
39

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE KINGDOM OF MOROCCO

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Bank Group is confronting a vastly changed environment compared to the one it
faced at the onset of the last CAS...
i.
Over the last four years, Morocco has undergone a major transition, which has
fundamentally altered the way the Bank Group and development partners work in the country.
The country has witnessed a fundamental opening of the political process, with the main
opposition parties forming a govemment for the first time since Morocco's independence.
This was accompanied by a major opening of the civil society. Since the death of King
Hassan II, Mohamed VI has moved even further allowing the return of long time dissidents
and stressing the rule of law and social progress as his main development objectives. This
transition is still unfolding, with new elections scheduled in about 12 months -- i.e. during the
CAS period.
ii.
While this profound transition has so far been peaceful and orderly, it involved
difficult trade-offs. Although economic and social reforms continued, consensus building
within the seven party Govemment slowed down decision-making on economic policy,
preventing Morocco from lifting itself out of its low growth path. In the meanwhile, two
years of drought further contributed to weaken economic growth. As a result, Morocco's
growth trend rate continued to slacken, entailing a stagnation in per capita incomes over the
last decade, as well as increased poverty and urban unemployment, in sharp contrast with the
performance of most other middle income countries over the same period. Poverty, at around
20 percent of the population, and urban unemployment, around 22 percent, now constitute the
key challenges facing the country. If left unattended, they could also undermine the on-going
political transition.
iii.
Yet, the country has enormous opportunities as well. It has established a solid track
record in economic stabilization over the last decade and is facing the prospects of a windfall
of privatization revenues, especially following its successful deregulation and privatization of
its telecommunications sector. This provides a unique platform to accelerate the reform
agenda to boost growth while at the same time strengthening human resources and
accelerating rural and social programs - all key ingredients to improve general living
standards while reducing the large social gaps between urban and rural areas. Indeed, the
Govemment recently signaled its continued focus on economic issues, through a realignment
of its exchange rate, which will in tum require strong fiscal discipline in the future.
... entailing new constraints and new opportunities...
*

Morocco has evolved into a more pluralistic society. This requires much more
consensus building, in particular with regard to the difficult second generation

institutional reforms on the agenda (such as that of the civil service) that involve
strong vested interests.
*

Civil society has also emerged as a new important actor, both vocal on the political
scene and active on the ground, but it is still relatively fragmented.

*

Despite clear progress on access to basic social services over the last few years, the
gap between rural and urban areas remains huge, and income poverty has increased
due to declining growth and repeated droughts affecting agriculture.

*

On the macroeconomic front, the country continues to enjoy financial stability, but
trends are not encouraging, with stagnating growth and a progressive deterioration in
government savings, which may jeopardize financial stability in the medium term if
corrective actions are not introduced in the coming years. Recent actions, such as the
adjustment of the exchange rate peg, will need to be accompanied by a more flexible
management of this instrument, as well as strong fiscal discipline and structural
measures, to lead to a new sustained growth path.

*

Finally, the country does not need major external financing flows due to the
availability of both concessional funding (especially from the EU) and the one time
privatization proceeds, which may amount to US$ 5 billion over the next three years.

and requiring a fundamental rethinking of the Bank Group country strategy.
iv.
Bank Group's assistance is thus at a juncture. It needs to adapt itself to the country's
new environment and capitalize on recent advances in decentralization and participation to
deepen its poverty impact on the ground. Finally, since it is clear that without growth only a
limited impact can be achieved on poverty reduction in the short to medium term, the Bank
Group needs to balance appropriately reform support and actions on the ground to maximize
the overall impact of the Government program on the living standards of the population.
Therefore, the CAS strategic directions are:
*

focusing on the poverty challenge, especially in rural Morocco, and working on key
emerging areas of progress, such as decentralization;

*

remaining present as a lead external partner on the structural front, by supporting
advances on reforms, while continuing to build up the policy dialogue and consensus
on macroeconomic and sectoral issues;

*

strengthening partnerships with other external agencies, especially the EU and AfDB,
under improved coordination mechanisms within the Govemment.

v.
In this environment, the CAS proposes to focus Bank activities on a base case
program composed of: (i) a core program with tangible impact on the ground, and (ii) support
for sectoral reforms contingent on government actions. The core program focuses squarely
on social development issues, on community-based approaches, and on governance and
decentralization, while also seeking new partnerships with the emerging civil society. This is
a key priority of the King and the Government, with great potential for progress. At the same
time, however, the Bank also plans to remain fully engaged on macro and structural reform
issues through analytical work, and be ready to support the Government reform efforts,
depending on progress on fiscal and structural issues.
vi.
In terms of lending amount, the base case program would remain at about the same
level as during the last five years, or about $250 million, compared to $300 million in the
previous CAS. However, it would include significant shifts. First, the program would be
divided into two components: a core poverty focused program and a sectoral reform support
ii

component. The core program would amount to $150 million, composed of about three
operations per year (excluding smaller institution building projects). This program would
seek to deepen the shift towards catalytic projects, institutional support, and analytical work,
and be clearly focused on the poverty and social agenda facing the country. Second, the
sector reform program, of about $100 million per year, would seek to support priority reforms
by the Government, currently under preparation, but not yet fully developed. This second
component, thus, would depend on progress in two areas: (i) fiscal triggers to ensure that the
budget remains sustainable in the long term; and (ii) sectoral triggers demonstrating the upfront commitment of the Government so as to support the actual implementation of the
reforms. In this respect, -the next Budget law (i.e., for 2002) will reveal Government
intentions both with regard to the depth of the fiscal consolidation contemplated and on the
direction of structural reforms.
vii.
The recent adjustment in the management of the exchange rate clearly demonstrates
the Government's continued focus on economic reforms. The next Budget law is also
expected to achieve greater fiscal discipline and tax reform, and to include further advances
on structural issues, inter alia the launching of a broader public sector reform program, with
increased emphasis on decentralization; a new framework for simplifying the business
environment; and continued rationalization of the food subsidy scheme. These are all avenues
the Bank would be ready to support when the details of such policies are worked out. Should
reforms be delayed, the Bank would focus on the core program of the country, and reallocate
resources towards analytical work to build consensus on the reform agenda.
viii.
The Bank would, however, also be ready to support strongly the Government should
it implement a more aggressive growth-oriented reform program. A high case scenario is
therefore proposed amounting to up to US$ 450 million in total per year to also support
programmatic or broad based adjustment lending and/or specific interventions designed to
protect the most vulnerable groups affected by the reforms. Such a scenario would be
triggered by a more aggressive reform program, including measures to further improve the
external competitiveness of the economy, within a framework of fiscal sustainability.
ix.
In this process, the Bank Group intends to continue to focus on the development of
the private sector. The Bank will focus on the business environment, issues relating to
employment and growth, and support for new services sector, such as information technology.
Collaboration will also be further strengthened with the EU on issues related to
competitiveness and EU integration. The IFC will support this thrust through efforts aimed at
mobilizing financing for complex projects, providing innovative financial instruments,
especially for SMEs, and supporting institution building in the financial sector.
Linking the CAS with the CDF
x.
Overall, in terms of approach, Morocco fully fits with the concept of the CDF.
Progress has been broad-based, encompassing political opening, the rule of law and social
development. Morocco followed a unique process with the Government embarking on the
CDF at the time of preparation of its five-year plan. At that time, the Government requested
Bank assistance in assessing sectoral performance in some 16 sectors to provide a broad
policy and institutional context to their program and to review priorities for action. These
sectoral matrices were then discussed with key counterparts. A series of seminars was
conducted on key sectoral issues, such as health insurance reform, education reform, and
issues of governance and corruption, to name a few. Following the approval of the Plan, the
Ministry of Finance has now prepared a broad financing plan to improve coordination of
external financing sources. The CAS program fits within this framework and proposes
various avenues to streamline the CDF concept in the future.

iii

xi.

In summary, the CAS proposes a refocused but flexible approach over the next three
years, as this will encompass a decisive period for Morocco, with elections scheduled
for around the middle of 2002. The proposed base case embodies this flexibility fully
by focusing on a core program, complemented by contingent support for reforms
depending on progress and emerging priorities.

xii.

In this environment, the Executive Directors may wish to focus on the following
issues:
*

Is the base case program, with its twin approach on a core poverty oriented program
and support for reforms, appropriate to reach the CAS poverty objectives?

*

Is the composition of the program, and the balance between lending, analytical work
and institution building adequate?

*

Are the level of assistance and the proposed triggers of the base case and the high
case programs in line with Morocco's development challenges and current policies?

iv

I. BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
1.
During the last years, Morocco has embarked on one of the most successful processes of
rapid political opening in the Middle East and North Africa. In addition, civil society has
experienced a tremendous expansion. Particularly important is the increasing assertiveness of the
media, notably the press, which has created new channels for civil society to voice concerns and
demonstrate its achievements. The key political events in this still unfolding process were:
*

In September 1997, the House of Representatives were elected by universal suffrage for
the first time, as called for under the new Constitution of 1996. A new electoral legal
framework is currently being prepared.

*

In March 1998, Abderrahmane Youssoufi, the leading opposition figure and a one-time
exile, formed a Government backed by a seven-party center-left coalition. Following a
limited reshuffle in September 2000, Mr. Youssoufi's Government is expected to remain
in office until the next legislative elections, in 2002.

*

Political democratization and modernization have been gaining further momentum since
Mohammed VI's accession to the throne in July 1999, including progress on human
rights and the return of well-known dissidents. The new King's agenda stresses social,
poverty, governance and gender issues, as well as the need for 'a new concept of
authority' based on the rule of law, and on a public administration supporting
development rather than control of the society. He has backed his ideas with decisions
that were both symbolic and had strong implications for governance, including a major
reshuffle among the senior staff of the Ministry of Interior and local governors. A new
legislative framework for decentralization is also currently under preparation.

2.
The focus of the Bank's poverty reduction strategy and assistance shifted during the mid1990s towards social development and access to services, away from a narrower focus on
economic adjustment. This shift in emphasis is due to both the consolidation of Morocco's
stabilization efforts of the early 1990s, as well as an increasing awareness both in Morocco and in
the Bank of the burden that poor and unequal social progress represents for Morocco's long-term
development. The 1997 CAS was the first Bank strategic document that focused on the
difference between the "two Moroccos": a relatively prosperous urban one, and a rural, backward
Morocco with social indicators closer to those of Sub-Saharan Africa than of MNA countries. In
support of this approach, the Bank's strategy emphasized social sector reforms, particularly in
education and health, and the provision of basic infrastructure and social services in rural areas.
The Bank's strategy, however, also considered income growth as an essential element of poverty
reduction, and stressed continued fiscal and structural reform. Given successful stabilization,
conditions were ripe to improve Morocco's rather weak growth performance of the early 1990s.
Where does Morocco stand after four years?

Table 1. Morocco: Selected Poverty Indicators
Past
Urban

Rural

Latest available year
Rural
Urban

Period
1990-1991
1998-1999
Population (millions)
12.3
12.7
15.4
12.9
Poverty incidence (percentage of total)
8%
18%
12%
27%
3.5
Number of poor (millions)
0.9
2.3
1.8
Number of econoniically vulnerable (millions) 1/
2.3
6.6
5.0
7.1
Poverty depth (percentage) 2/
0.4%
1.2%
0.8%
2.5%
Period
1990-1991
1998-1999
GINIcoefficient
37.7
31.2
37.7
31.6
Period
1992
2000
Percentage of households with access to safe water 3/
98%
14%
100%
42%
Percentage of villages with access to electricity
15%
45%
Period
1990-1991
1999
Percentage of households with access to electricity
89%
13%
89%
22%
Period
1990-1991
1998-1999
43%
84%
28%
79%
Women who last gave birth at home
Percentage of pregnant women who visited prenatal care
65%
24%
76%
37%
facilities
Period
1980-1992
1992-1997
Matemal mortality rate (per 100,000 births)
284
362
125
307
Period
1990-1991
1998-1999
Female primary net enrollment rate (%school-age female
79%
28%
83%
47%
population)
Female youth hteracy rate (aged 15-24)
76%
21%
77%
25%
Sources: Living Standards Measurement Surveys of 1990/91 and 1998/99, Labor Market Survey 1999, Statistical Yearbooks,
Statstical Office of Morocco; Provincial Department of Ministry of Equipment; National Electricity Office.
1. People between the poverty line and 1.5 times the poverty line.
2. Indicates inequality/income distribution among the poor. An increase in the index implies a deterioration in income
distribution.
3.
Percentage of the population with access to a pernanent source of drinking water with acceptable sanitary conditions,
generally stand pipes provided by the local authorities. Does not include catch basins or other unprotected sources of wai er
(even if uncontaminated).

A. Poverty Trends
3.
Social and human development policies have gained momentum since the mid1990s...
*

Access to health and education in rural areas has improved (Table 1) especially since the
mid-1990s, reflecting the new focus in Government policies on the poorest provinces
through instruments such as the flagship social programs (the 'BAJ')5 . Girls' net
enrollment in rural primary schools increased sharply from 28 percent to 47 percent
during 1991-98. These strong improvements follow many years of slow progress.

*

Over the past two years, the authorities have successfully mobilized financial resources 10
accelerate rural infrastructure programs (electricity, potable water and roads). As a
result, the timeframe for providing the rural population with universal access was reduced
from 30 to about 10 years, a remarkable achievement.

*

In education, perhaps Morocco's most important long-term development challenge, the
authorities and other stakeholders reached a consensus in 1999 on the main elements of

The Social Priorities Program for the poorest provinces.
2

reform. This breakthrough is set out in the "Charter for Education" prepared by a Royal
Commission composed of all key stakeholders.
*

4.

In an effort to become more responsive and effective, the Government has also initiated
several partnerships with civil society. For example, Government endorsed an ambitious
Gender Action Plan entirely prepared by a group of NGOs and women's representatives,
an unprecedented initiative in the MNA region. It is also supporting NGO-sponsored
schools and literacy programs. Finally, the authorities are establishing a Social Fund,
which by supporting community-based development, has strong potential to efficiently
reduce poverty.
but inefficiencies and gaps in the social sectors remain substantial,...

*

Despite significant public spending on education (6 percent of GDP), both quality and
coverage remain weak. Although illiteracy is slowly receding, it remains one of the
highest (52 percent) in NNA and lower rniddle-income countries (LMI). Similarly,
although school enrollment is increasing, 2.5 rnillion children, a majority of them rural
girls, still do not attend school. Quality is also an issue as evidenced by poor retention
rates in school: 25 percent of schoolchildren drop out before the fifth grade, and only 10
percent make it to 1 1h grade. University students take on average 8 years to complete a
4-year program, to find all too often their skills unsuited to the labor market.

*

The health system also lags behind most LMI and regional comparators. While life
expectancy has increased to 67 years and vaccination is widespread, many outcome
indicators remain disturbingly low: e.g., maternal and infant mortality are considerably
higher than the regional average2 , with continued significant urban-rural disparities.
Low, inequitable and inefficient spending on health, particularly in the public sector 3 , has
created serious problems in terms of access and quality, and is compounded by one of the
lowest health insurance coverage rates in the region (15 percent of population).

*

Despite efforts to enhance the status and condition of women4 , gender indicators,
especially in literacy and health and in rural areas, remain among the worst in the region.
For example, 83 percent of women are illiterate in rural areas. One of the few bright
spots is the high labor force participation for women.

*

Access to basic infrastructure by the rural population, in spite of the recent progress,
remains limited and constitutes a severe constraint to economic and social development.

5.

.... and most disturbingly, as a result of slow growth, income poverty and

unemployment substantially increased during the 1990s.
*

2

Poverty, which had declined from 21 to 13 percent of the population during 1984-91,
bounced back to 19 percent in 1998 (Box 1), and now affects 5.3 million people.5 The
vulnerable population also increased dramatically, from 9 to 12 million, or about 45
percent of the population. 6 Slow and volatile growth in a period characterized by repeated
droughts, rather than distributive factors, is mainly to blame.

Matemal: 230 per 100,000, vs. 134 in the region. Infant: 48 per 1,000 vs. 45.

3Total spending: Around 4 percent of GDP, vs. 5.4 percent in the region. Public spending is only 1.4

percent of GDP (1999 figures).
4The Government adopted the Beijing action program, ratified the Convention for the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and endorsed the Gender Action Plan.
5 The poverty line is based on per-capita consumption. See Morocco - Poverty Assessment Update, May
2001.
6 Defined as living between the poverty line and 1.5 times the poverty line.
3

*

Urban unemployment has risen to an all-time high of 22 percent of the labor force n
1999, up from 15 percent in 1991, and is 27 percent among young graduates.
Employment pressures will only intensify in the near future since the growth of the labor
force is expected to increase as a result of demographic trends.
Box i: Rising Pos erti) in Morocco
The latest Po%erty Update for Nlorocco is based on a Li'ing Standards Nleasurement Survev
conducted in 1998-99. It points to a significant deterioration in povert3 indicators:
W
While
po'.crl\ declined substaniallh in the 1980s. its inLidence increased in almost all
rectons cf Morocco during the 1990s. abo,ut 5.3 million people. i e 19 percent of che
population. ;re now considered px.r. compaTed to 13 percent in 1991. The number L4
Nloroccans *ulnerable to po%erty during episode.s ot instabilirN. such as droughis. a3bo
increased dramaticall. frtum around 9 million in 1991 to I million in 199S. or about 45
percent of tht pi apulaticn
*

The lack of economic growth hab been a kee
explaining 84 percent tl

the po\erty increase.

balance. and affected essentiall\ rural areas.

factor behind these developmenu..
Rising

incsuality accounted for the

Public and private transtfers tremittances

lrom abroad) constitute the backbone of the satetN net in the country.
*

While income po'envy *crsencd.
period

un labor intensi
*

access to b3sic %er%ices. however. impr"'ed o%er the

The Go ernmenL also rcentily introduced a drought emergency program foused
e w\ork. to.' cushion the impact of droughts on the poor

Poverny continues to be mostly a rural phenomenon. in 199S-99 more than one fourth ot

the population li%
ing in ruril aress arc pKor. a, compared to tine-tenth in urban areas The
depth and severity of pKo'ertN are also much higher in rural areas. and ha%e significanil'.
increased since 1991.

However. due to weak performance in the manufactunng sector

and continuing rural migration. the number of urban poor doubled to 1.800.000 during
the penod; about one third of the poor now li e in urban areas
*

The profile ot Ilte pooxr has nut changed dunng the 1990s poverly in both urban and rura.
areas is largely associated with
high dependency ralto: :nd tiih

(i)

larger household size. higher childiadult ratios and a

lack of human capital tin 1998-99. about 64 percent of the

poor had no edu,arlon and Jbout 1- percent had unk pi-mary education).

Urban poor

household heads arc must likel) to bt eLithcr \a:ge earners or self-employed in the
sersices or Vt.nstructLtin, rural ptr

hou.sehold heads are mrinls self-employed and work

in agriculture

B. Economic Developments
6.

Indeed, while Morocco has been relatively successful with stabilization...
*

Consolidating its stabilization efforts, Morocco has over recent years maintained inflation
below 3 percent p.a. and the current account deficit at around 1 percent of GDP. To
reduce external vulnerability, the authorities have relied more on domestic financing
sources to meet fiscal needs and gradually reduced external debt to about 55 percent of

4

GDP in 19997. These results are based on prudent monetary and fiscal policies that have
supported until very recently a fixed exchange rate that in turn anchored expectations.'
*

The fiscal deficit has been kept around 3 percent of GDP until very recently, although
fiscal management was
Figure 1.Average GDP Growth of Selected Reglorna
more
constrained
than
Conaator CouritrIes, 1991-1996
suggested
by
this
65
5.6
performnance.
The 19981999
and
1999-2000
budgets relied heavily on
4
one-time measures;9 without
3
these measures, the deficit
1.9
would have been around 5
2
percent of GDP. Additional
1
challenges
include:
ol
(i) expected revenue losses
..
of 2 percent of GDP from

Jordan

Egypt

Tunsia

Lebanon

Turkey

Moroco

the implementation of the EU trade agreement over the medium-term; (ii) continuing
pressures on the wage bill, already high at 12 percent of GDP; and (iii) contingent
liabilities in the banking system, or in the pension funds of the public sector.
*

7.

The financial sector has been liberalized by the gradual elimination of almost all forms of
direct state intervention, and the regulatory framework has been modernized. The Bank's
recent Financial Sector Review assessed Morocco's financial system as generally sound
and with limited exposure to risks, although characterized by weak competition. Some
specialized public banks, however, need to be restructured and revitalized.
... it has experienced a volatile and below-potential growth performance.

*

Growth dropped from an annual average of 4.4 percent during 1986-91 to 1.9 percent
during 1991-98, turning Morocco from one of the best to one of the worst performers
within the MENA Region (Figure 1). With population increasing at 1.7 percent p.a., this
has implied virtual stagnation of per capita income, and a reduction of per capita private
consumption that was crowded out by public consumption.

*

The contribution of agriculture to
overall growth turned negative
during 1991-99: minus 0.3 percent
p.a., a sharp drop from a positive
contribution

of 0.8

during 1986-91.
more

p.a.

manufacturing exports, 86-91
200%
and 91-98.
_
.
15%

more

and

output

100-

volatility during the 1990s.
system,

is

j~

5'%o

This,
a

1998

.>

.frt

.

_

0%

combined with weaknesses in the

net

991-

pronounced

leading to an increase in overall GDP

safety

-

-

Droughts became "

frequent

fluctuations

percent

Figure 2. Average annual growth of

key

_
Exports current US$

7Due

to exchange rate movements, total debt increased temporarily in 2000, to 59 percent of GDP.
s The authorities modified the currency basket underlying the exchange rate in late April, implying a de
facto devaluation of 5 percent.
9 Such as exceptional 'dividends' imposed on public enterprises; lump sums paid by private enterprises as
part of a tax amnesty scheme; and the sale of State assets.

5

contributing factor behind the increase of rural poverty.
*

The manufacturing sector's lack of dynamism has been an important factor behind the
increase in urban unemployment and poverty. Its average growth rate dropped from 4.5
percent p.a. in the late 1980s to 2.6 percent in the 1990s, less than half of that of other
emerging economies. The sector also lost competitiveness as evidenced by slower export
growth and the loss of market share (Figure 2). Service sectors are, however, emerging,
such as tourism and information technology.

8.
Slow growth reflects both increasingly rigid macro policies as well as slow, albeit
steady, progress in implementing structural reforms:
*

Successful as they have been, stabilization policies have started to take a toll on
competitiveness. First, the exchange rate peg contributed to a real appreciation of the
dirham, by over 20 percent during 1990-2000 leading the authorities, in April 2001, to
effectively devalue the domestic currency by 5 percent in nominal terms. Second, the
only mixed success achieved in reducing the fiscal deficit and total public debt has
implied some crowding out in financial markets and upward pressure on interest rates.
Finally, the fiscal deficit was mostly contained through cuts in public investment, while
recurrent expenditures, particularly the wage bill, have remained high. It is not yet clear
whether the recent readjustment of the exchange rate is a first step towards a more
flexible management of this instrument, and what other measures the authorities are
considering in the fiscal area.

*

Accelerating and completing the process of structural reforms is a key condition to
unleash the growth potential in a sustainable way. Many reforms have been achieved in
the 90s: the financial sector was largely liberalized, a privatization program has been
under way since 1993, including private sector participation in many infrastructure
sectors, and the investment climate was strengthened. More recently, the Government
also initiated a strong drive to enhance transparency and public sector governance. Sonme
of the more important initiatives are the customs administration reform, a new law on
public procurement, transparent procedures for privatization, initiating the reform of the
judiciary and the establishment of a competition council, together with price
liberalization.

*

Despite those improvements, the private sector response has been lagging, due to the
uneven progress on the reform program and slow decision making. For example, while
the Government has established commercial courts and passed new laws on competition
policy and on the liberalization of the road freight transport, implementation of these laws
has been slow. Other remaining constraints identified in the recent Private Sector
Assessment include: the weight and inefficiency of the administration, access to land,
investment procedures, skills of the labor force, rigidity of labor markets, access to
financial services for the SMEs, and agriculture incentives and policies.

*

A success story, however, is Morocco's policy of liberalization and privatization of the
Telecom sector, which is yielding unprecedented economic and financial benefits and
which illustrates well the potential benefits of structural reforms. In the late 90s, the
Government of Morocco, with support from the Bank, embarked on a radical reform of
the regulatory framework. In 1999, the award of a second GSM mobile phone license by
international bidding fetched more than US$ 1 billion. IFC supported this reform through
investment in Medi Telecom, the winning cellular operator for this license, and was
instrumental in mobilizing other sources of financing. This reform triggered a major

6

reduction of communication prices and the creation of thousands of jobs. Further
benefits are expected from the privatization of the state-owned telecom operator, the first
phase of which was completed recently. Together with the attribution of a third mobile
phone license, the partial privatization of the national airline carrier, and continued
divestiture of other large public enterprises, the govemment could reap up to US$ 5
billion, equivalent to around 17 percent of current GDP, over the next 3 to 5 years.

II. KEY DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

9.
The positive political, economic and financial developments that are taking place
present Morocco with the best opportunity in more than a decade to tackle successfully its
difficult development challenges. Progress in policy reform and institution building made
during the 1990s provide a strong foundation upon which to jumpstart the economy.
Morocco's most positive initial conditions are:
*

The process of political opening has placed Morocco ahead of most countries of the
Region. Although it may have reduced the continuity in government and affected its
focus on economic issues, political opening is bringing far-reaching developments. New
partners in development are emerging. The contribution of a vibrant civil society to
development is tangible and increasingly encouraged. The public sector is expected to
become more effective as local Government and local representatives of the central
Government take on increasing responsibility in the coming years.

*

The progress achieved during the 1990s on economic management is a strong basis from
which to implement more aggressive growth oriented policies and programs. Strong
stabilization was needed to re-establish credibility following the rescheduling agreements
of the late 1980s. Later on, it provided the basis to support structural reform, notably in
the financial sector and in opening the economy to private investments. Without
stabilization, the authorities would not have been able to correct the fiscal excesses of the
1980s, and macro instability would have reduced both the quality and quantity of private
investment. Without the liberalized markets and the stronger regulatory institutions,
Morocco would be less able to reap benefits from the EU Association agreement, and
generally integrate successfully into the world economy. While growth and poverty
reduction have been weaker than hoped for during the 1990s, this is not because of too
much reform, but because of too little progress on some critical structural reforms and
because of the rigid macro framework which emerged. The recent decision to rebalance
the currency peg basket and the resulting de facto 5 percent devaluation is a step in the
right direction to allow the economy to maximize its return from reform.

*

Potentially large privatization revenues provide a unique opportunity to reduce social
gaps and to create the conditions for long-term growth. In view of their one time effect,
Morocco should manage these resources carefully and use them to finance key social
priorities such as education reform or the extension of health insurance, as well as
stronger structural reforms in support of growth-oriented policies.

10.
Morocco's main development challenges can be summarized into four inter-related
objectives that cut across sector issues: achieving higher growth to reduce poverty,
improving the access of poor households to social services, enhancing public sector
efficiency, and reducing vulnerability, in particular to droughts and, in the medium-term,
to environmental degradation.
7

A. The Growth Challenge
11.
Higher growth and competitiveness hinge on the implementation of the outstanding
structural reform agenda, including in social sectors. However, because many of these reforns
are of a 'second generation' nature and require a significant measure of institution and consensuisbuilding, their effects will build gradually over time. While pursuing them aggressively,
Morocco therefore needs to also put in place an economic framework that allows the economy to
exploit fully its current growth potential, so that it can address the critical poverty and
unemployment challenges it is facing today.
12.
In order to achieve higher growth in the short-term, Morocco is essentially presented wth
two broad options: boost domestic demand through expansionary fiscal policies, or rely to a
larger extent on the dynamics of international trade.
*

Allowing for a higher budget deficit would not be a viable option. Total public debt has
been receding but still stands at a high 80 percent of GDP and, as already noted, fiscal
management remains constrained.

*

The option of a non debt-creating fiscal expansion is available to Morocco, thanks to tle
large expected privatization revenues. However, allocating these revenues only to pub' ic
investment would likely have only a transitory impact on growth, given the estimatled
modest supply-side effects in the long run. Allocating them to current expenditures would
endanger the sustainability of the already fragile overall fiscal position.

*

Fiscal and supply-side rigidities suggest that the best option to realize the full growth
potential in the short-term might be a shift in economic policy based on the stronig
dynamics of international trade. To this effect, two complementary measures should be
implemented: (i) increased flexibility in the exchange rate regime, building on the recent
devaluation to restore competitiveness of the tradable sector, and to allow enterprises to
diversify; and (ii) an acceleration and broadening of the trade liberalization agenda with
the EU to alleviate inflationary risks and maintain the pressure on import substitution
industries to improve productivity. Such an agenda should be complemented by
aggressive reforms to tackle supply-side constraints. Finally, there are two additional
elements of the agenda, discussed in more detail below, regarding social issues. First, the
authorities should simultaneously improve the currently fragmented and limited sociail
protection system in order to mitigate the possible adverse short-term effects of such a
policy shift on the poor. Second, they should also take action to accelerate the integraticn
of poor rural areas into the mainstream of the economy.
B. Improving the Poverty Focus of Public Policies and Expenditures

13.
Growth is key to poverty reduction, but, to make more rapid headway in reducing tt e
large social gaps, public policies need to promote equity much more forcefully than in the past.
Indeed, during most of the 1990s, expenditures on investment and social programs were
restrained, and budget priorities were only reassessed during the last few years. Equity therefoie
remains a serious issue in most sectors:
*

In the rural sector, the incidence of both the investment expenditures and subsidies s
biased towards larger farmers. For example, over 70 percent of the Ministry of
Agriculture's investment budget goes to large-scale irrigation, and since O&M costs aie
only partially recovered from users, it benefits mostly larger and better-off farmers. A
similar bias results from the high border protection for so-called strategic commodities

8

(wheat, sugar, and oil seeds) since large farmers produce the bulk of marketable
surpluses. High protection may have also induced some poorer farmers into soft wheat
production, increasing their vulnerability to drought. A food subsidies program,
established to compensate poor consumers for the impact of protection on domestic
prices, is poorly targeted. Recently, however, increased budgetary funding for rural
development and drought emergency programs have targeted poorer rural areas. Also,
the Government has dismantled the protection-cum-subsidy system for oil seeds in 2000,
but still maintains the system for the two other commodities.
*

In education, unequal expenditure patterns explain many of the gaps observed at the
primary level and in rural areas. As much as 20 and 17 percent of resources go to the
secondary and tertiary levels, respectively, which benefit more the urban and better-off
segments of the population but are provided free of charge. Among the many important
breakthroughs achieved by the Royal Commission on Education, however, is a consensus
for primary universal education and on regional decentralization and support for
community schools to achieve this goal.

*

In the health sector, despite recent increases, public spending remains low by
international standards, and is skewed towards the urban hospital sector, which absorbs
70 percent of the recurrent budget. As a result, 40 percent of public spending on health
benefits the top quintile of income distribution, as against 20 percent of spending for the
two bottom quintiles. Access to health facilities in some rural areas are 4 times lower
than in urban areas, and key public programs such as reproductive health are chronically
under-funded. Another emerging concern is the need to carefully monitor and control the
potential spread of HIV infections.

*

More generally, Morocco does not spend enough on specific poverty or employmenttargeted programs. Aggregate spending on social sectors is low by regional standards (12
vs. 20 percent of GDP in MNA countries), and most resources go to education, health,
food subsidies, and pensions, limiting the resources available for other forms of social
assistance. Promotion Nationale, the public works scheme, with 0.3 percent of GDP,
provides jobs to an average of 40,000 unskilled workers per year. Spending on Entraide
Nationale, which caters to the needs of disadvantaged women and children, is below 0.1
percent of GDP, and the program reaches only 80,000 individuals. Finally, with the
resources allocated to adult literacy programs (US$ 3.5 million a year), it would take
decades to reduce illiteracy to the LMI average rate of around 16 percent.
C. The Reform of the State

14.
The State in Morocco remains heavily involved in the provision of goods and services,
well beyond what would be justified by objectives of regulation or redistribution, and in excess of
its capacity to provide strategic leadership. Public sector management has been traditionally
characterized by excessive centralization and a culture of administrative formalism, which has
gradually degraded into poor accountability and pervasive petty controls. Not only does this
affect efficiency, but it also creates opportunities for mismanagement and corruption, cited by
private enterprises as one of the main obstacles to their development. The Government has
placed the issues of transparency and corruption squarely on its agenda. The key governance
issues are as follows:
*

Alternative delivery mechanisms involving the private sector or civil society could much
improve the coverage and efficiency of public services. Incipient support to NGO-led

9

education and literacy programs needs to be expanded through additional budgetary
resources, and improved capacity to regulate and monitor partnerships.
*

Excessive centralization has resulted in slow program implementation, lack of crosssector coordination and insufficient participation from stakeholders. Current centralized
procedures for budget preparation and execution have not led to better strategic
prioritization either, nor better efficiency in the use of resources, particularly in social
sectors. There are multiple examples of this: public hospital occupancy rates stancd at
around 50 percent; recently-built schools sometimes remain unattended for lack of basic
services such as water or access roads; in secondary education, pupil-to-teacher ratios
average only 12, a very low level by international standards. Despite growing consensus
in Morocco that the centralized administration model has become an obstacle to, rather
than an agent of, development, reform efforts are still at their very beginning.

*

Finally, the heavy burden of the wage bill (12 percent of GDP) is not the only problem
leading to calls for civil service reform. The skills mix, biased towards implementation
rather than managerial or analytical profiles, does not serve well the needs of a modmn
administration.
An opaque and fragmented compensation system, coupled E ith
constraining regulations, has inhibited staff redeployment, impeded administrative
decentralization, and led to larger recruitment than would otherwise be necessary.
D. Reducing Agricultural Vulnerability and Environmental Threats

15.
With 45 percent of the population and 70 percent of the poor living in rural areas,
agriculture is key to the living standards of the most deprived in Morocco. Increasing
fluctuations in agricultural output and the associated expansion-contraction cycles in rural
household incomes obviously influence their consumption-savings behavior. Indeed, the growing
economic uncertainty observed in the 90's, decreasing real prices for main crops, weak income
levels, and the absence of a genuine social protection system allowing to smooth out the effects of
droughts, seem to lead to asymmetric consumption patterns, with significant consumption drcps
during drought years not offset by increases during expansion phases.
16.
Environmental degradation is of concern, not only for growth sustainability, but also for
equity since the poor are the most affected. The main issues include the lack of water and
sanitation, with particular impact on the poor, water quality issues and urban pollution. Most
generally, water availability at 700m3/person/year puts Morocco in a situation of 'water stress'.
In rural areas, the lack of water and related infrastructure is affecting seriously the ability of the
rural poor to cope with what seem to be growing climatic shocks. Regional disparities, with the
deterioration of water quality in some water basins with high industrial and urban concentration,
aggravate the problem. The country is also subject to an increasing fragility of forest and graziag
land, with around 50 per cent of land affected by erosion.

III. MOROCCO's DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
17.
Morocco's development program was initially formulated in the current Government's
policy statement of 1998. It was further fleshed out in the five-year Plan approved by Parliament
in July 2000, which takes into account recent developments such as the vision of education
reform laid out by the Royal Commission, and the prospect of exceptional privatization revenues.
It addresses the four key development challenges as follows:

10

A. The Growth Agenda
18.
The acceleration of growth to an average of 5 percent over the five-year period is a
central objective of the five-year plan, and would be supported by higher public investment levels
and structural reforms. Mostly on account of privatization revenues, public investment would
increase markedly over the period, to average 4.5-5 percent of GDP. The EU agreement
represents a cornerstone in Morocco's integration strategy. The recent currency realignment also
reflects the growing importance of Europe in Morocco's trade.
19.
The Government expects private sector development to be a key source of growth. It
would encourage the private sector by continued implementation of ongoing structural reforms,
including: (i) privatization and PPI; (ii) the business environment, with special emphasis on
SMEs, export promotion, streamlined procedures for foreign and domestic investment, and
improved access to land; (iii) labor market policies, including the approval of a much delayed
new labor code, increased private sector participation in the professional training system, and
better market intermediation through the new National Agency for Employment; (iv) tax
administration, realignment of external tariffs, and the judicial system, including further
strengthening of commercial courts; and (v) continued strengthening of the financial sector.
B. Improving the Poverty Focus of Public Policies and Expenditures
20.
As noted above, the objectives of equity and inclusion, repeatedly stressed by King
Mohammed VI, have gained importance in the Government's program. The Plan targets the
generalization of education at entry levels by 2002-03. To this end, 10,000 new teacher positions
were created under the current 2001 budget and the Plan envisions a large school construction
program. The Government is also considering extending medical insurance, including to the
poor, to be financed with budget resources. Additional pro-poor policies and programs being
introduced are: (i) a further acceleration of rural infrastructure programs, with a view of reaching
60-70 percent of the rural population by 2004; (ii) a set of integrated and participatory rural
development programs, targeted at the poorest rural areas; and (iii) the creation of the Social
Fund, and the reform of Entraide Nationale, based on the results of a pilot reform program started
in 1999.
C. The Reform of the State
21.
The Government plans to improve public sector efficiency by implementing the
following measures: (i) enhanced autonomy for local municipalities, through a legislative reform
currently under preparation, and the establishment of intermediate levels of government (regions);
(ii) adrministrative decentralization, the principles of which were recently laid out in a draft
charter, and successfully experimented under the recent emergency drought program; (iii) acrossthe-board simplification of rules and regulations including the reduction of the administration's
discretionary powers; and (iv) increased accountability, through further build up of commercial
and administrative courts, and the strengthening or creation of Chambers of Accounts at the
central and the regional levels.
D. Reducing Agricultural Vulnerability and Environmental Threats
22.
The Government has launched a national drought protection program following a second
drought year in 2000. The program includes measures to improve water distribution,

11

strengthening of cattle feed distribution and subsidies, debt rescheduling for farmers, and cereal
distribution. The program has successfully used a decentralized and participatory approach that
has had maximum and quick impact. The program will now be institutionalized to ensure rapid
reaction in the event of drought.
E. Bank Assessment
23.
Overall, the Government's strategy does reflect Morocco's key development priorities
and to a large extent identifies the budgetary resources and instruments to achieve them, as
evident for instance for education reform and rural sector development. The Government strategy,
however, raises four sets of issues:
*

Many of the reforms underlying the Plan's growth targets are of an institutional nature
and might take longer than expected to materialize. Under unchanged macroeconorric
policies, it is unlikely that Morocco will rapidly embark on a path of sustained and
significantly higher growth. The recent readjustment of the currency peg basket, while
sending a positive signal and helping prevent a further appreciation of the real effective
exchange rate, might not be enough to alter significantly the growth outlook. Restoring
competitiveness would require continued flexible management of the exchange rate.
Similarly, these changes in exchange rate policy should be accompanied by a wider
policy package that includes trade liberalization, tight fiscal policy and structural reforrs
to facilitate private sector activity. Stagnation of agriculture output is also unlikely to be
reversed until the issue of crop patterns, and the related questions of protection, wat-r
management and price incentives, is addressed.

*

Fiscal management is under strain, and is a cause for concern. The 5-year Plan's
objective of reducing the deficit to 1 percent of GDP by 2004 hinges on 'compensatoiy
measures' of 4 percent of GDP, which have not been identified. Savings on the wage bill
or food subsidies will require difficult reforms in order to materialize. On the
expenditure side, strong pressures are already arising from education reform, particular y
through the wage bill, and further pressure may come from health insurance or thle
assumption of contingent liabilities (public pensions schemes and specialized banks).

*

Key structural reforms in areas such as education, extension of health insurance, health
financing for the poor, or the civil service, lack a clear vision as to how they will be
implemented, or financed. Education reform, in particular, requires a well-articulated
plan integrating and sequencing its various aspects, including fiscal costs and efficiency
gains.

*

While privatization revenues would present a unique opportunity to finance some of the
one-time costs of important structural or social reforms or to ease future fiscal
constraints, no provision to that effect has been made under the Govemment strategv.
Most of the privatization revenues have hitherto gone to finance lower budgetary savings,
and only a limited part has been earmarked for financing various investment projects and
recapitalization operations under the Hassan II fund10 .

24.
Finally, the political opening process is still unfolding. Over the last few years, the
political decision-making process has sought to build consensus among the coalition members,
and with civil society more generally. While transparency was enhanced, consensus building has
10 The Hassan 11 Fund was created in 1999 as an extra-budgetary account intended to earmark for
investment part of the proceeds of the second GSM license.

12

often caused delays and a lack of clear vision and drive, increasing uncertainties in the private
sector. With the advent of new elections next year, it is hoped that the Government will forge an
early consensus on reforms to allow it to move more decisively on its agenda.

IV. MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS
Morocco is at a juncture in its development agenda. In particular, choices made today in
25.
three economic policy areas will have a significant impact on economic prospects over the
medium-term. First, there is broad consensus that structural reforms should continue to be an
important focus of the reform program over the next four years. As noted above, the Government
has made significant progress during the last few years in tackling structural issues, as well as
improving human capital and reducing disparities between urban and rural Morocco.
Implementing these reforms at a faster speed would help jumpstart the economy, in particular if
private investors feel more reassured about the Government's commitment and capacity to
manage the economy. Second, structural (second generation) reforms alone are unlikely to
achieve a sharp increase in the growth rate, especially over the CAS period. The prospects for the
Moroccan economy over' the next 4 years also critically hinge on sound macroeconomic policies.
Finally, a decisive choice confronted by the authorities is how to use the large privatization
receipts. An unwise use would represent a missed opportunity to quickly tackle key structural
constraints, and might potentially undermine macroeconomic stability over the medium-term.
26.
The fundamental differences between the two scenarios described below depend on
choices in these three areas. The partial adjustment (base) case is defined as a continuation of the
macro policies of the 1990s, characterized by sustainable fiscal management and a nominal
exchange rate peg. However, given the recent deterioration of the budgetary situation financed
with the large privatization receipts, this scenario is conditioned on significant fiscal adjustment
over the next 3 years. In this regard, the fiscal measures of the next budget law for 2002 will be
critical in keeping Morocco firmly in this scenario. Also, following the recent readjustment of
the currency peg, the scenario assumes that the authorities would ensure that no real appreciation
of the currency occurs in the next few years. This scenario also assumes continued progress on
the structural front, along the same trends as in the 1990s. The high case, or full adjustment
scenario, represents a more dynamic policy stance, more susceptible to generate the higher
economic growth rates necessary for unemployment and poverty reduction.
A. Base Case Scenario (Partial Adjustment)
27.
The base case is predicated on the preservation of a stable macroeconomic
framework in a context of medium-term fiscal sustainability, a benign external
environment, and continuing structural reforms.
28.
As noted above, this scenario, based on the Moroccan five-year plan, restores the
economic policy framework of the 1990s, but given today's policies, it implies a sharp correction
of recent fiscal trends. Indeed, the 2001 budget law foresees a fiscal deficit of 7.7 percent of
GDP, although the debt-creating fiscal deficit is kept in the range of 1.2 percent of GDP, thanks
to privatization receipts of about 6.5 percent of GDP. This budget marks a serious deterioration
in the structure of public expenditures, essentially negative levels of government savings, which
could threaten medium-term fiscal sustainability. The realization of the base case scenario will
therefore hinge critically on three conditions that need to be achieved through ongoing fiscal

13

management during 2001, and through adequate measures in future Budget laws (see CAS Annex
for detailed macro projections):
*

*

Maintaining current budget revenues as a percentage of GDP (24 percent) from 20(1
onwards, in the context of declining customs duties under the EU agreement. This will
imply continued improvement in tax collection, and the broadening of the tax base
(especially with respect to VAT).
Less than full execution of budgeted investment, at around 85 percent of the leve .s
envisaged in the Plan, counting on implementation constraints and enforcement of tight
selection criteria. This should result in a level of Government investment above 5
percent of GDP for the CAS period, compared to 4.5 percent in 1997-98.

Table 2. Partial Adjustmnent Scenario - Selected Macroeconomic Indicators
Actual

Estmte

lndicaLor
1997
1998
Growth rates (%)
Real GDP
-2.2%
6.8%
Real non-agriculture GDP
3.2%
3.9%
Real Consumption per Capita
-4.3%
6.8%
Import Volume, GNFS
7.3% 21.4%
Export Volune, GNFS
8.3%
2.2%
Ratios to GDP (%)
Gross Domestic Investment
20.7% 22.5%
Government Deficit (excl.grants) 2/
-3.3%
-2.7%
Government Current Revenues
25.5% 27.4%
Govemment Current Expenditures
24.6% 25.2%
Government Budgetary Investment
4.2%
4.9%
Total External Debt
60.3% 57.5%
Current account balance
-0.3% -0.4%
1/Includes changes in stocks.
2/ Fiscal years in 1997 and 1998, calendar years otherwise.

Projected

1999

2000

2001

202

2003

p004

-0.7%
3.0%
-3.8%
4.7%
4.8%

0.8%
3.4%
-1.8%
-2.8%
-0.8%

8.0%
3.9%
6.6%
5.5%
4.0%

3.4%
3.9%
0.8%
4.9%
6.9%

3.6%
4.1%
1.9%
5.6%
5.7%

3 8%
42%
23%
5 9%
5 8%

24.2%
-3.8%
27.1%
26.0%
4.9%
54.5%
-0.5%

24.5%
-6.4%
26.2%
26.5%
6.1%
59.4%
-1.6%

24.7%
-7.7%
23.8%
25.5%
6.0%
54.9%
-1.5%

25.2%
-5.5%
23.9%
23.6%
5.8%
50.1%
-1.1%

25.4%
-4.3%
23.9%
22.9%
5.4%
45.7%
-1.0%

25 6%
-3 5%
24 0%
22 3%
5.2%
42.5%
-1.0%

Progress in reducing current expenditures. First, the 2001 budget law includes a
number of one-time expenditure items, such as the drought program, a retroactive
payment for the exceptional promotion of civil servants, and partial buffering of higheoil prices. A moderately tight control of Government consumption starting in 2002 would
allow to cut these expenditures by 1.3 percent of GDP by 2003. Second, further reform
of the food subsidy system could be implemented, following the elimination of cooking
oil subsidies in November 2000. Finally, it will be critical to enforce a strict control o.
the wage bill: zero net recruitment and no discretionary wage increases from 2002
onward would allow to reduce the wage bill by around 1.5 percentage point of GDP by
2004"'. The CAS program will fully take the fiscal situation into account, not only in the
determination of assistance levels but also by devoting resources to analytical work anc
policy dialogue on issues such as the reform of civil service or food subsidies.

" Except for the increase resulting from the process of conversion of temporary workers.

14

29.

Under these assumptions, more than half of cumulated privatization revenues will still be

absorbed to finance lower government

Rgure 3. Privatlzation Revenues, Government Savings, 1999-

savings, which will return to their
1999 level only by the end of the CAS
period. The debt-creating fiscal deficit
(i.e. after privatization receipts) would
be brought down to around 3 percent

of GDP, assuring

base-line fiscal

sustainability as indicated by a
declining Government debt-to-GDP
ratio"2 . Consequently, the Treasury

would face manageable pressures to

2004

8.0
6.0%4.0% --

0

2.0%
.20%
-4.0% 1999

2000

Pmiatization revenues

2001

+

2002

2003

2004

Government saMngs

meet its financing needs, and continue
to
favor
domestic-currency
denominated debt while foreign net financing flows are expected to remain mostly negative over
the medium term (Table 3).
30.
Monetary policy is expected to remain prudent and the major challenge will be to cope
with the large private capital inflows to avoid excessive expansion of the monetary base.
Inflation is projected to increase to about 3 percent in 2001 (as per the GDP deflator) reflecting
the expansionary fiscal impulse, the rebound in agriculture, last year's 10 percent increase in the
minimum wage, and the recent 5 percent devaluation of the currency. The real effective
exchange rate is projected to avoid any further appreciation, thanks to the recent decision to
adjust the relative weight of the US dollar and the Euro in the peg basket and to stringent fiscal
policy.
31.

The environment for the private sector is expected to benefit from:
*

Continued, albeit gradual, implementation of structural reforms yielding moderate
productivity gains; possibly accompanied by a harmonization of trade tariffs and faster
trade liberalization, to offset the higher protection granted by the devaluation.

*

Further recovery of private investment, based on the positive trend since 1998, and on
other recent developments. At the sector level, the ongoing rebound in the tourism and
construction sectors is expected to continue.

32.
Under these assumptions, GDP growth would be stronger than in the 1990s. After two
years of stagnation, GDP growth is projected to rebound to 7 percent to 8 percent in 2001. This
rebound reflects the recovery in agriculture following two years of drought. Thereafter, however,
agricultural growth would subside to factor in the probability of at least one drought over the
CAS period. Overall GDP growth is projected to reach 3.8 percent in 2004, mostly on account of
non-agricultural output. This increase would be mainly driven by higher private and public
investment, and by export performance improving as a result of sustained EU demand. However,
growth would be lower than envisaged by the five-year Plan (an average of 5 percent p.a.
throughout the period), but consistent with past patterns of investment efficiency in Morocco.
The key to fiscal sustainability beyond the CAS period will be ensuring a sound budget position when
windfall revenues dry out in 4-5 years time. It is also crucial that the deterioration of public savings in
2001 be managed tightly, in the light of possible shocks. The projections show that the level of primary
deficit associated with the base case fiscal stance would remain consistent with further reduction of
Government's total debt, from 83 to around 72 percent of GDP between 2000-04. However, most of this
debt reduction is expected to happen in 2003, in relation with higher government savings. This makes the
fiscal situation vulnerable to interest rate shocks and other exogenous factors that could derail the expected
trend. In sum, the fiscal stance warrants close and continuous monitoring.
12

15

Simple elasticity based estimations suggest that with this scenario, poverty could recede to around
15 percent of population by 2003. However, urban unemployment would continue to deteriorate
due to continuing increases in labor force participation, and could reach 24 percent of the urban
labor force by 2003-04.
33.
No significant tensions on external accounts are expected under the partial adjustment
scenario. The current account deficit, fuelled to 1.6 percent of GDP in 2000 by the drought and
higher oil prices, would remain at this level in 2001, mainly due to a higher fiscal deficit. It
would progressively recede to about 1 percent of GDP as a result of the improving service
balance and sustained current transfers. The trade balance would, however, not improxe
significantly. The situation would remain manageable thanks to substantial net foreign capital
inflows - around 2 percent of GDP p.a. - resulting from privatization operations and foreign
direct investment. Under this scenario, Morocco's financing needs would be mainly driven by
external debt repayments increasing from around US$ 2.4 to US$ 2.7 billion between 2000 and
2003, especially as rescheduled London Club private debt is due in the next few years. Total
external debt outstanding would as a result decrease further by 2004 to reach 42 percent of GDP.
34.
In the event of a lack of a strong fiscal adjustment, there would be no immediate financial
instability, but fiscal sustainability would be compromised in the medium term (possibly beyond
this CAS period) as privatization receipts dwindle, and financing needs would have to be met
through increased borrowing. Aided by the fiscal stimulus generated by the privatization
receipts, growth would remain close to the base case over the next few years but would not be
sustained later on. The higher fiscal deficit could crowd out private investment and could lead t3
higher inflation and interest rates, if budgetary financing needs are met through domestic
borrowing. Even under these conditions, poverty would likely decline in the short-term, because
of continued progress on improving social conditions through policies that allow better access to
health and education in rural areas and for girls.
B. High Case Scenario (Full Adjustment)
35.
Prospects for higher and sustained growth sufficient to make a rapid dent in
poverty and unemployment will depend on adopting a balanced package that includes both
a new macroeconomic framework and a strong set of accompanying structural reforms.
36.
To have a rapid impact on poverty, Morocco must strive for a significant jump in growth
performance. Sustained growth rates will have to rely on external demand and the dynamics of
integration, which in turn would have to be based on a significant improvement in external
competitiveness. To this effect, Morocco would need to establish a more outward oriented policy
framework with a higher degree of exchange rate flexibility, all the while maintaining
macroeconomic stability. To fully realize the benefits of the new policy approach and minimize
risks, Morocco would need to exploit the synergies of reforms along several axes:
(i)
Building on the recent changes to the currency peg basket, and the concomitant 5 percent
depreciation, introduce a much more flexible exchange rate policy stance, to allow the external
sector to fully develop its growth potential and reverse the loss of competitiveness due to real
exchange rate appreciation in the 1990s.

16

Table 3. Morocco - FinancingPlan (US$ million)

1995

1996

1997

Projected

EsL

Actual
1998 1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Financing Requirement

2576

2263

2763

2152

3766

2552

4937

2866

3129

3284

Current Account (excl. grants)
Debt Service a

-1186
3764

35
3352

-87
3190

-144
2782

-156
3047

-548
3534

-537
3614

-418
3496

-409
3656

-432
3344

2373
1391
-982

2006
1346
292

2123
1068
553

1761
1021
247

1971
1076
1638

2413
1121
-409

2541
1073
1858

2480
1016
-32

2706
949
13

2440
905
413

2576

2263

2763

2152

3766

2552

4937

2866

3129

3284

340
2089
906
449

469
1757
797
532

1108
1313
568
283

337
1586
641
214

846
2541
781
243

113
2290
594
575

2647
2199
776
558

1000
1766
717
497

1000
2057
738
552

1000
2178
789
493

c. Private Guaranteed

632

337

187

393

432

892

595

437

547

501

d. Private Non-Guaranteed

103

91

275

338

1085

230

270

115

220

395

0
147

0
38

0
342

0
228

0
380

50
99

0
91

0
100

0
73

0
106

Amortization
Interest
Reserve Build-Upb
Financing Sources
FDI and Portfolio Capital
Medium and Long Term Loans
a. Multilateral
b. Bilateral

Official Capital Grants
Other Capitalc

a. Includes IMFinterestpayments
b. Includes IMF credit purchases and repurchases
c. Mostly net short term capital, changes in assets holdings of commercial banks and private citizens

(ii)

Tightening offiscal policy, to hold back inflation and ensure that private investment is not

crowded out, and a monetary policy framework compatible with a more flexible exchange rate
policy.

Fiscal stringency will need to compensate for reduced tariff revenues. In particular,

reducing the wage bill from its current high level will be essential to dampen wage inflation and
keep the deficit under control, while simultaneously permitting a shift in expenditures towards
priority public investment and social expenditures. The latter is critical to more quickly integrate
rural Morocco into the mainstream economy.
(iii)
Faster trade liberalization. Given current high protection levels, the back-loaded
structure of the trade liberalization agenda with the EU may, if left unchanged, in effect increase
protection for producers for the domestic market.' 3 The recent devaluation only compounds this.
A faster acceleration of the reduction of trade barriers would hence be an essential complement to
increased flexibility in the exchange rate regime to ensure efficient resource allocation in favor of
competitive industries, to minimize inflationary pressures and to generally increase the
attractiveness of Morocco for private investors.
Structural measures to eliminate supply side constraints, including:

(iv)

*

A liberalization of labor market constraints, in particular passing the long delayed labor
code and promoting a more liberal system of labor retraining. Increasing labor market
flexibility will facilitate the reallocation of labor to the tradable sectors, in particular to
export oriented industries, and other industries with under-exploited potential such as

13 According to the EU agreement, the dismantling of protection for Moroccan producers will mainly take
place at the end of the 12 year implementation period.

17

fisheries, tourism and information technology. At the micro level, it would also create
more flexibility for firms to adjust their labor force. These measures would also
effectively reduce labor costs and promote employment.
*

Removal of the constraints to access land. Difficulties and delays in accessing land are
ranked by firms as a key constraint to investment in tourism and new industrial units.

*

Improvements in public-private interaction. The hassle factor is high in Morocco and
private sector managers spend a significant amount of time in dealing with public sector
rules and regulations. Administrative procedures are particularly heavy with regard to
the creation of new firms, a significant barrier to enhancing competition and growth.

*

Reform of agricultural price policies. The stagnation of agriculture has been a significant
factor in the disappointing growth performance of the 1990s. The more flexible
exchange rate regime would create a good opportunity to reduce agricultural protection,
and review agriculture support policies.

(v)
Faster integrationof rural areas, and strengthening the social protection system to shield
the poor and most vulnerable segments of the population from any negative effects of the
reforms. For example, in parallel to the changes in agriculture policy, it may be possible to
replace the existing subsidy schemes for wheat and sugar by better targeted systems. In addition,
re-establishing positive fiscal savings, together with stronger reallocation of public expenditures,
should enable the government to substantially accelerate its rural programs.
37.
This package, if implemented in its entirety, is expected to incite strong growth without
putting macroeconomic stability at risk. A more flexible exchange rate regime is expected to
result in an initial deterioration in the current account, but as the export sector picks up, the deficit
should be reduced to less than one percent of GDP. Tight fiscal policy, privatization receipts, and
the increase in economic growth are expected to lead to a reduction of the fiscal deficit over tinme.
The synergies among the policies described above should also contain any inflationary impact of
a more flexible exchange rate regime.
38.
With this broad based policy package, growth rates are expected to reach 6-7 percent p:er
year, on account of a sustained response in the manufacturing and other sectors with a strong
growth potential. As a consequence, Morocco would be able to significantly reduce the poverty
incidence back to some 13 percent of the population by 2004, assuming that private consumption
grows in parallel with output. The relatively labor intensive nature of growth would also drive
the urban unemployment rate to below 20 percent.
C. Exogenous Risks and Vulnerabilities
39.
Major exogenous risks on Morocco's growth performance and external position include:
(i) vulnerability to consecutive severe droughts and related volatility of output; (ii) contingent
liabilities; and (iii) external shocks, fast deterioration of terms of trade, and an important
dependency on EU economic performance. The Bank would assist the Government in addressing
these risks by: (i) integrating vulnerability alleviation as one of the CAS strategic objectives (see
next chapter); (ii) analyzing the issue of contingent liabilities in an integrated fashion in an
upcoming PER; (iii) maintaining a close monitoring on macroeconomic developments, and
advocating economic policies that increase Morocco's integration and resilience to the
international economy. Under the full and partial adjustment scenarios, the materialization of
these risks on a limited scale might call for additional financial support from the Bank, provid-d
good sector policies and adjustment measures are in place.

18

V. BANK GROUP STRATEGY
A. New Challenges and Opportunities for the Bank Group
40.
Morocco has changed both politically and economically over the last three years,
and to increase its effectiveness and relevance, the Bank Group needs to reposition itself at
this critical juncture in the country's development process. During the previous CAS period,
the Bank Group sought to reduce the social gap between rural and urban areas. The Bank Group
also encouraged the process of private sector-led development. The results of the last CAS are
mixed, however, and OED rated Bank assistance marginally unsatisfactory (see Box 2).14 While
Bank interventions have helped create breakthroughs in the country's development agenda and its
advice and support remains widely sought, the Bank needs to continue to adapt the way it does
business to the new country environment. How can the Bank Group increase its effectiveness,
taking into account the changes taking place in Morocco, as well as successes and failures from
recent experience?
*

Strong progress was initiated on the social programs -the previous CAS's major
objective-and consensus has now emerged in the country on the crucial need to reduce
the large disparities between the "two Moroccos". Basic infrastructure programs have
been successfully launched to improve rural access; a social fund was created; and
consensus was finally reached on a major education reform program, while education
outcome indicators improved on the ground, thanks to integrated approaches in the
poorest provinces. The challenge will be to reinforce the impact and efficiency of
existing programs by deepening bottom-up approaches.

*

The forthcoming elections in about 12 months may focus the Government on its political
agenda, preventing the decisive drive needed on economic issues. A key challenge for
the Bank will be to continue to support economic reforms, even during this period, as a
resumption of growth is critical for poverty alleviation. In addition, the Bank should
show flexibility in its program and strengthen analytical work to be prepared to help the
new Government following the elections. Should it move decisively on its reform
program, increased Bank financing would be required rapidly to support the reform drive
and address any potential negative impact on the poor.

*

Over the recent years, the Government has been successful in diversifying its financing
sources and expected privatization receipts are likely to eliminate any major financing
constraints over the next few years. What the Government seeks from the Bank is
technical advice, deep analytical work, institution building, and a catalytic role in
leveraging concessional and private financing. This implies that the Bank's role should
not be measured solely in terms of lending, but in terms of its development impact and
catalytic role.

14 Management's evaluation of the last CAS points to mixed results. It believes that tangible progress was
made on rural access and education reform - the two central CAS objectives -, as well as on opening
towards civil society. The Bank played a critical role in supporting Government efforts in these central
areas. Progress on other areas of the reform program was, however, less satisfactory. There was little
tangible progress on public sector reform and fiscal objectives. Indeed the rigidity of the budget further
accentuated, and government savings declined. Progress on structural reforms continued, but not to the
extent needed to boost significantly private sector confidence, except in telecommunications.

19

The demand for IFC's services has also changed during the 1990s towards large, complex
and innovative projects. In recent years, IFC has become significantly less competitive in
Morocco as other sources of capital, both private and donor based (e.g., the EIB), have
become more readily available. Some of these sources have lower spreads while others
are more able to provide local currency financing. As a result, IFC's program dropped
significantly; new approvals for the five years starting in FY90 totaled US$ 187 million,
but in the following five years amounted to only US$ 16 million. Correspondingly, IFC's
portfolio decreased from US$ 196 million at end of FY92 to US$ 32 million at end of
FY00. Furthermore, since FY95, roughly US$ 67 million in loans were prepaid by
clients with access to altemative sources of financing at lower rates. Nevertheless, events
in FY01 have proven that when project structuring is complex or volumes large, demand
for IFC's services increases. IFC invested US$ 89 million in FY01 on its own account in
Medi Telecom, the consortium for the second cellular license, and played a key role in
mobilizing an additional US$ 310 million in B-loans. This one investment resulted in a
significant increase in IFC's portfolio to US$ 105 million at the end of March 2001.
Other recent innovative projects include a partial risk guarantee in the MENA Forfaiting
Facility (of which the exposure to Morocco is expected to be US$ 10 million) to prov Lde
trade finance for local companies, and a US$ 5 million equity stake in a regional
investment fund targeting SMEs.
Developing deeper partnerships will be key to improve the Bank Group's effectiveness.
First, the increasing importance of bilateral aid implies a need for tighter coordination. in
particular with the EU. The signing of the association agreements with the EU provides
the broad framework for Morocco's integration into the world economy, and brings
increased concessional finance. Relations with the EU will thus need to be further
strengthened during the next few years to ensure a consistent and complementary
approach to Morocco's development. Second, the strong emergence of civil society is a
new positive dimension of the development process in Morocco which should reinforce
societal consensus, and hence the sustainability of reforms. For the Bank, the challenge
is to develop more effective partnerships to enhance community-based and decentralized
approaches, with stronger impact on the ground.
During the previous CAS, the Bank Group made significant efforts to improve and adjust
its program to the country's changing environment. The Bank (i) emphasized a
rationalization of the existing portfolio to improve its performance (see portfolio section);
(ii) launched various initiatives with civil society, such as a network of social scientists,
and supported the action plan on gender; and (iii) gradually transformed investment
projects towards catalytic interventions to support broad program approaches. It also
increased analytical work and its dissemination to foster consensus on reforms and
institutional work to promote sustainability. These efforts will be further reinforced
during the next CAS period.

20

Box 2: The Country Assistance Assessment by OED
In its recent CAE, OED rated the implementation of the 1997 CAS margirniall umsatisfactor).
According to OED, the CAS's strategic priorities were and remain highly rele'ant, but the
program implemented vas less so:
*

*

Total commitmens remained %kithin the base casve rurget c,f USiS I billion, but with a
signitic3ni shitc hetv een in%e%tment and adju%tmenh lending tialt'of investment lending went
Io rural and ,oial prneram.. .'hich e\.eeded the CAS iaxget of rne.third. but (i( a lower
u\erall inmetment program.
Adjustment lending hid mixed resultuh
the lirst FelecommuniLadiuns loan Lind the (OnfraL LUiU
Sa%ings De%elopment Loin (LISS 100- million eachi met their ohlectivez. rhe one-tranche
Poljc Reform Support Loan (PRSI. TSS 250 million) added %alue by in`rea'l:n|
cohesi\eness in the Gomernment program. but ILtresul-, are deemed dioappointing. irn \iew of
the hlow progress Lin administratLe and 1i%l ser%ice ret'rm, as well ai she rel.xatiLn -1fiscal
discipline

*

Inmesiment projecEs were in some cases dropped or downsized due to low government
Interest, limited a%ailabilirN tuf counterpart funding, or priOritrV zVIen lo C0ncesional funding
the coSt

*

Lft

doing business in Nlorocko has been ncrea.ing. due w, thc length -ind cost of

pro,ject preparatirn. decreasing 'ize ot im esiment projecis, ind the effort... albeit successful,
of addrev ing portfolio quali) problem,
Analytical and ad,visor) acti'uties Aere graded highls but became more cxpen.i'e
than

IENfA and Bank a%erages Dissemination and consenMsu-building efforis Were helpful in
accompanying the Government's ou.reach efforts to,wards c'.il sociec\. but less successful In
term Of retIrm outCOMes. The Bank caulalvic support Ot the participator\ preparitinn -1 i
gender Plan c f ActiLon %as praised as best practlice

B. CAS Approach and Key Objectives
41.
Given the new country environment, the rising poverty incidence and the social gaps still
existing in the country, the proposed CAS will further deepen its poverty focus through
community-based and decentralized approaches. Indeed, Morocco is at the vanguard of MENA
in opening up its civil society, democratization, promoting the rule of law, decentralization and
community participation. These are all avenues which can have a sustained impact on poverty
and will thus form the first leg of the Bank institutional support and lending programs. The
current economic policies of the government, however, are unlikely to have a sustained impact on
poverty reduction as long as stronger growth and agriculture reform agendas are not adopted.
Hence, the second crucial leg of the assistance program will be to promote strong analytical work
and dialogue on the conditions needed to revitalize private investment and growth, to be
complemented by financial support once consensus has been reached on the reforms needed.
42.
The CAS, hence, proposes to focus on the four following objectives: (i) promoting
human development and inclusion policies in the "second Morocco"; (ii) enhancing
conditions for economic growth and private sector development; (iii) reducing vulnerability
of the poor, especially in rural areas; and (iv) improving governance, an area critical for the
success of the other three priorities.

*

Promoting human development and inclusionpolicies in the "second Morocco ", focusing
on the delivery of basic education and health and on gender equality, is the key to
enhancing Morocco's long-term growth potential. To this end, assistance would be

21

targeted towards developing disadvantaged rural areas, expanding on the approach
initiated under the previous CAS. Key instruments would be infrastructure and social
programs that promote decentralization, community participation and cross-sectoral
integration, thus not only serving the objective of greater opportunities and equity, tut
also improving the efficiency of public programs.
*

Enhancing economic growth is strongly correlated with poverty outcomes in Moroc zo
and is key for creating jobs, both for the urban population and rural migrants. The focus
will be on building consensus on a growth-oriented economic framework, and :n
supporting the development of SMEs and the services sector (particularly those activities
linked to information technology), which are highly relevant to urban poverty a:-d
unemployment. IFC investments will focus on large projects that require mobilization of
international funding, as well as SMEs and other investments with strong developmen al
impact. The Bank would also be prepared to use its guarantee facility, should this be
required. There are also several areas, e.g. agricultural incentives and the business
environment, where the Bank would be prepared to support broader reform programs,
once consensus has been reached on their key components.

*

The Bank would also plan to support the Government to address the issue of vulnerabilUty
to droughts, through both short-term coping mechanisms and, in the longer run, a reform
of the agriculture incentive framework. Safety nets for the poor will also be high on the
agenda as this is an area where Morocco lags behind other countries. IFC is also looking
into financial instruments to help manage the risks resulting from adverse weather.

*

Across-the-board progress on public governance is essential to the effectiveness and the
long-term sustainability of the above development actions. Hence, this area would be
included in the cooperation priorities for the Bank, building on the progress recently
made in terms of consensus and political signals. Governance includes a wide variety of
difficult issues ranging from decentralization to budget management and civil service
reform, accountability, and the strengthening of civil society. Here the Bank would
mostly focus on institution building, but would also be ready to support selected reforns
in areas such as public administration or decentralization, should the Government initiate
deeper reforms.

43.
To achieve these objectives and implement our program effectively, the ways of
doing business will be inspired by the following principles: selectivity, participation and
partnership, institutional development and knowledge transfer, and an increasing role of
the country office set up during the last CAS period. The CDF process initiated recently
would serve as the glue of this new approach (see Box 3).

44.

Selectivity:
*

The CDF and the recently approved new five-year plan provide the foundation for
selectivity. The Ministry of Finance has recently prepared a broad financing plan by
sources of financing, to determine the areas of interventions of each external financing
agency. This will provide a tighter framework for coordination, which in the past has
been relatively weak.

*

In this new context, the Bank would focus on rural development, social development a-id
public sector reform, especially with regards to public expenditures management,
decentralization and municipal development. Interventions would be reduced in: Ji)
private sector and financial sector development, where the EU is taking a strong lead

22

(except for analytical work, and support for SME development); and (ii) major
infrastructure programs, such as transport, energy, and urban water and sanitation which
are not focused on the poor. Flexibility was, however, requested by the Moroccans, in
cases where the Bank Group could provide a strong catalytic impact on institutional
reforms, such as the PPI framework and the investment code.
*

Another important role for the Bank Group is to maintain a broad overview of progress
on the development front, in particular in the structural and institutional areas. This
would be done through the CDF and analytical work, while focusing on specific
interventions to avoid dilution of Bank resources and impact.

*

Selectivity also applies to IFC's activities. The Corporation will concentrate efforts on
those private sector investrnents where additionality is greatest and where its actions
complement reforms. The PPI framework, SME development and support to new service
sectors are all areas where the Bank and the TFC are working jointly.

Box 3: The CDF
The CDI is an evolving
The K prinrit% of the Go%emment in Nrrting th5 proce.;'% twofuld.
(i i anjl,ticjl i1rk to underpin the ne'. Fi.e-vear Plan it v.as prepiring- nd (iii consensus building and
outreach to civil society.
* At the request of the C-inernment. the Bank prepared 16 sectoral matrices which 'cre then
inc;rporited in the new fi'%e-Near plan. The plan WdS prepared in consultation with the pri%aLe
secltr and ci il sociei% Fallc,
ling appro%al rif the Plan, the Nlinistrv olf Finance prepared a broad
tmnjncing program The CAS hiLs ithin that framework.
* To streamline this initiative, three avenues are currently under discusalons:
1 Improved cvoordinauion of all actor. behind the Fi',e-)ear Plan. and deepening work cn a long-term
program behind ihe King s next isbon of inclusion
2. Cuninued .nalytical %.rk, through regular analtNical updates of Nioro,xc's de elopmenm issues and
challenges iSSRICDR tNpe exercise)
3. Deeper anasiys and agreement behind a comprehenhi%e and participatorv poverm reduction along the
lines o Ihe WDR 2000 repon

45.

Partnerships:
*

The emerging civil society, the decentralization drive and the introduction of new
concepts of authority based on services to the citizens rather than on control, involve a
major shift in attitudes in the country and will require strong institutional support. These
trends also represent a major opportunity to improve the efficiency of public
expenditures. This will represent a strong new avenue in all the Bank's interventions,
and constitute an explicit objective of this CAS. The Bank should also build on the
consultations with civil society initiated to help formulate this CAS (see Box 4) through
specific catalytic interventions, as described in Annex B 11.

*

Coordination on the ground has improved following the establishment of the Bank's local
office three years ago which, since summer of 2000, also has EFC representation. The
shift towards program interventions will, however, require more upfront coordination,
especially on broad sector strategies and objectives. In this respect, coordination will be
strengthened in particular with the UN agencies, and with the AfDB and the EU.
Following a tripartite meeting with the latter two during the CAS preparation, the
following joint priorities were agreed: (i) strong focus on education and literacy program;

23

(ii) health reform; (iii) agriculture and water strategy; and (iv) rural development. PSD
development will be a key area of emphasis in the new EU program; the respective
approaches will be closely coordinated to ensure complementarity. UNDP and the Bank
are already cooperating closely in social programs and on the CDF/U'NDAF approach.
*

Finally, increased coordination of external agencies will also require closer coordinaticn
within the Government, as aid coordination responsibilities are currently scattered amorg
three different ministries. This issue has been highlighted as part of the policy dialogiLe
with the authorities.
Box 4: Participatory Process

*

*
*

*

Over the last year, as part of the CDF proxess. the Bank organized J scrics of public seminars aith the
Goternmenr and Ci%lI Sxicity .on a akide range o ttopics. such 3ahealth financing. eduL.a.iton. rural
dc%elopment. SNME development, -nd corrupinon An inter-Moxernmentil serninar on the Sources oif
Gro%%th was held in June last veai.
The preparator% work of the CAS was carried out in the Field Office. and in,voled substanlial
Drainsiormina between the Bank team in Morocco and our counlerpart ministries
A\ t'ull-da% consultation with more than 60 Ci-il Society organizations wds held in October 200 n
Rabat. with the prcsenie or the Regional Vice-president and the Cuunirs Director. to investiga-e
i%cnues for closer partnership betmeen the Bank and NGOs. The rTCommendations from these
,nsuliatioins aere integrated in this CAS and will be discussed * ith Civil Sc:let' in the comirmonihs A.-\nnex B IF)
A mission led bN the Countr- Director discussed the CAS kith the Authorities in Februarv 2001 This
t%a accompanied bN discussions with the other donors acti%e in Morocco. in parlicular agencie,' of the
UN ^vmtem. the EL., the .AfDB. and key bilaterals

46.

Knowledge Transfer and Institution Building:
*

This is the basic value added that the government expects from the Bank Group in all
interventions. The CAS proposes to emphasize catalytic projects; joint and participatory
approaches on analytical work; increased dissemination; as well as small institutional
projects to support think tanks, civil society, flexible advice and seminars, and
information networks, especially through the GDLN and global gateway initiatives.

*

Support from the WBI will be crucial in the Bank Group's knowledge management
activities in Morocco, in particular regarding decentralization and local government. In
2001, WBI will contribute to a workshop on decentralization and local government, to be
followed up with a WBI dedicated course on local government financial management.
Decentralization and local government will also be key themes for the 4th Mediterranean
Development Forum in March 2002 in Amman. WBI will also be very active in
delivering through the GDLN a variety of courses on development policy.

47.

Country Office:
*

The increased emphasis on participatory approaches, outreach efforts towards civil
society, partnerships and knowledge transfer, and the CDF will further increase the role
of the Bank's local office in the support program. The office, set up three years ago, :s
now fully operational and staffed with 7 higher level staff, including one staff from IFC.
Over time, it should remain budget neutral, but with an increase in local hires and a slight
reduction of headquarters staff. Its mandate and profile will change with increased
accountability placed on (i) portfolio management; (ii) support for social sectors and rural
development; (iii) governance; and (iv) civil society outreach and participative
24

approaches. The local office is already taking the lead on small catalytic projects and
self-standing institutional development grants.
C. Assistance Levels and Triggers
48.
The Bank's lending program over the previous CAS period (FY97-99) averaged US$ 300
million for 4 to 5 operations p.a. but was substantially reduced last year to two small institutional
projects, as the Govemment was preparing its new five-year plan. The program is expected to
amount to US$ 98 million this year for the two projects submitted together with this CAS. In the
future, investment lending is expected to remain poverty focused and be further reduced to enable
a redirection of operational resources towards analytical work and institutional building efforts.
At the same time, flexibility will be critical to be able to support selected sectoral reform efforts
more intensively once the environment is appropriate and to support the priorities of the new
Govemment after the elections.
49.
Hence the CAS proposes a base case program of about US$ 250 million p.a., with
two components: (i) a core program, of about three investment projects p.a. (excluding
LILs and other small institution-building operations), amounting to about US$ 100-150
million p.a. and centered on poverty alleviation and social development, and (ii) a sector
reform program, of about $100 million per year, supporting priority reforms of the
Government, contingent on macroeconomic and sectoral reforms (see Table 4).
*

The core component would focus squarely on social development issues, on

community-based approaches, and on governance and decentralization, while also
seeking new partnerships with the civil society. It would seek to deepen the shift
towards catalytic projects, institutional support and analytical work, in particular to
support consensus on a more growth-oriented economic framework. IFC would aim
to strengthen the private sector through support for complex and innovative projects,
complementing Bank efforts aiming at streamlining the business environment.
*

The reform component would consist of one sector reform operation per year when
the Govemment corrects the fiscal stance and there is consensus on policy reform in
the respective sectors. While the Govemment is making progress in several critical
reform areas, it is difficult to predict in which will progress be fastest and strongest.
Given this context, rather than prejudging where Government will make most
progress, the Bank will stand ready to support reform and institutional development
in areas: (1) critical for development; (2) consistent with the Bank's mandate and
comparative advantage; and (3) where progress has been significant, signaling strong
commitment by the authorities to reform in the sector.

25

Table 4. Bank Assistance Levels and Triggers
BASE CASE
Core Program
Program

Focus on human
resource development
and inclusion of
"second Morocco."

Lending
flows
(per year)

US$ 100-150 million

Triggers

Investment projects and
institutional support
activities.

HIGH CASE

Sector Reform Program
Support to selected sectoral reform
depending on commitment and progress.
Potential areas are:
-Decentralization
-Public administration
-Private Sector
-Agriculture
US$ 100 rmillion.
Sector adjustment loans or program loans.

. Fiscal triggers. Necessary for all sector
programs:
Maintaining budget revenues as
percent of GDP (24 percent).
Containing wage bill and other
current expenditures.
-

Sectoral triggers. Commitment in each
sector would be assessed separately:
DECENTRALIZATION

-

Effective decentralization of
accountability and decision making.
Actions to improve financial
management capacity in local
governments.

-

PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
Improved incentive framework for
civil service.

-

Base Case program plu,
support to high growth
policy package.

US$ 250450 million.
Base case plus
programmatic support
and/or targeted
interventions to reduce
the costs of adiustment
* Adoption of growthoriented macro
framework
including a more
flexible exchange
rate regime and
strengthened fiscal
policy.
* Trade liberalization
Structural reforms tj
remove supply side
constraints:
Streamlining
business
environment
(e.g., land
access).
-

Labor market

flexibility.
* Social protection
reform.

PRIVATE SECTOR
-

Establishment of broad PPI
framework.
Streamlining of business
environment.
AGRICULTURE

-

Liberalization of agricultural price
system.

50.
Given Morocco's record of prudent fiscal management during the 1990s and recent
policy measures, it is likely that macroeconomic policies would be strengthened over the next
year or so as the Government shifts its attention from the political to the economic agenda.
Should reform be delayed, however, the Bank would concentrate on the core component of ihe
program, and reallocate resources towards analytical work to build consensus on the reform
agenda. In case of a serious, but unlikely, unraveling of the fiscal situation leading to

26

macroeconomic instability, the Bank's program would be further reduced, and the Bank would
closely coordinate activities with the IMF.
51.
The CAS also considers a high case program, which would be triggered by the adoption
by the Government of an economic policy framework more conducive to growth, including the
adoption of a more flexible exchange rate regime and faster trade liberalization. Under this
program, the Bank would carry out further analytical work on trade reform and on social
protection mechanisms for potential job-losers. The Bank would also be ready to help the
Government bear the fiscal or balance of payment costs of adjustment, through programmatic
lending and quick-disbursing operations. Under this scenario, lending volumes could reach up to
US$ 450 million in a given year. This lending amount would come close to stabilizing net
transfers, but exposure would improve gradually as a result of higher GDP and export growth
rates.
D. The Bank Group's Base Case Program: The Core Component
52.
As noted before, the central objective of the core program is to increase household
incomes, economic opportunities and access to services in the least advantaged rural areas, with
particular attention to gender disparities. The recent political developments provide the Bank
Group with an opportunity to renew its approach to these objectives, and to rely to a much larger
extent than in the past on community participation and alternative delivery mechanisms. To
support the CAS objectives, the core component of the base case program will focus on the four
following aspects.
Poverty-Reduction through Inclusion and Participation
53.
As in the previous CAS, this critical area of assistance aims to reduce urban-rural
disparities and further social development.
*

Poor rural areas. The Bank would support three adaptable programs promoting
community-based development (CBD) in poor rural areas. These projects would pioneer
decentralized and cross-sector approaches. They would bring basic infrastructure and
social services such as health and education together with economic opportunities. They
would be based on needs expressed by local communities, and develop their respective
natural resources: small-scale irrigation for marginal mountain areas; livestock for rainfed
areas; and watersheds, range-land and forests for environmentally sensitive areas. The
contingent financing of such projects is secured under the Government's five-year plan
and the first (integrated small-scale irrigation) project is presented to the Executive
Directors together with this CAS. Besides this new generation of innovative projects, the
Bank will continue to support rural infrastructure programs (roads, drinking water and
electricity), as needed, including through the possible use of guarantees.

*

Education. Implementation of the education reform program will be a key focus of the
CAS. An important entry point for Bank support will be a project aiming to extend and
improve non-formal education. Considering the critical importance of education reform
for Morocco, the Bank will spare no effort to respond flexibly to other Government
requests for assistance in implementing the Education Charter. At this time, such
requests include enhancements to the quality of formal education, and work on the fiscal
sustainability of education reform, which will be assessed as part of the ongoing Public
Expenditure Review (see below). As part of a response graduated to the depth and scope
of the government's reform effort, the Bank would also be ready to provide technical

27

assistance to overall reform engineering, support to pilot programs such as regional
decentralization or school evaluation, or targeted school expansion programs.
Literacy. The Government has requested Bank support to launch a new major literacy
initiative. This will receive very high priority through AAA and a planned operalion.
The Bank's support would build upon the alternative delivery mechanisms recently
developed with the private sector and NGOs as well as best practice international
experiences. This is an area where the catalytic impact on other donors will be very
large. The EU and AfDB have already expressed their intention to join.
*

Social Fund. The Bank would support the recently created Social Fund through ongoing
grant funds and an institutional-building operation, with a view to focusing its activ .ties
on small community-based projects. The Bank would also be ready to support child
protection initiatives and the implementation of the Gender Action Plan.

*

Poverty Report. To support its thrust in community-based poverty alleviation progrmins,
the Bank would launch a Participative Poverty Assessment (PPA). Building on the
recently completed Poverty Assessment Update, which focused on the LSMS data, the
PPA will expand the analysis to the other dimensions of poverty, along the WDR 2000
lines.

*

Health. In the health sector, the Bank would focus its cooperation on improving access
to basic health, with particular focus on children and women, through its ongoing health
projects and the upcoming integrated rural programs. The Bank is also helping the
Government improve health sector management and financing, in particular by
supporting its efforts to develop a national health insurance. The Bank will refrain from
preparing new operations but will instead support the efforts of the EU and the A;-DB
which are preparing a joint operation of significant size.

Growth and Private Sector Agenda
54.
The Bank Group will work with the Government and the business community to ptut in
place the conditions for sustained growth and employment. This work integrates Bank support
for policy change with targeted transactions by IFC to support private sector development. the
core of any growth strategy.
55.
The Bank Program. The central objective for the Bank is to build consensus on a
growth-oriented economic framework through AAA activities and to support selectively
employment generation, particularly in the SME and the IT sectors. These activities will to a
large extent involve joint work between the Bank and IFC.
*

Growth-oriented economic policies. The Bank will carry out further analytical work
aiming to build a consensus on a growth-oriented economic policy framework in close
coordination with the IMF. This work would deepen the analysis of Morocco's econcmic
integration challenges and competitiveness, and seek to demonstrate the sustainability of
pro-growth policies in terms of fiscal management, external account balances and sc-cial
impact. The FSAP will update the assessment of financial sector vulnerabilities in
advance of any further liberalization of external transactions. The Bank Group will also
help define a broad PPI strategy for Morocco in light of the success in
telecommunications, Beyond this dialogue, there is a need to reinforce Morocco's own
capacity to formulate quality economic policies in the context of an increasingly complex
policy environment. This objective will be pursued under an IDF grant under
implementation, the outcome of which might be the setting up of a Council of Econc mic
Advisers.
28

*

Employment generation. At the operational level, the Bank Group will focus on SME
development, with a potentially strong impact on unemployment and poverty. In this
domain, the Bank and IFC are developing, with the SME global department, a strategy to
deliver innovative support to SMEs (discussed below). Beyond this, the Bank would also
help develop the labor intensive services sector, especially information technology,
cultural heritage and tourism.

*

Information infrastructure. The CAS is being accompanied by an adjustment loan
supporting IT and telecommunications reforms. This operation was conceived as a
follow-up operation to support and deepen the liberalization of the telecommunications
and IT sectors initiated with the Telecommunication, Post and Information Technology
adjustment loan approved by the Board in May 1999. The operation seeks to (i) support
the privatization of the main public operator; (ii) consolidate the regulatory framework;
and (iii) initiate the transition from macro reform to micro applications in the IT and
postal areas. The operation involved intensive preparation and guidance, leading to the
recent successful privatization of Maroc Telecom. Although outside the proposed core
program, continued support on this long delayed operation, initiated before the CAS
preparation, was deemed important in view of the excellent track record and dialogue so
far; the pioneering role of Morocco in telecommunication privatization in the region; the
request of a Bank endorsement by the Government; and the need to deepen the reform
process to maximize the impact of the reforms on the population. The project was,
however, reduced in size and to a one-tranche operation to take into account the new
CAS framework. It will be followed by smaller investment projects in the IT and postal
sectors, possibly combined with support for the SME sector.

56.
IFC's Strategy. In line with the principle of additionality, IFC's strategy will be to
support large projects with complex structuring, SMEs, the financial sector, and selected other
investments with strong developmental benefits. IFC will act as catalyst in attracting
intemational funding for large investments. Overall, IFC has reassessed its approach in Morocco
for the most effective use of its expertise and resources for the country:
*

The upper limit on size of a locally completed financing package is currently in the range
of US$ 100 million to US$ 150 million. Generally, investments above this range require
support from the Bank Group on the policy and regulatory side as well as investment
funding and structuring expertise. Following Medi Telecom, this type of investment
would also apply to future projects in other infrastructure sectors, such as power,
transport and water. IFC may also provide advice on infrastructure privatization in
Morocco.

*

On the other end of the spectrum, small businesses find it difficult to obtain financing
locally as the financial sector in Morocco is not able to assess the risks in financing SMEs
or new sectors. Therefore, the Bank and IFC are working jointly to develop an
innovative strategy in support of SME development. The consensus of an early
diagnostic review is that the Bank Group should focus on work with existing agencies to
provide technical assistance (TA) and advisory work; promote better enabling
environments; and emphasize schemes to facilitate SME financing through financial
intermediaries. TA would include assistance on the appropriate legal and regulatory
framework, as well as the transfer of modem lending techniques to selected financial
institutions, information management systems and standardized financial products to
reduce transaction costs and expand outreach.

*

The support for SMEs could particularly benefit newer sectors, such as information
technology, which are not able to find financing locally. There is an active, diversified,

29

and well organized IT sector in Morocco, which is complemented by a strong presence of
large international firms in this sector there. With IFC's increased focus on IT, there is
potential for that work in Morocco. IFC' s support for small IT companies would be done
mostly through financial intermediaries, but selective direct investments may be
considered.
*

In the financial sector, IFC has been active and will continue to play a role beyond the
support for SMEs, particularly in the area of institution building or the development of
new financial instruments. For example, in FY00, IFC approved the MENA Forfaiting
Facility, which will operate in five countries, including Morocco (other countries are
Egypt, Lebanon, Tunisia and Jordan). This facility is aimed at fostering trade by
supporting local companies in their access to international markets; and expanding the
availability of medium-term finance for cross-border trade. IFC is seeking to introduce
new financial instruments such as local currency guarantees that provide additional
financial capacity without exposing businesses to foreign exchange risk, or instruments to
manage weather related risks. These financing mechanisms will be more adaptive and
responsive to market needs. Other areas IFC will selectively assess include cross-border
investments.

57.
MIGA. To promote foreign investment, an MOU was signed between MIGA and the
Government to market privatization opportunities in Morocco through MIGA's online service.
MIGA has insured one project in the financial sector but has no exposure today in Morocco.
Vulnerability
58.
While a reform of agricultural incentives will be critical to reduce the medium-term
vulnerability of the poors' income and consumption to droughts, coping mechanisms need to be
supported and developed in the meantime. A particular effort must also be made to stop the
degradation of natural resources on which many rural poor depend (water, rangeland, etc.), anc. to
help build consensus for a more sustainable and equitable global policy of utilization of scarce
water resources.
*

Social protection. The Bank has an ongoing policy dialogue with the Government on
social protection and the establishment of safety nets. The CAS proposes to deepen this
dialogue with both the Government and civil society and possibly initiate small catalytic
institutional projects. In the context of the sector reform program, the Bank would be
prepared to scale up support, should the Government show resolve in reforming the food
subsidies system or the safety net programs.

*

Water management. With irrigation water accounting for 85 percent of water
consumption in Morocco, and water availability per capita foreseen to halve by 2020
under unchanged use patterns, full cost recovery has become crucial from sustainabi: ity
and equity standpoints. Building on the 1995 Water Sector Review and on its experience
in irrigated perimeters, the Bank will undertake a comprehensive review of rural water
management, and an emergency drought preparedness study. If requested, drought
management could be an area for Bank support and could represent a solid opportunity to
push forward an integrated water resources approach.

30

Table 5. The Bank's Program
A. Lending Prooram (excluding LILs)
FY01

FY02

FY03

FY04

Core Program
IT Telecom
Small Irrig. CBD

65
33

Sector Reform
Program
Total

Education
Rainfed CBD
Asset Mgt.

50
20
30

-

98

Total

100

SME/IT
Rural Infrastructure
Literacy

30
40
20

Education
Forestry CBD
Cultural Heritage

40
20
40

Sector Reform

100

Sector Reform

100

Total

190

Total

200

B. InstitutionalDevelopment
FYOI

FY02

Think Tank (IDF)
GDLN Center
Support to Council of
Economic Advisors
(IDF)

Social Fund LIL
Governance LIL
NGO Cap. Building
(IDF)

FY03
5
5

Cultural Heritage LIL
Irrigation LIL
Child Protection

FY04
5
5

Municipal Development LEL
Gender Action Plan
Monitoring

5

C. Analytical Work
FY01

FY02

FY03

FY04

Formal Reports
Sources of Growth
Poverty Assessment
Municipal Study

PER/Public Sector Mgt.
Agriculture/Water Strategy

Particip. Poverty Review &
Social Protection Strategy
SSR

CAS
Enviromnent Review

Policy Notes
Agriculture Incentives
Education Strategy
Social Protection Review

Literacy Strategy
PPI Strategy
CBD Note (NGOs)

FSAP
Health Sector

Fiduciary Assessment Update
EU Integration Strategy
Judicial Reform

Expanded ICRs
Irrigation

Roads Program

Rural Water Supply

*

Environment. As a priority, the Bank would focus on awareness-raising and coalition
building to support the enactment of Morocco's draft Comprehensive Environment
Protection Law and Environment Impact Assessment Law, which are the cornerstone of
environment protection (see para. 68). While stand-alone environment projects are not
foreseen, environment will be mainstreamed into future projects, consistent with the

31

Region's Environment Strategy. The GEF will also be used to support projects in the
areas of climate change, energy conservation and efficiency, and renewable energy. The
Bank will also follow up on activities in which Morocco is already involved under the
Prototype Carbon Fund.
Governance
59.
Recent political developments in Morocco have made it possible for the Bank to start a
dialogue on governance. While this area is probably one of the most decisive for the countiy's
long-term development, expectations are that the dialogue will proceed gradually as it requires
much consensus building. It will be built upon analytical work, dialogue and pilot institutional
activities to test approaches on a limited scale, along the following lines:
*

Public finance management. A participatory PER will emphasize public finance
management, including budget programming and execution, administrai-ive
decentralization, alternative delivery mechanisms and civil service redeployment. A
Public Asset Management project (FY02) will help rationalize investment md
maintenance expenditures, and improve state land management.

*

Accountability. At the Government's request, a small Governance project (FY02)
would aim at reducing the scope for discretionary powers, and therefore for corruption, in
adrninistrative procedures, and at strengthening external and internal controls.

*

Local Governments are very relevant to, but under-equipped to deal with, issues
affecting the poor, such as land management and urban zoning, sewerage, and the
provision of infrastructure. In addition to the ongoing dialogue on the overall framework
for decentralization, analytical work and institutional projects could be undertaken to }.elp
strengthen the capacity of local governments and the provision of municipal services.

*

Civil Society. Following up on an IDF grant dedicated to building up NGO institutional
capacity, and the concerns heard during the CAS consultations, the Bank is considering
expanding support in this area. Possible areas of intervention include improving the
regulatory framework for NGOs, training, access to knowledge, and networking.
E. The Bank Group's Base Case Program: The Sector Reform Component

60.
The central objective of the sector reform component of the base case program is to
support reforms to enhance growth opportunities and increase the efficiency and effectiveness of
the public sector. As mentioned above, such support will be contingent on improvements in the
fiscal stance and on appropriate actions in the respective sectors. Flexibility will thus be required
on behalf of the Bank, as the choice of sectors will depend on Government priorities. At -his
stage, the following areas have tentatively been discussed with the authorities:
*

Decentralizationand Municipal Development. The Government is currently finalizing a
new charter for decentralization. The Bank is also completing sector work on municipal
development. Areas under review are: (i) the charter for decentralization; (ii) budget and
financial control mechanisms to improve efficiency and accountability at the local level;
(iii) financial market mechanisms to support municipal investments; and (iv) institutional
building at the local level. A possible operation could either be a municipal fmancing
cum institutional building project or broader based reform support through an adjustment
operation. The latter would be contingent on actions taken to improve local finanzial
management capacity and effectively decentralize accountability and decision-making

32

*

Public Administration and Civil Service Reform. The Government has initiated actions to
improve transparency and accountability, but still lacks an overall program to rationalize
and modernize its large public sector, in particular the Civil Service. At the request of the
Government, as noted above, the Bank is initiating a broad public expenditure review
focusing inter alia on the following issues: investment progranmning; staff compensation
and redeployment strategies; and modernization of budget and personnel procedures.
The improvement of an incentive framework for the Civil Service would serve as a
trigger for Bank support.

*

Business Environmentfor the Private Sector. Much remains to be done to improve the
competitiveness of the private sector and simplify the business environment. The
Government has recently established a commission to review the business climate and
key constraints facing the private sector. The Bank has also completed a Private Sector
Assessment and a Sources of Growth study, and FIAS is completing a review of the
investment code. Finally, the Bank is proposing a review of the PPI framework, based on
the success of the telecommunications liberalization framework. For a broader
adjustment operation, the Government and the Bank would need to agree on a PPI
framework as well as measures to streamline the business environment. The Bank would
not, however, directly support competitiveness at the firm level ('mise a niveau"
program), which is already supported by the EU.

*

Agriculture Incentives. The Government has issued a rural development strategy which
forms the basis for the integrated rural development projects. However, the incentives
system in agriculture remains distorted. A large array of analytical work is already
available, but agriculture remains a very sensitive sector. At the request of the
Government, the Bank is proposing to initiate a broad agriculture and water strategy note
in close collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, focusing on the incentive
framework and on possible safety net measures to alleviate the adjustment costs on the
vulnerable population. Should the Government show resolve in addressing these
complex and sensitive issues, strong financial support would be required during the
transition period.
VI. PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
A. Portfolio Management

61.
Bank Portfolio management improved substantially over the last CAS period. In FY 97,
45 percent of the portfolio was considered at risk of not meeting its objectives. As of July 1,
2000, only three projects were problematic, representing 15 percent of the portfolio. This
improvement was due to four main factors: (i) a substantial restructuring of the portfolio, which
was oversized at the beginning of the last CAS, in close coordination with the Moroccan
authorities (US$ 480 million cancelled over the CAS period); (ii) proactive supervision and
portfolio management; (iii) annual country portfolio performance reviews (CPPR), focusing on
systemic issues; and (iv) tight management of problem projects, including strict enforcement of
key covenants and closing dates. Based on the results of the latest CPPR mission, although
commitments and projects at risk increased recently, it is expected that the percentage of the
portfolio currently at risk will be reduced to around 15 percent by the end of the fiscal year.
62.
While the trend in the portfolio is satisfactory, there is no room for complacency as some
projects continue to face difficulties in implementing key policy reforms. During this CAS
period, the portfolio management strategy will intensify follow-up on the policy content of the

33

operations and their institutional impact; improve monitoring mechanisms to assess the projects
impact; and link more closely existing projects with new operations and analytical work to ens ire
an integrated approach in reaching the CAS objectives.

Table 6. PortfolioSummary
By fiscal year. As of March 31, 2001
# Projects in Portfolio 1/
Net Comrnitment Amount (US$m)

Cancellations (US$m) 2/
Undisbursed Amount begin. of FY (net of
adjustment loans)
Total Disbursements (US$m) 2/
Disbursement Ratio 2/3/

FY96

FY97

FY98

FY99

25

22

19

20

FY00 FY01 5/

20

2,305

1.820

1,353

982

900

667

198

159

165

155

0.8

--

1,442

1,173

913

650

535

391

485

302

271

411

107

90

19

23

17

18

15

20

14

Proactivity Index (expected for FYOI) 41

100

83

75

100

100

100

Realism Index (expected for FY01) 5/

100

80

100

100

100

100

24

45

32

20

15

32

Projects at Risk (% of total)
by number

by amount
2
48
24
22
15
23
1/ Excluding projects closed during the FY and including GEF (protected areas management).
2/ Including disbursements/cancellations of projects closed during the previous FY.
3/ Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio (excluding closed projects)
at the beginning of the year (investment projects only). Annualized for FY01.
4/ Percent of projects rated as problem projects 12 months earlier that have since been restructured, closed or upgraded.
5/ Percent of projects rated unsatisfactory on DO and/or IP to projects at risk.

63.
The grant portfolio (GEF projects, PHRD grants and IDF grants) has been reviewed
regularly as part of the CPPRs. Performance of the PHRD and IDF grants deteriorated in recent
years, as changing government priorities led to implementation delays and cancellation of seve^al
grants. These problems are now being solved. IDF grants have been increasingly used to
strengthen capacity on generic implementation issues. These include grants for improved
procurement and audit capacity, and a pilot experience with multi-year budget planning.
64.
The cost of doing business in Morocco has been relatively high over the last four years.
First, in FY97 and 98, a major clean up of the lending program took place, based on revised
Government priorities; this increased the number of dropped operations in those years. Aid
second, the direct cost of lending also remained high in some cases due to protracted discussions,
and long lead time between appraisal and Board. Both problems were discussed with Moroccan
officials. While over the last year, delays continued to occur due to the preparation of the plan,
the government has now instituted clear priorities for all external financing agencies, and a
mechanism has been put in place to ensure closer coordination among the key Government
agencies concerned. This is expected to substantially reduce the costs of preparing new
operations, although the choice of the Government to use Bank operations on catalytic aid
innovative projects may continue to involve relative high costs, especially per dollar lent.
65.
IFC's portfolio at the end of March 2001 amounted to US$ 105 million in six
investments, of which US$ 38 million was in equity or quasi-equity investments. One project,
Medi Telecom, accounts for almost 85 percent of the total exposure. The performance of IFC's
portfolio in Morocco is satisfactory.

34

Table 7: Time and Resource Costs of Bank Operations
Av. Time Appraisal to Board (months)
Direct Cost of Lending (US$ 000)
Direct Cost of Supervision (av. per project
per year in US$ 000)

FY96
8.5
386
53

FY97
7.3
266
51

FY98
12.6"
515
69

FY99
11I

392
58

FYOO
2.9
1672/
61

1/ Large variance due to a few long delayed projects
2/ Not fully representative: small TA operations prepared with bilateral financing

B. Fiduciary Provisions and Safeguards
66.
The Moroccan public Financial Management (FM) system is based on sound ex-ante
controls for commitments of public expenditures, that are anchored in very detailed but
cumbersome rules. The related payment system relies heavily on ex-post audits for reconciliation
of the accounts carried out by Inspection Generale des Finances (IGF). The ongoing PER
exercise will review all aspects of public financial management, with particular attention to
budgeting, accounting, treasury functions, reporting, and ex-post auditing. The PER will offer
proposals for capacity building and reform of the legal framework.
67.
Auditing. The IGF is the official auditor for the accounts of government-executed
projects. IGF's audits have at times raised problems regarding their timeliness and quality
particularly the auditing standards applied. The status of compliance with Bank policies on audits
is reviewed regularly as part of the CPPR exercises. Meanwhile the Bank will continue to
provide support to the IGF capacity building program, for which an IDF grant is being
implemented.
68.
A major development concerning procurement in Morocco was the issuance of a new
decree which became effective in July 1999. The decree reflects current international practice and
adequate control structures to control and oversee procurement in the country. Although the
decree is generally in line with the Bank's procedures, certain procedures are not acceptable to the
Bank, mainly the use of: (i) two-envelope system for works and goods; and (ii) open competitive
bidding for consultants' services. Nevertheless, the decree allows to waive national legislation
and apply the guidelines of international agencies. The overall procurement risks associated with
projects financed in Morocco are considered low.
69.
Environmental Assessment. Morocco has not yet enacted the comprehensive draft Law
on Environmental Protection and the draft Law and Decree regulating Environment Impact
Assessments (EIA). As a result, the country is vulnerable to environment risks. The
establishment of a Ministry in charge of Spatial Planning and Environment and of an EIA unit
within this ministry are positive developments, but human capacity for monitoring, reviewing and
enforcing EIAs remains weak. To help build Government capacity in this area and ensure full
compliance with environment safeguards in Bank financed operations, the Bank will:
*

Use its past work with METAP activities to work with the authorities to improve EIA
procedures particularly in the areas of sector environment assessment, public consultation
and dissemination of information. It will also assist with the preparation of, and followup on, project-and sector-specific environment management plans.

35

*

Offer training on EA preparation and review, NGOs, private sector and environment
specialists, through the METAP-funded regional center in Tunisia.

*

Dissemrinate its 'Guidebook for EA preparation and review' designed specifically for lhe
MNA Region by its environment group.

*

Undertake special field-based environment safeguards compliance reviews, to identufy
and mitigate areas of vulnerability in terms of regional and corporate risks. In FY01, the
Rural Water and Sanitation, and the Fes Medina Projects are being reviewed.

70.
Social Assessment. The ongoing and proposed portfolio have minimal issues regarding
resettlement or other social safeguards. Nevertheless, some projects have required careful
attention, such as that of the rehabilitation of the medina of Fez. A detailed review process has
been institutionalized to scrutinize all project documents for safeguard issues that include the
three social policies (involuntary resettlement, cultural property and indigenous peoples). Local
capacity to undertake social analyses has also been increasing and improving over time. The
Bank has established a network of local social scientists who have participated in project
preparation jointly with task teams. There is, however, still a need to further strengthen local
capacity to conduct social analyses.
VII. COUNTRY RISK MANAGEMENT
A. Country Creditworthiness
71.
Bank Lending Flows. The table below sumnmarizes IBRD net disbursements and
transfers under the base case macroeconomic scenario. This case responds to the Government's
likely request for financing, based on its own financing plan and corresponds to the proposed base
case program of the CAS. The lending flows and exposure are hence likely to be smaller until the
conditions to move on the sectoral reform programs are in place.
72.
Net disbursements were cumulatively negative over the last CAS period, reflecting the
country strategy of reducing its external debt, portfolio restructuring, and limits on adjustment
lending. No change in this trend is expected over the CAS period. Meanwhile, important flows
of concessional money are expected from the EU and from privatization receipts. Starting in
2001, the share of EBRD debt service in total public debt is expected to remain below 15 percent,
while preferred creditors debt service in total public debt will remain below 34 percent through
2004. Overall, Bank exposure would remain manageable and improve over the medium-term.
73.
Creditworthiness. Prudent macroeconomic policies, a sound active public debt
management policy, and liberalization and deepening of the domestic financial markets have
allowed Morocco to significantly reduce its external debt over the last decade, partly by reducing
its overall indebtedness, and partly by substituting external with domestic debt. Total external
public debt stood at 55 percent of GDP at the end of 1999 (equivalent to US$ 19 billion), down
from 88 percent in 1990 and 60 percent in 1996, and is expected to gradually decline over the
medium term"5. Long-term and public and publicly guaranteed debt represents nearly 90 percent
of total external debt. However, if this policy has allowed Morocco to obtain a rating from major
international agencies, the country does not yet benefit from an investment grade. As a result,
and also due to the East Asia crisis, Morocco has delayed borrowing from the international

15 The temporary increase in total external debt as percent of GDP in 2000 was due to exchange rate
movements.

36

markets. But, as conditions soften, the country might be able to tap the international markets to a
limited extent allowing it to reduce the pressures on the domestic market.

Table 8. Morocco -World Bank Lending Flows and Exposure(Base Case)
Calcndar

Act.
1995 1996 t997

Est. Piopjcted

18 1999

2000 2001

138
307
-169
190
497
-358

=002am3

Lending Flows (In US$ million)
Disbursements
Repayments
Net Disbursement
Interest Payments
Debt Service (DS)
Net Transfers

426
349
78
282
630
-204

380
341
39
260
600
-221

141
294
-153
238
532
-391

253 404
286 302
-34 102
206 212
493 514
-240 -110

150
241
-91
200
441
-291

107
238
-131
186
424
-318

161
247
-86
174
421
-261

237
270
-33
168
438
-201

Total DebtOutstanding

3966 3732

3271

3388 3194 2837

2747 2616 2529 2496

Debt Exposure Indicators (%)
Total Debt Outstanding/ GDP
Total Debt Service/ Exports (XGS)

68.7
33.4

59.6
28.0

60.3
27.6

57.5
22.9

54.5
23.9

59.4
27.6

54.9
26.7

50.1
23.7

45.7
23.3

42.5
20.0

17.0
5.6
32.4

18.1
5.0
32.8

17.6
4.7
35.1

18.3
4.0
33.7

17.5
4.0
31.6

15.6
3.9
31.6

13.6
3.3
29.8

13.7
2.9
31.3

13.0
2.7
29.4

14.9
2.6
33.

IBRD exposure indicators: (%)
IBRDDS/PublicDS
IBRD DS / (XGS)
Preferred Creditor DSlPublic

74.
Risks and uncertainties. The risks linked with the fiscal and external position are
discussed in the macro-section. Additional risks to economic performance might derive from the
scheduled parliamentary elections in June 2002, which could induce delays in tackling economic
reforms.
The recent Government actions on the exchange rate realignment, however,
demonstrate the Government's continued focus on economic issues. The basic mitigation
strategy for the Bank consists of a strong reduction of exposure, by requiring strong fiscal
adjustment and sectoral triggers for the support to sector reforms. In this respect, the next Budget
Law will provide crucial information on the depth of the fiscal consolidation and the direction of
reforms contemplated. The base case program will, anyhow, imply large negative resource
transfers for the Bank.
75.
Morocco has a tradition as one of the most stable country in the region, and the
successful political transition has demonstrated the resilience of the constitutional apparatus.
Although the continuing political transition will not always be smooth, political risks are deemed
limited.
76.
Worsening economic conditions, resulting in large youth urban unemployment, are likely
to bring heightened social tensions in the next few years. The democratization process, together
with the strong popular standing and constitutional powers of the monarchy, should allow to
diffuse these tensions for some time, but the adoption of growth-oriented economic polices will
remain key for reducing them.

37

Table 9: Morocco Core Performance Indicators
Area

Poverty and
Inclusion

Proposed monitoring
indicators

27%

of urban boys

53%

75%

*

Matemal mortality rate in rural
areas (per 100 000)3
Households with access to safe
water
Water cost recovery4
Public expenditure on social

307

250-270

42%

60-70%

62%

90%

assistance programs' (% of GDP)

0.6%

1.2%

19%
7.7%

15%
3.4%

12%

< 10%

.

Growth and

.

*

Poverty incidence
Fiscal deficit (% of GDP)

Public

*

Total government wage bill

Governance

Targets
2004

Poverty incidence in rural areas
Net primary enrolment rates of
arural girls, as percentage of NER

*

Employment

1

*
*

*

Vulnerability

Baseline

22%

(%of GDP)

1. Refers to latest available year, 1997-2001.

2. Related International Development Goal (IDG) is to eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary
education by 2005.
3. Related IDG is to reduce the maternal mortality rate by three quarters by 2015.
4. Rates of recovering operations and management costs by water fees collected in the nine large scale irigation
areas.
5. Defmed as resources on employment program and public works (Promotion Nationale), welfare (Entraide
Nationale) and literacy programs.

B. Performance Indicators and Monitoring
77.
To measure progress towards achieving the objectives of the CAS, two sets of monitoring
indicators are proposed, reflecting advancements in each of the key areas covered by the CAS: (i)
poverty and inclusion; (ii) vulnerability; (iii) growth and employment; and (iv) public
governance. The first set of indicators consists of core performance indicators, outlined in Table 9
below, which measure progress in outcomes in Morocco in each key area. Table 10 comprises
intermediate milestones related to the Bank Group's dialogue and program aimed at bringing
about the development outcomes.

38

Table 10. CAS Monitoring Indicators
Area

Proposed monitoring indicators
*

Rural infrastructure programs (water, electricity,
roads) to reach 60-70% of the population

Poverty and

.

inclusion

*

Agreement and progress on implementation of plan
for education reform seeking universal primary access
Successful launching of a major literacy campaigp
Increase in community schools and implementation of
the social fund

*

Growth and
employment

.
.

*
*

Containment of fiscal deficit and restructuring of
fiscal expenditures
Agreement on growth oriented economic framnework
Removal of consumer subsidies systems in key
agricultural products.
Extended coverage of social assistance programs
Passing the law on EIA
Agreement on framework for decentralization and

*

participation in key rural programs
Wage bill <10 percent of GDP

*

Vulnerability

Governance

.

78.
In summary, the CAS proposes a refocused but flexible approach over the next three
years, as this will encompass a decisive period for Morocco, with elections scheduled for around
the middle of 2002. The proposed base case embodies this flexibility fully by focusing on a core
program, complemented by contingent support for reforms depending on progress and emerging
priorities.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
Shengman Zhang

Peter Woicke

Washington, D.C.
May 7, 2001

39

ANNEXA2
P 1/2

Morocco at a glance
M East
& North
Africa

Lowermiddleincome

291
2a060

2 yd4
1,200

336

599

2 513

17
2.6

2.1
3O

1.1
1.2

19
55
67

58
68

43
69

48

45

32

15
I-

15

82

71

86

52
86
97

36
95
102

74

88

16
114
114
116

POVERTY and SOdAL.
Morocco
1999
Population, rmid-year (mtliions)
r'NP per capil Oros Tlerreroo. L'SS)
GNP 1AtFaderno.'700 IJSSOd1,orlsi

26 2
19Ue

5/7/2001

| Development dilamond'
Life expectancy

Average annual growth. 1993-99
P5pulariOn .
Labor force 1%)
Most recent estimate (latest veer available. 1993-99)
Poverty I, o pLoVularon oelow nahonalDpcerry lne)
UrDan popuLatf I% of rorar oopulatar'on)
Life extectanCV at or." I'years
Inrant morralty 'per IfOO he olrins.,
CnIla mainuirrton I ' O cnlaOren under 5.
A.cess to ,mrroved water source r %of populavon,o '
II1tera(-ty - of ooprlation age 15.,
Gross Dr.mary enrollment ,%'.r scnool-age o,ulaanonl
Male
Female

GNP
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

K

Access to safe water

-

M

orocco
-Lower-midoDe-income

group

__

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
109

1989

1998

1999

GDP (LSSSr.
Gr,,sa imestnc ntestrrenL,'GOP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
G'os5 dornesic sav,ngsGDP
Grro,s nal,c,nal sav,ncQS'GOP

15.9
24,5
17.0

22.8
23.7
23.6
18.2
205

35 7
22S
28.0
18.4
217

350
24,2
30.1
20,1
23.0

Current acxrjnt talance.GDP
Interest paymer,tsiGP
.otLaloeotj'30P
%tal debt samcepexpors
Present valuje c-I OeDLG-rjP
Present value of debt/exports

-9.6
30
4.36
26 3

*3 5

-0.4

0

48
9'
3D 2

2.9

3J

575
22.9

S4 5
23 9

1989-99

1998

1999

199903

4.0
1S

23
06

6.8
58

72

54

,9

-0,7
22
67

40
2
42

1979

1989

1998

1999

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

17.9
32.7
16.8
49.4

17.2
33.2
17.8
49.6

17.0
31.9
17.1
51.1

14.8
32.7
17.3
52.6

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

67.0
21.3
29.9

66.1
15.7
29.1

63.5
18.1
32.0

60.6
19.3
34.2

1979-89

1989-99

1998

1999

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

5.8
2.4
3.9
4.3

-0.8

24.7
1.8
2.4
5.1

-19.8
2.5
2.5
3.3

25

3.2
3.0
2.8

Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services
Gross national product

4.0
1.0
0.6
1.9
3.7

2.9
3.2
1.7
6.0
2.4

9.1
6.6
30.1
21.4
7.6

-4.1
6.2
6.9
4.7
-0.6

1t,6
15.6

EKxotrsof

3:os anr

Trade

Domestic
Savings cnvestment

\1

I

Indebtedness
1979-89

Ia,erage ennu il q.'r,
GDP
GNP per caDita

S

Economic ratl0o

se'r-cei

Mroc
MorocCo
Loterm;ddie- income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(%of GDP)

GrowthoflnvestnentandGDP(%)
40
30
20 10

o
-'10
-20
|GDI

asr

97

so

I

GDP

99

(average annual growth)
2011
15 -

s
0
w

90

97

v

so

U

-10
Exports

I

rmports

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.
1. Refers to 2000 figures. Includes access to treated surface water and untreated but uncontaminated water.
The definition of imDroved water source has chanaed over time.

ANNEX A2
D. 2/2
Morocco
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prices
(%change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1979

1989

1998

Inflation (%)

1999

10
8.3
7.3

3.1
4.0

2.7
0.7

0.7
0.9

8

a

2

Government finance
(%of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance

22.2
2.8

22.6
1.4

27.4
2.2

27.1
1.1

Overall surplus/deficit

-9.4

-6.0

-2.7

-3.8

I

I

94

95

-GDP

97

9s

deflator

98

99

wOQCPI

1

TRADE

(UJS$
millions)

1979

1989

1998

1999

Total exports (fob)
Agriculture& Food Items
Phosphate rock
Manufactures
Tota imports (eif

1,955
641
568
345
3,673

3,851
1,016
489
1,644
5,842

7,144
1,627
459
3,932
10,274

7,514
1 590
434
4,085
10,804

12000

550
710

590
843
1,458

1,191
922
2,567

1,177
1,330
2,830

4.000

Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995-100)

844
71
78

85
85

93
89

87
89

91

99

105

98

Export and import levels (USS mill.)
10000
.*
o

nI

I

2.000 .giiiii

MEI

0
93

94

95

90

97

1 Eoports

00

99

* Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)

1979

1989

1998

1999

2,707
4,752
-2,045

5,391
6,641
-1,249

9,970
11,425
-1,455

10,648
11,964
-1,317

-409
923

-1,159
1,606

-1,033
2,345

-977
2,137

Current account balance

-1,531

-803

-144

-156

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

1,499
32

808
-5

391
-247

1,795
-1,638

3.9

552
85

4,693
9.6

5,920
9.8

1979

1989

1998

1999

7,886
504
38

21,874
2,686
40

20,491
3,388
29

19,060
3,194
28

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

972
65
0

2,042
381
1

2,782
493
2

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment

95
331
673
39

101
688
228
167

0

0

357
137
25

518
364
182

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USs millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, localIUS$)

..

Current account balance to GDP(%)
I

0 .

9

w

-Il-2-

*4

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Portfolio equity

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Netflows

Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

Composition of 1999 debt (USS mill.)
c

[

A 3,194

3,047
514
2

F:5,750 /28
D:3,C;n

-455
281
313

-226
-212
839
E: Ss.76

|

204
253
286

A -IBRD
8 -IDA
C - IMF

356
404
302

112

182

-34

102

41
72

200
-18

206
-240

212
-110

E -Bilaterol
D- Other multilateral

F- Private
G - Short-termr

1

517/2001

ANNEX B2

CAS Annex B2 - Morocco
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date 4/11/2001

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
%of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
%of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

1998

1999

2000

19
3.5
32
24
32
24
18

20
2.9
20
22
20
22
15

20
3.2
15
15
15
15
20

19
3.7
32
23
32
23
14

yes
1803
69

yes
1380
58

yes
1162
61

yes
1002
53

Since FY 80
88
5632
25
23

Last Five FYs
17
1370
47
43

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). GEF project (Protected Areas
Management) included.
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only. Annualized for FY01.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio which includes
all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

2001

ANNEX B3
P. 1/2

CAS Annex B3 - Bank Group Program Summary
As of Date 4f1/2001
Proposed IBRD Base Case Lending Program

Fiscal/year

a

Proj ID

US$(M)

Strategic
Rewards
(HIMIL)

b

Imp
ementation
Risks
(H/M/L)

CORE POVERTY
2001

IT AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
IRRIGATION BASED COMMUNITY DEVT.

65
33

M
H

L
M

2002

ASSET MANAGEMENT LOAN
EDUCATION
RAINFED DEVELOPMENT

30
50
20

M
H
H

H
H
M

2003

SME DEVELOPMENT/ IT
RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE
LITERACY

30
40
20

H
H
H

H
L
M

2004

EDUCATION
FORESTRY
CULTURAL HERITAGE & TOURISM APL

40
20
40

H
H
H

M
M
H

TOTAL

388

2003

SECTORAL ADJUSTMENT LOAN

100

H

H

2004

SECTORAL ADJUSTMENT LOAN

100

H

H

TOTAL

200

SECTOR REFORMS

INSTITUTIONAL
2002

SOCIAL FUND LIL
GOOD GOVERNANCE DEVT. LIL

5
5

H
H

L
M

2003

CULTURAL HERITAGE LIL
IRRIGATION LIL

5
5

M
M

M
L

2004

MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT LIL

5

H

H

TOTAL

25

TOTAL BASE CASE

613

a. This table represents the proposed Base Case program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicates whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L)

ANNEX B3
P. 2/2

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Morocco
Morocco - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1998-2001
As of Date 411/2001
1998

1999 2000 2001

IFC approvals (US$m)

0

14

12

94

Sector (%/6)
TEXTILES
FINANCIAL SERVICES
HOTELS & TOURISM
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Total

0
0
0
0
0

100
0
0
0
100

0
43
57
0
100

0
0
0
100
100

Investment instrument(%/6)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

0
0
0
0
0

38
62
0
0
100

38
43
19
0
100

70
0
30
0
100

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

0

0

0

ANNEX B4

CAS Annex B4 - Morocco
Summary of Nonlending Services
Product
Recent completions
Sources of Growth

Completion FY

As of Date 411/2001
Cost (US$OOL Audience a.

Objective b.

FY00

93

Government, Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem
solving
Government, Bank, Public Knowledge generation, public
debate, Problem-solving

Poverty Update

FY00

72

CDF - Cultural Heritage

FY00

60

CDF -Govemance

FY00

60

CDF -Women/Civil Society
CDF -Social Sectors

FY00
FY00

29
96

CDF -Urban Strategy Note

FY00

33

CDF - Energy Strategy Note
CDF - Transport Strategy Note
CDF - UrbanWater Strategy Note
CDF - PSD/FSD Strategy Note
CDF - Rural Infrastructure Strategy
Note
Education Reform note
Underway
Municipal Management Strategy
Note

FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00

47
8
28
18
37

FY01

70

Government

Problem-solving

FY01

190

Govemment, Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem
solving

Agricultural Incentives Note

FY01

50

Government, Bank

Problem-solving

Social Protection Review

FY01

50

Govemment, Bank

PER

FY02

200

Agriculture/Water Strategy Note

FY02

100

Proposed
Literacy Strategy Note

FY02

70

PPI strategy Note

FY02

70

Community Based Development
(NGO) Note
Participatory Poverty Review &
Social Protection Strategy

FY02

70

FY03

200

Social and Structural Review

FY03

150

Financial Sector Assessment

FY03

100

Health Sector Note

FY03

70

Environmental Review

FY04

150

EU Integration Strategy Note

FY04

100

Judicial Reform Note

FY04

70

Fiduciary Assessment

FY04

40

Govemment, Donor, Bank,
Public

Knowledge generation, Problemsolving
Govemment, Bank, Donors Knowledge generation, Problemsolving
Govemment, Bank
Problem-solving
Govemment, Bank, Donors Knowledge generation, Problem
solving
Govemment, Bank
Knowledge generation, Problemsolving
Govemment, Bank, Donors Knowledge generation, Problem
solving
Govemment, Bank, Public Knowledge generation, public
debate, Problem-solving
Government, Bank, Donors Knowledge generation,
solving
Govemment, Bank and
Knowledge generation.
IMF
solving
Govemment, Bank, Donors Kn5iedge generation,
solving
Govemment, Bank, Donors Knowledge generation,
solving
Govemment, Bank, Donors Knowledge generation,
solving
Govemment, Bank
Knowledge generation
solving
Bank, Govemment
Problem-solving

ProblemProblem
ProblemProblem.
ProblemProblem-

ANNEX B5

Morocco Social Indicators
Latest single year
1970-75

1980-85

1993-99

17.3
2.4
37.7
6.3

21.6
2.2
44.6
4.7

28.2
1.7
55.3
2.9

..

26.0
17.3
32.6

19.0
12.0
27.2

..

610
59
54

1,190
108
102

..

..

..

..

..

..

39.5
6.5
46.6

Same region/income group
M.East
Lower&North
middleAfrica
income

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (%annual average for period)
Urban population (%of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

290.3
2.0
58.2
3.5

2,093.0
1.1
42.9
2.1

2,060
114

1,200
137

POVERTY
(%of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

..
..

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food prce index (1995=100)

550
23

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (%of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption)

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)

Education (%o1 GNI)
Social security and welfare (%of GDP)

2.3

6.3
1.7

1.2
1'
5.0
2.3

2.2

5.3
1.5

5.2

4.8

47
58
35

61
73
48

74
83
65

87
90
83

99
100
99

32
63
2

82
100
58

89
96
80

80
94
69

45
51

93
94
,.

91
92

87

..

..

Net primary school enrollment rate
(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female

Access to an improved water source
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

..
..
..

Immunization rate
(%under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (%under 5 years)

..
..
..

..

87

9

..

Life expectancy at birth

(years)
Total
Male
Female

55
53
56

61
59
63

67
65
69

68
67
69

69
67
72

115
187

79
152

48
62

45
56

32
40

330
258

264
207

199
145

183
151

191
133

Mortality
Infant (per 1,0OD live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

..
..

..

24

230

40

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than halt the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water
source data is 2000.
Source: 2001 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank. 1. For the period 1993-1999, refers to 1997.
2. For the period 1993-1999, refers to 1996. 3. Includes access to treated surface water and untreated but uncontaminated water.
Definitions of improved water source have changed over time.

Annex B6
P. 1 of 2

Morocco - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as %of GDP)
Gross domestic product at market pricesa
Agriculture

1996

1997

Estimate
1999

1998

2000

Projected
2002

2001

2003

2004

100
19%

100
15%

100
17%

100
15%

100
13%

100
16%

100
15%

100
15%

100
15%

31%
50%

33%
52%

32%
51%

33%
53%

33%
54%

32%
52%

32%
53%

32%
53%

32%
53%

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investmnent
Government investment
Private investment
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

84
19
3
17

83
21
3
17

82
22
3
20

80
24
3
21

82
24
4
21

82
24
4
21

81
25
4
22

80
25
3
22

80
25
3
22

26
30

28
32

28
32

30
34

31
38

32
38

33
38

33
39

34
39

Gross domestic savings
Gross nationlal savinigsc

16
19

17
20

18
22

20
23

18
23

18
23

19
24

20
24

20
25

36639

33414

35667

34998

33481

35471

37407

39525

41843

1290

1250

1250

1190

1250

1270

1250

1280

1340

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1980 prices)
12.2
-2.2
Gross domestic product at market prices
12.9
-1.1
Gross Domestic Income

6.8
10.7

-0.7
-0.5

0.8
-2.0

8.0
8.7

3.4
3.6

3.6
4.0

3.8
4.2

5.0
6.8
7.3

-2.3
-3.8
-5.6

-0.9
-1.8
-0.9

6.2
6.6
4.8

1.7
0.8
2.5

1.9
1.9
2.9

2.2
2.3
2.9

Industry
Services

Memorandum items
Gross domesticproduct
(US$ million at current prices)
GNPpercapita(US$,Atlasrnethod)

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1980 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
10.3
-3.9
Total consurnption
9.5
-4.3
Private consumption
10.5
-5.7
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Inports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance, incl. grants
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-tent loans (net)
Official
Pnvate
Othercapital(net,incl.errors&ornmissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR80 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

9629
6886
10862
9080
-1233
2576
35

9510
7039
10627
8903
-1117
2205
-87

9970
7144
11425
9463
-1455
2345
-144

10648
7514
11964
9956
-1317
2137
-156

10495
7297
12652
10597
-2157
2408
-498

11185
7647
13396
11191
-2211
2474
-537

12259
8343
14378
12006
-2119
2478
-418

13200
8941
15317
12782
-2117
2535
409

14172
9561
16340
13630
-2167
2589
-432

327
-68
-13
-55
-2
-292

1071
-736
-816
80
305
-553

313
-186
455
269
264
-247

839
437
-226
-212
1393
-1638

103
-111
-535
425
97
409

2632
-378
162
-540
142
-1858

980
-707
94
-801
113
32

975
-644
174
-818
92
-13

970
-251
146
-398
126
-413

-3.4

-3.3

-4.1

-3.8

-6.4

-6.2

-5.7

-5.4

-5.2

-2.1
-5.0
2.1
-4.6

6.0
3.7
9.1
3.6

6.7
5.3
7.6
16.9

10.3
14.9
4.5
4.9

-1.9
-1.5
-1.5
-2.9

2.7
6.8
-0.6
5.6

7.0
6.8
7.2
5.0

5.5
6.0
5.2
5.7

5.7
6.0
5.3
6.0

(Continued)

Annex B6
P. 2 of 2

Morocco - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Indicator

1996

Public finance (as %of GDP at market prices)'
Currentrevenues
24.5
Current expenditures
23.5
Currentaccountsurplus(+)ordeficit(-)
1.0
Governnent Investment
4.5
Foreignfinancing
-1.5
Budget Deficit
-3.5
Monetary indicators
M2tGDP
GrowthofM2(%)
Privatesectorcreditgrowtht
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR80 =100)
Merchandiseexportpriceindex
Merchandise import price index
Merchandisetermsoftradeindex
Realexchangerate(US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumerpriceindex (%change)
GDP deflator (%change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

1997

1998

Estumate
1999

2000

2001

Projected
2002

2003

2004

25.5
24.6
0.9
4.2
-1.9
-3.3

27.4
25.2
2.2
4.9
-1.7
-2.7

27.1
26.0
1.1
4.9
-1.1
-3.8

26.2
26.5
-0.3
6.1
-1.3
-6.4

23.8
25.5
-1.7
6.0
-0.7
-7.7

23.9
23.6
0.3
5.8
-1.3
-5.5

23.9
22.9
1.1
5.4
-1.5
-4.3

24.0
22.3
1.7
5.2
-0.9
-3.5

65.0
6.5
80.3

71.1
9.0
68.2

69.9
5.8
112.3

77.0
10.2
202.8

81.3
9.1
36.2

81.3
11.2
63.1

81.2
5.9
40.2

81.2
6.2
59.1

81.2
6.4
49.1

118.6
115.0
103.2
113.7

114.4
108.8
105.1
114.7

108.8
100.5
108.3
117.5

101.9
100.8
101.1
118.7

102.8
110.5
93.1
122.0

104.9
110.5
95.0
117.7

107.0
112.9
94.8
117.7

108.6
113.7
95.6
117.7

109.9
114.3
96.2
117.8

3.0
1.0

1.0
2.0

2.7
0.7

0.7
0.9

1.9
2.5

1.9
3.0

2.3
2.5

2.0
2.5

2.1
2.5

GDP at market prices
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Central government. Fiscal years in 1996, 1997, and 1998. Calendar years otherwise
"LCU" denotes "local currency units. " An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation. Based on Europe CPI.

ANNEXB7

Morocco - Key Exposure Indicators: Base Case

Indicator

1996

Totaldebtoutstandingand
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Estimate
1998

1997

1999

Projected
2001
2002

2000

2003

2004

21851

20161

20491

19060

19871

19479

18752

18081

17800

Net disbursements (US$m)a

-171

-876

-292

-264

-123

-342

-714

-650

-261

Total debt service (TDS)

3352

3190

2782

3047

3534

3614

3496

3656

3344

182.3

174.2

168.3

149.2

155.0

143.8

127.1

115.1

106.3

59.6
28.0
30.5

60.3
27.6
31.2

57.5
22.9
31.3

54.5
23.9
31.7

59.4
27.6
29.3

54.9
26.7
31.2

50.1
23.7
33.8

45.7
23.3
36.2

42.5
20.0
37.8

18.1
32.8

17.6
35.1

18.3
33.7

17.5
31.6

15.6
31.6

13.6
29.8

13.7
31.3

13.0
29.4

14.9
33.4

5.0
3732
4
32

4.7
3271
3
31

4.0
3388
3
29

4.0
3194
3
28

3.9
2838
2
27

3.3
2747
2
25

2.9
2616
2
24

2.7
2529
2
23

2.6
2496
2
22

0.0
1.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

5.0
9.0

4.0
7.0

66.0
28.0

..

..

..

..

..

..

(USSm)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public DS
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Share of IBRD portfolio(%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

($

MIGA

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of 1MF credits and net short-term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the 1MF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

ANNEX B8
P. 1/2

CAS Annex B8 - Morocco
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
As of Date 41112001
Closed

Projects
Active Proiects
Last PSR
Supervision Rating b/
Project ID Project Name
Project
NameID Project

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a

Original Amount In USS Millions

Development
Obl~~~2ectives

ImpIementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

IBRD

IDA GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

Frm Rev d

P042414

COOR/MON SOCIAL PRO

S

S

1996

28

0

0

0

9.4

3.9

0

P005525
P005499
P005519

HEALTH MANAGEMENT
IRR. AREAS AGR. SERV
LAKHDAR WATERSHED MG

S
S
S

S
S
U

1999
1994
1999

66
25
4

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
9.9
0

54
3.7
3.7

36.7
15
1.4

0.5
2.7
0

S
S
S
S
U
U
HU
S
S
U
S
S
S
S
S

S
S
U
S
S
S
U
S
S
U
S
S
S
S
S

2000
1999
2000
1995
1998
1999
1997
1997
1998
1996
1996
1996
2000
1998
1994
Result

5.3
14
0
57.6
70
5
23
85
10
40
54
68
2.2
20
160
737.1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
10.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10.5

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
71
80.9

5.2
11.3
9.3
14.5
22.1
3.9
12.3
61.8
4.5
30.3
30.6
14
2.2
16.1
19.1
328.2

0.3
7.6
0
21.7
28
1.6
13.6
43.5
5.3
18.5
12.8
-1.5
0.4
7.4
90.7
306.7

0
0
0
3.3
0
0
7.1
0
-0.4
0
0.7
0
0
0
9.3
23.2

LEGAL AND JUDICIAL DEVELOPMENT
P063918
FES/MEDINA REHAB.
P005524
PROTECTED AREAS MANAGEMENT
P048314
SECONDARY ROADS
P005489
MUNICIPAL FINANCE II
P005523
PILOT FISHERIES DEV.
P052247
PSD III-VOC TRG.
P038978
RAILWAY RESTR & PRIV
P043725
RURAL W.S.& SANITATN
P040566
SEW.& WATER REUSE II
P005503
SPI - EDUCATION
P005501
SPI -HEALTH
P042415
SUSTAINABLE COASTAL TOURISM DEVT.
P065757
WATER RESOURCE MGMT.
P005521
WATER SUPPLY V
P005435
Overall Result
Total Disbursed (IBRD and IDA)
of which has been repaid
Total now held by IBRD and IDA
Amount sold
of which repaid
Total Undisbursed

:

Active Proiects
278.2
8.05
-

:

319

Closed Proiects
6,647.9
4,363.5
20.1
20.1
10.9

Total *
6,926.1
4,371.6
2,863.6
20.1
20.1
329.8

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
b. Following the FY94 Annual Review of Portfolio Performance (ARPP), a letter based system was introduced (HS = Highly Satisfactory, S = Satisfactory, U = Unsatisfactoy, HU = Highly
Unsatisfactory): see proposed improvements in Project and Portfolio Performance Rating Methodology (SecM94-901), August 23, 1994.
' Data includes one guarantee (Jorf Lasfar)

ANNEX B8
P. 2/2

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Morocco
Morocco
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
(In US Dollars Millions)
As of Date 4/1/2001
Held
FY Approval

Company

1995
1990
1994/96
1999
2000
2001

Attijari
ENNASR
Mediafinance
Settavex
Maghreb Invest P
Medi Telecom
Total Portfolio:

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Disbursed
Partic

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

0.0
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
66.4

0.5
0.0
1.2
9.0
5.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
22.1

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
310.1

0.0
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
66.4

0.5
0.0
1.2
9.0
1.3
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
22.1

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
310.1

66.9

15.6

22.1

310.1

66.9

11.9

22.1

310.1

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

ANNEX B9
p. 1/13

MOROCCO - CAS PROGRAM MATRIX 1
IA. POVERTY, INCLUSION AND VULNERABILITY: DIAGNOSIS

OVerVieW: Or ihewpati thnde ecadcs, social indicators bawe improved steadily in Mmwocco. and the inre prinounced strengthening of social poltcy since ie nud 199tJs ua becn rcleccred

in a
or osilmt the
closer foKus on rural areas and un dialogue with civil society at large In all. hoc*er. thesr elffts have not been sufficint to cIse the Large gaps to countnes at sirrular incmnc lestis IX
4
itmpact of low and volatile gwtih on consumption levels througbuu the 1990s the ancideasc of poenwy tncreased to 19 percent iu 199U99 comnpared io 13 penrcnt In 19 X9I .and the number of pesople
who air eeonomically vulnerable incrased by almost three nmllion ULnemployment ishigh and s9Xi1 gaps ir atess and nulccimks renmain large. betwetn men and vwomen and beteen rural and urban
areas Hurman de,ekprnmnt and inclusion policies are the greatest challenge to significantly reducing pusrt arndproiesiing th fmst vuIlnerable. as vell as enhancing Mo-occo'b growth pcAen331 ovex
the longer term.

i Development Indicators

Morocco2

Benchmark
Indicators for
urban Morocco

1. Rural development, water and
environment
Percent of rural population below
the poverty line

27%

12%

Rural illiteracy
(population aged 10 and above)
women

67%
83%

35%

-Share of large scale irrigation in
MADREF budget

70%

WVBG performance 3

Country iWsues

of the Bank's 1998 Rural
Development Strategy report, the Government
has prepared its own "2020 Rural Development
Strategy" which emphasizes decentralization,
and
programs,
integration
of sectoral
in mural
areas;
community participation

* As a result

* Poverty has increased significantly in the rural areas. Despite the

Government efforts with its sectoral programs supported by the
Bank on basic edacation and health (BAJ), rural potable water and
sanitation (PAGER), rural roads (PNRR) and rural electrification
(PERG),
development indicators are showing large inequities in the
rural
world.

to basic services and rural
infrastructure, through Bank financed projects
(BAJ, PAGER and Secondary Roads) has
improved. Also, a pilot fisheries project is
testing new approaches to promote small-scale
fisheries;
* Agricultural policy reforms, addressed in the
Rural Development Strategy (AAA) and in the
Second Agricultural Sector Investment Loan
(ASIL 2) have shown little progress;
* A policy note on subsidies is under preparation:

*Agricultural growth trend is stagnating. The incentive framework,

* Access

notably price policy, needs to be adjusted to promote growth in the
sector.
*The pressure is increasing on natural resources, mainly on water
resources. The scarcity and growing demand for water require
optimal water resource planning and management. 'Te Water Law
promulgated in 1995 constitutes a favorable framework for better
planning, but its implementation is encountering problems due to
delays in promulgating decrees related to the financing of river basin
agencies. The efficiency of water use, both at the level of the
distributing agencies and users, is far from optimal, notably because
the water pricing system does not reflect the economic value of
water and does not allow to recover the water service costs.

* In the water sector. the Water Management

.

Project supports the implementation of the
Water Law;
the Large Scale Irrigation
Improvement Project (LSI 2) has allowed
improvement of irrigation efficiency, ORMVA
management and water tariff increases, but the
institutional framework remains inadequate.
The Agricultural Support Service Project
(PSDA) has contributed to agricultural
intensification in irrigated areas, though below
expectations

1. The program matrix is organized along the main themes of the CAS, namely (i) poverty, inclusion and vulnerability, (ii) growth and (iii) public governance.
Each section contains (a) diagnosis and (b) program.
2. Latest year available, 1995-2000.
3. Self and OED evaluation.

ANNEX B9
p. 2/13

Development indicators
- Rates of recovering O&M costs
by water fees collected in the nine
large scale irrigation areas

with access to basic
infrastructure in rural areas
+ Safe water (2000)

Benchmark

Morocco

- Agricultural VA growth (% p.a.),

WBG performance

*There is no legal framework for environmental protection. The lack
of EIA regulations is of particular concern.

* Sustainable natural resources management has
received increasing attention through a
Forestry Project (PDF 2), a Pilot Watershed
Management Project
and protected areas
management project (GEF);
on
* Environmental
work has focused
strengthening institutional and legal capacity of

62% (average)

- Household

+ Electricity (1999)

Country issus

42%

100%

22%

89%

the Ministry of Environment as well as on
CZM, protected areas, and mainstreaming
environment in other projects (e.g. water,
tourism).

-0.3

1991-1998

2. Social protection/safety nets.
Public expenditure on social
program
(Entraide
welfare
Nalionale), %of GDP
Vocational training (%of GDP)
force with formal pension
coverage
- Population with health insurance
coverage

Indicators for
MENA region

0.05%
0.3%

- Labor

28%
15%

n.a.
0.5%

* Based on the recent LSMS (1998/99) a poverty
update report has been prepared (March 2001)
to assess the extent and trend of poverty and
review the role of key social policies. The
Government has been very collaborative;
* A social protection note is under preparation;
*The Private Sector Development Ill (in-service
training) project (FY96, US$23 million) has
introduced mechanisms which develop human
resources through in-service training;
* An evaluation of the Entraide Nationale (inkind welfare program) has been prepared and
detailed restructuring measures have been
proposed;
* BAJ Coordination and Monitoring Project (FY
96, US$28 million) focused on (i) PN to create
employment and improve infrastructure; (ii)
coordination of the BAJ programs; and (iii)
establishment of the Living Conditions
__________________________________________________
_ __________________
I_ Observatory to monitor poverty,

*The rural population's vulnerability to fluctuations in agricultural
output is high, but there is no social protection system in place to
cushion the effect of droughts. Public social assistance programs
(food subsidies, public works, welfare) are in general not sufficiently
targeted to the poor and are limited in coverage.
*Training programs are mainly center-based and tailored for preemployment, and little has been achieved in terms of creating a
balance between pre-employment and in-service training which
helps upgrading the existing labor force.
*A large share of the population - self employed, agricultural workers
and workers in the informal sector - lack pension coverage and other
forms of old-age support.
*Promotion Nationale provides temporary employment in rural areas
and has been effectively used to scale-up labor intensive activities
during droughts. But roughly 50% of its budget is shifted towards
urban areas to support local Government.
*NGO administered safety net programs are expanding, although
their institutional capacity still needs strengthening.

ANNEX B9
p. 3/13
DIeveopment Indhcators

Morocco'

Benchmark
Lower Middle
Income Countries

3. Education
youth literacy rate
(% of all aged 15 - 24)
- Female primary net enrolment
rates in rural areas
- Female

-

Public spending on
education [Grades 1-9]
(%of GDP)

52%
47%

3%

Indicators for
MENA reeion
rate (per
208
307
125

women in rural areas
giving birth at home

79%

Infant mortality rate
(per 1s000 births)
- Public spending on health (%of
GDP)

48

- Pregnant

1.4 %

WBG performance3

*Public spending on education absorbs 6 percent of GDP (1999), or half

*The BAJ (Basic Education in Rural Areas)

of the Government's spending on social areas. Education programs
have increasingly been targeted to girls in rural areas, with promising
results. However, limited institutional efficiency and insufficient focus
on basic primary education is slowing progress. The low quality of the
education system is reflected in low retention rates and low literacy
rates.
* The 1999 National Education & 1rainng Charter, prepared by the
Royal Commission on Education, sets out a set of ambitious objectives
The
for the long-term improvement of the education system.
Government has begun implementing aspects of the Charter, but has yet
to develop an overall implementation strategy.

basic

4. Health.
- Maternal mortality
100000 live births)
In rural areas
In urban areas

93%

Country Issues

151

* Inadequate funding and inefficient resource allocation account for low

quality of public services and low physical access.
*Public spending on health is, at just above I percent of GDP,
comparatively low, and has traditionally been skewed towards the
richer segment of the population and urban areas.
*Insurance coverage is voluntary and limited to 15 percent of the
population, mostly civil servants in urban areas. It is heavily subsidized
and ineffective in risk pooling.

44
3.0%
(Tunisia)
3.7%

.___________________ (Jordan)

project, approved in FY96 at
37.5 million, supported
program to increase access
quality of primary education

an amount of US$
the government
and improve the
in rural areas. The

project has contributed to the increase in
enrolment rates and in forging public-private
partnerships.

* Two-pronged approach

to strengthen basic

health care services and support structural
reforms:
- Basic Health Project (FY96, US$68 million)
focusing on rural areas, within the context of
the BAJ project.
Financing and Management Project
(FY99, US$ 66 million).

- Health

* Progress

has been slower in politically
sensitive areas including health insurance,
decentralization and human resource issues.

ANNEX B9
p. 4/13

I B. POVERTY, VULNERABILITY AND INCLUSION: WORLD BANK PROGRAM
Developm nt priority

1. Rural development, water
and environment
.

The Government's new 2020
Rural Development Strategy
focuses on:
environment fr
and
rural
development
agricultural growth focusing
on rural employment, water
management and drought
resilience.

-Enabling

*Facilitating agricultural growth and

competitiveness

development
town
rural
(growth poles between rural
and urban areas), rural
employment promotion and
targeted social safety nets.
- Integration of rural women
into the development process
and development of human
resources in rural areas.

Donor Partners

IBRD
*An Agricultural Policy Note is under
preparation to stimulate the dialogue.

*Projects in conjunction with government
participatory
local
programs, with a decentralized approach
development in priority areas and
and focused on coordination across sectors:
enhancing rural non-agricultural and
for
piaesco cnni ciiisFnsalctdt
- As the first step toward implementing the
pnvate sector economic activities
2020 RDS, a participatory integrated
*Improving access to social and
rural development project based on small
economic infrastructure
and medium irrigation, including rural
*Rationalizing water management
roads, water supply/sanitation,
and policies
electrification, health and education
facilities (FY01).
*Improving natural resources and
environmental management
Agnculture
Development Project (FY02) is
*Promoting

Participatory, integrated small
scale projects, beginning with
poor irrigated and rainfed
areas.
-Expansion of basic niralunewy
infrastructure and access to
social services.
naturalresopartnership
ustainablservies.
- Sustainable natural resources
management based on user
participation and preservation
of the natural resource base.
Poverty~ alleviation throughs
-

Instruments

WBG

Government of Morocco

Development cooperation program
WBG pro pg~
Progress Indicators

establishment of Social
Development Agency (ADS) and promote
with Local Development
Associations and NGOs
.
.
.
*Continue mplementg ongog rural
infrastructure programs (Rural Water
Supply and Sanitation, National Rural
Roads and Rural Electrification (FY03) and
basic education and health programs (BAJ)
* Support

* EU ( rural roads, fisheries,

Ouantitative

FTA, rural water,
safety nets)
USAID and KfW
Basin Agencies)
Kf
AD
* AFD, OECF, KfW
water)
* GtZ, CIDA, UNDP

Incidence of poverty in rural areas
Access to basic infrastructure
loaedt D o
- ud
D
complementary community
infrastructure and basic services
- Increase in ADS financed activities
in poor, marginalized rural areas
Rates of recovering O&M costs by
eoeigOMcssb
-Rtso
water fees collected in the nine large
scale irfigation areas

-

Oualitative
of the consumer subsidies
n
e rdcs(ua
ssesi
sys emsal in tey produs (sugardand
soft wheat).
Issuance of outstanding Decrees on
water charges and pollution fees

-Removal

-

-

Establishment of regulatory
framework for environmental
protection

*Following up on past large scale irrigation

projects, sector work is planned on
economic and institutional issues.
*Complete establishment of Oum er R'bia
River Basin Agency under ongoing Water
Resources Management Project.
*Draw lessons of experience from Lakhdar
Pilot Watershed Management Project and
launch preparation of Improved Forestry
I Management Project (FY04)

I

social
(River
(Rr
(rural

ANNEX B9
p. 5/13

Develop ent priority
Government of Morocco

Instruments

WBG

Development cooeration proram__
WBG prRa
Progress Indicators

_m

Donor Partners

2. Sodal protection/ safety nets
* Continuing the development of
in-service training;
* Extending medical insurance;

* Piloting the reform of the
program (Entraide
welfare
Nationale);
* Rural development programs;
* Institutionalizing the national
drought program;
on
alternative
*Emphasis
delivery mechanisms.

*Promote

reinforcement of the
intensity and coverage of public
safety nets;

with
bottom-up
CAS
*Build on1997
approaches to supporting the
delivery of social programs in rural
areas;
*Integrated, community based rural
development programs;
community
local
*Emphasize
empowerment in poverty alleviation.

IBRD:
*Support the Social Fund activities
*Support Government reform in promoting
in-service training
*Expand public work programs (PN)
*Evaluate the extent of child labor and
provide support for Child Protection
Govemment to reorient PN's
resources to labor intensive activities in
rural areas

Ouantitative
Vocatin Tining Tax (TFP) to inVctoa riigTx(F)t
n
service training
- Poverty incidence in both rural and
urban areas
- Coverage of the assistance programs
(EN, PN)

*EU
*USAID
*UNDP
*UNICEF
*ILO

*Help

implementation of the Gender
Action plan

*Support

* Participative Poverty Assessment

Oualitative
Approve by the Council of Ministers a
revised 1974 decree on vocational
training tax (TFP) to (i) separate
funding for pre-service and in-service
training and allocate at least a
minimum amount of the TFP to inservice training; and (ii) institutionalize
the Operations Manual of in-service
training and legal status of the Central
Committee and Regional Committees.
- Introduce a comprehensive program for
protecting the children in collaboration
with other donors (UNICEF/ILO).
-

3. Education
*The long term strategy for
education is laid out in the
1999 National Education &
T'raining Charter which
reflects a national consensus.
This action plan includes:
- Universalization of primary
education (2002-2003);
- Restructuring of educational
cycles;
- Quality improvement;
- Regional decentralization;
- Humam resource reform;
- Partnerships

sector.

with the private

the government's reform
efforts, in particular the Charter,
focusing on rural areas and
especially decentralization:
- Reform engineering through pilot
programs in decentralization;
- Improvement of teaching quality
through curriculum renovation and
teacher training;
- Expansion of network of public
and community-based schools;

*Support

- Support

program.

the government's literacy

IBRD:
*Education reform support (APL), with first
phase concentrating on basic education
sub-sector
*AAA on selected issues e.g. literacy note

Ouantitative
rates
- Primary
net
enrollment
and
(disaggregated
by
gender
urban/rural)
and
- Primary repetition, dropout
promotion rates (disaggregated by
gender and urban/rural)
Oualitative
- Production of annual implementation
action plan

*USAID,
UNICEF,
UNESCO, EU, Coopdration
Franqaise.

ANNEX B9
p. 6/13
Develop

nt priority
WBG

Government of Morocco
4. Health
The government emphasizes
to
rationalize
need
the
resources and improve access,
quality and sustainability. The
Strategy
Sector
Health
includes:
reform (resource
- Hospital
of
quality
allocation,
services);
health
public
- Priority
family
(TB,
program:
planning, AIDS);
- Compulsory health insurance
for all workers in the formal
sector (30% of LF);
for medical assistance
for the poorest (55 percent of

- System

the population) .

* Provide support to:

public health programs
Access to basic health in rural
ua
ai
elhi
cest
areas
- Programs focused on child and
- Priority

maternal health
the
to
support
- Provide
development and implementation
of new health financing strategies.

Instruments

Developuenl cooperation program
WBG prc
Progress indicators

IBRD:
* Analytical support to policy formulation
and implementation, and ongoingproject.
n mlmnain n non rjc.

Quantitative
- Access to basic health care in rural
areas, e.g. percentage of births
assisted by skilled personnel.
Oualitative
- Implementation of:
Hospital reform
- Health financing reform

Donor Partners
* EU (MEDA 2), AfDB (joint

operation) -

ANNEX B9
p. 7/13

2 A. GROWTH: DIAGNOSIS
The low leveLs and high volatility in growth have bern a key facLor in th increase in poveiry tuoughoul the 1990s. While the rconomy has emmuined stable from a IUcroecIIOIuc
stagiated and pnrvat
perspective. a combinatior of drougbLB and a slowdown in nr. narjcultwal sectors has increased poveny. runalmigration and wban unemployment rairs Per capili irwnmes have
insufficient lo
proved
has
which
way,
uneven
and
gradual
in
a
implemented
be
to
continued
have
rcformns
Sumctural
consumption
by
public
out
cowidcd
been
extent
sipiricant
to
a
has
consumption
related
problems
mncro
remaining
arnd
constraunts
nacto
overall
Lo
due
lagging
been
has
response
sector
the
pnvate
chimate,
investmnent
general
the
Improve
competitiveness Despite reform5 Lo
impov1T
height and inefficieDcy of the administmaon
totnhc

OverView:

Developmenl indicators

Morocco2

1. Macro and trade
- Per capita growth

-

Fiscal deficit
(as %of GDP)

-Urban

unemployment

2. Private sector development
sector share of value-added
- Private
sector VA growth
(average p.a. 1991-1998)

- Manufacturing

Benchmark

Country Lssues

WBG performancee

Lower Middle
Income Countries

*Economic policy has achieved stabilization but has failed to

* A one tranche PRSL(FY99, $250 million) was

increase growth and competitiveness: moreover, fiscal adjustment
did not involve a deep restructunng of public expenditures;
*Fiscal management is now under strain: privatization revenues have
financed a sharp increase in current expenditures;
*The Dirham has appreciated in real terms and exports growth was

successful in assisting in the formulation of the
reform agenda, but was less successful in
engendering progress on the implementation of
structural reforms;
*A Growth Study was discussed at a widely
attended Government seminar. In general,
analytical and advisory services have been of
high quality but have not been sufficient to
move the reform agenda.

7. 7 %

halved in 1990s compared to the late 1980s;
* After considerable achievements in the 1980s, trade liberalization
slowed down in the 1990s. However, the recent conclusion of the
FrA with EU (March 2000) is a crucial step towards international
integration.

22%

Lower Middle
Income Countries
73%

2.6%

2.9%

*Important policy changes have improved the PS environment

* WB

initiatives have been centered around

PPI, legal and judicial
(stable economy, progressive liberalization,
reform), but the weak private sector performance of the 1990s is
evidence of an important outstanding agenda, including:

export
support to SMEs (in particular
and
of PPI,
promotion
development),
improvement of the business environment,

public savings, little investment in infrastructure, slow
progress on privatization;
- Concentration (and thus vulnerability) of exports both in terms of
products and markets;
- Limited and uneven competition, cumbersome administrative
procedures. lack of skilled workers, and high cost and limited
access to financing, especially for SMEs.

icludig through strengthenng commercial
laws.
*IFC activities dropped significantly in the 1990s
as a result of increased access to concessional
financing, but retained an important role in
telecom. IFC also
e..in
large pjt
provided important support to SMEs through an
equity investment in a fund that provides

- Low

financing and venture capital to SMEs.

ANNEX B9
p. 8/13

Development indicators

3. Financial sector development
- Gross domestic savings
(%of GDP)
Financial deepening
(M2 as %of GDP)
Claims on the private sector
(%of GDP)

Morocco2

Lower Middle
Income Countries
20%

4. Infrastructure
70
- Access to sanitation in urban
areas
. Paved road density/km/bOO1.2
-Paved toad density/kmtlOOO
1.2
2
- Tourist visits per year (millions)
8
as %GDP
Telephone main lines penetration
(per-1000 habitants)
53
(per 1000 habitants)
53
- Mobile phones penetration
(per 1000 habitants)
44
(perlOOOhabitants)
- Tourism

30%

77%
54%

WBG performance 3

Country lssues

Benchmark

74%

70
1.5
1.5
>10

-

90
90
18
18

* Analytical and advisory support for the overall
financial sector strategy, capital markets etc has
banking activities have to some extent been liberalized, the banking
provided important input to the policy
regulatory framework has been modemized, and capital markets
have developed. However:
formulation;
*Cross cutting work on savings/social protection
- Financial deepening and market liquidity still lag behind other
countries;
continues. A Contractual Savings Development
Loan (FY98) was intended to reform contractual
- The level of savings is low;
savings institutions and thus encourage higher
private savings and investment;
- In spite of progress in reforming the insurance industry,
institutional investors remain dominated by very large
* IFC's initiatives have focused on institution
(govemment owned) institutions;
in the area of capital markets and
Thepoor,esp.
rural areas,lackaccesstocreditabuilding
in
factoring as well as access to trade finance to
The poor, esp. in rural areas, lack access to credit as wel as
local companies (e.g. partial risk guarantee
savings instruments, which further exposes them to sharp swings
scheme in the MENA Forfaiting Facility).
in income;
- The financial viability of the pensions system is threatened over
the medium term.

*The financial sector has undergone important reforms in the 1990s:

Institutional issues are paramount as a result of poorly developed
and cumbersome regulatory framework, weak autonomy and
accountability and inefficiency of public infrastructure service
providers.
*A considerable stock of urban infrastructure exists but not sufficient
emphasis is placed on rehabilitation and maintenance, and
sustainable financing of urban transport, sanitation and water
services
Road network is in poor condition and limrited in rural areas.
* Road network is in poor condition and hmuted m rural areas.
*Strong public presence but the infrastructure sector is - gradually being opened
up the
to larger
the private
cities. sector. In transport, water and
some of
enerin
energy in some of the larger cities.
*Rapid rates of urbanization put strong pressure on infrastructure in
urban areas, resulting in unserviced areas that house the poor.
*The housing sector is constrained by lack of financing, land, and
inadequate subsidy system.
* The municipal charter is being revised - de facto centralized
decision making, overlapping functions, etc. remain problems to
well functioning local communities.

World Bank lending portfolio includes
projects in the fields of land development,
municipal finance, cultural heritage, urban water
and sanitation, railways, secondary roads and
power generation, and, under preparation,

*The

tourism development, rural infrastructure and
public asset maintenance. Technical assistance
has been given in the areas of municipal
development, housing, energy efficiency and
solar-thermal power generation.
h
TeWrdBn
rvddkyspott
key support to the
World Bank provided
*The
reform of the regulatory framework for
telecommunications. This is being followed up
by an information and teleconumunications loan
in FYO .
role was instrumental in structuring
complex and large volumes of financing as
demonstrated by the Meditelecom investment.

* IFC's

*A well integrated urban development, tourism and cultural heritage
strategy is needed to improve quality of life in urban areas and
boost growth.
*'lelecommunications infrastructure has been improved, however,
there is still a need to develop telecommunications and postal
networks to reach levels of countries of similar income level,
ensure better inclusion of rural areas, and an enabling regulatory
framework for private participation.

__

ANNEX B9

p. 9/13
2 B. GROWTH: WORLD BANK PROGRAM
Deveomp

nt prioriy_

Government of Morocco

Development cooperation program
WBG pro rams
Instruments
Progress Indicators

WBG

1. Macro and trade
*The fiscal deficit is to be reduced
to around 3 percent of GDP by
2004
with
* Further
integration
economy,
in
international
particular regional integration, to
accompany the Free Trade
Agreement with EU.

_____

Donor partners

IBRD
*Focus on building consensus on a

growth oriented framework.

* Analytical

work on growth orientcd
policies,
with wide dissemination,
emphasis on consensus building (e.g. EU
integration strategy);
* Institutional support to economic policy
formulation (IDF).

Ouantitative

* IMF

-Fiscal deficit as percent of GDP
-Civil service wage bill as percent of
GDP
- Non-EU mean tariff rate.

2. Private sector development
* Strengthening the business environment with focus on SMEs,
export promotion, investment
procedures;
* Strengthening the regulatory and
institutional framework for PPI
and continue with liberalization;
* Accelerating the privatization
program, with telecom and air
transport under way;
* Public enterprise reform.

*Combating

urban poverty and
unemployment by improving the
business climate, with particular
emphasis on SMEs and on the

IBRD/IFC:
* PPI strategy

services sector (IT, tourism);

* SME

*Focus on coordination with other

partners and on support which is
not currently
elsewhere.

being

provided

* IT/postal project

country mapping exercise to
determine most effective approach and
tools to support SMEs.

* African Development Bank

Ouantitative

* EU

-Share of bank credit to the private
sector
-Exports growth
- Infrastructure services

IFC:
* Partnerships being explored with financial
intermediaries to provide SMEs with
appropriate financing mechanisms.
* IFC investments, where appropriate and
with strong developmental benefits, in PPI.

(cost/coverage)
Oualitative

IBRD:
* Financial sector assessment program

Ouantitative

3. Financial sector
mainly analytical and
advisory services to support
policy formulation and reform

* Strengthening capital markets and
improving
domestic
debt
management;

*Provide

*Restructuring of main public
banks;
* Housing finance;
ouSM
finace,
ng

IFC:
implementation
instruments
under
* New
financial
* Seek to leverage financing in
areas where little support is being
consideration (e.g., weather insuraice,
local currency products. etc.).
provided,
* IFC will only work in areas with * Institutional building investments to
further development of capital markets.
clear developmental impact and
additionality.
I..I

- Improved

*EU

access

to

financial

services, especially in rural areas.
-Share of bank credit to the private
sector

_I

ANNEX B9
p. 10/13
Developm

ent priority

Development cooperation program

WBG pro era s
Government of Morocco

WBG

Instruments

Donor partners
Progress Indicators

4. Infrastructure and IT
* Increase

local

autonomy

of

municipalities

*Enhance

rWork

private

sector

participation in all sectors
* Upgrade the IT sector and more
particularly:
- Develop

university
parks, etc.)

"software"
(internetworks, technology

- Enhance
business
and
competitive environment for IT
firms

on

institutional

and

IBRD:

Ouantitative:

* Lending:

Degree of private sector participation

reuaoysrnteigTlcimnctosrvneas%f
*Provide

analytical and advisory

services
F
rEeO
*Focus on rural access

Rural Infrastructure
Tourism/cultural heritage

Telecommunications revenues as % of
DPmIc

IT/ Telecom reform

Oualitative

*Institional Support:

Implementation of regulatory changes to
support PPI

Public Asset Management
Cultural Heritage
*AAA:

PPI note
IFC:
*Potential investments, where
Infrastructure or IT

needed in

* USAID,

AID,

UNESCO

(urban development)

USI,

AD

KW

* USAID,

AfD,

KfW

ANNEX B9
p. 11/13
3A. PUBLIC GOVERNANCE: DIAGNOSIS

OVjLYjLViL Te politcal opeiing

in Mormto has spsred an open drbale on goverDance issues. inehlding aountaubiily. decennalization, transparency and orruption. and he need for iodernizing
instilutions lo nalch the proess of inetnationaml integraLion. However. the large prescee of the sLate
in C pro%ision of gooBs and svices togeher with Ihe high depee of centiraliLion inthe
administranos are an nmptd4meni
io efficient and cffective delivery of public scrvices, and jo the development of a dynamic pnvae sor. The World Bank progarn is ninteded lo suppn LUgeld
Inimention- in The area; of dexennalirmn, public e
hpeniures
mana enest, and judIcia Ireftm whik continuing io plce empasmis on fosenri public disussion and ino I IDRc;>il s.iesy

Development indicalors

Morocco 2

Benchmark
Lower Middle
Income Countries

-

Public sector %of value-added

27%

-

Public expenditure %of GDP

24 %

16%

34%
12.5%

24%

3.4%
60%
60%

3%
50%
50%

12%

15-20%

- Government

wage hill
as %of total expenditures
as %of GDP

Local expenditures % of GDP
. Local
as %wage
of total
bill
Local wage bill as % of total
local expenditures
- Local govemments' share of total
revenues
-

WBG performance3

Country hssues

The State remains heavily involved in the provision of goods and
services, and although some competition has been introduced in the
telecom, transports, urban water and sewerage sectors, the overall

*The

progress on the privatization agenda has been slow. Alternative
delivery mechanisms involving private and NGO sectors are still
on a very limited scale.

*The World Bank has focused on opening up the

* The administration of civil service is centralized and insufficiently

including the government, civil society and
external partners, and on strengthening the civil
society in its role (e.g. an IDF for NGO
institutional capacity) These efforts have been
succcssful in terms of engendering debate but
have so far had relatively limited impact on the
reform agenda.

*

performance orientated, resulting in cross-sector coordination
problems, insufficient participation of stakeholders, poor public
service delivery, a highly constrained/rigid remuneration policy,
structural constraints/impediments to address skill-mix as wcll as
mobility and redeployment issues, and an overall cost-efficiency
issue.
*The budget framework and procedures lack visibility, transparency
and efficiency
*Lack of accountability together with corruption are perceived as
important impediments to economic development.
*Local governments have little financial autonomy in revenues and
expenditures, and have weak financial and human capacities,
especially rural communes.
*The Government has, however, opened up the discussion on
transparency and corruption with civil society.

Policy Reform Support Loan (FY99,
US$250 million) was not successful in
engendering civil service reform.
discussion with civil society, e.g. through a
series of seminars and meetings on corruption,

ANNEX B9
p. 12/13
3B. PUBLIC GOVERNANCE: WORLDBANK PROGRAM
Develop

enl priority

Government of Morocco

WBG

the public governance
reform agenda in decentralization ,
public expenditures management,
civil service reform, strengthening
of judicial system, accountability
the
business
Improving
through the
environment, in particular for
and transparency,
means of:
SMEs
Strengthening of the judicial - Supportingconsensus building
comtm,erpciallcyrt
ancldin Supproviing expertise aniditcnica
commercistrati
courts
a
Providing expertise and technical
admninstrative courts,
advice
Across the board simplification
- Preparing reforms
of rules and
regulations - Supporting institutional development of civil society
including a reduction of the
administration's discretionary
powers
Increased
accountability
through strengthening of the
National Cour des Comptes,
setting up of Regional Cours
des Comptes, modemization of
administrative jurisdictions, as
well as dialogue with civil
society on key accountability
and anti-corruption issues
Administrative decentralization
(principles laid out in a draft
charter.
Enhanced autonomy of local
(legislative
municipalities
reform under preparation)
Deepen structural reforms in
the areas of:
Privatization and PPI

Renewed 5 year Plan (20002004) to serve as reference for
the
macro-framework/targets
and for annual spending
with
annual
programs,
evaluation of Plan execution to
he done and used as feedback
ogrami

progran_ning_

annual

budget

* Support

Insiruments

Development cooperation program
WBG pro ans
Progress Indicators

IBRD
* Public Expenditure Review (ongoing)
* Public Asset Management Project
Proiect
(administrative
procedures, extemal controls)
to
Justice
* Continued
support
modernization, through implementation of
the recently approved Judicial project
(focused on commercial courts), support to
modernization
and
extension
of
administrative courts (Governance project,
see above)
* Follow-up on the recent IDF for NGOs
institutional capacity, with other form of
toward
training,
support
geared
information access and experience sharing.
to
lending)
(through
* Support
implementation of key structural public
provided
reforms,
sector/governance
triggers are met, in the areas of
civil
decentralization,
administrative
service refonm, budget programming and
execution framework and procedures.
* Governance

Ouantitative
- Public sector share of value added
.
.
.
- No. prvatized enterprses
- Share of staff in general and high level
jobs in particular at provincial and
regional level
- Private sector and NGOs share of
basic public service delivery in
education, literacy, health.Delomn

|
Other partner
programs
* PPI/role of the state: UNDP,

EU, AfDB (partnership with
the WB)
* Budget

management:

EU,

* Civil Service: Arab Fund for
and
Economic
Social
* Accountability: EU, USAID,

Ne erimn ncvlsrieUNDP,
- Weight of the wage bill in % of GDP
(with a target of at least reducing it
from
2003) current 12.5% level to 10% in
Investment realization ratios
to produce budget execution
data (lois de reglement)
judicial
indicators
on
- Basic
effectiveness: backlog of cases, % of
decisions implemented.
- Local government wage bill < 50
percent of total local expenditures
- Budget
- Delays

-eInvestment> 25 perent of total
expenditures
- Unobligated investment commitments
<50 percent of total investment
Oualitative
- Key legal and administrative measures
implemented to enhance oversight of
increase
the
administration,
transparency and reduce discretionary
powers;
- Regulatory and managerial changes
increasing flexibility/autonomy in
by
state
management
budget
J

-

.

'_t
_cal

Reform/streamlining

uaits'

of

budget

expenditure process and its controls;

DFID

ANNEX B9
p. 13/13
Develop
Government of Morocco

ent priority
WBG

lnstrumenns

Development cooperation program
WBG pr grams
Progress indlcators
-

Revision of budget structure and
presentation toward more visibility and
comprehensiveness;

-

Legal and regulatory changes in
statutory dispositions of the civil
service as well as actual use /
implementation of the new legal
framework.

_

Otber partner
programs

ANNEX B 10

Morocco- CAS summary of development priorities

Network Area

Country
a
performance

Country
priority

Bank
d
priority

Rural poverty and
urban vulnerability

High

High

Major issue

b

Reconciliation of
country and Ban.

prioritiesd

Poverty Reduction and Economic Management
Poverty
Reduction

Poor

Economic
Policy

Fair/

Lack of growth

High

High

Public Sector

Fair

Efficiency of public
expenditures

Moderate

High

Gender

Fair

Women's
empowerment in
rural areas

High/
Moderate

High/
Moderate

Education

Fair

Rural girls' access,
efficiency

High

High

Health, nutrition
and population

Fair

Urban-rural gaps,
underfunding

Moderate

High

Continuing dialogt e

Social protection

Poor

Moderate

High

Dialogue and
alternative
mechanisms

Dialogue/analytical
support

Human Development

Insufficient and
inefficient coverage
of vulnerable

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development
development

Good

Agricultural pricing

Moderate

High

Continuing dialogue

Environment

Poor

Lack of EIA
regulation

Low

High

Dialogue at highet
level

Social
development

Fair

Vulnerability and
exclusion

Moderate

High

Cross-sectoral woik
at all levels

High

Moderate

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Competition,
savings
mobilization

Financial sector

Good

Private sector

Fair

SME
High
competitivenessgg

Energy and
mining

Fair

Legal/regulatory,
rural access

Infrastructure

Fair

Regulatory/PPI,
autonomy of public
utilities.

a. Indicated as "excellent", "good", "fair", or "poor".
b. Refers to principal country-specific problem(s).
c. Indicated as "low", "moderate", or "high".
d. Gives explanation where Bank and country priorities do not agree.

Strong EU presenLe
Leverage financing

High

Low

Moderate

Moderate

Moderate

Continuing dialogue

ANNEX Bl 1
P. 1/ 10

THE WORLD BANK AND CIVIL SOCIETY IN MOROCCO.
I. The World Bank and Civil Society: Achievements, Challenges and Future Program.
Achievements
During the past CAS cycle, the Bank focused its nascent civil society liaison efforts on a number of civil
society actors: NGOs, research institutes, academics and professional associations. Indeed, the Morocco
CMU has led the region's efforts to engage with Civil Society Organizations (CSO).
The most important of these efforts consisted of the following initiatives:
1. Support for women's organizations working under the auspices of the Secretary of State for
Social Protection, the Family and Children to craft a National Gender Action Plan.
2. An IDF implemented by NGOs that had two objectives. The first was to create an NGO
database, and the second to build the management, administrative and networking capacities of
NGOs.
3. An ongoing initiative to support the creation of an economic policy think tank based at Ifran
University.
4. An ongoing initiative to set up a Social Fund.
5. Equally important, a seminar was held bringing together prominent Moroccan social scientists to
identify and discuss the country's development priorities with a view to creating a network of
social scientists whose expertise and knowledge would be solicited in Bank supported programs
and projects.
6. An exciting development at the project level consisted of a reorientation of the educational
component of the BAJ project to incorporate support for informal schools run by over 100 local
NGOs.
Since the establishment of the Morocco field office, consultations with CSOs have been carried out
including a seminar on corruption, which was held in partnership with the government. Other contacts
with CSOs culminated in a daylong CAS consultation with CSOs in November 2000 which were also
attended by government officials. These CAS consultations have not resulted in the hoped for tri-partite
meeting (CSOs-Government-WB) because of reservations expressed on the government's part.
However, together with the impetus of the IDF grant, they have in fact prompted the Moroccan
government to plan a general meeting between CSOs and Government to be presided by the His Majesty
the King to craft rules of engagement between Government and CSOs. This is a welcome government
initiative as it would facilitate the World Bank's own future engagement with Civil Society, particularly
as the message from the Government was supportive of the World Bank's continued outreach to CSOs.
Several factors have contributed to the enhancement of Government-CSO-World Bank engagement.
These include a more open socio-political order leading to improved State-Civil Society relations; an
increase in the challenges facing government and society; improved CSO capability to participate in
policy dialogue and the delivery of social services; and strong leadership by the Morocco CMU.

ANNEX B1l
P.2/10

Challenges
1. One of the challenges expressed by CSOs both during the CAS consultations and at regular
meeting between Bank staff and CSOs, is the regulatory framework for CSOs. The present
Dhahir of 1958 governing the status of CSOs is being debated in Morocco and reforms to the
law are under consideration to align it with the social, political and economic developments that
have occurred in Morocco. The objective is to create a more enabling regulatory framework that
would pernit CSOs to fulfill their development potential.
2. Linked to this is the status of cooperatives. The
of the current status and legal framework for
existing entities would qualify as cooperatives.
form those cooperatives which would qualify as

Government has requested from the WB a study
cooperatives with a view to identifying which
This would make it possible to separate them
private businesses.

3. A third challenge is to move forward with and operationalize the Moroccan Social Scientist
Network.
4. Systematic evaluation and monitoring of the work of NGOs remains a challenge as expressed by
members of Civil Society themselves and by WB staff members, particularly in cases where
engagement with CSOs at the project level (such as in the case of informal schools) is underway.
5. Moving forward with CAS consultations raises other pertinent issues ranging from selectivity of
CSO partners at the consultation and project level, to creating a platform for dialogue, to
building the capacities of CSOs, all of which reflect and encapsulate the challenges menrioned
above.
6. While some operational staff have first hand experience in engaging CSOs in their work, many
have less experience while others are skeptical about the value added of mainstreaming CSOs in
Bank operations and processes. Greater operational mainstreaming therefore requires support of
senior management and a collaborative effort among country team members to ensure that all
learn from individual experiences.
Future Program
The Bank's future program will on the one hand seek to build on its achievemnents and on the other to
address the challenges cited above. To this end the following activities are planned:
1. Conduct a study in the form of an ESW to take stock of available information on CSOs and their
role in the development process in both rural and urban areas. The planned study would be
elaborated in close cooperation with relevant CSOs and Moroccan social scientists and would
therefore provide a platform for informnation sharing and exchange of views.
2. Engage Government, Civil Society and legal experts in a dialogue on reforming the legal
framework governing civil society organizations with a view to providing technical assistance in
this area if requested. This initiative, will build upon an earlier regional Bank initiative with
regional and international legal experts which produced a document on the standards and criteria
for a legal framework for CSOs. Moroccan legal experts were involved in this initiative.
Moreover, preliminary contacts have been established with the relevant officials in the office of
the Moroccan Prime Minister dealing with this issue.
3. The formal establishment and operationalization of the Social Fund would be a key institutional
activity that would facilitate and enhance engagement with CSOs. In this context, the natural
place to house the CSO data-base (compiled as part of the activities of the previous IDF for CSO
capacity building) would be the Social Fund which will be responsible for improving and
updating the existing data-base.

ANNEX Bl 1
P.3/10

4. Efforts will be exerted to move beyond the consultation stage with CSOs and to integrate them
from the outset in the project cycle. The objective is to involve both CSOs and members of the
Network of Social Scientists in direct beneficiary participation as well as the design,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of projects. In this context it is possible to envision
a flexible division of labour between CSOs and Social Scientists. The former would be
integrated mainly in social sector activities where their experiences provide them with a
comparative advantage, while the latter would be better suited to contribute to structural
adjustment loans and macro-economic work as well as analytical work.
5. Create a position in the field office for a Civil SocietylGender expert who would act both as a
gender focal point and the point person for outreach to CSO as well as be responsible for
coordinating with other donors on these issues. The responsibilities of this individual would
include:
a.

help operational staff to understand the value added of engendering projects and of
engaging CSOs in their projects;

b. bring innovative experiences from inside and outside the Bank to task managers;
c.

provide technical support and task management to in-country dialogue (e.g. CAS
consultations, and participatory approaches to poverty assessments);

d. identify possible CSOs as project partners; and,
e.

initiate dialogue between Government, CSOs, the private sector and donors to discuss
key policy issues and foster better coordination and collaboration between actors.

6. A follow up IDF for CSO capacity building will be considered and discussed with the relevant
Moroccan counterparts.
II. Civil Society - World Bank CAS Consultations.
A one-day consultation meeting with members of Morocco's civil society was held in Rabat on
Octoberl4th as part of the preparation for the World Bank's upcoming Country Assistance Strategy, the
first such meeting in the MNA region. As part of an ongoing process of constructive contacts with civil
society organizations, and in recognition of the important role they play in meeting the challenges of
development, the World Bank sought to solicit their views on how to establish a framework for future
collaboration, to identify development priorities and challenges as they perceive them, to identify
obstacles and implementation problems, and to elicit feedback on how the WB group can help meet
some of the priority needs more effectively.
About 70 civil society organizations received invitations to the event. Many of these groups, which
ranged from women's organizations to anti-corruption groups, community-based organizations, and
capacity building NGOs, had been recipients of training and networking through an Institutional
Development Facility grant (IDF) to Morocco. While the group of organizations invited is in no way
exhaustive and does not represent Moroccan civil society as a whole, the selection process was geared
towards involving groups that were active in diverse sectors, covered rural and urban areas, were
geographically diverse, and were involved at the grassroots and advocacy levels. The meeting was well
attended, with a total of 55 civil society organization representatives - a number of whom were already
familiar with the World Bank and its work in Morocco - present at the consultations. Several
government representatives from relevant ministries also attended the meeting.
The consultations were broken down into two plenary sessions, one at the beginning and another one at
the end of the day, in between which were held four workshops, each of which covered a priority area
for Morocco: rural development, urban development, governance and inclusion. In the first plenary
session, the World Bank's regional Vice President Jean-Louis Sarbib and Maghreb Country Director

ANNEX Bl 1
P. 4/ 10

Christian Delvoie articulated the importance of partnering with Morocco's civil society organizations to
combat poverty and attain sustainable development, particularly given their remarkable record at the
grassroots level and their positive impact on development in general. On their end, participants
expressed - among other things - their frustration with what they perceived as the lack of civil society
involvement in Bank operations and priority-setting but at the same time shared their interest in forging a
collaborative relationship with the Bank.
Participants were given the choice of selecting the facilitator-led workshop they were interested in
attending, which meant that some workshops were better attended than others. The rural development
workshop was the one with the largest number of attendees, reflecting both the importance of the issue in
the context of Morocco's development as well as the attention given to activities in this area by many of
the organizations present. Each of the workshops was divided into two sessions, the first one focusing
on gaining a better understanding of the activities and concerns of both Moroccan civil society and the
World Bank, and the second to create effective and innovative approaches for collaboration. Prior to the
meeting, the World Bank distributed to participants a set of rules of engagement which set out
expectations for the meeting and its aftermath in an effort to manage expectations and avoid
misunderstandings. Participants also received a background document providing a framework for
discussion of the upcoming CAS.
At the end of the workshops, participants attended a closing plenary session during which each of the
four facilitators presented the recommendations of their respective workshops. Recommendations
consisted of both challenges confronting development in Morocco, areas in which the World Bank. could
become more active, and suggestions for future WB-civil society engagement. Once completed,
workshop reports submitted by each of the facilitators were sent to the attendees for their review and
comments. Taking into account these comments, a final summary report of the consultations was
prepared. A follow-up meeting, possibly on a tri-partite basis, was suggested by some participants to
inform meeting participants as to how the consultations have influenced the definition of the Bank
strategy, and in particular, which of their recommendations have and which have not been incorporated
into the CAS document. In this regard, and as articulated in the rules of engagement document
distributed prior to the meeting, not all of the recommendations proposed by the participants will have
necessarily been included in the CAS document.

ANNEX Bl 1
P. 5/10

RECOMMENDATIONS FROM CIVIL SOCIETY CONSULTATIONS
I. Summary of recommendations for World Bank- Civil Society engagement.
Proposed Actions

Strategy
Forging
Partnerships

*

*
*
*

Strengthening
Technical &
Institutional
Capacity

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Fostering an
Enabling

*

Environment
*
*
Networking &
Outreach

*
*

*
*

Follow-Up

Promote inclusive partnerships which involve a large spectrum of CS, i.e. NGOs, universities, and professional groups.
Develop mechanisms, techniques, and indicators to better integrate CSOs in needs-assessments and project follow-up.
Support CSOs at the national and local levels, particularly as these maintain close ties and mutual trust with local
comnmunities and can assist in helping to identify priorities and to widen community participation.
Promote the role of CSOs in tri-partite projects and elaborate a charter defining the methods of engagement of each of the
partners with regards to the project cycle. In addition, support pilot activities on a tri-partite basis.
Enhance the role of beneficiaries and CSOs in promoting good govemance.
Support the extension of government grants to CSOs and scaling up of CSO initiatives.
Identify and encourage local experts to assess local conditions and contribute to the project cycle.
Encourage the matching of state administrative and technical know-how and resources with CS expertise so as to produce
more efficient interventions.
Support the transfer of expertise through secondment of expertise and trans-sectoral mobility, thereby enabling CSOs to
benefit from state resources and vice versa.
Train CS leaders on how to increase their organizations' institutional and technical capacities. Such efforts must
differentiate between the different types of CSOs, i.e local grassroots versus national level organizations.
Organize seminars to benefit and strengthen CS expertise and areas of involvement.
Help activate the process of reforming the current Law of Associations, including the aspect related to CSO funding by
private local and international funders, and support the introduction of legal measures to help develop and facilitate CSO
work in areas of public interest and the delivery of social services.
Promote greater transparency in public administration.
Ensure good governance by implementing oversight and evaluation mechanisms that secure community participation.
Maintain and update a CSO database.
Taking into account local languages, establish information databases and resources useful to CSOs.
Stress the mutual exchange of experiences and data through such vehicles as publications and seminars and through
innovative techniques of information and communication dissemination such as electronic dialogues and the intemet.
Foster dialogue through regular meetings between the World Bank at both the national and regional levels on such issues
as hygiene, health, unemployment, the environment, and literacy.

CAS -WB consultations related:
Ensure transparency of the entire CAS consultation process including the public disclosure of summary of discussions and
materials distributed during the event. Some participants recommended the final report be transmitted by the WB to the
GOM with the aim of organizing a tri-partite discussion. If this consultation is not envisaged and if the CAS is not
rendered public, some CS members said that they could conclude that govemance is not a priority issue between the WB
and its clients/partners. In this case, participants would prefer that no mention of CAS CS-WB consultations be made in
the CAS.
._______
_
*

ANNEX Bl 1
P. 6/ 10
*
*
*

Other:
Maintain a dialogue through periodic meetings.
Establish regional focal points to facilitate contact with the population and to monitor projects.

II. Summary of individual workshops on key country issues
A. Inclusion workshop.
Sector
Education

Health

-

Challengellssue
* Limited access to
education
* Poor quality of
education
* Lack of diversification
and choice
*

Insufficient evaluation system



Illiteracy

*

Insufficient access
Lack of partnerships

*
*

Dearth of follow-up structures and
of formal evaluation mechanisms

*

Insufficient investment inhuman
potential and resources to respond
to populations' needs

Recommendations/Priorities
* Facilitate access to education to a larger portion of the population by addressing the issue
of the physical environment, i.e. transport and school locations.
* Revise current structures and educational objectives by putting into practice the principles
set forth in the Education and Training Charter.
* Encourage and support an open and diverse schooling system, i.e. one that allows for both
formal and informal education and provides a choice of diverse pedagogical approaches
customized to the needs of the different populations.
* Encourage a system which values competition, innovation and performance. To this end,
improve and reinforce the quality of the evaluation system by carrying out and
institutionalizing both internal and external evaluations at the various stages and kinds of
pedagogical and educational - including literacy - projects. These evaluations, which
should take into consideration both qualitative and quantitative evaluation indicators,
would help assess both the internal efficiency as well as the impact of the different
projects on the educational system and the targeted populations. Extemal evaluations
should involve the participation of relevant external actors and other interested parties.
* Build the capacity of relevant actors and enhance methods of management of literacy
projects. Use audio-visual tools, multimedia and new information and communication
technologies to optimize results.
* Promote ambulatory forms of health care such as mobile units, particularly in rural areas.
* Reinforce professional partnerships between CSOs and their service-delivery units on the
one hand, and health providers and government authorities on the other hand.
* Introduce follow-up structures for funded projects and of formal evaluation mechanisms
- internal and external - in health establishments to improve management and optimize
costs.
* Carry out training of paramedical personnel to address their needs and lacunae.
* Introduce new procedures and channels to respond to urgent needs, such as those which
have already been identified in the fields of psychomotricity and mid-wivery.

ANNEX Bl 1
P. 7/ 10

*

a

Lack of sufficient preventive
measures

*

*
*
*

Insufficient medical coverage
Exclusion

*
*

*

Entraide Nationale

*

*

Agence du Developpement Social

*

*

Exclusion

*

*

Limited access to capital and
revenue-generating activities

*

*
Social
Protection

Socio-Economic
integration

*
Gender

*

Gender analysis

*

I

Introduce health education in the education system, the family, and socio-economic areas
of intervention.
Promote State-CS cooperation incarrying out awareness-raising activities on such issues
as hygiene, nutrition and the environment. Awareness-raising efforts should also be
carried out during pre-natal periods in order to prevent mental and physical handicaps
and to significantly reduce the number of deaths linked to childbirth.
Strengthen and involve CSOs in famnily planning initiatives.
Use the media to educate the population to health issues, particularly in rural areas.
Institute universal medical coverage to expand access of the population to health care.
Reach out to and integrate a larger segment of the population into the development
process, namely vulnerable populations particularly children at risk and the elderly.
The continued existence of this institution is contested. Its is deemed outdated, out of
touch and no longer responding to current needs.
The composition of the ADS needs to be revised in order to ensure that it meets certain
criteria that conform to its social vocation.
Reinforce the training-integration-employment model through mentoring and involving the
private sector.
Support revenue-generating activities targeting indigent populations or those with limited
access to capital (micro-credit) and resources.
Help extend bank or other financing to small enterprises whose needs fall between microcredit and those who qualify for larger commercial loans.
As a cross-cutting issue, gender considerations should be integrated in all the above
sectors and recommendations.

B. Governance workshop
Sector
Governance

Challenge/Issue
* Insufficient beneficiary ownership

*

Lack of community participation

*

Insufficient dissemination of
information

*

Partnerships

Recommendations/Priorities
* The success and sustainability of development projects requires beneficiary ownership
of relevant projects through participation in the conception, implementation and
evaluation of these projects, including oversight.
* To secure community participation and to involve citizens in assessing project viability,
necessary controls and evaluation mechanisms must be implemented.
* Since communication is key to participatory development, the population must be
informed about current projects regularly. This can promote administrative
transparency, strengthen citizenship, contribute to the modernization of the state and
curb the abuse of power. There is a need to reinforce the information dissemination
systems of all public administrations, as well as promote information sharing between
international donors and credit and grant recipients.
* While the WB is free to undertake consultations deemed relevant to the CAS, rendering the

ANNEX B1 I
P.8/10

*

*

Decentralization

*

*

Good governance

*

*
*
*
*

CAS public is subject to government consent. In this setting, the role of CSOs is more one
of consultation rather than partnership.
The WB's mission to fight poverty does not seem to be in line with its actions.
Moreover, CSOs expressed skepticism at the WB's ability to implement its new
approach since it is not accepted by its shareholder governments.
Encourage and give technical support to the decentralization process; decentralize the
management of public services and strengthen the capacities of local government which
cooperate and coordinate efforts with CS.
Institutionalize the inspection and intemal evaluations of public services and implement
"Cours des Comptes" audits.
Simplify budgetary procedures, improve budget preparation, and follow up on
implementation to ensure cost-effectiveness.
Institute a public debate around World Bank financing.
The WB should implement good governance practices in its activities, including in the
design and implementation of the CAS.
Sustainable development efforts and participatory governance presuppose a democratic
environment, i.e. an independent judiciary, the rule of law, etc.

C. Rural development workshop.
Sector

Challenge/Issue

Rural
Development

*

Vulnerability of agricultural
sectors to climactic
unpredictability

*

*
*

Lack of existing infrastructure
Rural-urban gap in basic services
and human development
Destruction of the environment
contributes to the
underdevelopment of rural areas
Insufficient decentralization

*
*

*

*

Recommendations/Priorities

*

*

I

The main priority for any economic and social development strategy in Morocco,
where the majority of the population relies on subsistence agriculture which is often
subject to climactic unpredictability, should be to increase or at least to stabilize
vulnerable populations' incomes.
Support infrastructure development - roads, bridges, electricity - in rural areas.
Development projects need to focus on and enhance human development and ensure
access to basic services in rural areas.
Protection measures must be instituted as part of an overall project of human and
sustainable rural development.
More autonomy in decision-making, management and fiscal matters needs to be
given to local administrations.

ANNEX Bl1
P. 9/ 10

*

Corruption, lack of good
governance and weak capacity

*

With better resources, capacities, and accountability to constituents, local authorities
could guarantee field coordination, and bring together public authorities and

~~~~~~development agencies.

*

Agence du Developpement Social

*

*

Weak capacity of local populations

*

*

Lack of WB visibility in rural areas

*

________________

The ADS can be used as a vehicle through which can be incorporated into local
development projects and policies.
Local communities are not yet in a position to act as ethical watchdogs and do not
dispose of sufficient resources and skills to successfully lead a process of
consultation and local development.
In the view of some participants, the Bank seems to be unaware of local conditions
and current realities on the ground and the projects it supports take on a top-down
rather than a bottom-up approach.

D. Urban development workshop.
Sector
Urban
Development

Challenge/Issue
*
Lack of beneficiary participation

*
*

*

Lack of private sector (SME and
SMI) involvement.
Corruption in public administration and local collectivities
impedes efficient CS interventions
Centralized administration

Recommendations/Priorities
Promote beneficiary participation and involvement in identifying needs.
*
*
Support the setting up of an anti-poverty program in urban areas to highlight the visibility of
associations and facilitate their contribution to the field.
Develop partnerships between the private sector, CS, the relevant public administrations and
*
the World Bank on urban development projects.
*
Anti-corruption efforts targeting the public administration and local actors must be carried
out to achieve more efficient CSO interventions and efficient governance.
*

*

Help speed up the process of administrative decentralization to better target its actions to
meet the needs of vulnerable populations. Commission studies on the current state of affairs
to identify reform priority areas in a way that considers the contribution of all relevant actors
Support training of elected officials to enhance their contribution to urban
development.

ANNEX B1 I
P. 10/10
E. Participants remarks regarding specific World Bank projects.
Sector
Governance

Rural
Development

Remarks
Since reform in this sector must ensure independence and transparency, this project could
*
serve as a good model for partnership and should be carried out in cooperation with
universities, professional associations and the public.
Without prejudicing the outcome of the recently initiated project, participants
*
PublicAssets Management
emphasized that the desired reforms cannot be accomplished without administrative
decentralization.
* CSOs can help assess and provide recommendations on the situation.
*
The program in itself is proof of the difficulties of existing tri-partite partnerships. For one,
Anti-corruption programs
the WB's participation in this effort has been delayed and marginal.
* CSOs were not implicated in the design and organization of the event the WB organized
with the MAG. Little has come out of the follow-up commission due to the limits of its
scope, its lack of institutionalization and the ambiguity of MAG's mandate which does not
allow it to act as a govemment representative and to access any govemment administration.
Participants remarked on the limited success of WB integrated development projects. The
*
Tissa Project
example given by participants was the Tissa project, where purportedly very little of what
was implemented remains. Apart from the drinking water component - which was
apparently successful - the cultivation of trees (arboriculture) failed and the development
of rural roads was slow. Moreover, several dozen villages are no longer electrified.
In the Rif areas, many classrooms located in BAJ schools (BAJ I project) are now deserted
*
BAJ and Education Projects
and a number of health establishments remain without equipment. In the education sector,
though not in the context of the BAJ, a number of rural schools - some of which are not
________________ _ __________ _______electrified - have non-functioning cafeterias.
Project
Modernizationof the Justice
System

With the exception of the "Summary Recommendations for World Bank-Civil Society Engagement" section, each of the sections in the report are based on the respective workshop
report and the inputs and ideas that emanated from participants attending that particular workshop. The "World Bank-Civil Society Engagement" section, on the other hand, regroups
the recommendations made by participants in each of the four sessions on this particular issue and hence does not necessarily reflect a consensus among all participants.

