Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 30941-CV

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE

January 27,2005

Cape Verde Country Management Unit
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The date of the last Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report was August 28,2001.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Cape Verde Escudos (CVE)
US$1 = 84 CVE (January 2005)
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
CAS
CFAA
CPAR
CPPR
DPR
ERA
ESW
EU
FAIMO

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Financial Accountability Assessmenl
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Development Policy Review
Economic Regulatory Agency
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Frente de Alta Intensidade de ME0 de Obra
(labor-intensive public works scheme)
FIAS Foreign Investment Advisory Service
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEF Global Environment Facility
GNP Gross National Product
J.DF Institutional Development Fund
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural
Development
IFC International Finance Corporation
IMF International Monetary Fund
INPS National Institute for Social Protection
I T Information Technology
JSAN Joint Staff Advisory Note
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MCC Millennium Challenge Corporation
MDG Millennium Development Goal

Vice President:
Director:
Country Program Coordinator and CAS TTL:
Team members:

MIGA
MPIP
MTEF
NGO
OED
PEM
PER
PIU
PPIAF

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Multi-sector Private Infrastructure Project
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Nongovernmental Organization
Operations Evaluation Department
Public Expenditure Management
Public Expenditure Review
Project Implementation Unit
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory
Facility
PPP Public-Private Partnership
PRGF Poverty Reduction Growth Facility (IMF)
GPRS Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy
PRSC Poverty Reduction Support Credit
GPRSP Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper
PSD Private Sector Development
RDA Rural Development Assessment
SAC Structural Adjustment Credit
SME Small and Medium Enterprise
TSSD Technical Secretariat to Support
Development
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
USAID United States Agency for International
Development
VAT Value-Added Tax
WBI World Bank Institute
WHO World Heath Organization
WTO World Trade Organization

Gobind T. Nankani
Madani M. Tall
Iradj Alikhani
Cape Verde Country Team
Herminia Martinez, Peer Reviewe1
Peter Miovic, Peer Reviewer

FOR OFFICIAL, USE ONLY

Republic o f Cape Verde
Country Assistance Strategy
Contents

............................................................................................. ...
I.
Introduction.............................................................................................................
1
Country Context ......................................................................................................
1
I 1.
6
I11. Main Challenges. Issues And Strategies ..............................................................
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

111

A . Background.........................................................................................................
B. Macroeconomic stability and modernization o f Government ............................
C. Growth and competitiveness ..............................................................................
D. Human capital development and social protection ...........................................
E. GPRSP Priorities and supporting basis ............................................................

.

IV
V

.

Bank Experience Under The Previous CAS
World Bank Group Assistance Strategy

.

VI

......................................................

.............................................................

A . The World Bank Group’s results-based assistance strategy .............................
B. World Bank Group country program and vehicle for assistance .....................

.......................................................

Results-BasedMonitoring And Evaluation

.................................................................................................
VI11. Concluding Remarks ...........................................................................................
.

VI1

Risk Management

6
6
9
13
15
16

18
18
22

26
27

29

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used b y recipients only in
the performance of their official duties I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed
without W o r l d Bank authorization.

.

*.

11

Tables
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:

Selected Economic Indicators ..................................................................... 2
Cape Verde’s Progress Towards the MDGs ................................................. 5
CAS results-based framework ................................................................... 20
CAS Lending Scenarios - U S $ M i l l i o n...................................................... 23

CAS Annexes
Annex 1
Annex 2
Annex 3
Annex 4

Framework for a Results-Based Country Program.....................................
Description o f main GPRSP Pillars............................................................
GPRSP Costing Table ................................................................................
Country Financing Parameters ...................................................................

30
36
38
39

Standard CAS Annexes
Annex 5

Annex 6
Annex 7
Annex 8
Annex 9
Annex 10
Annex 11
Annex 12
Annex 13
Annex 14
Annex 15
Annex 16

CAS Table A1 .
Key Economic & Program Indicators.............................
47
.
Change from Last CAS
Cape Verde at a glance ................................................... 48
CAS Table A2 .
CAS Table B 2 .
Select Indicators o f Bank Portfolio ................................
50
Performance and Management
IDA Program Summary .................................................
51
CAS Annex B 3 .
CAS Annex B 3 .
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2002-2005 ......................
52
CAS Table B 4 .
Summary o f Non-lending Services, FY04-FY08 ........... 53
CAS Table B 5 .
Social Indicators..............................................................
54
CAS Table B 6 .
K e y Economic Indicators................................................ 55
CAS Table B 7 .
K e y Exposure Indicators .................................................
57
CAS Table B 8 .
Operations Portfolio (IDA and Grants) ...........................
58
CAS Table B 8 .
Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio .......... 59
CAS Table B 10 .
Summary o f Development Priorities.............................
60

MAP (IBRD 33383)

...

111

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
Since the last CAS was presented to the Board in 1997, and the progress report
was issued in 2001, Cape Verde has experienced sustained economic growth and poverty
alleviation. Poverty still affects 37 percent o f the population, the majority o f whom are
rural dwellers. The country i s on target to attain Millennium Development Goals
(MDG). The economic basis for these improvements has been provided by sound
macroeconomic policies, promotion o f private investments through an improved
investment climate, divestiture, infrastructure reform, and public investments in human
capital and social sectors. The macroeconomic environment briefly deteriorated in 1999
and 2000, which was reflected in unsustainable deficits. Since then, the new
administration moved swiftly to address fiscal problems with the support o f Bretton
Woods institutions, and good progress on macro and structural fronts has been achieved.

..

The country benefits from a well-functioning multiparty democracy. Corruption
appears quite l o w and few governance issues have been identified, even though fiduciary
systems need improvements, access to legal services should b e expanded, and regulatory
barriers remain. Geography and external factors largely determine the country’s
development. The archipelago consists o f 10 islands, which results in a high-cost
economy, principally because o f lack o f economies o f scale in infrastructure and
government programs. Agriculture is constrained by limited arable land and poor
rainfall. Remoteness from mainland Africa hinders regional integration. On the other
hand, the large diaspora contributes substantially to the country’s GNP through
remittances, estimated at about 20 percent o f GDP. The main growth sectors include
construction, services, trade and tourism.
11.

iii. The CAS covering the four-year horizon (FY05-08) sets out planned lending and
non-lending activities o f the World Bank Group in support o f Cape Verde’s Growth and
Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS) and their intended results. The CAS takes into
account achievements to date, integrates key development challenges and relevant sector
strategies. K e y issues include (a) growing demands o n public fwnds for provision o f nonprimary social services and social safety nets for the poorest segments o f the population,
and (b) the challenge o f building a competitive economy. T o address these, the Bank’s
strategy i s articulated around three objectives that constitute the CAS pillars:
(a)
(b)
(c)

ensuring macroeconomic stability and sound public finance and budget systems;
supporting private-sector-led growth through an enhanced investment climate and
increased competitiveness through public-private partnerships in infrastructure; and
implementing social programs aimed at alleviating poverty and inequity.

I t is expected that GDP growth o f at least two percent per capita will be sustained
during the CAS period and poverty will be reduced by about one percentage point per
year, with special attention to alleviating rural poverty and addressing inequality which

iv.

remain pronounced. The following measurable improvements are among those expected
by the end o f the CAS period: (i)
coverage o f targeted social services to vulnerable
groups increased; (ii)
cost recovery based o n ability to pay for basic services expanded;
(iii)
key transport parastatals brought to point o f divestiture; (iv) administrative barriers

iv

reduced; (v) 2,000 new formal sector jobs created; (vi) coverage o f infrastructure
improved and certain costs reduced; (vii) improved non-primary health and education
coverage; and (viii) outreach o f social programs to the poor increased.
The ongoing portfolio o f four projects and the proposed new lending program
support C A S objectives and specific outcomes identified in i t s results-based framework.
While the l o w case i s considered improbable, it consists o f two projects (US$30 million).
Under the base case (US$50 million from IDA and US$5 million from GEF), 60 percent
o f new lending will consist o f programmatic lending through PRSCs. This approach is
justified by the country’s good and growing capacity and its successful track record, and
i t will contribute to donor harmonization. The rest o f the base case will finance a roads
project and an infrastructure investment operation. The high case (US$19 million above
base case) would finance larger amounts under PRSC3 and PRSC4, and would include an
IDA credit o f US$5 million to sustain efforts to stem the incidence and impact o f
HIV/AIDS. The triggers for moving to the high case envisage a strong performance,
notably in the areas o f public expenditure management and private sector reform.
v.

vi.
The CAS provides a framework for the participation o f I F C and MIGA, especially
to support the development o f private participation in infrastructure, as w e l l as WBI and
specialized facilities. Non-lending programs are front-loaded in the CAS period, so that
their results can be used to develop lending operations and as input to the policy dialogue
in outer years (FY07-08).
Other AAA would also help to monitor reform
implementation and complete core diagnostic requirements. Capacity enhancement will
be an integral part o f Bank support and will be closely harmonized with donors.

Implementation o f the CAS i s subject to five broad, inter-related risks. The first
relates to the volatility o f donor concessional lending, which would be mitigated by
Government’s political commitment to policy reform. The second relates to the
sensitivity o f Cape Verde to external shocks. The Government intends to continue
providing investment opportunities in the country to its citizens living abroad and
believes that the country’s stability and good governance, together with guarantee
instruments, will help secure foreign international investors. The third r i s k stems from
the Government’s ability to fulfill the reform agenda and avoid macroeconomic slippages
in order to sustain growth and poverty alleviation. This is mitigated by the fact that
stakeholders in Cape Verde have integrated lessons learned from previous pre-election
experiences, and that M&E systems would ensure that slowdowns in reforms are
identified and addressed. The fourth risk i s the hard budget constraint o n public
expenditures and competing demand for resources which m a y result in the crowding out
o f key programs. Mitigating measures include funding o f infrastructure programs
through private-public partnerships, prioritization o f expenditures, and management o f
contingent liabilities. Fifth, capacity constraints are being addressed with donor support.
vii.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion: (i)
does the CAS
i s the policy, institutional and results
adequately address key development priorities; (ii)
framework underpinning the CAS adequate; (iii)
is the shift towards more programmatic
lending warranted; and (iv) does the CAS adequately assess r i s k s and contribute to
greater donor harmonization?
viii.

INTERNATIONAL, DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE
I.INTRODUCTION
1.
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) covers the four-year period from FY05 to
FY08. I t sets out planned lending and non-lending activities o f the World Bank Group in
support o f Cape Verde’s Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS) and their intended
results, which are in line with the country’s Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The
CAS takes into account achievements to date, and integrates key development challenges and
relevant sector strategies. The central challenge facing Cape Verde i s to sustain poverty
reduction while addressing relatively high inequity. To address this challenge, the Bank
strategy i s articulated around three objectives that constitute the CAS pillars: (a) ensuring
macroeconomic stability and sound public finance and budget systems; (b) supporting
private-sector-led growth through an enhanced investment climate and increased
competitiveness through public-private partnerships in infrastructure; and (c) implementing
social programs aimed at alleviating poverty and inequity. The proposed Bank assistance
draws upon the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (GPRSP)’, which helps ensure
that it is aligned, covers the same period, and builds on the GPRSP’s consultative process.
11. COUNTRYCONTEXT

2.
Geography and population are key factors. Cape Verde i s an archipelago o f ten
islands, nine o f which are inhabited by about 472,000 people. About h a l f the population
lives o n the island o f Santiago around the capital, Praia. Following decades o f emigration,
about twice as many Cape Verdeans live abroad. This diaspora keeps close ties with its
country o f origin and contributes substantially to its GNP through remittances, estimated at
about 20 percent o f GDP. The country’s geography, l o w proportion o f arable land, poor
rainfall, and limited population make it a high-cost economy, principally because economies
o f scale in infrastructure and government programs cannot be easily attained. The country’s
remoteness from mainland Africa has hindered significant integration with West Africa.
Recent macroeconomic performance has been strong. Table 1 presents selected
3.
economic indicators. Despite a drastic fiscal contraction in 2001 to reassert control over
public expenditure, annual growth has remained above 4 percent. The current account deficit
remains stable at around 11 percent o f GDP since 2001, reflecting effective demand
management, l o w import growth, sustained inflows o f remittances o f almost 20 percent o f
GDP, and better management o f the country’s exposure to external shocks l i k e o i l price
increases. Foreign direct investment and donor disbursements have also helped to increase
reserves at the Central Bank to 2.2 months o f imports, higher than the original target for the
three-year PRGF program. Economic growth for 2004 i s estimated at 4 percent and inflation
i s around 1.5 percent. Contrary to most o f Sub-Saharan Africa, the economy relies primarily
on services, which account for 72 percent o f GDP. The main source o f growth i s expected to
be in the service sector, such as hotels and restaurants, transport, and communication. The

’ Reviewed in a recent Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN) discussedby the Board in January 2005.

-2medium-term GDP growth rate is projected at 5 percent with an inflation rate under
2percent. The current account deficit (excluding grants) i s expected to remain steady at
around 10 percent o f GDP, based on continued inflows o f remittances and fiscal prudence.
T a b l e 1: Selected Economic Indicators
~~

~~

Annual average inflation (%)
National Accounts (growth rates, YO)
Agriculture
Industry
Services
GDP at market prices
Real per capita GDP
National Accounts (% of GDP at current market prices)
Gross domestic investment
Public investment
Private investment
Gross domestic savings
Balance of Payments (YOof GDP at current market prices)
Current account balance (including budgetary and project grants)
Current account balance (excluding projects grants)
External Indicators
Total debt service paidExports
Gross Official Reserves in months o f imports
Government finance (YOof GDP at current market prices)
Domestic revenue
Current expenditures
Overall fiscal balance excluding capital grants
Overall fiscal balance including all grants
Extemal borrowing (net)
Domestic borrowing (net)
Monetary indicators
Broad money (M2) (% annual growth)
M2IGDP (% o f GDP at current market prices)
Current social expenditure (YOo f GDP at current market
prices)
Education
Health
Memo: GDP at current market prices (billions o f LCU)
Nominal average exchange rate (LCU per US$)
Source: World Bank and IMF databases

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
4.4 -2.4 3.8 1.8 3.0

27.3
2.6
2.6
8.6
6.6

3.9
2.4
2.4
6.6
4.6

3.3
4.3
4.3
5.1
3.1

2.5
3.5
3.5
4.3
2.3

3.2
4.2
4.2
5.0
3.0

20.9 19.3 18.3 20.9 20.2
14.5 12.5 10.8 13.0 9.8
6.4 7.2 7.5 7.9 10.4
-17.6 -13.3 -14.4 -15.0 -14.0
-12.4 -1 1.2 -10.7 -1 1.2 -10.3
-14.9 -10.6 -10.3 -11.5 -9.7
20.8
1.6

5.3
1.0

7.3
1.4

6.2
2.0

2.3
2.0

26.42
26.6
-14.8
-9.9
2.3
1.1

20.8
34.2
-25.9
-19.8
3.8
14.6

21.9
21.9
-10.9
-4.8
3.1
2.0

23.1
21.3
-9.9
-2.7
1.6
0.3

22.5
20.9
-8.1
-3.5
2.6
1.0

19.2 12.7 9.8 14.3 7.8
61.2 65.6 67.5 72.5 72.4
1

6.9 8.8 8.5 7.9 7.6
2.2 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.8
60.4 63.6 70.5 75.4 81.2

4.
Sources of growth are concentrated in a few sectors. Compared to many other
African countries, Cape Verde has modest growth potential, but has h l l y exploited various
opportunities so as to achieve steady economic development. In the medium term, tourism i s
expected to continue to be the main source o f foreign exchange revenue, especially as the
sector develops high value niches. This sector would in turn drive other sectors that supply
i t s inputs, including food, handicraft, manufactures and services. The development o f
activities around the telecommunications cluster i s also expected to contribute to economic
growth through improved and expanded telecom services, value added activities such as
internet as well as call centers, the first o f which now operates in Praia and employs about
Includes 6.6 percent o f GDP from privatizations

-380people. GDP growth would be sustained through the expansion o f services, notably
construction, and increased productivity o f ongoing activities, such as agriculture. As the
country builds i t s human resources and expands and liberalizes infrastructure sectors, new
sources o f growth and exports would emerge, for example in the aforementioned information
technology (IT) sector. The Government’s longer term vision also calls for Cape Verde to
become an infrastructure gateway service provider for West Africa, which would fhther
strengthen growth through regional integration.

5.
External factors are important. Cape Verde is especially sensitive to external
factors that may undermine growth. The fiscal balance and the funding o f public programs
depend o n continued donor support. Continued inflow o f remittances is critical. Increases in
international petroleum prices have unfavorable consequences on private sector growth, the
electricity sector, the fiscal equilibrium and the balance o f payments, especially when
Government limits adjustment in domestic prices. Finally, tourism receipts would be
affected by a perception o f insecurity resulting from international events, which has so far
been avoided, and recession in Europe. Cape Verde’s stable social, political and economic
environment mitigates these risks.
6.
Regional integration potential i s constrained. As a small, open economy, Cape
Verde i s well integrated into the world economy. Strong economic and social links exist
with the United States, Europe, West Africa (notably Senegal and Guinea-Bissau) and the
lusophone community in general. However, the country’s geography and relative distance
from the coast o f Africa implies that regional integration i s largely implicit and its physical
manifestations are mainly through trade. In recent years, Cape Verde has envisaged
establishing closer regional links, for example by being part o f regional arrangements on
modemization o f business law, air transport safety and regulation, and insurance regulation.
This has not been brought to fruition, in part due to language considerations. The main
option still under consideration by Government is for Cape Verde to provide an infrastructure
gateway to West Africa. Studies are needed to help determine niches that would be
technically feasible and economically and financially viable.

7.
Cape Verde i s a well-functioning multi-party democracy. Since the adoption o f a
multi-party political system in 1991, there have been three elections and two orderly changes
in Government. Corruption in the country i s perceived as being quite l o w and few
governance issues have been identified, even though fiduciary systems need improvements,
access to legal services should be expanded, and regulatory barriers exist. Macroeconomic
slippages have occurred during the last two elections. While still a risk, a repeat i s
significantly less likely to occur in the context o f the next parliamentary and presidential
elections, scheduled for late 2005/early 2006. Past slippages were accompanied by a
breakdown in the macroeconomic dialogue with Bretton-Woods institutions, the repetition o f
which is unlikely. Furthermore, the independence o f the Central Bank has been strengthened
during the last few years, and the scope for unprogrammed domestic financing has been
substantially eliminated.
8.
Cape Verde has reached middle-income GNP levels. In parallel with the above
evolution in the political system, the country has moved from a largely centrally-planned
economy to a liberal economic regime based on: (a) improved factor markets and privatesector-led growth through divestiture o f state enterprises and utilities, financial sector reform,
the strengthening o f property rights and price liberalization; (b) better integration into the

-4world economy through trade liberalization and encouragement o f export-oriented activities;
and (c) enabling fiscal and monetary policies, including strict limits o n public sector deficits
and the peg o f the Escudo to the Euro. Since the early 199Os, economic growth o f about four
percent per capita has been sustained by these policies and the GNP per capita now stands at
about US$1,450. Bank support envisaged under the CAS would enable Cape Verde to
deepen these reforms and sustain recent performance levels.
9.
Poverty has declined and i s mainly rural. Growth led to notable poverty
alleviation during the 1990s. In 2001-02, 37 percent o f the population was poor, and 20
percent was extremely poor (reference daily consumption level i s about US$1.5 and US$1.O
respectively). Poverty has declined by about a quarter, compared to the 1988-89 level: the
annualized decline in per-capita poverty i s one percentage point. Poverty in Cape Verde
remains predominantly a rural phenomenon. More than half o f the rural population is poor
compared to a quarter o f urban residents. Generations o f Cape Verdeans have coped with
entrenched rural poverty by migrating both abroad and to urban areas. During the last
decade, the rural population has declined from 56 percent to 45 percent o f the total
population, but accounts for 62 percent o f the country’s poor. The most rural islands (Santo
Antilo, Fogo, Brava) have significantly higher poverty rates than the rest o f the country. As
discussed in Chapter 111-C, rural poverty is linked to lack o f income opportunities. The CAS
will help promote continued poverty reduction through initiatives that support growth.
Moreover, to help improve the situation for the majority o f the poor who live outside cities,
the CAS will pay particular attention to rural development.
10.
Inequality remains high. The implied elasticity o f 0.7 for poverty reduction with
respect to GDP per capita i s significantly below the figure observed elsewhere. This appears
to be linked to income distribution that has not improved. The Gini index n o w stands at
~ shows that consumption inequity in
about 0.533, compared to 0.51 in the late 1 9 8 0 ~and
Cape Verde i s generally worse than in comparable countries. Four factors appear to
contribute to the high Gini index: (a) remittances seem to benefit relatively better-off
segments o f the population and may exacerbate inequity problems; (b) the incidence o f
public expenditures may not be sufficiently pro-poor; (c) the geography o f the archipelago
makes it difficult and costly to bring social services to certain areas; and (d) entrenched rural
poverty. As envisaged in the CAS, continued growth complemented with appropriate
expenditure targeting i s expected to result in improved income distribution.
11.
Human development indicators show significant improvement. Cape Verde is on
target to reach most MDGs by 2015, including in education and health (see Table 2). Under
current trends, assuming GDP per-capita growth o f about two percent, the target o f reducing
poverty by h a l f will be attained and surpassed. Even though relative inequality has
increased, household living standards as measured by comfort factors (home ownership,
household appliances, access to water and sanitation and infrastructure services) are fairly
good for most Cape Verdeans, especially those who are not poor and are urban dwellers. In
this respect, the rural inhabitants tend to be worse o f f than others.

The GPRSP cites an even higher figure o f .57 for the Gini. But the lower figure i s quoted in the
recent poverty assessment report and i s considered to b e a more up-to-date estimate.

-5-

Table 2: Cape Verde's Progress Towards the MDGs

Source: World Development Indicators database, April 2004, and World Bank reports. Note: In some cases the data are for earlier or later
years than those stated.

12.
Gender inequality i s less pronounced than elsewhere in Africa, but needs to
continue being addressed. Women are more likely to b e poor than men in Cape Verde.
Although a formal gender assessment has not yet been carried out, a revised poverty and
gender profile has been generated based on analysis o f the national income and expenditure
household surveys. These figures show that there have been impressive gains for women in
basic education and falling fertility rates. Prevailing trends imply a decreasing dependency
ratio and less pressure o n public finance to serve a growing population. In terms o f
challenges ahead, women are more likely to be unemployed, and when employed tend to earn
less than men at similar levels o f education and experience. Also almost half o f adult women
in rural areas cannot read, and domestic violence i s an issue. The ongoing Bank support
contributes to addressing these issues in a number o f ways. An IDF grant aims to strengthen
the rule o f law. Also, the PRSC aims to expand social programs, for instance in the area o f
improved matemal health.

-6111. MAINCHALLENGES, ISSUES
AND STRATEGIES
A. Background

13.
Sustaining and building upon achievements to date. The Government recognizes
that the main challenge i t faces is how to sustain the growth performance at around three
percent per capita, so as to continue poverty alleviation, while at the same time implement
social policies that improve the welfare o f poorer segments o f the population. Stakeholders
recognize that neither result will be easy to achieve. Growth will need to be stimulated by
further policy reforms. This will be complemented by a redirection o f expenditure programs
towards the poor, together with an ambitious agenda to improve delivery o f social services
and increased allocations for social sectors, above and beyond targeted programs. To
achieve these objectives, the Government intends to introduce further reforms that ensure
macroeconomic stability, an improved investment climate, infrastructure development and
enhanced competitiveness.
14.
The PRS aims to consolidate the prospects of sustainable growth with a significant
impact on poverty and inequity, and provides a framework for reforms. During 2004, there

were extensive discussions o f GPRSP drafts with stakeholders and donors. The final version
o f the Cape Verde GPRSP (2004-2007) was distributed on September 21,2004. The GPRSP
is built on a set o f strategies and priorities that address Cape Verde’s main development
challenges. In its strategy, the Government has put together a credible and realistic plan
around the following main pillars o f interventions: (i)
modernization o f Government;
(ii)
economic growth and private sector development, (iii)
human capital development;
(iv) infrastructure, regional development and the environment; and (v) social protection.
These pillars are described further in Annex 2.
15.

The GPRSP includes strategic choices and trade-offs to bring the country up to par
with the standards o f a middle-income country. The key issues and options facing the
country are discussed in the remainder o f this chapter.
B. Macroeconomic stability and modernization o f Government

16.
Macroeconomic stability and modernization o f Government are central elements o f
the development strategy. Bank assistance will contribute through analytical work, notably
Public Expenditure Reviews (PERs), the review o f fiduciary systems, the investment climate
work, and proposed annual programmatic lending and ongoing investment operations.
17.
Macroeconomic stability. The fixed exchange rate regime in the form o f the peg to
the Euro i s seen as one o f the mainstays o f macroeconomic stability and growth, and a
contributor to a sound investment climate. The main disadvantage o f the regime i s in terms
o f limiting monetary policy, which in turn constrains fiscal policy and results in pronounced
trade-offs between competing public expenditure programs. Advantages include stability in
this important dimension o f the investment climate. This arrangement, which the
Government intends to maintain, is considered an important factor in sustaining the
continued flow o f remittances that fuel investments and consumption. The bulk o f
remittances originates from the United States (U.S.) and the U.S. dollar has depreciated
significantly with respect to the Euro. This may lead to a reduction o f future remittances in
local currency terms. Another risk, considered manageable at present, relates to increases in
interest rates in the United States and Europe that could cause local interest rates to increase

-7accordingly. Still, the present fixed peg arrangement has been deemed adequate in the
medium to long term, and there are no plans to modify it, say by introducing some weighting
for the dollar in the peg.
Sustained capitalflows. Cape Verde remains dependent o n external capital flows to
18.
finance its development. Donor funding has reached a plateau in recent years and i s unlikely
to further expand relative to GDP, at least not at highly concessional terms; and debt
sustainability considerations limit borrowing on commercial terms. Private remittances
remain steady, but are sensitive to changes in perceptions o f risk. In addition, the divestiture
program that generated about US$lOO million from sales o f shares and assets during the
1990s i s not expected to bring significant additional net revenues. These factors - together
with the fact that domestic savings, as a share o f GDP, are unlikely to increase very much in
the short to medium term - highlight the need for Government to maximize i t s limited
sources and ensure that they flow to investments with the highest rates o f return and/or to
fund programs that primarily benefit the poor. I t also underscores the importance o f
attracting external private capital flows in order to sustain investments in infrastructure and
productive sectors.

19.
Public expenditure allocation and control. Both revenues and expenditures
(respectively about 22 percent and 30 percent o f GDP during the 2001-2003 period) are high
by African norms and comparable to that o f many lower middle-income countries. There
appear to be limited options for significantly increasing revenues relative to GDP, even
though specific levies and user fees can be implemented to finance specific public programs.
Similarly, in the absence o f significant additional aid inflows, the scope for increasing public
expenditures i s limited by the need to keep domestic borrowing in check, especially to avoid
crowding out private investment and to ensure debt sustainability. There is a recognized
need to improve the budget allocation mechanism, so that important poverty alleviation
initiatives can be funded. A Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) is being
developed to help improve allocation decisions and move towards multi-year expenditure
programming. The hard budget constraint and cap on the deficit also require the
reductiodelimination o f relatively regressive programs, such as subsidies to the national
airline and increased cost recovery from the richer segment o f the population.
20.
Budget systems. T o improve transparency o f public expenditures and strengthen
good governance, Govemment tax administration, and financial and procurement systems
need to be strengthened. In the area o f tax administration, capacity is being enhanced. W h i l e
customs administration i s strong, income tax administration is being strengthened through the
introduction o f a new taxpayer registry and identification number, and a modem I T system.
Fiduciary issues are being addressed through the implementation o f e-Government systems,
the development o f relevant procedures manuals, and improvement in extemal and intemal
controls (also covering issues such as timely reconciliation o f accounts, improved debt and
cash management, empowering oversight institutions, et^.^). The financial management
capacity o f municipalities i s uneven and will be strengthened in line with fiscal
decentralization. Similarly, the consolidation o f responsibilities for oversight o f all donorfunded projects i s expected to strengthen budget implementation and monitoring systems.
Finally, while procurement operations are basically sound, a legal framework to support and
harmonize procurement activities i s being developed.
See recent CFAA and PER.

-8Improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the public sector. Recent analysis
21.
(CFAA, PER and CPAR) confirms the direction o f ongoing public finance reform in order to
facilitate resource mobilization, reach envisaged goals and improve Government
effectiveness. These studies and the GPRSP also call for further improvements. Progress in
implementing financial management reforms risks being offset by capacity constraints and
delays in adopting an appropriate legal framework. Moreover, fiscal slippages have
exacerbated some shortcomings in public expenditure management, including recourse to
emergency budget management on a cash basis, which may result in resources being taken
away from priority sectors. Pressures are increasing from structural expenditure programs,
such as pensions, health care, and education, in addition to the effects o f rising interest rates
on domestic debt service, and contingent liabilities from autonomous institutes and
parastatals, all o f which need to be managed.
Strengthening public finance. The main medium-term challenges are to reinforce
22.
and improve critical aspects o f public finance at the central and municipal levels, including:
(a) further integrating investment and expenditure budgets, by developing a MTEF to guide
resource allocation and link sector budgets to programmatic outcomes; (b) reinforcing
financial controls, including more timely and higher quality reporting and audits; (c) more
effective tax administration through improved information management; (d) development o f
adequate procurement legislation; and (e) control o f contingent liabilities. O f note, unlike in
many countries in the sub-region, the residents o f Cape Verde generally do not perceive
corruption as a major issue, as shown in the 2004 Afiobarometer s u r ~ e y s .In
~ addition WE31
work6 shows that the control o f corruption in Cape Verde i s about twice higher than other
sub-Saharan countries, and converging towards European norms.
With respect to
governance indicators, the country receives relatively high marks for political stability, rule
o f law, and voice and accountability, while further efforts are clearly needed in other areas,
such as Government effectiveness and quality o f the regulatory regime. Improved fiduciary
systems and public service delivery, and regulatory and investment climate reforms
mentioned elsewhere in this document will further reinforce transparency and help strengthen
the weaker aspects o f Cape Verde’s governance.
Continuing the strong record of delivering a good mix of quality and quantity of
23.
public services. Even though the country’s population i s l o w (472,000 people) and
concentrated in a handful o f large cities, the archipelago structure o f Cape Verde, including
four islands with less than 15,000 inhabitants, calls for moving to the local level - wherever

technically feasible and financially justifiable - the responsibility for decision-making and
monitoring o f service provision. Current proposals for strengthening the role o f the
municipalities underpin the intended goal to further improve policy responsiveness and
implementation. The Government i s s t i l l elaborating i t s decentralization strategy, and it i s
likely that this approach will be implemented progressively and cautiously so as to avoid
excess cost o n the economy.
24.

Public sector reform priorities focused on removing the main bottlenecks to a
modern administration. In the absence o f such an integrated strategy, ad-hoc institutional
Afrobarometer, Working Paper No. 34, March 2004.
D. Kaufmann, A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi 2003: Governance Matters 111: Governance Indicators
for 1996-2002.

-9reforms are threatening the Government’s ability to coordinate its actions and are
undermining accountability. An example i s provided by the proliferation o f autonomous
institutions with specific missions and their own revenue streams. Government actions are
aimed at converting poorly functioning departments into institutes or agencies with a clearer
mandate and more qualified personnel. The creation o f some agencies, such as the Economic
Regulatory Agency or the Aviation Authority, stems from strategic choices that have been
discussed and agreed with donors. In some other cases, this has resulted in overlapping
mandates, diseconomies o f scale and increased costs. The establishment o f special
frameworks to retain critical staff may also delay more comprehensive civil service reform.
As part o f the first PRSC, the Government is reviewing the role and cost o f the various
agencies to identify and mitigate contingent liabilities. The scope and role o f such
institutions are part o f the sector dialogue aimed at paving the way to streamlined and more
effective public institutions. Another reform priority i s to strengthen the rule o f law by
raising citizen awareness o f and access to the judicial system, particularly for the poor.
C. Growth and competitiveness

25,
Cape Verde has greatly benefited from economic liberalization and divestitures
undertaken during the past decade. Still, diminishing retums to these reforms are being
experienced and a new impetus i s needed, specifically in the areas described below. The
main theme i s that while Government has adopted the broad policy framework,
implementation in certain areas, especially when institutional building is needed, has been
slower than expected, for example in the area o f economic regulation. Recognizing this
issue, the Government has given it special attention since late 2003 and positive results are
now being achieved. Bank assistance will further contribute through analytical work, notably
the infrastructure and investment climate studies, as well as through the proposed and
ongoing investment operations.
26.
Completion of the divestiture program. Following important accomplishments
between 1991 and 1999 when most government-owned productive enterprises were divested,
there has been a slowdown in the implementation o f the divestiture program during the past
five years. M a i n divestiture actions which are now completed were related to the liquidation
o f EMPA (public trading enterprise - import/export) and TRANSCOR (municipal transport
enterprise) and related sector liberalization in the context o f the structural adjustment
program. Important divestitures still under way include EMPROFAC (pharmaceutical
enterprise), T A C V (Cape Verde Airlines) and ENAPOR (Cape Verde Islands Port
Authority). These enterprises affect the cost and quality o f transport services and contribute
to contingent fiscal liabilities. For example, large annual subsidies to TACV, up to about
US$10 million at times, are a contributing factor to government expenditures not being
reallocated to pro-poor expenditures. The Government recognizes these issues and i s well o n
the way to completing the divestiture program by end-2005.
Competitiveness of utilities.
The introduction o f private participation in all
27.
infrastructure sectors, except as noted below in transport, has yielded positive results in terms
o f private investments and service delivery. Since privatization, teledensity (fixed and
mobile) has increased to over 250 per thousand inhabitants, a level similar to that o f East
Asia. Also, following investments o f about US$lOO million by E L E C T R A (electricity and
water enterprise), electricity and water supply has expanded, the number o f customers
increased by 50 percent between 1999 and 2002, and power cuts are less frequent. However,
partly reflecting the small and segmented domestic market, the costs o f these services are

- 10quite high: electricity tariff and the cost o f an international call to the U.S. are respectively
about 20 percent and three times higher than in Senegal. Enterprises operating in the energy,
water and telecommunications sectors benefit in practice from a legal monopoly that
contributes to high costs, discourages efficiency, competition and diversification o f services
such as information technology. The inefficiency o f ELECTRA was reflected in high
technical losses during the period 2000-2002 (18 percent for electricity and 25 percent for
water), exacerbated by collection problems. Uncompetitive infrastructure thus constrains
economic growth. Also, the rural poor face access problems that hinder attainment o f social
objectives (as demonstrated in Latin America). To address these issues, the Government
intends to encourage investments, through public-private partnerships, that would enhance
competitiveness, reduce costs and increase competition by encouraging entry o f new
operators (notably in the telecoms sector). This may also lead to the introduction o f private
management in several o f the islands (such as Fog0 and Brava) where municipalities s t i l l
control the water distribution.
The State is withdrawing from the transport sector. The public sector is involved in
28.
many aspects o f the transport sector, which is viewed as a strategic sector in light o f Cape
Verde’s location and population dispersion. Government owns maritime and air transport,
and port and airport services, and will continue to maintain and expand the road network,
especially to rural zones. The circumstances o f Cape Verde explain this situation. The
introduction o f the private sector in port operations would still yield a private sector
monopoly that would need to be regulated. Where competition i s more easily attainable,
transport services are predominantly in private hands in urban and inter-urban road transport,
long haul maritime transport, and largely in inter-island maritime transport.

29.
Private sector involvement i s thus seen as a key to relieving an over-extended
Government that would increasingly play the role o f regulator and facilitator, and tackle
remaining sector issues. The Government recognizes the need for faster progress in
implementing port reforms. TACV has experienced a number o f loss-making years, and
substantial contingent liabilities have tended to materialize periodically. Finally, the airports
are managed autonomously, but the five-year delay in the opening o f the new Praia airport
has been an issue, exacerbated by a large investment remaining idle. Beyond its fiscal
impact, the transport sector i s a key element o f the domestic value chain that needs to be
operated competitively and efficiently to support economic activities. N e w investments are
needed and private participation in the sector i s needed to complement public resources. The
Government i s aware o f the problems that have delayed changes in the past and intends to
implement a comprehensive sector reform strategy and to encourage public-private
partnerships in the sector. In this context, the institutional and funding mechanism for roads
maintenance and i t s financing is being addressed through the reform in 2005 o f the existing
roads fund.
30.
Adequate economic regulation capacity i s needed. There have been delays in setting
up an appropriate regulatory mechanism, despite considerable efforts over six years. This i s
partly due to politicization o f the process and partly due to indecision o n the appropriate
institutional arrangements. These delays are partly responsible for tariff-setting problems
encountered in the infrastructure sector. They also contribute to multiplication o f institutions
that hamper fiscal sustainability. The establishment in 2004 o f the Economic Regulatory
Agency (ERA) i s the first step towards addressing this need. ERA i s becoming operational
and has already made its first decision pertaining to the transport sector. Capacity

- 11 enhancement i s under way and, later on, a consolidation o f institutional responsibilities i s
expected. This measure would help eliminate overlapping mandates across sectors and
between technical and economic regulators, and would encourage efficiency.
3 1.
Trade Policy reform should continue. Reforms implemented in early-2004 have
improved the tariff structure and shifted revenue instruments to VAT and excise taxes.
Tariffs still remain high by intemational standards (7 bands between 0 and 50 percent) and
contribute to anti-export bias. In the letter o f development policy o f the 2001 Structural
Adjustment Credit (SAC), the Government indicated that fbrther tariff reforms would be
considered during the next few years (entailing 3-4 bands between 0 and 20-25 percent).
Otherwise, there are few remaining quantitative restrictions, even though for some products
competition may be limited by high market concentration. The reductiodelimination o f
administrative barriers may alleviate such problems. Further trade liberalization during the
remainder o f the decade is expected to take place in the context o f Cape Verde’s ongoing
accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO).
32.
The investment climate as the facilitator of private initiative. The Government has
recently initiated reform o f corporate taxation and administrative barriers, and has given
emphasis to judicial strengthening in order to ensure an even playing field that will stimulate
private investment. Tax reforms include reduction o f the marginal effective tax rates for
enterprises, rationalization o f the system and reduction o f exemptions. Administrative
barriers are excessive: it takes between 96 and 200 days to open an enterprise in Cape Verde.
In 2005, through IDA funding, the registries will be electronically linked throughout the
islands and businesses should be able to be registered with 48 hours, assuming all documents
are in order. Expected reforms would improve the interface between the private and public
sector, reduce delays and transaction costs and contribute to improved supply chains. The
thrust o f judicial strengthening i s to implement a legal and institutional framework that
strengthens property rights, and facilitates rapid and fair dispute resolution.

33.
Functioning of labor markets. Unions are strong in the public sector and parastatals,
particularly in transport and utilities. While this has not prevented divestiture o f these
sectors, i t has led to situation where compensation to retrenched workers has been well above
the minimum required by law. Public sector unions have been a responsible partner and have
agreed to a social compact with Government that has contributed to social stability at times
o f austerity. Labor regulations reflect a legacy o f past policies, and may have contributed to
high official unemployment rates o f about 25 percent. The high severance pay regulations,
which call for payment o f one month or more with every year o f work, increase employment
costs and hinder the functioning o f the labor market. Changes in employment are hampered
by the limited portability o f pension benefits. Finally, the legislation defining the modalities
o f employment relations needs to be updated. Labor issues limit growth, constrain the
development o f export-oriented activities, and contribute to inequality. The Government i s
aware o f these problems and has drafted a comprehensive labor code, already presented to
and discussed with the private sector. This code would facilitate labor mobility and ensure a
closer relationship between compensation and labor productivity.
Financial sector development in support of economic activities. The banking sector
34.
is fairly modem and, in view o f l o w non-performing loans, does not appear to face
significant systemic risk. Financial deepening i s taking place and a modem payments system
i s being implemented. Envisioned pension reform should contribute to the mobilization o f

- 12term resources that can be recycled for investment financing, while at the same time reducing
fiscal contingent liabilities and strengthening the safety net for formal sector employees. The
sector issues s t i l l to be tackled include the high intermediation costs and under-developed
financial services, especially for SMEs.
35.
Combating money-laundering. Cape Verde has demonstrated determination in
combating money laundering by recently passing anti-money laundering legislation and
joining the Inter-African Group Against Money Laundering. With some support provided by
an ongoing IDA project, Cape Verde i s taking further steps to fully comply with international
standards, including enacting specific regulations, promoting an effective bank supervisory
system, and related capacity enhancement. Cape Verde i s also currently participating in a
project initiated by the Portuguese government, in collaboration with the World Bank, aimed
at providing further assistance in this area to Portuguese-speaking countries.

36.
Rural Development. Less than 10 percent o f the land is suitable for agricultural use
and agricultural productivity is low. Farming i s mainly based o n smallholder farmers
cultivating less than 1.5 hectares o n average. About 40 percent o f rain fed arable land is
owned by farmers that cultivate it, and the poor have limited access to productive land. Only
7 percent o f cultivated lands are irrigated. Rural households do not produce enough food to
satisfy their consumption needs, and agricultural production contributes to about 15 percent
o f Cape Verde’s food needs. L o w aquifer reserves and erratic rainfall constitute limiting
factors. The mountainous geography also causes water run-off and soil erosion. While urban
areas rely o n desalinization plants, rural areas have limited water harvesting and stocking
infrastructure. Constrained access to quality education further reduces alternative
employment opportunities for the rural poor. The rural population has been supported by
labor-intensive public works schemes, which may have created welfare-dependency while
building limited skills. Improving revenues in the rural areas would require both farm and
non-farm activities.

37.
The Government i s aware that over-investment in rural activities i s a risk and intends
to stimulate viable rural activities where this can be done in a manner that i s sustainable and
affordable for the budget. Priorities include developing smallholder production systems
resilient to shocks (irrigated agriculture) and oriented towards high added-value/competitive
products. This would be achieved through increased reliance o n water-efficient irrigation
technology, particularly on a small-scale basis. Agricultural techniques would include
measures to mitigate soil degradation and improve water resource management.
Furthermore, efforts would also concentrate o n non- farm activities. Small-scale fishing and
related downstream activities show some potential. Other non-agriculture-related activities
may include cottage industries (wood carving, pottery making, weaving) and tourism and
eco-tourism services. Finally, improved land tenure would contribute improved access to
credit and rural development. The Bank does not have substantial past involvement in rural
development in Cape Verde and has limited knowledge o f the rural sector. The CAS calls
for a Rural Development Assessment (RDA). This study would underpin future investment
in the rural sector and help leverage a collaboration with other donors, notably FAD.
38.
Environmentally Sustainable Growth. The perception o f mounting natural resource
challenges prompted Government to undertake an Environmental Action Plan (PANA-I) in
1994, which was updated in 2004. PANA-I1provides a strategic orientation for the rational
use o f natural resources and the sustainable management o f economic activities. I t s basic

-13premise i s that the sustainable use o f resources and environmental protection are central to
poverty reduction through the safeguard o f environmental assets, improved food security,
and employment opportunities. The Plan i s comprehensive and i s the result o f broad
consultations. It emphasizes sectoral linkages and management o f the environment at the
municipal level and identifies three main environmental issues that match the M D G s in the
areas o f (i)
water supply; (ii)
sanitation, (iii)
marine and terrestrial biodiversity.
Implementation o f the Plan will be overseen by the Department o f the Environment, which
was established in 2002 within the Ministry o f Environment, Agriculture and Fisheries. A
broad array o f donors supports the Plan. Major Bank involvement in this area i s not
anticipated, even though the proposed RDA study would cover fisheries and i s expected to
lead to a GEF grant in FY07.
D. H u m a n capital development and social protection
Expenditure programs in favor of the poor need to be expanded. The 2004 PER
39.
notes that since 2000, education and health account for about 30 percent o f public
expenditures, one o f the highest levels with respect to comparators, including East Asian
countries. Sustaining this ratio i s proving difficult in the face o f budget constraints,
especially as mandatory and other priority expenditures crowd out other programs. An
exacerbating factor is the increasing percentage o f primary school students that enroll in
secondary education and the rapidly growing demand for health services, especially as life
expectancy goes up. Both education and health services are facing demands that cannot
continue to be met under the existing budget constraints. Therefore, achieving social sector
objectives will take greater prioritizing and/or perhaps pursuing innovative ways to ensure
greater private sector participation. The Government i s aware o f the need to make these
programs more targeted towards the poor through cost-sharing by those with the ability to
pay. Furthermore, fiscal space is being created for complementary social protection
programs needed to alleviate the impact o f inequalities mentioned above.
Expansion in access to and improved quality of education i s central to long-term
40.
poverty reduction. The Government sees as a priority to deepen the improvement of
education quality, especially as most children complete primary education. There are two
to continue providing textbooks and
key priorities to be supported by the Government: (i)
teachers' guides; and (ii)
to reinforce and improve quality o f in-service teacher training.
Universal enrollment at the primary level has created a surge in demand for secondary
education. Enrollment figures in secondary increased three-fold from 16,000 students in
1994 to about 50,000 students in 2002-2003, a figure that is expected to grow to 70,000 by
2015. W h i l e the Government has instituted fees for secondary education, its unit costs are
more than 2.5 times those o f primary education. Expanding access to both pre-school and
tertiary education will fui-ther test the financial framework o f the sector. Revamping
professional training and the apprenticeship system has traditionally been seen as important
for providing opportunities o f fiu-ther education to a growing number o f students who only
completed primary education and do not have the skills needed to enter the j o b market.
However, the Government's vision also goes well beyond this limited objective and i s linked
to its ambition for Cape Verde to build a competitive economy for the twenty-first century.
To this effect, in the context o f its education reform strategy, the Government i s developing
an ambitious policy to support professional training as an additionaVcomplementary option
for secondary graduates and for graduates from lower secondary to be oriented towards high
schools with technical and professional streams.

- 144 1.

Non-communicable diseases are becoming more prevalent, claiming an increasing
share of the health care budget. Despite impressive strides, such as the eradication o f many

contagious diseases that undermine development on the African continent, including
containment o f AIDS and maintenance o f l o w prevalence rates around one percent, the
growing cost o f non-communicable diseases strains the financial sustainability o f the health
system. A s health indicators improve in Cape Verde, becoming comparable with those o f
middle-income countries, fiscal instability o f the system is the main sectoral issue. The
public sector health system faces serious financial difficulties, even though total Government
health spending in Cape Verde is generous and financing by donors i s the second highest per
capita in Africa. The main causes o f the financial problems are: (a) a growing deficit at the
I N P S (National Institute for Social Protection), which reached two percent o f GDP in 2002;
(b) a high and rapidly increasing rate o f expenditures o n pharmaceuticals; and (c) increases in
demand as incomes improve and the population ages. In 2002, total health expenditures were
approximately 4.5 percent o f GDP. Only 54 percent o f these expenditures were included in
the Government budget: private, out-of-pocket expenditures accounted for 18 percent and
INPS was 28 percent. The main challenges for the Government will be to develop a
sustainable health-financing framework, including expansion o f insurance coverage, and to
address inequities in access to services, including medicines for the poor. With respect to
health financing, it should be noted that sustainability issues have been identified regarding
the health fund that faces large accumulated debt. Work i s under way to quantify this
problem and implement solutions that would help restore the system’s financial equilibrium.
However, i t is likely that the related financial restructuring will impose additional temporary
demands o n the budget.
Creating a sustainable social protection system. A further challenge will be to
42.
reduce vulnerability and social exclusion, particularly among those least able to avoid or
cope with shocks. The long-term covariate risk o f drought (when there i s a drought, all the
islands tend to be hit so that there i s little room for spreading the losses by having people
diversify their income sources to other economic activities) has led generations o f Cape
Verdeans to mitigate risks through labor migrations. The remaining rural population has
been supported by labor-intensive public works schemes (FAIMO - Frente de Aka
Intensidade de Mi0 de Obra). Over time, the system generated a welfare-dependency;
wages were low; no real skills were accuqulated; and there was little monitoring and
evaluation o f the quality and impact o f the infrastructure created. Management o f
idiosyncratic risks to health, livelihood, and access to services by vulnerable groups-such as
the elderly, children and youth at risk, and single mothers-is currently addressed through a
patchwork o f social assistance programs carried out through both public and NGO providers,
with little overall coordination o f the quality, targeting or impact o f these services. In terms
o f formal social security systems, the aging ex-FAIMO workforce and targeted groups have
access to small pensions through non-contributory schemes, and formal sector workers and
civil servants through contributory schemes. Coverage i s limited and targeting o f the noncontributory schemes needs improvement. Current pensioners with state or private pensions
enjoy generous entitlements, but both schemes require changes to make them sustainable
instruments to manage the risks associated with aging, particularly given Cape Verde’s
demographic evolution.

43.
Mainstreaming gender issues. Gender issues are mainstreamed in the GPRSP and
reflected in the results framework o f the C A S and PRSCs. Gender disaggregated
performance indicators and those for priority interventions will be tracked in all relevant

-15sectors. By the end o f the GPRSP period, the Government expects to have attained the
following monitorable outcomes: (a) in education, gender parity achieved in primary
education will be extended to the secondary level; (b) in health, access o f poor women to
health services and specifically the presence o f trained staff, including midwives in poor
districts, will be increased; (c) in social protection, the number o f women benefiting from
decentralized social services, and o f poor women receiving social pensions and support for
essential medicines will be increased; and (d) within justice, women will have benefited from
community-based programs on knowledge o f law, and from judicial aid and alternative
disputes resolution mechanisms.

E. GPRSP Priorities and supporting basis
44.
For each of its pillars, the GPRSP provides a cost estimate (above current
allocations) over the next three years. The cumulative overall amount i s about US$460
million o f which 4 percent i s allocated to governance, 15 percent to Private Sector
Development (PSD), 20 percent to the social sectors, 51 percent to infrastructure, and 14
percent to social protection. The high allocation to the infrastructure sector reflects i t s
prominence in the GPRSP, even though the Government i s aware o f the risk o f crowding out
other expenditures should (a) some o f the expected funding fail to materialize, or
(b)resulting recurrent costs impose an unsustainable burden o n the budget. The risk
mitigation strategy includes reliance on the private sector to make and maintain a portion o f
investments needed and prioritization o f programs so that only those with highest priority are
funded within any given resource constraint. The remaining pillars will therefore benefit
from other resource flows. At about 7.5 percent o f GDP per year, the complete financing o f
the priority expenditures in the other pillars seems ambitious, but realistic.
45.
The growth projections of the GPRSP are relatively optimistic and higher than those
o f the IMF PRGF-supported program (6.5 percent real annual growth versus 5 percent), but
their underpinnings are clear and realistic: inflation projected at two percent (in line with
Euro zone projections and consistent with the fixed exchange rate regime). Growth would
come from higher domestic investment levels through the GPRSP period (at 23 percent, 3
percent above the PRGF-supported program). I t should be noted that the CAS includes a
more conservative GDP growth target o f at least two percent per capita, which is the
minimum required to sustain poverty reduction o f about one percentage point per annum. In
the projections, public investment is expected to increase by 1.6 percent o f GDP to 7.1
percent. Private investment including foreign direct investment i s projected to rise from 14.7
percent o f GDP in 2004 to 16.0 percent. In the longer term, investment-driven growth should
gradually make way for export-driven growth. Exports o f goods and non-factor services
(GNFS) should gradually increase to more than 38 percent o f GDP, up from the current
figure o f 30 percent. Throughout, fiscal discipline will underpin private sector confidence.
The deficit (after grants) i s expected to reach n o more than 4.8 percent o f GDP, it being
understood that some o f the programmed expenditures would occur only if external financing
materializes. T o achieve full financing will require successful mobilization o f internal and
external resources, as well as a refocusing o f domestic expenditures towards priority
programs. The GPRSP funding gap i s estimated at at least US$60 m i l l i o n per annum.
Annex 3 summarizes the financing needs for each pillar. Relevant analysis shows that debt
service can be sustained in the medium to long term.
Monitoring and evaluation of the GPRSP i s a key instrument. The GPRSP’s
46.
implementation will be carried out through an integrated institutional framework, on the

- 16basis o f a comprehensive set o f 37 core indicators. A GPRSP Coordinating Commission,
comprised o f representatives fkom ministries, municipal governments, the Central Bank, the
National Statistics Institute (NE), the private sector and NGOs, will oversee this. Mayors
head consultative commissions at the decentralized level. The Technical Secretariat to
Support Development (TSSD) under the General Direction o f Planning has day-to-day
responsibilities to provide technical guidance, monitor program performance including
reporting on the core set o f indicators, and inform internal and external partners o f progress,
This framework will also be relied on to monitor CAS indicators.
The GPRSP’s strategic framework is appropriate. The GPRSP was developed
47.
through a broad, participatory process under the guidance o f a Steering Committee supported
in i t s activities by the TSSD. The GPRSP has a matrix approach o f pillars in strategic areas
and cross-cutting policies (macroeconomic stability, decentralization, employment policy,
etc.), which results in a comprehensive view o f poverty reduction. Two shortcomings are
that the status o f TSSD remains undetermined and that the Secretariat will require capacity
enhancement. Both issues are being addressed by Government, with the support o f donors.

48.
Debt Sustainability. Concessional lending will continue in the foreseeable fbture
under the “small island rule” that allows higher GNP per capita thresholds for graduation to
IBRD. A review o f debt levels indicates that debt sustainability i s not an issue at present,
and is unlikely to become one in the future. Specifically, following the negotiated reduction
o f bilateral debt, the ratio o f external public debt service to exports has been declining from
29.2 percent in 2001 to 10.6 percent in 2003, which points to the sustainability o f Cape
Verde’s external position over the medium term.

IV. BANKEXPERIENCEUNDER
THE PREVIOUSCAS
49.
The bulk o f Bank’s lending occurred after 1992. As o f January 10,2005, IDA had
extended 21 credits to Cape Verde, amounting to about US$198 million equivalent, o f which
US$174 million has been disbursed. Sixteen credits have closed, and the current portfolio
includes four projects (five credits), amounting to US$58.1 million, o f which about US$25
million remains undisbursed. In recent years, lending to Cape Verde has averaged about
US$15 million per year, peaking at about US$30 million in 1997.

50.
The CAS has provided a useful framework to guide Bank support. The last CAS
for Cape Verde was presented to the Board in December 1997. I t covered the period FY9800. A CAS update, covering FY01-02, was presented to the Board in August 2001. The
goal o f the CAS was to support macroeconomic management and debt reduction, private
sector development, human resource development, and poverty reduction. Six credits were
extended during the 1997 CAS period, which i s broadly in line with the high-case scenario.
The CAS update maintained the same objectives and envisaged additional lending through
three operations, all o f which were approved by the Board. One o f the three operations, the
Structural Adjustment Credit - prepared in four months in response to Government’s request
for World Bank assistance in the face o f the balance o f payments and fiscal crisis
experienced in 2001 - was key in staving o f f significant macroeconomic difficulties.
According to a recent OED assessment, this operation exceeded i t s objectives with respect to
key policy reforms. T w o supplemental credits o f US$4 million each and a Growth and
Competitiveness Project were also prepared during 2002-2003.

- 175 1.
Historically, the performance of the portfolio has been satisfactory and
Government has been effective in addressing emerging issues. Since the previous CAS
and i t s update, the Government has demonstrated i t s ability to manage a larger portfolio o f
projects. Up to now, all Bank projects in Cape Verde have closed with a rating o f
satisfactory or better. However, two important projects (Privatization and Regulatory
Capacity Building; and Energy and Water) were downgraded to unsatisfactory during FY04;
so was another project (Social Sector Development) in October 2004. The problems
experienced under the first two projects were attributable to a number o f unresolved
infrastructure issues, including delays in divestiture, lack o f adequate regulatory capacity and
policy indecision. These issues are being addressed. The privatization project experienced a
significant turnaround and development objectives were expected to b e largely met by
closing in December 2004. Exceptionally, the Energy and Water Project i s being extended
for two years to allow for the completion o f k e y works and resolution o f contractual issues
with the private partners. Finally, with regard to the Social Sector Development Project,
Government has implemented the actions agreed with the Bank and a satisfactory outcome
appears more likely.

52.
Experience i s encouraging. As discussed above, in spite o f recent difficulties
reflected in the downgrading during 2004 o f three projects to unsatisfactory, the majority o f
activities have been successfully undertaken and have been sustainable. Implementation
challenges, which included high turnover o f staff, procurement at the local level, and
weaknesses in accounting procedures, have been overcome. The Government has given
priority to a progressive elimination o f Project Implementation Units (PIUs) and the
mainstreaming of project implementation. This is being achieved through PIU consolidation
and by projects being implemented by existing institutions (by the end o f the FY05-08 CAS
period, there will be at most one PIU in operation). In the short term, implementation
capacity problems have been addressed through training and/or hiring o f experts in
procurement, financial management, etc. Strong stakeholders’ ownership and their increased
involvement in project implementation, as well as an effective partnership between
Government and IDA, have been keys to success. Further evidence o f this i s provided in the
case o f the Privatization and Regulatory Capacity Building Project, where an ineffective
participatory process in the form o f a non-functioning steering committee was partly
responsible for delays in implementation. Lessons learned are being integrated in ongoing
and planned investment lending, and this approach seems to be paying off: the HIV/AIDS
Project has been upgraded to highly satisfactory and some components o f the Growth and
Competitiveness Project are also rated as highly satisfactory.
53.
Lessons from the last CAS and the CAS update. The CAS update points to
important achievements under the 1997 CAS. Infrastructure was constructed, and policy
reform and divestitures in key enterprises were completed. Implementation challenges,
which included high turnover o f staff, procurement at local level, and good accounting, were
successfully overcome. Strong stakeholder ownership and good relationship with the Bank
were additional elements in the success. The shortcomings noted included the problems in
1999 and 2000 with public expenditure management, some unresolved domestic debt issues,
and delays in divestitures. A contributing factor may have been that analytical work to
address key issues briefly declined during the late 1990s, as a result o f a temporary drop in
Economic and Sector Work (ESW). Another issue related to insufficient participation o f
stakeholders in oversight o f some projects was reflected in ineffective steering committees (a
few did not meet over long periods).

- 1854.
Good results can be achieved once risks and policy issues are addressed.
Excellent performance, notably under the SAC, has been partly undermined by slow progress
in the infrastructure reform agenda, especially in the area o f regulation and improved
competition policies. These risks will be mainly addressed through dialogue under the
Growth and Competitiveness operation. Another example o f transitional problems affecting
results i s the Government’s decision to consolidate PIUs. The decision was implemented in
2003, whereby actions were taken to rationalize j o b descriptions and salary structures for
consistency among PIUS. In some cases, the salaries increased, but in most, they decreased.
The use o f the same PIU by two or three projects led to the achievement o f economies o f
scale, increased synergies, and lowered administrative costs. In isolated cases, the salary
reductions may have exacerbated staff turnover, affected morale and undermined
implementation - for example in the case o f the Social Sector Development Project. The
integration of the execution o f future projects within existing structures will eliminate some
problems, but could result in conflicting priorities and inadequate capacity. These problems
could be addressed through appropriate training and reliance o n short-term experts.
55.
Non-lending services increased. Another recent achievement i s the increased
delivery since 2001 of important ESW envisaged in the SAC. These include a Public
Expenditure Review (PER, FY04), a Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA,
FY03), a Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR, FY04), a poverty assessment
(FY04) and a Development Policy Review (DPR, FY05). These studies have been important
inputs into the policy dialogue and have facilitated future programmatic lending. The study
on the Role o f the State (FY04) provided underpinning to the proposed civil service reform
and local community empowerment under the proposed PRSC. Other E S W not envisaged in
the CAS and i t s update, but prepared because i t responded to an important gap in knowledge,
include two Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) reports o n administrative barriers
and taxation, as well as informal reports o n economic regulation and pensions. Reflecting
the “demand-driven” nature o f these reports, they benefited ofim cofinancing o f consultants
either by donors or Government (through IDA Credits).

v.

WORLD BANKGROUPASSISTANCE
STRATEGY

A. The World Bank Group’s results-based assistance strategy
The proposed CAS is aligned with the GPRSP. The thrust o f the Bank’s future
56.
program i s to assist Cape Verde in implementing i t s Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy,
and the proposed CAS i s aligned with the GPRSP pillars. In view o f the need to sustain
poverty reduction while addressing relatively high inequity, the Bank’s strategy i s articulated
around three objectives that constitute the CAS pillars:
(a) ensuring macroeconomic stability and sound public finance and budget systems;

(b) supporting private-sector-led growth through an enhanced investment climate and
increased competitiveness through public-private partnerships in infrastructure; and
(c) implementing social programs aimed at alleviating poverty and inequity.
The strategy cuts across and contributes to the GPRSP by focusing o n areas where the
57.
Bank has a comparative advantage. A s selectivity i s needed to maximize the impact o f
limited IDA resources, interventions are proposed in areas that are likely to generate the

- 19strongest results. The CAS calls for a significant shift towards programmatic lending,
complemented by a multi-sectoral investment operation, to the extent possible every two
years. Contributing to the harmonization agenda, Bank group support aims to catalyze other
donors and build partnerships.
58.
Achieving greater development effectiveness. This i s to be attained through
emphasis on growth and poverty, and consolidating projects so that they encompass multiple
complementary objectives, such as macroeconomic stability, fiscal reform, sector reform and
capacity enhancement. The CAS i s flexible in terms o f i t s proposed interventions. The fouryear horizon (FY05-08) will also provide stakeholders greater certainty over the scope and
timing o f IDA support. As detailed below, results-orientation i s the most important feature
o f the present CAS.

59.
Through the assistance described in this CAS, the Bank will: (a) develop better
dialogue with all stakeholders; (b) use ESW to stimulate policy dialogue and support lending;
(c) establish better linkages between implementation and G P R S P M D G results; and (d) build
human capital through lending and advisory services. Table 3 summarizes a framework for
monitoring progress towards intended results and ensures better alignment o f proposed and
ongoing programs. Annex 1 provides additional details related to the results framework.
Contributions to CASpillars. IDA supports the achievement o f the GPRSP goals
60.
through its existing lending portfolio, the planned CAS program o f lending, advisory
services, and capacity enhancement for monitoring and evaluation. IDA’S assistance
strategy, including ongoing and proposed lending, aligns with the GPRSP priorities as per
Table 3 (next page). The CAS pillars are as follows:

>
0

0

>
0

7

CAS Pillar I - ensuring macroeconomic stability and sound public finance and
budget systems:
The proposed PRSCs would be the main vehicle for supporting improved budgeting
and budget systems, focusing o n the areas o f public expenditure management, civil
service reform, decentralization, and judicial reform; and
The ongoing Growth and Competitiveness Project (US$1 1.5 million, FY03)7 supports
the development o f an appropriate investment climate through simplified Government
procedures.
CAS Pillar 2 - supporting private-sector-led growth through an enhanced investment
climate and increased competitiveness through public-private partnerships in
infrastructure:
The ongoing Growth and Competitiveness Project seeks to broaden the base o f
private participation in Cape Verde’s economic growth, enhance private sector
competitiveness, further develop its financial sector and strengthen legal systems;

Credit 3755-CV closes on February 28,2008.

- 20 Table 3: CAS results-based framework
Strategic and longer term
/Higher order country
outcomes
Maintain a stable
macroeconomic framework
o f 2 percent per capita GDP
growth
Improve budget systems
Ensure adequate public
expenditures allocation and
control

I

Reduce over-extended
Govemment
Improve investment
climate

Macro stability
Debt sustainability maintained

Pillars 1 t o 5

P E M more transparent, and oversight institutions empowered

Pillar 1

Public expenditures allocated and used according to GPRSP pnorities
Municipalities function in clanfied framework matched by adapted resources

Pillars 1, 3
and 5

Improved ability t o manage public sector reform across institutions
Framework to manage and train civil servants better adapted t o modem
administration

Maintain an efficient,
effective and accountable
public sector
Improve knowledge and
access to legal and judicial
system

CAS link
to GPRSP
Priorities

CAS Outcome(s) during 4-year Period

I
1

Improved adherence and knowledge o f the law among l a w communities
Increased free access to justice system by the poor
Improved supply o f professional mechanisms such as mediators

CAS Pillar Two: Growth and Competitiveness
Divestiture program to be completed by end-2005 and increase in publicpnvate partnerships
Transaction costs are reduced and contnbute to improved supply chains
Property nghts are strengthened and legal framework facilitates rapid and fair
dispute resolution

Pillar 1

1I

Pillars 1
and5

I Pillars 2
and 4

Pillars 2
and 4

Maintain adequate
economic regulation capacity

Adequate functioning o f Economic Regulatory Agency (ERA)

Pillars 2
and 4

Improve functioning o f
labor markets

Comprehensive labor code in place

Pillars 2
and 4

Enhance competitiveness
o f infrastructure

Investments to enhance competitiveness and reduce costs

Pillars 2
and 4

Improve growth potential
o f rural sector
Encourage environment
sustainable growth

Smallholder production systems and non-farm activities are developed,
including small-scale fishing, cottage industries and inputs t o tourism sector
Adequate implementation o f Environmental Action Plan

education and improve
quality o f educational
opportunities

Improved quality and efficiency o f education
Expanded and diversified general and technical secondary education and
professional training service delivery
Consolidated and restructured tertiary education sector

Develop a sustainable
health-financing framework
and address inequities in
access to services

Improved sustainabihty, access and quality o f health services
M o r e efficient health services
Improved coverage o f p n o n t y health programs Integrated Management o f
Childhood Illness (IMCI)
Population more knowledgeable and with healthier behaviors

Reduce vulnerability and
social exclusion, particularly
among those least able to
avoid or cope with shocks
and continued reduction in
poverty by about one
percentage point per year

Improved ability t o plan and monitor social assistance services
Improved access by the poor t o education, health and nutrition services
Expanded coverage and better targeting o f the non-contributory pensions
schemes
Improved outreach and coverage o f children at extreme risk
Better prevention and management o f food crises

Pillars 2
and 4
Pillar 4

Pillar 3

I

- 21 0

0

0

0

0

9
0

0

0

The ongoing Social Sector Development Project (US$20.1 million, FY99)8 has been
one o f the Government's central programs in the re-conversion o f F A I M O public
works programs by promoting economically and socially usefbl works executed costeffectively by the private sector, and including support to small-scale entrepreneurs to
enable them to carry out some o f the works;
The proposed Road Sector Support Project (FY06, USSl5 million equivalent) would
support Cape Verde's objective to improve i t s multi-modal transport network. In
particular, it would improve communities' links to the main intra- and inter-island
networks, fill critical network gaps and provide support to institutional reform and
capacity enhancement in the sector;
The ongoing Energy and Water Sector Reform and Development Projectg (US$17.5
million, FY99) aims to (i)
improve the supply o f power, water and sanitation systems,
(ii)
increase the operational and end-use efficiency in the power and water sectors,
(iii)
lessen the barriers to the development o f renewable energy sources, and
(iv) foster the sound management o f water resources;
The proposed Multi-sector Private Infrastructure Project (MPIP, FY07, US$5 million
equivalent) would support infrastructure associated with rural development and
tourism, as well as utilities and transport; and
The proposed GEF grant (FY07, US$5 million) would improve fisheries and
environmental and coastal management.
CAS PiZZar 3
inequity:

-

Implementing social programs aimed at alleviating poverty and

The proposed PRSC series would provide programmatic support for education and
health policy reforms in line with GPRSP objectives, and would support
improvements in the coverage, targeting, effectiveness and financial sustainability o f
the social protection system, including social pensions, social assistance, community
development, targeted programs to increase access to social services, and
management o f food crises;
The ongoing HIV/AIDS Project", and its proposed follow-up under the high case,
supports the goal o f the national strategy to reduce the spread o f HIV infection in the
country; and
The ongoing Social Sector Development Project has built a significant number o f
basic social service facilities, including classrooms, rural health posts, community
centers and day care facilities in order to expand access in the poorest communities.

* Credit 32240-CV o f US$16.1 million and Credit 32241-CV o f US$4.0 (supplemental) are scheduled
to close on March 31,2005.
Credit 3205-CV closes on December 3 1, 2006.
lo
Credit 3629-CV closes on December 3 1,2006.

- 22 I t also strengthens municipalities and local associations’

community development targeted to vulnerable groups.

ability to engage in

B. World Bank Group country program and vehicle for assistance

6 1.
The CAS has built upon the participatory process of the GPRSP. The CAS builds
on the broad in-country consultations on the GPRSP. Throughout its preparation, the key
proposed IDA lending instrument, the PRSC, has been discussed extensively with
representatives o f the Government and local communities, the civil society, the private
sector, NGOs, unions and donors. Finally, discussions were held during the week o f
December 6, 2004 with all main stakeholders, including key Government counterparts,
NGOs, civil society and private sector representatives, and donors. The exchanges focused
on the strategic partnership matrix, the CAS lending and advisory programs, the triggers for
IDA assistance, and the expected results framework. The CAS was generally well received
and supported by stakeholders. The present document reflects feedback received.
Strategic considerations, aid effectiveness, harmonization and selectivity are key
62.
elements of the CASprogram. An increase in IDA and donor aid effectiveness i s to be
achieved through the progressive consolidation o f the portfolio into three or four operations
by the end o f the CAS period and through better harmonization. Lending and advisory
services are intended to avoid duplicating the efforts o f other development partners. This
includes traditional donors, such as the European Union (EU) and Dutch cooperation, as well
as newer ones, such as the Global Fund for HIV/AIDS and the Millennium Challenge
Corporation, which i s expected to be a key cofinancing partner in infrastructure. In the case
o f the PRSC, the donor harmonization agenda is being advanced through a memorandum o f
understanding on budget support developed with Dutch aid and the EU. Finally, the Bank
will continue to work closely with the IMF to support the Government’s efforts to strengthen
public finance management. In a number o f areas where the mandates o f the two institutions
overlap, the work i s being coordinated to ensure that consistent advice i s provided to the
authorities. The goal o f advisory services i s to define appropriate public interventions for
growth and poverty reduction, and to provide a forum for stakeholders to discuss specific
policy and reform issues. In this context, the Government o f Cape Verde has requested, from
a Bank-administered trust fund, financing o f advisory services related to output-based aid.
This i s expected to be approved during FY05.
New World Bank procedures will provide greater lending flexibility. The country
63.
financing parameters for Cape Verde are set out in Annex 4 (with supporting analysis).
There will be opportunities for investment projects to be designed using these parameters and
to take advantage o f increased flexibility under the Bank’s new expenditure eligibility policy.

64.
Rationalization of IDA lending and rapid transition to budget support are key
features of the CAS. The Government has requested a significant shift away from
investment lending towards programmatic lending based o n the GPRSP. Government and
donor ongoing support to institutional capacity enhancement in Cape Verde makes this
possible. The four-year base-case lending program o f US$50 million and a proposed GEF
grant o f US$5 million includes an IDA Roads scale-up operation originally programmed for
FY05. Sixty percent o f the proposed lending will be in the form o f budget support through a
series o f PRSCs. The rest will support the development o f private and rural sectors, and
infrastructure programs. Table 4 summarizes the CAS lending scenarios. The lending

- 23 scenario has been developed at a time when the amount o f IDA 14 replenishment has not yet
been fully known. Should the IDA resources allocated to Cape Verde during FY06-08
exceed the envelope assumed in the CAS, the Credit amounts for PRSC2 and 3 and the MPP
project would be adjusted accordingly.
Table 4: CAS Lending Scenarios - US$ Million

NO5
Programmatic

FY06

FY07

PRSCl (USrS15.0)
PRSC2 (USrS7.5)

PRSC3 (USrS7.5)
PRSC3 (USrS5.0) gl

Investment

Base

High

FY08

Roads (US$lS.O) bl

PRSC4 (USrS9.0)

MPIP (USrS5.0)
Fisheries (US$5.0 GEF)
HIV/AIDS2 (USrS5.0)
MPIP (USrS5.O)d

-a1 In the high case, the credit amount would be in addition to the base case.

I

bl Project will be ready in FY05 and presented in FY06 if IDA resources are not available before June 2005.

65.
In view o f Cape Verde’s long and good track record, the low-case lending scenario i s
considered very unlikely. The low-case scenario would materialize primarily if there were
serious macroeconomic slippages, which in any event would delay future PRSCs. The FY05
lending scenario assumes that the PRSCl will be fully funded under the l o w case. The
proposed PRSC would allow IDA to consolidate i t s lending operations and engage in policy
and technical dialogue in three GPRSP pillars. This choice o f pillars matches IDA’S
comparative advantage and division o f labor with investment projects in the portfolio, and
reflects selectivity with other donor support. The objectives o f the proposed PRSC series are
to: (a) support the policies and reforms set forth in the Government’s GPRSP in order to
achieve sustained improvements in the well-being o f the population; (b) develop an improved
form o f external assistance that reduces distortions and transaction costs associated with
project-based aid and increases Government capacity to plan, execute and monitor i t s efforts
to address poverty; (c) harmonize donor support around the GPRSP, including alignment
with other multilateral and bilateral donors (EU, Dutch cooperation) involved in or planning
budget support operations; (d) provide predictable support to the budget cycle to consolidate
and smooth resource transfers, particularly important given its external vulnerabilities; and
(e) improve access to and quality o f key social services.

66.
Even though Cape Verde’s IDA lending in FY05 i s affected by shortages in IDA13
resources, the Roads Project - under preparation since F Y 0 4 as part o f the IDA infrastructure
scale-up program - remains in the base case, but with a scaled-down amount o f US$15
million (envisaged initially at US$25 million). Should this operation fail to materialize in
FY05 because of IDA resource constraints, i t would be delayed to FY06. The M P P would
aim to support public-private partnerships and private initiative, mainly in the areas o f

- 24 -

infrastructure (broadly defined),ruraldevelopment,andtourism.It
may include an IDA
and/or MIGA guarantee and wouldhelp leverage support from other partsof the World Bank
Group, notably IFC, as well as from the private sector and donors. The sequence of PRSCs
reflects the need to make a medium-term commitment to supporting the Government in areas
of public finance management, public administration and human development capital.
In
FY08 there would be a need on the Bank’s side to evaluate with its partners the programs
supported by three PRSCs and results achieved. A PRSC4 operation is planned in FY08
(US$9.0 million) in the high case. Should high-case triggers be met early on and additional
IDA resources be allocated to Cape Verde, it is possible that the MPIP would be topped up
by an additional US$5 million. If sufficient matching donor resources were found for the
PRSC, an alternative wouldbe to allocate any top-upresourcesunder the high case to
support growth and infrastructure development, including a possible supplemental credit to
complement the Growth and Competitiveness Project.
67.

The country assistance will be enhanced through Analytical and Advisory Activities

(AAA).Much of the analytical work has been front-loadedin FY06 so that it can contribute
to lending and policy dialogue planned for subsequent years. Advisory services, including
IDF grants, are expected to be in large part related to infrastructure, fisheries and economic
management (public service reform) as well as legal. and judicial capacity development.
Proposed ESW includes core diagnostics, annual PER updates, and general economic work
(to sustain the macroeconomic and sectoral dialogue). The following studies are planned
(see Annex 10):
FY05 - Infrastructure Regulation and Competitiveness Diagnostic Report (based on
REDI indicators).
FY06 - (i) Investment Climate Assessment (ICA), initiated
in FY05; (ii) Pension
Study based on work undertaken in the context of the Growth and Competitiveness
Project, and expanded to include
health care and other benefits.
FY06-07 - due to budget constraints, work will be initiated in FY06 and may be
completed in FY07 - (i) Review of Human Development, covering education, health
and social protection; and (ii) a Rural Development Assessment, including
an analysis
of the potential of non-farm activities, fisheries, land tenure and rural microfinance, to
be cofunded by the Fisheries Partnership Fund.
FY07 - Integrated CFAA/CPAR update assessing progress in implementing existing
fiduciary reform agenda anddefining next steps.
FY08 - (i) Poverty Assessment
update;
and
(ii)
Long-term
a
Growth
and
Competitiveness Study, which would provide inputs to the next cycle of GPRSPs
(initiated in FY07).
Furthermore, in the context of PRSC implementation support, the extended task team would
prepare short policy-orientednotesfor discussion with stakeholders.Thesenoteswould
provide the basis for further studies to be funded by Government and/or donors.
68.
Expected contributionsfrom otherparts of the World Bank Group. During the past
five years, Cape Verde has benefited from the support of different members of the Bank
Group. This support, which is expectedto continue over the CASperiod,includes

- 25 specialized advisory services from networks and centralized units o f the Bank, notably in the
area o f pension reform. I F C through FIAS has been an active participant and is expected to
continue advising on investment climate reform. Cape Verde’s investment promotion agency
was provided advisory services by MIGA, which may continue in the future. MIGA’s
guarantees are expected to support future PPPs (Public-Private Partnerships). WBI has been
supporting the development o f a social protection strategy. Cape Verdean regulators and
policy-makers have also benefited from participation in specialized training provided by the
Institute in Dakar. They would further benefit from knowledge management activities
targeting lusophone countries that might be organized out o f Praia. The Public-Private
Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) will also be called upon to further investigate
regulatory and infrastructure reform options. Finally, while the I F C has not yet been a major
player, i t s role should expand as new tourism, information technology and PPP investments
take place.
69.
CAS triggers and expected results. The main CAS triggers to maintain base-case
lending would include: (a) continued satisfactory macroeconomic performance (PRSC
trigger); (b) no more than one project with IDA commitment considered at risk (investment
lending trigger); (c) adequate budget allocation to GPRSP sectors; and (d) avoidance o f
accumulation o f new domestic arrears especially to suppliers and utilities beyond 0.2 percent
o f GDP. High-case triggers would include: (a) no part o f the portfolio considered at risk;
(b) substantial implementation o f priority actions o f the CFAA, including (i)
presentation to
Parliament o f the executed budget o f the previous year no later than six months after the end
o f the year, and (ii)
submission to Parliament o f the State’s general accounts for the period
2000-2003; (c) completion o f process to attract private partners in the transport sector,
specifically the airline and the port; and (d) improvement in the investment climate”, as
measured by the reduction by half o f the average time to establish an enterprise, using 2002
as a point o f reference.
In line with ensuring better alignment between objectives and results, this CAS
70.
includes an expected results framework containing select key indicators (Table 3 and
Annex 1). Reflecting expected additionality, the results will go beyond those expected under
ongoing or planned operations. The expected long-term results o f the CAS and the GPRSP
will be ultimately measured by general progress towards meeting MDGs, continued
reduction in poverty by about one percentage point per year, and an increase in the relative
share o f public spending that reaches the poor in various categories as measured through the
poverty assessment update (as a proxy for improved consumption inequality).
The continued support of development partners is essential. Cape Verde’s main
71.
instrument for overall donor coordination is the Round Table. The last Round Table took
place in April 2003, and was jointly supported by UNDP and the W o r l d Bank. In terms o f
donor coordination, the country’s long-term goals are to develop a country strategy results
framework and to foster harmonization o f donor operational policies and procedures with
national systems. The World Bank encourages Government efforts to sustain and increase
donor funding, and to this effect is collaborating with a number o f emerging donors (notably
directed to the Millennium Challenge Corporation). InAugust 2004, Cape Verde became the
first country to make a detailed request to the MCC. While indications are that the US$73
l1
This

trigger i s in line with the main conclusions o f the “Copenhagen Consensus.”

- 26 million or so currently requested would not be fully allocated to the country, it i s likely that
substantial sums would be made available for infrastructure and irrigation, some
complementing IDA operations. The Bank has further encouraged the mobilization o f
additional resources for Cape Verde by investigating with other donors the possibility o f
topping up ongoing and planned operations.
72.
Donors are expected to take the lead in the area o f environment. The Government o f
the Netherlands i s supporting the implementation o f the Environmental Action Plan through
a budget support program targeted at the environmental sector, covering support to
municipalities and legal and regulatory capacity enhancement. I t i s also funding, through the
World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), a project to conserve Cape Verde’s coral reefs and
more generally the country’s coastal and marine biodiversity. The EU is funding activities to
improve access o f the poorest segments o f the population to fresh water and sanitation,
particularly in urban and peri-urban areas where needs are most pressing. The African
Development Bank i s funding watershed management activities to reduce soil erosion and
increase infiltration o f rainwater. UNDP, with GEF support, i s helping to implement Cape
Verde’s National Biodiversity Strategy (1999) through the Integrated Participatory
Ecosystem Management Project. The proposed GEF grant would thus help complement
these donor activities.

73.
Continued capacity enhancement is key. Recognizing the importance o f capacity
enhancement in institutions responsible for GPRSP implementation, several donors have
either expressed interest or are already engaged in significant capacity-building efforts,
including WHO in developing sectoral approaches in health; the Government o f Portugal in
strengthening the national statistics system, among other areas; the EU in developing budget
planning mechanisms; the Dutch cooperation in implementing the C F M C P A R action
plans; the Canadian cooperation in supporting the development o f a MTEF; the French
Government in supporting decentralization and municipal strengthening; and IFAD, ADB
and U S A I D in strengthening local associations and community-driven development
approaches. Similarly, vulnerability o f its climate and rainfall cycles, limited fresh water
supplies, and reliance o n tourism as an engine o f development put sustainable use o f
resources and protection o f the environment as central to poverty reduction. As noted above,
the Government, with support from the Dutch cooperation and UNDP, has developed the
National Environmental Plan (2004-20 14) through a multi-sectoral planning process, which
is the main instrument for mitigating this critical risk.
VI. RESULTS-BASED
MONITORING
AND EVALUATION

74.
The CAS monitoring and evaluation system will be aligned with that o f the
GPRSP. The overall objective o f a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system for the
GPRSPKASPRSCs would be to ensure easy and timely access to relevant data in order to
monitor progress, evaluate the impact o f the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy, and
help define new orientations or make changes based o n analysis o f current data. The GPRSP
has provided an opportunity for Cape Verde to develop a national integrated approach to
monitoring and evaluation, control, statistics and information. Once h l l y implemented over
the next three years, this system would become a flagship for Africa. A detailed technical
implementation plan was validated by the Government o n December 15, 2004. This plan
provides for clear institutional responsibility for various aspects o f M&E. The main features

- 27 o f the system are integration o f budget and financial management systems with the technical
aspects o f program delivery, development o f an integrated technological platform, open
access for users to the main data warehouses, and the restructuring and strengthening o f
various Ministries. W h i l e ambitious, the system builds on existing applications and
platforms, which have been implemented by permanent teams in the Government. Needs in
technical assistance and sources o f financing have been identified, including support from the
Netherlands, EU, UNDP, the Government o f Portugal, and a possible GPRSP
Implementation Trust Fund through the World Bank.
The above system will be responsible for the monitoring and evaluation o f CAS
results. A detailed M&E action plan and indicators have been agreed with Government in
the context o f the PRSC and will be complemented from other sources, principally IDAfunded infrastructurePSD projects. The GPRSP provides an opportunity to introduce a
results-based M&E system that includes: (a) annual GPRSP progress reports; (b) periodic
reporting o n achievement o f MDGs (supported by UNDP); (c) overall annual budget
monitoring; (d) PERs; (e) annual sectoral budget execution and service delivery targets
prepared by line ministries; ( f ) periodic follow-up household surveys to track poverty and
access to services, carried out by the National Statistics Institute (JIVE); (g) stakeholder
surveys and qualitative monitoring o f Government performance and poverty impacts
contracted through the TSSD; (h) analysis o f fiduciary performance; and (i)
sectoral studies,
including those covering investment climate and infrastructure competitiveness indicators.
75.

VII. RISK MANAGEMENT

76.
There i s considerable overlap between CAS and GPRSP risks. The coverage o f
the CAS is less than that o f the GPRSP; and some o f i t s indicators, such as GDP growth, are
not as ambitious. Nevertheless, there i s full consistency between the two strategies and the
CAS shares many o f the risks facing the GPRSP. One such risk relates to the volatility o f
donor contributions compounded by inadequate donor coordination mechanisms. This r i s k
can be mitigated by a strong and visible political commitment to policy reform, even though
it i s possible that over time Cape Verde will no longer be eligible for certain forms o f
concessional lending.
77.
External shocks. Cape Verde is sensitive to external shocks, such as recessions in
Europe and the United States, rising international interest rates, private investors and
infrastructure operators becoming risk averse to further expansion into emerging markets,
worldwide insecurity and o i l shocks, and reduced donor support. Recent studies suggest that
these risks have been greatest since the end o f the cold war, and the Government i s aware o f
the need to have mitigating plans ready for implementation. Recent o i l price increases have
been mitigated by the appreciation o f the Euro vis-a-vis the dollar. Experience after
September 11, 2001 shows that the attraction o f Cape Verde as a tourist destination remains
steady even under very difficult circumstances. Recent petroleum sector reform has
mitigated the impact o f rising prices o n the fiscal equilibrium, which has been moderated by
the fall o f the dollar. The country intends to continue providing good investment
opportunities to its citizens living abroad, and the Government believes that the country’s
stability and good governance, together with instruments such as IDA and MIGA guarantees,
will help secure foreign international investors. Finally, remittances have been quite stable
over time and experience suggests that a significant sustained fall i s unlikely.

- 28 -

Domestic policies. The run-ups to the last two parliamentary and presidential
78.
elections witnessed fiscal slippages, the repeat o f which now appears significantly less likely.
Since the last elections, the Central Bank has been granted considerable independence, which
reduced this risk. Furthermore, as discussed in Chapter 11, sustaining growth and poverty
alleviation will require fulfilling the reform agenda. Delays or policy reversals could
undermine both objectives. Stakeholders in Cape Verde have integrated lessons learned from
previous pre-election experiences and are committed to avoiding a repetition o f the past.
Furthermore, the Bank and the Fund are actively pursing the macroeconomic dialogue and
are monitoring the fiscal outtums on quarterly basis. This provides a system for early
identification and alleviation o f any emerging problems. Similarly, the implementation o f
the policy agenda highlighted in the GPRSP, and to be taken up under proposed PRSCs and
IDA investment lending, is being monitored through M&E systems and followed by
stakeholders. Slowdown in reforms and deviations from intended results would thus be
quickly identified and addressed as needed. Finally, the Government i s committed to
improving competitiveness through investment climate and labor reform. Building on earlier
FIAS studies, the proposed Investment Climate Assessment would provide a more
comprehensive diagnostic to policy makers.
The hard budget constraint and management o f contingent liabilities. Cape
79.
Verde faces a binding hard budget constraint on public expenditures. This may lead to
certain programs, such as those related to human development, being crowded out by others,
for instance infrastructure investments. The Government i s aware o f this risk and proposes
to address it in three ways. First, infrastructure programs will be fimded as much as possible
through private-public partnerships. Second, various programs will be prioritized so as to fit
the overall resource envelope. Third, recurrent implications. o f expenditures will be taken
into account and integrated into the MTEF. Realization o f contingent liabilities could also
undermine the budget process. The Government is aware o f this risk and i s taking
appropriate steps to mitigate it. These include resolution o f problems with the energy
operators and making sure that all future private-public partnerships are built o n sound bases.
Other steps include pension and parastatal reforms and adequate health financing.
Capacity constraints. The CAS calls for reliance on Government systems, as
80.
opposed to project implementation units, to implement key multi-sector programs that are
becoming more ambitious and complex as more sectors are mainstreamed in the PRSC.
While the pay-off to this approach in the medium to long term appears high, lack o f adequate
capacity in the public administration in the short to medium term could become a bottleneck.
This risk i s being mitigated in a number o f ways, including building appropriate budget
systems in the context o f the PRSC, increasing the complexity o f programs progressively
over time, and substantial capacity enhancement activities, many o f which are supported by
donors.

- 29 VIII. CONCLUDINGREMARKS

81.
During the next four years, Cape Verde will have the opportunity to consolidate
results achieved since the early 1990s and implement a new agenda that will help the country
converge to middle income status, with decreasing levels o f poverty and greater equity. The
Bank will be a key partner in this process and is gearing up the way i t does business so as to
move away from traditional project support and shift primarily to programmatic lending.
This will also involve working even more closely with stakeholders in Cape Verde and the
donor community to benefit from synergies to sustain poverty alleviation and growth.

Washington D.C.
January 27,2005

t@i

0

e

0

9

e . 5

0

0

Q

>
0

-2
Q
0

m

e
&

0

8

1
,.s
0
0

0
N

%

0

8

.3

Y

cd

2

v

m

%
.-.)

I

N

m
l

m

W
.-.s

%

9

0

.5o
a

0
*
m

0

a2

0
*

u
0
cd
0

m

.3

%
0

u

&

2
8

80

0

3

a

ry

E

Y

8

L

0

4

9

c
0

V

d

e

e

c1

0

x

I

m
m
I

e,

>
0

-2

e,
e,
CA

I

d

m
I

e,

>

0
P
(d

e,
e,

n

0

c.'

-36-

-

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE Annex 2
Description of main GPRSP Pillars
1.
The first pillar aims to modernize Government by improving procedures and
institutions and enhancing its interface with citizens. Accountability and equity will be
strengthened through more direct participation o f civil society, better financial
management practices, improvements in tax policies, a firmer regulatory role in the
economy, judicial reform, simplified administrative procedures, expanded use o f
information technology (IT), and increased decentralization o f responsibilities and
resources. The GPRSP discusses a broad reform agenda and refers explicitly to the
recommendations o f the CFAA, PER, and CPAR, and thus confirms the shared vision
among key stakeholders in the administration, beneficiaries, and donor community.
2.
The second pillar reflects the Government’s acknowledgment that fighting
poverty requires economic growth built on sound and sustainable PSD. The proposed
policy interventions focus o n the sectors with potential to generate employment and
reduce poverty. Employment policy would benefit from improved labor market
conditions; market failures in micro-enterprise financing would b e addressed; drip
irrigation technology would be disseminated to improve agricultural productivity;
infrastructure in the fisheries sector would be modernized; and tourism marketing and
basic infrastructure development would be enhanced.

3.
Human capital development, the third pillar, seeks to improve the education
and health status o f the population. Aligned with i t s Education Reform Strategy, the
GPRSP aims to improve the employability and skills o f the labor force to support
economic growth and alleviate poverty in Cape Verde. In particular, the Government
seeks to: (i)
reduce barriers that prevent the poorest from accessing secondary education;
(ii)
improve teacher training in order to increase the education system’s internal
reinforce the linkage between the education system and the labor market
efficiency; (iii)
by ensuring that the skills and knowledge acquired are those needed by the economy;
(iv) expand access to early childhood education; and (v) develop and organize tertiary
education, in particular supporting science and technology, thus contributing to the
creation o f superior-level skills needed for highly qualified jobs.

4.

In the case o f health policy, the Government’s sectoral reform strategy
(Programa - Reformar o Sistema para Promover a Satide 2002-2005) has been
summarized in the GPRSP, and identifies several priorities which together are assumed to

have a significant impact o n poverty. Mindful o f increasing costs, health care will focus
on an expansion o f the network o f health facilities in areas that are currently underserved,
limit treatment overseas by improving local alternatives, improve human resources
management through decentralization, strengthen health information system, reinforce
citizen participation in health promotion and disease prevention, and ensure sustainable
financing for the sector.

- 37 5.
The fourth pillar covers infrastructure, regional development and the
environment. These issues have been at the heart o f Cape Verde’s development plans
since independence and are seen as key contributors to the country’s competitiveness.
Reflecting this view, while the private sector has outpaced public sector growth in the
past 12 years, public financing o f large infrastructure projects has remained prominent.
Specifically, energy, water and sanitation are slated to expand their networks through
public/private partnerships. Air and maritime transportation are the focus o f a domestic
and regional hub strategy. The Government also intends to encourage intra-island
transport. The fund would finance new roads and maintenance o f the existing network.
This pillar also proposes to develop environmental protection and conservation measures,
to be implemented through increased community involvement.

6.

The emergence o f social protection as the fifth pillar reflects the challenges of
curbing the increasing income inequality. There is also a growing realization that
existing schemes (FAIMO-type job employment creation, public and private pension
schemes, and public and private health insurance) require reforms to ensure sustainability
and broaden coverage. The Government’s reform strategy seeks to move from the more
reactive, coping strategies o f the past to increased attention to risk mitigation and
prevention measures, and decentralize and contract out service delivery in line with the
broader reforms o f the State that are under way in Cape Verde. The GPRSP prioritizes
five medium-term objectives that support the reform strategies already under way,
namely: (a) developing institutional capacity in social protection, (b) strengthening and
extending programs that reach disadvantaged groups (including social pensions, social
assistance and health insurance programs); (c) promoting local initiatives and community
development; (d) promoting the rights o f children, and (e) improving mechanisms to
prevent and manage food crises and strengthen food security.

- 38 -

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE -Annex 3
GPRSP Costing Table
2005

0.0

2007

2006

2.7

0.0

0.3
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0
0.0

Total 2005-2007

2.9

0.0

8.4

0.0

3.7

0.0

0.8

2.1

0.1

2.5

0.3

2.6

0.3

0.8

1.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.8

7.8

6.2

6.1

4.8

23.0

18.6

0.0

0.4
0.1

0.0

0.4

0.2

0.1

0.0
0.2

1.1
0.2

0.0
0.6

0.0

7.9

0.0

23.9

26.0

0.0

8.2
4.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

48.7

0.8

0.0
0.0
0.0

2.0
11.7

3.4
4.8

0.2

1.4

0.7

1.1
1.7

0.7
3.8

0.9
1.6

0.0

- 39 -

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE -Annex 4
Country Financing Parameters
BackgroundNote

Summary

1.
This Note describes the application o f the new policy for expenditure eligibility in
World Bank financing to Cape Verde by outlining the country financing parameters for
Cape Verde. The new framework allows the Bank to finance expenditures needed to
meet the development objectives o f the operations i t supports, within an overall
framework that addresses risks to fiscal sustainability and the appropriate use o f Bank
resources, in a way that i s consistent with the Articles o f Agreement.

2.
The new policy increases the flexibility to allow the use o f Bank loan proceeds for
a number o f expenditures. I t rests on three guiding principles: (a) the expenditures
financed from Bank loan proceeds are productive; (b) the impact o f operations financed
under such loans o n the borrowing country’s fiscal sustainability i s acceptable; and
(c) oversight arrangements on the use o f Bank funds are acceptable.
3.
The Government has been consulted on the parameters. Discussions on the new
policy took place with the Government o f Cape Verde during the Country Portfolio
Performance Review in M a y 2004 and during the CAS discussions in December 2004.
The Government has indicated that i t welcomes the increased flexibility in the Bank’s
approach to investment lending under the new policy.
4.
I t was however noted that with the shift o f Bank lending towards PRSCs, only
about a third o f the proposed FY05-08 base case lending could benefit from that
increased flexibility, mainly under two new investment operations, the Roads Sector
project and the multi-sector Private Infrastructure project. In those instances, it is
expected that recurrent expenditures could be financed as needed (to be decided o n a case
by case basis).
Country Assistance Strategy

5.
This Note i s an annex to the FY05-08 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)
Document. The overall CAS objective is to support the implementation o f Cape Verde’s
Poverty Reduction Strategy, focusing on ensuring macroeconomic stability and sound
public finance and budget systems, supporting competitiveness through public-private
partnerships in infrastructure, and implementing social programs aimed at alleviating
poverty and inequity. The base case lending scenario calls for US$50 million o f new
IDA lending for FY05-08, covering two investment operations (Roads Sector - US$15
million in FY06; and Multi-sector Infrastructure - US$5 m i l l i o n in FY07), and three
PRSCs (US$15 million, US$7.5 million and US$7.5 m i l l i o n in FY05, 06 and 07
respectively).
6.
Afi-ica.

High CPIA ratings put Cape Verde as one o f the best performers in Sub-Saharan
Historically, the performance o f the portfolio has been satisfactory and the

-40-

Government has been effective in addressing emerging issues. The current portfolio
includes four projects, amounting to US$58 million, o f which about US$25 million
remains undisbursed. The current portfolio focuses on capacity building in the social,
public and infrastructure sectors, and to the careful introduction o f market-based
incentives for private sector development. Two important projects (Privatization and
Regulatory Capacity Building; and Energy and Water) were downgraded to
unsatisfactory during FY04; so was another project (Social Sector Development) in
October 2004. The problems experienced under the first two projects were attributable to
a number o f unresolved infrastructure issues, including delays in divestiture, lack o f
adequate regulatory capacity and policy indecision. These issues are being addressed.
The privatization project experienced a significant turnaround and development
objectives were expected to be largely met by closing in December 2004. Exceptionally,
the Energy and Water Project i s being extended for two years to allow for the completion
o f key works and resolution o f contractual issues with the private partners. Finally, with
regard to the Social Sector Development Project, Government has implemented the
actions agreed with the Bank and a satisfactory outcome appears more likely. Lessons
learned are being integrated in ongoing and planned investment lending, and this
approach seems to be paying o f f the H I V I A I D S Project i s being upgraded to highly
satisfactory and some components o f the Growth and Competitiveness Project are also
rated as highly satisfactory.
Macroeconomic and Fiscal Considerations

7.
Recent economic developments have been good, but below expectations due to
exogenous factors. Growth i s projected at 4.0 percent in 2004, while inflation remains
l o w at below 2.0 percent. Tourism remains a strong performer, despite an uncertain
world economic outlook and high o i l prices.
8.
The fixed exchange rate regime in the form o f the peg to the Euro is seen as one
o f the pillars o f macroeconomic stability, and a contributor to a sound investment
climate. The main cost o f the regime is in terms o f limiting monetary policy, which in
turn constraints fiscal policy and results in trade-offs between public expenditure
programs.
9.
Economic policies have been consistently pro-growth and pro-poor. Fiscal
performance has remained sustainable, with a fiscal deficit (including grants) o f 3.2
percent o f GDP in 2003 - thanks to high levels o f grants, sustained performance in tax
revenue administration and responsiveness in expenditure management.
Public
expenditure management reforms are being coordinated by a technical secretariat, with
technical assistance from the Bank and other donors.
10.
The Government completed i t s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper in September
2004. Cape Verde i s not a HIPC country, and has never had a debt rescheduling under
the terms o f the Paris Club. However, it has, from time to time, negotiated a debt
reduction on a bilateral basis with its various creditors. As a result, the ratio o f external
public debt service to exports has been declining from 29.2 percent in 2001 to

-41 -

10.6 percent in 2003, which points to the sustainability o f Cape Verde’s external position
over the medium term.
11.
Both revenues and expenditures (respectively about 22 percent and 30 percent o f
GDP during the 2001-2003 period) are high by African norms and comparable to that o f
many lower middle-income countries.
There appear to be limited options for
significantly increasing revenues relative to GDP, even though specific levies and user
fees can be implemented to finance specific public programs. Similarly, in the absence o f
significant additional aid inflows, the scope for increasing public expenditures is limited
by the need to keep domestic borrowing in check, especially to avoid crowding out
private investment and to ensure debt sustainability.
12.
To improve transparency o f public expenditures and strengthen good governance,
Government tax administration, and financial and procurement systems need to be
strengthened. In the area o f tax administration, capacity i s being enhanced. Fiduciary
issues are being addressed through the implementation o f e-Government systems, the
development o f relevant procedures manuals, and improvement in external and internal
controls (also covering issues such as timely reconciliation o f accounts, improved debt
and cash management, empowering oversight institutions, etc). The consolidation o f
responsibilities for oversight o f all donor-funded projects is expected to strengthen
budget implementation and monitoring systems. Similarly, the consolidation o f
responsibilities for oversight o f all donor-funded projects is expected to strengthen
budget implementation and monitoring systems. Finally, while procurement operations
are basically sound, a legal framework to support and harmonize procurement activities i s
being developed.
13.
Recent analysis (CFAA, PER and CPAR) confirms the direction o f ongoing
public finance reform in order to facilitate resource mobilization, reach envisaged goals
and improve Government effectiveness. The main medium-term challenges are to
reinforce and improve critical aspects o f public finance, including: (a) further integrating
investment and expenditure budgets, by developing a MTEF to guide resource allocation
and link sector budgets to programmatic outcomes; (b) reinforcing financial controls,
including more timely and higher quality reporting and audits; (c) more effective tax
administration through improved information management; (d) development o f adequate
procurement legislation; and (e) control o f contingent liabilities.
14.
Donors have coordinated monitoring and analysis o f the impact o f the
interventions they have supported. Donors who provide programmatic budget support
have harmonized their fiduciary requirements, such as reporting and procurement. The
CFAA, PER, CPAR, and DPR, which have been funded jointly by the Bank, the EU and
the Netherlands, have been widely shared and discussed, and provide a strong basis on
which to improve the public expenditure systems.

- 42 Cost Sharing

15.
Current Practice: The current cost sharing limit for Cape Verde applied to the
overall lending program i s 90 percent. For individual projects, the Bank usually expects
the borrower to make a 10 percent minimum contribution to project cost. The Bank’s
financing share in an individual project i s determined during project preparation, based
on the technical requirements o f projects. In practice, IDA credits have funded well
under 90 percent o f project costs. The actual practice for the past three years has been 80
percent o f project costs on average. Specifically, with regard to the Transport project
which closed in December 2004, the average was 80 percent. With regard to the overall
multi-donor program on the fight against HIV/AIDS, the January 2005 mid-term review
established that the Bank’s coverage over the past two years had been 70 percent, with
the remaining 30 percent covered by the Government and other partners.

16.
Bank-financed projects are fully integrated into the budget and as discussed in the
CAS, the Government has full ownership o f the projects supported by the Bank. Bank
investment disbursements amounted to US$13.8 million in FY04. This i s a relatively
small portion o f Cape Verde’s overall development spending o f around US$305 million
(or 32.6 percent o f GDP in 2004).
17.
The country’s public expenditure spending indicates that the authorities are
committed to funding the development program and that Bank and other donor financing
are fairly well integrated into the Government’s budget. Inthat regard, it should be noted
that the thrust o f the Bank’s h t u r e program is fully aligned with the Government’s
Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy, as presented in the country’s GPRSP.
Specifically, the Bank’s strategy i s articulated around three objectives that constitute the
CAS pillars o f ensuring macroeconomic stability, supporting private-sector led growth
and implementing social programs aimed at alleviating poverty. I t should also be noted
that strong stakeholders’ ownership and their increased involvement in project
implementation, as well as effective partnership between the Government and IDA, have
been keys to the success o f the previous CAS implementation.
Conclusion: In view o f Cape Verde’s overall strong commitment to the
18.
implementation o f Bank-financed projects, the Bank may finance up to 100 percent o f
project costs. However, recognizing that the overall IDA envelope is fixed and that the
CAS lending program i s shifting to budget support, very few projects are likely to adopt
the higher Bank financing limits. Typically, most projects are expected to include
contributions from Government, and would therefore not have 100 percent Bank
financing. This approach would apply to projects in the private sector and infrastructure
(FPSI) sectors, where for example significant participation in the order o f 50 percent o f
total costs would be expected from private and other sources. The cost-sharing
arrangements would be determined during the preparation o f each investment project,
taking into account such project-specific considerations. In determining Bank financing
in individual projects, the government’s funding from its o w n resources for the sector
concerned will also be considered.

-43

-

Recurrent Cost Financing

Current Practice: Currently in Cape Verde, the Bank finances some recurrent
19.
costs in line with the existing policy. O n average, these account for 10 to 20 percent o f
project costs. Examples o f recurrent cost financing include training, decentralized
activities, as well as funding o f PIUs for implementation. Ongoing projects that finance
the aforementioned types o f recurrent costs include social sector development,
Energy/Water, HIV/AIDS and Growth and Competitiveness projects.
20.
In Cape Verde, increased financing o f recurrent costs does not jeopardize fiscal or
debt sustainability for several reasons: (i)
recurrent costs are already w e l l integrated into
the budget preparation and execution processes, and financing o f these costs by the Bank
would not introduce any special considerations for fiscal sustainability; (ii)
as noted
above, Cape Verde has a solid fiscal situation and good debt sustainability; and (iii)
very
few projects are likely to require significant recurrent cost financing, and therefore the
amounts o f recurrent cost financing involved will remain limited, and may finance, for
example, the cost o f limited training programs. There i s therefore no r i s k o f dependency
on donors for recurrent cost financing.

A review o f debt levels indicates that debt sustainability i s not an issue at present,
21,
and i s unlikely to become one in the future. Specifically, following the negotiated
reduction o f bilateral debt, the ratio o f external public debt service to exports has been
declining from 29.2 percent in 2001 to 10.6 percent in 2003, which points to the
sustainability o f Cape Verde’s external position over the medium term. Concessional
lending will continue in the foreseeable future under the “small island rule” that allows
higher GNP per capita thresholds for graduation to IBRD.
Inspite o f recent difficulties reflected in the downgrading during 2004 o f three
22.
projects to “unsatisfactory”, the majority o f activities have been successfully undertaken
and have been sustainable. The Government has given priority to a progressive
elimination o f Project Implementation Units (PIUs) and the mainstreaming o f project
implementation. This is being achieved through PIU consolidation and by projects being
implemented by existing institutions (by the end o f the FY05-08 CAS period, there will
be at most one PIU in operation).

23.
Enhanced flexibility in recurrent cost financing would contribute to an important
goal o f the proposed PRSCs in Cape Verde, namely more transparent reporting o f public
expenditures through proper classification o f recurrent items in the development budget.
24.
Conclusion: N o country level limit o n recurrent cost financing is therefore
proposed. Recurrent costs would be financed as needed o n a case by case basis. This
principle will be applied selectively based o n short term needs and requirements to meet
outcome targets. In all cases, it will be undertaken after careful assessment o f risks to
sustainability at the sector and project levels.

-44-

Local Cost Financing

Current Practice: At present, Bank projects generally finance 100 percent o f
25.
foreign expenditures, but the share o f Bank financing for local expenditures are generally
less than 100 percent.
26.
The country satisfies the two conditions for eligibility. The exact share o f local
cost financing varies across projects and expenditure categories. Greater flexibility in
local cost financing would eliminate any perverse incentives for the Borrower to prefer
foreign over local expenditures as the former i s financed at 100 percent.
27.
The country satisfies the first requirement that i t s development program exceeds
the public sector’s own resources and expected domestic borrowing. As noted above, the
total financing requirement for Cape Verde’s development program i s US$305 million.
Domestic borrowing, taxes and other revenues provide only US$227 m i l l i o n (24 percent
o f GDP), whilst US$78 million (9 percent) needs to be externally financed.

The country satisfies the second requirement that the financing o f foreign
28.
expenditures alone would not enable the Bank to assist in the financing o f individual
projects. Local costs have been high in past investment projects in Cape Verde: Bank
disbursements for local costs averaged 67% o f total investment lending disbursements in
FY02-04. In the case o f infrastructure projects, local costs relate to construction that is
mainly composed o f local costs. In the case o f private-public partnerships, private
investors are often foreign and fund foreign expenditures o f the project, leaving local
costs to be financed by the projects/Govemment.
Conclusion: Overall, Cape Verde meets the requirements for Bank financing o f
29.
local costs. Therefore, the Bank can finance local costs in any proportion required by
individual projects. N o distinction needs to be made between foreign and local
expenditures in individual projects, unless needed for project-specific considerations.
Taxes and Duties

30.
Cape Verde’s tax system i s generally efficient. Income tax is the largest
contributor to domestic revenue. 2,000 companies are potentially subject to income tax.
Income tax is 30 percent for companies, down from 35 percent in 2003. The 13 largest
companies pay more than 70 percent o f a l l income tax. An update o f the taxpayer
registry i s currently under way. The average personal income tax (about US$250 per
taxpayer) points to shortfalls in the identification o f payers and/or the collection o f taxes.
A plan was successfully introduced in 2001 to allow the collection o f income taxes twice
a year through commercial bank agencies. The work o n the registry o f taxpayers still
needs to be completed.
3 1.
The new VAT (single rate o f 15 percent) introduced in 2004 i s a success: its
intake i s twice what was originally projected, and was expected to top 6 percent o f GDP
at end 2004. The introduction o f the VAT i s highly unusual for Western Africa, and
underscores the higher contribution o f services in GDP. The VAT also replaces the

-45

-

consumption tax. I t has been introduced with a streamlining o f tariffs to 7 extemal tariff
bands (from 0 to 50 percent) down from more than 100 bands, but s t i l l complex by
intemational standards. ConsumerAuxury goods have high customs duties. These items
are not material in Bank-financed projects. Most items financed by IDA fall under the
0-20 percent band.
32.
There currently exist exemptions to taxes on trade, consumption and income. The
Govemment i s aware o f the issues and i s working with the IMF o n compiling a report
that will present recommendations to streamline exemptions. A letter o f November 2002
from the Ministry o f Finance clarified that no taxes would be levied on foreign
consultants or o n foreign supplies o f goods, when said consultant services and goods
were financed by IDA.
33.
Conclusion: While Cape Verde’s taxes have been assessed and are not considered
excessive, thus there are no taxes or duties that the Bank would not be able to finance. At
the project level, the Bank would consider whether taxes and duties constitute an
excessively high share o f project costs.
Concluding Comments

34.
The Bank and the Govemment o f Cape Verde find that the framework set out
above reflects the best arrangements for Cape Verde, keeping in mind the three guiding
principles mentioned in the summary o f this Note. As part o f the CPPR process, the
parameters will be revisited, with any necessary adjustments made and processed as
appropriate, in accordance with Bank procedures.

- 46 Cape Verde: Country Financing Parameters

The country financing parameters for Cape Verde set out below have been approved by
the Regional vice president, Africa, and are being posted o n the Bank’s internal website.
Item
Cost Sharing: Limit on the proportion
o f individual project costs that the
Bank may finance.

Parameter

up to 100
percent

Recurrent Cost Financing: Any
l i m i t s that would apply to the overall
amount o f recurrent expenditures that
the Bank may finance.

N o country
level limit

Local Cost Financing: A r e the
requirements o f local expenditures
met, namely that: (i)
financing
requirements for the country’s
development program would exceed
the public sector’s own resources (e.g.,
from taxation and other revenues) and
expected domestic borrowing; and
(ii)
the financing o f foreign
expenditures alone would not enable
the Bank to assist in the financing o f
individual projects.
Taxes and Duties: Are there any taxes
and duties that the Bank would not
finance

Yes

None

RemarksDExplanation
The Bank may finance up to 100 percent o f project
:osts, but most projects are expected to include
:ontributions from the Government. This approach
would apply to projects in the private sector and
infrastructure (FPSI) sectors, where for example
significant participation in the order o f 50 percent o f
total costs would be expected from private and other
sources. Cost sharing arrangements for individual
projects w i l l be based o n project specific
considerations.
Recurrent cost financing will be determined by project
specific considerations. In all cases, it will be
undertaken after careful assessment o f risks to
sustainability at the sector and project levels. The
amount o f recurrent cost financing i s expected to
remain limited and i s not expected to significantly
imnact fiscal and debt sustainabilitv.
The two requirements for Bank financing o f local
expenditures are met. The Bank can therefore finance
local costs in the proportions needed in individual
projects.

The current taxes and duties are not unreasonable. At
the project level, the Bank would consider whether
taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share o f
project costs.

- 48-

-

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE Annex 6
CAS Table A2

Cape Verde at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Cape
Verde

SubSaharan
Africa

Lowermiddleincome

'

0.47
1,440
0.68

703
490
347

2,655
1,480
3,934

I

11/24/04

Developmentdiamond"
Life expectancy

I

I

I

Average annual growth, 199743
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

2.6
3.8

2.3
2.4

0.9
1.2

66
69
34

36
46
103

74
24
144
146
143

58
35
87
94
80

50
69
32
11
81
10
112
113
111

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% of population below nationalpoverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

I

' GNI

I

Gross
primary
nroilment

per
capita

I
I

i

Access to improved water source

I

1

-Cape

Verde

-Lower-middleincomegroup

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1983

1993

2002

2003

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmentlGDP
Exports of goods and ServiceslGDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

0.1 1
54.6
34.7
-1.8
24.5

0.36
39.7
12.4
3.7
26.4

0.62
20.9
31.5
-15.0
10.1

0.80
20.2
31.7
-14.0
10.6

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debtlGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debtlGDP
Present value of debtlexports

49.2
1.9
67.6
5.1

-9.0
0.4
41.1
4.8
25.1
80.3

-11.5
0.5
53.8
9.1
32.3
70.9

-9.7
0.3
45.4
5.3
27.3
56.6

1983-93

199343

2002

2003

200347

7.3
5.3
-4.3

6.1
3.4
14.9

4.6
1.9
8.5

2.4
5.9

5.0

5.5
2.9
6.4

1983

1993

2002

2003

10.2
16.9
72.9

13.7
20.5
9.6
65.8

11.2
17.1
8.2
71.6

6.8
19.7
8.0
73.4

93.1
8.7
91.0

78.7
17.6
49.3

103.2
11.7
68.1

99.3
14.7
66.3

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annualgrowth)
Agnculture
Industry
Manufactunng
services
Pnvate consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestcc Investment
Imports of goods and services

._

1983-93

199343

I

Economic ratios'
Trade

T
Domestic
savings

Investment

i
Indebtedness
Cape Verde

Growth of investmentand GDP (Oh)

A

Growth of exports and imports (%)

79
113
166
63

61
55
78
62

15
45
47
51

I5
45
47
57

62
157
16
03

90
25
-25
88

47
90
19 5
11 7

10
31 9
15
22

6o

40
2o

-20-

-Exports

-0-lmporls

Note: 2003 data are preliminary estimates

* The diamonds show four key indicators in the countly (in bold) compared with its income-group average. if data are missing, the diamond will
be incomoiete.

I

- 49-

-

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE Annex 6
Cape Verde at a glance (continued)
Cape Verde
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1983

1993

2002

2003

10.3

5.8
1.9

1.8
1.8

3.0
2.8

30.1
10.3
-9.3

24.4
3.1
-10.2

22.8
1.8
-6.4

1993

2002

2003

4
0
1
1
154
53
6
71

42

53

245
61
26
I09

303
65
26
111

89
89
100

129
138
93

133
133
100

1983

1993

2002

2003

37
117
-80

45
179
-134

194
419
-226

253
529
-275

-7

-4
105

-12
166

-12
210

Current account balance

-52

-33

-71

-77

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

55
-3

29
4

94
-23

80
-3

46
71.7

77
80.4

72
117.2

93
97.7

1983

1993

2002

2003

72
0
0

149
0
21

331
0
116

362
0
131

3
0
0

5
0
0

26
0
1

20
0
1

41
16
0
0
0

58
7
0
3
0

47
10
0
22

59
10
0
31

7
0
0
0
0
0

13
4
0
3
0
3

0
20
0
20
1
19

0
15
0
15
1
14

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit
TRADE

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Bananas
Fish
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1983

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade /1995=100J
BALANCE of PAYMENTS
/US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, /oca/AJs$)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
iBRD
IDA
Total debt service
iBRD
IDA
Composition of net resourceflows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

' Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
1350

47

98

99

00

02

01

Ew01t8

03

impotts

1 Current account balance to GDP (Oh)

j16

Composition of 2003 debt (US$ mill.)

A-IBRD
B - IDA
C-IMF

D - Other multilateral

-

E Bilateral
F Private
G - Short-term
~

11/24/04

- 50REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE -Annex 7
CAS Table B2
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As at 01/10/05
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number an
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount as
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$’OOO)
Average Supervision (US$’OOO/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2002

2003

2004

2005

8
3.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.9

7
4.7
0.0
5.1
0.0
5.1
30.9

5
4.9
40.0
43.5
40.0
43.5
30.3

3
3.3
33.3
49.5
33.3
49.5
17.0

No

Yes

Yes

Planned

464
(7 proj.)
66.3

690.4
(8 proj.)
86.3

580.0

410

82.9

82.8

Since
FY 80
11
104.7
0.0
0.0

Last Five
FYs
4
43.8
0.0
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank‘s country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank’s portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

Note: All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

- 51-

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE -Annex 8
CAS Table B3
IDA Program Summary
As at 01/10/05
Proposed IDA Base-Case Lending Program

Fiscal year

la

strategic
Implementation
Rewards jb Risks (H/M/L) /b
(H/M/L)

Project ID

us$(M)

2005

Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC I)
Result

15.0
15.0

H

H

2006

PRSC II
Road Sector Support
Result

7.5
15.0
22.5

H
M

M
M

2007

PRSC Ill
Infrastructure (MPIP)
Result

7.5
5.0
12.5

H
H

M
M

Overall
Result

50.0

/a This table presents the proposed program for FY05 and the next three fiscal years.
/b For each project, the strategic rewards and implementation risks are indicated according to
expectation: high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).

- 52-

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE -Annex 9
CAS Table B3
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2002-2005

IFC approvals (US$m)
Sector (YO)
Finance & Insurance
Total

2002

2003

2004

0.00

0.00

6.08

0

0

100
100

Investment instrument (YO)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

0

0

0

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

1.14

0.54

0.54

2005

0

43
57

0

- 53REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE -Annex I O
CAS Table 8 4
Summary of Non-lending Services, FYO5-FY08
As at 01/10/05
Completion FY

Product

FY Cost
USJOOO

Under way in FY05
General Economic Work

125

Audience

b

Objective

Knowledge generation, problem solving,
policy dialogue
Bank, Govemment, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving

Bank

annual

50

Diagnostic Report
Dev. Policy Review (DPR) - carryover
Full GPRSP
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)
Country Performance Portfolio Review (CPPR)
* Investment Climate Assessment (ICA)
IDF Grant (Strengtheningthe Rule of Law)
Planned in FY06
General Economic Work

2005
2005
2005
2005
annual
2006
2005

TFund

5
15
50
25
50
15

Bank, Govemment
Bank, Govemment, Donors
Bank, Govemment
Bank, Govemment
Bank, Govemment, Donors
Bank, Govemment

annual

35

Bank

PER update
GPRSP Progress Report
CPPR
Country FinancialAccountability Assessment
(CFAA)/Country Procurement Assessment
Report (CPAR) (Integrated)
* Pension Study
* Investment Climate Assessment (ICA)
* Human Development Review
* Rural DevelopmentAssessment
Planned in FY07
General Economic Work

annual
annual
annual
2007

50
15
25
30

Knowledge generation, problem solving,
policy dialogue
Bank, Govemment, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment

2006
2006
2007
2007

15
25
25
25

Bank, Govemment, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving,
Bank, Govemment
Knowledge generation, problem solving,
Bank, Govemment

annual

35

Bank

PER update
GPRSP Progress Report
CPPR
CFMCPAR (Integrated)
* Human Development Review
* Long-termGrowth and Competitiveness Study
* Rural Development Assessment
Planned in FYO8
General Economic Work

annual
annual
annual
2007
2007
2008
2007

50
15
25
30
25
50
25

Knowledge generation, problem solving,
policy dialogue
Bank, Govemment, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment
Knowledge generation, problemsolving
Bank, Govemment

annual

35

Bank

CAS
PER update
GPRSP Progress Report
CPPR
* Long-termGrowth and Competitiveness Study
* Poverty Assessment Update

2008
annual
annual
annual
2008
2008

100
50
15
25
100
100

PER update

* Infrastructure Regulationand Competitiveness

* Plannedin FY05-08

Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problemsolving
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving

Knowledge generation, problem solving,
policy dialogue
Bank, Govemment
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Bank, Govemment, Donors Knowledge generation, problem solving,

CAS AAA scenario (see para. 67).

a. The product list does not include trust funds and grants that are expected to support additional AAA in various areas, including

public sector, and legal andjudicial capacity development, as well as infrastructurereform and fisheries.
b. Govemment, donors, Bank, public dissemination.
c. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

- 54-

-

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE Annex 11
CAS Table B5

Cape Verde Social Indicators
Same regionlincome group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population,mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban populalon (% ofpopulation)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1970.75

1980-85

1997.03

SubSaharan
Africa

Lowermiddleincome

0.3
0.8
21.4
7.0

0.3
I.4
33.0
6.0

0.5
2.6
65.6
3.5

702.6
2.3
36.1
5.1

2,655.2
0.9
49.7
2.1

260

350
52

1,440
133

490

1,480

I.8

2.5
3.4

2.6
4.0

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcourt index
Urban headoount index
Rum1 headcountindex
INCOME
GNI per capib (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index(l995=100)
INCOMUCONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile p? of income orconsumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNl)
Social security and weifare (% of GDP)
Net primary schod enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (? under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(Years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under5 (per 1,000)
Adult (1569)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 populafon)
Maternal(per 100,OOOlive births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

95
97
93

91
92
91

99
98
100
74
64
89

19

58
83
45

81
94
70

58
54

78
84
11

59
58
61

63
61
66

69
66
72

46
45
47

69
67
71

88
123

78
95

34
42

103
174

32
40

335
279

292
249

207
121

519
46 1

214
135

10

1 1/24/04
CAS Annex 85. This table ws produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zem or less than half the unit show. Net enrolhent rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due b
change tom ISCED76 to ISCEW7. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who recehd vaccinationsbefore one
year of age.

- 55REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE -Annex 12
CAS Table B6

-

Cape Verde Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as YOo f GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

2000

Actual
2001
2002

Estimate
2004

2003

Projected
2006
2007

2005

100
12
18
70

100
11
17
72

100
11
17
72

100
7
20
73

100
7
20
73

100
7
21
72

100
6
19
74

100
6
18
76

113
20
12
7

114
18
11
8

115
21
13
8

114
20
10
10

113
22
11
11

112
23
12
12

110
23
12
11

108
21
9
12

28
61

30
64

31
68

32
66

31
64

32
65

32
63

33
62

-13
10

-14
9

-15
10

-14
11

-13
11

-12
12

-10
13

-8
13

531

550

616

797

936

1009

1090

1177

1320

1280

1250

1440

1700

1960

2130

2240

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1980 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
6.6
3.8
Gross Domestic Income
6.6
3.8

4.6
4.6

5.0
5.0

5.5
5.5

5.5
5.5

5.5
5.5

5.5
5.5

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1980 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
1I1
3.8
1.9
2.5
0.0
Total consumption
2.1
-2.7
Private consumption
13.4
2.0

2.4
1.6
-1.5

2.9
1.9
1.8

2.9
1.6
2.2

2.9
1.5
1.8

2.9
1.5
1.8

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment
(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

EXPOS
I

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'
Memorandum items

Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)

(GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
N e t current transfers
Current account balance

EXPO*

N e t private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items

Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR80 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

146
38
326
226
-180
135
-56

167
37
351
232
-1 84
133
-57

194
42
419
278
-226
166
-7 1

253
53
529
342
-275
210
-77

292
56
596
384
-305
23 7
-79

319
60
65 1
422
-332
250
-9 1

353
64
688
454
-334
256
-87

383
70
724
49 1
-341
263
-87

32

32

22

31

38

42

38

38

12

8

21

31

16

21

-3

-3

20

-15

-23

-3

-6

0

0

-16

-33.9

-33.4

-36.6

-34.5

-32.6

-32.9

-30.7

-29.0

398.7

-5.9

10.8

22.4

3.8

12.4

5.5

6.0

-11.1

0.0

1.4

28.3

8.6

0.0

-0.3

-0.3

- 56Cape Verde - K e y Economic Indicators
(Con tinned)

Indicator

2000

Public finance (as % of GDP a t market prices)e
20.8
Current revenues
Current expenditures
34.2
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
-13.4
Capital expenditure
12.5
Foreign financing
10.0
M o n e t a r y indicators
M2/GDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR80 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise t e r m o f trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)'
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (?? change)

Actual
2001
2002

2003

Estimate
2004

Projected
2006
2007

21.9
21.9
-0.1
10.8
9.2

24.7
21.3
3.4
13.0
8.7

23.5
20.9
2.5
9.8
7.2

25.7
21.9
3.8
10.7
7.7

25.6
21.3
4.3
11.6
6.1

24.3
20.4
3.9
12.1
5.3

24.5
19.6
4.8
9.3
4.9

65.6
12.7
19.2

67.5
9.8
60.6

72.5
14.3
43.0

72.5
7.8
71.9

72.5
8.2
88.6

72.5
7.8
110.3

72.5
8.0
259.9

72.6
8.2
50.0

187.7
219.5
85.5
96.7

192.8
215.3
89.5
97.0

196.3
230.0
85.3
99.9

201.7
221.4
91.1
102.6

206.6
225.8
91.5
105.4

211.2
230.3
91.7
108.2

216.2
235.6
91.7
111.1

221.3
241.1
91.8
114.1

-2.4
-1.2

3.8
2.7

1.8
1.8

3.0
2.8

2.0
2.5

2.0
2.2

2.3
2.4

2.3
2.4

a. GDP at market prices

b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c.
d.
e.
f.

2005

Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use o f IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

- 57-

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE -Annex 13
CAS Table B7
Cape Verde - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

2000

Actual
2001
2002

Estimate
2004

2003

Projected
2006
2007

2005

302

328

33 1

362

378

414

423

43 8

Net disbursements (US$m)a

24

7

20

31

16

21

-3

-3

Total debt service (TDS)

12

19

17

9

12

6

25

25

136.0
56.7
5.3
110.2

129.5
59.7
7.4
102.1

118.1
53.8
5.9

94.4
45.4

88.8
40.4

99.6

87.9

2.8
81.3

71.2

85.3
38.9
5.1
66.4

83.2
37.2

2.3

90.1
41.0
1.4

0.0
70.0

0.0
81.7

0.0
79.5

0.0
57.5

0.0
76.8

0.0
57.5

0.0
89.1

0.0
89.1

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0

0

0

0.0
0

102

110

116

131

133

145

159

173

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

(uS$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators

(%I

TDOIXGS~
TDOIGDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionaliTDO

4.8
64.2

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSipublic D S
Preferred creditor DS/public

DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS

IBRD TDO (US$mld
O f which present value o f
guarantees (US$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$mld
I F C (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

e,
y1

I

-I
y

9

0 o
o
0 o
0 o
0 o
0

0

I

00

10
I

5

v)

- 59-

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE -Annex 15
CAS Table B8 (IFC)
Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As at 11130104
Disburseb (I

Held (US$ mil)
FY Approval

Company

mil)

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Participation

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Participation

1992 AEF
Growela
2004 CECV

0.15

0

0

0

0.15

0

0

0

6.63

0

0

0

0

0

0

Total Portfolio:

6.78

0

0.00

0

0

0

0

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan

Equity

Quasi

Growela = shoe manufacturing
CECV = Caixa Econbmica de Cabo Verde

Participation

0.15

- 60-

REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE -Annex 16
CAS Table B10
S ummary of DeveIopme nt Priorit ies

Network

Country
performance

Major issue

Country
priority

Bank
priority

High

High

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management

Poverty reduction

Fair

Economic policy

Good

Regulation

Moderate

High

Public sector

Good

Public finance

Moderate

Low

Gender

Fair

Inequality

Moderate

High

Secondary education

High

High

Quality

High

High

Rural growth and poverty

Human Development Department

Education

Good

Education

Fair

Health and nutrition

Good

Non-communicable diseases

High

High

Social protection

Poor

Vulnerable groups

High

High

High

Moderate

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development

Rural development

Poor

Limited access to land, soil erosion

-Rural development

Poor

Alternative employment

Moderate

Moderate

Coastal environment

Good

Coastaymarine areas

Moderate

Moderate

Social development

Fair

High

High

Promote financial intermediation

Moderate

Moderate

Moderate

High

Inequality

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure

Financial sector

Good

Private sector

Fair

Complete divestiture program

Infrastructure

Fair

Water and sanitation supply

High

High

Infrastructure

Fair

Need for PPP

High

High

