Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 34463-LB

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE REPUBLIC OF LEBANON

November 22,2005

Lebanon Country Management Unit
Middle East and North Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance o f their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise b e disclosed
without W o r l d Bank authorization.

The Date of the Last Country Assistance Strategy was December 4,1997
CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit = Lebanese Pounds (LL)
1 US$= 1,5075 LL (November 2005)
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

EIB
ENP

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Abu Dhabi Fund for Development
Agence Franqaise de Developpement
[French DevelopmentAgency]
Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development
Banque du Liban
[Central Bank of Lebanon]
Banque Libanaise pour l e Commerce
[Lebanese Commercial Bank]
Country Assistance Strategy
Council for Development arid Reconstruction
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Consumer Price Index
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Consultant and Research Institute
European Commission
Economic and Social Council
Electricite du Liban
[Lebanon Electric]
European Investment Bank
European NeighborhoodPolicy

ESCWA
ESW
EU
FA0
FDI
FY
GDP
IBRD
ICT
IDAL
IDB
IDF
IFC
ILO
IMF
IoF

Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
Economic Sector Work
European Union
Food and Agriculture Organization
Foreign Direct Investment
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Information and CommunicationTechnology
Investment Development Authority o f Lebanon
Islamic Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Labour Organization
International Monetary Fund
Institute o f Finance

AAA
ADFD
AFD
AFESD
BDL
BLC
CAS
CDR
CEM
CFAA
CPI
CPPR
CRI
EC
ECOSOC
EdL

MDG
MEA

Japan Bank for InternationalCooperation
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development
Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau
[German Development Credit Agency]
Millennium Development Goals
Middle East Airlines

MENA

Middle East and North Africa

METAC
MIGA
MOET
MOF
NDGI
NGOs
NSSF
OECD
OED
OFID

Middle East Technical Assistance Center
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Economy and Trade
Ministry of Finance
National Deposit Guarantee Institution
Non Governmental Organizations
National Social Security Fund
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Operations and Evaluations Department
OPIC Fund for International Development

OMSAR
PEPMENA
PIP
PPP
QPPR
ROSC
SFD
SMEs
SOEs
UNDP
UNESCO
UNFPA
UNICEF
USAID
UTDP
WBG
WBI
WHO

Office o f the Minister of State for Administrative Reform
Private Enterprise Partnership for the Middle East and
North Africa
Portfolio Improvement Plan
Public-Private Partnership
Quarterly Portfolio Performance Review
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
Saudi Fund for Development
Small and Medium Enterprises
State Owned Enterprises
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Org.
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Children’s Fund
United States Agency for International Development
Urban Transport Development Project
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Health Organization

JBIC
KFAED
KFW

MANAGERS AND STAFF RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS CAS

Vice President: Christiaan Poortman
Country Director: Joseph Saba
Task Team Leader: Omar Razzaz

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Several Bank staff members contributed to the writing o f this report: Chadi B o u Habib
(Economist); Sebastien Dessus (Senior Country Economist); Hadia Karam (Operations Officer);
Omar Razzaz (Country Manager); and Haneen Sayed (Lead Operations Officer). M o n a Ziade
(Communication Officer) organized the consultations with civil society and Mouna Couzi (Senior
Program Assistant) edited the report and provided diligent support and quality assurance throughout
the process. The report was prepared under the guidance o f Joseph Saba (Country Director). The
report underwent two Regional Operations Committee reviews in January and November 2005. The
team i s gratefbl for the comments and suggestions received from many colleagues during the C A S
process, a l l o f which helped to improve the report.
Substantial inputs were received from both the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and
the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). IFC staff w h o contributed inputs included
Julia Brickell (Country Officer) and Torek Farhadi (Strategy Officer). MIGA staff who contributed
inputs included Alwaleed Fareed Alatabani (Senior Risk Management Officer) and K e i t h Martin
(Senior Marketing Specialist).
Various Government officials, advisors, elected officials, academics and researchers, private
sector representatives and representatives o f the international community provided guidance to the
report, a l l o f whom should be warmly thanked.
This report i s dedicated to the memory o f the late Minister Basil Fuleihan, w h o conducted
most o f the C A S discussions between the Government and the Bank.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

1

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

The Civil War Legacy
Macro-Economic and Structural Issues
Poverty, Human Development, and the Millennium Development Goals
Natural Resources and the Environment
Governance

1
1
5
7
8

11.

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND OUTLOOK

10

A.
B.

Country Development Program
Economic Outlook

10
11

111. LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE PREVIOUS CAS AND LOOKING FORWARD
A.
B.
C.
D.

CAS Lessons
Portfolio Issues
Preparing the New CAS
Development Partners

13

13
14
16
16

IV. PROPOSED BANK COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

17

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

The CAS Pillars
Building Partnerships for Local and Regional Capacity Enhancement
Lending Scenarios and Triggers
IFC, MIGA, and WBI Programs
Monitoring and Evaluation o f Results

17
22
23
26
28

V.

CREDITWORTHINESS AND R I S K S

29

A.

Creditworthinessand Risks

29

BOXES
Box 1 Lebanon’s Debt
Box 2 The Private Sector in Lebanon
Box 3 Budgetary Processes Continue to be Opaque

2
3
9

FIGURES
Figure 1. Annual Cost of Environmental Degradation by Environmental Category

7

TABLES
Table 1.
Table 2.
Table 3.
Table 4.

Actual Economic Developments and 1997 CAS Base Case Projections
Base Case Scenario Projections: Selected Macro-Economic Indicators
Indicative Lending Assistance Program
CAS Consultations Timeline

1
12
25
45

CAS ANNEXES
Annex I. Framework for a Results-Based Country Program
Annex 11. Activities o f Development Partners (Ongoing/Planned)
Annex 111. CAS Consultations

31
35
41

CAS TABLES
Annex A 2 - Lebanon at a Glance
Annex B 2 - Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B 3 - Bank Group Program Summary (IBRD, IFC, MIGA)
Annex B 4 - Summary o f Non-Lending Services
Annex B5 - Social Indicators
Annex B 6 - K e y Economic Indicators and Selected Indicators Table
Annex B 7 - Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B 8 - Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B 8 - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA/Grants)

MAP IBRD 33433

46
48
49
51
52
53
58
59
60

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i.
The tragic assassination of Prime Minister Hariri (February 2005) was a watershed event
for Lebanon. The assassination climaxed thirty years o f c i v i l strife, war, attempts at state building,
and physical reconstruction in a heavily contested political environment. Throughout this period, the
resilience and resourcefulness o f the Lebanese people, and the willingness o f investors to return has
been impressive - due largely to the country’s talented and entrepreneurial workforce, a favorable
geographical position, and a modem financial sector able to attract large foreign investment.
But the challenges going forward are formidable. Public mismanagement has resulted in a
ii.
huge accumulated public debt, slow economic growth, weak public institutions, and delayed structural
reforms.
Today, Lebanon faces: (i)severe macro-economic imbalances, with debt to GDP
approaching 17 1 percent; (ii)limited employment-generating growth, resulting in higher levels o f
poverty and emigration; and (iii) deficient public infrastructure and services (power,
telecommunications, water, wastewater), which reduce the country’s competitiveness and degrade its
environment and natural resources.

iii.

The root of Lebanon’s pressing challenges lies in its governance. While it has been very
effective in maintaining peace and stability (no small accomplishment after 15 years o f war),
Lebanon’s governance structure has proved unable to promote economic and social development in a
sustainable manner. Overlapping powers and responsibilities, clientelism, and limited accountability
and transparency have often resulted in policy paralysis, weak institutional structures in both the
public and private sectors, and perceptions o f high levels o f corruption. In the absence o f c i v i l service
reform, administrative reform, and the revamping o f control agencies, fiscal, structural and sector
reforms are at risk o f being unsustainable.
iv.
Looking forward, Lebanon faces stark choices: it could “muddle through” in a crisis
management mode, losing further ground and facing a possible severe economic crisis; or
alternatively, it could develop and implement a transition plan for credible public institutions and
sustainable growth. Putting Lebanon back o n a sustainable path to growth and stability would
require a broad-based national dialogue involving a l l branches o f the Government and society in
working towards a socialleconomic recovery plan. Such a plan would need to be perceived as both
credible and fair, addressing the short-term transition to macro-economic stability, as w e l l as laying
the foundations for longer-term employment generation and growth. The transition period would
include: tightening fiscal policy in a socially equitable manner; reforming/privatizing State Owned
Enterprises (SOEs) and utilities in a transparent and productive way; reducing the stock o f debt in a
concerted effort w i t h local and international creditors; restoring the minimum acceptable levels o f
good governance in a few critical public institutions; and mitigating the poverty effects o f the
transition. But, it w o u l d also include a longer-term strategy for reforming public institutions and
processes to enable the public sector, in partnership with the private sector and c i v i l society, to effect
quality human capital development, well-managed natural resources, and an investment climate
conducive to investment, growth, and employment generation.
V.
This is a tall order and a challenging agenda. But there is clear evidence of broad-based
appreciation oJ and commitment to, such an agenda from the polity at large and the Government.
The World Bank and other international donors and agencies stand ready to help. Indeed, reforms
are already under way in many areas. The Government sees its task as laying the foundations for
much o f this work in preparation for rapid implementation over the next few years. The W o r l d Bank,
in partnership w i t h other donors and development agencies, stands ready to provide assistance in a
number o f the above aseas over the next four years o f this Country Assistance Strategy (CAS 20062009). The CAS focuses o n three pillars: (i)governance for economic management and growth
support; (ii)
the development o f human capital and the mitigation o f the poverty effects o f transition;

and (iii)
resource and environmental management. To this end, a robust assistance program o f
analytical and policy advice, institution building, and finance for investment would be deployed. For
investments, up to US700 m i l l i o n in IBRD lending would be made available over the C A S period,
should Lebanon make an effort to significantly reduce the debt burden, carry out structural reforms,
enhance the safety net and poverty mitigation program, and improve portfolio performance. I F C and
MIGA would focus o n a number o f investment climate, privatization, political risk coverage, and
investment promotion activities.
vi,
The international response has been strong. Recognizing the need for external assistance, a
concerted international effort has taken place to mobilize assistance for Lebanon if it makes a credible
commitment to reform and takes concrete actions to implement a program for recovery and growth.
A Donors’ Conference to assist Lebanon i s anticipated during the First Quarter o f 2006.

vii.
This results-oriented CAS provides a framework for such assistance, including the ways
and means for setting priorities, and assessing and monitoring progress in a rapidly shifting policy
environment. While the pillars are not anticipated to change, the results framework will need to be
updated by the mid-term C A S review, in light o f the detailed Government reform program currently
under preparation.

...
viii.

Thefollowing issues are suggested for Board discussion:

I s the composition o f the program and the balance between lending, analytical work, and
institution building adequate?

A r e the levels o f assistance and the proposed triggers in line with Lebanon’s development
challenges and current policies?

11

I.COUNTRY C O N T E X T

A.

The Civil War Legacy

1.
Lebanon’s devastating 15-year Civil War (1975-1990) resulted in massive economic,
social, and political destruction. Because o f Lebanon’s C i v i l War, most o f the country’s
infrastructure was destroyed or severely damaged, a quarter o f the population was displaced, one in
five Lebanese citizens - mostly professionals and skilled workers - left the country, and public
institutions were severely weakened. Today, 15 years after the end o f the C i v i l War, Lebanon i s in
the difficult position o f having not completed the post-war reconstruction process, from both physical
and institutional perspectives. Lebanon i s facing severe short-term macro-economic difficulties and
long-term poverty and environmental challenges. Lebanon’s current level o f per capita income i s still
one-third below the level o f 1975.
2.
Initially, Lebanon made a strong recovery, restoring basic services and rehabilitating
basic infrastructure while maintaining economic stability. By 1997, per capita real incomes had
nearly doubled from their end-war levels, many o f the country’s social indicators had returned to prewar levels, and much o f Lebanon’s infrastructure had been rebuilt, and public services restored.

However, this period of initial recovery came at a cost. Public debt had rapidly
3.
accumulated to unsustainable levels, and the country experienced a slowdown o f economic growth,
the continued weakening o f public institutions, and limited progress in structural reforms. The
unsettled regional situation, often intractable differences in national politics and external
interferences, added to Lebanon’s difficulties.
B.

Macro-Economic and Structural Issues

4.
By 1997, the Lebanese public had become aware of large macro-economic imbalances.
The high public and external deficits o f the initial post-war years, while not unusual during

reconstruction, were becoming unsustainable, and the newly prepared Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS) at that time (December 1997) stressed the necessity for a sharp fiscal adjustment. If the
accumulation o f the public debt was not contained, the base case stability and growth scenario
developed in the C A S (Table 1) would be threatened.

Table 1. Actual Economic Developments and 1997 CAS Base Case Projections, 1998-2005

Real GDP Growth (%)
CPI Inflation (%)
Gross Debt Over GDP (%)
Fiscal Balance Over GDP (YO)a/
Primary Fiscal Balance Over GDP (YO)a/
Net Debt Over Revenue (YO)
Primary Fiscal Balanceover Revenue (%)
Gross Foreign Reserves (USS billion)
Net Foreign Reserves (US$ billion)
Banks’ Deposits Dollarization Rate (%)

1997
15.6
2.7
8.2
97.8
-24.6
-10.1
587
-51.0
5.9
3.1
63.9

1998
16.9
2.7
0.3
109.2
-15.2
-2.1
576
-1.5
6.4
3.0
65.5

1999
17.0
-0.8
0.3
131.4
-15.6
-1.5
600
1.5
7.6
4.8
61.6

Current Account Balance (% o f GDP)
1997 CAS Base Case Pro.iections
Real GDP Growth (%)
CPI Inflation (%)
Gross Debt Over GDP (%)
Fiscal Balance over GDP (%)

-30.8
1997
4.0
8.5
89.0
-18.8

-23.6
1998
5.0
8.0
93.0
-14.7

-19.5
1999
6.0
7.0
94.0
-11.8

Actual Figures
Gross Domestic Product (US$ billion)

2000
16.7
0.9
-0.3
149.9
-24.6
-7.9
738
-35.2
5.7
2.5
66.9
-18.2
2000
6.5
6.0
94.0
-10.1

Source: World Bank Staff Calculations based on MOF, MOET, C R I and BDL.

* Projections as o f September 2005.

ai includes foreign-financed capital expenditures.

1

2001
17.1
4.4
-2.4
165.7
-18.6
-1.8
877
1.7
4.4
-0.8
72.5
-19.9

2002
18.5
2.6
4.5
170.0
-15.4
1.2
761
5.4
5.1
-0.2
69.3
-17.9

2003
20.0
4.9
4.3
167.0
-13.7
2.5
711
14.1
10.2
3.2
66.1
-20.9
2001-2005
7.3
5.0
75.0
-4.8

2004
21.9
6.3
4.8
163.9
-9.9
2.3
661
13.3
9.5
0.1
70.0

2005”
22.3
1.o
1.4
171.4
-10.5
1.1
730
8.0
9.9
-0.8
72.0

-18.9

-20.2

5.
Efforts made by the Authorities since 1997 were notable but were insufficient to stabilize
the debt. These efforts included deep tax reforms and debt restructuring, which significantly

improved tax collection and lowered the debt service. Between December 1997 and December 2004,
however, the gross public debt rose dramatically - from US15.4 billion (98 percent o f GDP) to
US$35.8 billion (164 percent o f GDP), and was projected to approach US$38 billion (171 percent of
GDP) by end-2005. Although the primary deficit dropped significantly during this period - to
eventually turn (from 2002) into a surplus, the debt dynamics i s still considered highly unsustainable
in the face o f current GDP growth rates and interest rates (see B o x 1).

Box 1. Lebanon’s Debt

B y end-2005, Lebanon’s public debt will approach US$38 billion, or approximately 171 percent o f GDP, the
highest ratio in the world. In 2005 the debt service will have stood at about 11-12 percent o f GDP, down from
16-17 percent in the period 2000-2003, thanks to the major debt restructuring efforts undertaken in 2003
following the Paris I1 Conference. The vast majority o f the debt i s held by private investors - by Lebanese
commercial banks, in particular, which are highly exposed on the sovereign risk (more than half o f their assets
are in public bonds or at the Central Bank). Half o f the debt i s denominated in foreign currencies, mostly in
US. Dollars. Debt denominated in local currency has an average maturity o f 1.8 years, against 5.8 years for
debt denominated in foreign currency. Yet maturities are not evenly distributed, with 75 percent o f the current
debt to mature over the CAS period 2006-2009, including 50 percent over its first two years.
Sustainability analysis suggests that the primary surplus, at less than 2 percent o f GDP in 2005, would need to
increase rapidly to 6-7 percent to maintain the debt to GDP ratio at its current level under adverse circumstances
(a rise in interest rates, exchange rate fluctuation, growth deceleration). In the absence o f fiscal and structural
reform measures, World Bank projections suggest that the debt to GDP ratio would start to rise again (base
case), placing Lebanon in a situation o f greater vulnerability with dampened growth. In contrast, measures that
would result in a significant rise in the primary surplus, coupled with the privatization o f some public assets,
would permit to lower the debt to GDP ratio (high case) by the end o f the CAS period.
6.
Growth slowed down after the initial boom o f post-war reconstruction. Estimated
economic growth did not exceed 2-3 percent (in annual terms o n average) over the period 1997-2005
- d o w n from 6-7 percent during the initial post-war phase o f recovery and reconstruction (19921997). Furthermore, economic growth was very volatile over this period and strongly responsive to
external and political shocks. Lebanon can structurally benefit from massive financial transfers and
capital inflows from abroad. However, most o f these savings are consumed or unproductively
invested, hence preventing the extension and modernization o f supply capacities, and in turn,
economic growth and j o b creation. Over the years, the Lebanese economy has progressively entered
into a slow growth trap, whereas declining investment’ reflects lack o f profitable business
opportunities and weak external competitiveness. The latter suffer from the upward pressure o n price
levels’ exerted by transfers and capital inflows, which i s not compensated w i t h productivity gains. In
turn, the economy has gradually abandoned important sectors o f activity to foreign competition and
concentrated its productive resources into non-tradable activities where the demand i s moribund and
productivity gains potentially scarcer. In the face o f high reservation wages (with high price levels),
would-be domestic workers prefer to emigrate (skilled youths in particular) or not participate in the
labor market (women notably). T w o percent o f the labor force i s emigrating every year, and
Lebanon’s human capital is progressively eroding, despite massive education spending. Structural
impediments to private investment (from costly utilities, t o a configuration o f high regulatory barriers,
to private investment and monopolies, see B o x 2), high real interest rates, and macro-economic
uncertainty linked to the debt overhang most likely prevented Lebanon from channeling a greater
share o f its large financial base towards productive investments.

’

Investment as a percentage o f GDP decreased from for 31 percent in the period 1994-1997 to less than 21
percent since 2001. Banks’ credits to the private sector have been saturated since 2001 (Source: MOET, ABL).
While broadly similar in 1992, price levels in Lebanon were almost twice that o f comparator uppermiddle-income countries in 2004 (Source: W D I indicators).
2

Box 2. The Private Sector in Lebanon: Entrepreneurship
in the Midst o f InstitutionalMalaise
I t i s ironic that Lebanon’s entrepreneurs, who have flourished just about everywhere in the world, are struggling in
Lebanon. Obviously, macro-economic conditions can explain much o f the weaknesses in the private sector, but numerous

surveys have suggested that the problems extend well beyond the macro-economic conditions, into the very structure of
Lebanon’s economy and governance.

Lebanon has the one rare ingredient o f economic productivity that most countries in the region lack: a multi-lingual,
talented, entrepreneurial, and relatively well-educated workforce. In general, Lebanon also has a strong banking sector and
a strong services sector (tourism, the media, retail and wholesale trading, professional services, including education and
health). But, Lebanon lacks some o f the common ingredients that most countries now take for granted: a reliable and
affordable power supply; a modem Information and Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure; efficient trade
facilitation systems (including customs, border crossing and transport logistics); a streamlined regulatory system for
business entry, operation and exit; modem corporate governance and capital market regulations; protection for intellectual
property rights; and a legal framework to ensure competition in competitive markets, as well as for restricted markets
es, public services, natural monopolies).
Empirical studies b y the World Bank Group and others have shed light on the above constraints in Lebanon:
State Owned Enterprises and the Role of the Private Sector: The Bank has long maintained that privatization i s not an
end in itself, but a means to achieving an end. In Lebanon, the end should not be seen solely in terms o f getting the highest
return from privatization to reduce the public debt. Indeed, the total valuation o f enterprises with the potential for
privatization i s quite small in relation to the total debt (around 10-15 percent). Rather, the end should be to reduce the cost
and enhance the quality o f service in key industries such as power and telecommunications, with the ultimate aim o f
spurring economic growth. A Public-Private Partnership Strategy needs to be developed which conceives o f the full scope
o f private participation options, from service contracts all the way to full privatization, and i s applied differently to SOEs
that are very different in nature (water, electricity, telecommunications, tobacco, airline, ports, casinos, etc.).

Barriers to Entry and Operation: Administrative barriers were highlighted in the recent cost o f doing business survey.*
In Lebanon, 46 days are needed to register a business, compared with the best practice o f less than 1 day. Contract
enforcement takes 721 days, three times as long as the OECD average. Other studies have highlighted similar areas o f
regulatory concern.
Corporate Governance: Corporate governance is also poor, with a disclosure index significantly worse than the MENA
average. This area requires immediate attention in terms o f developing the appropriate regulations, laws, enforcement
systems, and professional associations. This i s particularly fundamental to Lebanon’s financial services sector aspirations,
including the development and deepening o f capital markets.
Monopolies and Oligopolies: About half o f all Lebanese markets in agriculture, manufacturing and services are
considered oligopolistic or monopolistic; and one-third have a dominant firm w i t h a market share o f about 40 percent. This
might be due partly to the small size o f the economy, but artificial barriers do exist and they reduce opportunities for
competition.
Expanding Economic Activities Beyond the Greater Beirut Area: As in many small countries, Lebanon’s capital city,
Beirut, captures the bulk o f economic productivity. This i s natural in many sectors which require agglomeration
economies, access to universities, and a high quality o f life. But, real opportunities beyond tourism exist for local economic
development in secondary cities such as Tripoli, Sidon, Tyre, Ba’albeck, and Zahle which are not fully exploited. In these
areas, the opportunity exists to identify industrial clusters around transshipment and trade logistics, agro-industry, and small
manufacturing.
Trade Facilitation: Lebanon’s traditional role as a trade link between the East and the West is being undermined b y
substandard and outmoded infrastructure, operating systems, and regulations. Important improvements have been made to
the airport’s infrastructure, management and customs systems, but ports, highways linking the ports to Syria (especially
through Tripoli), border crossings, and other logistics need to be upgraded. The availability o f trade financing i s another
area which requires further investigation.

The World Bank Group i s providing assistance to reduce a number o f the above constraints, but Lebanon is still far behind
many countries o f similar income levels. A national strategy with a timetable and clear deliverables is needed to improve
the investment climate.
*Doing Business 2005, The World Bank, Washington, DC.

3

7.
The Lebanese macro-economic environment i s highly dependent on its financial and
fiscal situation. W i t h domestic banking deposits exceeding 260 percent o f GDP and a full openness

o f the capital account, confidence shocks can at any time entail massive capital outflows, which
would inevitably entail a large contraction o f the demand resulting from a forced closure o f the
current account deficit. In turn, depositors’ confidence in the financial system i s ultimately linked to
the fiscal situation, given the very high level o f exposure o f the banking system to the sovereign, in
foreign currency in particular. In the face o f potentially high vulnerabilities related to the public debt
was notably evidenced in the
overhang, Lebanon’s financial system seems particularly r e ~ i l i e n t .This
~
weeks following the assassination o f former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in February 2005, during
which financial stability was severely threatened.4 Fortunately, the financial authorities managed to
contain capital outflows and the situation eventually rebounded. But the fiscal, economic, and
financial costs implied by these events are very substantial and have left the country in an even more
precarious financial position. And while there i s a widespread sentiment in Lebanon that the financial
system can withstand any shock after it managed to avoid a full-blown confidence crisis in early 2005,
past experience around the world systematically demonstrates that private markets cannot indefinitely
accommodate rising public debt ratios. Even the most faithful investors can eventually lose
confidence in the Government’s capacity to honor i t s debt, and a major crisis can then ensue, w i t h
potentially devastating effects o n economic and social fabrics.

8.
Addressing the unsustainability o f the public debt dynamics and improving the
investment climate are national priorities for setting the country on a higher growth path. The

country has strong comparative advantages that should allow much faster longer-term real GDP
growth, above 5 percent every year. These advantages include: strong entrepreneurial skills, high
human capital, an open economy, a favorable geographical position, and a modem financial sector
able to attract large foreign i n ~ e s t m e n t ,a~l l o f which w o u l d help provide Lebanon with a base for
future growth and the development o f a modern, competitive, and outward-oriented economy.
However, this potential cannot be realized unless: (i)
the underlying macro imbalances are rapidly
addressed, through a significant drop in the debt stock and fiscal deficits; and (ii)the investment
climate i s improved so that the private sector can absorb a greater share o f savings currently invested
in public debt.

9.
Lessons from the failure to implement the Paris I1 reform plan should guide the design
of a new social and economic reform plan. In November 2002, the Government convened a
donors’ meeting - Paris 11, during w h i c h i t presented a program o f fiscal and structural policies

intended to reduce fiscal imbalances, maintain financial stability, and restore growth. The program
consisted o f three pillars. The first pillar was fiscal and reflected a major effort to bring the primary
surplus to 8-9 percent o f GDP by 2007, through a combination o f tax increases and expenditure
containment. The second pillar was financial and constituted restructuring the public debt towards
longer maturities and lower interest rates. The third pillar considered the privatization o f major State
Owned Enterprises whose proceeds would be used entirely to reduce the stock o f the debt. These

Lebanon probably benefits from the fact that most o f its public debt i s intermediated by domestic banks, which
have large access to foreign savings (commercial banks’ deposits represented 261 percent o f GDP by end-2004;
and current account deficits have been well above 20 percent o f GDP on average since 1992) from the Lebanese
Diaspora and Gulf countries. Over the years, the banking sector has progressively become locked into financing
the growing public sector financing needs, and has found itself trapped in a situation in which it becomes critical
for its own viability to maintain the solvency o f its most important client, the Government. This country-specific
characteristic could explain to some extent the greater resilience o f the Lebanese financial system to what i s
perceived to be an unsustainable debt dynamics.
In the month following Prime Minister Hariri’s assassination, US$5.2 billion (23 percent o f GDP) worth o f
Lebanese Pound-denominated deposits were converted into foreign currency, out o f which US$2 billion
(9 percent o f GDP) left the country. The Central Bank’s net reserves dropped and became strongly negative.
A l l these characteristics are considered, in the long-run, growth empirical literature as being fundamentally
favorable to growth (see Sachs and Warner, 1997, for instance). In contrast, the same literature underlines the
negative impact o f high government deficits and a poor institutional framework on long-run growth.

4

three pillars were embodied in the Budget Law o f 2003. Yet, only the second pillar materialized with
the assistance o f donors and Lebanese banks.
Other components o f the Paris I1 reform package
proved too ambitious in the face o f Lebanon’s weak institutional capacities and diffusion o f decisionmaking power. In particular, the Government’s privatization program, which was foreseen as
strongly reducing the debt stock and fostering economic activity, did not materialize. Lack o f
consensus on the ultimate role o f the existing public enterprises in the provision o f public goods,
together with insufficient technical preparation, probably explained this lack o f progress. Similarly,
Lebanon was unable to raise its primary surplus as much as i t had envisaged in the face o f the
population’s growing opposition to further fiscal adjustment. This suggests the need for strong
consensus-building efforts on key reforms areas, and a reinforcement o f social protection and safety
nets to insure a fair sharing o f the adjustment burden across the various political and social groups in
Lebanon.

C.

Poverty, Human Development, and the Millennium Development Goals

10.
An accurate understanding of the poverty situation in Lebanon and o f progress made
over the past decade i s very difficult to obtain, given the weakness o f baseline information and
the lack o f recent data on income o r expenditures. The most recent source o f statistical
information’ on income and consumption dates back to 1997 and data at that time focused only on the
Greater Beirut Area, excluding most o f the country and population. In addition, there i s no official
poverty line in Lebanon. Along with a Living Conditions Survey, a new Household Budget Survey
(nationally representative) was conducted in 2004, but expenditure data necessary for poverty
calculation were not yet available at the time o f writing o f the CAS (November 2005).
11.
Regional disparities in poverty levels are believed to be significant. Recent indirect
indicators o f poverty (based on the knowledge o f local social actors, or the consumption o f particular
items for which data exists at a detailed geographical level) suggest large geographical disparities in
poverty rates.’ Poverty i s concentrated in suburbs o f large urban poles, or on the contrary, in remote
rural areas (from an accessibility perspective). Zones o f conflict during the war also still appear to
constitute major pockets o f poverty.

12.
Unemployment i s high among youth, prompting emigration in large numbers.
According to a Living Conditions Survey conducted in 2004, the active population stood that year at
1.17 million (31 percent o f the estimated population, excluding Palestinian refugee camps), out o f
which 8 percent declared themselves unemployed. Sixty-four percent o f the unemployed are aged
between 15 and 29 years (while the same age category represents 33 percent o f the active population).
In other words, the frequency o f unemployment among youth, at 16 percent, i s twice higher than the

US$4.4 billion was pledged by the donors at the Paris I1 Conference, out of which US$3.1 billion was for debt
restructuring, and the remainder for project finance. US$2.4 billion worth o f soft loans was eventually
transferred for debt restructuring in 2003. Lebanese banks contributed to the debt restructuring effort through
the acquisition of 2-year public bonds at zero percent and the write-off o f some public debt detained by the
Central Bank. Paris I1 contributions from donors and Lebanese banks permitted to restructure part o f the debt
profile and lessened the terms on which the Government could borrow on the domestic market. These
contributions also encouraged private capital inflow and enabled the Central Bank to replenish its stock of
foreign reserves. Regional developments, through greater tourism inflow, growing oil prices, and the
repatriation of Arab funds in the region, coincidentally came to the rescue of Lebanon and eventually amplified
the positive impact o f Paris I1 on market confidence, private capital inflow, and interest rates.
Available informatioddata sets include: the Population and Housing Survey conducted in 1994-1996 by the
Ministry of Social Affairs, based on a method o f unsatisfied basic needs, which does not include income or
household expenditures; and the 1997 Central Administration of Statistics Survey on Household Income and
Budget, which includes information on household income and budget but i s not publicly available.
Source: “Formulation of a Strategy for Social Development in Lebanon”, Council for Development and
Reconstruction, Beirut, February 2005.

’

5

national average. These figures confirm those o f an earlier survey’ conducted in 2001 (although not
strictly comparable from a statistical sense), which also estimated the unemployment rate among
youth to be twice the national average. The 2001 survey indicated that 58 percent o f the unemployed
youth were considering emigration as a response to their poor economic conditions, and that 1.5 to 2
percent o f the active population had been emigrating every year between 1996 and 200 1.
13.
While Lebanon does spend significantly on health, education, and social welfare
programs - about 21 percent o f GDP, excluding pensions - the outcomes are not commensurate
with this level of spending. A unique feature i s the l o w public sector share o f this spending - only 6
percent o f G D P (compared to the international average o f 11 percent), and much o f the public
spending o n human development has a limited impact.” Most social sector programs, including
health and education, are not targeted to the poor. Rather, a significant share o f public social
spending takes the f o r m o f demand-side support (such as subsidies to c i v i l servants), instead o f
support for a more desirable increase in the supply and quality o f public social services. Thus, instead
o f supporting, for example, better schools or greater access to health services, a significant part o f
public spending i s allocated, via the government payroll, to families that may not necessarily be the
neediest.

The Government has sought Bank assistance in developing a social strategy. Given the
14.
anticipated fiscal contractionary environment in the coming years, i t i s important that the Government
develop a comprehensive poverty strategy that would focus o n h o w to mitigate the effects o f the
transition o n the poor and the near poor. The first critical step towards such a comprehensive poverty
strategy would be to develop a nationally representative poverty survey. The Government, through
the Ministry o f Social Affairs and the Central Administration o f Statistics, and with the support o f the
World Bank, U N D P and UNFPA, i s in the process o f implementing a multi-purpose household survey
- the first o f i t s kind in Lebanon. The W o r l d Bank i s also providing technical assistance o n pension
and social security reform, social public expenditure reform, and creating a safety net.
As in the case of poverty, little accurate data exist on the status o f women in Lebanon.
15.
Nevertheless, various studies point to the fact that women have made significant gains over the past
two decades in areas such as education, where the gender gap has been closed in primary and
secondary enrollment rates (indeed, women have higher rates o f enrollment in higher education),
although this has not necessarily translated into equal access to economic activity o r to decisionmaking at the national level. For example, only 20 percent o f the female working age population (1564 years old) are working or are seeking a j o b compared to 76 percent o f men. In 2004, the
unemployment rate for women approached 11 percent, against 7.5 percent for men. The reasons
behind the seemingly low levels o f participation in the labor force are not fully understood. Further
investigation o f this issue (which should include some original data collection) i s necessary, as i s
further investigation into other factors which are impeding further empowerment o f women in
Lebanese society.

With respect to the remainder o f the Millennium Development Goals, Lebanon i s
16.
considered as “probably o r potentially” meeting them by 2015, with the majority o f the goals
classified as “probably will be met” by the UN MDG Report.” Ninety-eight percent o f children in
Lebanon enroll in primary education, and the percentage o f students completing primary education
has increased from 9 1 percent in 1997 to 95 percent in 2003. Mortality rates for children under age 5
years have declined significantly in the past decade. But compared t o other middle-income countries
Source: “L’entree des jeunes Libanais dans la vie active et l’emigration,” Saint-Joseph University, Beirut, June
2002.
loPer the recent World Bank’s Public Expenditure Review draft, which was delivered to the Government for
comments and clearance.
‘ I See Millenium Development Goals Report (MDGR) for Lebanon, by the Lebanese Government and UN
Country Team (September 2003).

6

and to the level o f expenditure o n health and education, Lebanon is considered to have relatively poor
quality health and education indicators, especially in the public sector. The Government i s keen to
achieve the Environmental Sustainability Goal, although it faces the challenge o f the absence o f a
national environment strategy and o f specific intervention programs that would respond to the need o f
this sector. F o r all the MDGs, there are important regional disparities in access, quality, and
efficiency issues.

D.

Natural Resources and the Environment

17.
Lebanon’s natural resources are being mined and degraded at an unsustainable rate.
Lebanon’s water resources, its landscape, and its overall environment are among its main assets and
are sources o f attraction to tourists and Diaspora Lebanese. The years o f war, however, followed by a
long period w h i c h lacked a clear environmental strategy, regulations, or enforcement, have severely
degraded these resources. In 2000, the cost o f environmental degradation in Lebanon was estimated
at between 2.8 percent and 4.0 percent o f GDP per year.” The estimated costs o f this damage are
broken d o w n by environmental category in Figure 1.

18.
The cost of environmental degradation measured here i s not limited to the resources
themselves. The cost spills into areas o f public health, household budgets, the competitiveness o f the
economy, and inter-generational equity, where the rate o f mining and degradation means that many o f
these resources will not be available in the future.13
0

Water: Although service coverage i s
high, w i t h 90 percent o f municipal
households connected to the public

Figure 1. Annual Cost o f Environmental Degradation
by Environmental Category (mean estimate as a
percentage o f GDP).

,

water
system,
the
country’s
1.20%
infrastructure i s generally o l d and
deteriorated,
and
leaving
or
100%
overflowing wastewater results in
0 80%
severe
sanitary
conditions
and
0 60%
contaminates surface and ground
0 40%
water resources.
Operations and
management and billing deficiencies
0 20%
are equally weak, which l i m i t the
0 00%
ability to recover operating costs, let
Water
Air
Coastal
Land
Waste
alone any maintenance or capital
investment costs. Still, the private
cost o f water i s extremely high:
Lebanon’s population consumes a large quantity o f bottled water, due mostly to the
perception that the municipal water supply i s o f l o w quality. The cost associated w i t h this
perception i s estimated at around US$90 m i l l i o n per year. This high consumption also
contributes to increased plastic and glass bottle waste. F r o m a health perspective, it i s
estimated that about 260 children die every year (10 percent o f a l l child deaths) from
diarrhea-related diseases associated w i t h inadequate potable water, sanitation, and hygiene.

[

0

Air Quality: Despite significant improvements in overall air quality levels due to the recent
banning o f light diesel vehicles, the impact o f air pollution o n human health i s still

significant, w i t h an estimate o f about 350 premature deaths each year that are due to urban

Sarraf e t al., 2004, “Cost o f Environmental Degradation - The Case o f Lebanon and Tunisia,”
Environmental Economics Series, Paper No. 97, World Bank Environmental Department.
l3Cost measures include: (i)
loss o f a healthy life and the well-being o f the population; (ii)
economic losses
loss o f environmental opportunities
(reduced soil productivity, value o f lost resources, loss in tourism); and (iii)
(reduced recreational value for beaches, forests, etc.).
7

air pollution. Additional cases o f chronic bronchitis and other forms o f respiratory illnesses
are counted by the thousands. About 80 percent o f air pollution i s generated by vehicles,
while the rest can be attributed mostly to power generating plants.
0

E.

Coastal and L a n d Degradation: B o t h types o f degradation are the result o f untreated and
often illegally dumped municipal solid waste and wastewater, as well as uncontrolled
development o n shorelines and fragile landscapes (including quarries, deforestation, and
industrial development in watershed areas). Combined, their cost exceeds 1 percent o f GDP.
Governance

T h e root o f Lebanon’s problems lies in its governance structure. Some aspects of
19.
governance in Lebanon are unique to the country and reflect i t s confessional mosaic. But this
should not justify a lack o f transparency o f public processes o r accountability o f public officials.
Lebanon’s governance structure reflects its confessional mosaic o f 17 different sects: the seats in the
National Assembly are shared equally between Christians and Muslims; the President must be a
Maronite Christian; the Prime Minister must be a Sunni Muslim; and the Speaker o f the Assembly
must be a Shia Muslim. This formula ensures that no single leader can dominate national decision
making and that most public affairs issues are subject to consensus among the major groups o f the
Government. This is, perhaps, an aspect o f governance deeply embedded in the Constitution and the
T a i f Accord, and has many virtues in the Lebanese context. The downside o f this arrangement, as has
been made clear in the past few years, i s that it can potentially paralyze structural reforms in the
absence o f full consensus and render it difficult to hold Government officials accountable for ultimate
executive responsibility.
20.
On the positive side, Lebanon has many o f the constitutional institutions which have a
positive influence on g ~ v e r n a n c e . ‘ ~Indeed, Lebanon ranks among the highest o f countries in the
region in terms o f political participation, c i v i l liberties, and a free press. A m o n g the most important
features o f such accountability are the following: (i)
Lebanon holds regular parliamentary and local
supervision by the media and c i v i l society i s fairly strong, and unfettered public debates
elections; (ii)
o n governance are a regular feature o f public life; and (iii)
the Lebanese L a w o f Associations i s one o f
the most liberal and one o f the oldest in the region, reflecting the large number o f NGOs active in all
parts o f the country. This i s an important and unique asset for Lebanon in the region, and the country
can build o n this asset by enhancing public awareness o f national challenges so that “participation”
becomes a more meaningful exercise by informed citizens.
21.
On the negative side, Lebanon ranks low in terms o f the quality o f i t s bureaucracy, the
independence o f civil service from political pressure, corruption, and tax evasion.” The country
lacks the modern, flexible, and business-friendly regulatory framework and apparatus needed for the
sustainable development o f the private sector. Civil service reform i s o n hold, which leaves the c i v i l
service staffed with people who have little training and are unprepared to tackle the modern demands
o f public administration. Budgeting and capital expenditure procedures need to be revamped.
Lebanon’s legal framework also needs modernization, especially in the area o f commercial l a w and
courts. At the local level, elections and participation are guaranteed, but without the corresponding
decentralization of, or financial autonomy for, the local councils. Addressing all o f these issues i s
complicated by the governance structure itself, which, by design, diffbses political authority among
various sects and branches o f the Government. These governance issues are reflected in most sectors
and in the Bank’s o w n portfolio, in which physical components have tended to move (albeit slowly)

l 4 “Better Governance for Development in the Middle East and North Africa: Enhancing Inclusiveness and
Accountability”, The World Bank (2003).
15
Indeed, in terms o f the perception of corruption, Lebanon has slid in ranking from 78 in 2003 to 97 in 2004
according to the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index.

8

while reforms, especially those requiring coordinated actions beyond a particular ministry,I6 have
stagnated.

Box 3. Budgetary Processes Continue to be Opaque

While the Government has made progress in reporting the budgetary position on a regular basis, many
activities are conducted in an opaque manner. These activities include: (i) transactions o f extra-budgetary
funds and entities; (ii)
loans to selected public autonomous agencies that are converted to expenditure at
the end o f the financial year; (iii) unutilized investment authority that i s carried forward without
additional parliamentary disclosure; (iv) major funds for health, social services, and municipal financing
that are not disclosed to parliamentary budget scrutiny or for review o f actual performance against the
budget plans; and (v) the absence o f a formal audit opinion by the Court o f Accounts on the fairness o f
the Government’s annual financial report.
The CFAA which was delivered to the Government for comments and clearance has proposed a number
o f key refoms that, if implemented, would have direct impact on reforming the public financial
management system o f the Government. The priorities for the next 2-3 years, as proposed by the CFAA,
should be focused on: (i)establishing a unified budget framework that accounts for the financial
activities o f the public sector and presents it in a consolidated, audited set o f financial statements for the
public sector; (ii) strengthening internal controls by making the amendments to the Law on Accounting
through the introduction o f an internal audit function; (iii)
reforming the Court o f Accounts to make i t
independent o f the Government, remove i t from the Government’s internal financial control processes,
and focus its work on expressing an opinion on the fairness o f the Government’s annual financial
statements and on performance audits o f Government entities.

22.

The challenges going forward will be to build a national consensus needed around a
governance reform agenda and the commitment to implement it; and to insure that national
reforms are “unstuck” by streamlining the reform process itself. Areas o f actions include: (i)
budget consolidation and expenditure tracking; (ii)c i v i l service reform, including transparent
enhanced judicial capacity and independence; (iv)
processes for hiring based o n meritocracy; (iii)
revamping and empowering the control agencies responsible for ensuring public accountability and
transparency (Civil Service Board, Court o f Accounts, Central Inspection); and (v) to build the
capacity o f executive ministries/agencies at the middle management level and insulate them from
frequent political interference. All these are hndamentally sovereign initiatives - that is, the political
w i l l has to be endogenous for them to succeed. The Bank and other international organizations can
only play a helping role in sharing international best practices, technical know-how, and capacity

building.

l6 Indeed, some ministries, such as the Ministry o f Finance, Ministry o f Health, and Ministry o f
Telecommunications, and the Office o f the Minister o f State for Administrative Reform (OMSAR), have
undertaken important internal reforms o f their structures and systems.

9

11. C O U N T R Y DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND OUTLOOK
C o u n t r y Development Program”

A.

23.
The Government o f Lebanon fully appreciates the severity o f the current economic
situation, f r o m both a sustainable development perspective and a financial perspective, and has
expressed its commitment to undertake deep structural reforms supported by national
consensus. This sense o f urgency i s compounded by an awareness o f the limited and diminishing
impact over time o f the financial package put forward at the Paris I1 Conference to contain the growth

o f the public debt. The Government also acknowledges the utmost need to undertake deep structural
reforms, and considers the development o f a national political consensus necessary to embark o n a
program o f reforms that will profoundly reshape Lebanon’s political, economical, social, and judicial
systems.

The Government i s articulating i t s economic and social program around four main
24.
pillars. These are:
0

Modernizing the real economy;

0

Addressing Lebanon’s fiscal and debt sustainability challenges;

0

Improving the Government’s governance capacities and reforming the public sector; and

0

Improving social conditions and strengthening social safety nets.

25.
On the real economy front, the Government foresees privatization, trade liberalization,
the improvement o f the investment climate, and the development o f capital markets as major
elements o f i t s strategy. The Government would seek greater private participation in public utilities
(telecommunications, electricity, water), with private involvement ranging f r o m contract management
to full transfer o f public assets to the private sector, depending o n the situation o f various public
entities. Privatization w o u l d be accompanied by the establishment o f independent regulatory
authorities, with the objective to increase competition in these sectors. The Government w o u l d seek
full accession to the W o r l d Trade Organization, and envisages, in this regard, enforcing the legal
protection o f intellectual property rights. I t i s also committed to pursuing its gradual trade
liberalization with the European U n i o n (EU) and Greater Arab Free Trade Area countries. The
Government foresees the simplification o f the business regulatory environment (reducing entry and
exit barriers t o private sector operations; and enhancing the effectiveness o f the judiciary system) and
the development o f capital (debt and equity) markets as critical to the promotion o f private
investment.

26.
On the fiscal front, the Government i s aiming f o r the rationalization o f public
expenditures, the introduction o f a global income tax, and the r e f o r m o f the tax and debt
management administration. The rationalization o f expenditure comprises public and private
pension reform, power sector reform, and public expenditure management reforms. Proceeds from
privatization would be entirely used for debt reduction.
27.

On the governance front, the Government envisages developing a comprehensive
strategy to restructure public institutions based on a new appraisal o f the role o f the State, and
to overhaul the civil service through a large human resource plan. The strategy would address: (i)
public finance transparency; (ii)
civil service reform; (iii)
procurement reform; (iv) reducing red tape;
and (v) improving and enforcing anti-corruption measures.

” This section i s based on the presentation made by the Government o f Lebanon to donors in New York, United
States, on September 19,2005.

10

28.
On the social front, the Government foresees the necessity o f reinforcing social safety
nets and developing targeted programs to reach poverty clusters through NGOs and
municipalities. This includes the reform o f Social Security, the institutionalization o f current social
fund type projects, and the rationalization o f public social expenditures, in order to achieve greater
coverage and better targeting o f the latter.
29.
I n terms o f capital investment priorities, the Council for Development and
Reconstruction’s (CDR) Three-Year Development Program emphasizes the detrimental effects o f
limited investments o n water resources, the Lebanese coastline, and the agricultural sector.
Regionally, it acknowledges a “glaring” level o f regional disparities and calls for bridging the gap
towards achieving a “balanced development,” translated into full equity for basic services (potable
water, electricity, and telephone networks), and prioritization o f other services such as sewerage and
solid waste according to population density.
30.
I n light of these priorities, the Government (represented by the Prime Minister’s Office,
the Ministry o f Finance, the Ministry o f Economy and Trade, the Central Bank, and the
Council f o r Development and Reconstruction) has been in close coordination with the B a n k and
other international agencies to align donor advisory services w i t h r e f o r m and investment
priorities.

B.

Economic Outlook

3 1.

The sources o f uncertainty regarding Lebanon’s economic outlook are considerable.
They range f r o m uncertainty about the external economic environment (oil prices, global interest
rates, global growth) to uncertainty about regional political developments (the Arab-Israeli conflict;
developments in Iraq, Syria, and Iran), the readiness o f donors to provide financial support, and
Lebanese domestic developments, whether economic, financial, political, or social. This, added to the
absence o f solid statistical information (balance o f payments, real economy indicators) renders any
forecasting exercise difficult at best. Nevertheless, some important parameters need to be considered
in assessing Lebanon’s possible outlook.
32.
On the external side, it i s unlikely that the environment w i l l continue to be as favorable
as i t has been in recent years. Global interest rates are projected to rise over the medium term (by
some 300 basis points over the C A S period)I8, which will exert a significant upward pressure o n the
Government’s borrowing costs. A t the regional level, capital flows in the aftermath o f September 11,
2001 have been significant, and may continue for the foreseeable future, depending, notably, o n the
evolution o f o i l prices.
33.
On the regional side, uncertainties are likely to remain high. An Israeli-Arab peace
settlement i s not yet in sight, nor i s a rapid stabilization o f the political situation in Iraq, w h i c h could
open sizeable outlets to Lebanese exporters. Growing tensions between SyridIran and Western
countries could also have some repercussions o n the domestic political scene. Donors, w h o expressed
their intention to support the Government’s reform program, might, nevertheless, require the ex-ante
implementation o f reform measures before substantial additional assistance (for debt restructuring
notably) can be disbursed.
34.
On the domestic policy side, coherence among various branches o f t h e Government and
broad political support w i l l be a deciding factor in Lebanon’s capacity to undertake such a
challenging fiscal adjustment, in particular when it i s designed to r e f o r m and rationalize public
expenditures, raise tax revenue, and transfer public assets to the private sector. At the time o f
writing the CAS, the Government had not yet articulated in detail i t s reform plan. The adoption o f

’* “MENA Economic Development and Prospects”, The World Bank, April 2005.
11

such a plan by the Cabinet, the Parliament, and more broadly by the population, has, therefore, yet to
be seen.

35.
I n the short run, the likelihood of a market-driven financial disruption seems low, but
the prospect o f a confidence crisis cannot be dismissed. Short-term risks are reduced by the level
o f gross foreign currency reserves at the Central Bank, which by end-2005 should approach 40
percent o f GDP and cover 48 percent o f the money supply in local currency. But w i t h such a high
debt to GDP ratio, combined w i t h a pegged exchange rate and high capital mobility, Lebanon w i l l
remain vulnerable to a confidence crisis. In light o f the aforementioned considerations, three
scenarios could be envisaged:

36.
A first scenario would correspond to a “muddling-through’’ situation: The Government
would continue to undertake some policy measures in the right direction, but these measures
would be too weak and would be dependent on the political mood of the moment. Overall, the

policy framework would be insufficient to stabilize the debt dynamics, which would inevitably expose
the country to greater risks o f financial disruption and would further hamper its growth prospects.
From a C A S perspective, this scenario would define the W o r l d Bank’s base case engagement. (Table
2 shows base case scenario projections for selected macro-economic indicators). At the time o f
writing the CAS, Lebanon was considered by the C A S team to be in the base case.

Table 2. Base Case Scenario Projections: Selected Macro-Economic Indicators, 2005-2009
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Real Gross Domestic Investment
Export Volumes, GNFS
Import Volumes, GNFS

1.o
2.7
-5.0
-4.0
0.0

3.0
1.8
2.9
4.0
2.6

2.5
1.7
1.2
4.2
-0.7

2.0
0.9
0.6
4.3
-1.5

2.0
0.9
0.7
4.3
-1.6

Ratios to G D P (%)
Gross Domestic Investment

20.0

20.0

20.0

20.0

20.0

-0.9
-20.9
1.1
-10.5
171

-0.5
-20.5
1.2
- 10.4
175

0.3
-19.7
2.3
-10.7
179

1.5
-18.5
2.9
-11.7
186

2.7
-17.3
3.5
-12.2
193

8.0
730

8.1
716

9.7
718

12.4
742

14.7
774

Growth Rates (%)

Real GDP
Real Private Consumption

Gross Domestic Savings
Resource Balance
Fiscal Primary Balance a/
Fiscal Balance a/
Gross Public Debt
Fiscal Triggers
Fiscal Primary Surplus Over Fiscal Revenue

Net Public Debt Over Fiscal Revenue
Source: World Bank Staff Projections.
a/ Includes foreign-financedcapital expenditures.

37.
A second scenario would see the policy framework envisaged by the new Government
being fully implemented. This would involve bold fiscal efforts to increase the primary fiscal
surplus; pension and civil service reform; active debt management; significant overhauling o f
the power sector; and enhanced private sector participation in utilities. In this scenario, the fiscal
primary surplus would reach 6-7 percent o f GDP by the end o f the C A S period, a level that would
initially stabilize and then progressively reduce the debt to GDP ratio”. Structural reforms that would
improve the business environment, competition, the entry and operation o f SMEs, and better service

’’

The magnitude o f the decline in the debt to GDP ratio would then depend to a large extent on donors and
banks’ debt restructuring contributions. A very optimistic scenario would foresee the debt to GDP ratio going
down to 120-130 percent by 2009; a less optimistic one to 140-150 percent.

12

delivery ( o f power in particular) would upgrade, to some degree, the long-term growth potential o f the
Lebanese economy2’. However, the situation would remain fragile and would require broad public
support. Also, social policies would be needed to bridge the gap in public services, health and
education, and better protect the most vulnerable segments during the adjustment. This scenario i s
ambitious if it i s judged by the track record o f several years o f policy paralysis. Nevertheless, it i s
realizable in light o f the following: (i)the Government’s announced intentions to curb the debt
dynamics through structural reforms while shielding the poorest f r o m negative impacts o f the
adjustment2’; (ii)the probable large impact o f the power sector’s overhaul o n fiscal accounts,
economic activity, and Government credibility; (iii)the likely financial support o f the donor
community t o the implementation o f the reform program (social and economic) and debt
restructuring; and (iv) the likely large response o f the market to the perceived ability o f the
Government t o command a strong mandate for carrying out the adjustment program. From a C A S
perspective, this scenario would define the W o r l d Bank’s high case engagement.

38.
A third scenario would correspond to a rapid deterioration of the financial situation
should investors lose confidence in Lebanon’s capacity to honor its debt. A major economic
crisis would then ensue in the face of insufficient liquidity to finance the deficit and to roll-over
the debt stock. A negative shock, or simply the inability o f Lebanon to consolidate the fiscal
adjustment efforts undertaken in recent years, could be at the origin o f this reversal in investors’
perceptions. F r o m a CAS perspective, this scenario w o u l d define the W o r l d Bank’s low case
engagement and warrant a CAS Update. The latter would re-evaluate the situation and, accordingly,
the World Bank’s engagements w i t h a view to contain the growth in poverty, improve safety nets, and
guarantee the delivery o f basic services.

111.
A.

LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE PREVIOUS CAS AND LOOKING FORWARD
CAS Lessons

39.
The 1997 CAS predicated Bank Group assistance upon satisfactory macro-economic
performance (particularly in reducing the fiscal deficit) and good performance in the
implementation of the portfolio. As the “Review o f the 1997-2000 C A S Period” indicates,
outcomes, with respect to both o f these areas, were poor. Yet, there were important islands o f success
and progress in policy dialogue and project performance. The experience offers the following
important lessons for future engagement:
0

The complexity of the political environment for decision making in Lebanon should not
be underestimated. The Bank, like other donors, has often made the erroneous assumption
that simply because a piece o f policy reform i s in the national interest o f Lebanon it will be
implemented. In Lebanon, the confessional system o f governance and the resulting diffusion

o f political authority make such reforms subject to collective action, and such collective
action is, for the same reasons, far f r o m guaranteed.
0

I t i s important to stay out of lending in sectors where consensus on reform has yet to be
developed and to focus instead on non-lending analytical and advisory work until a
credible commitment can be ascertained.

*’This scenario envisages an average 5 percent nominal GDP growth (3 percent real) throughout the period, a

rate broadly similar to that observed since 1997. I t i s assumed here that the negative short term impact o f fiscal
adjustment on aggregate demand would be offset by a rapid decline in interest rates spreads and a more
progressive improvement in the investment climate.
In the absence o f any reliable poverty data (at the time o f writing o f the CAS), projecting poverty rates in the
various scenarios remain highly speculative, though, i t i s likely that a fiscal adjustment strategy only aimed at
reducing the public debt (Le., not accompanied with specific measures to protect the most vulnerable segments
o f the population) would aggravate the poverty situation in the short run.

’’

13

0

0

0

0

0

B.

The Bank’s analytical work, and i t s dissemination through dialogue w i t h the
Government, Parliament, civil society, and the media have been as important as lending
(if
n o t more so) in having a positive impact on strategic public choices in Lebanon.
I t i s important to learn to build on the country’s strengths: i t s private sector, civil
society, and local governments. The country’s strengths l i e in: (i)
i t s highly entrepreneurial
private sector, which has survived, and in some sectors prospered, in spite o f the difficult
environment; (ii)
i t s vibrant civil society/NGO sector, which has provided many o f the social
services and public goods traditionally provided by the Government; and (iii)its nascent
elected local councils, which have provided local services with limited resources.

I n the absence o f comprehensive civil service reform, public sector programs should a i m
to: (i)
help spin o f f public services that can be performed by the private sector, and (ii)
focus policy reforms and capacity building on successful public sector “islands” critical
to the management, monitoring, and regulation o f the economy, the social services, and
the environment.
Simpler projects should be designed, and adaptable instruments should be considered.
I t i s important to keep an eye on short-term fiscal trends, but a deep understanding o f
structural and institutional constraints to long-term development should also be
developed.

Portfolio Issues

40.
Every project in Lebanon i s b o r n w i t h two exogenous “flags,” signaling the risk
associated with the macro-economic record and poor track record o f completed projects.22 Any
additional “flag,” such as the “effectiveness” flag that results f r o m delayed ratification in Parliament,
immediately brands that project as a “potential problem project” for several years, and before the
concerned ministry or the project team has a chance to start implementing the project.

4 1.

Measurement issues aside, the Lebanon portfolio i s a challenging one, t o say the least. A
confluence o f macro, governance, organizational, capacity, and implementation problems has helped
put Lebanon’s portfolio o n the Bank’s “watch list,” w h i c h raises serious questions about the ability o f
the Bank to make a positive contribution t o development in Lebanon through lending, and about
Lebanon’s ability to absorb and make good use o f foreign-funded projects. In the past year, and in the
context o f political turmoil, the portfolio deteriorated even further. There have been important
exceptions in this portfolio picture, w i t h several projects performing very well.

42.
The Lebanese authorities have historically argued that W o r l d B a n k conditions and
procedures have been much more onerous than those o f other donors, and have thus
contributed to complications and delays. The Bank has accepted the responsibility for its o w n part,

and has worked to design simpler projects and, as part o f its overall internal streamlining effort,
continues to work o n simplifying procedures. However, the performance o f the Lebanese portfolio
remains weak vis-&vis the Bank’s overall regional and global portfolios and the portfolios o f other
major donors, which suggests a need to address systemic problems in the Lebanese portfolio.

The two flags are Country Environment and Country Record. The first i s based on a composite indicator o f a
country’s weak macro management. The second i s based on an independent evaluation o f samples o f completed
projects (selected by the Operations and Evaluations Department), where net commitments associated with
unsatisfactory projects represent more than 40 percent o f commitments for completed projects over the previous
five years.
22

14

43.
Joint efforts to diagnose and address portfolio problems have resulted in a two-pronged
approach to improving the portfolio: (i)
a short-term approach to adapt the portfolio to current
macro and implementation conditions; and (ii)
a medium-term CAS-driven approach, to launch
the type o f incentives, policies, procedural reforms and capacity building needed to realize the
development objectives o f the country.

44.

To address the short-term portfolio management issues, the Bank and the Government
have made concerted efforts to proactively address project issues, as well as restructure or
cancel projects when ne~essary.’~In 2004, the Bank rolled out the “Client Connection” to provide
the Government w i t h full access to project information, and in partnership with the Government
(Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry o f Finance, and CDR), started a Quarterly Portfolio Performance
Review (QPPR) to ensure a proactive monitoring/problem solving approach to the portfolio. An
intensive procurement training program i s also under way.

45.
However, these measures by themselves are not sustainable in the absence of systemic
improvements in a number of areas o f public management/policy making. These areas are
discussed in the following six paragraphs.

46.
Agreement on sector strategy up front: Going forward, all proposed investment lending
operations need to be strongly justified within a broad sectoral approach, agreed upon ex ante
with the various branches o f Government. Such a dialogue o n reform has already begun in the
areas o f debt and fiscal management, health, pensions, safety nets, water, and power with significant

potential o n the upside in terms o f rationalizing fiscal policy and reducing poverty. Other potential
sectors for future agreement include the reform o f oversight and control agencies, education,
municipal finance, procurement, and solid waste management.

Parliamentary ratification procedures: Effectiveness delays in Lebanon are highest in
47.
the MENA region, and have considerable implications for the cost of projects and the
realization o f their development objectives. While the Parliament has a constitutional responsibility
to ratify all foreign loans, there i s considerable room for streamlining the procedures. Such a
discussion has already begun with members o f Parliament and should result in concrete steps to

reduce the ratification time.

Counterpart funds and land expropriation: In an attempt to contain and manage the
48.
budget deficit from year to year, the slow release of project counterpart funds and the absence
of budget appropriations for land expropriation have resulted in considerable delays in project
implementation. A move, currently under way, to accrual-based accounting and medium-term
budgeting w i l l reduce any incentives to delay payments by fully budgeting and accounting for project
costs up front.

49.
The attracting and retaining of quality civil servantskonsultants in t h e public sector to
ensure the sustainability o f improvements: A Government freeze on all new hiring, subject to
approval b y the Cabinet o f Ministers, has helped to put the lid on an expenditure item that had
been growing without control. However, i t has also made i t difficult t o hire critical staff to

m a n a g e h n systems aimed at modernizing the public sector, or even to retain o r replace skilled c i v i l
servants who are going into retirement.24 This, typically, has thrown into doubt the sustainability o f
the institutional development components o f many previous Bank projects. As the Government i s

23 Under the first CPPR (June 2001), U S 7 8 million was cancelled from three problem projects, and a fourth one
was cancelled (because o f the suspension o f an undisbursed amount o f US$16.5 million). The second CPPR
(October 2002) focused on bringing the problem projects to a satisfactory status and preventing hrther
deterioration o f the projects at risk. The 2003 PIP reduced unsatisfactory projects by half through the
cancellation and restructuring o f non-performing projects.
24 The average age o f civil servants in the public sector i s 58 years, and mandatory retirement i s 64 years o f age,
implying a high rate o f attrition in the years to come.

15

contemplating broad reforms and capacity building, the issue o f hiring, compensating, or redeploying
c i v i l servants and consultants needs to be fully addressed.

50.
Procurement reform: World Bank projects implemented by CDR have frequently faced
procurement problems and delays. A recent diagnosis carried out by the International Training
Center o f the ILO pointed to a number o f deficiencies including the high centralization o f decision
making, the lack o f a “manual o f procedures,” and the need for further capacity building o f
procurement staff o n W o r l d Bank procedures. CDR has recently moved to address these constraints
in an attempt to quickly turn around the performance o f the portfolio. Beyond CDR, however, other
ministries and public agencies have to abide by an antiquated Public Procurement L a w and
procedures dating back to 1959 and 1963. A revised draft public procurement l a w was prepared with
an IDF grant. If approved and implemented, i t would greatly enhance the efficiency and transparency
o f public procurement procedures and would allow the Bank to rely increasingly o n national public
procurement systems.
51.
Portfolio triggers: The base lending scenario envisioned in this CAS partly reflects the
poor state of the portfolio (see Section IV, Part C.). M o v i n g to higher levels o f engagement will
require reducing problem projects (no more than 33 percent); increasing the disbursement rate (equal
to or above 15 percent) and ensuring more rapid ratification o f loans (9 months or less).

C.

Preparing the New CAS

52.
The CAS preparation process has overlapped three consecutive Governments,
establishing a much broader consensus around its broad strategy and pillars. In anticipation o f a
change in Government in 2004, extensive C A S consultations were carried out with a broad set o f
stakeholders, within and outside the Government, to ensure broad endorsement o f the strategy and the
pillars. Indeed, the pillars and broad direction identified w i t h the previous Government’s counterpart
team (representing the Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry o f Finance, and CDR), were validated
and elaborated w i t h the new counterpart team. A C A S workshop held with the core counterpart team
(the Prime Minister’s Office, the MOF, and CDR), and later with the extended Government,
confirmed Government endorsement o f the C A S pillars and matrix.
53.
CAS consultations in Lebanon have been extensive. Given the substantial freedom o f the
press in Lebanon and the considerable tolerance for public discourse, the Bank planned and
implemented an extensive C A S consultation process w i t h Parliament, the private sector, c i v i l society,
and the press o n the three pillars o f the CAS. A m o n g the m a i n outputs o f the consultations have been
the following: (i)
refinement and augmentation o f the C A S outcomes and indicators, and Bank inputs;
(ii)
agreement o n enhancing the relationship with Parliament through the C A S and project cycles by
organizing regular briefings o n project preparation, implementation performance, and outcome
evaluation; and (iii)
j o i n t W o r l d Bank-IFC follow-up with the Chambers o f Commerce o n progress in
removing regulatory constraints to the entry and operation o f the private sector (see Annex 111).

Given the outcome orientation of the CAS, it was agreed that consultations would be on54.
going to take stock o f the progress made towards the intermediate and CAS outcomes.

D.

Development Partners

55.
The Bank has been working very closely with its international and regional partners to
forge a well thought out and coordinated strategy for Lebanon. The partners’ programs are
described in the C A S Results Matrix (Annex I)and in Annex 11. The present section outlines the
programs o f the m a i n partners and the j o i n t efforts and activities.

16

56.
International Monetary Fund. Although the IMF does not have a formal program with
Lebanon, i t has carried out Article 4 Consultations and capacity building o f the macro-economic,
fiscal, and financial sector management. Field missions have coordinated very closely o n analytical
work, and have joined forces in preparing the IMF’s Fiscal ROSC and the Bank’s Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA). Since the recent opening o f the IMF’s M i d d l e East Technical
Assistance Center (METAC), coordination on capacity building in several areas i s poised to grow.

57.

European Commission. The EC’s Lebanon National Indicative Program 2002-2004
identifies four priorities: (i)the development o f the trade sector/implementation o f the Association
Agreement; (ii)the integrated rural development program for alleviating poverty; (iii)support for
environmental protection; and (iv) support for exchanges and cooperation in the education sector.
The Bank and E C are in close coordination with the Lebanese Government o n the power, water, and
capacity building o f C D R to ensure strategic complementarities and improved absorptive capacity o f
donor-funded projects. Going forward, E C assistance to Lebanon would be governed by the European
Neighborhood Policy (ENP). The ENP provides a framework for the Lebanese Government to
develop a five-year Action Plan that would enhance economic integration and deepen political
cooperation with the EU. The Action Plan i s s t i l l to be developed, pending the Government’s more
precise identification o f its policy priorities. The E C has sought Bank feedback o n that front, and
regular exchange o f information and review by the Bank o f E C programs i s envisaged.

58.
Regional and Bilateral Donors and UN Agencies. These donors and UN agencies provide
advisory services and finding to projects aimed at supporting development efforts and social sectors,
and improving physical infrastructure and vital services in the country. The Bank participates in
regular donor and agency coordination meetings. These meetings provide an opportunity for
participants to present their programs and address common issues. The m a i n activities o f each
donor/agency are spelled out per pillar in Annex 11.
IV. PROPOSED BANK COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

59.
The proposed Bank Country Assistance Strategy i s guided by the Bank’s current
portfolio and by lessons learned from the previous CAS period. Namely, Bank resources would
improving the performance o f the current portfolio
be focused o n the following priority areas: (i)
through supervision and through building implementation capacity; (ii)expanding analytical and
advisory activities in support o f the improved economic, social, and environmental management o f
the transition process; and (iii)
limiting lending activities to sectors in which a credible commitment to
reform i s established ex ante.

A.

The CAS Pillars

60.
The objective o f the CAS i s to help Lebanon build its public institutions to transition out
of its current macro-economic imbalances; to address the social and environmental implications
o f the transition in an equitable fashion; and to lay the foundations for job creation and growth.
Bringing down the public deficit i s a necessary condition for sustained debt reduction and economic
growth; but this requires greater fiscal tightening, w h i c h in turn i s likely to have a negative impact o n
the most vulnerable in the society and o n growth itself in the short run. The success o f a painful
a credible fiscal
transition period to sustainable growth requires several ingredients simultaneously: (i)
adjustment program to improve investors’ anticipations and lower interest rates; (ii)a better
investment climate to enhance the growth response to the restored macro-economic conditions; and
(iii)a more efficient social program geared towards social protection for the most vulnerable groups.
In addition, many capital investments and maintenance operations o f a public good nature are likely to
be postponed during the transition, and this might cause irreversible degradation to the natural
environment. Hence, there i s a need to move strategically and selectively o n investments in these
areas.

17

61.
Three pillars are envisaged to help Lebanon in this transition and beyond: (1)
governance, economic management, and growth support; (2) developing human capital and
mitigating the poverty effects of transition; and (3) resource and environmental management.
These pillars overlap very w e l l with the Government’s strategy (see Section 11. A.) that i s to be
considered in a high case scenario, as well as with the Bank’s assessment o f what needs to be or can
be achieved over the next four years in light o f the current macro-economic and political outlook and
the status o f the existing portfolio. Their expected outcomes are described in the next paragraphs and
in Annex Iin greater detail.

CAS Pillar (1): Governance, Economic Management, and Growth Support
62.
This pillar aims to support the central objective o f the CAS, Le., t o address the underlying
deficiencies in the governance and management o f public finance in terms o f transparency,
accountability, information, and capacity building. Such reforms would reduce the sources o f macroeconomic imbalances and put the economy o n a path towards sustainable growth in the medium to
long term. The challenge for the Government is to: (i)bring the country’s indebtedness to a clearly
declining trend through governance reforms, fiscal discipline, and debt management; and (ii)
move
aggressively to remove the structural constraints to investment through a combination o f regulatory
reforms and public investments aimed at enhancing the competitiveness o f the private sector. This
pillar, therefore, i s divided into two components: governance and economic management o n the one
hand, and growth support o n the other hand.
63.
Governance and Economic Management. This component w o u l d contribute to the
realization o f three main outcomes: (i)improved transparency o f budget processes and tracking o f
public expenditure incidence and impact; (ii)improved capacity in fiscal and debt management,
statistical information and public investment planning; and (iii)increased financial autonomy and
private sector participation in SOEs. A credible bundle o f policy measures, as opposed to disjointed
efforts, w o u l d have a significant payoff in terms o f investor confidence in Lebanon. Such a bundle
would include fiscal and debt management measures, as w e l l as long awaited structural reforms to the
economy. Bank lending operations for economic management w o u l d be conceived within a broader
strategic commitment by the Government, w i t h a focus o n public sector restructuring operations
which could result in significant savings/loss reduction to the public sector and to a better
rationalization o f expenditure/public sector management.
64.
Obvious targets for improved fiscal management are public autonomous agencies and
pension reform. As o f January 2005, Lebanon counted n o less than 72 public autonomous agencies
and enterprises, as w e l l as several participations t o the capital o f various commercial activities. These
entities exert a strong influence o n the Government’s accounts, some in the f o r m o f a major drain o n
the budget (the most prominent example being Electricite du Liban, which cost Lebanon in 2004 onefifth o f its overall public deficit) and others in the form o f important additional entrepreneurial
revenues (the telephone companies, for instance, which in 2004 covered about h a l f o f the deficit).
Over the last few years, the Government has legally paved the way for the privatization o f some o f
these assets, but a lack o f consensus o n the role o f the public enterprises in the provision o f public
goods, and insufficient preparatory measures, have prevented any serious progress f r o m being made.
Furthermore, most o f these entities’ financial activities are not transparent to the Government, to
Parliament o r to the public. These include loans to selected public autonomous agencies that are
converted to expenditure at the end o f the financial year, unutilized investment authority that i s carried
forward without additional parliamentary disclosure, and major funds for health and social services
and for municipal financing that are not disclosed to parliamentary budget scrutiny, or for review o f
actual performance against the budget plans. As for pensions, the current pay-as-you-go schemes to
c i v i l and military services and end-of-service indemnities to government contract workers (the latter
being managed by the National Social Security Fund [NSSF]) are not sustainable. This would
impose, over the C A S period, an additional annual cost to the budget o f approximately h a l f a percent
o f GDP, which would grow further thereafter. Various reforms can be envisaged, most o f which
would require technical assistance and financial assistance in the transition.

18

65.
Public expenditure management i s another important element of the bundle of reforms.
Currently, t h e capital investment budget of CDR i s not consolidated into the budget, though i t
significantly affects the future stream of current expenditures and debt repayments. Public
procurement procedures are also antiquated and non-transparent, which leaves the door open for lack
o f competition and widespread perceptions o f corruption. With a view to developing a medium-term
expenditure framework in the near future, expenditure information systems (including tracking
surveys) need to be developed in the relevant agencies. The entire investment planning cycle - from
planning, approvals, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation - needs to be improved through
procedural reforms, improved systems, and capacity building. A draft public procurement law, which
has been languishing since 1999, needs to be revived and considered for revamping procurement
procedures.
66.
Debt management i s another field in which capacity needs to be built (at the Ministry of
Finance in particular, in coordination with the Central Bank), in order to minimize the r i s k s of
financial disruption while maintaining the lowest possible borrowing costs. The Ministry o f
Finance and the Central Bank, w i t h support from the W o r l d Bank and the IMF, have supported the
creation o f a specialized Debt Management Department. Management systems and capacity building
for the Department will be needed to make i t fully operational.
67.
The statistical capacity to support policy formulation remains crucially limited.
Attempts to build statistical capacity have not been sustainable in the absence of a clear
institutional design o f roles and responsibilities for various sets of statistics. Assistance in this
assistance with a Statistical Master Plan to define the institutional needs,
area w o u l d include: (i)
funding sources, and data needs at the national and sectoral levels; (ii)
partnership w i t h the IMF in
improving economic/fiscal/financial statistical data; (iii)assistance with methodologies for
poverty/social data analysis; and (iv) making statistical information available to the public through a
clear dissemination strategy.

More specifically, Bank activities in this area could include both lending and advisory
68.
services, as described below:

Lending operations w o u l d include investment/TA lending for power sector restructuring;
SOE refodrestructuring; statistical capacity; public expenditure information systems;

pension and social security reform; and modernization o f the role o f control agencies (Audit
Court, Civil Service Board, and Central Inspection).

Bank diagnostics w o u l d include Public Expenditure Review (ongoing); Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (ongoing); Country Procurement Assessment Review; governance
reform; municipal finance and decentralization; policy notes o n pensions; and public
investment planning.

Technical assistance would concentrate o n debt management, SOE restructuring, and
financial sector assessment capacity.
69.
Growth Support. The second component o f the first pillar i s concerned w i t h improving the
growth potential o f the Lebanese economy, which could reach up to 5 percent (in real terms) in the
medium to long run. For such growth to have a progressive distributional impact, policies would need
to focus o n removing obstacles to investment in labor-intensive sectors (services, ICT, agro-industry),
and policies w o u l d need to be developed to address labor market and segmentation issues
(skilledunskilled, domestic/foreign, and maleifemale) to facilitate local economic development in and
around secondary cities with high unemployment rates.

70.
Obviously, a necessary pre-condition for such growth would be enhanced macroeconomic stability, but other structural and regulatory constraints also play a role in depressing
private investment and growth and need to be removed in preparation for a recovery stage.

19

These constraints include the high cost and inefficiency o f public services and utilities (power,
telecommunications, and water); weak trade facilitation systems (trade policy, transport, customs,
administrative procedures, trade finance, and information supply); regulatory obstacles to private
sector entry and operation; monopolistic market structures; and rudimentary corporate governance
rules (see B o x 2).

Going forward, and in coordination with the IFC and MIGA, the B a n k i s prepared to
undertake a series of lending and advisory activities.

71.

0

Lending operations would include local economic development projects focused o n
secondary cities in labor-intensive sectors w i t h clear comparative advantages, with national
level support in export finance, and with efficient trade facilitation systems (customs, border
crossings, transport logistics, one-stop-shop service).

0

Bank diagnostics would include Investment Climate Assessment; Trade Strategy; Sources o f
G r o w t h Study; Labor Market and Gender Assessment;
administrative barriers and industrial zones.

0

and technical assistance on

ZFC and MZGA would focus on a number o f investment climate, privatization, political risk
coverage, and investment promotion activities (see Section IV. D: IFC, MIGA, and WBI
Programs for details).

CAS Pillar (2):

Developing Human Capital and Mitigating the Poverty Effects of Transition

72.
This pillar supports the CAS outcomes o f reducing poverty levels, enhancing the
efficiency o f the social protection scheme, rationalizing health expenditure and improving i t s
poverty focus, and enhancing the quality o f education.
73.
Recent international experience has shown that periods of economic turbulence have a
profound impact on the social fabric o f a developing country. The poor and near-poor are
particularly vulnerable to crises even though they are not directly exposed to the financial sector.
Even when a country manages to successfully shelter the economy against crises, the poor still suffer
disproportionately from the impact o f fiscal contraction, and thus the new poor emerge. These groups
begin to “disinvest” in their human capital by withdrawing their children f r o m schools, delaying
needed health care, and similar types o f behavior.
74.
T o prevent the above from happening, Lebanon as a first step needs to develop a
comprehensive “social protection” strategy that i s shared among the various segments o f
society, The development o f such a strategy w o u l d help build social consensus around the recovery
reforming the endprogram. Elements o f the social sector and safety net strategy would include: (i)
of-service indemnity program and the c i v i l servants and military pension funds; (ii)enlarging the
scope of social assistance programs and seeing that they are more effective and better targeted; (iii)
increasing labor market flexibility; and (iv) evaluating the impact o f social programs through a
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis-type approach. The strategy would also need to consider h o w to
protect public social spending (health, education) during adjustment and fiscal consolidation, which
would require increasing the efficiency o f spending in these sectors. The current household survey
presently being undertaken by the Ministry o f Social AffairdCentral Administration o f
Statistics/UNDP/World Bank will shed light o n the profile o f the poor and will serve as the building
block for the development o f a poverty assessment. In the event where the survey would reveal high
incidence o f rural poverty, an explicit rural poverty alleviation program could be considered, in close
coordination w i t h the EC.
75.

Beyond the safety nets, Lebanon needs to continue to develop its human capital, which
can be i t s most vibrant resource when utilized efficiently and effectively. This will require
pushing o n with reforms in the health and education sectors to achieve better outcomes f r o m the

20

significant level o f spending already taking place. In the health sector there i s a need to focus
Government efforts on a few health policy objectives, such as containing overall health care costs,
improving financial protection for households, and strengthening the primary health care system.
Pharmaceutical reform, particularly the issue o f drug pricing, i s one such key area. Another i s the
issue o f integrating the various public health insurance funds to provide wider and better coverage for
the poor. In education, there i s a need to build the system’s policy development capacity and to agree
o n a sector-wide strategy, to introduce governance models and institutional structures that can
adequately manage the sector efficiently and yield quality outcomes, and to address regional
educational disparities.

76.
This pillar would support lending and advisory activities aimed at mitigating poverty and
reinforcing the existing safety nets through community or municipality-driven development programs
(by focusing the delivery o f services through NGOs and municipalities). M o r e specifically, the
following are considered:
Lending operations would focus o n fostering financially viable, effective and efficient anti-

poverty and social safety net programs, and supporting reform in k e y areas o f pensions, health
and education. N e w operations could include the expansion o f community- or municipalbased development programs; a health technical assistance project focused o n rationalizing
health expenditures through big-ticket items such as the drug bill; greater financial protection
from illness for the poor; greater use o f primary health care; and a pension reform technical
assistance project.

Bank diagnostics w o u l d focus on supporting the following: (i)
a pension reform strategy; (ii)
a poverty assessment and strategy; (iii)a labor market and gender assessment; and (iv) a
multi-year programmatic Economic Sector W o r k program to develop a comprehensive “social
protection strategy” that would consist o f the integration o f analytical w o r k on pension
reform, social safety nets, labor market impediments, health and education, and the impact
evaluation o f social programs.

Technical assistance w o u l d include a small grants program for NGOs (grants), and an

H I V / A I D S IDF grant.

CAS Pillar (3): Resource and Environmental Management
77.
This pillar would contribute to the CAS outcomes o f improved water management, land
use management and air pollution control.
78.
Currently, Lebanon’s natural resources - water, soil, air, fauna and flora - are being
mined at such a rate that many of the resources will not be available in the future. A key

objective o f the C A S i s to reverse these trends and enable Lebanon to move to more sustainable use
patterns. The resource most in need o f better management i s water. This w o u l d require an integrated
approach addressing the balancing o f the competing demands o f a l l water users (irrigated agriculture,
urban water supply, industry, recreation, fisheries and ecosystems) as w e l l as those that affect water
quality (industrial pollution, urban wastewater, urban solid waste, new development, agricultural
pollution). This approach w o u l d focus o n obtaining the maximum benefit f r o m water extracted and
on ensuring minimal degradation o f water quality in the country’s rivers, coastal zones and aquifers.

79.
Over the next four years the Bank can help Lebanon improve the quality o f surface and
groundwater and improve urban and rural water delivery. Such help w o u l d not only make
Lebanon’s natural resource use more sustainable, but would also bring immediate benefits to
agricultural productivity, human health and ecosystems. The Bank w o u l d help the Government
strengthen its nascent Water Authorities and change the water management system to a system based
o n basins and sub-basins rather than administrative units. The Bank w o u l d also help the country to
develop and adopt a more efficient environmental agency to set and enforce environmental policy and

21

to assess and monitor the environmental impacts o f new development. These changes would help the
authorities t o reduce the agricultural, industrial and municipal pollution o f surface and groundwater,
and to control excess abstraction. A new system o f policy and enforcement w o u l d provide predictable
environmental guidelines for private sector development. The approach w o u l d be based o n the
national land use plan recently prepared by CDR, the waterhrrigation sector notes prepared by the
Bank to justify water management at the basin and sub-basin level, and the A c t i o n Plan for the water
sector aimed at stepping up sector reforms (consensus o n strategy, regulatory framework, cost
recovery and subsidy policy, the implementation o f regional tariff schemes; and the expansion o f
private sector involvement in sector operations).

80.
On solid waste, the challenge i s to develop a comprehensive solid waste strategy that i s
sustainable, i s acceptable to Lebanese society, and i s underpinned by an appropriate policy,
institutional, and financial framework. A Bank proposal has been drafted to address this
strategically and to seek the support and consensus o f key stakeholders. No B a n k lending would be
conceived in this area in the absence o f a clear and broadly endorsed strategy.

8 1.

Bank activities under this pillar would include both advisory and lending services.
e

Lending operations would include an integrated water and environmental management
program in two basins - the Beka’a and the Litani. This program would: (i)
establish a

mechanism for environmental management, including reducing pollution in the Upper Litani
Basin; (ii)
rehabilitate and develop new urban water, wastewater, irrigation, and drainage
infrastructure to improve water use efficiency and increase productivity; (iii)protect
biodiversity and the natural heritage; (iv) implement the land use plans for this basin; and (v)
build capacity among local officials and raise public awareness regarding the sustainable
management o f water resources. The environmental program w o u l d be complemented by an
urban water and wastewater project targeting several areas o f Lebanon, in line w i t h national
priorities.

e

Policy notes w o u l d include a Country Environmental Analysis, w h i c h w o u l d focus primarily

o n water quality, costal zone management, environmental compliance and enforcement, and
w o u l d identify win-win solutions based o n a cost-benefit analysis o f mitigating adverse
productivity and health impacts.

Technical assistance would include the harmonization o f Lebanese policies for
environmental assessment and resettlement with those o f the Bank, the preparation o f
financial schemes for solid waste management, and support to the Ministries o f Environment
and Justice to improve the enforcement o f environmental regulation.
B.

Building Partnerships for Local and Regional Capacity Enhancement

82.
Lebanon i s known for its high caliber specialists and academic institutions, and for a
high capacity in certain sectors of the economy, which for years it has “exported” to the rest of
the region and the world. The Bank’s strategy proposes to build upon Lebanon’s human capital
advantage by developing partnerships with local universities, institutions, associations, and NGOs for
the delivery o f capacity enhancement activities locally and for the region. F o r this purpose, Lebanon
has several k e y advantages: (i)
it can offer training in three languages - Arabic, French, and English and, therefore, can serve the eastern and western parts o f the region; (ii)
it offers a wide range o f good
facilities and infrastructure for learning activities, including high connectivity; (iii)
it provides easy
travel access; and (iv) it hosts key regional institutions such as ESCWA, UNESCO, ILO and others
that would be natural partners in this work. F o r these reasons, Lebanon has become a virtual “subregional training hub,” complementing the Bank’s knowledge hub in the city o f Marseille.
83.
The Government has indicated its commitment to developing Lebanon as a regional hub
for learning and i s willing to facilitate the resources needed for the implementation o f this

22

objective. As an initial step, the Government has signed a knowledge partnership Memorandum o f
Understanding among the Institute o f Finance, the W o r l d Bank Middle East and N o r t h Africa region,
and the W o r l d Bank Institute. On January 18, 2005, the W o r l d Bank opened its Public Information
Center at the Institute o f Finance as a first phase o f the partnership. In parallel, the IMF announced
Lebanon as its regional base for the Middle East Technical Assistance Center. This should provide
for significant synergies in realizing the full potential o f Lebanon as a regional training center.
C.

Lending Scenarios and Triggers

84.
The Bank’s financial assistance i s tailored to the scenarios envisaged below (see also
Table 3). These various scenarios take into account the Donors’ Conference expected to be held in
early 2006 in Beirut. This conference may result in donor funds being made available for debt
restructuring.

85.

Lending envelopes, triggers, and a mix o f lending instruments (project finance vs.
development policy lending) have been identified with a view to support the Government in
implementing its structural reform agenda. The stronger Lebanon’s commitment to and
implementation o f key structural reforms, the larger the lending envelope and the accessibility to
quick disbursing programmatic development policy lending. The size o f the lending envelope and
accessibility to quick disbursing programmatic lending are directly related to specific demonstration

o f commitment to and implementation o f critical structural reforms.

86.
A l l lending in the base and high case i s subject to the following principles o f engagement: (i)
upfront reforms; (ii)readiness for implementation at the time o f negotiations (operations manual
completed, TORS and draft contracts agreed upon, etc.); (iii)
agreed-upon strategies with the W o r l d
Bank; and (iv) clear social impact a n d o r support to the fiscal adjustment effort.
Base Case Scenario

87.
Up to US$100 million for investment could be lent by the World Bank to Lebanon over
the four-year CAS period in the Base Case Scenario. The Bank’s engagement w o u l d be limited to

investment lending and advisory services (i.e., n o development policy lending).

The Base Case Scenario would require meeting the following fiscal (budget plus
treasury) outcome and portfolio indicators:

88.

a

The ratio o f fiscal primary surplus over total fiscal revenue not below 8 percent25;

a

The disbursement ratios o n existing W o r l d Bank portfolio not below 10 percent each year; and

0

Effectiveness delays not to exceed 9 months.

Low Case Scenario

89.

The inability to meet the above indicators would suggest a limited political willkapacity
to carry through with fiscal, portfolio and structural reforms and, therefore, a high and growing
probability for a financial and economic crisis. Thus, lending as envisaged in this C A S to support

structural reforms would become irrelevant and unjustified. Lending w o u l d cease until the country
meets again the triggers in the base case, o r i f a rapid deterioration o f the financial and economic
situation warrants a C A S update. The latter w o u l d then reevaluate the situation, and accordingly, the
W o r l d Bank’s level o f engagement.

As projected for end-2005 by the MOF, as o f September 2005, excluding foreign-financed capital
expenditure. Unlike the more traditional primary surplus over GDP, this measure presents the advantage o f
being easily monitorable, as reported every month by the MOF. In contrast, GDP figures are not easily
available.
25

23

High Case Scenario

90.
Up to U S 7 0 0 million could be lent by the World Bank over the four-year CAS period in
the high case scenario; US$250 million before the mid-term CAS review, and another U S 4 5 0
million afterwards.
The High Case Scenario would require meeting the following fiscal (budget plus
91.
treasury) and indebtedness indicators:

Before the mid-term CAS review, up to US$250 million could be committed should the following
conditions be met:
The fiscal primary surplus over total fiscal revenue ratio gradually improving above 8
percent;

The net public debt26to total fiscal revenue ratio gradually declining from 730 percent;
Strong Government and Parliament commitment to raising the fiscal primary surplus, through
the implementation o f structural reforms in pension (public and private) and power sectors,
safety nets and civil service. Commitments would be clearly spelled out in official
declarations;
Implementation initiated in pension (public and private) and power sectors, and safety nets;

The disbursement ratios on existing World Bank portfolio not below 15 percent each year;
Effectiveness delays not to exceed 9 months; and
Projects in “problem” status not to exceed 33 percent o f total portfolio (by number o f
projects) - down from 71 percent as o f October 2005.

Out o f the USS250 million, up to US$lOO million could take the form o f development policy lending.
In addition to the conditions above, development policy lending would be considered in connection
with the adoption by the authorities o f a major policy package financially supported by the
international community.

After the mid-term CAS review, up to another US$450 million could be committed should the
following conditions be met:

The fiscal primary surplus over total fiscal revenue ratio above 17 percent by end-2007;
The net public debt to total fiscal revenue ratio declines below 650 percent by e11d-2007;~~
Observed implementation of, and continued Government and Parliament commitment to
significant structural reforms in the pension (public and private), power sectors and safety
nets; and
Implementation initiated in civil service reforms.

Out o f the US$450 million, up to US$300 million could take the form o f development policy lending.
Such lending would support the continued implementation o f substantive incremental reforms as

proposed in the above-mentioned policy package.

As projected for end-2005 by the World Bank staff, as o f September 2005. The net public debt i s defined by
the difference between gross public debt and public deposits in the banking sector. This measure i s also reported
every month by MOF.
26

For a 5 percent nominal GDP growth, these triggers broadly correspond to a 2 percentage points o f GDP
increase in the primary surplus and a 4 percentage points of GDP decline in the net public debt between 2005
27

and 2007.

24

Table 3. Indicative Lending Assistance Program
Engagement

Lending
Social Funds/Public Works

Loan Amount
(US$ million) *
20-50

15-50

Municipal InfrastructureProject
(supplement to the existing loan)

Utility Investment and Management
Improvement Program (including
power and water, could be split for
simplification)

50-100

Base Case
Grants

Diagnostics

Public Expenditure Review (06)
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (06)
Country Procurement Assessment
Review (06)
CEM - Sources o f Growth (07)
Poverty Assessment and Strategy Based
on New HouseholdBudget Survey (07)
Investment Climate AssessmenUTrade
Facilitation (06)
Labor Market and Gender Assessment
(07)
Social Protection Strategy (07)
Policv Notes

Small Grants Program to NGOs
(ongoing)

Pension Policy Note (06)
Country EnvironmentalAnalysis (07)

HIViAIDS IDF Grant

Technical Assistance

100

Sub Total

100-300

Utility Investment and Management
Improvement Program (expanded
beyond the base case)
Investment/TA Loan for Public Sector
Restructuring(SOEs, Public
Investment Information System,
Pension and Social Security Reform,
Statistical Capacity Building, Public
Monitoring Authorities)

50-60

Health Project (new loan)

15-20

TA on Financial Sector
AssessrnenUPublic Debt Management
(ongoing)
TA administrative barriers and industrial
zones (07)
TA on governance reform and municipal
finance (07)
Technical Assistance

Capacity Building and Information
Systems for Relevant Economic and
Financial Administrations (ongoing)
Public-Private Sector Partnership in the
Water Sector (06)

High Case

50-100

Trade Facilitation/Local Economic
Development Projects in Secondary
Cities
IntegratedLitani Basin Management
Program

Capacity Building (solid waste,
environmentalperformance, and social
safeguards) (07)
Enforcement o f environmental
regulations (07)

50
400

Development Policy Lending for above
mentioned structural reforms

700

Total High Case Envelope

*

Analytical and Advisory Activities

While individual projects may vary in amount, as indicated above, the total for the base case will not exceed US$lOO million,
and the total for the high case will not exceed US$700 million.

25

IFC, MIGA, and WBI Programs

D.
IFC

92.
Lebanon was previously one of IFC’s largest exposure countries in the region. However,
in the past few years, due to the country’s macro-economic situation, I F C has been selective with i t s
investments and has rather focused o n managing its portfolio in Lebanon. In FY05, I F C approved a
US$8 m i l l i o n loan for a new international school in Adma. In September 2005, the portfolio
contained seven investments totaling US$32 million. A majority o f the portfolio is composed o f
credit lines to Banks, through which I F C helps address the financial sector, including leasing and onlending to SMEs. I F C has signed three banks under the Global Trade Finance Program, w i t h the
intention o f addressing the international trade finance needs in the country. Furthermore, I F C has
been providing advisory services and technical assistance (TA) in Lebanon. Over the last C A S
period, I F C has provided advisory services and TA in the successful restructuring o f M i d d l e East
Airlines and for the development o f the insurance industry.
IFC i s presently assisting the Lebanese Government through technical assistance in
93.
addressing urgent economic and business environment reform issues. The Private Enterprise
Partnership for the Middle East and N o r t h Africa (PEP-MENA) i s IFC’s new facility to deliver TA
throughout the Region. In Lebanon, P E P - M E N A plans to have interventions in the financial sector,
strengthening S M E development, business enabling and regulatory environment, privatization o f
SOEs and public-private partnerships. Currently, PEP-MENA i s working in several areas as
described below:
a

Corporate Governance: I F C PEP-MENA i s working with the Association o f Banks o f
Lebanon and its member banks to strengthen standards o f corporate governance in the
banking sector.

a

Bank Privatization: I F C PEP-MENA i s carrying out a valuation o f Banque Libanaise Pour le
Commerce (BLC) - for Banque du Liban. This valuation i s a necessary first step in the return
o f this bank to the private sector.

a

Business Environment: In November 2005, IFC, in conjunction with the Ministry o f
Economy and Trade, held a conference o n D o i n g Business in Lebanon, which discussed the
barriers the private sector faces. P E P - M E N A i s n o w discussing a number o f additional
programs to address the various issues identified by the session. Programs under discussion
w i t h the Government include Alternative Dispute Resolution, and administrative reforms
targeting various Government approvals.

0

In the coming months, PEP-MENA i s also proposing to provide technical assistance in the
housing finance, microfinance and the S M E sectors, to assist banks in better serving these
markets, and i s also considering rolling out the Business Edge Program, w h i c h provides
training to small businesses to help them improve their business systems.

During the CAS period, IFC will focus on three broad objectives:

94.
a

Enhancing the Climate for the Private Sector;

a

Reform o f SOEs, privatization, and Public-Private Partnerships;

a

Supporting Private Sector Investment.

I n the near term, the key focus o f the IFC i s enhancing the investment climate for the
95.
private sector in Lebanon. T h e W o r l d Bank’s D o i n g Business Survey, 2006 edition, continued to
highlight a number o f obstacles. Indicators place Lebanon towards the high end o f regional economies
in terms o f the cost to start a business, the number o f days needed, and number o f approvals required.
Significant delays in the time i t takes to enforce a contract, in addition to some o f the highest costs o f
26

enforcement in the region, place a constraint on the effective operation o f the private sector, and in
turn negatively affect the growth o f the economy and o f employment, as businesses are unable to
expand and operate effectively. The IFC’s PEP-MENA w i l l provide assistance t o the Government to
review procedures for registering a business, enforcing contracts, including alternative dispute
resolution and refocusing government regulation on oversight and protection.

96.
Reform of SOEs, privatization and public-private partnerships. IFC’s PEP-MENA i s
already working o n a bank privatization project in the country. Provided the Government moves
ahead w i t h reform in certain areas such as infrastructure, I F C would expect to pursue opportunities in
advisory work and potential selective investments. The proposed reform o f the electricity sector i s an
area that PEP-MENA stands ready to assist the Government in. Other potential areas where I F C
might be able to assist the Government include port and airport privatization.
97.
Supporting private sector investment: IFC’s traditional involvement in Lebanon has
been in financing the private sector. To enhance international opportunities for Lebanese
companies, link and integrate them w i t h the global economy, I F C will continue to increase i t s
assistance in Trade Finance by pursuing additional banks for the Global Trade Finance Program. In
the meantime, as one o f the Bank’s strategic focuses i s o n mitigating the poverty effects o f transition,
IFC w i l l continue to look for investment opportunities in microfinance, which will address critical
financing needs for the lower end o f the S M E sector. In the context o f improved macro-economic and
regulatory conditions, I F C could quickly scale up its investments and target a number o f sectors,
including labor intensive and export oriented manufacturing facilities, energy, health and education,
and more interventions in the financial sector. A particular emphasis will be placed on identifying
south-south financing opportunities, capitalizing o n Lebanese expertise and capacity o n a regional or
international level, where IFC’s global reach may provide value.

MIGA
98.
MIGA’s activities are designed to encourage productive foreign direct investment (FDI)
flows into developing countries. T o this end, MIGA’s package o f risk mitigation instruments w i l l be
an integral part o f the overall W o r l d Bank Group (WBG) efforts under the C A S to support the private
sector development agenda in Lebanon, particularly in infrastructure development, the attraction and
retention o f investments, access to the international capital markets for Lebanese companies and
banks, and support for Lebanese investors venturing abroad. A t this critical moment in Lebanon‘s
economic and political development, MIGA guarantees, by effectively mitigating the political risks
associated w i t h private investments, can play a significant role in providing comfort to foreign
investors whose risk perceptions may have increased in recent months.
99.
Infrastructure: M I G A can support private investments, as well as privatizations/publicprivate partnerships (PPPs), through the provision o f political risk guarantees to foreign
investors, particularly in the infrastructure sector. MIGA’s guarantees can alter investor’s risk
perceptions and facilitate access to financing, extending the tenor and reducing the interest rates o n
loans. In this regard, MIGA will continue to work w i t h the Bank and the I F C in order to identify
potential privatizations and PPPs in the power and water sector and provide support to investors that
are particularly interested in the breach o f contract (breach o f government undertaking) cover that
MIGA offers. Investors interested in investing in the water sector in Lebanon have approached
MIGA.

100. Following on initial contacts during fiscal years 2004 and 2005, M I G A i s prepared to
deepen its collaboration with the CDR, the Privatization Council, and the Investment
Development Authority o f Lebanon (IDAL), focusing on assisting those agencies in the targeted
marketing o f infrastructure opportunities to investors, including through MIGA’s suite of online investment promotion sites, and providing investors with information on risk mitigation
instruments available for the projects.

27

10 1.
Attraction and Retention o f Investments. The Government and the investment promotion
agency IDAL have expressed an interest in MIGA’s assistance in overcoming Lebanon’s image
problem in the investor community, particularly outside o f the MENA region. With support from
partners, and a full commitment from the Lebanese authorities, MIGA i s prepared to launch a fullscale, multi-year program o f targeted assistance for IDAL under the new CAS, with a view to making
IDAL a state-of-the-art investment promotion agency that will have a measurable impact o n the
attraction and retention o f FDI into Lebanon, consistent with the Government’s goal o f increasing and
diversifying FDI inflows. Targets in this regard would be sectors that are labor-intensive and that
have significant potential for FDI, such as tourism, services and SMEs.

102.
I n addition, M I G A i s planning to conduct a regional enterprise benchmarking program
for the M E N A region, and Lebanon will be included in that list. This will give IDAL and others
in Lebanon concrete, enterprise-level data o n obstacles to and opportunities for investment in key subsectors o f the economy. Finally, an important component, in conjunction with the Lebanon country
office, will be to ensure that all relevant actors in Lebanon are aware o f the full range o f WBG risk
mitigation instruments available from the Bank, IFC, and MIGA, to mitigate risks - real or perceived
-that may inhibit investors from investing in, or obtaining financing for, projects in Lebanon.
Access to International Capital Markets for Lebanese Companies and Banks. By
103.
assuming the Lebanese sovereign risk, MIGA’s guarantees can allow strong Lebanese companies and
banks going to the international capital markets to significantly exceed the (currently sub-investment
grade) sovereign ceiling o f Lebanon and achieve significantly higher ratings, resulting in both
increased investor interest and lower all-in financing costs. Banks can also use this program when
arranging mortgage-backed securitizations or private placements in the international capital markets.
Support for Lebanese Investors Investing Abroad. Lebanese investors and banks have
104.
long played an important regional role in the Middle East and in Africa. Unlike their counterparts in
most developed countries, Lebanese investors do not have access to national schemes to support them
as they venture abroad. MIGA can bridge this gap and can thereby also increase the potential for
Lebanese f i r m s to obtain financing, either locally or abroad, for their investments. Moreover, the
presence o f MIGA investors could increase tenors and decrease interest rates o n loans sourced
domestically or abroad. MIGA has already supported Investcom, a Lebanese telecommunications
company, for its investments in Benin, Ghana, and Syria with more than US$165 m i l l i o n in
guarantees. In the forthcoming C A S period, MIGA will seek to enhance this role, as Lebanese
investors and banks become more active abroad, and as their knowledge o f MIGA’s services
increases.

WBI
105.
The W B I has embarked on several initiatives to support government officials, NGOs,
the media, private sector and academia by offering policy dialogue and training opportunities to
promote knowledge and capacity building. I t has provided in-country and regional training in
several sectors such as finance, education, social protection, health, and gender. I t has also
established partnerships with universities and “think tanks” in order to build national capacities and
promote in-country technical expertise. I t will also be the k e y partner within the Bank Group for the
implementation o f Lebanon’s “regional training hub” strategy.

E.

Monitoring and Evaluation o f Results

106.
The Lebanon Country Team has organized itself into three clusters corresponding to the
three pillars o f the CAS. Each cluster will have the responsibility o f periodically validating the
CAS outcomes, monitoring intermediate indicators, and adjusting staffing and Bank resources
strategically to avoid fragmentation and ensure the prioritization o f Bank involvement. The
main focus o f monitoring and evaluating results o n the Government side will be CDR, the main

28

agency in charge o f implementing the bulk o f capital investments for the country. The C D R has just
established a monitoring and evaluation department which will be supported with capacity buildingby
the Bank. A t the country level, given the lack o f timely economic and social data for policy
formulation, an important part o f the Bank’s strategy w i l l be the development o f a Statistical Master
Plan, which will be the basis for ensuring that timely statistics can be obtained for the evaluation o f
the outcomes o f national policy on the economic and social fronts. In addition, the Bank will work
with partners and the Ministry o f Social Affairs to implement a new household level survey for
poverty assessment. For the capacity enhancement activities (nationally and regionally), the Bank
w i l l monitor and evaluate directly the impact o f such initiatives.
107.
The results-based monitoring framework for the CAS reflects work in progress in a
rapidly shifting policy environment. The framework presented in Annex Iwill need to be updated
by the mid-term CAS review or before, in light o f a detailed Government reform program which i s
currently under preparation. The updated framework w i l l become the basis for program performance
evaluation in the CAS Completion Report, which in turn w i l l be rated and validated by an OED
review.

V. CREDITWORTHINESS AND RISKS
A.

Creditworthiness and Risks

108.
Lebanon’s limited creditworthiness and the considerable uncertainties regarding future
policy direction require caution in managing the World Bank’s exposure to Lebanon.
Simultaneously, the World Bank remains deeply committed to its role, together with the entire
international financial community, in reducing poverty and helping Lebanon to return to a
sustainable growth performance consistent with its potential. Lebanon’s debt to the IBRD
(disbursed and outstanding) reached US$346 million as o f October 2005 (excluding guarantees).
With undisbursed amounts at US$222 million, exposure could increase in the next few years i f
disbursements improve.
Financing Requirements. In the most likely scenario, Lebanon would need to receive, on
109.
average, US$4.7 billion a year over the CAS period from abroad to finance i t s current account deficit
and replenish i t s commercial and central banks’ net foreign assets, excluding any privatization
operations. B y way o f comparison, US$4.7 billion worth o f capital inflows were required each year
on average between 2000 and 2004 to perform the same operations. Given existing exposure and
creditworthiness limits, the World Bank w i l l remain, in all cases, a marginal contributor to Lebanon’s
financing requirements.
World Bank Exposure. In the event that Lebanon would be able to raise i t s disbursement
110.
ratios to 20 percent - against 15 percent by end-2004 - the share o f the IBRD portfolio exposed to
Lebanon could reach 0.34 percent on average between 2005 and 2009 in the base case scenario (an
outstanding debt o f approximately US$500 million, see Annex B7), slightly up from the period
between 2000 and 2004, where it reached 0.32 percent (including guarantees). Such an exposure
could rise sharply - and even almost double, should Lebanon decide to borrow under the conditions
stipulated in the high case scenario, where up to US$400 million would be made available for
development policy lending (US$lOO million before the mid-term CAS review, and US$300 million
after).

111.
Lebanon’s Creditworthiness and Associated Risks. Four categories o f risk pertain to
Lebanon: (i)the risk o f deterioration o f the portfolio performance; (ii)the risk o f a stalled reform
program; (iii)the risk o f a financial crisidhard landing adjustment; and (iv) political (domestic and
regional) and related security risks. All these risks are significant, though the first two lend

29

themselves better to risk mitigation measures by the Bank. The following paragraphs explore these
risks and possible mitigation measures.
112.
Portfolio Risks. Lebanon’s portfolio i s on the Bank’s “watch list.” Concerted efforts have
been made by the Bank and Government counterparts to close and restructure non-performing
projects. New efforts are in place to reduce effectiveness delays and to proactively address emerging
problems. But most portfolio risks (Country Risk, Country Environment, Procurement, and
Effectiveness) are not project specific and are mostly rooted in macro-economic, institutional
processes, and capacity constraints - hence the risk o f recurring portfolio problems. The portfolio risk
i s mitigated in the medium term through capacity building in fiduciary areas (procurement, financial
management and safeguards).
I t i s also mitigated by a selective approach to future lending
conditional o n up-front and credible commitments.
113.
Risk o f a Stalled Reform Program. There is a significant risk that narrow personal and
sectarian interests w i l l continue to overshadow national-level interests and obstruct the
implementation o f a comprehensive reform plan. This risk could be compounded in the case o f
macro-economic stress, as national priorities requiring collective action could be faced w i t h political
paralysis and deepening social fragmentation. This risk would be mitigated by limiting Bank
involvement to the l o w case o f n o lending, but intensifying the Bank’s effort to build public support
and capacity for reform through analytical, advisory, and outreach activities.
114.
Financial Crisis Risk. The nature and extent o f macro-economic imbalances will continue to
make Lebanon vulnerable to a hard landing adjustment. Past international experience has forcefully
and systematically demonstrated that private markets cannot tolerate rising public debt ratios and
sluggish growth performance indefinitely, even though interest rates w o u l d remain lucrative and the
banking sector would seemingly remain profitable. Sooner or later, governments have to adopt a
policy framework that addresses the macro-economic imbalances and the debt unsustainability. The
longer governments wait, the more painful the adjustment will be, and the less they will be able to
count on investor confidence. The main sources o f domestic vulnerability are the large size o f the
fiscal deficit, the debt to G D P ratio and the exposure o f commercial banks to the sovereign risk.
Domestic vulnerability also includes contingent liabilities such as the public pension system, which, i f
not tackled in time, could weaken the fiscal situation even more. The principal source o f external
vulnerability lies in the great dependence o f Lebanon o n foreign capital inflows. A currency crisis or
a sovereign default could be compounded by a loss o f investors’ confidence that could reduce or even
reverse the needed capital inflows. Conversely, a loss o f confidence could also trigger a currency
crisis or a sovereign default. These risks are compounded by the likely fact that the external
environment (global interest rates, available liquidities in the region) w i l l n o t always be as favorable
for Lebanon as they have been over the past decade. The above risks are mitigated somewhat through
the extensive advisory services provided by the IMF and the W o r l d B a n k o n debt and fiscal
management. Other sources o f external vulnerability are linked to political instability in the region
and are discussed below.
115.
Political and Security Risks. Regionally, Lebanon i s exposed to external risks that are
directly linked to the relations with Syria and the Arab-Israeli conflict next door: Relations with
Syria are still in flux; Lebanon i s technically in a state o f war w i t h Israel; skirmishes between Israeli
and Hizbullah forces continue along the southern borders; and, finally, Palestinian refugees in
Lebanon, living in destitute conditions and barred from employment in most professions (in spite o f
recent improvements), continue to await their right o f return. All o f these factors combine to produce
a potentially explosive situation in Lebanon if a regional settlement o f the Arab-Israeli conflict i s not
ultimately reached.

30

I I3

2.

5 .

.

. . .

x .

. .

.

.

.

.

.

0

.

.

W 3 i .

$1

-1

/*
I

.

0

.

.

e

0

0

e

e

0

0

3

w w w

0

a

E

m

w

a

a

E

C

P
Y

c

E
O

n

h

z3

3

ft

3

w 9

e

e

E

x

4

*

e

e

E

\

w

5

a

_.

_.

t

i
00

m

P
Y

E

0

3

5
-f

0

3
sm
5

CAS ANNEX I11- CAS CONSULTATIONS
Introduction
The W o r l d B a n k Lebanon Country Office held a series o f C A S consultation sessions as o f early 2004,
drawing more than 300 participants w i t h a wide range o f backgrounds into the debate over the three
C A S pillars. The discussions and workshops included NGOs, Parliament Committees, Municipal
Councils and the Private Sector, in addition to line ministries and public institutions currently
involved, or likely to be involved, in the Bank’s portfolio o f lending and non-lending activities.
The consultations slowed during the Government transition after the exit o f Prime Minister Rafic
Hariri and the advent o f Prime Minister Omar Karami (October-November 2004) to allow for the
validation o f the pillars by the new Government. Activities picked up pace in December when the
Bank and the new Government agreed to the C A S Matrix. With the Government’s consent, the Matrix
was distributed to active players in the public sector, the private sector, N G O s and Parliament,
enriching subsequent discussions in January and February 2005.

In addition, the Bank received a number o f written remarks and suggestions for cooperation f r o m
participants in the discussions, including the Office o f the Minister o f Administrative Development,
the Ministry o f Environment, the Ministry o f Interior and Municipalities, the Ministry o f Agriculture,
the Ministry o f Public Works, the Consumer Association-Lebanon, Prestige Publication and the NGO
Jihad al-Binaa.
Each o f the sessions began with a World Bank presentation, comprising:
1. Introduction to the W o r l d Bank;
2. Explanation o f the C A S and C A S process;
3. Lessons learned from the previous portfolio; and
4. Overview o f the three pillars in terms o f C A S outcomes and B a n k inputs.

Discussiono f Pillars
In general, participants commended the Bank for a comprehensive Matrix that established the l i n k s
between fiscal and debt management, as w e l l as the development o f real economy, employment and
poverty issues. Others welcomed the emphasis o n the development o f local economies in secondary
cities and rural areas.

There was a consensus that many o f the needed reforms, while technical in nature, hinged largely o n
political economy and decision making. M a n y participants referred t o the B a n k as a “credible
authority” with “convening power” - assets that could be deployed to press for reform.
The dialogue w i t h Parliament and w i t h the public sector exposed complaints over the Bank’s
complicated bureaucracy that had caused delays in the execution o f projects. Also, Parliament
members stressed o n more than one occasion the need to involve them in the project cycle at an early
stage. There was an obvious sense that the Government was “parachuting” projects negotiated w i t h
the Bank into Parliament, without the prior consultation with MPs, w h o could better identify the
developmental needs in the regions they represent.
The W o r l d Bank acknowledged the bureaucracy that governs i t s work, but noted that reforms were
under way to streamline Bank procedures, citing the Clearing Country Systems as one example.
However, the Bank stressed that Lebanon’s performance i s uniquely weak, even compared with other
countries o f the region, and that the country i s one o f 12 o n the Bank’s watch list, despite its human
resources potential.
41

Some participants questioned why the W o r l d Bank was s t i l l involved in lending operations, despite
the absence o f sector reforms, which deny the country the ability to properly benefit from such
investments.

The Bank agreed that, indeed, this was an important lesson drawn f r o m the previous CAS. Going
forward the B a n k will invest only in sectors in which a credible commitment to reforms has been
established. The scenarios o f lending envisioned range f r o m zero lending, where only advisory
services are offered, a l l the way to substantial lending in reformed sectors.

Poverty and Social Safety Nets

The consultations culminated in increased awareness o f poverty issues in Lebanon, but it was difficult
to determine the extent o f poverty, especially abject poverty, in the absence o f reliable statistics and
official data. There were requests for:
1. Expediting the household survey, due in FY06;
2. Defining a poverty line;
3. Devising a strategy to mitigate the transition costs o f structural policy changes;

4. Improving the impact o f the social safety net through better distribution o f budget
allocations, and

5.

Designing a mechanism for the coordination o f interventions by local and international
stakeholders.

Economic Management
The consultations underlined a widespread understanding o f the need to address, without delay, the
country’s macro-economic difficulties, especially that o f managing the debt, w h i c h has exceeded
US$35 billion. There were serious concerns about the absence o f statistics and reliable figures to
support an economic development policy. Central Bank representatives stressed the need to stimulate
growth, citing the development o f capital markets, to monitor the progress o f SMEs and to introduce
reliable databases as some activities that would help support such a policy. Parliamentarians and
private sector representatives voiced concerns over the distributional impact o f macro-economic
policies. Some questioned the ability o f the national economy to withstand the “astronomical” profits
earned by local banks, w h i c h are restricting the growth in other sectors.
The W o r l d Bank noted that tension between the fiscal adjustment agenda and the growth agenda
would be felt in the short term.
The Bank stressed that in the transition phase, there has to be an equitable sharing o f the burden. Any
macro-economic policy to ensure monetary and fiscal stability should not neglect the poor. A fair tax
policy, social safety nets and employment-generating growth could help mitigate the impact o f
transition.
Discussants sought explanations o f the pros and cons o f privatization as prescribed by the W o r l d Bank

- a process that was promised at the Paris I1 conference o f the donor community in 2001 but was

disrupted by political disagreements. The Bank clarified that privatization was a means and not an
end, and advised a tailored approach to each SOEs.

The Bank also clarified that some services, such as the power and water sectors, w o u l d need to
significantly improve their performance to become appealing for potential private sector investment,
noting that the Government has to weigh core privatization and management privatization o n a caseby-case basis.

42

Entrepreneurs called on the Bank and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) to increase their
interaction w i t h the private sector.

The Bank acknowledged that in the past i t had been mostly focused on monitoring short-term macroeconomic changes. Going forward, it w i l l devote more resources to the Investment Climate
Assessment and sources o f growth. Naturally, this will require close interaction with the private
sector.
Capacity Building
Local interlocutors, in both the public and private sectors, agreed that the lack o f statistics, the
deficient institutional capacity, unclear designs and an absence o f a division o f labor have impaired
policy development and hindered project implementation. The Bank was asked to focus on these
issues in the next CAS.
Sectoral ministries expressed serious concerns about the sustainability o f World Bank projects in the
shadow o f deficient institutional capacity. They singled out the dismantling o f Project Implementation
Units (PIUs) after the completion o f a project, without ministries being able to absorb skilled
consultants, as a major obstacle. The inability to absorb the PIUs in ministries affects both the
sustainability and the continuity required to uphold Bank-Government cooperation.

The Office o f the Minister for Administrative Reform (OMSAR) stressed the unique role it could
providing assistance in capacity building, (ii)
preparing a legislative
assume on a number o f levels: (i)
draft for reform, and (iii)carrying out institutional design and organizational structures for the
ministries.
The Bank concurred, and expressed a willingness to support a reform process and capacity building

efforts. The Bank noted that it was involved in administrative reform through an ambitious project
which was only partially implemented, largely because o f the lack o f political will. The Bank agreed
that OMSAR could play a major role in moving forward, but stressed that the political w i l l would
have to be evident.
For their part, parliamentarians sought technical assistance from the World Bank to obtain accurate
data and devise policies that would address the key social issues such as healthcare, education and
pension plans. They noted that parliamentary committees have the constitutional prerogatives to
develop legislation, but that their members lack the data and the expertise.
One suggestion was for the development o f an “observatory network” that would help support
Parliament.
One concern raised was the slow development o f the Information Technology (IT) sector. One
Member o f Parliament attributed the deficiency to a fight for supremacy among various ministries,
each seeking to annex the sector to its portfolio (Finance, Economy, Telecommunications, etc.).

Agro-industry and Trade Facilitation
Discussions touched on agriculture and agro-industry as possible opportunities for growth and
employment generation. Participants asked that the Bank give more prominence in the CAS to
agriculture, agro-industry and trade facilitation, given their importance for j o b creation, especially in
poor and rural areas.
The Bank asserted that it has been involved in this sector through two projects that sought to improve
irrigation and develop the agricultural infrastructure. But in national terms, agriculture was
contributing only 6.5 percent to the GDP, with limited potential for expansion. The Bank stressed that

43

there was a need to generate other economic opportunities for employment in rural areas and to
further develop the agro-industry sector. I t was also noted that the EU was active in this particular
sector, but that the Bank was ready to complement EU activities in either lending or advisory work
focused o n agro-industry or the Litani Basin.

Industry
In answer to a complaint that there was n o sufficient emphasis on local industry, the W o r l d Bank
asserted that i t lacked the proper data to be able to evaluate the contributions o f the various sectors’ to
the economy and their future potential for growth. But as far as the Bank was concerned, tackling the
issue o f industrial competence should not encourage further subsidies. Instead, lowering barriers to
entry and reducing production costs (water, electricity, and telecommunications) w o u l d help support
industries.

Housing, Vocational Training, Knowledge and Partnership
Representatives o f line ministries noted the lack o f reference to housing and vocational education, and
proposed that the Bank partner w i t h local universities in knowledge sharing.
The Bank agreed that housing was important for the security and livelihood o f the poor, but this was
in essence a private good. The Bank asserted the need to address the nature o f market failure in the
housing sector, including the absence o f financing, land supply, infrastructure and inflationary
pressures in the real estate market.

With regard to vocational training, the Bank’s experience in this area has been disappointing and
resulted in the cancellation o f the US$29 m i l l i o n Vocutionul Training Project. As for knowledge

partnerships, the W o r l d Bank has been capitalizing o n the research, academic and training facilities in
Lebanon, which are among the country’s most valuable assets.

Health
There were clear concerns about the absence o f a national health plan - a deficiency that has spurred
piecemeal/sectoral interventions by the donors. Participants called for a national plan that w o u l d set
the priorities for this sector and a mechanism that w o u l d enable donor contributions to be more
efficiently absorbed. Health Ministry officials complained that weak capacity and W o r l d Bank
bureaucracy had delayed the implementation o f a health plan that took nine years to complete, instead
o f the initially envisaged maximum o f six years. They also suggested that health issues be included in
the first CAS pillar as a macro-economic priority and not restricted to the second pillar.

The Environment
Participants referred to Bank studies, w h i c h estimated the cost o f environmental degradation at 3.5
percent o f the GDP or more than the total economic growth projected in 2004. There was significant
worry about the gradual, yet consistent, degradation o f coastal areas and the pollution o f the air and
water in the absence o f a comprehensive national policy. The Ministry o f Environment said 45
percent o f the coastal areas were occupied, and that the country was losing 2 percent o f its coastline
per year.
The Parliament’s Environment Committee complained that the environment has not been a priority
for the Government, which i s grappling w i t h macro-economic and financial imbalances. B u t the Bank
insisted that Lebanon could n o longer afford to put environmental issues o n h o l d as it risked
irreversible ecological damage. The Bank cited threats to the country’s water resources, especially the
underground tables.

44

In discussions in Parliament and w i t h the Public Sector, participants lamented the waste o f water
resources, w h i c h were unmatched in the region. A national water strategy, combined w i t h a technical
action plan, w o u l d allow Lebanon to sell water to i t s neighbors. A Ministry o f Environment official
noted that Gulf countries were blessed w i t h “black gold,” and Lebanon w i t h potentially lucrative
“transparent gold,” if the sector were properly managed. The Bank stressed the need to strengthen
local water authorities.
There were calls for an urgent remedy to the nationwide problem o f solid waste. M a n y municipalities,
especially the 250 new ones created after the 2000 election, lacked the expertise and capacity to deal
w i t h solid waste. There were unanimous calls for a comprehensive approach to solid waste
management - collection, disposal and treatment. The Bank noted that it was forced to close a solid
waste project after a disappointing performance, but expressed i t s willingness t o re-engage i f a clear
national strategy were adopted by the Government.

Table 4. CAS Consultations Timeline

45

CAS Annex A2 - Lebanon
Lebanon at a Glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL

2004
Population. mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Lebanon

M. East
8 North
Africa

Uppermiddleincome

4.6
4,700
21.4

294
2,000
589

576
4,770
2,740

1.3
2.6

1.8
-1.3

0.8
-0.9

Development diamond'

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1998-04
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

GNI
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1998-04)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Literacy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

88
71
26

56
68
45

72
69
24

100
88
103
105
101

66
69
100
104
94

93
91
106
108
106

Gross
primary
enrollment

~

Access to improved water source
Lebanon
Upper-middle-incomegroup

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1994

2003

2004

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formation/GDP
Exports of goods and servicesiGDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

9.6
31.6
7.9
-22.9
-16.1

20.0
20.3
17.2
0.5
-0.6

21.9
21.1
21.3
1.4
2.2

Current account balanceiGDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debtiGDP
Total debt serviceiexports
Present value of debtiGDP
Present value of debtiexports

-28.6
0.9
22.2
5.3

-20.9
7.4
39.6
16.3

-18.9
6.1
41.0
11.0

2003

2004

2004-08

2.8
1.3
12.4

4.9
3.6
10.1

6.3
5.0
23.4

2.2
1.1
2.5

1984

1994

2003

2004

..
..
..

6.8
26.5
15.0
66.7

7.9
20.3
12.9
71.6

7.0
20.9
12.7
72.1

..
..
..

107.6
15.3
62.4

82.8
16.7
37.0

81.3
17.4
41.0

1984-94

1994-04

2003

2004

..
..
..

2.2
0.8
1.1
3.0

4.9
4.9
4.9
10.0

6.3
6.3
6.3
5.9

..

0.8
5.0
-2.1
-0.9

1.8
0.2
13.8
1.6

2.5
8.8
7.1
7.0

1984

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

1984-94 1994-04
16.1
13.6
26.5

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Householdfinal consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Householdfinal consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services

..

..
..
..

36.6

Economic ratios'
Trade

__

Domestic
savings

Capital
formation

Indebtedness
Lebanon
Upper-middle-incomegroup

i

Growth of capital and GDP (%)
30
20
10

-2-0

;;:1
-30

,

~

I

99

00

02

01

03

04

-

GCF

--O-GDP

IGrowth of exports and impo

Note: 2004 data are preliminaryestimates.

* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

46

-

CAS Annex A2 Lebanon
Lebanon at a Glance (continued)

Lebanon
PRICES and GOVERNMENTFINANCE
Domestic prices
I%change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes cumnt grantsJ
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surpluddeflcit
TRADE

(US$ mi//ionsJ
Total exports (fob)
Livestock, animal, and vegetable products
Fats and oils
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1984

1994

2003

2004

..
..

7.9
7.9

1.3
3.2

3.0
2.9

..

..

13.3
-11.3
-20.1

22.2
-10.7
-13.7

22.9
-6.7
-9.9

1984

1994

2003

2004

1.758

2,556

1,483
7,134

2,182
0.727

..

0
2,375
40
494

#DIV/O!

1,307

1,533

87
84
104

98
98
100

98
93
106

1994

2003

2004

756
5,990
-5.234

3,435
7,387
-3,952

4,649
8,964
4,315

327
2,165

-1,232
1,003

-1,079
1,265

Current account balance

-2,742

4,181

-4,129

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reselves

4,603
-1,861

7,566
-3,386

4,298
-169

7,375
1,680.1

14,031
1,5075

13,500
1,507.5

(US$ mi//ions)
Exports of gwds and selvices
Imports of goods and sewices
Resource balance

1984

Net inwme
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ mi//ionsJ
Conversion rate (DEC, /oca//US$)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCEFLOWS

6.5

1984

1994

2003

2004

861
29
0

2,127
64

7,906
454

8,957
477

Total debt selvice
IBRD
IDA

125
7
0

185
8
0

762
49
0

893
48
0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Podfolio equity (net inflows)

28
23
-29
5
0

74
398

581
33

-8
-2,548

77
27
4
23
4
19

0
57
34
23
15
7

0
49
35
14
14
0

(US$ mi//ions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

0
5
4
1
3
-2

DevelopmentEconomics

~ _ _ _

II

llO.WO,
8wo

..

Export price index (2000=100J
lmpolt price index 12000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100J
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
I

-

98

99

w

ZIExports

02

01

.~lmportsO3

"I

1 Current account balance to GDP (%)

Composition of 2003 debt (US$ mill.)
A 454

1
/

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G -Short-term

10/19/05

47

-

CAS Annex B2 Lebanon
Selected Indicators* o f Bank Portfolio Performance and M a n a g e m e n t

(As o f October 18,2005)
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2003

2004

2005

2006

13
4.9
30.8
35.9
46.2
45.2
14.7

9
4.7
11.1
16.8
33.3
36.1
17.4

7
4.8
71.4
67.3
71.4
67.3
11.3

7
5.1
71.4
67.3
85.7
92.2
4.0

Yes
646
46

no
873
67

no
678
75

Yes
600
75

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
13
9
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
527.2
460.5
46.2
44.4
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
21 .I
17.9
a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c, Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

48

-

CAS Annex B3 Lebanon
Bank Group Program Summary
(As of October 18,2005)

Tentative IBRD Base-Case Lending Program *
Fiscal year

2007
2007
2007
2007

Proj ID

US$(M)

Lebanon Health Sector Development
Utility Investment and Management Improvement Program
Community Development Project (supplementary loan)
Municipal Infrastructure Project (supplementary loan)
Result

Overall
Result

15.0
50.0
20.0
15.0
100.0

Strategic
Rewards /b
(H/M/L)

Implementation
/b Risks
(H/M/L)

H

H

H
H
M

H
H
L

100.0

l a This table presents the proposed program for the next two fiscal years.
ib For each project, the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or Low (L).

49

CAS Annex B3 (IFC and MIGA) - Lebanon
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2003-2006
(As of October 18,2005)

IFC approvals (US$m)

2003

2004

2005

0.00

5.25

8.00

2006

Sector (%)

Education Services
Nonmetallic Mineral

100

Total

0

100

100

100

100

100

0

100

100

0.00

0.00

0.00

0

Investment instrument (%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

50

0

CAS Annex B4 - Lebanon
Summary of Non-Lending Services

(As o f October 18,2005)
~

Product
Recent completions
-Line Ministries
PER Social Sector
PER Education
PER Transport
PER Telecom
PER Health
PER WatedWastewater
PER Solid Waste
PER Irrigation
Energy Strategy
Assessment of Socio-Economic
Poverty Note
Privatization Support
Social Security/ContractualSaving
IDF for Public Procurement
Sources of Growth
Economic and Social Review (Note)
Social Protection Note
IDF for Streamlining MOSA
Capital Market Development TA
Economic Reform Support
ROSC Accounting and Auditing
Hydrocarbons Strategy
Agricultural Policy Note
Irrigation Sector Sustainability
Poverty Survey/TA
Underway
Pension Policy Note
Financial Assessment (CFAA)
Public Expenditure Review
IDF for Strengthening HIV/AIDS Sys.
Planned

Country Procurement Ass. Review
Investment Climate Assessment
Poverty Assessment
Labor Market & Gender Assessment
CEM - Sources of Growth
Country Environmental Analysis
Social Protection Strategy
Economic Monitoring

Completion Cost
(US$OOO) Audience a/
FY

1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
2000
2000
2000
2001
2001
2002
2002
2004
2003
2003
2003
2004
2004
2004
2005

147
182
83
64
43
27
84
32
41
115
67
105
166
176
25
161
50
146
25
18
111

Objective b/

190
65
125
50

GovernrnentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernrnentlBank
GovernrnentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernrnentlBank
Government/Bank
Government/Bank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
Government
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
Government
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank

Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledae aeneration/Problem-solvina
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generationlProblem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generationlProb1et-n-solving
Knowledge generationlProblem-solving
Knowledge generationlProblem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generationlProblem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Problem-solving
Knowledge generationlProblem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generatiodProblem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

2006
2006
2006
2005-08

90
40
220
80

Government/Bank
Government/Bank
Government/Bank
Government

Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

2006
2006
2007
2007
2007
2007
2007

150
150
175
140
150
100
80

GovernmentlBank
GovernrnentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank

Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving
Knowledge generation/Problem-solving

35 GovernmentlBank
vearlv

Knowledge generationlProblem-solving

2006-09

-

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

51

1

-

CAS Annex B5 Lebanon
Social Indicators (as o f October 18,2005)
Latest single year
1970-75 1980-85 1997-2003
POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(“4 of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME

4.5
1.3
87.5
2.2

311.6
1.9
58.0
3.1

334.9
1.2
75.8
2.4

4,565
126
108

2,250

5,340

3.7
1.7
0.4

2.8
4.3

3.7
4.4

90
90
89

83
86
83

93
93
94

100
100
100

88
96
78

77

23
17

96
92

92
92

94
90

65
63
67

66
64
68

71
69
73

69
67
70

73
70
77

45
54

38
44

28
32

44
54

19
22

259
198

241
181

192
136
150

193
143

197
103

2.9
2.4
67.0
4.5

3.3
1.7
79.4
3.6

GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOMElCONSUMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (YOof GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Social security and welfare (YOof GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate

(“A of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate

(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

S a m e regionlincome group
M. East &
Upper8 North Africa
middle-income

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age.
World Development Indicators database August 2004, World Bank

52

7r

0

le
3
3
N

C

I3
3

C
Q

rg

C

2
vi

3
3
N

2

VI

o???

09s

0

VI

N

Q\

3
3
N

W

d

-

z

vi
3
3
N

0

B
3

0

8
3

0

N

C

3
N

m

d

? ? ?
0 “ -

z
d

N

a\

0

d

N

C

3

m

5
3

0

3

C
F

Q

Q\

m

N

3

m

3
N

m

0

7r
7r

Q

2

00

m

U

(I

0

- 0 9 1

r.imm

Q\

0
0
N

2
w
w

W
0
0
N

m
sc
m
m

t0
0
N

+

\o
0

N
0

0
N

In
0
0
N

v

0

0
N

-

-

m

w
d

m
d
w

d

P
N

s

43
P

Q\
Q\

5

I

d

N
0
0

0
0
0
N

1

m

m

0
N

3

-s

rri
0
0
N

N

3

z

m

m

N

m

N

3

Q
N
N

3
N
N

e,

Q\
0
0

N

00
0
0
N

I-

O
0

N

\o
0
0
N

m

0
0
N

v

0

0

N

3
0

N

N
0
0
N

10
10
3

0
0
N

d

0
0

0

N

t\

s

.-*0m
.-V

!i
4

m
0

0
N

oe

0

0
N

t-

0
0
N

w

0
0
N

IA
0
0
N

B
0

N

B
0

N

3

sm

m
0
0

*
00
0
0
N

l0
0

*
w

0

0
N

vi
0
0
N

B
0

N

90090Pt09

o - + o d P r-l n m *
lnor-0
m w m

c0

CI

Q

aE
0

I

5
B

h

c,

.
I

a
u.
.m
I
I

.
I

4

5P

..
u

3

z

pa

E

.
I

V

E
Q

E

iz

I

Q

fa

c,

4

n
*
L

6

0

0

h

E

w

m
3
v
v:
a,

c..

c

E

M
1

-

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) Lebanon
Statement o f IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
(As of August, 31,2005)
(In U S Dollars Millions)
Held
F Y Approval
1997
1997
1996
1999
1996
1998
2001
1996
1996
2005
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed

Company

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

ADC
Bank o f Beirut
Byblos Bank
Byblos Bank
Fransabank
Idarat SHV
Lebanese Leasing
MidEast Capital
SGLEB
SIS Adma

0.42
7.53
0.78
13.04
0.3
1.07
0.75
0
0.47
8

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.5
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0.62
4.43
0.27
0
0
0
0.47
0

0.42
7.53
0.78
13.04
0.3
1.07
0.75
0
0.47
5

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.5
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0.62
4.43
0.27
0
0
0
0.47
0

32.36

1.5

0

5.79

29.36

1.5

0

5.79

59

0
W

MAP IBRD 33433

61

IBRD 33433
35°30'E

36°00'E

36°30'E

To
Hims

To
Tall Kalakh

To
Al Hamidiyah

Kabir

Qoubauyat

LEBANON
Halba

35°30'N

Funaydiq

Tripoli

To
Al Qusayr

Abou Moussa

Zhgarta
Zhgarta

Hermel
Hermel

NORTH
LEBANON

Chekka

Qaa

Ja o

Bcharri

z

n

Qurnat
Qur
nat
as Sawda’
Sawda’
(3,088 m)

.

s

Al Labwah

M

t

Aynata
Aynata

O ro

Ihdin

Douma

Mediterranean
Sea

ntes

Sib’’il
Sib
Sib’il
Amioun

V

34°00'N

b

a

n

Afqa

B

e

Jounie

BEIRUT

a

i

e
-L

b

a

n

o

n

s.

To
An Nabk

Baalbeck

34°00'N

BEKAA

Antilyas

BEIRUT

a

e

tn

L

MOUNT
LEBANON

e

k

l

M

A

Ibrahim

a

l

nt

o

Jbeil

n

Al Aqurah

y

Rayak
Hammana

Baabda

Zahleh
i
an
L it

Damour

Beit
ed Dine

Jieh
Joub Jannine

Saida

Qaraaoun

El Zahrani

Rachaiya
Ha

L it a n i

Tibnine
Tibnine
Naqoura

N A B AT I Y E H

10

20

10

30 Kilometers

20 Miles

LEBANON

To
Baniyas

Hula

Bent Jbail
Rmaich

0

Mar yjayoun
Maryjayoun

SOUTH
LEBANON

sb

34°30'N

i
an

0

Nabatiyeh

Tyre

To
Ad Dimas

A w w a li

Jezzine
34°30'N

To
Az Zabadani

To
Gadot

To
Nahariyya

33°00' N

35°30'E

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

To
Qiryat
Shemona

GOVERNORATE (MOHAFAZAT) CAPITALS
This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS
MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS
GOVERNORATE (MOHAFAZAT) BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

36°00'E
NOVEMBER 2004

