Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report N o . 31793-SL

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF SIERRA LEONE
FOR THE PERIOD
FY2006-2009

Public Disclosure Authorized

M a y 5,2005

Country Department 10
Africa Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
W o r l d Bank authorization.

1

Date of Last TSS: March 26,2002

1

Currency Equivalents
Currency Unit = Sierra Leonean Leones
US$l.OO = S L L 2,836
(as o f April 2005)
Weights and Measures
Metric System
Fiscal Year
January 1 - December 3 1
Abbreviations and Acronvms
AAA
AAP
ACC
AfDB
ASR
BB
BECE
BHP
CAS
CEM
CET
CFAA
CG
CPAR
CPIA
CPPR
CRRP

cso

CSR
DACO
DDR
DEPAC
DfID
DHMT
DPO
ECOWAS
E1
EIR
EITI
ENCISS
ERRC
ERRG
ESW
EU
FA0
FIAS
FSAP
GDP
GEF
GoSL
GRS

Analytic & Advisory Activities
Assessment and Action Plan
Anti-Corruption Commission
African Development Bank
Agricultural Sector Review
Bank Budget
Basic Education Certificate Examination
Bumbuna Hydroelectric Project
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum
Common External Tariff
Country Financial and Accountability Assessment
Consultative Group
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Policy and lnstitutional Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Community Reintegration and Rehabilitation Project
Civil Society Organization
Country Status Report
Development Assistance Coordination Office
Disarmament, Demobilization, & Reintegration
Development Partnership Committee
Department for Intemational Development
District Health Minagement Team
Development Policy Operation
Economic Community of West African States
Extractive Industries
Extractive Industries Review
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Enhancing Interaction and Interface Between Civil Society and the State
to Improve Poor People’s Lives
Economic Rehabilitation and Recovery Credit
Economic Rehabilitation and Recovery Grant
Economic Sector Work
European Union
Food and Agriculture Organization
Foreign Investment Advisory Services
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Government o f Sierra Leone
Govemance Reform Secretariat

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HIPC
HSRDP
IDA
IDB
IDPs

IF

I

IFC
IFMIS
IMC
IMF
I-PRSP
IRCBP
JSAN
JSDF
LC
LG
LGA
LGDG
M&E
MDAs
MDBS
MDGs
MDTF
MIGA
MODEP
.MOF
MOHS
MOLG
MSME
MTEF
NaCSA
NCDDR
NCP
NCRRR
NEPAD
NGO
NPA
NPPA
NPV
NRC
NSAP
NTC
OPIC
PASCO
PEP AErica
PER
PETS
PFM
PHU
PPA
PPB
PPIAF
PRDACO
PRGF
PRSP
PSIA
PSMS
PSR
REBEP
RRI
RSLAF
RTFP

Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Health Sector Reconstruction and Development Project
International Development Association
Islamic Development Bank
Internally Displaced Persons
Integrated Framework
International Finance Corporation
Integrated Financial Management System
Inter-Ministerial Committee
International Monetary Fund
InterimPovkrty Reduction Strategy Paper
Institutional Reform and Capacity Building Project
Joint Staff Advisory Note
Japan Social Development Fund
Local Council
Local Govemment
Local Government Act
Local Government Development Grant
Monitoring & Evaluation
Ministries, Departments and Agencies
Multi-donor Budgetary Support
Millennium Development Goals
Multi-Donor Trust Fund
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry o f Development & Economic Planning
Ministry o f Finance
Ministry o f Health and Sanitation
Ministry o f Local Government
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
National Commission for Social Action
National Committee for Disarmament, Demobilization & Reintegration
National Commission for Privatization
National Commission on Resettlement, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction
New Partnerships for M c a ’ s Development
Non-Governmental Organization
National Power Authority
National Public Procurement Authority
Net Present Value
The Nonvegian Refugee Council
National Social Action Project
National Technical Committee
Overseas Private Investment Corporation
Poverty Alleviation Strategy Coordinating Office
Private Enterprise Partnership for Africa
Public Expenditure Review
Public Expenditure Tracking Study
Public Financial Management
Public Health Unit
Participatory Poverty Assessment
Public Procurement Board
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Poverty Reduction Development Assistance Coordination Office
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Poverty and Social Impact Assessment
Public Sector Management Support
Project Status Report
Rehabilitation and Basic Education Project
Rapid Results Initiative
Republic o f Sierra Leone Armed Forces
Regional Trade Facilitation Project

/This document has a restricted distribution and may b e used by recipients only in
/the performance o f their official duties. I t s contents m a y n o t be otherwise disclosed
, w i t h o u t W o r l d Bank authorization.

RUF
SHARP
SLEDIC
SLIHS
SLP
SLPRSP
SLRA
SME
TA
TRC
TSS
UN
UNAMSIL
UNDP
UNHCR
UNICEF
UNIFEM
UNMIL
USAID
WBI
WFP
WHO

Revolutionary United Front
Sierra Leone HIV/AIDS Response Project
Sierra Leone Export Development and Investment Promotion Agency
Sierra Leone Integrated Household Survey
Sierra Leone Police Forces
Sierra Leone Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Sierra Leone Roads Authority
Small Medium Enterprise
Technical Assistance
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
Transitional Support Strategy
United Nations
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
UnitedNations Development Program
United Nations High Commission for Refugee
UnitedNations Children Fund
United Nations Development Fund for Women
UnitedNations Mission in Liberia
United States Agency for International Development
World Bank Institute
World Food Programme
World Health Organization

Vice President
Country Director
Task T e a m Leader

Gobind Nankani
Mats Karlsson
James Sackey

Country Assistance Strategy
for the
Republic of Sierra Leone
FY2006 .2009
Table o f Contents
E X E C U T I V E SUMMARY

.
I1.

................................................................................... i

Introduction ...........................................................................................................

I

-1

Country Context ..................................................................................................... 2

. Political Economy and Social Context ...........................................................
. Poverty and Vulnerability ...............................................................................

A
B
C
D

2
3
4
7

Sierra Leone’s Development Program .................................................................

7

. Economic Developments and Prospects .........................................................
. Debt Sustainability ...........................................................................................

.

I11

.
.

A The Sierra Leone PRSP ...................................................................................
B Implementation. Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms..........................

.

IV

7
9

B a n k Group Assistance ......................................................................................... 9

.

A Implementation of the Transitional Support Strategy ................................. 9
B Partnership and Harmonization ................................................................... 12
C Participatory and Consultative Process ...................................................... 13

V

.
.

.

Results-Based Bank Support to the PRSP .........................................................

.
.

A Alignment o f CAS with PRSP Objectives ....................................................
B W o r l d B a n k Activities - Three Strategic Priorities ....................................

.

14

14
15

Strategic Priority 1: Govemance, Decentralization and Public Financial
Management ............................................................................................. -15
Strategic Priority 2: Sustainable Growth, Food Security and Jobs Creation ...18
Strategic Priority 3: Human Development ....................................................... 23

C Summary o f B a n k Assistance ....................................................................... 25
D Measuring Results: The Monitoring & Evaluation Framework ..............29

.

.

VI

Managing R i s k s ....................................................................................................

32

List o f Tables

Table
Table
Table
Table

1:
2:
3:
4:

T a b l e 5:
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table

6:
7:
8:
9:
10:

Sierra Leone - Selected Social Indicators ..... ........................................3
Sierra Leone - Selected Economic Indicators ....................................... 5
Sierra Leone - Financing Requirements ............................................... 6
Governance, Decentralization and Public Financial Management Selected Targeted Results .................................................................... 16
Sustainable Growth, Food Security and Jobs Creation - Selected
Targeted Results..,................................................................................20
H u m a n Development - Selected Targeted Results.............................. 24
IDA Financing Program....................................................................... 26
Analytical Underpinnings ................ ......,.,,,....,,.,,,..............,................26
Progress Towards Attaining the M i l l e n n i u m Development Goals ......30
Policy Performance - Areas for Improvement .................................... 3 1

List o f Boxes

Box 1: Characteristics o f the Poor in Sierra Leone ................................................ 4
Box 2: The Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR) Program ..11
Box 3: Extractive Industries (EI) .......................................................................... 23
List o f Annexes

Annex 1: Sierra Leone Results Matrices: ..... .................................... .......... .........34
Pillar 1: Governance, Decentralization and Public Financial
M anagem ent
Pillar 2: Sustainable Growth, Food Security and Jobs Creation
Pillar 3: Human Development

Annex 2:
Annex 3:
Annex 4:
Annex 5:
Annex 6:

Consultative Group Results Framework Progress Report ...................44
Sierra Leone: Debt Sustainability Analysis ........................................ 50
Sierra Leone: Review o f TSS h p l e m e n t a t i o n ................................... 53
Sierra Leone: Country Financing Parameters ..................................... 65
Standard C A S Annexes: ...................................................................... 69

A2
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8

Sierra Leone at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Performance and Management
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
Summary of Non-Lending Services
Sierra Leone Social Indicators
Sierra Leone -Key Economic Indicators
Sierra Leone - K e y Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRDLDA & Grants)

M a p o f Sierra Leone

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF SIERRA LEONE
FY2006 - 2009
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
Sierra Leone i s emerging from a period of post-conflict reconstruction which
followed a decade of civil war. The era o f civil conflict began in 1991 and caused
destruction, disruption o f agriculture and mining, and the collapse o f public services,
health and education. The war led to the displacement o f two m i l l i o n people, h a l f the
country’s population, the death o f over 20,000 people, and immeasurable suffering. The
Lome Peace Accord in July 1999, the deployment o f United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and the restoration o f security following military intervention
ushered in the era o f post-conflict reconstruction in Sierra Leone. Full peace has been in
place since 2002. The rehabilitation programs for ex-combatants are successfully
concluded, most displaced people have returned, and security prevails. Presidential,
parliamentary, chieftancy and local council elections have been held.

..

Sierra Leone’s post-conflict economic performance has been robust,
especially during 2002-04, owing to recovery in agriculture and mining outputs.
Sierra Leone has sustained a strong economic recovery: 4.3 percent Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) growth in 2002, 9.3 percent in 2003, and 7.4 percent in 2004. Recovery
has been propelled by large-scale resettlement and reconstruction, increases in land under
cultivation, a resumption o f mining, a bounce-back in the private sector and the growth o f
donor-financed imports.
11.

...

Sierra Leone’s remarkably successful post-conflict recovery remains fragile.
To sustain the gains, the present transition from a post-conflict to a PRSP-based
development framework needs to succeed as well. Some o f the challenges include
pervasive and deep poverty (about 70 percent o f the population i s below the poverty
line); weak govemance (fragile judiciary system, corruption, and weak capacity);
dilapidated infrastructure; poor human resource development (including severe gender
inequalities); and high unemployment (especially o f the youth in urban settings). Sierra
Leone remains 177thout o f 177 countries in the Human Development Index.
111.

iv.
The Sierra Leone Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (SLPRSP) lays out the
Government’s commitment and priorities in addressing the causes of conflict and
poverty. It focuses o n three strategic objectives: (a) good govemance, security and
peace; (b) pro-poor, sustainable economic growth for food security and jobs creation; and
(c) human resource development.

This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) i s aligned with the three pillars of
v.
the SLPRSP. I t i s selective and builds on existing programs in economic reform,
decentralization, infrastructure development and the social sectors. Economic reform
will be underpinned by annual development policy operations (DPOs). Support for

decentralization will go beyond institutional reform and capacity building to include
transfer o f resources to support innovative approaches to decentralized governance,
including the use o f the rapid results initiative (RRI) to boost and empower local
I t will include public finance management tools at b o t h central and
councils.
decentralized levels. To sustain high economic growth, reduce poverty levels, generate
jobs and improve food security, the Bank’s program foresees support to private sector
development, infrastructure, agriculture and mining. An integrated rural and private
sector development initiative will target agriculture and youth unemployment. The Bank
will boost infrastructure by support to power and water, the Bumbuna Hydroelectric
Project, and a major transport operation. Roads development will be a critical element in
the high-priority food security strategy. A mining sector technical assistance project will
facilitate poor people’s benefits from this critical growth sector. Building upon the
rehabilitation programs for health and education, and the social fund, future interventions
will focus o n sectoral strategy, efficiency, quality and access, including by vulnerable
people, through a social protection scheme. All programs will b e supported by analytic
and advisory activities (AAA).

vi.
The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework of the CAS i s articulated
in the CAS Results Matrices, w h i c h will serve as the basis for assessing progress o f the
Bank and the Government in achieving agreed development objectives. Implementation
performance will be assessed through a mid-term C A S Progress Report w h i c h will draw
o n yearly portfolio reviews. A C A S Completion Report will b e prepared at the end o f the
four-year period to assess overall progress.
vii.
There are five fundamental risks that may impede the successful
implementation of the CAS. They are:
(a) L i m i t e d institutional capacity at both local and central levels;

(b) Lack o f progress in the fight against weaknesses in governance, including

corruption;
(c) Too l o w a level of external support in the transition f r o m a post-conflict
environment to a PRSP-based development framework;
(d) Economic shock resulting f r o m weak management o f public finances o r
shifting terms-of-trade; and
(e) Regional turmoil.

viii.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
Transition: Does this strategy adequately address, both in terms of volume
and content, issues of fragility and sustainability in the transition from a
post-conflict environment to a PRSP-based development framework?

Alignment: Does the proposed strategic focus of the CAS adequately align
with the PRSP?

..

11

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF SIERRA LEONE
FY2006 - 2009
I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This results-based CAS for Sierra Leone covers the activities of the World
Bank Group for the four-year period, FYO6-09. The C A S replaces the Transitional
Support Strategy (TSS), w h i c h was considered by the Board in M a r c h 2002, o n the basis
o f an I-PRSP. At that time, a PRSP was envisioned by December 2003, but delays in i t s
completion delayed the submission o f this C A S . Sierra Leone’s full PRSP was discussed
by Executive Directors, along with the Joint Bank-Fund Staff Advisory N o t e (JSAN), o n
M a y 3, 2005, and serves as the basis o f this strategy.
2.
The CAS i s based on a broad consultative process, involving the
Government, civil society, and development partners. I t i s fully aligned with the m a i n
pillars and cross-cutting issues encompassed in the Sierra Leone PRSP. The C A S also
draws o n the Government’s “Sierra Leone Vision 2025: Strategies for National
Transformation.”

3.
The challenge facing the Bank Group i s how to help Sierra Leone build on its
post-conflict success. The challenge o f the next four years will be to help Sierra Leone
transition f r o m the post-conflict period into a PRSP-based framework, to make the best
possible use o f limited Intemational Development Association (IDA) resources, and to
leverage this engagement to generate additional donor support and achieve a harmonized
development partnership. Following three full years o f peace, Sierra Leone i s s t i l l
heavily dependent o n external aid flows. Sierra Leone i s at the bottom o f the H u m a n
Development Index, with one o f the highest c h i l d mortality rates in the world. W h i l e
impressive gains have been made in the areas o f demobilization and reintegration, and the
resumption o f agriculture, it i s important to recognize the fragility o f these gains.

4.
Harmonizing with other partners will be a critical aspect of the Bank Group
strategy. IDA will need to remain actively engaged with Sierra Leone’s partners in order

t o solidify the foundation o n w h i c h growth can b e generated and benefits can b e
delivered to the country’s expectant population. In recognition o f the Government’s
improved systems, IDA’S engagement will take the f o r m o f a blend o f investment and
budget support. The implications o f this approach include the need to focus
simultaneously o n harmonization with other donors around k e y development themes,
while at the same time emphasizing institutional aspects o f ownership and accountability
- decentralization, capacity building, and govemance. The Bank worked particularly
closely with the United Nations, the UK Department for Intemational Development
(DfID), the African Development B a n k (AfDB), and the European U n i o n (EU) in the
preparation o f this CAS.

11.
A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

Political Economy and Social Context

5.
T h e history o f the political economy o f Sierra Leone has been mixed, but the
post-conflict efforts have been largely successful. The recent economic history can be
classified into three distinct phases: the post-independence era (1961-90); the period o f
the c i v i l conflict (1991-99); and the period o f post-conflict reconstruction (2000-04).
After growing significantly during the 1960s by about an average o f 4.5 percent per
annum, the economy slowed down markedly during the 1970s and 1980s, w i t h rapid
inflation and severe external payment imbalances. While external developments were a
factor, the more fundamental reason was inappropriate government policies and poor
govemance. The era o f c i v i l conflict began in 1991 and was characterized by long
periods o f political instability associated w i t h military interventions, as well as unrest in
response to the poor economic and governance environment. Sporadic attacks by the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) in the southeastern part o f the country spread
throughout. The conflict caused significant destruction in economic and physical
infrastructure, halted major official mining activities, resulted in the abandonment o f
farms and plantations, and led to the displacement o f two m i l l i o n people, h a l f the
country's population, the death o f over 20,000 people and immeasurable suffering. I t
also led to the total collapse o f public service delivery, in particular, health and education.
6.
Cessation o f hostilities and restoration o f security following the L o m e Peace
Accord in July 1999 ushered in an era o f post-conflict reconstruction in Sierra
Leone. The Government o f Sierra Leone (GoSL) has led the country through the
post-conflict transition. The Government completed i t s disarmament, demobilization,
and reintegration (DDR) program for ex-combatants in February 2004 through an
impressive program financed by numerous donors and supported by local communities.
The Government resettled over 150,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees,
disarmed and demobilized 72,000 ex-combatants, out o f which 56,000 participated in
reintegration activities. Deployment o f the UNAMSIL military component and the
improvement o f capabilities o f Sierra Leone Police Forces (SLP) and o f the Republic o f
Sierra Leone Armed Forces (RSLAF) have significantly stabilized the security situation
all over the country. Government has also been stable and functioning. Local elections
were completed in M a y 2004. The Truth and Reconciliation Committee (TRC)
completed public hearings, which were attended by all parties involved in the conflict,
and submitted i t s report in 2004. A United Nations-sponsored Special Court has indicted
15 persons for crimes committed during the c i v i l conflict, including former Liberian
President Charles Taylor. The end o f the war opened up the entire country for the free
movement o f goods and services, greatly improved resource allocation and utilization,
and boosted the economic and social recovery process.

7.
Despite the impressive post-conflict improvements, the country still faces
many challenges. A UN assessment mission to the country in March 2004 highlighted
the continued need to strengthen the capacity o f the nation's security organizations as
UNAMSIL prepares to draw down i t s operations by end 2005. A national risk
assessment focused o n the high levels o f extreme poverty and youth unemployment.
2

Because o f the involvement o f some o f the youth in the decade-long conflict, youth
unemployment i s considered a major priority. Further study by the B a n k points to the
need to deal w i t h conflict-related challenges such as poor govemance, regional
disparities, weakened coping strategies o f the poor, and the lack o f inclusion for certain
segments o f society.

B.

Poverty and Vulnerability

8.
The decade-long conflict exacerbated the poverty situation in Sierra Leone.
The country n o w exhibits the classical characteristics o f a poor nation as manifested by
low-national income and human development. Sierra Leone i s rated last, 177th o f 177
countries, in the UN H u m a n Development Index. Poverty in Sierra Leone i s reflected in
abysmal social indicators w h i c h include the highest under-five mortality rate in the w o r l d
(Table 1). T h e conflict deepened and expanded poverty through social dislocation, the
emergence o f large numbers o f war victims (amputees, orphans, widows and widowers,
drug victims, refugees and the homeless), and the loss o f coping mechanisms.
Table 1: Sierra Leone - Selected Social Indicators
2002 or otherwise noted

An Integrated Household Survey (SLIHS), conducted from May 2003 to M a y
9.
2004, highlighted the following characteristics o f poverty in Sierra Leone.
0

0

0

The proportion o f the population below the national poverty line (defined at
L e 2,111 o r about $0.75 per day) i s estimated at 7 0 percent. Some 26 percent
o f the population m a y be classified as extremely poor, that is, unable to meet
50 percent o f their daily needs.
Poverty i s heavily concentrated in the areas outside Freetown. The proportion
below the poverty line in Freetown i s estimated at 15 percent, compared to 79
percent in the rural areas and 7 0 percent in other urban areas.
The Gini coefficient i s calculated at 0.39, implying that income distribution i s
moderately skewed. Income inequality i s relatively higher in the rural areas
(0.36), compared to Freetown (0.32) and other urban areas (0.33).

10.
Participatory poverty assessments (PPAs) conducted by GoSL during the
preparation of the PRSP (Box 1) highlight poor people’s focus on the lack of access
to food, shelter and the absence of support mechanisms. The association between

3

agriculture and high incidence o f poverty points to the need to focus o n production and
productivity concerns o f the sector in any poverty-reduction policy for Sierra Leone.
Category

The poorest (popolipo)

The poorer
(Po-pas-po)
The poor (Po)
The better off
burce: GoSL, PPA.

Box 1: Characteristics o f the Poor in Sierra Leone

Characteristics
Those who cannot meet immediate needs (food, shelter, and clothing); cannot invest for
the future; and have exhausted the charity'and goodwill o f others. They have dirtyitom
clothes; cannot meet medical expenses when they fall ill;and are often physically
challenged. Those without family to care for them also fall into this category.
They have some ability to meet some basic needs but not always. They are unable to
invest for the future through education and savings. Their credit i s limited. They cannot
afford decent clothes. Often, they do not have enough to support a family. They highly
depend on others for both work, housing and general support.
They can meet some o f their daily needs including a meal though i t may not be
nutritious. They can barely afford to send their children to school and have no savings.
They can hardly afford medical care.
They tend to see well-being in terms o f their ability to provide the essentials o f life for
themselves and their families. They can provide good food, shelter, education, clothes
and medical facilities for their families; and are gainfully employed and physically fit.

11.
The S L I H S shows that with an average population growth rate o f 2.1
percent, the economy has to grow by at least 4.7 percent in real terms annually to
prevent the number o f poor people from rising. The rural per capita incomes have to
grow by at least 5.6 percent annually and the urban by 4.0 percent annually. These
calculations point to the need for growth as a necessary (but not sufficient) condition for
dealing with poverty in Sierra Leone.
C.

Economic Developments and Prospects

The main sources o f growth in the economy are agriculture and mining,
12.
complemented by services and manufacturing. Agriculture sustains about 70 percent
o f the population and accounts for about 40 percent o f the GDP. The mining sector
accounts for 20 percent o f GDP and contributes significantly to export earning. B o t h
diamonds and iron ore (supplementedby rutile and bauxite) were significant in the past in
determining the economic prosperity o f Sierra Leone. The service sector (comprising
transport, communications, and Government) accounts for about 40 percent o f GDP. The
manufacturing sector i s small with mainly import-substituting industries and employs
only about 2 percent o f the labor force.
Sierra Leone's post-conflict e-conomic performance has been robust, owing to
13,
recovery in agriculture and mining. With a real GDP growth o f 4.3 percent in 2002,
Sierra Leone's recovery continued into 2003 and 2004 when real GDP grew by an
estimated 9.3 percent and 7.4 percent respectively, despite an o i l price shock (Table 2).
Recovery has been propelled by agriculture and mining, revived communities, the growth
o f donor-financed imports, large-scale resettlement and reconstruction activities,
increases in land under cultivation and growing remittances and investments by the Sierra
Leone expatriate community and other investors. The officially registered output o f
diamonds has grown considerably, offshore o i l exploration i s expected to get underway
soon. The average real growth rate i s expected to be about 7 percent per year over the

4

2005-07 period. This i s the minimum growth rate needed to ensure that the number o f
poor people does not increase.
Table 2: Sierra L e o n e - Selected Economic Indicators
[ndicative Scenario
t e a l GDP Growth a/
Aggregate
Per-capita

Estimates

Projections

Growth Rates
6.5
4.4

6.0
3.9

6.0
3.9

19.6
16.2
-1.2

7.1
5.0
GDP Shares
20.7
21.0
17.5
14.1
0.0
1.3

21.1
12.8
2.3

21.1
11.2
2.8

21.2
10.3
3.4

19.9
41.3
-7.6

22.9
39.1
-4.9

24.9
42.4
-8.0

29.0
43.1
-6.2

30.5
43.3
-4.8

31.7
42.9
-4.1

31.7
42.0
-3.7

20.2
12.4
7.8
26.9
15.6
6.4
4.9
-6.7

21.3
12.3
9.0
24.8
13.2
6.9
4.6
-3.5

22.4
13.0
9.4
26.4
13.0
5.5
7.9
-4.0

21.9
14.7
7.3
25.9
13.2
4.5
8.2
-4.0

23.1
15.8
7.3
25.3
13.3
3.9
8.1
-2.2

23.1
16.6
6.4
25. I
13.6
3.3
8.1
-2.0

23.6
17.6
6.C
25.2
14.C
2.5

7.5
20.2
2,348

14.2
28.0
2,69 1

8.5
18.5

7.4
17.4

5.7
15.7

4.7
14.7

4.(
14.(

9.3
7.2

7.4
5.3

[nvestment
Foreign Savings
Fiscal Savings

14.3
21.3
-3.2

Exports Goods & Non-factor Services b/
Imports Goods & Non-factor Services
Current Account Balance c/

Revenue and Grants
Revenues
Grants
Expenditures
Consumption
Interest and Other
Development
Fiscal Balance
Consumer Price Inflation (%, p.a.) d i
Treasury Bill Interest Rate (%, e.0.p.)
Exchange Rate (LelUSS, p.a.)

7.5
5.4

Other

ai The statistical authorities have provisionally revised their GDP estimates for 2001 -03.
bi Includes estimates o f unrecorded diamond exports.
c i Including current official grants.
d/ Period average. Western Area only.
Sources: International Monetary Fund through 2007; staff estimates thereafter.

8.1

-1.;

1

14.
Export growth has shown rapid post-war recovery at a rate o f 27 percent in
2003 and 17 percent in 2004, mainly on the strength o f alluvial diamonds. The
external current account deficit (including official transfers) stood at 7.6 percent o f GDP
in 2003 and i s estimated to have improved to 4.9 percent o f GDP in 2004 due in part to a
10 percent contraction in imports in 2004. This i s mainly due to a large reduction in UN
forces, and the departure o f some post-conflict NGOs. The current account deficit was
financed mainly by concessional external assistance.
15.
Fiscal performance in 2003 was complicated by delays in external budget
support. Expenditures were adjusted downwards, but not enough to compensate fully
for the loss in external financing. As a consequence, recourse to domestic credit and
monetary growth were higher than planned. Spending i s expected to have fallen in 2004,
due in part to additional delays in budget support which led to a reduction in the
procurement o f goods and services. This l e f t an estimated fiscal balance equivalent to
-3.5 percent o f GDP in 2004.

5

Inflation had been negative in 2002 as the end of the war allowed renewed
access to goods, both domestic and imported. The situation in 2003-04 has been more
challenging due to a combination o f external shocks, delays in aid disbursements and
incomplete fiscal adjustment. The average inflation rate for 2003 grew to 7.5 percent and
i s estimated to be 14.2 percent for 2004. There has also been a sharp increase in
domestic interest rates. The nominal, end-of-period rate on treasury bills was 20 percent
in 2003 and 28 percent in 2004, up from an average o f 15 percent in 2001-02. The
exchange rate depreciated to an average o f 2,691 Le/US$ in 2004.

16.

Cumulative financing requirements for Sierra Leone between 2005 and 2009
17.
are projected by the IMF to be U S 9 9 6 million (Table 3). Identified financing for
fiscal operations i s expected to total US$847 million for the period 2005-09. Financing i s
expected to come from US$452 million in grants (including those for Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries [HIPC] relief), US$218 million in loans and US$177 million in debt
relief. This leaves a residual gap o f US$193 million to be filled by the expected PRGF
and other sources. These numbers are consistent with implementation o f PRSP priorities
under the macroeconomic framework agreed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
on the basis o f identified external financing. Implementation o f the PRSP beyond core
priorities will require additional financing.

18.
Increased revenues, and expected declines in domestic interest due, will allow
an expansion in development expenditures beginning in 2005 and a reduction in the
deficit by 2007. The fiscal balance, after grants, i s expected to improve to -1.7 percent o f
GDP by 2009 from -4.0 percent o f GDP in 2005. The Government also plans to create a
buffer against delays in budget support by following a fiscal r u l e where spending does
not exceed the discounted envelope unless the full amount o f aid i s actually received.
This fiscal tightening, combined with prudent monetary policy i s expected to lead to a
reduction in the inflation rate to 4.0 percent in 2009 from an average o f 14.2 percent in
2004.
Table 3: Sierra Leone - Financing Requirements
‘05-07

2004

I

3oss Financing Requirement (US$ Millions)
Current Account Balance (less interest & grants)
Debt Service Due (before relief)
Reduction in Arrears
Increase in Reserves

267 5
100 9
91 6
95
65.5

210.0
128.6
83.2
0.0
-1.8

190.2
103.3
66.9
0.0
20.0

197.3
100.0
17.3
0.0
20.0

196.9
91 .O
85.9
0.0
20.0

201.4
90.7
90.7
0.0
20.0

995.8
513 6
404.0
0.0
18.2

inancing Sources (US$ Millions)
Govemment Budget
Grants
Loans
Debt r e l i e f
Bank o f Sierra Leone
All Other
Foreign Direct Investment
Loans
Other
Unidentified

267.5
229.2
97.2
90.3
41.6
41.2
-2.9
12.5
38.4
-53.8
0.0

210.0
181.9
93.9
53.1
34.9
21.6
-11.1
27.2
5.6
-43.8
17.7

190.2
168.0
86.5
46.0
35.5
0.0
-21.5
7.2
-4.0
-24.6
43.6

197.3
170.9
92.9
43.0
35.1
0.0
-7.4
2.2
11.0
-20.5
33.7

196.9
162.1
88.8
38.0
35.3
0.0
-12.3
2.2
5.0
-19.4
47.1

201.4
164.3
89.8
38.0
36.5
0.0
-13..7
4.6
0.0
-18.3
50.8

995.8
847.2
451.9
218.1
177.2
21.6
-65.8
43.3
17.6
-126.7
192.8

ource: IMF through 2007; staff projections thereafter.

6

D.

Debt Sustainability

19.
I n March 2002, Sierra Leone reached the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) decision point which made it eligible for US$950 million in debt service
relief. This r e l i e f i s equal to 80 percent o f the country’s outstanding (foreign) external
debt as o f end-2000 (US$600 m i l l i o n in N e t Present Value [NPV] terms). Under the
HIPC Initiative, 10 out o f 11 Paris Club creditors have agreed to provide debt relief. A
significant debt reduction i s expected after Sierra Leone reaches the HIPC completion
point, All non-Paris Club official creditors have agreed to deliver debt relief, o r indicated
their willingness t o do so. A second debt buy-back operation, to b e financed by the
Bank, f o r validated commercial obligations i s also under preparation.

20.
An external debt-sustainability analysis was recently completed by the IMF.
The analysis suggests that Sierra Leone faces moderate risk o f external debt distress,
despite l o w debt service requirements relative to exports, because o f the fragility o f the
recovery process. In the baseline scenario, without any shocks, the ratio o f external debt
service to exports o f goods and non-factor-services i s projected to fluctuate around an
average o f 5 percent for the period 2006-2021. The ratio o f the net present value o f
external debt-to-exports i s projected to level o f f at around 120 percent. Interest o n
domestic debt, as a share o f revenues and grants, falls f r o m 14 percent to 8 percent. This
i s made possible by the improving fiscal balance w h i c h takes pressure o f f the domestic
interest rate. Total debt service due (after all relief) falls f r o m 19 percent o f revenues and
grants in 2003 to 13 percent by 2021, Under the baseline scenario, the total stock o f debt
falls to 69 percent o f GDP by 2022 f r o m 76 percent in 2003. Within this amount,
domestic debt falls f r o m 41 percent in 2003 to 16 percent in 2021 w h i l e external debt
rises to a peak o f 59 percent o f GDP in 2011 before declining to 53 percent o f GDP in
2021 (Annex 3).

111.
A.

SIERRA LEONE’S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

The Sierra Leone PRSP

21.
The SLPRSP outlines the strategies and priorities the Government intends to
employ to address the country’s main development challenges. I t addresses the
long-term causes o f conflict and poverty and relates explicitly i t s poverty reduction goals
to the M i l l e n n i u m Development Goals (MDGs). The SLPRSP underscores the need to
achieve high and sustained broad-based economic growth particularly in rural areas
where agricultural development and increased food production are central; to provide
essential social and economic services and infrastructure to the poor; to create j o b
opportunities for the large and growing number o f young people; and to improve
govemance. I t also recognizes that continued broadening and deepening o f r e f o r m o n
several fronts will ensure that growth translates into improved poverty and human
development outcomes. The SLPRSP was discussed by the Board o n M a y 3,2005.
A series of extensive consultations was conducted throughout the country
22.
during 2003-04 to underpin the SLPRSP. These consultations were coordinated by the
Poverty Alleviation Strategy Coordinating Office (PASCO) with the support o f the
National Commission for Social A c t i o n (NaCSA), the Government agency responsible
7

for community-driven rural development. They were conducted through workshops,
focus group discussions and PPAs, involving a total o f 8,591 community members
nationwide. Government held a national consultative conference to discuss the draft in
M a y 2004, followed by district-level consultations in June 2004. Four workshops were
organized at the regional levels, with stakeholder representatives to validate the final
draft o f the SLPRSP. These consultations were characterized by open dialogue between
Government and key stakeholders. Radio and television discussions were an important
part o f the communication and sensitization strategy. The donor community was also
extensively consulted and provided a wide range o f technical support.

The SLPRSP establishes the Government’s vision around three complementary
23.
pillars, backed by a wide array o f strategies and proposed programs:
0

0

0

Good governance, security and peace. The SLPRSP underscores the
Government’s commitment to eradicate corruption, improve governance and
strengthen the institutional capacity for security and peace building. Although
significant progress has been made in rebuilding various institutions for
governing the state and safeguarding national security, there i s still a need for
deeper reforms and for strengthening Government’s capacity for effective and
efficient delivery o f basic services. The PPA undertaken for the PRSP
identifies various aspects o f bad governance as one o f the main causes o f
deepening poverty. The SLPRSP provides for programs that improve public
safety, law and order, police reforms, anti-corruption measures, judicial
system reforms, c i v i l service reforms, public financial management, and local
government reforms.
Pro-poor sustainable economic growth for food security and jobs creation.
This pillar encompasses food security for the poor and vulnerable and
expansion o f j o b opportunities for the unemployed and under-employed,
especially youths in both rural and urban areas. The main goal in the SLPRSP
i s the reduction o f the poverty headcount from the current level o f 70 percent
to the 1990 level o f 57 percent by 2007. This i s to be achieved through an
ambitious growth rate o f 8-9 percent per annum (6-7 percent per capita). The
Government’s growth targets are premised on increased productivity in
agriculture, mining, trade and industry. Increased productivity and growth
w i l l depend on the rehabilitation and expansion o f Sierra Leone’s degraded
infrastructure and, in particular, on increased involvement o f the private
sector.
The SLPRSP identifies policies to rehabilitate dilapidated
infrastructure in the areas o f roads, energy, telecommunications, the port, and
air transport. Also underpinning a return to growth will be reform o f the
financial sector and the privatization o f state-owned enterprises.
Human resource development. The SLPRSP argues that investment in the
health and education o f the population and improvement in access to basic
services provide the basis for fighting poverty o n a sustainable basis.
Programs include putting in place measures to achieve 100 percent net
enrollment at primary level and to raise quality at all levels o f education,
improving health care coverage, continuing the battle against HIV/AIDS,
reducing gender gaps and regional poverty disparities, carrying out

8

institutional reforms to enhance employment creation through vocational
training. The SLPRSP emphasizes labor market reforms to quicken the pace

o f productivity growth. The SLPRSP also provides for poverty-targeted
programs aimed at poor communities and marginalized groups.

B.

Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms

24.
The SLPRSP establishes a coordinating and implementation framework to
provide the oversight required for PRS implementation. The coordinating bodies
comprise the Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC), a National Technical Committee
(NTC), and a Poverty Reduction and Development Assistance Coordination Office
(PRDACO). Further analysis and consultations will be undertaken to ensure full
integration o f effort with key ministries, including the Ministry o f Finance, and other
public institutions.
,

25.
Monitoring and evaluation activities will benefit from support by key
development partners including DfID, UNDP and the EU. The SLPRSP focuses on a
limited number o f monitorable indicators derived from the MDGs. Structures are being
established for improving the quality and availability o f poverty-related data to monitor
progress o f the SLPRSP. The Government i s preparing a national statistical development
strategy with the support o f a multi-donor trust fund (MDTF) for Statistical Capacity
building managed by the Bank. A national census for 2004 was recently completed and a
An integrated financial
national demographic and housing survey i s planned.
management system (IFMIS) i s expected to be implemented in mid-2005.

IV.
A.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE

Implementation of the Transitional Support Strategy

26.
The T S S set out to mitigate the risk of renewed conflict and increase access to
basic services, targeting the rural population, women and children. The strategy also
emphasized the decentralization o f service delivery and the restoration o f local
government in order to reorient the allocation o f resources from the capital to the rural
communities. The TSS was based on an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy and was
reviewed by the Board on March 26, 2002. The Board review o f the Decision Point on
HIPC took place on March 5, 2002. Through the TSS, the Bank sought to achieve a
number o f outcomes relating to: (a) consolidating peace and security; (b) resettlement,
rehabilitation, and reintegration; (c) improving governance, targeting institutional reform
and capacity building down to the local level; (d) accelerating economic growth;
(e) expanding access o f the poor to basic social services, infrastructure, markets, and
assets; and (f) combating HN/AIDS. In addition, the Bank supported the preparation o f
the PRSP through providing analytical work and funding.
27.
Since the beginning of the TSS, I D A has committed US$230 million in Sierra
Leone (Annex 6, Table BS). This represents an extraordinary effort by IDA to assist in a
post-conflict environment. In addition to emergency support provided through a series o f
Economic Recovery and Rehabilitation Credits (ERRCs) and a Public Sector

9

Management Support (PSMS) project, IDA’S assisted in three areas: social sectors;
community development and decentralization; and infrastructure. The TSS originally
covered the period 2002-03. As a new C A S needed to follow the completion o f the
PRSP, F Y 0 5 has become an interim year for IDA. The major commitment to
infrastructure i s followed through by three projects: the Power and Water Project, the
Bumbuna Hydroelectric Project and a Transport Project (IDP Transport, FY06).
Furthermore, an ERRG in F Y 0 5 maintains continuity in economic reform and support to
public finances, and bridges to a future multi-donor framework for budget support.
28.
The Bank’s support to the social sectors focused largely on rehabilitation,
reconstruction and response to HIV/AIDS. The B a n k i s providing support t o the
education sector through a US$20 m i l l i o n grant for the Rehabilitation of Basic Education
Project (2003-2008). The objectives o f the project are to assist G o S L to reestablish
education services and to build up the capacity o f the education sector. Similarly, B a n k
effort in health i s focused o n rehabilitating health sector facilities with emphasis o n the
most exposed districts.
The US$20 m i l l i o n Health Sector Reconstruction and
Development Project (HSRDP) i s a sector investment grant with some features o f a
sector-wide project. T o supplement the health project, the US$15 m i l l i o n Sierra Leone
HIV/AIDS Response Project (SHARP) finances a wide spectrum o f activities including
prevention, care, support, and impact mitigation.
29.
Community development and decentralization has been at the forefront of
the Bank’s engagement in Sierra Leone. During the latter phases o f the c i v i l war, the
Bank was fully engaged in programs for vulnerable groups. The B a n k strove t o
complement diplomatic, peace-keeping and humanitarian efforts through the Community
Reintegration and Rehabilitation Project (CRRP, US$25 million) w h i c h provided support
to: (a) the Government’s DDR program; and (b) the Government’s Emergency Recovery
Social Fund w h i c h supported the return o f IDPs and refugees and the rehabilitation o f
basic social and economic infrastructure; in addition, (c) a Bank-administered
multi-donor DDR Trust Fund (US$36.6 million) strengthened donor coordination and
broadened the country’s limited “donor base.” As a result o f the implementation o f this
program and several complementary bilateral programs, over 70,000 soldiers were
demobilized (see B o x 2). These activities were followed up in 2003 by the National
Social Action Project (NSAP, US$35 million), w i t h a k e y objective o f continuing to assist
communities in restoring infrastructure and building local capacity for collective action,
using a community-driven development approach. The Institutional Reform Capacity
Building Project (IRCBP, US$25 million) i s aimed at supporting the newly elected local
councils, after the first such elections in recent Sierra Leonean history, and at improving
the public financial management system. The objectives o f the project are to help
establish a functioning local government system and improve inclusiveness,
transparency, and accountability o f public resource management at all levels o f
govemment.

10

Box 2: The Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR) Program
Immediately after the conflict, the international community and the Government o f Sierra Leone
financed a massive and successful DR program w h i c h demobilized 72,000 ex-combatants f r o m a l l
factions, provided training and r egration activities to 56,000, and supported communities in
ex-combatants’ reintegration. The program also provided special support t o c h i l d ex-combatants and
could be considered a successful special youth program. The overall cost o f the DDR program was
almost US$lOO million, in large part financed by the donor community through a MDTF, the W o r l d
Bank (through a credit t o the Government and extensive technical assistance), the G o S L and other
partners. The National Committee for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (NCDDR) was
a k e y player in this process, providing policy guidance to the DDR program and technical assistance
and, later on, direct implementation support. As part o f the broader reintegration process, the Bank and
other donors financed activities through instruments such as the Emergency Recovery Support Fund to
support communities in rehabilitating basic infrastructure, hence creating the conditions for the return o f
IDPs. o f refugees. and o f former combatants.

I

30.
The recently approved Power and Water Project ( U S 3 5 million) will address
prioritized issues in water and sanitation, urban waste management and power
through the rehabilitation of essential infrastructure and institutional capabilities.
Concurrently, i t will pursue power and water sector reforms aimed at increasing private
sector involvement through investment and public-private partnerships, particularly
through instituting a performance-oriented management contract for the National Power
Authority (NPA) and the Guma Valley Water Corporation. Additional financing i s also
being requested to cover additional costs associated with the restructuring o f the Sierra
Leone Urban Water Supply Project (FY1995-2000) which was necessitated by the
outbreak o f conflict in 1999.

31.
The Bumbuna Hydroelectric Project (BHP) will respond to the urgent need
for new power supply. By completing a near-finished dam, installing generators and
rehabilitating transmission lines, 50 M W will be added to today’s functioning levels o f
10-20 M W in the Westem Region, average cost o f bulk power will be radically cut and
the rotating power black-outs will end. An IDA partial risk guarantee o f up to US$30
million w i l l complement investments by Italy, AfDB and the OPEC Development Fund.
The BHP will be complemented by: (a) an IDA grant supporting the implementation o f
environmental and social safeguard measures associated w i t h the impacts o f BHP; (b) a
local community development initiative for which funding i s being sought from the
Japanese Social Development Fund (JSDF); and (c) a carbon financing operation to be
provided by the Prototype Carbon Fund.
32.
I n order to facilitate the transition from post-conflict to a PRSP-based
development, an Economic Rehabilitation and Recovery Grant I V ( E R R G - I v ) will be
provided for FY05. The ERRG IV i s a one-tranche quick-disbursing budget support
grant o f US$15 million, covering the period April 2005 through M a r c h 2006. I t i s
designed to help the Government make the transition from post-conflict recovery to
sustainable development by: (a) consolidating core capacity for public resource
management; (b) building capacity for PRS implementation in sector ministries and local
governments; and (c) promoting private sector development.

11

33.
Overall, the Bank’s portfolio i s performing satisfactorily. All six projects are
rated satisfactory with regard to their implementation. The quality o f the portfolio has
improved in recent months through intense supervision. In t e r m s o f impact, limited
technical and administrative capacity remains a major constraint to project
implementation. F o r example, although the Education and Health projects have been
successful in achieving their primary objective o f restoring the delivery o f basic services,
their sustainability remains questionable because o f concerns about shortage o f human
and capital resources. Implementation constraints (mainly in financial management and
delays in procurement) have created substantial delays in disbursement.
34.
An Economic Sector Work (ESW) program was developed to inform Sierra
Leone’s post-conflict development challenges and the Bank’s responses. I t includes
core analytical w o r k covering public expenditure (Public Expenditure Review [PER] and
Public Expenditure Tracking Study [PETS]), and poverty (Household Income &
Expenditure Survey), as w e l l as analysis o f public sector reform options, reform o f the
mining sector, and the agriculture sector. In addition, the Government undertook an indepth governance diagnostic assessment with participation f r o m c i v i l society reps and
support f r o m DfID, the EU and UNDP. A major social assessment was undertaken.
Legal and Judicial Sector Assessment was completed j o i n t l y with DfID in 2004; and a
Country Gender Assessment i s currently underway. Finally, the Bank provided advisory
support to the development o f the Investment Code as well as the Procurement Law.

The following lessons emerge from the review o f the implementation o f the
35.
Bank’s TSS:
0

0

Where the implementation capacity o f the country i s weak, project design
should be simple and w e l l articulated. Commitment and ownership depend o n
the stakeholders’ understanding o f what i s implied in implementing a
program.
Weaknesses in public sector management have a strong impact o n portfolio
performance.
This i s particularly so in cases where weaknesses in
procurement could lead to implementation delays and financial
mismanagement. The lack o f adequate counterpart funding m a y also cause
slippages in project implementation.
Grass-root community development works should b e promoted especially in
rural areas where the sense o f community i s strong. If appropriately
supported by a technical agency and by a decentralized structure o f
Government, local communities can w o r k effectively and in a sustainable w a y
for their o w n development.
Direct community financing should be
encouraged as i t helps improve governance and accountability.

B.

Partnership and Harmonization

36.
Donor coordination i s led by Government through the Sierra Leone
Development Partnership Committee (DEPAC). The first meeting was held o n M a r c h
20, 2003, co-chaired by the V i c e President o f Sierra Leone with the B a n k and the UNDP,
and comprising Government, i t s development partners and representatives o f c i v i l

12

society. An additional 11 DEPAC meetings have been h e l d through April 2005, each
with strong donor representation o n a wide variety o f topics. Each meeting has reviewed
progress in implementing the Results Framework for Peace, Recovery and Development,
agreed at the 2002 Consultative Group (CG) meeting - the “CG Matrix” (Annex 2).

37.

Donor coordination has been particularly strong on issues of governance
and public financial management, and will further be strengthened in the areas of
support to local councils and communities, to the social sectors, and to
infrastructure. In particular, i t will be important to create frameworks that will allow
donors to participate in j o i n t action with m i n i m a l overhead costs. As the financing needs
will continue to be high, i t will be important to seek to maintain and expand the number
o f development partners and their contributions. There i s a risk that Sierra Leone will
face a reduction in overall support as previous allocations to support the country during
i t s post-conflict phase are reconsidered by donors. Unless this risk i s effectively met,
Sierra Leone could face considerable challenges just as the absorptive capacity for
long-term PRSP-based development cooperation i s improving. The DEPAC will
continue to promote stronger harmonization, lower transaction costs and j o i n t financing
frameworks.

38.
Key budget support donors - AfDB, DfID, EU and the World Bank - have
agreed in principle to the development of a Framework for Multi-Donor Budget
Support (MDBS) to cover the period 2006-08. The framework aims to coordinate
donor support for the Government’s reform program and PRS. I t will set out goals,
monitorable progress indicators and areas o f responsibility. The initial framework i s
expected in the first h a l f o f 2005, in time for the 2006 budget. The Government, the
W o r l d B a n k and the UN are organizing a CG meeting in June 2005 to consider the
SLPRSP, and to promote a results-oriented, harmonized support framework within w h i c h
partners can mobilize increased levels o f coordinated support. A Results M a t r i x o f
ongoing and planned donor activities, organized by SLPRSP-defined strategic areas, will
b e developed as the framework for partnership coordination during the implementation o f
the SLPRSP.
C.

Participatory and Consultative Process

39.
This CAS draws upon a consultative process that was carried out during
January-March 2005. Consultations were carried out with Government counterparts at
the sectoral level t o the proposed Results Framework, as w e l l as the program o f lending
and ESW. Consultations with c i v i l society and community groups were undertaken in
t w o phases: (a) an upstream discussion addressed the expected role o f the B a n k and
donor community in supporting the SLPRSP; and (b) a downstream consultation
validated the final draft o f the C A S to ensure that client inputs are reflected. Each event
h a d between 50 and 60 participants. The m a i n objective o f the consultations with c i v i l
society was to bring together a broad range o f representative opinion o n Sierra Leone’s
poverty reduction challenges and responses as contained in the SLPRSP to guide the
preparation o f the CAS.

13

40.
Overall, the CAS consultations confirmed the direction of the proposed
strategy. Participants endorsed the proposals for Bank support to local councils, public

sector reform, and the anti-corruption agenda as the first, second, and third most
important interventions in addressing the problem o f poor governance. In dealing with
food security and unemployment, participants felt that the provision o f supportive
infrastructure and promotion o f private sector development were the most critical
interventions. Similarly, private sector development and legal regulatory and institutional
reforms were identified as prerequisites for economic growth. Participants cited the need
for supporting basic education, technical and vocational training, as w e l l as maternal and
child health care, health education, and affordable access to health care. Water and
sanitation, rural water supply, urban water supply, sanitary education and sewage
management were also highlighted.

V.
A.

RESULTS-BASED BANK SUPPORT TO THE PRSP

Alignment of CAS with PRSP Objectives

41.

This CAS builds on the three pillars of the SLPRSP. I t focuses o n govemance,
decentralization and public financial management; sustainable growth, food security and
jobs creation; and human development. In alignment with other development partners,
the strategy addresses the country’s overriding challenge o f extreme poverty, w h i c h i s
accentuated by high unemployment (especially o f the youth), food insecurity
(compounded by poor infrastructure) and dismal social sector indicators.

42.
Bank Group support for the SLPRSP will be selective and build on the
existing programs in economic reform, decentralization, infrastructure development
and the social sectors. Economic reform will be underpinned by annual development

In recognition o f Government’s improved systems for the
policy operations.
management o f public resources, the B a n k proposes to j o i n a multi-donor budget support
framework. A fourth ERRG has been developed for FYOS as a bridging operation.
Support for decentralization will go beyond institutional reform and capacity building to
include significant transfer o f resources to support innovative approaches to decentralized
governance, including the use o f the RRI, t o boost and empower local councils in the
districts. I t will include expansion o f public financial management tools at b o t h the
central and decentralized levels o f Government. To support the growth and employment
agenda, the Bank will expand i t s support to infrastructure through the FY05 Power and
Water Project and the Bumbuna Hydroelectric Project with a major transport project. A
multi-donor support framework for roads development and maintenance will b e
especially critical for the food security agenda. An integrated rural and private sector
development initiative will target growth and youth unemployment. In the areas o f health
and education, the Bank’s strategy builds u p o n the current rehabilitation programs, to
develop sector programs, focusing o n efficiency, quality and access. The ongoing social
fund i s contributing to a l l three results areas. The rationale for the strategic priorities o f
Bank Group support are outlined below.

14

B.

World Bank Activities - Three Strategic Priorities

Strategic Priority 1: Governance, Decentralizationand Public Financial
Management
43,
Introduction. Sierra Leone’s govemance problems are pervasive.
Governance and Corruption Surveys reveal the following problems:
Over-centralization o f power and resources in Freetown;
0

Weak enforcement o f laws and regulations;

0

Weak monitoring mechanisms;

0

Inadequate watch-dog role o f the c i v i l society and the media;

0

Non-transparent management o f public resources; and

0

The 2002

Weak capacity both in the public and private sectors (for example, lack o f
awareness o f c i v i l rights, unqualified government personnel in certain critical
positions, inadequate training infrastructure).

44.
Based o n the Bank’s assessment o f political commitment and implementation
capacity, IDA has chosen to support GoSL to pursue two routes o f govemance reform:
(a) one focusing o n fiscal decentralization and empowerment o f local govemment and
communities to more effectively determine their o w n development priorities and
undertake development initiatives; and (b) the other focusing o n improving transparency,
promoting accountability and effectiveness o f public financial management. Other
partners, especially DfID, EU and UNDP, are providing support to the Anti-Corruption
Commission, legal reform and capacity building, and c i v i l society organizations, and
WBI i s supporting the Governance Reform Secretariat by helping to monitor the success
o f institutional reforms underway, conducting workshops and establishing a Global
Distance Leaming Center in Freetown.
(a)
Supporting fiscal decentralization and empowering local government and
communities to effectively determine local development priorities and undertake
development initiatives

45.
Context. K e y findings o n the causes o f c i v i l conflict in Sierra Leone point to:
(a) exclusion o f local communities from major national decisions; (b) exclusion o f
vulnerable groups; and (c) mismanagement o f public resources. To help ward against
future conflict, the Bank will continue to support the local provision o f social services
and productive activities using a demand-driven approach with strong community
involvement. Over the next four years, GoSL will gradually transfer a significant set o f
service-delivery responsibilities and corresponding budget resources in the form o f grants
to local councils. To ensure equity and transparency in resource allocation across
localities, the Local Government Act 2004 requires that the allocation o f each o f these
grants be determined by a formula using objective indicators o f service-delivery needs
and revenue capacity. IDA will support GoSL in designing and implementing this
transfer system. In addition, under the ongoing NSAP, the Bank i s helping communities
restore infrastructure and services with priority given to areas that have not been
previously served by Govemment and to the most vulnerable groups.
15

Table 4: Governance, Decentralization and Public Financial Management
Results

- Selected Targeted

Strategic and Long-Term Country
Development Outcomes

CAS Outcomes that the Bank Expects to Influence

Fiscal decentralization and
empowerment of local government and
com m unities

(a) Each )car, central Go\ernment transfers functions to local councils

Local government empowered with
service-delivery responsibilities, local
revenue mobilization capacity and
central Government grants

(b) Each year, local councils receive grants from central Government in
the amount necessary to provide the same coverage and quality o f
services as in the prior year.

A local government system, which
adopts an inclusive, transparent and
accountable governance culture and is
capable of discharging service-delivery
responsibilities

(c) B y 2008, all 19 councils will be able to use an inclusive process to
produce development plans that respond to local priorities.
(d) B y 2008, at least 14 local councils will meet the transparency and
financial management accountability requirements as per the Local
Government Act o f 2004.
(e) B y 2008, at least 14 local councils will be able to sustain or improve
the level and quality o f all devolved services.

Poor and marginalizedpeople and
communities are empowered through
inclusive, transparent and accountable
institutions andprocesses at the local
level
Improve transparency, accountability
and effectiveness ofpublic resource
managem en t by central Government

(f) 100% compliance with participatory project selection and
implementation process in communities with subproject and shelter
financing (NaCSA & JSDF).
(g) Increases in access and utilization o f social and economic
infrastructure and services at the community level.

according to the Local Government Act 2004 and the Devolution Plan
2005.

Imvroved strategic orientation of budpet:

(a) Key MDAs (Agric, Educ, Health, SLRA, Transport, Mineral
Resources) have strategic plans and 3-year program-based budget by
2008, consistent with SLPRSP.
(b) To help finance decentralized service-delivery responsibilities,
central Government will provide tied grants to local councils based on
published formulae using objective indicators o f service-delivery needs
and revenue capacity.
Imvroved transvarencv of overall Government resource envelope and
allocation:
(c) 90% donor funding captured in budget and fiscal reports using
Government classifications by program and object o f expenditures.
(d) In-year reports on poverty-related expenditures published on
quarterly basis.
Imvroved accountability of svending units:
(e) 95% o f Vote Controllers submit monthly reports on actual revenue

and expenditures to the Financial Secretary.
(f) Cabinet recommendations to address the issues revealed by the
annual Expenditure Tracking Survey (ETS) are implemented in a
timely manner.
(g) 90% o f reporting entities provide satisfactory response to Auditor
General’s recommendations.
Imvroved transvarencv and accountabilitv of procurement:

(h) Improved public perception o f transparency in public procurement
process and reduced level o f perceived corruption in procurement,
compared to 2002 Governance and Corruption Survey.
Imvroved staffing for vublic financial management:

(i)More qualified managerial and professional staff in the Ministry of
Finance (MOF) and the above key MDAs.

16

46.
T o help G o S L maximize the development - and peace - dividend o f the
decentralization process, IDA, through the IRCBP, i s helping G o S L establish a local
government system, with an inclusive, transparent and accountable governance culture
capable o f discharging service delivery responsibilities. IRCBP i s helping local councils
build management capacity in inclusive development planning, financial management,
project identification and implementation, and revenue mobilization. IDA i s also
supporting the ministries, departments and agencies’ (MDAs) devolution programs to
ensure a smooth process o f decentralization and capacity building. I R C B P has
earmarked US$6 m i l l i o n in seed money to help GoSL establish and finance the L o c a l
Government Development Grant (LGDG). As part o f the inter-governmental transfer
system, LGDG provides untied block grants to local councils to finance discretionary
development projects. In September 2004 the LGDG financed 19 local council R R I s in
agriculture, feeder roads and small bridges, rural water and sanitation, urban traffic and
solid waste management. This experimentation with LGDG demonstrated that the local
councils can manage small infrastructure and service delivery initiatives. These
successful R R I s have encouraged the councils to embrace a results-oriented management
approach w h i c h will prove useful as they take over more and more responsibilities under
the devolution program. IDA, through IRCBP, possible supplementary funding and other
programs, will continue to facilitate the adoption o f results-focused management
approaches. The B a n k will also explore with G o S L a transition strategy for the NaCSA,
so i t s resources can b e channeled through local councils to establish them as relevant
leaders for local development and encourage them to embrace a community-driven
development approach.
47.
Expected Results. The long-term strategic outcome i s the empowerment o f local
governments and communities to identify local development priorities, leverage
resources and undertake their o w n development initiatives. The C A S outcomes include:
0

0

Local governments empowered with service-delivery responsibilities and
resources: (a) each year, central Government transfers functions to local
councils according to the L o c a l Government A c t 2004 and the Devolution
Plan 2005; and (b) each year, local councils receive grants f r o m central
Government in the amount necessary to provide the same coverage and
quality o f services as was provided in the prior year.
L o c a l government capable o f inclusive development planning, accountable
financial management and effective service delivery: (c) by 2008, a l l 19
councils will b e able to use an inclusive process t o produce development plans
that respond to local priorities; (d) by 2008, at least 14 local councils will
meet the transparency and financial management accountability requirements
as per the L o c a l Government A c t o f 2004; and (e) by 2008, at least 14 local
councils will b e able to sustain o r improve the level and quality o f a l l
devolved services.
Communities in p i l o t areas (NaCSA and JSDF intervention areas) use
participatory project selection and implementation processes (1 00%
compliance in communities w i t h subprojects).

17

0

Increased access and utilization o f social and economic infi-astructure and
services at community level.

(b)
Improving transparency, accountability and effectiveness of public financial
management

Context. IDA’Ssupport to the ongoing public financial management reform and
the anti-corruption agenda will focus on: improving budget classification and coverage
to enable budget analysis and reporting; re-orienting the budget to support SLPRSP
implementation; improving accountability o f those entrusted w i t h public resource
management responsibilities; establishing a transparent and efficient public procurement
system; and supporting human resource management.

48.

49.
Through a series o f development policy operations and the IRCBP, IDA will
continue to strengthen the capacity o f the Ministry o f Finance (MOF) to manage the
budget and to lead public financial management reform. IDA will support the
establishment o f sustained capacity in the Budget Bureau, the Economic Policy and
Research Unit, the L o c a l Government Finance Department, the Accountant General
Department, and the National Public Procurement Authority (NPPA). IDA will also help
strengthen the strategic p o l i c y analysis and program design, financial management,
monitoring and evaluation capacity o f some k e y Ministries, Departments and Agencies
(MDAs).

50.
Expected Results. The strategic and long-term development outcomes will b e
improved transparency, accountability and effectiveness o f public resource management
(Table 4). The C A S outcomes will include:
0

0

0

0

Improved strategic orientation o f the budget: key MDAs (Agriculture,
Education, Health, Mineral Resources, Transport, Sierra Leone Roads
Authority) will have strategic plans and a three-year, program-based budget
by 2008, consistent w i t h the SLPRSP.
Improved transparency o f overall Government resource envelope and
allocation: 90% o f donor funding captured in the budget and fiscal reports
using Government classifications by program and object o f expenditures;
in-year reports o n poverty-related expenditures published o n a quarterly basis.
Improved transparency and accountability o f procurement: improved public
perception o f transparency in public procurement process and reduced level o f
perceived corruption in procurement, compared to 2002 Governance and
Corruption Survey.
Improved staffing for public financial management:
more qualified
managerial and professional staff in the MOF and the above k e y MDAs.

Strategic Priority 2: Sustainable Growth, Food Security and Jobs Creation

5 1,

are:

Introduction. The four over-arching objectives related to this strategic priority
0

Sustain real GDP growth at above 6 percent per annum;

18

Reduce the share o f the population in poverty f r o m 70 percent in 2004 to 66
percent in 2009;
Eliminate food-poverty; and
0

Reduce unemployment.

Recognizing that a multitude o f factors will affect the ability of Sierra Leone t o
52.
achieve these goals, the strategic objectives o f this C A S pillar are focused o n t w o aspects
o f the country’s enabling environment and o n the t w o primary sources o f growth. The
strategic and long-term development outcomes are:
0

Improved investment climate and access to finance for the private sector;
Increased investment in, and improved maintenance of, infrastructure;
G r o w t h in agriculture; and
G r o w t h in pro-poor mining.

In addition to the B a n k operations and activities described in the sections below,
53.
the B a n k will support these goals through annual DPOs, investment projects and p o l i c y
dialogue, a l l backed by analytical work. The policy reforms supported by the DPOs, and
amplified through a framework for Multi-donor Budget Support, will help increase the
private savings and investment rates needed to drive long-run growth and j o b creation,
and the biannual PERs will assess the level and composition o f public investment.
(a)

Investmeiit climate and access to finance

Context. In order to sustain the current levels o f high growth, the Govemment
54.
will need to deepen its macroeconomic reform program and create an enabling
environment for diversification o f the economy through private sector initiatives. The
Bank will continue i t s assistance in overall economic p o l i c y dialogue (along with the
IMF). Emphasis will be placed o n (a) continued macro-economic stability, reducing
interest rates, and increasing access to finance by the private sector; (b) improved
investment climate, through better services, appropriate regulation, and public enterprise
reform.

55.
Analytical w o r k will include the Bank’s Integrated Framework, a multi-sector
approach to private sector competitiveness, building o n the F Y 0 5 Foreign Investment
Advisory Services (FIAS) Administrative Barriers work. A regional trade insurance
study m a y be launched to investigate potential investor demand for political risk
insurance to cover trade and direct investment in Sierra Leone. A labor market and youth
study will identify p o l i c y options to increase employment while still maintaining decent
wages. The study will also be used to establish a baseline and a target for future
reduction in unemployment which will be monitored through periodic surveys financed
by the Bank and/or other donors. Financial sector p o l i c y reform requirements will be
The p o l i c y
assessed through a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP).
recommendations that emerge f r o m this analytical w o r k will feed into the DPOs and will
drive the Rural and Private Sector Development Project and the Mining Sector TA
Project.

19

Table 5: Sustainable Growth, Food Security and Jobs Creation - Selected Targeted Results

climate and access to
long-term finance
Increase investment in, and
maintenance oJ;
infrastructure

Growth in agriculture

Growth in pro-poor mining

I

administrative barriers, and competition policy.
(b) Financial sector reform, including establishment of long-run financial
instruments.
(a) Minimum continuous electrical power supply o f at least 37.8 M W nationally
(b) Increased volume o f water supplied to Freetown, from a base o f 95,340 m3/day
in 2003.
(c) Ensuring that four districts have appropriate all-weather access to district
headquarters and all major agricultural projects.
(a) Increased rice production from 2002 base of 422,000 M T .
(b) Higher volume o f agricultural and fishery exports from 2003 base of zero.
(c) Increased access to roads, inputs and extension services.
(d) Establishment o f regulatory capacity within Ministry of Agriculture for quality
o f inputs and exports.
(e).Increased private sector participation in the provision o f agricultural inputs and
extension services.
(a) Improved legal and regulatory framework for mining with special emphasis on
exploration and mining rights (administered under cadastral system).
(b) Increase in the number o f extension service contracts.

Expected Results. The strategic and long-term development outcome will be an
improved investment climate and access to finance for the private sector. The CAS
outcomes will include:

56.

0

0

(b)

Reforms aimed at improvements in competitiveness through a reduction in
administrative barriers, and the introduction o f competition policy; and
Financial sector reform, including the establishment o f long-run financial
instruments.

Infrastructure

57.
Context. The deteriorated state o f infrastructure i s a major constraint to pro-poor
growth, job creation, food security and human development. Even conservative estimates
indicate that hundreds o f millions o f dollars would be needed for a minimal
infrastructural platform.
The PRSP emphasizes that the Government considers
infrastructure a top priority, and that i t will look to the private sector to meet the
challenges o f massive financing needs as well as improved management.

58.
New financing under the CAS will focus o n power and roads. The Transport
Development Project scheduled for FY06 will be a multi-modal operation focusing o n
prioritized road rehabilitation and maintenance and o n physical investments and
institutional support for the ports and airport. The feeder road component o f this project
i s expected to be a substantive source o f employment. The content o f the proposed FY09
infrastructure project will be determined in the context o f the CAS Progress Report. The
telecommunications sector may be addressed through IFC & Public-Private
Infrastructure Adviso y Facility (PPIAF) collaboration o n technical assistance or projects
aimed at improving the telecommunications management and establishing a sound legal
regulatory and institutional framework. Rural infrastructure (water, feeder roads) i s also

20

expected to be supported by the N S A P and IRCB-funded projects. All infrastructure
support will be conducted in coordination not only with the relevant sector ministries but
also w i t h the National Commission for Privatization (NCP). NCP i s responsible for
eventual commercialization o r privatization o f k e y infrastructural assets including the
NPA, the water authorities, the Road Authority and the Sierra Leone
Telecommunications Company. DflD i s expected to provide technical assistance to NCP
for i t s r e f o r m program. A Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) i s proposed for
the power sector.

Expected Results. The strategic and long-term development outcome will be
59.
increased investment in, and improved maintenance o f the country’s infrastructure. The
C A S outcomes include:
0

0

0

(c)

Minimum continuous electrical power supply o f at least 37.8 M W for
Freetown f r o m a 2003 base o f 19.8 M W effective capacity at the Freetown
K i n g t o m power station;

An increase in the volume o f water supplied to Freetown, f r o m a base o f
95,340 m3/day in 2003, and
Adequate roads to ensure that four selected districts (supported by the
Transport Development Project) have appropriate access to the m a i n road
network.

Growth in agriculture

60.
Context. Agriculture and fishing provide the highest potential in the short- to
medium-term for addressing Sierra Leone’s food security agenda, as w e l l as the high
level o f unemployment. At present, there i s insufficient access by farmers to inputs and
equipment, technology, credit, markets and information. The current approach to land
allocation and land use induces most farmers to maintain small plots at close to
subsistence levels. Similarly, fishing continues t o b e characterized by small vessels
Lntegrating the rural
devoid o f modern technology and marketing infrastructure.
economy into the national economy will require the development o f agricultural markets,
a dynamic agribusiness sector, and infrastructure that meet the needs o f producers and the
private sector. Better roads will be a k e y priority. Processing and value added to
agricultural production, including fisheries, will b e necessary to raise incomes and create
employment. Sustained increases in productivity will b e necessary to improve the
competitiveness o f domestic agricultural production and to improve agricultural incomes.
61.
Bank support for promoting agriculture and fishing w o u l d build o n the F Y 0 5
Agricultural Sector Review (ASR). A regional trade study m a y b e undertaken to
investigate regional opportunities for trade cooperation and expansion. The p o l i c y
recommendations f r o m the ASR, the Integrated Framework (IF) the labor market study,
and existing analytical w o r k will i n f o r m design o f a proposed rural and private sector
development project.
62.
Expected Results. The strategic and long-term development outcome i s
sustained growth in agriculture with increased competitiveness in export crops and higher

21

value crops; increased employment; and, in particular, increased rice and palm o i l
production. The CAS outcomes include:
0
0

0

0

0

(d)

Increased rice production from the 2002 base o f 422,000 MT;
Higher exports o f agricultural and fishery output from a 2003 base o f virtually
zero;
Increased access by farmers and fishermen to roads, inputs and extension
services;
Establishment o f regulatory capacity within Ministry o f Agriculture for
quality o f inputs and export; and
Increased private sector participation in the provision o f agricultural inputs
and extension services.

Growth in pro-poor mining

63.
Context. The mining sector i s the second most important productive sector after
agriculture and fishing for employment and income generation. Mining households are
also the second poorest group after agricultural households. Mining development has
been hindered by a weak regulatory environment and lack o f technical support. Through
ERRC 111, the Bank and other development partners have supported initial high-priority
reforms in the administration o f mining rights (cadastre) and extension services. These
advances need to be sustained by countrywide deployment o f the cadastral system and
extension services, as well as hrther work o n an improved geological information base,
fiscal and other regulatory aspects.
64.
Bank support continues in FY06 with a focus o n capacity building within the
Ministry o f Mineral Resources and a Strategic Environmental Assessment on Extractive
Industries. This may be supplemented by a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA),
followed by a Mining Sector Technical Assistance (TA) Project in FY07. This technical
assistance will support the improvement o f the legal and regulatory framework around
mining rights, investment and taxation regimes, as well as the management o f mineral
rents, in line with intemational practice. I t will also support artisanal and small-scale
mining w i t h a view to mitigating the associated social and environmental impacts.
Training programs w i l l also be developed to assist mines in the identification and
valuation o f diamonds, marketing, occupation health and safety practices, business
practices and stakeholders’ roles. The impact o f the Mining T A Project would be
amplified through coordination with the Integrated Framework which will examine
opportunities to make Sierra Leone metals and minerals more competitive globally.
65.
Expected Results: The strategic and long-term country development outcome i s
growth in the mining sector reflected in increased personal income o f alluvial miners,
increased government revenues from mining and increased volume and value o f mining
exports. The CAS outcomes include:
0

0

Improved legal and regulatory framework for mining with special emphasis
on exploration and mining rights (administered under cadastral system); and
Increase in the number o f extension service contracts.

22

Box 3: Extractive Industries (EI)
Sierra Leone has substantial mineral resources. In 2004, raw diamonds accounted for 88 percent o f exports and 20
percent of GDP. Govemment has a Mineral Policy (2004) in place along with a Mines and Minerals Act (1996) and a
National Environment Protection Act (2000). T h e Extractive Industries Review (EIR) identified four areas that need to
be addressed:
Governance and Transparency. Sierra Leone i s participating in the Kimberly process, a scheme that aims to
eliminate the sale of so-called “blood diamonds” that have fueled many conflicts, includmg Sierra Leone’s. But mining
rights are not secure and are poorly organized. Much o f the production i s unaccounted for (though the volume moving
through official channels in increasing every year), and there i s a high degree o f dis
egohating fiscal and
other terms o f large scale mining deals. DfID i s providing support for a review o f
pects o f the mineral
policy, and Govemment plans to introduce model m n i n g agreements to establish t
Government has also formally asked to participate in the Extractive Industnes Trans
nitiative (EITI) which
would be another important step.
Ensuring the E1 Benefits reach the Poor Alluvial diamond miners are benefiting from assistance from the Peace
Diamond Alliance, an organization consisting o f local communities, Govemment mnistries, local and extemal NGOs,
private f i r m s and external donors such as DfID and United State Agency for International Development (USAID). The
Alliance helps miners organize into cooperatives, sell diamonds at prices closer to world prices, and teaches methods of
conflict management. Bank analytical work may include a PSIA (FY07).
Mitigating Social and Environmental Risks. Uncontrolled mining activities have left vast areas deforested and
degraded. This will be a key focus o f a strategic environment assessment (FY06). Mine sites are often operated in
unsafe conditions, with negative impacts on local communities To deal with environmental and social problems,
Government has installed a cadastral system to adm
ining rights, and i s initiating mining extension services to
provide advice on safety and environmental responsi
Protecting the Rights of People affected by E1 Investments. Government’s mining extension services include
reporting procedures that will help reduce the employment o f children in mining areas. Also, the Ministry o f Gender
and Children’s affairs has begun to work in collaboration with Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) to reduce the
number o f child miners. Mining tends to have a negative gender bias (benefits, e g. employment, are typically captured
by men and costs, e.g. social disruption and environmental harm, have the greatest impact on women and children).

Strategic Priority 3: Human Development
66.
Introduction. The Bank will evolve i t s existing program to focus o n sector
approaches to education, health (including HIV/AIDS), and social protection. Ongoing
projects in education and health are complemented by service provision through the
community and district-based support in NSAP and IRCBP. Analytical work will
underpin the choices for future sector support, foreseen for FY08.
(a)

Education

67.
Context. Bank support (co-financed by the AfDB) through the Rehabilitation and
Basic Education Project (REBEP) has helped Government to reestablish education
services throughout the country and i s preparing the ground for expansion and quality
improvements. Nevertheless, the following issues need attention: (a) the lack o f
sufficient and adequate inputs at school level, compounded by insufficient planning,
management and implementation capacity at all levels; and (b) the lack o f coordination
among the various actors providing education service in the country (including the donor
community). Bank support will build o n the ongoing REBEP by undertaking an
Education Country Status Report (CSR) in FY06. The outcome o f this analysis will be
used to guide a sectonvide strategy and to provide a framework for development
partners’ support.

23

68.
Expected Results. The strategic and long-term development outcome will be to
achieve primary universal education as well as improved quality, efficiency, equity (in
particular, gender parity) and relevance at post-primary levels nationwide. The CAS
outcomes include:
0

0

0

20 percent increase in enrollment on average for girls in primary schools in
targeted districts;
20 percent increase in passing rates o f students taking the Basic Education
Certificate Examination (BECE); and
Pupil/textbook ratio reaches 1: 1 at basic level in core textbooks by 2009.
Table 6: Human Development - Selected Targeted Results

in targeted districts,

(b) 80% o f births are attended by trained health personnel;

(b)

Health

69.
Context. C i v i l war depleted the country’s supply o f social services both in terms
o f coverage and quality, resulting in under-investment in human capital. A consequence
of this under-investment i s the very high under-five mortality rate (284 out o f 1,000 live
births), the equally high maternal mortality rate (2,000 out o f 100,000 live births) and the
lack o f financial sustainability o f the health services currently provided.
The
Bank-financed HSRDP supports capacity strengthening o f the Ministry o f Health and
Sanitation (MOHS) and the District Health Management Team (DHMT) b y improving
the decision-making process and enhancing capacity for appropriate planning, financial
management and supervision. The HSRDP also promotes private sector and c i v i l society
participation in the health sector with a view to increase efficiency, ensure equity and
improve the quality o f services provided. But a number o f issues hinder the ability o f the
system to achieve national goals. Among them are: (a) the limited financial resources
allocated to the health sector, which has resulted in limited availability o f good quality
health facilities; (b) inadequate planning and management o f the health sector’s human
resources; and (c) the lack o f coordination among the various actors in the heath sector.
The Bank will support the implementation o f the revised national health policy by
focusing o n decentralization, promoting community-level and participatory financing

24

mechanisms, and building partnership among organizations that influence health
outcomes. A review o f the health sector i s planned for FY07.
70.
Support for HIV/AIDS will continue through the ongoing SHARE) operation, with
renewed acceleration using the technique o f the RRI. Beyond expanding the emphasis o f
the SHARP program in the area o f care and support, effort will be made to mainstream
H I V / A I D S concerns in all ongoing and proposed operations, especially the Transport
Development Project.

71.
Expected Results. The strategic long-term outcome will be to improve the health
status o f Sierra Leoneans. The CAS outcomes are based on the four districts where the
Bank activities are concentrated. They include:
0

70 percent o f the population have access to essential health services;

0

80 percent o f births are attended by trained health personnel;

65 percent o f children aged 13-24 months are fully immunized; and
0

(c)

99 percent o f women aged 15-19 remain HIV negative.

Social Protection Strategy

72.
Context. Recent surveys in Sierra Leone have recommended the need to
strengthen social protection and safety net systems so as to target social vulnerability
more efficiently. Proposed Bank intervention in this area will focus on action-oriented
research to pilot innovative responses to the needs o f vulnerable groups, such as youth
and orphans, and analytical work (FY07) o n social protection policies, system reform and
implementation.

73.
Expected Results. The long-term strategic outcome will be a sustainable caring
mechanism for vulnerable groups. The CAS outcome will include a social protection
strategy for the Ministry o f Social Welfare, Gender and Children’s Affairs.
C.

Summary of Bank Assistance

74.
Based on the results framework defined above, the Bank’s proposed financial
support to G o S L i s summarized in Table 7. The program builds on the TSS - w i t h a
bridge o f three projects in FY05 (Power and Water, ERRG I V and the Bumbuna
Hydroelectric Project) - to facilitate the transition from post-conflict to a PRSP-based
framework. The assistance program i s built on a strategy o f annual budget support
(through a development policy instrument) and selective investment operations. The
investment program focuses heavily o n infrastructure, support to private sector
development, agriculture and mining, and continued investment in education and health.
The CAS does not propose base and high cases, but IDA support i s intended to be scaled
up on the basis o f improving performance as measured by the Country Policy and
Institutional Assessment (CPIA) and the Annual Review o f Portfolio Performance
(ARpP).

25

Table 7: I D A Financing Program
(Indicative Credit/Grant Amounts in US$ millions)
FY06:
IDP Transport Project

43

FY07:
Development Policy Support
Rural and Private Sector Development Project
Mining Sector Technical Assistance Project
Sub-total

10
28
5
43 *

FYOS:
Development Policy Support
HealtWEducation Project
Sub-total

10
33
43 *

FY09:
Development Policy Support
InfrastructureDevelopment Project
Public Sector RefodCapacity Building
Sub-total

,

10
20
13
43 *

Analytical work will provide the intellectual underpinnings for the Bank’s
75.
assistance program (Table 8). In addition to analysis in the core areas o f public
expenditure, public financial management and poverty monitoring, the B a n k will
undertake focused analysis in selected areas in response to the specific challenges facing
Sierra Leone.
Table 8: Analytical Underpinnings

26

76.
The program also covers a number of cross-cutting issues, most notably
gender, environment, and capacity building. Gender i s integrated in m a n y areas o f
the w o r k program. One o f the most notable gender issues in Sierra Leone i s maternal
health, since the country has extremely high rates o f matemal mortality; the ongoing
health project addresses this problem. Female literacy and girls’ enrollment rates,

including the lack o f parity at higher levels o f post-primary education, are other areas
w h i c h will b e addressed in the Country Education Status Report. The proposed labor
market and youth study will build o n a detailed survey w o r k and p a y particular attention
to differences in h o w m e n and women fare in the labor market, including issues such as
access to credit and land, legal system and gender-based violence. Environmental
issues are also mainstreamed in the Bank’s program. In addition to the proposed Gobal
Environment Facility (GEF) o n biodiversity, each o f the infrastructure has adequate
environment assessment components and safeguards. Other activities likely to have a
positive environmental impact include the ongoing Power and Water project, which
should reduce the demand for urban fuel wood use, and help improve water resource
management.

77.
One of the primary objectives o f the Bank’s program i s to help Sierra Leone
regain and develop its capacity to deliver its national PRSP objectives. I t aims at
enhancing GoSL p o l i c y and budget management, strengthening domestic accountability
system, and establishing inclusive, effective and accountable local governance. IDA
resources will increasingly b e channeled through government budget and
inter-governmental transfers system. Existing operations will, in addition to achieving
their service delivery and infrastructure development objectives, strengthen the capacity
o f the counterpart government agencies in policymaking, financial management and
procurement, program implementation, and M&E. Existing operations will also assist the
newly established local government to establish necessary capacity to execute
decentralized service delivery and infrastructure development responsibilities through
leaming-by-doing, Substantial efforts will be put into helping GoSL unleash latent
capacity and build o n existing capacity to implement i t s ambitious development agenda.
The RRI, successfully piloted under I R C B P and SHARP, m a y b e disseminated to other
govemment agencies. IDA will also support GoSL to play an effective leadership role in
ensuring aid f r o m all donors help strengthen (rather than bypass o r undermine) domestic
capacity .
78.
Complementing the efforts to improve governance, as laid out in Strategic
Priority 1 above, capacity building will also be supported by the results focus o f the
DPO and by mainstreaming in the investment projects. A major piece o f ESW,
building o n the FY04 report, Strategic Options for Public Sector Reform, August 2003,
will address public sector reform and capacity building. F o l l o w i n g that assessment, and
the mid-term C A S Progress Report, a decision will b e made whether t o have a dedicated
FY09 project for this purpose.

27

Regional Programs. The Bank will support the implementation by Sierra
79.
Leone o f regional efforts, such as the Common External Tariff ( C E n of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) countries. T o address the
concerns o f negative perception associated with the post-conflict environment, Sierra

Leone m a y b e included in the Regional Trade Facilitation Project (RTFP) w h i c h sets up
an insurance mechanism against losses caused by political risk. Opportunities for Sierra
Leone to benefit f r o m regional programs financed by IDA will b e sought, in particular
regarding roads and power.

80.
Other World Bank Group Support. International Finance Corporation
(IFC) i s aligning its policy to the framework defined for the private sector by the
SLPRSP. I t has recommenced activities to improve the business climate following the
end o f the conflict. IFC has been involved in two operations: (a) Celtel Sierra Leone, a
mobile telecommunications operator, supported by U S $ 4 m i l l i o n loan, committed in
FY02; and (b) assessment o f a privatization o f the fixed-line telecom service, SierraTel
(2001/2002).
8 1.

I F C support focuses on:
0

0

Technical Assistance: I F C organized a micro-, small- and medium-enterprise
( M S M E ) Forum in Freetown in June 2003 to explore needs in the sector with
respect to technical assistance and government’s related priorities, and to
coordinate any potential interventions w i t h existing development partners.
I F C will be holding a series o f capacity-building workshops for M S M E s in
Freetown in A p r i l / M a y o f 2005. Through i t s n e w Private Enterprise
Partnership for A f r i c a (PEP Africa), IFC will consider w o r k i n g with F I A S to
improve the investment climate, including a business forum and business
registration.

Lending opportunities to select SMEs and financial
institutions will be pursued. As strategic infrastructure and mining sectors are
opened to private participation, IFC m a y also p l a y a direct financing role.

Lending Prospects:

82.
While the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) had no
outstanding gross exposure in Sierra Leone prior to FY05, this situation i s changing
rapidly, In FY05, MIGA approved cover o f a small (US$300,000) investment by the
Kjaer Group, a Danish investor in Freetown. MIGA’s pipeline i s expanding quickly and
by mid-FYO5, MIGA had three more projects at various stages o f the underwriting
process. MIGA expects to see increased demand for support for infrastructure projects
and projects in the mining sector. In preparing and implementing Sierra Leone’s
privatization and divestiture strategy, MIGA can play a useful role both in ensuring wide
dissemination o f information o n investment opportunities in Sierra Leone and in offering
i t s support - through i t s guarantee program - to address perceived political risk o n the
part o f foreign investors. MIGA can also provide advice during the project design phase
to ensure that projects are so designed as to make the mitigation o f political risk issues
easy to address.

28

83.
M I G A has become active on the technical assistance front, working in
collaboration with FIAS in support o f Sierra Leone Export Development and
Investment Promotion Agency (SLEDIC). The Government overhauled the investment
code in late 2003 with W o r l d B a n k support. SLEDIC will p l a y an important role in
collating and presenting information to the domestic business community and also over
time to prospective foreign investors. A further role i s to meet with existing investors in
the country t o identify the issues o f greatest concern. Where possible, S L E D I C should
seek to troubleshoot areas o f frustration and ensure that the most serious constraints rise
to the top o f the agenda o f business-government private sector forums. As outside
interest develops, this institution will serve as a first port o f call for investors seeking
information o n the economy and identifying trade, investment and contracting
opportunities. FIAS, with DffD support, i s already addressing issues related to the
investment micro-environment, and MIGA will offer i t s assistance in training, developing
the necessary tools and procedures to enable SLEDIC to develop the capacity needed to
play this role.

84.
I n collaboration with the Governance Reform Secretariat, the World Bank
Institution (WBI) organized an anti-corruption survey as part o f efforts to address
the issue of poor governance in the country. Data collected in the survey were used to

establish quantitative benchmarks for monitoring the success o f the institutional reforms
underway.
WBI also organized a series o f national and regional workshops to
disseminate results o f the survey so as to spread awareness about governance issues.
Parliamentarians f r o m Sierra Leone have participated in the WBI course on strengthening
the oversight roles o f Finance and Public Accounts Committees. During the C A S period,
WBI will build knowledge and capacity relating to fiscal decentralization (including
chiefdom development issues), anti-corruption and training o f c i v i l servants. I t will also
facilitate delegates f r o m Sierra Leone participating in regional thematic activities. A
distance learning center i s being established in Freetown under the IRCBP. I t i s expected
to increase the country's access to WBI programs and help break the country's relative
isolation.

D.

Measuring Results: The Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) Framework

85.
The performance of the CAS will be reviewed at mid-course, based on the
outcomes identified in the results matrices (Tables 3, 4 and 5 and Annex 1). Annual
Country Program Reviews (CPRs), undertaken j o i n t l y with Government, will assess
progress o f the portfolio and alignment o f the Bank's assistance with C A S and SLPRSP
objectives. These CPRs will serve as inputs to the C A S Progress Report w h i c h will
assess whether C A S outcomes are actually being achieved and, in light o f the findings,
will determine whether adjustments are needed. A completion report will b e prepared at
the end o f the four-year C A S cycle to assess the overall progress in achieving the
objectives o f the CAS.
86.
Monitoring o f CAS and portfolio outcomes will need to rely in large part on
the M&E framework that Government has in place for the PRSP. Efforts have been
made to promote consistency between C A S progress indicators and PRSP indicators, but

29

further alignment will be needed. In addition, this involves significant roles for Statistics
Sierra Leone, the MOF, the Ministry o f Development and Economic Planning (MODEP),
and sub-national government in the implementation o f the M&E system. The Bank i s
committed to work with the Government and other donors in establishing the statistical
basis for the M&E system. JSDF funding has been approved to support capacity building
at Statistics Sierra Leone.

87.

Millennium Development Goals. Accelerated progress toward meeting the
MDGs will require focused action by the Government and intensified support from
the Bank Group, as well as from the rest of the internationalcommunity. Table 9
shows progress so far.
Table 9: Progress Towards Attaining the MillenniumDevelopment Goals

school.
3. Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women
Target 4: Eliminate gender disparity in
I Ratio o f female to male at
tertiary level o f education

Source UNDP, Human Development Report 2004

30

1

--

I

0.40

1

On track

88.
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA). The CPIA assesses the
quality of a country’s present policy and institutional framework and plays a key
role in the Bank’s mechanism of allocating IDA resources among IDA recipients. In
accordance with research o n aid effectiveness, IDA resources are directed to countries
that are pursuing policies that promote growth and reduce poverty. A l o n g with the
performance o f the portfolio, a country’s CPIA ratings play a major role in determining
the volume o f IDA flows i t receives every year. Countries are evaluated according to 16
criteria, grouped into four categories as shown in Table 10: (a) macroeconomic
management, (b) structural policies, (c) policies for social inclusion and equity, and
(d) public sector management and institutions.
These criteria are re-examined
periodically and adjustments are made in line w i t h lessons f r o m cross-country experience
and research findings. Based o n the current assessment, Sierra Leone’s performance i s
comparable to the average IDA recipient. In order to m o v e to a higher level o f IDA
support, the Government w o u l d need to take actions that w o u l d lead to an increase in the
CPIA ratings. Table 10 presents a number of options that could drive improvements in
the country’s CPIA score, thereby justifying higher volumes o f IDA support.
Improvements in the area o f public sector management and institutions are especially
important in terms o f delivering results to the country’s population. These governance
areas are also emphasized in the allocation o f IDA resources.
Table 10: Policy Performance - Areas for Improvement
Macroeconomic
Management

Actions Recommended to Trigger Increased Levels of IDA Support
Accelerate improvements in the macroeconomic environment as measured by:
(a) Substantially reduced interest rates; and

I

(b) Develop and implement legislation goveming competition policy; and
(b) Distribute resources transparently and equitably across local councils.
(a) Key ministries to develop 3-year program-based budgets consistent with
SLPRSP:
(b) Improve transparency o f poverty expenditures, including tracking expenditures
by function;
(c) Improve efficiency o f procurement planning and execution; and
(d) Improve transparency of overall government resource envelope and
allocations, capturing donor funding in budget.
(a) Zero projects with unsatisfactory IP and D O ratings; and
(b) Satisfactory compliance with procurement procedures.

=
and Iristitutioris

Portfolio Performance

89.

The volume of IDA support that will be made available to Sierra Leone will
also depend to some degree on the country’s debt sustainability profile over the
coming years. The framework governing the financing terms for IDA’Sassistance over
the FY06-FY08 period l i n k s the provision o f grants to debt vulnerability. Sierra Leone i s
currently classified as an all-grant country, but it i s possible that debt sustainability will
improve sufficiently after the HIPC Completion Point and that Sierra Leone m a y b e
re-classified as a m i x e d grant/credit country. Assessments o f debt sustainability will b e
undertaken o n an annual basis, and the financing terms o n w h i c h IDA assistance i s
provided, as w e l l as the volume o f the support, will be adjusted accordingly. W h i l e
future IDA assistance levels will depend largely o n p o l i c y performance, portfolio
implementation, and debt sustainability, the Bank will seek to respond quickly to

31

opportunities and unanticipated needs that m a y arise. Similarly, in the event that
progress i s n o t realized as expected, the Bank will re-evaluate i t s program together with
Government w i t h a v i e w to focusing IDA assistance more narrowly in selected areas.

VI.

MANAGING R I S K S

There are five risks that may impede the successful implementation of the
90.
PRSP and the CAS. They are:
0

0

0

0

0

Weak Institutional Capacity. The failure to strengthen institutional capacity
at b o t h central and local levels m a y lead to slow and partial implementation.
The C A S aims to mitigate this risk through i t s decentralization strategy and by
mainstreaming capacity building and prioritizing for possible further direct
project support.
Poor Governance and Corruption. Despite the Government’s efforts to root
out corruption, i t i s far f r o m being eliminated. Sierra Leone i s also vulnerable
to money laundering and financial terrorism. B a n k assistance and dialogue
are designed to give strong support to the anti-corruption agenda
strengthening the institutions at local and central levels charged w i t h the
responsibility o f ensuring transparency and accountability.

L o w Level of External Support. As Sierra Leone leaves the post-conflict
phase behind, some donors who were ready to engage w i t h post-conflict
related support m a y choose to reduce their levels. There i s a clear risk that
Sierra Leone would face too l o w levels o f support precisely when the
absorptive capacity for PRSP-based objectives i s being restored and enhanced.
The CAS provides for approaches in the areas o f budget support,
infrastructure (roads in particular), support through local councils, and sector
support in the social sectors, that w o u l d allow donor coordination and
harmonization to reduce transaction costs and provide opportunities for
development partners to j o i n efforts. The C G in June 2005 will have this risk
as a m a i n theme.
Economic Shock. Macroeconomic stability m a y n o t b e attained as a result o f
exogenous shocks such as substantial public sector wage demand, adverse
terms o f trade, o r a reduction in official flows. This risk i s compounded by
the l i m i t e d preparedness o f Sierra Leone to deal with such shocks. The B a n k
will w o r k closely with other partners and the IMF t o promote appropriate
policy response and to mobilize the resources needed to support efforts to
achieve and maintain macroeconomic stability.
Regional Turmoil. The regional inter-connectedness between Sierra Leone,
Guinea, Liberia, and also Cote d’Ivoire i s strong. Progress in Liberia, in
particular, has helped Sierra Leone succeed in its post-conflict stability
recovery. The UN, ECOWAS and the M a n o River U n i o n are making strong
efforts to promote stable developments and regional integration.
Nevertheless, i t must be recognized that there are major sub-regional security

32

concerns that still need full attention o f the international community and
sub-regional organizations. This CAS addresses the root causes o f conflict in
Sierra Leone, but further W o r l d B a n k engagement in a sub-regional effort for
conflict prevention, regional integration and accelerated development i s
necessary.

91.
Sierra Leone has made a remarkably successful transition from conflict.
The World Bank engaged throughout this transition in a major way. The country’s
PRSP, and the W o r l d Bank’s CAS, marks the transition f r o m a post-conflict environment
to a n e w framework for development. Nevertheless, the success o f progress so far
remains fragile, the challenges o f extreme poverty remain, and extraordinary efforts by
the Government o f Sierra Leone and i t s partners will b e necessary to secure the progress,
accelerate action that leads to results, and ultimately empower the people, the
communities and the nation o f Sierra Leone.

33

SIERR4 LEONE
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Annexes

Annex 1:

Sierra Leone Results Matrices:
Pillar 1: Governance, Decentralization and Public Financial Management
Pillar 2: Sustainable Growth, Food Security and Jobs Creation
Pillar 3: Human Development

Annex 2:

Consultative Group Results Framework Progress Report

Annex 3:

Sierra Leone: D e b t Sustainability Analysis

Annex 4:

Sierra Leone: R e v i e w o f TSS Implementation

Annex 5:

Sierra Leone: Country Financing Parameters

Annex 6:

Standard CAS Annexes:

A2
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8

Sierra Leone at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Peifornzance and Management
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
Summary of Non-Lending Services
Sierra Leone Social Indicators
Sierra Leone -Key Economic Indicators
Sierra Leone -Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRDLDA & Grants)

IA
M
L

3

W

m
y1

.f

00
M
n
v)

J

0
d

E

I

3

d

.-x

a
0
C

.-I

3

-0

W

z

Z

N
d

I

6
B

c

.-E

m

.-C

2

I

U

P

P

Annex 3

Sierra Leone: D e b t Sustainability Analysis

This annex summarizes the results o f a fiscal and external sustainability analysis
for Sierra Leone carried out in late 2004.' The historical data and projections have since
been superseded by n e w numbers in the Sixth Review o f the IMF Poverty Reduction
G r o w t h Facility (PRGF) reported elsewhere in this CAS. W h i l e a n e w exercise will be
conducted for the HIPC Completion Point in the fall o f 2006, the main conclusions are
not expected to differ substantively f r o m those reported here, barring differences in
methodology. The m a i n conclusion i s that Sierra Leone faces moderate risk o f external
debt distress, despite very l o w debt service requirements relative to exports, because o f
the magnitude o f shocks i t could face in the future.
A.

Baseline Scenario

Fiscal Assumptions. The baseline scenario assumes that the high real GDP
growth seen in recent years will taper o f f to an average o f 6.0 percent per annum between
2010 and 2022, with inflation leveling o f f at just under 4 percent per annum. The
primary fiscal balance i s projected to strengthen over the medium-term f r o m a deficit o f
just under 2 percent o f GDP in 2003 to a small surplus o f almost 1 percent o f GDP by
2021 (See Table). This i s brought about, o n the one hand, by stronger domestic revenue
effort and augmentation o f the revenue base. The improved revenue effort will be
necessary because foreign grants are projected to decline f r o m almost 8 percent o f GDP
in 2003 to below 2 percent o f GDP by 2021. On the other hand, government
expenditures as a whole are projected to decline t o facilitate the attainment o f fiscal
sustainability in the long run. The reduction should be achieved in part through cost
cutting, rationalization, and other reforms to contain costs and improve efficiency o f
government services. Furthermore, in light o f the need to limit expenditures, outlays
need to b e prioritized reflecting developmental and poverty-related needs o f the Poverty
Reduction Strategy. The share o f investment expenditure i s projected to increase to
promote high output growth.
D e b t Service. The outcome o f the baseline scenario i s that external debt service
due (after all relief) i s projected to fluctuate around an average o f 7 percent o f revenues
and grants (or 5 percent o f exports o f goods and services) over the period (See Table).
This i s facilitated by debt forgiveness under the HIPC Initiative w h i c h will lower the net
present value o f external public debt. Interest o n domestic debt, as a share o f revenues
and grants, falls f r o m 14 percent to 8 percent over the same period. This i s made possible
by the improving fiscal balance w h i c h takes pressure o f f the domestic interest rate. Total
debt service due (after a l l relief) falls f r o m 19 percent o f revenues and grants in 2003 to
13 percent by 2021.
D e b t Stock. The total stock o f debt falls to 69 percent o f GDP by 2022 f r o m 76
percent in 2003. Within this amount, domestic debt falls from 41 percent in 2003 to 16

' Sierra Leone: 2004 Article I V Consultation, IMF Country Report No. 05123.
50

percent in 2021 while external debt rises to a peak o f 59 percent o f GDP in 201 1 before
declining to 53 percent o f GDP in 2021 (See Table). The net present value o f total debt
as a share o f revenues and grants falls from 252 percent in 2003 to 94 percent in 2021.
Within this, domestic debt falls from 203 percent o f revenues and grants to 81 percent
while extemal debt falls from 94 percent to 13 percent. The NPV o f external debt to
exports o f goods and non-factor services falls from 123 percent in 2003 to 116 percent in
2021.

B.

Sensitivity Analysis

The overall macroeconomic environment in which the Government i s operating
will have an impact o n the fiscal outcome, and by extension fiscal sustainability. Thus, i t
i s important to construct a number o f alternative scenarios to test how sensitive or robust
the results are to various changes in assumptions. This was done as part o f the IMF debt
sustainability analysis. As a result, the following conclusions were made:
0

0

0

0

In the unlikely event that Sierra Leone were to revert to the growth rates and
fiscal stance seen during the war, then the debt indicators would deteriorate in
the long run. This scenario would require that real GDP contract at a rate o f
0.8 percent annually while the primary deficit o f 3.9 percent o f GDP.
Similarly, a temporary negative output shock could lead to an unsustainable
fiscal adjustment and rapidly rising debt-to-GDP and debt service ratios. Total
expenditures would rise as a percent o f GDP, leading to a large primary deficit
and borrowing.

If the fiscal primary deficit i s maintained at the high level o f 3 percent o f
GDP, the level seen in 2002 when post-conflict spending requirements were
s t i l l very high, then the debt ratios would exhibit an explosive trend.
A temporary worsening o f the primary balance, such as might be caused by
delays in external grant financing, may not necessarily affect the
Government’s long-term fiscal position permanently, provided that the
authorities adequately adjust the fiscal portfolio in the medium-term.

I t i s also worth noting that the current stock o f domestic debt carries a significant
rollover risk in the event that domestic interest rates rise. This i s because o f the high
GDP share o f the debt stock and i t s short-term composition.2 The Government should
therefore continue to reduce the primary deficit and promote domestic debt markets.

* The instrument used to refinance

i s rolled over four times in a year.

domestic borrowing i s three-month Treasury bills, so that the debt stock

51

Debt

istainability Indicators, 2003-2021

2021

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010-20

20.1
12.4
7.7
21.8
1.7

21.3
12.2
9.1
23.4
2.1

21.0
13.0
8.1
21.5
0.5

22.0
14.5
7.5
22.3
0.4

23.4
15.6
7.8
22.6
-0.8

23.0
16.4
6.6
22.9
-0.1

22.7
17.3
5.4
23.4
0.7

20 6
17 5
31
20 8
02

19 7
17 9
17
18 8
-0 9

19.2
5.4
13.8

24.8
8.7
16.1

18.4
5.2
13.2

12.1
1.1
11.0

11.8
3.2
8.6

11.0
4.3
6.7

12.1
6.4
5.7

I49
81
68

12 7
51
77

5.4

8.1

4.1

0.9

2.5

3.0

4.4

52

31

763
35.5
40.8

739
39.2
34.7

77.3
45.8
31.5

78.0
49.7
28.3

76.3
51.8
24.5

76.9
54.8
22.1

78.1
57.3
20.7

74 5
56 2
18 3

69 2
53 3
15 9

N P V o f Debt as % o f Revenue & Grants 2/
External
Domestic

252.0
48.9
203.2

208.6
45.8
162.8

163.6
13.8
149.8

142.0
13.3
128.7

117.5
12.8
104.7

109.3
13.1
96.2

104.7
13.3
91.4

102 3
13 7
88 6

94 1
13 1

N P V o f External Debt as % o f Exports 21

123.0

127.2

123.7

120.5

120.6

119.4

122.2

1190

9.2
28.8
8.3

7.4
20.8
10.0

11.4
27.5
2.9

9.1
15.1
3.3

8.0
15.5
3.3

7.5
15.5
3.3

7.0
5.4
3.4

Baseline Fiscal Scenario

Revenue and grants
Revenues
Grants
Primary (non-interest) expenditure
Primary deficit
Debt Service Indicators I/

Debt Service as % Revenue & Grants
External
Domestic
External Debt Service as % Exports
Debt Stock Indicators I/

Public sector debt as ?4 ol'GDP I /
External
Domestic

K e y Assumptions

Growth o f Real GDP (% p.a.)
Growth o f US$ Exports (% p.a.)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, % p.a.)

relief.
21 Debt service i s defined as the sum o f interest and amortization o f medium- and long-term debt

52

6C
5.4
54
3.8
38
mal HIPC b t

Annex 4

REPUBLIC OF SIERRA LEONE
REVIEW OF T S S IMPLEMENTATION
FY2002-04
A.

Introduction

The m a i n purpose o f t h i s report i s to assess the effectiveness o f the W o r l d
1.
Bank’s Transitional Support Strategy (TSS) for Sierra Leone f o r FY2002-04, w h i c h
was discussed by the Board o n M a r c h 26, 2002. The report i s based o n a selfassessment of the country team as w e l l as analysis o f the information gathered f r o m
Project Status Reports (PSRs), Project Implementation Completion Reports, various
Aide-MCmoire and Back-to-Office Reports.
In addition, interviews have been
undertaken w i t h clients and representatives o f the donor community in the country
seeking their perspectives o n the Bank’s p o l i c y and portfolio performance under the
TSS. A CPPR was not undertaken during this period. W h i l e the TSS provides a good
strategic framework, there are some challenges in terms o f tracking results/outcomes.
The Consultative Group Framework Progress Reports have been used to track progress
made towards achieving the benchmarks set out in the TSS (Annex 1-A).

2.
During the TSS period, Sierra Leone made considerable progress in restoring
security and consolidating peace throughout the country. Completion o f the fourth
review o f the IMF PRGF o n 23 February 2004 signifies continued maintenance o f a
satisfactory macroeconomic framework. The improved security situation strengthened
business and consumer confidence, resulting in recovery o f the economy, m a i n l y in the
agriculture, mining, manufacturing, and services sectors. Real GDP growth exceeded
6% in 2002, and inflation remained subdued. The economic recovery continued in
2003, with real GDP growth o f 6.5% and a projected growth rate o f 7.4% in 2004.
However, inflation increased sharply in 2003 and the first h a l f o f 2004, reflecting
higher fuel costs, expansionary fiscal and monetary policies, and a depreciation o f the
currency. The currency depreciation was influenced by a number o f other factors,
notably a reduced supply o f foreign currency, due t o scaling d o w n o f the activities o f
the U N A M S I L ahead o f i t s withdrawal f r o m Sierra Leone.
The conclusion of the TSS Implementation Review i s that the Bank’s assistance
3.
strategy was relevant to the medium-term, post-conflict agenda o f Sierra Leone and that
many o f the TSS objectives were achieved. In particular, the B a n k has been successful
in responding to the immediate post-conflict needs o f the country. I t played a catalytic
role in consolidating peace, recovery, resettling and integrating ex-combatants and
refugees, and in rehabilitation and reconstruction o f basic social services (health and
education). In addition, ERRC I1 and the ERRC I11 provided critical balance o f
payments and budget support that helped to finance costs associated with the

53

Government’s DDR program and rehabilitation o f social and economic infrastructure in
those parts o f the country that had become accessible following the positive
developments o n the peace and security front. Significant progress was achieved o n the
macroeconomic front, and p o l i c y dialogue (through analytic w o r k such as the Strategic
Options for Public Sector Reform and the PER) helped the Government develop an
integrated development strategy for the country. Through p o l i c y dialogue and
adjustment lending (ERRC I1 and ERRC 111), the B a n k brought attention to k e y issues
o n governance, including public expenditure management and procurement reform. I t
also assisted the Government to make and implement structural reforms (such as
enactment o f the investment code and procurement legislation) in a challenging
economic and political environment. In addition, the Bank played an important role in
the preparation o f the PRSP, through the provision o f analytical w o r k and funding.

4.
A t the same time, the Bank strategy was less clear and i t s achievements were
limited in productive sectors. In particular, despite the vital importance o f the sector to
the country’s long-term economic and social development’, p o l i c y advice and activities
conceming agriculture, rural development and mining were inadequate. W h i l e the
Bank’s support to the NSAP provides assistance to the productive sectors (mainly
agriculture and fishing), n o systematic productive sector assistance program was
envisaged through this instrument. I t should b e noted, however, that for a country
emerging f r o m a decade o f war, the first point o f focus i s often humanitarian and relief
activities. B a n k Group support for private sector development has been limited and
ad-hoc through F I A S .
B.

Long-Term Strategic Goals

5.
Sierra Leone’s development strategy was l a i d d o w n in an I n t e r i m PRSP
(I-PRSP), w h i c h was approved by the Board o f the Directors o f the B a n k and the Fund
o n September 13, 2001. I t aims at the establishment o f an efficient link between
out-phasing r e l i e f action, ongoing rehabilitation programs and long-term development.
As laid out in its I-PRSP, the Government adopted a two-phased approach to poverty
reduction. In the transitional phase, covering the period 2001-02, the Government
focused o n addressing the immediate postwar needs, including: (a) consolidating
peace, (b) resettlement and reconstruction, (c) improving governance, and
(d) maintaining a macroeconomic framework conducive to economic recovery. In the
medium-term phase f r o m 2003-05, the focus has been o n longer-term development and
poverty reduction issues, as elaborated in the full PRSP2. The Government o f Sierra
Leone also articulated a medium-term post-conflict agenda that was presented to the
CG Meeting o n November 13-14, 2002. The agenda under the F r a m e w o r k for Peace,
Recovery and Development sought to address the post-war social needs in health,
education, and community infrastructure, as w e l l as fostering sustained economic
recovery and macroeconomic stability. The agenda also took into account recent
developments o n peace and security and the NEPAD initiative, w h i c h focuses o n

’

The agricultural sector (including livestock, fisheries and forestry) accounts for about 50% o f the
country’s total GDP and provides a direct or indirect livelihood t o more than 75% o f the population.
The PRSP was discussed by the board o n M a y 3,2005.

54

poverty reduction w i t h a potential for contributing to the attainment o f the MDGs in
Africa.
C.

T S S Outcomes

6.
TSS Objectives: The Board discussed and approved the TSS for Sierra Leone
o n M a r y 2, 2002. Based o n the country’s development priorities as expressed in the IPRSP, the TSS was designed to facilitate Sierra Leone’s transition f r o m post-conflict
reconstruction to sustainable poverty reduction. T o this end, the first year o f the TSS
focused o n supporting rehabilitation and restoration o f k e y services; and the second
year funded activities in support o f the development phase o f I-PRSP. The objectives
o f the TSS were to help mitigate the risk o f renewed conflict and l a y the foundation for
sustained poverty reduction and increased access t o basic services, targeting the rural
population, women, and children. The TSS also stressed the need for support towards
the decentralization of service delivery and the restoration o f local government in order
to shift away f r o m a Freetown-biased allocation o f resources to one favoring rural
communities. In this context, the W o r l d B a n k sought to achieve a number o f outcomes
relating to: (a) consolidating peace and security; (b) resettlement, rehabilitation, and
reintegration; (c) improving governance, targeting institutional reform, and capacity
building d o w n to the local level, with heavy emphasis o n enhancing participation and
community-driven development activities; (d) accelerating economic growth;
(e) expanding access o f the poor to basic social services, infrastructure, markets, and
assets; and (f) combating H I V / A I D S .
Consolidating peace arzd security

In its National Recovery Strategy, the Government’s priorities centered o n
7.
rebuilding the war-ravaged economy as w e l l as addressing the basic needs o f war
victims. The different measures and actions to restore the security situation comprised
the implementation o f the L o m t Peace Agreement, the implementation o f the DDR
Program for some 45,000 ex-combatants, as w e l l as a comprehensive set o f measures to
restructure security forces and re-establish basic public administration.
The
Government also established a social fund to support the consolidation o f peace and l a y
the foundations for long-tenn d e ~ e l o p m e n t . ~

8.
The DDR Program was highly consistent with the country’s development
priorities, and i t was clearly stated in the Bank’s TSS that the DDR program was a
pre-condition for any efforts to m o v e f r o m war to peace. The DDR program was at the
center o f the Government’s peace strategy and was clearly made the first priority o f i t s
National Recovery Strategy. The consolidation o f peace still figures prominently in
Sierra Leone’s I-PRSP and full PRSP.
The Bank contributed significantly towards consolidating the peace and security
9.
process as w e l l as resettlement, rehabilitation and reintegration activities. During the
first year o f the TSS, the B a n k successfully administered the MDTF for the third phase
NACSA, which was previously named as the National Commission for Reconstruction, Resettlement
and Rehabilitation (NCRRR) has been supported by AfDB, UNDP, DflD, and IDA.

55

o f the DDR program, including chairing the third C G in November 2002 that facilitated
the pledging o f US$640 million. The M D T F support has made a significant
contribution to the early transition from conflict and the establishment o f basic security,
which are preconditions for reconstruction and development. In this regard, the results
o f coherent post-conflict partnership have been extraordinary. Sierra Leone has made
the transition from war to peace and i s n o w embarking o n a set o f structural and other
reforms, paving the way for sustainable economic development.
10.
Following the completion o f the disarmament and demobilization program in
February 2002, ex-combatants were fully integrated, and virtually all I D P and refugees
were resettled. Peace was restored, and people and goods could move freely
throughout the national territory. Throughout the country, the security situation was
stabilized w i t h additional police recruited, trained, equipped and deployed. The Truth
and Reconciliation Committee completed public hearings, which were attended by all
parties involved in the conflict. The entire country was made accessible to the
Govemment and development partners. The Govemment made remarkable progress
towards completing the post-conflict transition, with the conclusion o f the
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration exercise for over 72,000 former
combatants. The N C D D R was a key institution, providing policy and overall guidance
to the DDR program and technical assistance as well as direct implementation support.

11.
Through various projects, the international community together with the
Govemment o f Sierra Leone financed a massive and successful DDR program, which
demobilized 72,000 ex-combatants from all factions, provided training and
reintegration activities to 56,000, and supported communities in ex-combatants
reintegration. The program also provided special support to child ex-combatants. As
part o f the broader reintegration process, the Bank and other donors financed parallel
activities such as an Emergency Recovery Support Fund to support communities in
rehabilitating basic infrastructure. The Bank also supported the short-term reinsertion
program for ex-combatants, supported through the NCDDR, and supported medium
t e r m interventions through community-oriented reintegration, rehabilitation and
recovery programs for ex-combatants through the National Commission o n
Resettlement, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction (NCRRR). However, these linkages
were not maximized to the fullest extent. The NCDDR’s reintegration program
succeeded in i t s primary objective o f providing ex-combatants with an early transition
to social and economic reintegration and helped them to readjust to civilian life.
However, in the Sierra Leonean context, initial social and economic reintegration has
been constrained by the general poverty in the country.
Expanding access of the poor to basic social services

12.
The provision o f basic social services in rural and underserved areas was
identified as a priority in the TSS, and as a means to mitigate the risk o f renewed
conflict and lay foundation for sustained poverty reduction. IDA has been active in

providing support towards rehabilitating and expanding access to basic social services
mainly through i t s investment projects. IDA provided a US$20 m i l l i o n grant for the

56

REBEP, w h i c h became effective o n 15 M a y 20034. The m a i n objectives o f the Project
are to assist the Government to reestablish education services, and prepare the ground
for building up the education sector. Specifically, the Project assists participating
schools to achieve a basic operational level and building up the capacity o f the M i n i s t r y
o f Education, Science and Technology in planning and managing the delivery o f
education services. Similarly, the US$20 m i l l i o n HSRDP, which became effective o n
28 M a y 2003, was designed to help the Government restore the most essential functions
of the health delivery system with emphasis o n rehabilitation o f basic health facilities in
four priority districts o f the country. The Project also assists the Government’s effort in
strengthening the health sector’s capacity to improve efficiency and make the health
sector more responsive to the needs o f the population by supporting eligible district
health teams and five k e y services o f the M O H S .
13.
In terms o f implementation, b o t h the education and health projects have been
successful in achieving their primary objective o f restoring the delivery o f basic
services. They also made significant progress in strengthening management functions
b o t h at the ministry and district levels. However, their sustainability i s questionable
because o f concerns about a shortage o f human and capital resources. L i m i t e d
technical and administrative capacity (mainly in financial management and delays in
procurement) and lack o f common disbursement procedures by donors have created
substantial delays in disbursement. I t has also been noted that some o f the Project
components were over-ambitiously designed, w i t h their objectives not w e l l articulated.
F o r instance, w i t h respect to the health project, the component dealing with the
participation o f the private sector in the health sector has not yet achieved any
significant result because o f the lack o f clarity o f what needs to be done.

14.
T o supplement the health project, the US$15 m i l l i o n S H A R P became effective
in October 2003. The development objectives o f this four-year project are to:
(a) reduce H I V / A I D S incidence, and (b) mitigate the impact o f H I V / A I D S o n persons
infected or affected by H I V / A I D S . The Project finances a wide spectrum o f H I V / A I D S
activities including prevention, care, support, and impact mitigation over a four year
period. A National H I V / A I D S Council, chaired by the President, has been established
to oversee national strategy and p o l i c y issues. Regional H I V / A I D S initiatives
involving Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone have also been pursued under the auspices
of the M a n o R i v e r Union.
15.
Through i t s NSAP, the B a n k has been providing part o f the funding
requirements for N A C S A towards resettlement o f returnees and IDP, reconstruction,
and community development in the n e w l y accessible areas (those that were under rebel
control until January 2002 and the most vulnerable population groups within those
areas). The program has so far been successful, particularly in building community
cohesion and supporting the transition f r o m war to peace. N a C S A has supported 174
communities in rehabilitating 60 Primary schools (7 1,286 beneficiaries); 8 Maternity
C h i l d Health Posts (34,152 beneficiaries); 12 Community Health Centers (96,677
beneficiaries); 27 Community Health Post (120,7 13 beneficiaries); 17 Water and
The Project was jointly prepared by IDA, AfDB and DflD and i s co-financed by IDA and AfDB.

57

Sanitation (35,120 beneficiaries); and 50 other projects. NaCSA has used direct
community prioritization, implementation and financing. In subproject areas, access to
and utilization o f social and economic infrastructure and services has increased
substantially. However, the activities o f the rural public works program have been
delayed due to lack o f qualified implementing partners. In addition, NaSCA has been
less effective than anticipated in the oversight o f the Project. There i s also a need for
complementing NaCSA’s effort with other government and donor support for
decentralization and capacity building activities.
Accelerating economic growth

16.
The Bank used a combination o f lending and non-lending services to support
the Government towards its effort to accelerate growth. IDA provided a total o f US$30
million and US$50 million financing for ERRC I1 and ERRC 111; respectively, as an
integral part o f the Bank’s TSS to assist Sierra Leone in implementing i t s program to
consolidate peace and enhance governance, re-launch the economy and improve service
delivery. These funds contributed to economic recovery and growth by providing
foreign exchange resources for imports o f essential goods, including food products,
petroleum products and raw materials and intermediate goods required for relaunching
the economy and provided macroeconomic stability by closing the financing gap.
These credits have also been instrumental in initiating structural reforms, notably the
revision o f Mining Policy to promote formal activity (in artisanal mining), and
attracting private investment for medium- and large-scale mining. An investment
promotion code that will boost private sector activities has also been enacted.
17.
As part o f the Government’s effort to address the acute shortage and
unreliability o f infrastructure facilities, particularly electricity, water and sanitation, the
Bank recently approved a US$30 million credit financing for the Power and Water
Project, which i s a multi-sector project reflecting a comprehensive development
approach. The Project supports the Bank’s TSS as well as the Government’s I-PRSP
and the National Recovery Strategy, o f which power, rural water supply, and urban
sanitation are key elements. I t i s intended to address prioritized issues across various
water and sanitation, urban waste management and power sectors, taking into account
all other donor commitments and ongoing and planned programs. The Project supports
improved access to essential power, rural water supply, sanitation, and urban solid
waste management services. This w i l l be accomplished through the rehabilitation and
strengthening o f essential infrastructure and institutional capabilities to plan, manage
and maintain these services.
The Project provides funds for targeted critical
investments with the aim o f establishing core infrastructure services that will contribute
to poverty reduction and facilitate economic growth. Concurrently, i t will continue to
support power and water sector reforms aimed at increasing private sector involvement
through investment and public-private partnerships, particularly through instituting a
performance-oriented management contract for NPA and Guma Valley Water
Corporation.

While the Bank’s adjustment lending instruments (through ERRC I1 and 111)
have been instrumental to economic recovery and growth, macroeconomic stability
18.

58

and the implementation o f major structural reforms, there have been substantial
slippages particularly in the areas o f mining sector development due to lack o f political
commitment at higher levels. As for the agriculture sector, the Bank’s intervention was
also very limited, although the NSAP included actions for the rural economy. The
Project mainly focused on addressing the social and basic infrastructure problems
arising from the c i v i l war and using community involvement.
Improving governance

19.
The Bank has been a key player in supporting the Government in furthering i t s
governance agenda (minimizing corruption and enhancing effective service delivery).
The key areas include:
(a) Enhancing transparency in budget preparation and implementation: This
has been achieved through the creation o f Budgetary Oversight Committees,
which assist in the determination o f budgetary priorities through the
Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) process and through the
production o f budgetary monitoring reports at the activity level, including
payroll.

(b) Strengtlzeningpublic expenditure management: Two o f the Bank projects,
namely ERRC I1 and 111, have played a catalytic role in pushing reforms

towards strengthening public expenditure management, including deepening
o f budget reforms, financial management and procurement reform. The
Parliament approved the Public Procurement Act 2004 on December 2,
2004, and the President signed i t into a law on December 7 , 2004. Under
ERRC 11, the Bank, in collaboration with the Government, undertook the
Country Financial Accountability Management System (CFFA) that helped
to fdentify the weaknesses o f the financial management system and better
ways to improve financial accountability. The PER was also undertaken to
help the Government consolidate its post-conflict successes and reorient i t
policies for long-term sustained growth and poverty reduction.

(c) Strengthening local government for service delive y : Following the
recommendations o f the analytical study “Strategic Options for Public
Sector Reform in Sierra Leone”, the IRCBP was designed to help the
post-conflict government establish a functioning local government system
and improve inclusiveness, transparency and accountability o f public
financial management at all levels. Through i t s decentralization and
capacity building component, IRCBP assists the Government in designing a
phased approach to decentralization. The public financial management
reform component helps establish the core policy advisory and
implementing capacity o f the P F M reform program.

59

D.

Measuring Bank Performance

20.
Overall Performance: The B a n k i s one o f the largest donors to Sierra Leone
with a portfolio o f 8 active projects (with commitments o f US$215 million) Since the
beginning o f the TSS, IDA has committed US$230 million in Sierra Leone o f w h i c h
US$65 m i l l i o n were grants. All the proposed adjustment and investment lending
activities in the TSS have been approved and implemented. The Education and Health
projects were launched in April 2003; implementation o f the NSAP, w h i c h became
effective in August 2003, i s also underway, and the H I V / A I D S project (SHARP) i s now
m o v i n g rapidly after a slow start-up. The Power and Water Project became effective in
September 2004.

’.

Description

Second Economic Recovery and Rehabilitation Credit (ERRC 11)
Multi-Sector HIViAids Response Project
FY 03
Rehabilitation o f Basic Education
Health Sector Reconstruction
National Social Action Program
Third Economic and Recovery and Rehabilitation Credit (ERRCIII)
FY04
Institutional Reform and Capacity Building
Power & Water Project

lDA
In millions
(USS)

Undisbursed amount
In millions (USS)
(As of 01/28/2005)

50
15

0.0
11.41

20
20
35
30

17.83
20.18*
29.99
0.0

25
35

23.06
35.36*

* The higher value is due to exchange rate appreciation

21.
Portfolio Assessments: The Projects in the Bank’s portfolio are w e l l aligned
with the TSS and are generally performing satisfactorily. Out o f the eight active
projects, all are rated satisfactory with regard to their implementation, and all projects
except one (ERRC 111) are rated satisfactory in terms o f project management. The
completed ERRC I1 project was rated satisfactory both at entry and in terms o f
implementation by QAG. The quality o f the portfolio has improved in recent months
through rigorous supervision (especially, following the application o f the rapid
response initiative).
22.
Review of ESW: A focused ESW program was developed t o i n f o r m Sierra
Leone’s post-conflict development challenges and the Bank’s responses. It included
the Strategic Options for Public Sector Reform; Tapping M i n e r a l Wealth for Human
Progress-a Break with the Past, and the LegaUJudicial Assessment (undertaken with
DfID), all o f w h i c h were recently completed. The Mining Sector Study set forth an
action plan, based o n international best practices, for the revival and development o f the
mining sector, including needed fiscal, legal, and regulatory reforms, and requisite
institutional frameworks. The Agricultural Sector Review was completed in FY04 as
w e l l as a PER. The Bank’s PER focused o n government’s ability to translate PRSP
According the GOSL report, the B a n k disbursed a total o f US$32.7 m i l l i o n accounting for 22 percent
o f a l l multilateral aid flows in 2003.

60

objectives into feasible spending and implementation plans. The Bank also supported a
PETS undertaken by GoSL.

MDTF Admnistration
Private Sector Participation Strategy for Power (PPIAF)
Property Rights (Post-conflict Fund)

E.

I Completed

1 Not completed

Consultations and Coordination with Development Partners

23.
The GoSL takes the lead in coordinating donor activities. Recognizing the need
for a more efficient and effective mechanism for aid coordination and implementation,
the Government has already established a two-tier structure o f aid coordination,
following the C G Meeting in Paris in November 2002. The first i s the joint DEPAC,
which i s an organ for policy dialogue between government and development partners.
Co-chaired by the Vice President o f the Republic o f Sierra Leone, the World Bank and
the UNDP, the Committee has the responsibility for monitoring the agreed C G
Benchmarks, which include the preparation o f the PRSP. Since March 2003, DEPAC
has met bi-monthly to discuss and reach consensus o n pertinent issues relating to the
recovery process and the transition from post-conflict to long-term development and i t
has guided the preparation o f the PRSP. It has also provided an excellent arena for
transparent policy dialogue among the donor community, government and several
development stakeholders (including C i v i l Society and NGOs) which has led to
significant improvements in the quality and focus o f post-conflict policies, aid
coordination and effectiveness. The second tier, the DACO, which became operational
in January 2004, serves as the technical support and secretariat to DEPAC. D A C O i s
also a focal point for coordination o f development assistance from external sources,
including both financial and technical assistance through multilateral, bilateral and
N G O sources.

24.

From i t s experience in other post-conflict countries, the Bank recognizes the
importance o f effective aid coordination for improving its responsiveness to the
realities o f post-conflict situations. In Sierra Leone, the Bank advised the Government
on key policy issues and institutional building. In this process, the Bank has sought to
maximize the impact o f i t s interventions by focusing on greater government ownership
and donor coordination. The Bank collaborated with the IMF and other donors (AfDB,
the DflD and the EU) in providing budgetary support and played a catalytic role in

61

supporting, mobilizing and coordinating aid for the peace process, as well as the
rehabilitation and reconstruction activities. The Bank took the responsibility o f
administering Multi-Donor Trust Fund. The Bank also co-chaired, with the GoSL, the
C G and D E P A C meetings, which have been instrumental for systematic aid
coordination, collective policy dialogue and laying the groundwork for the multi-donor
budgetary support arrangement, which i s currently under discussion. Given the
complexity and the multiplicity o f players in this post-conflict situation, an expansion
o f the Country Office in Sierra Leone has been useful to strengthen the policy dialogue
with government and aid coordination with other donors.
25.
Donor harmonization has been particularly strong in the areas o f peace process,
governance and public financial management. However, donor harmonization was
weak particularly in the co-financing o f the education and health sector projects, which
contributed to delays in the disbursement o f funds and the implementation o f the Bank
programs.
26,
Partnership in analytic work has been modest. The Bank and DfID jointly
prepared a m i n i - C F A A and a full C F A A with Government in 2002. The Government,
AfDB, U N D P and the Bank jointly prepared an Issues Paper o n Public Procurement,
which ultimately led to support for the Procurement Act o f 2004. An Agriculture
Sector Review was prepared by the UN agencies (notably Food and Agriculture
Organization [FAO]), with collaboration from the Bank. Some capacity building
support was provided through partnerships and in line with government priorities.
27.
Support to the PRSP Process: The Bank provided both financial and technical
assistance to the PRSP process and contributed several analytical inputs during the
formulation. Through i t s PMPS 11, the Bank offered a supplementary grant o f
US$500,000 to finance, among other things, the Household Income and Expenditure
Survey which provided base poverty data for the PRSP, the consultative process, and
capacity building activities for the PRSP Coordinating Secretariat. The Bank, in
collaboration w i t h other donors, has also provided guidance in the preparation o f the
PRSP.

F.

Lessons Learned

28.
The conclusions o f this TSS implementation review concur w i t h the findings
and recommendations o f the Operations Evaluation Department’s (OED) note o n
“Lessons Learned from World Bank Experience in Post-Conflict Reconstruction”.
These lessons include: (a) adapting Bank services and products to post-conflict
situations; (b) effective aid coordination and partnerships with other donors and
consensus on respective roles for, each donor; and (c) the need for early engagement
and strong field presence. In Sierra Leone, as in many other countries emerging from
post-conflict situations, the limited technical and administrative capacity o f the
Government and weak public sector management impede the implementation and
performance o f the Bank’s lending programs.

62

Finally, the following lessons emerge from the review o f the implementation o f
29.
the Bank’s TSS:
0

Where the implementation capacity o f the country i s weak, project design
should be simple and well articulated. Commitment and ownership depend
on the stakeholders understanding o f what i s implied in implementing a

program.
0

0

0

0

0

Weaknesses in public sector management have a strong impact on portfolio
performance. This i s particularly so in cases where weaknesses in
procurement could lead to implementation delays and financial
mismanagement. The lack o f adequate counterpart funding may also cause
slippages in project implementation.

A realistic timeframe should be agreed when attempting to introduce
structural reforms which need resources and wider political consensus. In
addition, project design should accommodate envisaged future changes
resulting from exogenous internal and external changes.
Active stakeholder participation and high-level commitment i s critical for
the success o f the Project.

In a post-conflict situation, effective donor participation and coordination i s
critical in order to adequately and systematically support short-term
emergency needs.
Although the Project Implementing Units are effective in achieving rapid
results in a post-conflict environment, longer-term measures should be taken
to strengthen the institutional development o f a country’s permanent
institutions.
Grass-root community development works, especially in rural contexts
where the sense o f community i s strong. If appropriately supported by
technical agencies and by a decentralized structure o f government, local
communities can work effectively and in a sustainable way for their o w n
development. Direct community financing should be encouraged as it helps
improve governance and accountability.

63

u

4V

s
VI

C
I

D

E

s

c

3
3

2
=-

E
0

8
2

1

6

Annex 5
SIERRA LEONE: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
Country financing parameters, pursuant to the Bank’s policy o n financing for
investment projects (OP/BP 6.00, Bank Financing) have been discussed with the
Government and are outlined below.
Cost shaving

1.
The Government i s committed to i t s poverty reduction program, w h i c h was issued
in February 2005 (refer C A S paras. 21-23). Sierra Leone’s overall spending o n
development projects in 2004 was around 5 percent o f GDP and the Government funded
roughly 20 percent o f this amount with i t s o w n resources. This dependency u p o n
external financing i s likely to continue for several years given Sierra Leone’s l o w income
and level o f development. All projects funded by the W o r l d B a n k are aligned with the
poverty reduction strategy and are integrated in the annual budget.’ The Government and
the B a n k are working together to improve the integration o f the PRS into the
medium-term economic framework. The overall quality o f public financial management
i s adequate and improving (refer C A S paras. 48 to 50). The Bank’s IRCB project, ERRG
I V and subsequent DPOs are contributing toward addressing these issues. Although
Sierra Leone’s portfolio had a history o f problems during the conflict years, the current
portfolio i s performing satisfactorily ( w i t h n o problem projects) due to increased
government commitment and rigorous supervision over the past year (refer CAS para.
33).

2.

Government ownership i s k e y and will continue to be emphasized. The Bank i s
routinely taking measures to assure and enhance ownership and commitment o f proposed
projects, such as the requirement that grants to local councils f r o m the IRCBP b e
matched by devolution grants, and the requirement to establish a road maintenance fund
to ensure sustainability and ownership o f the Infrastructure Development Project.
Allocations o f the Bank’s overall financing envelope to individual projects will continue
to b e determined by the prioritization outlined in the C A S and in any future Bank’s
strategic documents. The B a n k will in general seek Government counterpart funding in
a l l projects, and in addition the B a n k will continue to promote harmonization o f i t s
program with other donors’ assistance including through seeking cofinancing.
Nonetheless there m a y be projects in w h i c h the B a n k finances up to 100 percent o f
project costs. Decisions regarding the Bank’s financing share will not, however, affect
the total volume o f IDA assistance in any given year. Financing o f up to 100 percent will
be applied after a selective and case-by-case review o f merit/justification. Typically,
projects executed by Government entities with o w n sources o f income (e.g. ports o r
power) are expected to include counterpart funding contributions and w o u l d therefore not
~

’

A l l external funding for planned expenditures i s identified and integrated in the budget The HIPC AAP
notes, however, that the current accounting system cannot track what i s actually spent from donor
resources This i s being rectified through the implementation o f a new Integrated Financial Management
Information System and a new Chart o f Accounts

65

have 100 percent B a n k financing. Some projects that m a y be financed up to 100%
include those that support social sector development, governance, and capacity building.
Recurrent cost financing

3.

The B a n k i s already financing recurrent costs in several projects. Examples
recurrent cost financing include material and supplies in social sector projects, as w e l l
funding o f PIUs and the salaries o f various consultants. These needs are l i k e l y
continue for the foreseeable future given Sierra Leone’s current state o f transition out
the post-conflict stage.

of
as
to
of

4.
Balanced against these needs i s a concern for the fiscal and debt sustainability o f
recurrent cost financing. As reported in Annex 3 o f the CAS, Sierra Leone faces a
moderate risk o f external debt distress because o f the magnitude o f shocks i t could face in
the future rather than debt service requirements. In fact, under the baseline scenario
projected by the IMF, total debt service due, domestic and external, i s expected to decline
f r o m 19 percent o f government revenues and grants in 2003 to approximately 12 percent
o f revenues and grants by 2009.2 Moreover, the JMF PRGF required that a l l external
borrowing by Government must be o n concessional terms. This i s expected to b e
continued under the next PRGF as well. The Government i s also actively engaged in
public expenditure management reforms which are widely supported by donors,
including the B a n k and the Fund.3 All o f the above suggest that B a n k financing o f
recurrent costs per se w o u l d not have an adverse impact o n the country’s fiscal and debt
sustainability. Financing some recurrent costs in the short to m e d i u m term could even
have a stimulating effect o n the economy and thus contribute t o increase the
Government’s capacity to support larger recurrent costs in the future. Nonetheless, it i s
very important that the Bank continues to monitor the fiscal adjustment programs
(working closely with the IMF) and public expenditure management and public sector
reforms to ensure that recurrent cost financing i s embedded in a credible and sustainable
government macroeconomic strategy. The Bank will also carry out general and sector
specific Public Expenditure Reviews, where issues o f sustainability will be identified.
No country-level l i m i t o n recurrent cost financing i s proposed. Recurrent costs
5.
m a y be financed as needed in individual projects, subject to project o r program-level
assessment. In determining Bank financing o f recurrent costs in individual projects, the
Bank will take into account sustainability issues at the sector and project levels, including
a consideration o f i m p l i e d future budgetary outlays. I t had been expedient in the recent
past to finance the salaries o f senior o r skilled Government officials, nominally treated as
consultants, in order to attract them into the system. At the request o f the Ministry o f
Finance, in order to ensure sustainability, especially for capacity building, projects that
include financing for local staff costs will need to b e accompanied by explicit agreement
All Bank financing expected at the time o f the D S A was taken into account in the fiscal and debt
analysis.
The recurrent and development budgets are n o t presently conceived and reported in an integrated fashion,
reflecting the current capacity constraints within Government. This i s being addressed as a medium-term
issue in the public expenditure management reforms.

66

that Government will assume the cost o f permanent positions after the B a n k contribution
to the Project i s completed.
Local cost financing

The criteria required for Bank financing o f local costs are met. First, the
financing requirements for Sierra Leone’s development program through 2009
considerably exceed the public sector’s o w n resources f r o m taxation and other sources
even when PRSP implementation i s constrained to priority programs (refer C A S para. 17
and Table 3). Second, the financing o f foreign expenditures alone w o u l d not enable the
Bank to assist in the financing o f individual projects. In fact, the B a n k has already been
financing a significant amount o f local costs in Sierra Leone: these accounted for 49
percent, 60 percent and 79 percent o f disbursements for investment projects in FY02,
FY03 and FY04 respectively. This trend i s expected t o continue with the Projects that
are expected to enter the portfolio, many o f w h i c h have a high element o f local
expenditure, including those in the social sector and infrastructure sectors. The B a n k
m a y finance local costs in any proportions required by individual projects.

6.

Taxes and duties

Taxes and duties are considered reasonable. The Sierra Leonean tax system does
7.
not yet include a value-added tax, though implementation o f the VAT could begin as
early as 2007. Firms, local or foreign, are subject to an overall company profit tax rate o f
35 percent. Sierra Leonean nationals are subject to employment income tax rates
between 20 percent and 35 percent, depending o n the level o f income. Under the
E C O W A S C o m m o n External T a r i f f adopted in January 2005, the four t a r i f f bands carry
rates o f 0, 5, 10 and 20 percent with a mean o f approximately 13 percent. There i s a
diamond export tax o f 3 percent. The tax rates attracted by W o r l d B a n k funded projects
are n o higher than the generally applicable ones. There are n o taxes and duties that are
unreasonable and therefore the B a n k m a y finance a l l taxes and duties associated with
project expenditures. The application o f this general approach will be subject to an
ongoing monitoring o f tax p o l i c y and h o w taxes are applied to IDA projects. At the
project-level, the B a n k w o u l d consider whether taxes and duties constitute an excessively
high share o f projects costs.

67

The country financing parameters for the Republic o f Sierra Leone (RSL) are set
out below. These parameters will be reviewed on approximately bi-annual basis, and
when the next IDA assistance strategy i s prepared.
RemarWExplanation

Item

Cost sharing.
Limit on the proportion o f individual

project costs that I D A may finance.

Any limits that would apply to the overall
amount of recurrent expenditures that
I D A may finance.

Local cost jinancirig.
Are the requirements for IDA financing
o f local expenditures met, namely that:
(I) financing requirements for the
country's development program would
exceed the public sector's own resources
(e.g., from taxation and other revenues)
and expected domestic borrowing; and
(ii)the financing o f foreign expenditures
alone would not enable I D A to
adequately assist in the financing o f
individual projects?
Taxes and duties.
Are there any taxes and duties that the
IDA would not finance?

100%

f i e Bank will seek Govemment counterpart funding and
w i l l promote harmonization through seeking cofinancing in
111 projects. Nonetheless there may be projects in which the
Bank may finance up to 100 percent o f project costs.
Financing at this level will be applied after a selective and
:ase-by-case review o f justification. Typically, projects
Zxecuted by Government entities with own sources o f
income (e.g. ports or power) are expected to include
Zounterpart funding contributions. Some projects that may
be financed up to 100 percent include those that support
social sector development, governance, and capacity
building.

No country
level limit.

IDA, working closely with the IMF, would monitor the
fiscal adjustment program, and public expenditure
management and public sector reforms to ensure that
recurrent cost financing i s embedded in a credible and
sustainable govemment macroeconomic strategy. In
determining I D A financing o f recurrent costs in individual
projects, IDA will take into account sustainability issues at
the sector and project levels, including a consideration o f
implied future budgetary outlays. In order to ensure
sustainability, especially for capacity building, projects that
include financing for staff costs w i l l need to be accompanied
by explicit agreement that Government will assume the cost
o f permanent positions after the Bank contribution to the
Project i s completed.

Yes

The two requirements are met IDA may finance local costs
in the proportions needed in individual projects.

None

Taxes and duties are considered reasonable. The applicatior
o f this general approach will be subject to an ongoing
monitoring o f tax policy and how taxes are applied to I D A
projects. At the Project-level, I D A would consider whether
taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share o f
projects costs.

68

CAS ANNEXES

Annex 6

Sierra Leone at a dance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2004
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNi (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Sierra
Leone

SubSaharan
Africa

Lowincome

54
200
11

703
490
347

2,310
450
1,038

4/27/05

1 Development diamond.
Life expectancy

I

Average annual growth, 1998-04
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

20
23

23
24

19
23

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1998-94)

~

Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1.000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulation)
illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

70
39
39
146

58
35
87
94
80

30
65
82
44
75
39
92
99
85

36
46
103

28

,

GNi
per
capita

~

I

I

Gross
primary
enrollment

I

Access to improved water source

I

*--*

I

-

Sierra Leone

- Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS **
1984

1994

2003

2004

GDP (US$ billionsj
Gross domestic investmentiGDP
Exports of goods and sewices/GDP
Gross domestic savingsiGDP
Gross national savingsiGDP

1.09
12.7
10.6
10.9
9.7

0 99
78
27 1
11 3
25

0 99
14 3
19 9
-7 0
67

108
19 6
22 9
28
14 7

Current account balanceiGDP
Interest paymentsiGDP
Total debVGDP
Total debt sewiceiexports
Present value of debtiGDP
Present value of debtiexports

-4.7
0.5
56.6
24.8

-5 3
20
150 2
59 4

-7 6
18
162 9
46 6

-4 9
16
144 7
36 0

1984-94

1994-04

2003

2004

2004-08

-39
-6 1
-0 6

30
09

93
70

74
52

68
47

1984

1994

2003

2004

620
189
60
19 1

377
255
55
368

821
69
124

785
102
235

91 4
156
412

883
132
391

2003

2004

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and sewices
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Sewices

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and sewices

(average annual real growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Sewices
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

1984-94

Igg4-O4

-4.0
5.8

I

-4.0
-4.8
-3.2
53.9
0.8

7.6

8.1
4.8

I Economic ratios’
Trade
T

Indebtedness

I

Sierra Leone

i Growth of investment and GDP (Oh)

I

I

-10

“GDi

*b

*GDP

Growth of exports and Imports (Oh)

L
,

-7.6
5.3

I

Low-Income group

0

99

00

01

02

03

04

Note: 2004 data are preliminaly estimates. Group data are for 2003.
*The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its Income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.
** GDP shares prior to 2001 are not comparable to shares thereaffer due to a structural data break.

69

Sierra Leone
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1984

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Diamonds (incl. unrecorded exports)
Other

2003

2004

24 2
36 2

75
83

14 2
15 9

11 8
-1 7
-5 5

20 1
-2 0
-6 8

21 3
11
-3 5

1984

1994

2003

2004

126 6

194 1

138 0
126 2
11 9

174 5
158 3
16 1

66 7

Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1984

1994

2003

2004

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

177 3
215 2
-37 9

269 1
233 9
35 2

197 3
408 3
-211 1

246 3
420 6
-174 3

Net income
Net current transfers

-29 8
16 7

.1136
25 5

-27 1
163 0

-27 6
150 7

Current account balance

-51 0

-52 9

-75 1

-51 2

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

25 0
25 9

52 4
05

64 9
10 2

98 6
-47 4

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ mil/ions)
Conversion rate IDEC, /oca//USS)

77
2 51

40 6
586 7

59 4
2 348

124 9
2 691

1984

1994

2003

2004

616
8
47

1492
3
186

1612
0
584

1556
0
534

Total debt service due (before relief)
IBRD
IDA

44
2
0

160
0
2

95
0
8

92
0
10

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Ofkial creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

21
10
-3
-4
0

72
47
0
-3
0

83
25
87
21
0

101
-10
100
13
0

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

21
6
1
5
1
4

0
38
1
37
1
35

105
27
5
22
3
19

60
38
7
31
3
28

(US$ millions)

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millionsl
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

-

I

-6-CPI

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
I350 T

~

Development Economics, IMF and staff estimates.

1

(Oh)

GDPdeflator

!

Export price Index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms oftrade (1995=700)

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

Inflation

I

40

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surpiusldeficit

TRADE

1994

98

99

00

01

mu Exports

02

03

04

0 Imports

Current account balance to GDP (%)

8

10
12
14
16

1-16

Composition of 2004 debt (US$ mill.)
F 6G 30

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private

G - Short-term

4/27/05

70

-

CAS Annex B2 Sierra Leone
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 03/23/2005

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average ImplementationPeriod (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
9'0 of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2002

2003

2004

2005

7
3.5
0.0
0.0
14.3
8.1
61.7

7
1.7
0.0
0.0
14.3
22.1
38.4

7
2.2
14.3
19.4
57.1
63.8
11.8

6
1.8
0.0
0.0
16.7
16.7
17.9

no
867.5
123.9

no
909.9
129.9

no
1191.9
132.4

no
1317
146.3

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
23
10
465.5
267.3
52.2
40.0
48.6
39.9

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance(except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementationprogress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

71

-

CAS Annex B3 IBRDllDA Program Summary
Sierra Leone
As Of Date 03/23/2005
Proposed IBRDllDA Base-Case Lending Program

Fiscal vear

Proi ID

2005

SL Power and Water

UWM)

SL Bumbuna Support SIL

14.5

SL ERRG 4

15.0

SL Urban Water Supplemental

2006

2007

68.0

SL IDP Transport

43.0

Result

43.0

SL Development Policy Support

10.0

SL Rural & Private Sector Development

28.0

Result

2009

Overall Result

3.5

Result

SL Mining Sector TA Project

2008

35.0

5.0
43.0

SL Development Policy Support

10.0

SL Health/Education Project

33.0

Result

43.0

SL Development Policy Support

10.0

SL Infrastructure Development

20.0

SL Public Sector/Capacity

13.0

Result

43.0

FY06 - FYO9

172.0

72

CAS Annex B4 -Summary of Nonlending Services
Sierra Leone

As Of Date 03/23/2005

Product

Completion FY

Recent completions
Strategic Options for Public Sector Reform
Microfinance Study
Tapping Mineral Wealth for Human Progress
LegaVJudicial Assessment
Public Expenditure Review
CPAR Issues
Agriculture Sector Review

FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY04
FY04
FY05

Underway
Country Gender Assessment
Education Country Status Report (CSR)

FY05
FY06

Planned
CEM/Poverty Assessment
PRSP Monitoring
Social Accountability Study
FSAP
PSlA (Power & Mining)
PFM Performance Report
PRSP Monitoring
PER
Labor Market and Youth Study
Integrated Framework
Health Sector Review
Social Assistance Scheme
PRSP Monitoring
Decentralization Impact Study
CEM/Poverty Assessment
Investment Climate Assessment
PRSP Monitoring
CAS Impact Evaluation
PFM Performance Report
SME Review
PER

FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
fy09
fy09
fy09
fy09
fy09

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

73

I.

C A S A n n e x B5: S i e r r a L e o n e Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same regiodincome
group
Sub-Saharan

Low-

1970-75

1980-85

1997-2003

Africa

income

3.6
2.0
26.9

5.3
2.0

702.6
2.3

2,310.3
I.9

Urban population (% o f population)

2.9
2.0
21 4

38.8

36 I

30.3

Total fertility rate (births per woman)

6.5

6.5

5.6

5.1

3.7

280

260
1

150
271

490

450

0

2.6

2.5

1.2

3.1

2.6

3.4

2.7

POPULATION

Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)

POVERTY

I%ofpoptiintion)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME

G N I per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index
Lowest quintile (% o f income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% o f income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% o f GDP)
Education (% o f GDP)
Social security and welfare (% o f GDP)

1 .o

Net primary school enrollment rate

M ofnge groicpJ
Total
Male
Female

78
84
72

Access to an improved water source
(% ofpopulation)

Total

57

58

75

Urban

75

83

90

Rural

46

45

69

60
50

58

64
64

Immunization rate
(YOofchildren ages 12-23 months)
Measles

DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)

28

54

27

44

Life expectancy at birth
('ears)

Total
Male

35
34

36
35

74

37

46

36

45

58
57

Female

37

38

39

47

59

Mortality

Infant (per 1,000 live births)

206

192

165

103

82

Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)

363

336

284

174

126

552

540

587

519

319

534

527

53 1

461

268

Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)

2,000

Births attended by skilled health staff (YO)

42

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and
1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations
before one
year o f age.
World Development Indicators database August 2004, World Bank

75

38

-

C A S Annex B6: Sierra Leone Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as YOof GDP)

Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

107.0 . 97.2
14.3
19.6
4.8
8.8
9.4
10.8

96.4
20.7
7.4
13.3

92.7
21.0
8.0
13.1

91.4
21.1
8.1
13.0

89.8
21.1
8.1
12.9

88 8
21.2
8.4
12.9

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

19.9
41.3

22.9
39.1

24.9
42.4

29.0
43.1

30.5
43.3

31.7
42.9

31.7
42.0

Gross domestic savings

-7.0
6.7

2.8
14.7

3.6
12.7

7.3
14.8

8.6

10.2
17.0

11.2

16.3

990
-7.6
190

1,075
-4.8
200

1,136

1,234

1,336

1,441

1,557

210

210

220

240

250

9.3
9.7

7.4
7.5

7.5
7.4

7.1
7.0

6.5
6.9

6.0
6.2

6.0
6. 1

7.0
2.0

5.2
-3.1

5.3
3.4

4.9
0.8

3.8
2.0

3.9
2.3

0,il

3 2

0.-

-0.8

4.3
2.2
I..?

-0.1

-0 h

Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

197.3
146.3

246.3
171.8

408.3
294.8

420.6
266.2

357.8
272.4
531.7
351.5

408.1
313.7
579.1
385.5

457.5
354.2
618.9
412.6

493.2
380.0

Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB

283.0
203.6
481.9
312.9

Resource balance

211.1
-27.0
163.0
-75.1

174.3
-27.6
150.7
-51.2

-199.0
-30.3
136.3
-93.0

173.9
-33.7
129.5
-78.1

171.1
-31.7
136.3
-66.5

161.4
-32.3
133.0
-60.6

161.0
-33.2
135.0
-59.2

21.0
2.1
10.8
-8.7
41.8

12.5
73.8
43.2
30.6
12.2

27.2
-13.7
1.3
-15.0
64.9

7.2
-8.4
9.6
-18.0
104.1

2.2
6.1
6.1
0.0
94.8

2.2
-5.4
0.6
-6.0
109.5

4.6
-11.4
-0.4
-11.0
115.5

Gross national savings'
Memorandum items

Gross domestic product (US$million at current prices)

GNI per capita (USS, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption
Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)

Net Factor Service Income
Net current transfers

Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment

Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private (includes Commercial Banks)
Other capital (net, includes errors & ommissions)

76

17.6

654.2
432.4

10.2

-47.4

14.6

-24.7

-36.1

-45.6

-49.6

-21.3

-16.2

17.5

-14.1

-12.8

- 1 1.2

-10.3

Public finance (as YOo f GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues and grants
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (f) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Overall fiscal balance
Foreign financing (including r e l i e f and change in arrears)

20.2
22.1
-1.9
4.9
-6.7
2.9

21.3
20.2
1.1
4.6
-3.5
3.8

22.4
18.5
3.8
7.9
-4.0
3.2

21.9
17.7
4.2
8.2
-4.0
3.7

23.1
17.2
5.9
8.1
-2.2
3.1

23.1
17.0
6.1
8.1
-2.0
2.5

23.6
16.9
6.7
8.4
-1.7
2.3

Monetary indicators
M2iGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)

20.2
23.9

19.3
19.2

18.7
11.8

18.7
13.4

18.7
11.7

19.1
12.8

19.5
12.0

38.4

435.9

74.6

88.2

123.5

111.4

117.4

91.0
11.8
7.5
8.2

87.1
12.0
14.2
16.0

9.2
8.5
1.6

9.3
7.4
5.8

9.5
5.7
4.7

9.6
4.7
3.9

9.6
4.0
3.4

Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% o f GDP)

Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

Private sector credit growth / total credit growth (%)

Price indices

Real exchange rate (YR90=100, USULe)'
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a. Sector shares are based on GDP at factor cost. A l l other shares use GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f I M F resources.
e. Consolidated central govemment.
f. "Le" denotes "Leones." A n increase in US$/Le denotes appreciation.

77

C A S Annex B7: Sierra Leone - K e y Exposure Indicators
Indicators

Estimate

Projected

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

161 1.9

1555.8

1529.2

1502.9

1464.5

1411.8

1348.9

-4.2

61.3

14.1

4.9

-10.5

-25.0

-30.0

before debt r e l i e f

94.9

91.6

83.2

66.9

77.3

85.9

90.7

after debt r e l i e f

14.3

24.5

27.1

7.3

11.6

20.8

24.7

TDO/XGS~,~

701.0

612.1

525.3

410.4

351.4

302.9

TDOiGDP

162.9

144.7

134.6

121.8

109.6

98.0

86.6

46.6

36.0

28.6

18.3

18.5

1S.4

18.1

7.0

9.0

9.3

2.0

2.8

4.5

4.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total debt outstanding and disburseda(TDO) in U S $ m
Net disbursements (US$m)a

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a,

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
203

s

TDSIXGS~,~
before debt relief
after debt relief

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSipublic D S
Preferred creditor DSipublic D S (%)d

56.2

44.5

32.0

34.2

35.0

35.0

35.0

IBRD DSiXGS

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

IBRD TDO (US$m)e

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Share o f IBRD portfolio (%)

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

583.8

534.3

509.2

Loans

0.0

0.0

Equity and quasi-equity'

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

IDA T D O (US$m)e

IFC (USSm)

MIGA

MIGA guarantees (USJm)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net short- term capital.
Data are f r o m W o r l d Bank Debtor Reporting System.

b. F r o m IMF.
c. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.

d. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
e. Includes present value o f guarantees.

f. Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f b o t h loan and equity instruments.

78

u m m m v m
3 0 0
3 0 0
U N " "

0
0

0
0

0
0

MAP SECTION

