Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 32294-TJ

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN

FOR THE PERIOD FY06-09

October 3,2005

Central Asia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

The International Finance Corporation
I F C Southern Europe and Central Asia Department

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance o f their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

Last CAS Discussion: February 27,2003
Currency Equivalent
(Exchange Rate effective M a y 10,2005)

Currency Unit = Somoni
US$l.OO = Som 3.06
Weights and Measures

Metric system
Fiscal Year

January 1 - December 31

IBRD
Vice President: Shigeo Katsu
Country Director: Dennis de Tray
Task Team Leaders: L i l i a Burunciuc and Cevdet
Denizer

IFC
Assad Jabre
Khosrow Zamani
Gorton de M o n d

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA
ACU
APL
ADB
CAREC
CAS
CFAA
CIDA
CPAR
CPIA
CPPR
CPS
DFID
EBRD
ESW
EC
FIAS
GTZ
HIPC
IDF
IDA
IDB
IDF
IFC
KfW
MDG
MIGA
NSIFT
PBA
PBC
PER
PIP
PPP
PRSC
PRSP
PSD
SDC
SDR
SIDA
SWAP

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Aid Coordination Unit
Adaptable Program Lending
Asian Development Bank
Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Organization
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Canadian International Development Association
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Performance and Institutional Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Country Partnership Strategy
UK Department for International Development
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Economic and Sector Work
European Commission
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Gesellschafi fiir Technische Zusammenarbeit
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
Institutional development Fund
International Development Association
Islamic Development Bank
Institution Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
National Social Investment Fund o f Tajikistan
Policy-Based Allocation
Policy-Based Credit
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
Public Investment Program
Purchasing Power Parity
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Private Sector Development
Swiss Development Cooperation
Special Drawing Rights
Swedish International Development Association
Sector Wide Approaches

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

TA
TTF
UNDP
UNICEF
UNODC
USAlD
WBI

Technical Assistance
Trade and Transport Facilitation
United Nations Development Programme
UnitedNations Children’s Fund
UnitedNations Office o n Drugs and Crime
United States Agency for International Development
World Bank Institute

Ths document was produced by a core team that included: Dennis de Tray, L i l i a Burunciuc, Cevdet
Denizer, Gorton D e Mond, Luis Alvaro Sanchez, Jakob v o n Weizsacker, Jariya Hoffman, Aziz Khaidarov,
Arshad Sayed, Bekzod Shamsiev, C e m Mete, Emesto Cuadra, Brian Levy, Jonathan Kamkwalala, Peyvand
Khaleghian, Raghu Sharma, Ramin Shojai, T.V. Sampath, W i l l e m Zijp, Anders Zeijlon and Cathy
Summers. Other members o f the Bank Group-wide Tajikistan Country Team also made valuable
contributions throughout the process. Helpful guidance and advice was provided by Tevfik Yaprak (OPCS).

REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS

...............................................................................................
I.COUNTRY CONTEXT ................................................................................................

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

1

A . TAJIKISTAN TODAY ..................................................................................................... 1
Economic Successes and Poverty Reduction..........................................................
1
4
B. CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE ...................................................................................
Geography ...............................................................................................................
4
Demography............................................................................................................ 4
Governance. Corruption and the Political Setting ..................................................
5
.
...................................................................................................
C STRATEGIC CHOICES
7
Keeping Growth Going N o w ..................................................................................
7
Supporting Growth in the Longer Term .................................................................
9
Building Transparent and Reliable Institutions .................................................... 11
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Outlook ..............................................................
11

.
.....................................................................
I11. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP...........................................................
I 1 THE GOVERNMENT’S PROGRAM

A . LESSONS
FROM PAST BANKEXPERIENCE
..................................................................
B. FY2006-09 CAS: KEYFEATURES
............................................................................
The Process ...........................................................................................................
Dealing with a Constrained IDA...........................................................................
c. BANKGROUPPROGRAM TO SUPPORT THE STRATEGIC OUTCOMES ...........................
Strategic Objectives ..............................................................................................
Anticipated Results ...............................................................................................
W B I ’ s Program .....................................................................................................
The Regional Dimension ......................................................................................
D.MONITORING
AND EVALUATION
OF RESULTS ...........................................................
E. DONOR
COOPERATION ...............................................................................................

.

I V RISKS

........................................................................................................................

List of tables
Table 1: Tajikistan-Selected Macroeconomic Indicators. 2000-2004
Table 2: N e t FDI Inflows in CIS in U S $ per capita (1999-2004)
Table 3: Selected Health Indicators
Table 4: Proportion o f Communities with Schools Having Satisfactory Materials
Table 5: Summary o f CAS Results
Table 6: Indicative IDA Program for FY06-09

12
13
13
15
15
15
17
17
17
23
23
24
24

26

TABLE OF CONTENTS
(continued)
List o f boxes
Box 1: The Aluminum Plant TadAZ
Box 2: Cotton Sector Problems
Box 3: Development Policy Instruments
Box 4: Donor Programs
List o f figures
Figure 1: Tajikistan Enjoys High Growth and Macro Stability
Figure 2: Poverty Indicators in Europe and Central Asia
Below US$2.15 a day, 2000 PPP
Figure 3: The Depth o f Tajikistan’s Banking System i s the Shallowest in Eastem Europe
and Central Asia (2003)
Figure 4: SME Administrative Barriers
Figure 5: Multiple Level Interventions and Cross Linkages to Deliver the Maximum
Impact in a Sector: Example o f Education Reform
Attachment
Attachment 1: Results Matrix
Attachment 2: CAS Completion Report, FY02-04
Attachment 3: Medium-Term Economic Outlook
Attachment 4: Debt Sustainability Analysis
Attachment 5: Central Asia Regional Cooperation Program
Attachment 6: Country Financing Parameters
Attachment 7: Achieving MDGs Goals: An Assessment
Attachment 8: Donor Matrix
Attachment 9: Partnerships
Attachment 10: Discussions with Civil Society Organizations
Attachment 11: WBI Activities in Tajikistan
Standard CAS Annexes
Annex A2: Tajikistan at a Glance
Annex B2: Seiected Indicators o f Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: IBRD/IDA Program Summary
Annex B3: IFC and MIGA Program Summary, FY 2002-2005
Annex B4: Summary o f Non-lending Services
Annex B5: Social Indicators
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio-IBRD/IDA and Grants
Annex B8: Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
~

Map: 34125 TAJ

Page i

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Tajikistan has done well since the signing o f the peace accord in 1997. I t i s
among the few post-conflict countries that moved quickly from c i v i l war to internal
stability and to a functioning government. I t has achieved remarkable economic success,
averaging 10% growth a year for the past four years. Inflation i s under control, the
exchange rate stabilized, external debt cut in half, and poverty markedly reduced. Yet,
Tajikistan remains the poorest and among the most fragile o f the CIS countries, and a
continuation o f this bright picture i s by no means assured.
1.

..

Tajikistan faces a daunting development agenda-failing infrastructure, tenuous
health and education systems, and weak institutions, especially the financial system and
the c i v i l service. Magnifying these challenges are Tajikistan’s geography, its
demography and a reputation for corruption.
11.

iii. Tajikistan i s landlocked, remote, mainly mountainous, and surrounded by difficult
neighbors. W h i l e improved air and transport l i n k s as well as WTO membership would
enhance Tajikistan’s foreign trade potential, in the short run export growth is not likely to
be sufficient to maintain high growth. Domestic sources o f growth must also be tapped
which puts a premium on private sector reforms, especially in agriculture.
iv.
The country’s demographics-40% o f the population i s under 15-places huge
demands o n the Government and the economy, first to educate, then to employ. I f
education and health services can be sustained and the business environment improved,
Tajikistan’s youth could be a positive force for future growth. However, should these
systems fail and the business climate not improve, they could be the basis o f future
instability.

Tajikistan’s weak public and private institutions do not provide an environment
v.
conducive to private investment, domestic or foreign. A s the Government i s w e l l aware,
corruption, both petty and large scale, remains a serious barrier to private sector
development and public sector efficiency. Exacerbating this situation i s the potentially
corrosive effects o f the drug trade that Tajikistan’s long border with Afghanistan could
generate.
Tajikistan needs to act swiftly to consolidate recent achievements and to diversify
vi.
i t s basis for growth-because i t i s unlikely that past sources (a postwar recovery in
productivity, remittances, and commodity exports) will be sufficient to ensure continued
future high growth. The immediate task i s to improve the business environment and
create more job opportunities at home. A s these immediate needs are pursued, the
Government must also stem the decline in human and physical capital and increase
domestic investment, which now stands at less than 13% o f GDP.
vii.
While Tajikistan’s challenges and needs are enormous, it has limited resources to
address them. IDA’Sannual allocation-at SDR19.6 million, or SDR3.10 per capita-is
sufficient for one medium-sized road project. Moreover, the combined resources o f all
donors-a mix o f humanitarian and developmental aid-is declining as Tajikistan exits

Page i i

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

the post-conflict stage. Ironically this decline i s taking place just as Tajikistan’s
absorptive capacity i s improving as evidenced by significant improvements in the quality
o f the IDA portfolio.
The Bank Group and the Government will need to be extremely creative to ensure
viii.
that these limited resources produce a sizeable impact. The strategy going forward i s
meant to be selective, effective, and practical. The Government and the Bank Group
agreed to focus this CPS o n three narrow goals: supporting growth in the immediate
future by improving domestic economic opportunities, laying the foundation for h t u r e
growth by preserving and enhancing the human capital, and exploiting the country’s
energy potential. Specifically,

To improve business opportunities in rural and urban areas, the Bank Group,
with the IFC in the lead, will support the strengthening o f the financial sector,
reduce the cost o f doing business and, with IDA in the lead, will support measures
to improve access to agricultural land and reduce rent extraction in the cotton
sector.
To enhance andpresewe the quality of the human capital, the Bank Group will
help improve the system o f resource allocation to education and health, create
conditions for better teaching and primary school attendance, increase utilization
o f primary health care, and increase the supply o f safe water in selected areas.

To exploit the country ’s hydropower potential, the Bank Group will support
efforts to increase efficiency o f the domestic energy sector through improved cost
recovery, and will assist the Government in attracting foreign investment in the
hydropower sector.
ix.
In each of the above areas, the Bank Group and Government will work to improve
government capacity and efficiency, and reduce corruption by giving special emphasis to
measures that increase transparency o f resource use, reduce discretionary controls, and
encourage the participation o f users in the provision o f services.

In agreement with the Government, IDA will devote the bulk o f i t s lending
x.
resources to support health and education programs. This implies necessarily that Bank
Group efforts in the area o f private sector development will focus primarily o n policy
framework and business environment issues. And in the energy sector, IDA’Srole will be
limited to technical partnership and advice. However, the Bank Group, through IBRD,
I F C and guarantee instruments, may have a role to play in supporting export-oriented
hydroelectric projects. I F C and MIGA will work to improve the climate for business,
with IDA providing support through policy reform operations and technical assistance.
IFC will, o f course, continue to seek investments in the private sector.
Given resource and capacity constraints, the results framework developed with
xi.
the Government sets modest goals for the next four years. Achieving even these modest
results with the limited available resources and weak institutional environment will be a
considerable challenge-but one the Government i s determined to take on.

Page iii

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

xii.
T o partially offset i t s o w n limited resources, the Bank Group will act as a catalyst
in an effort to expand Tajikistan’s resource envelope and improve efficiency in the use of
domestic and donor resources. Building on its convening authority and comparative
advantage as a global knowledge institution, it will assist the Government to develop
sector platforms that bring together donor coalitions in support o f reforms in key sectors,
where appropriate through the use o f Sector Wide Approaches (SWAPS).

This CPS recognizes that results on the ground can be achieved only if all l i n k s in
xiii.
sector supply chains-the central government, local governments, communities and
households-are in place and functioning. To achieve this, the full range o f Bank
instruments-development policy operations, investment operations, technical assistance,
community interventions-will be brought to bear o n the limited set o f priorities
identified above, a strategy o f “opening many doors to the same room.” The CPS i s
therefore selective in outcomes, but brings multiple instruments to bear o n each o f these
outcomes.
xiv.
This strategy carries significant risks. The main external risks are the volatile
political and security situation in the region and the potentially corrosive effects o f the
drug transit from Afghanistan. Recent events in the Kyrgyz Republic and Uzbekistan
have increased these risks. The main r i s k to the Bank Group i s that the donor assistance
it i s able to generate in support of the Government’s programs may not be sufficient to
help Tajikistan overcome i t s formidable development challenges. Unless the
intemational community is prepared to increase i t s support to Tajikistan, this r i s k will
persist even if implementation o f the current CPS proceeds as planned.

The following questions are proposed for discussion by the Executive Directors:

xv.
e

I s this strategy sufficiently focused given Tajikistan’s institutional capacity and
govemance problems?

e

Are Executive Directors comfortable with the proposed strategy which i s likely to
bring only modest results in the CPS period?

e

I s IDA’Srole as a catalyst to attract additional resources a plausible one? I s it
likely to be supported by other development agencies?

Page 1

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

TAJJKISTAN: COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY2006-09
1. COUNTRY COETEXT

1,
Tajikistan i s a small economy with 6.7 million inhabitants, a GDP o f US$2.1
billion, and a per capita income o f US$3 10. Shortly after independence the country
descended into a civil war that brought widespread physical damage and heavy human
losses. Only after a peace accord was reached in mid-1997 was the Government able to
tum i t s attention to goveming.
2.
Since the c i v i l war ended Tajikistan has done remarkably well. In the first years
after the war, the Government, under President Rakhmonov, worked to establish control
over the country, concentrating o n political consolidation and security. The challenge
then moved to repairing and developing a war t o m country that under the Soviet system
was among the poorest in the CIS.
A. TAJIKISTAN TODAY

Economic Successes and Poverty Reduction
3.
The Government’s success i s evident in the economy’s impressive cumulative
growth o f almost 60% over the last five years, albeit from a very l o w base. Growth in
this period was driven in part by a postwar recovery in productivity, especially in
agriculture, but also by an expansion o f services and construction fuelled by remittances
from migrant workers, mostly in Russia. Favorable world market prices for the main
export commodities-aluminum and cotton-also helped.

4.
Rapid growth was in part the product o f good macroeconomic management.
Inflation has been under control at 7% in 2004 and the exchange rate i s stable,
contributing to a marked increase in public confidence in the domestic currency. Exports
grew at 19%, driven by aluminum, but imports grew even faster, at 28%, fuelled by
demand induced by remittances. The current account deficit tripled, from 1.3% in 2003 to
3.9% o f GDP in 2004 (Table 1 and Figure 1). The higher trade deficit was partly offset
Table 1: Tajikistan - Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2000-2004
Nominal GDP (inmillion US$)
Real GDP growth (%)
CPI inflation (annual average, %)
Exchange rate (SomondUS$)
Overall fiscal balance (excluding PIP, % o f GDP)
Current account deficit (% o f GDP)
Public external debt (% o f GDP)
Source: IMF

2000
955
8.3
32.9
1.82
-0.6
-6.2
128.4

2001
1,033
10.2
38.6
2.32
-0.1
-6.6
98.4

2002
1,193
9.1
10.2
2.73
-0.1
-2.7
84.6

2003
1,556
10.2
17.1
3.06
0.9
-1.3
66.2

2004
2,073
10.6
7.1
2.94
0.3
-3.9
39.7

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

Page 2

Figure 1: Tajikistan Enjoys High Growth and Macro Stability
20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

-5%

-10%

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Source: IMF

by the remittances, which now account for an estimated 30% o f GDP.' Gross
international reserves increased substantially to US$189 m i l l i o n at end-2004, but even so
were equivalent to only two months o f imports.
In spite o f the fact that strong economic growth increased tax revenues, the budget
5.
deficit (including the public investment program (PIP)) increased slightly to 2.7% o f
GDP in 2004, from 1.8% in the previous year, due mainly to higher domestic and
external capital expenditures. Tajikistan has also substantially reduced its debt burden.
Debt restructuring agreements with bilateral creditors, especially Russia and Pakistan,
combined with restrained new borrowing, lowered the external debt stock to 40% o f GDP
at end-2004 from 85% j u s t two years before.2 Debt management capacity i s improving,
in part through IMF technical assistance. The authorities n o w regularly update the debt
inventory and submit quarterly debt reports to Parliament.

The growth o f the past h a l f decade has reduced poverty significantly, to 64% in
6.
2003 from 81% in 1999, though Tajikistan remains the poorest country in the E C A
region (Figure 2). Consumption growth has been fairly even across households, but

'

This includes the recorded remittance inflows via the banking system at about 20% o f GDP and the nonrecorded inflows estimated at about 10% o f GDP.
The debt for asset swap with Russia, signed in October 2004, included a write-off o f the external debt
stock by US$250 m i l l i o n in exchange for Tajlk assets estimated at about US$200 m i l l i o n and a payment
from the budget in the amount o f U S 5 0 m i l l i o n o n behalf o f Russia, as investment in the Sangtuda
hydroelectric power. In addition, Pakistan wrote o f f US$13 m i l l i o n o f T a j i k debt.

Page 3

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy
Figure 2: Poverty Rates in Europe and Central Asia
Below US$2.15 a day, 2000 PPP

80

70

60

50

30

20

10

0

Source: ECA Regional Study on Growth, Poverty, and Inequality in Europe and Central Asia, June 2005
Year 2002 estimates for Hungary, Poland, Romania, Belarus, Russia, Georgia, Moldova
Year 2003 estimates for Lithuania, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Armenia, Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan
Year 2004 estimate for Bosnia

oblast (province) differences in poverty remain significant, ranging from 84% in GomoBadakhshan to 45% in Rayons under Republican Jurisdiction (RRS).3

7.

N o t all sectors of the economy have contributed equally to the recent economic
successes. Because o f the complex political economy and considerable governance
problems, the contribution of such important sectors as aluminum and cotton remains
below their potential. Private sector development also lags behind.4

I t i s important to note, however, that policy makers have had little control over the two k e y factors that
contributed significantly to poverty reduction in the 2000s: (i)
the transfers from abroad and (ii)
the postwar recovery o f productivity. Therefore, further poverty alleviation efforts may be hndered in the absence
of structural reforms needed t o sustain high economic growth.

Small and micro enterprise growth has been below expectations. However, the privatization program has
proceeded as planned with more than 100 enterprises privatized in 2004. The services sector continued to
expand in 2004 and preliminary data suggests that this sector will continue t o contribute to growth in 2005.
An encouraging development has been the productivity gains in non-cotton agriculture which continue to
be strong.

Page 4

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

B. CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE

As Tajikistan looks to the future, a critical challenge to the Government and the
8.
donor community will be how to align the country’s vast development needs with its
limited financial and institutional resources. Three overarching characteristics o f
Tajikistan must l i e at the base o f such an alignment: the country’s geography, its
demography, and i t s weak governance and corruption.
Geography
One o f the world’s most isolated countries, Tajikistan i s 2,000 kilometers from
9.
the nearest port, 93% mountainous, and in a difficult neighborhood. High mountains
separate it from two neighboring countries, the Kyrgyz Republic and China. Its long
border with Afghanistan creates security and drug trafficking problems. Its fourth
neighbor, Uzbekistan, considers it a security risk and maintains tight controls over the
border, controls that have been strengthened following events in Andijan. While transit
and trade through Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran may someday play a role, Tajikistan’s
access to potential export markets will remain constrained for the foreseeable future.
Tajikistan’s unfavorable geography has an important implication for its growth
10.
strategy: to compensate for it, it has to work harder than other countries to attract
investment. In addition, while improved air and transport l i n k s as w e l l as WTO
membership would enhance Tajikistan’s foreign trade potential, in the short run export
growth i s not likely to be sufficient to maintain high growth. Domestic sources o f growth
must also be tapped which puts an additional premium on private sector reforms,
especially in agriculture.

Demography

11.
With 40% o f i t s population under the age o f 15, Tajikistan’s youth will be a main
force in determining the country’s economic future and stability. The country challenge
in serving its youth i s underscored by the fact that the country is, as o f now, unlikely to
meet six Millennium Development Goals (MDG): child mortality, maternal mortality,
gender equality in school, school enrollment, incidence o f H I V / A I D S and tuberculosis,
and access to improved water sources. The likelihood o f meeting the income poverty
reduction target i s also not assured (see Attachment 7 o n M D G s and their costing).
Indeed, recent trends in school enrollment, child mortality, maternal mortality, and
H I V / A I D S prevalence appear to be moving in the wrong direction.’ Tajikistan’s future
will depend o n the Government’s ability to stem the decline in these indicators and to
retain and expand o n the human capital inherited from the Soviet system.6

’

Administrative and survey data tend to differ o n the extent t o which infant and maternal mortality have
changed since the 1990s.
A recent UNDP assessment o f the cost o f meeting the MDGs in Tajlkistan has come up with US$12.9
billion, an astonishing number compared t o available resources (Attachment 7).

Page 5

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

Governance, Corruption and the Political Setting
The legacy o f the c i v i l war includes a complex political economy that constrains
12.
institutional development and presents significant govemance challenges. In the first
years after the war, the Government, under President RaMunonov, worked to establish
control over the country, concentrating on political consolidation to establish security
throughout the country and set the basis for economic revival. The Govemment now
faces the difficult task of transitioning from a government based o n the need to stabilize
and balance power to a modem government built o n transparency and accountability.
Tajikistan’s public administration and public finance systems are still based largely o n
the o l d Soviet model and lack capacity. Moreover, extremely low public sector wages
(around U S $ l O a month o n average) fuel corruption and, coupled with the highly
centralized f o r m o f government, reduce incentives and accountability at all levels.
13.
The consequences o f these govemance problems are nowhere clearer than in the
aluminum and cotton sectors, where political and vested interests undermine progress.
Poor financial management and the lack o f transparency in aluminum-as illustrated by
the recent scandal surrounding the previous management o f the aluminum smelter
TadAZ-are handicapping efforts to improve efficiency (Box 1).

Box 1: The Aluminum Plant TadAZ

The Company. TadAZ i s by far the largest enterprise in Tajikistan. It employs about
13,000 people, accounts for over 60% o f exports and 30% o f imports, and consumes a third
of domestically produced hydropower. I t s share in industrial production i s around 18% and
i t s contribution to GDP i s over 5%. In2004, production totaled 355,700 tons with a sales
value o f around US$572 million.
Corporate Governance. T a d A Z i s a state owned enterprise. I t i s not governed by a
Board o f Directors or any other type o f executive committee. Instead, i t i s under the sole
command o f i t s Director, who reports to the President o f Tajikistan while other SOEs report
t o line ministries. The company i s subject t o numerous checks by various Government
control bodies. The April 18, 2005, audit by Tajikistan’s supreme audit agency discovered
that the Company owed more that U S $ I60 m i l l i o n t o companies abroad. In view o f this, the
Government brought charges against TadAZ’s former director, w h o fled the country, for
illegally borrowing funds for TadAZ and misappropriating them.
Financialperformanceand management. I t was not until recently that the Company
presented i t s financial statements in line with International Accounting Standards (IAS),
beginning with the 200 1 audit and followed by another audit for 2002. No audits are
available for 2003 and 2004. TadAZ has benefited from energy subsidies in the form o f l o w
tariffs and has in addition been allowed t o run up large arrears o n i t s energy bill and even
tax obligations for extended periods o f time. The net present value o f these privileges for
TadAZ has been substantial. Curiously, these privileges did not result in corresponding
profits at TadAZ. Instead, the company ran up substantial debts, US$520 m i l l i o n at last
count. One explanation i s that profits were covertly channeled f r o m T a d A Z t o the group o f
private companies that TadAZ relies o n for the supply o f r a w material, for purchase of
finished goods, and for credit. InApril 2005 an agreement was reached that TadAZ would
stay current on i t s electricity bills, but it i s too early t o tell whether i t will be honored.

Page 6

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

14.
Poor performance in cotton, also a major sector in the Tajik economy, has affected
agricultural growth. Agriculture grew by a third from 1999 to 2003, far behind total GDP
growth o f 47%. Cotton sector growth i s being held back by slow progress in land reform,
weak price incentives for cotton farmers from a group o f non-competitive and closely held
ginneries, continued state management o f production targets, and difficult access to finance.
The sector i s also crippled by high and mounting debts o f farmers to a select group o f input
suppliers, an issue of great concern to the Government and donors (Box 2).
Box 2: Cotton Sector Problems
Agriculture employs two-thirds of the country’s labor force, with the cotton sector the largest
employer in rural areas. In 2003 cotton exports amounted to 11% o f total exports-the third most
important export after aluminum and electricity. Inthat year, cotton was grown o n around 45% of
farmland, with an average yield of 1.9 tons o f seed cotton per hectare, l o w by international
standards and lower than yields before the transition (see b o x figure below).

-

Box Figure: Average cotton yields in Tajikistan
1985-2003
3 I-2.5 21.5 0.5

-

c

(Tons per hectare)

-

\

Pre-transition

I

Efficiency Zone

\

Post-trans ition

o , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,
Source: State Statistical Office, M inistry of Agriculture

monopolization o f the credit and input provision.

,

Cotton suffers f r o m substantial
inefficiency and inequities. I t
i s estimated that cotton sector
income could grow by 50%
f r o m i t s current level o f
around US$200 m i l l i o n a year,
with feasible increases in
yields and ginning outturns.
Several problems stand in the
way: (i)
ownership and
governance o f cotton farms;
(ii)
continued state
management o f production
targets, and (iii)
monopsony o f
the ginning sector and related

Governance of cotton farms i s usually poor, so that farmers typically have difficulty
controlling farm management decisions, distorting incentives. A large number o f cotton farms
have not been privatized. Where farms have been privatized, land certificates have often not been
issued. In this case, farmers received collective land tenure rights, while farm management mostly
remained as before, resulting in n o significant increase in individual farmers’ authority. Though
farm managers are nominally elected by the farmers in the collective, the key t o their power i s the
support from local authorities. And because cotton farmers are usually required t o produce cotton
by local govemments, they have little freedom o f crop choice.
Powerful creditors with high-level political backing and the help o f local governments exploit
farms by establishing local monopolies in financing, input provision, and ginning markets. The
inability o f farmers t o choose whom they can go to for financing, ginning, and marketing of
produce has resulted in their exploitation by intermediaries. Over-invoicing and under-deliveries
of inputs resulted in inflated farm debts o f about US$185 m i l l i o n in 2004. These large debts of
questionable legtimacy are used by these powerful creditors t o assure continuing control. By
requiring the planting of cotton and not allowing cotton t o move t o different gins, local
govemments reinforce the stranglehold o f intermediaries. The result: a highly complex and
inefficient web o f production incentives that impedes efficiency improvements and perpetuates
the Dovertv o f cotton farm workers.

Page 7

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

15.

The greatest long-term threat to Tajikistan’s efforts to control corruption may well
be i t s border with Afghanistan and the prospects for drug trade that border produces.
Tajikistan i s a natural transit route for Afghanistan’s opium and heroin to Russia and
Europe. The Tajik Drug Control Agency, with substantial international support, i s
working to control the f l o w o f drugs through Tajikistan but the task is daunting and the
record o f such efforts in other parts o f the world i s not encouraging. L o w public sector
wages, weak institutions, and the border with Afghanistan all underscore the enormity of
the challenge Tajikistan faces in dealing with i t s corruption problem.

C. STRATEGIC CHOICES
Tajikistan’s decision makers face a classic and immensely difficult trade-off. The
16.
immediate need for continued growth and j o b creation i s obvious. Without these the
country will not hold together. But, the need to build for the future i s equally pressing.
Without this growth cannot be sustained. Below i s the outline o f some o f the main issues
that will drive a strategy to serve these competing needs.
Keeping Growth Going Now

17.
If Tajikistan i s to maintain growth in the near term, it must find ways to translate
domestic resources into productive investments. Remittances, now at 30% o f GDP, are
an obvious source o f such investments but today go mostly for c o n ~ u m p t i o n .T~o
encourage and enable private agents to channel more o f those remittances to productive
investments will require improvements in the credibility and performance o f the financial
sector and an improved domestic business environment.
Figure 3: The Depth of Tajikistan’s Banking System i s the
Shallowest in Eastern Europe and Central Asia (2003)

90.0%
80.0%
70.0%
60.0%
50.0%
40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%

IDeposit to GDP

Credit to GDP

Kyrgyz
Georgia
Ukraine Kazakhstan
Russia
Latvia
Tajikistan Azerbaijan Armenia
Moldova Lithuania
Estonia
Source: InternationalFinancial Statistics. Albania, Georgia,Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro, Azerbavan, Russian
Federation, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan,and Moldova. GDP data arefrom World Development Indicators. For Tajikistan, data
j o r 2003 do not include AIB Credit-Invest.

Page 8

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

Figure 4: SME Administrative Barriers

External Financing
Export-import operations
Taxation
Inspections
Licensing

A

A

Certification and Standardization
Obtaining permits and approvals
Registration
Bank account operations
90%

A

60%

30%

0%

30%
60%
% of respondents

Source: IFC 2003 SME Survey

18.
In the past few years the banking sector’s performance has improved, as
evidenced by the significant increase in the use o f the banking system for transferring
remittances. But much remains to be done to h r t h e r strengthen confidence in the
financial system and increase its ability to attract, hold and intermediate deposits. Indeed,
Tajikistan’s financial sector remains the shallowest among all ECA countries (Figure 3).
Tajikistan’s business environment also lags behind those in other transition
19.
countries. The private sector i s only about 50% o f GDP, and foreign direct investment
i s l o w (Table 2). Tajikistan’s SMEs face considerable administrative barriers to
efficient and profitable operation (Figure 4). Lack o f access to financing, restrictions
o n external trade, excessive government regulations, licensing and inspections all
constrain private sector development and fuel corruption and rent-seeking.
Agriculture could be an important driver o f growth and poverty reduction, but,
20.
as mentioned earlier, the sector lags behind the rest o f the economy, in large part
because o f poor
performance in the cotton
Table 2: N e t FDI Inflows in CIS in US$ per capita
sector. The immediate
(1999 - 2004)
challenge i s to improve
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
2004
access to land and remove
the bottlenecks in the
Armenia
38
34
22
35
38
44
30
Belarus
44
12
10
44
17
cotton sector described in
73
74
Georgia
13
33
17
35
Box 2 to unleash the
(0)
1
...
9
Ky-rgyzRep.
8
(1)
sector’s potential. In
Moldova
11
39
41
32
14
13
addition, Tajikistan cannot
Tajikistan
4
4
2
6
5
41
ignore the worrisome trend
Turkmenistan
27
28
36
58
47
...
29
27
Ukraine
10
12
16
14
in land, pasture and forestry
5
3
3
3
5
3
Uzbekistan
degradation, which
Source: DDP time series and DEC (World Bank)

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

Page 9

contributes to frequent natural disasters, soil erosion and silting o f waterways used for
drinking water, and leads to further impoverishment o f rural population.8

2 1.
Better use o f remittances and an improved environment for business in urban and
rural areas are all essential to continuing growth. But unless Tajikistan stems the decline
in human and physical capital, growth will inevitably slow.
Supporting Growth in the Longer Term

22.
I t goes almost without saying that Tajikistan’s future depends o n the quality o f i t s
labor force, yet health and education systems are at great risk. Poor health outcomes (see
Table 3) are driven by l o w government spending (less than US$1per capita a year) and
structural sector weaknesses. Most health spending i s private and informal, and
affordability i s a major problem for the poor. A recent survey indicates that 57% o f poor
households (up from 42% in 1998) do not seek health care because they cannot afford to.
As health services have declined and increased in cost, sources o f disease have increased.
Water supply has become unreliable and unsafe, with only 55% o f households having
access to safe water. Some three-quarters o f respondents now identify health as their

Table 3: SelectedHealth Indicators

kerbaijan

Total fertility Maternal
rate
mortalityratio
births per
per 100,OOO
m e n
live births
2OOOmodeled
2o03
estimates

2.1
29
Central African Republic
4.6
Georgia
1.1
Ghana
4.4
Kazakhstan
1.8
Kenya
4.8
Kyrgyr RepuMic
2.4
Nepal
4.1
1.3
Russian Federation
Tajikistan
2.9
Ukraine
1.2
Chbekistan
2.3
3.7
Lowincome
a. b t a are for m3st recent year available.
%me:

94
380
1100
32
540
210
loo0
110
740
67
100
35
24
689

Prevalence of
child
malnutrition
%of children
under age 5
Stunting
19952003a
13.3
48.5
28.4
11.7
29.9
9.7
30.3
24.8
50.5
10.6

36.2

15.9
21.1

43.1

Incidenceof
Infant
Uncier-five
tuberculosis rortalityrate mortalityrate
per 100,OOO per 1,OOO live
per 1,OOO
people
births
2003

2003

2003

76
246
325

91

210
145
610
124
211
112

75
46
115
41
59
63
79
59
61
16

92
115

15
57

83

168

225

76

80

69

180
45

95

73
123

68

82
21

95
20
69
123

W d Pevelopment Idicators 2K6

Tajikistan i s periodically affected by various natural disasters, especially mud slides, partly because o f
deforestation and soil erosion and partly because o f natural geological and climatic features o f the country.
With regard to soil erosion, continued practices o f cultivation o f sloping land, over grazing o f near pastures

Page 10

greatest concern, compared to a
quarter who cite money or jobs.
23.
Education outcomes are also
deteriorating. Although education
expenditures have been gradually
increasing, at 3% o f GDP they are
s t i l l low. The education system

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy
Table 4: Proportion of Communities with
Schools Having Satisfactory Materials
Item
DesWChairs
Blackboards
Textbooks
Other Supplies
Heating Fuel

National
54.9%
63.5%
36.0%
29.2%
29.3%

Rural
52.1%
59.1%
31.7%
24.7%
26.4%

Urban
60.1%
71.8%
44.3%
38.0%
35.0%

suffers O
‘m
teaching
Source: 2003 Tajikistan Living Standards Survey
underpaid teachers, lack o f
appropriate learning materials, an
outdated curriculum, and an inefficient and inequitable expenditure allocation system.
Physical infrastructure i s deteriorating, and a significant number o f community schools
lack conditions for productive learning. In a recent survey, only 36% o f communities
reported adequate textbook availability, only h a l f o f schools had enough desks and chairs
(Table 4). Tajikistan’s universities are also in trouble. Corruption, driven by l o w
professor salaries, i s undermining the quality o f university education, meaning that
qualified specialists inherited from the o l d Soviet system are not being replaced.

If quality human resources are essential to Tajikistan’s future, so, too, are quality
24.
infrastructure services. Interruptions in energy supply are common all over Tajikistan.
Other municipal infrastructure (water, solid waste management, sanitation) i s also in
decline. Inadequate resources for operation and maintenance, l o w cost recovery, and a
lack o f financial discipline all contribute to this alarming picture. Restoring basic urban
and energy infrastructure services will require b o l d reforms and significant investments.
25.
Tajikistan’s hydro-electric generation and export capacity i s an important
potential source o f growth over the long term.’ As a first step in tapping this potential,
Tajikistan needs to find markets for surplus seasonal power in Russia, Afghanistan, Iran,
perhaps Pakistan. Before i t can pursue these markets, i t will have to stabilize and restore
i t s domestic energy sector through a combination o f policy and investment measuresremoving perceived risks in the sector and building the confidence needed to secure
export contracts o n which to attract the substantial financing the large projects will
require.
26.
For a country as remote as Tajikistan, good transportation and communication
links are vital to economic development, but road and rail transport to k e y markets such
as Russia are difficult because o f the poor quality o f infrastructure and transit barriers
imposed by the neighboring countries. Facilitating air transportation and improving
telecommunication links by introducing competition and allowing foreign companies to
participate will be essential to future growth.

and unsustainable practices o f fuel wood cutting are considerably aggravating the situation and reducing
the prospects for sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction in rural areas.

’

The country possesses vast hydroelectric resources-calculated at about 114,000 MW (with a n energy
potential o f 527 billion kwh), of which only up to 5% are exploited.

Page 11

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

Finally, given i t s position in the economy, the country’s future i s tied to the future
27.
of TadAZ, the state aluminum company. The long-term viability o f the aluminum sector in
Tajikistan i s difficult to assess at this time, but there can be no question that efficient
production o f aluminum in the longer term will require significant new investments. These
will happen only with transparent financial and improved management practices.

Building Transparent and Reliable Institutions

28.
Whether the objective i s growth now or growth in the future, Tajikistan must deal
with issues o f government performance and corruption. While consolidation o f political
power may have been necessary following the c i v i l war, international experience shows
that overly centralized forms o f government often lead to rent-seeking and state capture
by groups with access to power. Recent events in several Central Asian countries
reinforce this message. Tajikistan’s institutional reform agenda will, therefore, remain a
top development priority for the foreseeable future.
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Outlook
Tajikistan’s medium-term economic prospects are expected to remain broadly
29.
favorable during the FY06-09 CPS period. Inthe base case for this period, real output i s
projected to grow at 8% in 2005, and subsequently stabilize at about 6-7% during 200609. Growth i s expected to come from: (i)
continued strong inflow o f worker’s
further improvements in productivity, (iii)
increased and more effective
remittances, (ii)
donor-funded public investment, and (iv) export revenues from aluminum, cotton, and
electricity. Under prudent fiscal and monetary management, inflation i s expected to
stabilize at about 6% a year. The fiscal surplus, excluding PIP, i s likely to turn into small
deficit in 2005, as public expenditure increases in priority areas. Strong import growth
and a decline in the terms o f trade are expected to widen the current account surplus to
more than 4% of GDP, but much o f this would probably be financed through unrecorded
remittances. In the near term, public sector external debt will remain below 40% o f GDP,
and the ratios of debt to exports and general government revenue are expected to remain
favorable. lo
In a l o w case scenario, lack o f progress in addressing governance, state owned
30.
enterprise accountability, and structural weaknesses are assumed which would have
negative implications for growth, fiscal and debt position. Inaddition, the external
shocks associated with a decline in world prices o f key exports would lower GDP growth
and widen the current account and fiscal deficits. As a result, the k e y external debt
sustainability indicators would deteriorate in the l o w case scenario. However, they would
s t i l l remain well below the HIPC benchmarks. More serious disruptions o f
macroeconomic stability could potentially occur if, for example, there i s internal political
instability, or if external political disruptions affect the r a i l transit through Uzbekistan, or
ifthe visa-free access o f Tajik migrant workers to Russia i s withdrawn. A detailed
discussion on Tajikistan’s medium-term macro outlook i s presented in Attachment 3.
lo
An analysis o f the country’s debt sustainability i s presented in Attachment 4.

Page 12

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

11. THE GOVERNMENT’S PROGRAM
The Government’s vision for poverty reduction i s outlined in its 2002-05 Poverty
3 1.
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The four primary objectives o f that strategy are:
0

0
0

T o encourage equitable, labor-intensive economic growth, with an emphasis o n
exports.
T o support the efficient and fair provision o f basic social services.
T o target support to the poorest groups o f the population.
T o improve governance and security.

These objectives are at the base o f the strategy outlined in this document.
32.
The Government i s now finalizing the second PRSP Progress Report and i s
planning to prepare a new PRSP in 2006. I t intends to set more realistic priorities and
consolidate its development agenda (the PRSP and the long-term Social Economic
Development Plan) in a single document to provide clearer guidance o n policy and
resource allocation. The key aspects o f the strategy under revision include public sector
reform, business development, education and health financing, agriculture modernization,
and infrastructure.
The Government assigns a high priority to reforming the public sector-to improve
33.
administrative effectiveness and reduce corruption. A high-level Presidential Working
Group has been formed to develop a public sector reform strategy aimed at modernizing
the administrative architecture and improving c i v i l service management and pay
incentives. In addition, the Government i s exploring ways to reduce excessive state
interference in business development-for example, by abolishing the remnants o f central
planning and by streamlining licensing and inspection regimes. As an example, a law now
in the final phases o f drafting would cut by 50% the number o f licenses business need.
In agriculture, the Government’s short-term priority i s to find equitable and
34.
affordable solutions to the high cotton farm-debt problem. Other elements o f the sector
strategy include continuing the farm land privatization program, improving competition
in farm inputs and cotton marketing, and rehabilitating irrigation infrastructure.

35.
In education and health, the Government has an ambitious program o f reforms
supported by a slow but steady increase in budget allocations to these sectors. For
education, structural changes are being piloted in several rayons, including the introduction
o f per capita based funding to improve incentives and interregional equity. For health, the
Government i s increasing its focus o n primary health care-it piloted a basic benefits
package in two rayons in 2004, and i t intends to scale the package up nationally in 2005.

The Government also sees developing the country’s hydropower infrastructure for
36.
electricity and aluminum exports and improving its regional transport networks as
important priorities. T o support this agenda, the Government has committed to
improving cost recovery within the domestic energy sector by gradually increasing power
tariffs to cost recovery level by the end o f 2010. I t also aims to attract new investments
for hydropower generation, aluminum production, and transport systems.

Page 13

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

37.
Finally, the Government i s planning to tackle i t s governance challenge. W h i l e
commitment i s difficult to measure, there are signs that the Government i s increasingly
focused on improving transparency and management in TadAZ and the cotton sector.
For TadAZ, the recent scandal involving a substantial loss from the TadAZ accounts has
brought home to the Government both the value o f international audits and the need for
better management. Inthe cotton sector, the Government's ongoing efforts to resolving
the farm debt issue equitably through an independent commission against the financial
interests o f some highly placed individuals i s a strong signal o f commitment." The
President's personal endorsement o f this approach underscores this commitment.
111. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP
A. LESSONS
FROM PAST BANKEXPERIENCE

38.
The previous Tajikistan Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) focused o n
improving services to people, fostering private sector development, and continuing the
longer term task o f building institutions for a market economy. These are medium term
goals and the strategy took a medium term perspective, arguing that to achieve results
would require five to seven years or longer. A review o f outcomes after just over two
years o f implementation suggests that while there has been progress (in private
agricultural activities, privatization o f state enterprises, financial sector reform,
government capacity building, health and education sector strategies, local infrastructure)
the approach needed adjusting.
39.
The FY03-05 strategy was centered o n enhancing the participation o f local
governments and communities in public service delivery, supported by a unified program
o f donor assistance. In parallel, support was to b e provided to the central government to
build and strengthen institutions needed for the country's longer term development. This
approach required Government acceptance o f local participation in the development
process and a high degree o f donor coordination and harmonization.

40.
A s the Board recognized when the CAS was presented, the strategy was not
without i t s risks. Although s t i l l early to judge, a preliminary assessment suggests that
while the FY03-05 strategy did deliver o n the lending and AAA goals set out in the
document, the overall development framework did not develop at the planned pace. The
Government saw the focus o n local communities as an NGO-driven agenda disconnected
from i t s primary concern o f state-building and enhancing central government capacity.
The donor community was slow to come together, due in part to the relative newness o f
donor activities in Tajikistan and in part to the absence o f the Government's commitment.
The analysis suggests therefore that while the goals o f the previous CAS remain valid, a
more traditional sector-oriented approach may be needed to demonstrate the value o f

A debt resolution strategy, protecting the rights and interests o f farmers, has been recently agreed
between the Government, Bank Group, ADB, and key donors. The Bank's analytic and advisory work in
this area has been very important.

Page 14

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

engaging all levels o f government, communities, and donors in the provision o f public
sector services.

41.
In the previous strategy, IDA-financed interventions were designed to test new
policies and approaches. T o move from these pilots to nationwide coverage, the new
IDA strategy will need to be more narrowly focused in terms o f both priorities and will
have to find ways o f increasing the impact o f donor and government resources under
common strategies.
The Bank Group’s analytic and advisory activities, while good technically, did
42.
not always have the desired impact o n policy due often to a lack o f government
ownership and weak links to the lending program. The work did, however, contribute to
the Bank’s understanding o f poverty patterns, the country’s energy potential, financial
sector issues, and the agenda for public sector reform and thus provides a solid basis for
the design o f this CPS.
Experience from the past CAS also supports lessons from other l o w income
43.
countries under stress (LICUS): in weak institutional environments, development policy
lending needs to focus on simple, politically feasible reforms and be backed by sectorspecific projects, capacity-building, and communication campaigns. Tajikistan’s capacity
for policy design and implementation continues to be limited, and policy operations
under the new strategy must reflect this.

44.
IFC’s experience during the last CAS period shows that technical assistance and
project financing are most successful when there i s an early convergence o f interests
between the private sector and the Government in project design and implementation.
This was demonstrated in the legal and regulatory framework projects related to
microfinance and leasing, the SME survey, and action plans to address problems related
to the business environment-as well as in the pilot Farm Ownership Model, which
looked at alternative financing mechanisms for farmers.
45.
The Government’s generally poor statistics and weak monitoring capability made
tracking progress and evaluating Bank Group activities difficult. Until recently, even
basic information o n the conditions in the health and education sectors has been difficult
to evaluate, making policy dialogue in these sectors difficult. Improving Tajikistan’s
statistical base and monitoring and evaluation capacity remain major challenges.
One positive lesson from the past CAS period i s that portfolio performance can be
46.
improved even in difficult implementation environments. From a l o w o f 11% in FY03,
disbursements have improved to 32% as o f end FY05. Problem projects have been
reduced to zero at the end o f FY05 from a high o f 57% in FY99. This improvement i s
the result o f a conscious and concentrated field-driven effort by the Bank team, strong
support by the Government, regular Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR)
meetings12and in-depth monitoring.
l2
The last CPPR took place o n June 2,2005. I t i s n o w an ongoing process, owned by the Government,
with good collaboration between the Asian Development Bank and W o r l d Bank.

Page 15

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

B. FY2006-09 CAS: KEYFEATURES
The Process
A s the review o f the last CAS suggests, Government ownership remains essential to
47.
successful implementation. To strengthen ownership the Bank team tumed to a process
used with success in preparing a strategy for Kazakhstan, a middle income country. As an
initial step toward agreeing o n goals and instruments, the CPS team organized a two-day
brainstorming session between senior Bank Group colleagues and essentially the entire
team o f Government decision makers, including seven ministers, in Warsaw in February
2005.13 This meeting had two benefits. It ensured that the Bank and Government teams
heard each other, and it provided a venue for the Government team to discuss among
themselves the difficult trade-offs that allocating constrained resources requires and to
speak with one voice o n their choices. The Government left this meeting with a clear
understanding that this was to be their strategy as w e l l as the Bank’s. With a basic outline
o f the strategy in hand, the Bank Group then met with c i v i l society representatives to hear
their views (see Attachment 10) and consulted other donor organizations to secure their
support.

Dealing with a Constrained IDA

48.
The indicative IDA envelope for FY06-09 i s SDR79 million; the FY06 allocation
is SDR19.6 million (SDR3.1 per capita), provided in grants.I4 I F C interventions will
come through technical assistance as well as investment in projects both directly to
Tajikistan and through regional facilities for Central Asia. For IDA, these are very
modest sums which will not by themselves allow for broad nationwide impact in the
areas o f CPS focus.
49.
T o increase its impact in a resource-constrained environment, the Bank Group
will build o n i t s convening powers and comparative advantage as a global knowledge
institution to act as a catalyst for broader donor support. T o this end the CPS will seek
ways to increase donor collaboration, including the promotion o f SWAps. Given the
country’s fiduciary and institutional constraints, SWAps will initially focus o n shared
strategies, parallel donor funding, joint implementation, and common reporting and only
later move to full pooling o f donor support.
The Bank Group will also pursue the harmonization and donor coordination
50.
agenda through a program o f co-location o f staff from k e y bilateral agencies modeled
after the successful secondment o f a DFID staff to the World Bank’s Regional Office in
Almaty. The ADB i s also considering this possibility with the Swiss Government. If we
l3
The Government’s team included the State Economic Advisor t o the President; Ministers o f Economy
and Trade, Finance, State Revenue and Duties, Health, Education, and Energy; the Governor o f the
National Bank; and the Head o f the Aid Coordination Unit under the President’s Office. The Warsaw
meeting was organized in close cooperation with the WBI and IFC. Participation o f senior peers from other
countries sponsored by WBI has played an important role in the success o f the meeting.
l4
The eligibility for grants will b e determined annually based o n the annual debt sustainability assessment
and country performance assessment.

Page 16

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

are successful, this arrangement would help ensure daily, on-the-ground coordination
among the t w o key multilateral banks and two key bilateral donors.

5 1.
To maximize the effectiveness o f the CPS program, the Bank Group will support
the Government through a multi-donor, multi-instrument approach (development policy
operations, investment operations, technical assistance, community interventions, AAA)
focused o n a highly selective set o f priorities. The interventions will work at national and
local levels and seek to involve all key stakeholders. Figure 5 illustrates h o w this
approach will work in the education sector. To ensure maximum impact:
0

0

0

at the central government level, donors will work with the Ministries o f Education
and Finance to support the key policy reform measures, such as developing an
education reform strategy and introducing a per capita financing mechanism through
development policy instruments;
at the sector level, donors will work to deepen these reforms through investments,
technical assistance, and AAA leading to curriculum reform, improved textbooks and
teaching materials, better teacher incentives, and teacher training;
at the local level, donors will provide direct assistance to community-based
organizations for the most pressing local infrastructure needs, such as rehabilitating
schools, and involve communities in the oversight o f education service delivery (for
example, through parent-teacher associations).
Figure 5: Multiple Level Interventions and Cross Linkages to Deliver the Maximum
Impact in a Sector: Example o f Education Reform

PRSP Goal: Improve education outcomes

I

Sector reform
strategy

1

- Curriculum

reform
-Teaching
materials
-Teacher training

I

Per capita
f, financing reform

-

A

4

Rehabilitation of
schools through
PTAs, Local
committees

4

TA for state and
local budget
management

Social funds
invest in
b. downstream
activities, roads,
latrines, etc.

1

Page 17

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

By linking interventions at different levels o f the public service “supply chains”
52.
this approach will ensure coordination among instruments and a process that delivers o n
the ground.

C. BANKGROUP
PROGRAMTO SUPPORT THE STRATEGIC OUTCOMES
Strategic Objectives

53.
As the analysis discussed in the first part o f this document suggests, this CPS will
continue the Bank Group’s focus o n maintaining growth in the short term and building a
foundation for growth in the future. A major consideration during discussions with the
Government was the necessity, driven by limited IDA, for Bank assistance to be highly
selective. At the conclusion o f the Warsaw meeting the Government asked the Bank to
focus i t s program o n three strategic objectives:
1.
2.
3.

Improve business opportunities in rural and urban areas
Preserve and enhance the quality o f health and education
Improve the delivery o f energy services and exploit the country’s hydropower
potential

These three objectives are to be supported by a cross-cutting theme o f improving national
governance and reducing corruption through strengthening the state’s institutional capacity.
A brief outline o f the approach to achieving each o f these objectives follows.
Anticipated Results

54.
The results framework developed by the Government and the Bank Group seeks a
balance between the need for short t e r m results and the recognition that in many areas o f
support significant improvements may not occur until w e l l after this CPS period. For this
CPS the agreed targets are to reverse the decline in public service delivery, including
health and education, and to begin building the institutional apparatus for more
substantive development outcomes in the longer term. Table 5 summarizes the main CPS
results expected during the next four years. Even these relatively modest goals will be a
considerable challenge given resource and institutional constraints, but the Government i s
fully committed to achieving them.
The approach and instruments IDA will use to deliver these results are discussed
55.
below. The bulk o f IDA lending will be devoted to health and education. I F C and MIGA
will focus on improving business opportunities, with IDA support coming through
dialogue, development policy instruments and technical assistance. IDA will limit its
future involvement in the energy sector to policy instruments, technical assistance and
advice. If opportunities develop in the hydroelectric sector, IBRD, IFC and the Bank’s
guarantee instruments may come into play.

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

Page 18

Table 5: Summary of CPS Results

CPS Objectives
Improve business
opportunities in rural and
urban areas

0

0

Main Results
Reduced cost o f doing business (licensing, time spent with
public officials) as measured by regular IFC surveys
Improved access to financing by private businesses
Improved access to agricultural land as measured by issuing at
least 60,000 farm-family land-use right certificates by the end o f

2008

0

Preserve and enhance the
quality o f health and
education

0

0

0

0

Improve the delivery o f
energy services and
exploit the country’s
hydropower potential

0

0

M o r e competitive cotton market as measured by marketconforming changes in farm gate prices o f inputs and outputs
Increased primary school completion rate and improved learning
achievements in localities supported by the IDA program
M o r e equitable allocation o f resources in health and education
by using the per capita criterion
Increased consumption o f safe water in Dushanbe and selected
towns
Increased use o f primary health care by children and women o f
childbearing age in areas supported by the IDA program
Improved access to essential economic and social services in
poor areas through community and local government
participation, with support from the Social Investment Fund
Improved financial viability o f public utilities for energy and
water in Dushanbe and selected towns as measured by increased
cash collections
Create conditions for substantial growth in revenues f r o m
electricity exports and their transparent use

Improving business opportunities

56.
The CPS will support the Government in i t s efforts to reduce the cost o f doing
business, support the growth o f the private sector, improve access to finance, and increase
income opportunities for farmers. As a first step, IDA, IFC, EBRD, and the IMF will
work with the Government to develop a strategic framework for the private sector
development that reflects Tajikistan’s constraints and circumstances, and establishes a
division o f labor among the donor institutions in delivering the strategy.
I F C will lead the Bank Group in this area, building o n the recently completed
Investment Climate Assessment and IFC’s small and medium enterprise surveys. The
approach will focus initially o n streamlining the licensing and permits systems, limiting
the number o f business inspections. Work will also be initiated to educate enterprises
and investors o n the benefits o f implementing good corporate governance practices, as
well as on increasing awareness o f legal issues among businesses and o f private sector
issues among the general public. In addition, the I F C will consider participation in local
projects through direct lending and through such IFC regional facilities as SEAF-CASEF
(a regional small equity fund) and the Central Asia Leasing Facility. IDA will support
this agenda and the Government’s privatization program, including enterprise

57.

Page 19

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

restructuring and improving the transparency o f privatization, through the planned
policy-based operations, a Rapid Response TA project, and AAA.

58.
The IFC, in partnership with EBRD, will back the Government efforts to improve
SME access to finance, an important precondition for maintaining high rates o f growth,
by strengthening the banking sector. The recently completed Financial Sector Review
will guide the Bank Group assistance. The I F C will provide financing through lending to
local intermediaries under the Tajik Micro and S M E Facility, funded jointly with EBRD,
as w e l l as under the IFC’s Central Asia Leasing Facility. Inaddition, I F C will continue
its technical assistance programs to support microfinance institutions and leasing and will
initiate work o n the legal and regulatory frameworks to support development o f the
housing finance sector.

59.
The recently completed Agriculture Sector Strategy will provide the basis for
dialogue o n enhancing agriculture growth. The Bank Group, w i t h other donors, will
work with the Government to resolve the debt issue for cotton farmers, to support
measures to reduce state control o f input and output markets for cotton and will provide
altemative financing mechanisms.” In addition, the Bank will continue its support for
increasing income opportunities for farmers, including increased access to land,
rehabilitation o f the irrigation and drainage infrastructure, and measures to prevent land
degradation. IDA and I F C will support this agenda through a combination o f new and
ongoing development policy and investment instruments, including the proposed IDA’S
Policy-Based Credits, Cotton Development, Ferghana Valley Water Resource
Management, and the ongoing Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation, Community
Agriculture and Water-shed Management, Land Registration and Cadastre System, and
IFC’s Farm Ownership Model Project. I F C also plans to develop pilot projects in agroprocessing, particularly to support the export o f fresh h i t s and vegetables. In addition,
IDA and GEF will continue supporting environmental and natural disaster mitigation and
preparedness measures through the ongoing IDA’SLake Sarez Mitigation and GEF’s
Dashtidzhum Biodiversity Conservation Projects.
Preserving and enhancing health and education

60.

IDA will support the Government’s program to improve service delivery in health
and education by refining health and education sector strategies, strengthening the
capacity o f the line ministries and the Ministry o f Finance, facilitating community
involvement, and implementing new delivery designs in selected areas. T o support
important policy reforms in these sectors, IDA will rely o n the proposed Policy-Based
Credits. Support will also be provided through the ongoing Education Modernization,
Second Poverty Alleviation, the proposed Community Basic Health and Third Poverty
Alleviation projects, complementing the work o f the Government and other donors. An
Education for All Action Plan will also be developed, to enable Tajikistan to tap funds
from the Education for All Fast Track Initiative.

l5Inview o f the importance o f the issue o f cotton farm debt, donors have come together to develop a joint
position on this matter that has been discussed with the Government.

Page 20

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

61.
IDA will help improve access to safe water in Dushanbe and selected towns
through the ongoing Dushanbe Water Supply and the proposed Municipal Infrastructure
projects. Given the resources required to upgrade the country’s municipal infrastructure,
the Bank will seek significant participation from other donors.

62.
IDA will also help the Government prepare the basis for SWAPSin health and
education. T o do this, IDA will carry out an institutional and fiduciary assessment o f the
Ministries o f Health and Education in FY06-07 to determine the main deficiencies in the
financial and procurement systems and will then support a program to address these
problem areas. IDA’s ongoing dialogue o n public administration and budget reform, as
w e l l as the Treasury modernization and public procurement reform under the proposed
Rapid Response TA Project, will also contribute to this objective. In addition, IDA will
help the Government introduce expenditure tracking in health and education and establish
mechanisms for community oversight, and support beneficiary surveys.
63.
High seasonal migration and the drug trade significantly increase the likelihood o f
HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis epidemics in Tajikistan. IDA will support the Government’s
commitment t o fight communicable diseases through the ongoing Central Asia regional
dialogue o n H I V / A I D S and tuberculosis, coupled with the recently approved Central Asia
Regional H I V / A I D S Project and the proposed Central Asia Regional Tuberculosis
Project.
Continued assistance through the Social Investment Fund, supported by the IDA’s
64.
Poverty Alleviation Projects, will help improve access to essential economic and social
services (health, education, water supply) in poor areas not covered by the IDA sector
interventions.
Improving energy services delivery and increasing electricity exports

65.
The Bank Group will support the Government’s two-prong approach to improving
domestic energy service delivery and increasing electricity exports. Support for the
Government’s domestic energy agenda will focus o n improving the efficiency o f
domestic energy services while moving toward full cost recovery. Current social
protection schemes for energy consumption will be revised to minimize the impact o f
energy price increases o n the poor and vulnerable segments o f the population based o n
the results o f the social impact analysis carried out as part o f the Energy Utility Reform
Review. The Pamir Power and Energy Loss Reduction projects are already under way;
the proposed Policy-Based Credits will supplement these by supporting k e y energy sector
reforms.
66.
The Bank Group will also support the Government in its efforts to promote the
export o f hydropower, initially by serving as an intermediary between the Government
and potential hydropower investors. There may also be scope for the Bank Group to
invest in hydropower facilities through an IBRD enclave project complemented by I F C
participation. Another option for mobilizing IBRD lending could include third-party
governments providing a credit guarantee for the Government o f Tajikistan.

Page 21

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

67.
A s the Government understands, the Bank Group’s involvement in new
hydropower investments i s conditional on the Government demonstrating that
hydropower revenues will benefit the population at large. The need for a mechanism to
ensure the transparent management o f revenues from energy investments will be critical
in this regard.
Underpinning the strategic objectives: Improving governance and state capacity

Success in achieving any and all o f the three strategic objectives set out above
68.
will depend o n improving the environment for private sector activities and public service
provision. The Government understands that progress o n governance and corruption will
only be achieved if the President, the Government and the people take the lead but the
Bank Group can help. Initial efforts will focus o n bringing Bank Group experience to
bear o n eliminating petty corruption and achieving greater transparency in and out o f the
Government. Longer term efforts will help the Government put in place a system o f
checks and balances and improving transparency and oversight. Early tests o f this
strategy will b e progress o n corporatizing TadAZ and improving the management o f the
cotton sector.

69.
T o help the Government build transparent and reliable institutions, the Bank
Group program will integrate capacity building measures across sectors, projects and
AAA activities. In the aluminum sector, discussions are underway to modernize the
management o f TadAZ, driven by recent publicly acknowledged losses from poor
management and oversight. In the cotton sector, work o n resolving the farm debt issue
and o n deregulating the ginnery sector i s under way. In health and education, the Bank’s
program will give particular emphasis ensuring transparency o f public financial
transactions through expenditure tracking exercises and participation and oversight by
users. In addition, it will continue to support reforms o f public expenditure and budgetary
systems, public procurement, the c i v i l service, and public administration. l6 The Bank
Group will pay special attention to building capacity in the k e y ministries involved in the
implementation o f CPS programs. A rich set o f recent ESW-CFFA, CPAR, PEIR, and
Note o n Public Sector Wages-will guide the dialogue and assistance in these areas. Key
policy reforms and their implementation will be supported through the proposed PolicyBased Credits and Rapid Response TA Project.

These issues, especially the c i v i l service pay, also feature in IMF’s discussions with the Government on
the overall budget envelope.

Page 22

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

Table 6 summarizes IDA’Sproposed lending program for the CPS period. The
70.
size o f the program i s driven by the performance allocation system based o n the CPIA. I f
the government slips on core elements o f the CPIA, such as govemance or structural
policies, this will adversely affect i t s performance-based allocation under IDA. Given the
need to be catalytic, the CPS program will necessarily be flexible in the choice and
number o f instruments. In addition, the IDA allocations to each project should be seen as
indicative to maximize prospects for co-financing. Partnerships already in place with
donors in the implementation o f this CPS are listed in Attachment 9.
Table 6: Indicative IDA p r o g r a m f o r FY06-09

Project
Policy-Based Credits (PBC)
Rapid Response TA; Treasury;
Procurement; Statistics
Community Basic Health
Municipal Infrastructure
Education SWAP
Health SWAP
Central Asia Tuberculosis
Ferghana Valley
Cotton Development
Poverty Alleviation I11

Amount
(million
US$)

Fiscal
year

10110

2006108

10
10
15
15
15
2
13
15

2006-07
2006
2006
2009
2009
2007
2006
2007
2007

5

Business
opportuni
ties
X

X

X
X

0bj ectives
Human Energy
capital
sector
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

Governance
and state
capacity
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

71.
IDA will proceed with policy-based operations only when the authorities have
demonstrated a solid track record and strong government commitment for policy reform.
The size o f the PBCs will be calibrated to the significance o f the reform program. IDA
will not consider a Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) until credible progress is
made in k e y structural reform areas, such as public finance managemnt and governance.
Box 3 describes the role o f development policy instruments in the CPS.
M u c h o f the core analytical work needed to support the four k e y objectives o f this
CPS has already been completed. A Public Expenditure and Institutional Review,
Agriculture Review, Trade Study, Investment Climate Assessment, a set o f S M E
Surveys, studies o f public sector wages and remittances provide a solid basis for program
development and dialogue (Annex B4 contains a full listing). In recognition o f this stock
of AAA work, this CPS will concentrate o n mining existing knowledge rather than
creating new analytic work.

72.

As agreed with the Government, the planned programmatic poverty work will
73.
monitor the poverty situation as well as strengthen the Government capacity in this area.
The programmatic PER will support the implementation o f the P E R recommendations,
which are needed to improve the realism and focus o f the next PRSP. The proposed Note
o n Social Protection and the Private Sector Policy Note will help strengthen the

Page 23

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

Box 3: Development Policy Instruments
Based on the lessons fi-om Tajikistan and other low income countries under stress (LICUS),

IDA’Sdevelopment policy instruments (Policy Based Credits (PBC)) will focus o n simple,

politically feasible reforms in support o f the CPS’s three objectives. These p o l i c y reforms will
reinforce, and b e reinforced by, sector-specific projects and capacity-building activities as
illustrated in Figure 5.
Because the current version o f Tajikistan’s PRSP i s not sufficiently focused to provide
guidance on a practical medium-term reform agenda, development policy operations will start
with a series o f single tranche PBCs. In addition to supporting structural reforms, these PBCs will
provide a basis for the preparation o f a programmatic framework for a PRSC when circumstances
justify that approach. To support this effort, a Presidential Working Group has been created to
develop action plans for public sector reform under the PBCs.
The PBCs will focus on supporting policy reforms in areas critical for attaining the CPS
outcomes. For example, these operations will support budget reform measures to allow for per
capita based funding in health and education w h i c h i s critical for the success o f both sector
programs. In addition, measures to increase cost recovery in the energy sector, for example by
controlling the T a d A Z electricity arrears, will support energy sector projects in meeting their
objectives.

Government’s knowledge in these areas as we move forward with the private sector
reform and poverty alleviation programs.

WBI’s Program

74.
WBI will be active in Tajikistan given that Central Asia has been selected as a
priority region for WBI. Its capacity-building work will be tailored to support CPS
priorities and it will be determined yearly based o n the evolving needs. In FY06, jointly
with IDA, I F C and MIGA, WBI will continue i t s work o n the investment climate. In
addition i t will put in place a three-year training program to increase public expenditure
management capacity at central and local government levels, complementing the Bank’s
support for the C i v i l Servant’s Training Institute under the ongoing Institution
Development Fund (IDF) grant. Finally, i t will continue the successful series o f
ministerial level leadership courses. These country specific activities will be
complemented by regional activities o n trade, WTO accession and export promotion.
Attachment 11 presents a more detailed picture o f W B I ’ s activities in Tajikistan.
The Regional Dimension
Improved regional cooperation remains critical to Tajikistan’s economic
75.
prospects, especially given i t s geopolitical challenges described earlier. The program
outlined in this CPS will be supplemented by the Bank Group’s regional cooperation
program in Central Asia17 in such areas as trade and transport facilitation (TTF), water
‘7

The Bank Group’s work at the regional level i s guided by the Central Asia Regional Framework Paper

put in place in early 2004.

Page 24

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

resource management, energy trade, anti-money laundering, and H I V / A I D S and
tuberculosis. Attachment 5 provides an overview o f the regional program. Tajikistan i s
an active member o f the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Organization
(CAREC), supported by the multilateral institutions.

76.
On trade and transport facilitation, the recent Central Asia TTF report and
complementary trade audits o n individual countries, as w e l l as the IMF-led work o n trade
policies in the region will serve as a basis for the continued dialog o n h o w to remove the
barriers to greater intra- and inter-regional trade.
In the area o f water and energy, the Bank i s developing a blueprint for a Water
77.
and Energy Consortium as a basis for improved regional management o f these resources.
Tajikistan stands to benefit significantly from the rationalization o f Central Asia’s
domestic and export investments in power and from the exploitation o f the region’s
substantial potential for exporting power. In addition, as mentioned earlier, Tajikistan
will also benefit from the ongoing regional work o n H I V / A I D S and tuberculosis aimed at
preventing the emergence o f an epidemic in Central Asia and supporting the
establishment o f a regional surveillance system.

T o prevent money laundering, capacity i s being built through a joint program with
78.
UNODC. The anti-money laundering specialist based in the Bank’s Central Asia
Regional Office in Almaty and co-funded by the United Nations Office o n Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) i s finding considerable support for her efforts to raise the profile o f
money laundering issues among Central Asian governments. The early signs are
encouraging.

D. MONITORING
AND EVALUATION
OF RESULTS

79.
The Bank Group, in close cooperation with other donors, will help the
Government improve i t s statistical system through project and TA work. The State
Statistical Committee o f Tajikistan will be supported in i t s implementation o f the recently
approved multi-year plan for statistical reform. In addition, the Bank Group will help
establish a baseline for measuring the impact o f Government and donor interventions as
part o f i t s sector programs. IDA will continue tracking impacts o n poverty and service
delivery through household surveys, and linking the findings to PRSP monitoring. The
I F C will continue i t s surveys o f the business environment to monitor progress in that
area. The Bank Group will strengthen the monitoring and evaluation o f its o w n projects,
including beneficiary surveys to evaluate user satisfaction. The Bank Group will also
seek to involve the communities in monitoring and evaluation.
E. DONOR
COOPERATION

80.
The success o f this strategy will depend o n improved donor cooperation and
harmonization. Tajikistan’s difficult development challenges and limited resources
demand a coordinated donor response. The main goal will be to improve the
effectiveness o f existing donor resources. In addition, the Bank Group will continue to
try to leverage i t s resources through co-financing. The Government i s leading the effort

Page 25

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

to improve donor coordination through the creation o f the Aid Coordination Unit under
the Presidential Administration.

8 1.
A s the Co-Chair o f the Consultative Group (CG) process, IDA i s also playing a key
role in enhancing donor coordination. Under IDA leadership, the C G process has recently
tumed from a focus o n money and pledging toward a dialogue on the country’s strategic
priorities and programs to meet them. The C G meetings are now always held in Dushanbe
and the President always attends. These events have evolved into an important forum for
the open-and often remarkably frank-exchange o f views between the Government and
donor community. They are an important part o f the harmonization process.

82.
The Bank Group has a growing record o f partnerships with donors in a number o f
CPS areas, as reflected in Attachment 9. T o highlight a few, in health the Swedish
International Development Agency (SIDA) has committed to co-finance the proposed
Community and Basic Health Care Project with about US$6 million. In energy, building
o n the successful partnership o f the Swiss Government and Aga Khan Development
Network (AKDN) with IDA and I F C under the Pamir Private Power Project, the Swiss
Government proposed US$8 million in co-financing for last year’s Energy Loss
Reduction Project. In the area o f statistics, several donors, such as the IMF, ADB,
EUROSTAT, UNDP, UNICEF, DFID, S I D A and the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation (SDC) are already working together to support the implementation o f
the Government’s multi-year plan for statistical reform. As mentioned before, the IFC
and EBRD have put in place several joint facilities, such as the Micro and Small
Enterprise Facility. Partnerships are also being forged in education, rural finance, social
investments, agriculture and public finance. These successes notwithstanding, much
more can and should be done o n the partnership front.
83.
Given IDA’Slimited financial resources, the Bank Group must rely o n other
donors to address important areas not covered in the CPS. In the area o f trade and
transport facilitation and infiastructure, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), Islamic
Development Bank (IDB) and European Commission (EC) have financed a number o f
projects, including those on road transport, water supply, and power generation and
transmission. They are planningto stay active in this area. Legal and judicial reform i s
covered by technical assistance from the EC, UNDP, U S A I D and Swiss Government.
The EBRD has a substantial program totaling some US$45 million in the areas o f private
sector development, focused o n S M E and micro enterprises; financial sector; and trade
facilitation. Finally, community development i s supported by a large group o f donors
with the UNDP in the lead-AKDN, KfW, GTZ, Government o f Japan, DFID, SIDA,
C I D A and the Swiss Government. Attachment 8 and B o x 4 provide a more detailed
picture o n the thematic coverage o f donor programs.
84.
The strategy set out in this CPS was the subject o f extensive consultations with
donors including visits to donor headquarters, roundtables and meetings in Dushanbe,
and reviews o f draft documents during the CPS preparation. As discussed earlier, to
strengthen donor coordination and harmonization, IDA i s exploring, with DFID and the
Swiss Government, the possibility o f co-locating staff in the Bank’s Dushanbe office.

Page 26

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy
Box 4. Donor Programs

Asian Development Bank - Total assistance in 2004 was some US$25 million. The
2003 ADB CAS supports promoting economic growth through rural development and
regional cooperation in areas such as customs modernization, regional energy trade,
rehabilitating the transport network.
European Commission - Total assistance in 2004 was 40 m i l l i o n Euro. The core
objectives o f the 2002 five-year assistance strategy targets: (a) institutional and
administrative reform; (b) addressing social impact o f transition; and (c) development o f
infrastructure.

USAID - The three-year resource envelop for 2007-2010 i s estimated at US$20 m i l l i o n
focused o n economic reforms in energy and agro business, democracy and conflict
mitigation, health and education.
Islamic Development Bank - Current assistance i s approximately US$37 m i l l i o n
targeted to increasing reliable generation, transmission and supply o f electricity and
ensuring availability o f a year round direct land transport link between western and eastern
Tajikistan.
UNDP - During 2001-2004, UNDP’s assistance totaled US$37 m i l l i o n (including
US$22 m i l l i o n in non-project grant aid from Japan). UNDP’s assistance framework for
2005-2009 focuses o n four interlinked thematic areas o f improved capacity t o prevent and
reduce infectious diseases, sustainable agricultural production, management o f natural
resources, and improved responsibility and responsiveness o f the justice system.
EBRD - Since 1996, EBRD has provided US$45 m i l l i o n in loans and U S $ l 8 m i l l i o n
in technical assistance. The future strategy o f EBRD i s geared t o supporting small and
medium sized enterprises, through private sector development and alleviating constraints
facing these enterprises especially in the financial sector and selective support for critical
investments in infrastructure.
CIDA - I t s assistance i s aimed at poverty reduction, human security, and economic
agriculture, and (ii)
water
growth and i t s programs are concentrated in t w o areas: (i)
resource management. I t s project portfolio totals CDN$34 million.
Aga Khan Development Network - Even though i t ’ s financial resources may be
somewhat limited, i t s presence and support, most notably in poverty alleviation and
capacity building, make i t a valuable and trusted partner in development in the country.
Other bilateral programs - The government o f Japan provided US$% m i l l i o n over
10 years from 1993 - 2003, with programs in health, education, infrastructure, preservation
o f cultural heritage, and capacity building. GTZ with projects totaling US$13 m i l l i o n since
1993, and KfW with financial support totaling 10.5 m i l l i o n Euro support programs in
health, education and microfinance. DFID’s current assistance totals E2.5 m i l l i o n a year in
areas such as micro enterprises, living standards survey, poverty alleviation, and a smallgrants program. The Swiss program totaling CHF12.5 m i l l i o n focuses o n a number o f
areas such as violence against women and support to mass media, which are critical but not
covered by other donors. SIDA’s current allocation to Tajikistan totals some US$9 million,
targeted to health and humanitarian assistance programs.

Just as the development challenges Tajikistan faces are defined by geography,
85.
demography and government capacity, so, too are the risks this strategy faces. Tajikistan

Page 27

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

borders Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and the Kyrgyz Republic, sharing the volatile Fer hana
18
Valley with the latter two. All three countries have security and stability problems.
Combined with pressures from the drug trade, Tajikistan’s political and security situation
could come under significant externally driven pressures. While the Bank Group has
little influence o n this set o f risks, we are maintaining an active watching brief in
collaboration w i t h our South Asia colleagues.
Tajikistan’s growing and youthful population presents both an opportunity and a
86.
looming threat. On the one hand, a healthy, well educated youth could drive future
development. On the other, if the economy creates too few jobs for the emerging
generation, a disappointed, disillusioned and poorly educated youth could become a
formidable source o f instability. The Government’s control o f the economy could also
lead to instability. As demonstrated by recent events in the Kyrgyz Republic and
Uzbekistan, political and economic stability i s endangered when power and wealth are in
the hands o f a privileged few. The strategy set out above i s designed to lower these risks
but i t s effectiveness will depend o n implementation.
In LICUS-like countries such as Tajikistan, there i s a perennial risk that weak
87.
implementation capacity will slow the program. The Bank Group working to mitigate
this risk by developing a program o f capacity building at the project implementation level
supported by the Almaty-based Operations Manager and an increasingly strong team o f
national staff. W h i l e we can point to significant successes to date, the challenge will be
to maintain standards in program implementation.

88.
External economic shocks could come in several forms. The two most prominent
are from a decline in remittances were Russia to restrict entry for seasonal workers from
Tajikistan or a fall in the world prices for aluminum or cotton. The consequence o f such
shocks would be a sharp decline in the rate o f economic growth and an ensuing threat to
domestic stability. The emphasis in the strategy o n diversification through improving the
business environment i s essential to mitigate this risk.
There is, as well, a r i s k that IDA, even with other donors, may not generate a level
89.
o f support sufficient to fund even the narrow set o f development challenges that guide
this strategy. This risk i s likely to persist under the current Performance Based
Allocation system and i s affecting not only the World Bank but our main multilateral
partner, the ADB. The Bank Group will continue to work with the intemational
community to attract additional resources to Tajikistan but the challenge i s significant.
Recent events in neighboring countries-Kyrgyzstan,
Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan-further underscore
the “neighborhood” challenge Tajikistan faces. With increased tensions on and near its borders it must n o w
work doubly hard to gain access to markets-an “open sky” policy will be essential as will a more liberal
visa regime. Second, as President Rakhmonov fully understands, it must move aggressively to differentiate
itself f r o m i t s neighbors, to assure national and international investors that Tajikistan i s different. The full
and aggressive implementation o f the program outlined in this CPS will be an important element in
achieving that goal.

Page 28

Tajikistan Country Partnership Strategy

Tajikistan's recent successes also present a r i s k to the implementation o f this
strategy. A combination o f high economic growth, the Russian debt deal, proposed large
investments in Tajikistan's hydroelectric and aluminum sectors by Russian entities could
lead the authorities to believe that additional reforms can wait. Given Tajikistan's fragile
economic and social setting, any slackening o f the reform effort, especially in
governance, state owned enterprise accountability, cotton, and energy sectors, would not
only render the goals set out in this CPS unattainable but put recent gains at risk.

90.

1
s

Q

3

e,

E

......
E

z5:
C
.-z
c

c

E

0

.

I

I

I

.-g

n
h

0

b

0

.
3

x
C
-x
C

c

.C

E

Go

L a
u
s

0

0

.

1i
P
a2

d

2

.-

Y
u

Attachment 2
Page 1 o f 25
Attachment 2: Tajikistan CAS Completion Report, FYO3-05

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
This Completion Report reviews the FY03-05 Country Assistance Strategy,
discussed by the Board in February 2003.' This was the third CAS for Tajikistan and the
first one based on Tajikistan's PRSP. The Report i s an integral part o f the FY06-09 CAS
package, and has provided substantial input into the preparation o f the new CAS. The
CAS evaluation was done by the Bank Group country team in close cooperation with the
Government. After an initial review mission to Dushanbe in October 2004, the findings
were reviewed jointly by the Bank Group team and the Government at a CAS
brainstorming meeting in Warsaw in February 2005 and during the main CAS mission in
March-April 2005. The country team also discussed the main lessons and implications
for the new CAS during a country team retreat in January 2005 and at several subsequent
country team meetings.
The CAS provided lending and grants for four projects totaling US$58 million
2.
and contributed about US$2 million to one regional IDA grant - Central Asia H I V / A I D S
project (US$26.9 million, FY05). Thus, the utilization o f the IDA lending envelope o f
US$80 m i l l i o n for FY03-FY05 unfortunately f e l l short by US$20 million. T w o main
factors contributed to this shortfall - the IDA allocation cuts, owing to the shortage o f
IDA13 resources in FY05, and delays with project preparation. The Bank Group also
delivered a substantive number o f important Economic and Sector Work (ESW) reports
to Tajikistan over the CAS period: Poverty Update, a Country Procurement
Accountability Review (CPAR), a Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA), a Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR), a Health Sector Note, a
Gender Review, an Energy Utilities Review, an Investment Climate Review (ICA), and
an assessment o f the impact o f cotton farmland reform o n poverty. Tajikistan also
benefited from several central Asia regional studies such as the Regional Electricity
Export Potential Study (REEPS), H I V / A I D S Report, Tuberculosis Study, and Trade and
Transport Facilitation Report.

3.
This Report takes into account that the FY03-05 CAS was designed for the
medium t e r m - five to seven years - and therefore many o f the expected results are s t i l l
works in progress. Hence, the analysis focuses not only o n achieved outcomes but also on
intermediate indicators o f progress.
I.OVERALL DEVELOPMENTS
After the intemal conflict ended in 1997, the priorities o f the Government
4.
centered on regaining central authority and recovering the economic ground lost as a
result o f transition and intemal conflict. During the CAS period, economic growth

'

T h e Report takes stock o f the FY03-05 CAS results a n d performance, even though it was not a formal
results-based CAS.

Attachment 2
Page 2 o f 25
continued at a brisk pace - at around 10% in 2003 and 2004.2 The rapid rate o f economic
growth has led to an equally rapid drop in poverty incidence from 82% in 1999 to 64% in
2004. Inequality has increased only marginally.

5.
An improved macroeconomic environment has accompanied the economic
growth. Inflation went down from 39% at the end o f 2001 to less than 6% at the end o f
2004, and intemational reserves have increased to over two months o f imports. The
govemment revenues have increased as a percentage o f GDP and the fiscal deficit stood
at 2.7% o f GDP in 2004. The external debt burden has eased significantly - from a
public extemal debt to GDP ratio o f 85% in 2002 to 40% in 2004 - owing to a Russian
debt swap and a Pakistani debt write-off in 2000. Despite this impressive performance,
however, the income per-capita, at US$3 10, i s s t i l l far below the US$1,050 level
estimated for 1990.
111. COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY IMPACT
A. Strategic Context

6.
The FY03-05 CAS was based o n Tajikistan’s 2002 PRSP, which set the
objectives to: (a) encourage equitable, labor-intensive economic growth, with emphasis
o n exports; (b) support the efficient and fair provision o f basic social services; (c) target
support to the poorest groups o f the population; and (d) improve govemance and
~ecurity.~
7.
The CAS was well aligned with the PRSP at the level o f broad objectives.
However, the broad nature o f the PRSP agenda and the presence o f an alternative
govemment development program made i t difficult to align the objectives at the
generate growth through private
implementation level. The CAS objectives were to: (i)
address the most critical social needs o f the poor through greater
sector development; (ii)
continue building the institutions needed for a market
community involvement; and (iii)
economy. The CAS sought to combine a top-down with a bottom-up approach to
improve govemance and generate growth. The top-down objective was to assist in
improving i t s macroeconomic and budgetary management, reform the c i v i l service and
public administration and develop sector strategies to build the basis for stronger service
delivery systems. The bottom-up strategy was to develop the capacity to deliver services
at the local level, with community participation. Over time, these two approaches were
to converge to generate strong and transparent delivery systems for public services.

8.
The CAS took a five to seven-year perspective, even if the programs were built
around the traditional three-year framework. Although the CAS agenda was ambitious,
2

The cumulative growth was almost 60% over the last 5 years.
T w o PRSP updates were produced in 2004 and 2005 and were reviewed by the Bank and the IMF. (The
Joint Staff Note o n the 2005 PRSP Progress Report i s scheduled for submission to the Executive Directors
in July 2005). The Government plans to prepare a new PRSP in 2006.
4
See the report o n “PRSP Process and Arrangements under the PRGF-Republic o f Tajikistan,” prepared
by the Independent Evaluation Office (IMF) and the Operations and Evaluations Department (World
Bank).

Attachment 2
Page 3 o f 25
both for the level o f resources available and for the institutional capacity o f the
government, it has had a positive impact o n the country’s successes towards meeting i t s
long-term objectives, as outlined in the PRSP.

B. Evaluation Summary

9.
Tajikistan has made significant progress in meeting i t s PRSP objectives during
this CAS period. Some PRSP objectives set for 2006/2007 have already been exceeded.
For example, economic growth and poverty reduction outcomes have been outstanding
and higher than expected. In addition, good progress has been made in macrostabilization and debt reduction, as well as in increasing the role o f the private sector,
especially in agriculture. The financial sector has been stabilized, although it still falls
short o f meeting the demands o f the productive sectors. The financial discipline in the
public sector i s stronger, including in some large state-owned enterprises. Work has
commenced o n building the institutions for public resource management and o n
reforming the civil service. However, a great deal remains to be done to improve the
management o f public resources. Attention to two important sectors o f the economy cotton and power - has increased, including through improved understanding o f the main
impediments to unleashing their full potential.
10.
Although the Bank has been active in many o f the above areas, i t i s difficult to
determine the exact impact o f i t s activities o n the achieved results. However, the Bank
Group’s work in the areas o f privatization and private sector development, public
expenditure management, farm restructuring, irrigation rehabilitation, financial sector
reform, health and education has undoubtedly had a positive impact o n the country’s
success mentioned above.
An important achievement during the CAS period i s a higher quality o f the
11.
dialogue with the Government, which has allowed both sides to have a better
understanding o f the main challenges and the way forward.

12.
The significant improvement in the portfolio performance i s another major
achievement during the CAS period. At the end o f FY05, the entire portfolio will be
rated satisfactory. Moreover, the disbursement ratio stands at 30% o f outstanding
commitments - higher than the E C A average ratio o f 22% and an unprecedented
disbursement ratio for a LICUS country. Finally, the pro-activity indicator has been
100% throughout the CAS period.
The greatest shortcoming in the implementation o f the CAS has been the limited
13.
advances made in improving service delivery nationwide. The World Bank and other
donor efforts have centered on limited interventions in selected geographic areas, and
scaling-up these efforts nationwide i s yet to take place. W h i l e it i s not reasonable to
expect the scaling-up to have happened with the limited IDA resources during the brief
two-year period o f this CAS implementation, i t i s important to recognize what works or
not and why.

Attachment 2
Page 4 o f 25
C. Evaluation of CAS programs

As already mentioned, after two years o f implementation, many o f the efforts are
s t i l l in progress. Therefore, this report takes stock not only o f achieved outcomes but
also o f intermediate indicators. In doing so, i t seeks to determine whether Bank
assistance i s moving in the right direction towards the set CAS goals and objectives, and
i t seeks to identify mid-term corrective measures, if such are needed.’ The summary o f
the CAS achievements measured against the programmed indicators i s given in Table 1.
14.

D. Overarching CAS Objective - Poverty Reduction
Box 1: CAS Performance Indicators on Poverty Reduction
Reduce poverty headcount ratio to 75% by 2006
N e w national survey o f living standards completed
0 Data baseline established and reliable measurement tools developed for monitoring and evaluating
outcomes o f the 9 MDG targets indicated in the PRSP
0
0

~

15.
Good progress was made in meeting the CAS objectives under this pillar. As
noted before, the poverty count f e l l significantly during the CAS period, exceeding the
75% target. It i s difficult to evaluate the direct CAS impact o n this outcome, but the
Bank’s macro dialogue as well as programs in agriculture and social sectors, including
the Social Investment Fund, are believed to have contributed to this success. In addition,
IDA has helped to improve the statistical capacity o f the country to measure and track
poverty patterns and social indicators. Jointly with the UK Department for International
Development (DFID) i t helped the Government to complete the Tajikistan Living
Standards Survey (TLSS) in 2003. This survey has updated information o n poverty and
has set the basis for complementary surveys (2004) to explore the patterns o f energy
consumption and the status o f service delivery in health and education. The Government,
with the Bank’s help, has made progress in the construction o f a poverty map, which will
facilitate the evaluation o f the impact o f Government and donor poverty reduction
programs. However, not much progress has been made in establishing reliable
measurement tools for the MDG targets. The ongoing and new work under the Bank’s
sector operations in health, education and water supply should help address this issue
during the next CAS period.
E. CAS Objective 1: Stimulating Growth
The Government has made good progress in meeting its growth targets. And
16.
progress in meeting the Bank performance indicators was broadly positive, as detailed
below. The CAS support for economic growth centered on: (a) improved
~

The evaluation in this section follows the program as presented in the CAS Annex B9, which included a
set o f CAS Performance indicators along with selected PRSP outcomes. Since sometimes the CAS
indicators are not the best measure o f actual performance, this report focuses on the overall Bank effort as
guidance for evaluation.

Attachment 2
Page 5 o f 25
macroeconomic management, (b) improved conditions for the development o f the private
and financial sectors; (c) improved conditions for agriculture development, and (d)
rehabilitation o f infrastructure.
Macroeconomic Management

The CAS did not seek to have a direct effect o n the macroeconomic outcomes,
17.
which, as reported above, have improved considerably, including high growth, l o w
inflation and l o w fiscal deficits. In addition, internal revenue mobilization by the
Government has marginally increased and now stands at 16% o f GDP, arguably still
below the amount that the country needs to mobilize given the needs o f the population.
Legislation has been passed to eliminate directed credit, but there i s a r i s k o f noncompliance. The slowest progress has been seen in reducing the quasi-fiscal deficit,
estimated at over 20% o f GDP, mostly originating from the energy sector (15% o f GDP).
Private Sector Development and Financial Sector

Box 2: CAS Performance Indicators on Private Sector and Financial Sector Development

0
0

Regulatory framework for microfinance adopted
Improved financial transparency and accountability o f key SOEs (Barki-Tajik, Tajiktelecom and
Tajik Gas) through the elimination o f tax offsets and directed credits
Annual I A S audits o f key SOEs (TadAZ, Barki-Tajik, Tajiktelecom and Tajik Gas) carried out
Adoption and implementation o f an action plan to achieve economic viability o f TadAZ.

18.
Progress has been made towards meeting most o f the CAS indicators in this area,
but more time i s needed to reach some o f them. However, the Bank Group support to
increase the role o f the private sector in the economy produced several important results
in the areas o f privatization, financial sector development, business environment and
financial discipline o f the state-owned enterprises. At the same time, the private sector’s
share in the economy i s s t i l l small at around 50% (up from 45% two years ago), while the
state continues to play a dominant role in the economy through: (i)
ownership o f large
enterprises; (ii)
regulatory powers and market controls (e.g., in the production and sale o f
cotton); and (iii)
control over land.
19.
Privatization. Although, the CAS did not include privatization outcomes,
privatization has played an important role in the dialogue between the Government and
the Bank. Its support came through the adjustment operation - SAC2 - and a technical
assistance project - IBTA2. Policy dialogue and analytical work complemented this
support. The main outcome in privatization was the adoption o f a privatization strategy
in November 2003, covering most o f the medium and large enterprises, to be
implemented from 2004 to 2007. Implementation o f the program i s ahead o f schedule.
In 2004, 13 1 enterprises were privatized against an agreed target o f 110. Implementation
o f the privatization program continues to be o n track. The target for 2005 i s 117; o f these
74 have already been privatized. As the Government moves ahead with privatization o f
large enterprises, the Bank Group i s helping to introduce more transparency in the

Attachment 2
Page 6 o f 25

privatization process. In this regard, the Government plans to let an independent panel to
review a sample o f 5 to 10 enterprise privatization cases annually with the support o f the
next policy operation.6
Financial Sector. An important outcome during this period has been a stronger
20.
financial sector. Various policy decisions and legislative initiatives supported by the
Bank and IMF have helped to strengthen it. For instance, the abolition o f taxes o n
foreign bank transfers has contributed to the growth o f the banking sector. Between 2002
and 2004, the net transfer o f remittances through the banking sector went up from US$65
m i l l i o n to US$3 13 million. Bank deposits grew tenfold between 2002 and 2004. Also,
an amendment to the Tax Code allowed banks to deduct loan loss provisions for nonstandard loans; and the law o n collateral has been improved. The National Bank o f
Tajikistan (NBT) has likewise improved i t s regulatory practices and has closed five
commercial banks that did not comply with the minimum capital requirements. An
important result o f these measures has been a reduction o f the interest margins and
lending rates.

Given the importance o f small scale entrepreneurship, the I F C provided support to
21.
improve the access o f small and micro enterprises to financial resources. This support
led to the adoption o f microfinance legislation in 2004, and the corresponding prudential
framework under p r e p a r a t i ~ n .This
~ legislation should help NGOs to participate in the
financing o f micro-enterprises. Through a joint facility w i t h the EBRD, the I F C has
provided credit targeted to micro-enterprises. Technical assistance i s n o w being provided
to financial intermediaries to improve their capacity to service the productive sectors.
However, an IDA banking operation did not materialize, as i t was judged that the
necessary preconditions were not in place for the banking sector to absorb such support.
Despite this progress, the financial sector remains weak, and further consolidation
22.
i s needed. Regulatory practices need to be improved. More importantly, there are
indications that the banking sector i s s t i l l not capable to adequately service the private
sector and that some segments o f the economy (e.g., medium-size enterprises and
agriculture farms) are underfinanced. Borrowing by f i r m s from the financial sector
remains low. In 2004, the Bank finalized a Financial Sector Note, which has provided a
roadmap for the future strengthening o f the financial sector.
Business Environment. The Bank and other donors supported the Government’s
23.
efforts to improve the underlying framework for business activity. However, progress o n
the ground as measured by surveys, has been slow. IDA’Ssupport came through
analytical work8, policy dialogue, and SAC2. IFC’s support has come through TA to
reform the regulatory regime-especially in the area o f inspections and licensing, and
regular SME surveys. The efforts to improve the institutional framework include: the
passage o f the new Tax and Customs Codesg; streamlining the legislation o n registration
6

The next development policy operation i s under preparation under the name o f Policy Base Credit (PBC).
IFC, U S A I D and other donors were involved in achieving this outcome.
* IDA has prepared an Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) in FY05
The Government reformed the trade tariff and customs regimes w i t h the support o f the ADB. A new Tax
Code was approved in late 2004.

Attachment 2
Page 7 o f 25
o f legal entities; creation o f a Tax Ministry in 2002; elimination o f nuisance taxes;
strengthening o f the large taxpayers unit; and the creation o f and internal audit function.
Other measures include: lowering the court fee to 2% o f the claim value and mandating
enterprises to keep a l o g o n Government inspections (Black Book) to facilitate
transparency. Reportedly, around 60% o f enterprises keep the log, although much
remains to be done to make the business environment more attractive for local and
foreign investors. Despite the efforts described above, the 2003 IFC-PEP survey showed
that over 95% o f SMEs were inspected every year; each enterprise was inspected o n
average 16 times; and 98% o f them made unofficial payments,” which shows the
magnitude o f the challenges that lie ahead.
State Enterprise Sector. Some progress has also been made with respect to state24.
owned enterprises (SOEs). The large participation o f the state in the economy i s due in
part to the presence o f large SOEs which include the aluminum smelter company TadAZ,
Tajik Air, the energy utility company Barki Tajik, and Tajik Gas. The CAS paid primary
attention to TadAZ, whose production accounts for over 50% o f country’s exports.
Special emphasis was placed o n TadAZ staying current o n i t s electricity bills and o n
phased repayment o f i t s past debts.” Directed credit to TadAZ was eliminated and an
independent I A S audit o f TadAZ’s 2002 accounts was issued o n a qualified basis. 12 13
IAS audits for 2003 and 2004 have been completed recently, though these have not been
shared with the Bank. Given i t s size and importance, TadAZ will continue to challenge
public policy making. The main concerns are the transparency o f the company’s
accounts, prompt payments o f i t s energy bills and tax obligations, as well as possible
preferential tax treatment.

Progress with respect to other SOEs has been slower than expected. Audits for
25.
Barki Tajik and Tajik Gas are underway. The I A S audit o f Tajik R a i l i s proposed under
the PBC and its initiation will be funded by a PHRD grant. Bringing discipline to the
SOEs i s closely tied to the privatization program.
26.
With hindsight, it i s now clear that the effectiveness o f the reform efforts, here as
elsewhere in the program, has been handicapped by the fact that the Bank tried to tackle
difficult, politically charged issues, in a weak institutional environment. This
corroborates w i t h the lessons from other LICUS countries, that in weak institutional
environments, i s it better to proceed w i t h a well sequenced reform program that starts
with issues where there i s existing support from reformers. Although Tajikistan’s
institutional capacity has improved during the CAS period, this lesson s t i l l holds.

Environment in Tajikistan As Seen by Small and M e d i u m Business,” IFC, 2003.
The size o f T a d A Z arrears was o f the same magnitude as SAC2.
l2An earlier audit h a d been rejected.
I3This latter action was the main reason for the significant delay in the disbursement o f the second tranche
of the adjustment operation SAC2.
lo
“Business

Attachment 2
Page 8 o f 25
Agriculture and Environment
r

Box 3: CAS Performance Indicators in
Agriculture

I

27.
The Bank has achieved i t s
performance indicators in this area,
although
- the CAS indicators were too
modest compared to the size of the Bank

G
~portfolio
~ in
this
~
~ TheYCAS ~
program focused o n land privatization,
irrigation infrastructure upgrades, land
management, and management o f water
resources. However, the Government has had only partial success in improving the state
o f things in agriculture. l4The main results are increases in efficiency in selected areas mostly in non-cotton lands and progress in addressing the cotton farm debt issue.
28.
Increased Productivity. Support for land privatization and titling (through the
Farm Privatization Support Project) combined with the restoration o f irrigation
infrastructure (through the Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project) reportedly
produced significant increases in productivity. For instance, wheat yields have doubled
from 1.2 t/ha to 2.6 t/ha during the CAS period. This approach highlights the importance
combining privatization with the provision o f complementary services and (ii)
o f (i)
providing unambiguous property titles. underpin
29.
The Bank supported the privatization o f 10 collective farms and issuance o f over
5,900 titles with due registration in the State Land Committee under the Farm
Privatization Support Project. The total number o f titles issued by the State Land
Committee was slightly less than 21,000 and covered 350,000 hectares by end-2004. In
addition, the State Land Committee claims to have issued over h a l f a m i l l i o n (largely
hand recorded) temporary land certificates, including for the household plots, as o f
January 2005. The project has also upgraded the technical capacity o f the State Land
Committee which resulted in the reduction o f the costs o f issuance o f titles down to
US$6. In contrast, it i s estimated that manually registered land certificates cost around
US$250.00 because o f the high charges applied by local administrators for their services
(surveying, mapping, transcribing, waterline-printing paper, etc.). The misunderstanding
between what constitutes a land title and land ~ e r t i f i c a t ehas
' ~ led to a discrepancy in the
evaluation o f how advanced the land privatization process actually is. W h i l e the
Government maintains that the percentage o f land in private hands already exceeds 50%,
the Bank's estimate stands at less than 30%.

The Bank has also supported the simplification o f agriculture taxation to reduce
30.
the opportunity for corruption. T o that effect, i t has recommended the application o f a
single land tax, an idea implemented in selected rayons where the Bank supported
privatization. The reform o f the Tax Code (at the end o f 2004), introduced the system o f
simplified taxation in agriculture for the whole country. The introduction o f the system
to 70% of the population lives in the rural areas and the majority o f the poor are located there.
holder of a land certificate does not necessarily know the precise location o f the corresponding land

l4Close
IsThe

plot.

Attachment 2
Page 9 o f 25
has raised concerns regarding the level o f the rates and regarding the fact that the
imperfect implementation o f the V A T (limited operation o f the refund system) represents
de facto additional taxation. A review o f these issues i s advisable. The Bank is finalizing
a review o f the agriculture sector, which should serve as background for future reforms in
agriculture.

3 1.
Cotton Sector. Reform o f the cotton sector has proceeded unevenly. In fact, the
privatization o f cotton land in a distorted environment has led to a significant increase in
farm debt which has become one o f the major policy concerns o f the government. The
Bank projects did not cover the cotton sector to a significant extent because the
government asked the Bank to focus o n non-cotton areas. However, it carried out a
Poverty Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) o f Cotton Farmland Privatization, which reveled
the main problems that constrain growth and poverty reduction in the cotton-growing
areas, and jointly with other donors, the Bank Group has lately been advising the
Government o n how to address the cotton farm debt issue in a fair and equitable way.16.
Recently, a major breakthrough was achieved in the area o f cotton farm debt. A
32.
resolution strategy protecting the rights and interests o f farmers has been agreed between
the Government, World Bank, ADB, and several other key donors. The intensive
dialogue carried out by the Bank since November 2004 and i t s analytic work, such as the
PSIA o f Cotton Farmland Privatization and the report o n the Cotton Farm Debt,17 have
plaid a k e y role in reaching this outcome.
Environmental Protection. The Bank has supported the preparation o f a National
33.
Environmental Action Plan (NEAP), which i s fairly advanced. Other efforts o n
environmental issues include the development o f a community-based early warning
system to mitigate the risk posed by Lake Sarez." More recently, the Community
Agriculture and Watershed Management Project has sought to build up productive assets
for rural communities in selected mountain watersheds, so as to achieve sustainable
increases in productivity and to curtail the degradation o f fragile lands and ecosystems. I t
i s too early to assess the impact o f this intervention.

Infrastructure
Box 4: CAS Performance Indicators in Infrastructure

Improve the safety, reliability and efficiency o f water service provision in Dushanbe
Strengthen the institutional and financial capacity o f the Dushanbe Vodokanal
Develop and implement a program for rehabilitation o f municipal infrastructure services at the sub-national
government level
I

The I F C through i t s Farm Ownership M o d e l has carried successful interventions in p i l o t cotton areas.
Tajik Cotton Debt Report was produced to support the Bank's dialogue with the government and
other donors on the cotton farm debt resolution. I t was not recorded in the Bank's system as a formal
deliverable.
'6

" The

Attachment 2
Page 10 o f 25
34.
Progress in meeting the Bank performance indicators under this pillar has been
limited in part because o f delays in project preparation and implementation. However,
the CAS has achieved some positive results such as improvements in power supply in
mountainous areas trough an innovative practice o f private sector participation in the
electricity sector, knowledge generated through several pieces o f analytical work, and
advances in the dialogue with the Government on how to put the energy sector o n sound
footing.
Municipal Water. CAS progress in improving water service delivery was slow to
35.
come through the Dushanbe Water Supply Project and a JSDF grant. In Dushanbe, after
some delays, a private operator was contracted to manage the Vodokanal and to
undertake a rehabilitation plan. As a result, only partial improvements in water delivery
services have been attained. l 9 Given the modest increases in service delivery, it has not
been possible to increase tariffs or to strengthen the financial capacity o f the Vodokanal.
Because o f the delay with the Municipal Infrastructure Project, support to other
municipalities has not started yet.

36.
Power Sector. A significant achievement during this period has been the transfer
o f the Gomo-Badakshan electricity network to a private concessionaire (Pamir Energy
Corp) with the participation o f the Agha Kahn Foundation, the IFC, and the financial
support o f the Swiss Government which has brought reliable power supply to the remote
localities in Gomo-Badakshan. IDA supported this public-private partnership through
the Pamir Private Power Project. This project represents a first-rate example o f donor
coordination and innovative design, even though i t took some time for the Government
and the local authorities to come to a fully shared vision o f the project. The concession
has operated successfully: a consumer database has been created, comprehensive remetering i s in place, and a tariff structure to support the project has been developed and i s
under implementation. Collections improved significantly in 2004 over 2002 and 2003.
37.
The CAS has made significant analytical contributions to the understanding o f the
power sector, including the Energy Utility Review and Central Asia regional studies o n
water & energy nexus and o n power export potential. The analytical w o r k has helped
understand better the steps to the power sector viability in Tajikistan and h o w to protect
the poorest segments o f the population from the impact o f tariff increases. I t has
contributed to improved dialogue with the government, culminating in a comprehensive
strategy for developing the sector (electricity, gas, and heat) over the medium term. The
Government conveyed this strategy to the Bank in a Letter o f Energy Sector
Development Strategy, provided under the recent Energy Loss Reduction Project. As for
the payment discipline in the power sector, the rate o f cash collections i s s t i l l l o w at
slightly above 50%. The main improvements came through reaching an agreement o n the
TadAZ arrears and by keeping the company current on its obligations with the support o f
SAC2. In addition, all budget entities are mandated to program their expected utility
18

These efforts have been supported by the Lake Sarez Risk Mitigation Project and JSDF-funded poverty
reduction grant in the High Mountain Environments around Lake Sarez.
19
The Islamic Development Bank i s also supporting the rehabilitation o f the Dushanbe water supply
infrastructure.

Attachment 2
Page 11 o f 25
expenditures within their budget plans. The large majority o f utility clients are within the
90 day sales equivalent. A policy o f cut-offs i s in place for clients that fall into arrears.
Trade and Transport. Bank support in trade and transportation has come through
38.
analytical work. I t has prepared a regional Trade and Transportation Facilitation report,
and i s finalizing two reports o n Trade and Aviation in Tajikistan. This analytical work
provides a solid basis for the future dialogue in this area.

F. CAS Objective 2: Improving the Delivery o f Social Services and Community
Development
H u m a n Development
Box 5: CAS Performance Indicators on Human Development Outcomes
Budget allocations to health and education increased by 0.2 % o f GDP annually
Preparation o f the education and health budget based o n activitylpopulation costing
0 M o r e cost effective health and education delivery systems achieved by switching f i o m norm- to
activity-based costing
0 Immunization survey and a strategy for strengthening the immunization program completed
0 Strategy to contain spread o f TB and H I V I A I D S in place

0

39.
The CAS has achieved mixed results in meeting i t s performance indicators in this
area, in part due to overambitious targets given the resources available and technical
capacity in the Government. Although the Bank has been effective at the project level, i t
has found it difficult to progress o n a broader nationwide scale not least because o f i t s
limited resources.
The greatest progress has been made in building the basis for
future reforms in the service delivery sectors. Other donor efforts have been limited in
scope, sometimes duplicative, and some o f them are possibly not sustainable.

40.
Health and Education Strategies. The Bank supported preparation o f subsectoral
strategies for health and education, centered on improving the methods for allocating
resources and o n providing basic services for the poor. After a long and slow preparation
process, a Health Financing Strategy was ratified by the M i n i s t r i e s o f Health and Finance
in March 2005. The Education Strategy was approved by the govemment last year and i s
currently being refined. Their partial implementation has been initiated through Bank
and other donor projects.

The economic contraction and the c i v i l war led to a significant deterioration in the delivery o f basic
services, which contributed to worsening o f education and health outcomes. The prevalence o f infectious
diseases increased, and the country became highly vulnerable to the A I D S threat owing to the large
migration flows and the increased use o f drugs.
*O

*' Nationwide improvements in service delivery in education, health, water and sanitation and social

services have been small relative to the enormity o f the challenge, and service delivery continues in an
emergency mode. I t i s important to note that the lack o f reliable statistics prevents taking a thorough
evaluation o f service delivery and progress towards the achievement o f the MillenniumDevelopment Goals
during this CAS period. A recent L i v i n g Standards Survey suggests that social service delivery continues
to be in a crisis situation, despite efforts by the govemment and donors.

Attachment 2
Page 12 o f 25
41.
Budget. The Bank encouraged the Government to increase the budgetary
allocations to health and education. Resource allocations to education as a percentage o f
GDP indeed took place,22but the health allocation increased only marginally and stood at
around 1.5 % o f GDP in 2004.23 Significant salary increases reportedly have raised the
allocations for health and education in 2005. M u c h remains to be done in linking
budgetary allocations to PRSP objectives, especially in the social sectors.
Efforts were also made to improve the intra-sector allocation o f resources in
42.
health and education. The objective here has been to move from allocations based o n
norms (such as number o f beds) to a formula that better reflects the demand for services.
Some progress in implementing a new system o f budgetary allocations has been made at
the level o f Bank projects and projects o f other donors. The Bank has also supported the
introduction o f a Basic Benefit Package and has assisted in the designing o f a case-based
payment system for hospital services. Some o f these ideas have been piloted within the
Primary Health Care Project, h l l y disbursed and closed o n March 3 1, 2005.
In addition, the Primary Health Care Project, developed evidence-based clinical
43.
guidelines for primary care, financed the retraining o f primary health workers,
established sub-national training centers, rebuilt primary health facilities in two districts,
and assisted with the implementation o f the immunization strategy. Key lessons learned
the need to take into account the political
through the project included the following: (i)
the
and technical complexity o f rationalizing health facilities, especially hospitals; (ii)
need to “anchor” activities in the country’s policy context to ensure their sustainability;
the difficulty o f supervising a large number o f c i v i l works to be completed o n
and (iii)
time and at reasonable cost (although performance in this regard was considered very
good). The project benefited from the increased maturity o f the Tajikistan health sector
and from improvement in the openness and technical content o f the health policy
dialogue, especially in the latter years o f proj ect implementation.

44.
AIDS. The main result in the fight against A I D S has been the preparation o f an
H I V - A I D S Central Asia Strategy and the approval o f a regional facility to fight AIDS in
Central Asia. Tajikistan i s now ready to draw o n this facility, given the progress it has
made in setting a required institutional basis, under the leadership o f the Ministry o f
Health. What i s important i s that there i s an increased awareness o f the fact that the
country i s highly exposed to HIV/AIDS, and there i s commitment at the highest levels to
combat this threat.

Immunization Program. The national immunization strategy was approved by the
45.
Government o f Tajikistan in April 2003 and was reviewed and endorsed the following
October by the Ministry o f Health, MOH, WHO, UNICEF, and the World Bank. The
strategy i s presently under implementation. The Bank support has come in the regions
covered by its health project, while other donors have covered additional geographical
areas.

22

See the PEIR and IMF Reports.

23Mosto f the health expenditures are born by households.

Attachment 2
Page 13 o f 25
46.
Education. Implementation o f the Education Modernization Project has started in
two o f out five planned districts. In these rayons, school infrastructure has improved and
the experience with community participation through PTAs i s reported as successful.
The Bank has also been supporting the introduction o f per capita financing and has
implementedthe approach in one district; other donors support i t s implementation in four
additional districts. With Bank’s support, the Ministry o f Education has made progress
with curriculum reform and has improved i t s institutional capacity to oversee textbook
quality.

47.
Thus, the progress made so far in health and education has had only limited
impact o n the national outcomes in these sectors, but the C A S has helped to set the basis
for more ambitious undertakings during the next CAS period. Further work would have
increased allocation o f public funds to these sectors; (ii)
improved
to include (i)
greater
government effectiveness in the planning and allocation o f resources; (iii)
transparency in expenditure, including the formalization o f informal payments; (iv)
improved donor coordination; and (v) increased community involvement.
Community Led Development (CLD)
48.
Although the CAS emphasized the role that communities could play in stemming
the deterioration in the delivery o f basic services, it did not propose specific outcomes in
this area. The FY03-05 strategy employed a two-pronged approach in which the
participation o f local governments and communities was to be combined with a unified
donor program to address public service needs. In parallel, support was to be given to the
central government in its effort to build institutions that would serve future needs. This
approach required comfort on the Government’s part with the participation o f community
and local governments in the development process and a higher than usual level o f donor
coordination and harmonization. As the Board recognized when i t was presented, this
strategy was not without risk. W h i l e i t has yielded positive results, it i s fair to say that it
did not take root as planned. On the Government’s side the focus o n local communities
was seen as an NGO-driven agenda not connected to pressing concerns w i t h statebuilding and enhancing central government capacity. The donor community was also
slow to come together due in part to the relatively l o w starting level o f donor
coordination in Dushanbe.
A t the project level, the results o f the C L D approach have been positive. For
49.
example, community participation has worked well in education, through PTAs and also
as part o f an effort to put in place an early warning system to mitigate the r i s k s posed by
Lake Sarez. In addition, Bank assistance has contributed to the creation o f 29 out o f a
total o f 38 water user associations in the country.24 Moreover, legislation i s under
consideration to facilitate the creation o f water users’ associations as part o f
implementation o f the Water Code. Admittedly, economic sustainability o f water-user
associations i s a concern. Even though water fee collection rates are high (around 90%),
the revenues cover only around 30% o f the total costs.
This work was supported through the Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Community Agriculture and
Watershed Management Projects.

24

Attachment 2
Page 14 o f 25
The support provided to the National Social Investment Fund o f Tajikistan (NSIFT)
50.
through the Second Poverty Alleviation Project has allowed completion o f 111 microprojects covering 110,000 beneficiaries in education, health, water, energy, roads and
bridges, all with community involvement. The NSIFT experience, while positive,
highlights concerns about the sustainability o f its interventions and about the type o f works
best suited for a C L D approach. For instance, medium size works, like health centers,
require technical expertise to obtain results that can be integrated into the national
network-recurrent financing, training, etc. In countries with limited decentralization like
Tajikistan, integration with the national networks cannot always b e worked out w i t h local
authorities and have to be anchored within national strategies, some o f which are just under
development. This increases the sustainability risk. The review o f the NSIFT currently
underway will be important to make corrections for the future.

5 1.
Currently, under the U N D P leadership, four joint government/civil society/donor
working groups are developing recommendations and monitoring community projects in
the country. UNDP i s planning to continue this leadership role. The IDA team i s
working o n a review o f i t s experiences with the C L D approach. The next CAS needs to
articulate more clearly the potential role o f the communities in service delivery in
attracting donor support and Government participation. A joint review o f the NSIFT and
the C L D under preparation could provide the basis for a renewed effort to utilize the
potential resources o f communities in addressing the critical needs o f the country.
G. CAS Objective 3: Building Institutional Capacity and Improving
Governance
Public Sector Management and Governance

52.
The results achieved in this area are modest. The Bank supported the
Government’s efforts to improve the use o f public resources and to upgrade the c i v i l
service and the public administration. As anticipated, progress has been slow, but it has
accelerated towards the end o f the CAS period as the Government has engaged in a
renewed effort to improve i t s public administration. Various analytical pieces completed
Box 6: CAS Performance Indicators on Public Sector Management and Governance
Functional reviews o f central ministries carried out and restructuring plans implemented
C i v i l service salary review carried out and a merit-based salary system introduced
Budget prepared based o n a prioritized PIP
Budget execution published o n a regular basis
CPPR action plans implemented
Revised legal basis for a transparent and competitive public procurement system put in place

by the Bank, including under the PEIR, the Note o n Public Sector Wages, IDF grant on
C i v i l Service training, and I B T A 2 provide a solid basis for future advances in this area.
Public Administration and C i v i l Service Reforms. The Bank supported functional
53.
reviews in several ministries, including Health, Agriculture, Education, and

Attachment 2
Page 15 o f 25
Telecommunications through the I B T A 2 in 2002. W h i l e the implementation o f the
recommendations o f the IBTA2 has been delayed, the dialogue o n public administration
reform has been invigorated recently in part drawing from work done under the IBTA2.
A Public Administration Reform Strategy has been issued in early April, and the
Govemment has started to implement the first phase o f this strategy in June 2005. This
involves the streamlining o f the functions o f the Office o f the President, Ministry o f
Economy and Trade, and o f the Agency for Anti-Monopoly and Entrepreneurship
support.

On c i v i l service reform, the Bank has prepared background reviews o n c i v i l
54.
service issues (pay, etc.) The civil service dialogue among the Government, the Bank
hiring practices, (ii)
transparency o f the remuneration
and the IMF has centered o n (i)
systems, (iii)
salary scales and (iv) information management. It i s expected that the
forthcoming PBC will support public administration and civil service reforms.
Given that the limited public sector capacity has handicapped the implementation
55.
o f Govemment programs (including those with donor support), the C A S was correct in
assigning priority to institution and capacity building. However, with hindsight, more
significant results could have been achieved through greater coordination between the
consultants and the Government in the delivery o f technical a s ~ i s t a n c e .Looking
~~
ahead,
the Bank and the Govemment should evaluate alternative strategies for TA so that i t
produces adequate results o n the ground.
Public Expenditure Management. Progress in improving public expenditure
56.
management has been mixed. The Bank completed a C F A A (FY03) and a C P A R
(FY03), as well as a Public Institutional Expenditure Review (PEIR) (FY04).
Implementation o f the C F A A and CPAR recommendations has been delayed and i s only
starting now due to weaker than hoped for govemment ownership. The PEIR
implementation has also been slow but not for the lack o f govemment ownership -- the
weak capacity o f the key economic ministries has delayed the implementation process.
Advances have been made in creating an appropriate supporting legal framework. For
Main
example, the law o n State Finances sets the basis for modem b~dgeting.’~
the budget i s comprehensive and has been
achievements include the following: (i)
a
implemented as approved; (b) a near real tracking o f expenditures i s possible; (iii)
single Treasury account i s operative; (iv) loans and grants are now included in the budget
process; (e) the domestic part o f the PIP as well as the counterpart funding f r o m the
extemal PIP have been integrated into the budget; and (vi) budget execution reports are
published quarterly in newspapers.
Despite a first attempt to develop an MTBF for 2002-04, linking the MTBF and
57.
the PIP with the national priorities will require further work. The mandate for the Budget
Commission, which i s to lead and coordinate public expenditure, remains weak. And
there are still multiple investment plans. Ministries do not have the autonomy that would
25 DFID has carried an independent review o f the program supported by I B T A 2 and SAC2 and came out
with unsatisfactory ratings for both interventions.
26 Other legislation includes, for example, the L a w o n National Bank o f Tajikistan

Attachment 2
Page 16 o f 25
empower them to assign resources to the most critical priorities. Rigid norms tie them
down. Reportedly, the Government plans to develop a single national development
strategy which will encompass the two main strategies currently in place (PRSP and the
Social and Economic Development Plan (SEDP)). When this i s done, i t will be easier to
integrate the investment plans.

111. BANK PERFORMANCE
New Commitments
58.
The utilization o f the IDA lending envelope for FY03-FY05 (US$SO million)
unfortunately fell short o f U S 2 0 million, in part due to the IDA allocation cuts owing to
the shortage o f IDA13 resources in FY05. Tajikistan was particularly hit by this cut
given that i t s program was back loaded. One project - Ferghana Valley (US$13 million)
was negotiated and was ready for Board presentation in FY05 but had to be moved to
FY06 due to the lack o f IDA resources in FY05. Additional projects, such as Municipal
Infrastructure ( U S 1 5 million), also had to be moved to FY06 for the same reason.
However, delays in project preparation have also contributed to this shortfall. The noted
delay in implementing SAC2 precluded the design and approval o f SAC3 within this
CAS period. In the same way, delays in the implementation o f the Primary Health Care
Project delayed the preparation of the Community Basic Health Care Project. The
Banking and Private Support Project was dropped out o f the CAS as premature, owing to
the weakness o f the financial sector at the time. I t i s important to note that during the
CAS period, the Bank and the Government, have exhibited flexibility and have identified
and agreed upon new areas o f assistance to be financed with new operations in
agriculture (Land Registration and Cadastre System Improvement Project, US$10
million) and energy (Energy Loss Reduction Project, US$18 million).
Portfolio Performance

Portfolio performance has improved significantly during the C A S period and i s
59.
now among the best in Central Asia. The disbursement ratio currently stands at about
30% - well above the E C A average o f 22%. There are no problem projects at the end o f
FY05. The Government, through i t s Aid Coordination Unit under the Presidential
Administration, has played a critical role in this success. Regular CPPRs with the
Government and other donors (e.g., ADB) have been instrumental in identifying and
dealing with bottlenecks. Lately, the CPPR discussions have focused o n h o w to keep the
high portfolio standards and how to improve sustainability, including through the phasing
out o f the PIUs in the long-term. PIUs are s t i l l being used for project implementation
given the difficulties faced by the implementing agencies to hire and retain qualified
staff. However, a practice o f combined PIUs has been introduced, as i s the case with the
Farm Privatization Support, Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation, Community Agriculture
Watershed Management and the recently approved Land Registration and Cadastre
System for Sustainable Agriculture projects. T o ensure that l i n e ministries and relevant
local governments o w n and are accountable for project implementation and results, the
teams are working o n integrating better the PIUs into the work o f line ministries. The

Attachment 2
Page 17 o f 25
goal i s to fully mainstream the PIUs into the government agencies by the end o f the
projects.
Instruments
Policy Dialogue. The quality o f the dialogue between the Government and the
60.
Bank has been improving. Towards the end o f the CAS period, the Bank made it clear by
i t s actions that it was not interested in pushing its way o f doing things. The lessons
leamed from the past analytical, adjustment and technical assistance work reflected
below should help to further improve the quality o f the dialogue.

61.
Policy Lending. The implementation o f SAC2 was completed, but n o new policy
operations were approved during this CAS period.27 SAC2 played a leading role in
supporting achievements under this CAS. I t s implementation, however, took longer than
expected-three years elapsed between the first and the second tranches. This delay
prevented the preparation o f the SAC3 (now PBC), and has affected the implementation
o f the overall CAS program by diverting attention to meeting the SAC2 conditionality.
The Bank placed high expectations o n the speed o f reforms, but this was slower than
expected due to the Government’s primary focus o n the consolidation o f the machinery
o f government. Another important consideration i s that factoring o f the political
economy in the design could have smoothed implementation. Any new policy operation
must be kept simple and must be based o n outcomes o n the ground before disbursements
are made. The best option i s to work o n single tranche operations, starting with the PBC
and preparing the ground for PRSC-type operations in the future.
Technical Assistance. This CAS provided technical assistance to the Government
62.
through the I B T A 2 project and capacity building components under investment
operations. The experience with the I B T A 2 has been mixed at best; project perfonnance
has been rated unsatisfactory lately. O f the three areas covered, the project was
reasonably successful o n supporting privatization, including the development o f a
privatization strategy, had mixed results with regard to public expenditure management,
and was less successful in c i v i l service and public administration areas. Some o f the
difficulties arose from the fact that i t s activities were not always adjusted to the reality o f
the clients’ needs and circumstances. This reduced the TA effectiveness even when the
quality was acceptable, which was not always the case. In addition, because some o f TA
came in too late, the government had gone ahead with reforms o n i t s own. Finally, the
design o f the I B T A 2 was not flexible enough. Very large contracts to consultancy f i r m s
could not be restructured once it became clear which components would not work.28
Technical assistance provided under other investment operations (e.g., in education and
health) were more successful as i t was tailored directly to the client’s needs and because
i t was supporting an ongoing program o f reforms in these sectors.
The project covered a large number o f themes over two tranches.
See, “Structural Adjustment Credit and Institution Building Technical Assistance-An Evaluation
Report-Enterplan, October 2004” -Draft. This review raises additional points: (i)
the need to develop an
effective relationship between technical assistance and the rest o f the assistance program, specifically,
the urgent need to produce opportune and relevant results for the client; and, (iii)
adjustment lending; (ii)
the need to take account o f political economy factors that might limit reform.

27
28

Attachment 2
Page 18 o f 25
Investment Projects. The project portfolio under implementation relied o n limited
63.
interventions in agriculture, irrigation, environment, education, health, social assistance,
energy, institution-building and water supply areas. In view o f the magnitude o f the
development needs o f the country, there has always been the perception that these efforts,
while justified, were not sufficient to cover the critical needs at a larger scale. Some
projects have taken time to mature, and there are concems about the sustainability o f
some interventions, especially given that PIUs have operated more or less independently
from the government agencies. However, the basis for a broader collaboration among the
Government, the communities and other donors seems to be taking shape. For example,
in health and education, the Bank i s working with the sector ministries in preparing or
revising sector strategies and modemizing the budgeting o f public resources. The reform
o f the public expenditure system that i s under way complements the sector efforts and
sets the basis for leveraging national resources with donor contributions and for SWAPS.
Moreover, as mentioned before, the Bank and the Government have started discussions
o n how to mainstream the PIUs into the government agencies.
Analytical Work. The Bank prepared a significant batch o f analytical materials
64.
during the CAS period as reflected in Table 3 in the Appendix. Thus, the CAS target to
improve the knowledge base on Tajikistan has been largely met. The analytic materials
have enriched the policy dialogue and have had some impact through the Bank operations
and the IMF’s PGRF. Although the areas covered were highly relevant, limited attention
to the AAA work by the Government, especially at the beginning o f the C A S period,
handicapped prompt implementation. Lack o f direct Government involvement in
selection and preparation o f AAA has contributed to this lack o f attention. This situation
was exacerbated by the Bank’s inadequate focus o n dissemination and implementation.
Since the Bank has produced a large body o f analytic work o f good quality, which
provides a solid basis for the future reform program, the Bank Group should concentrate
on i t s implementation rather than o n production o f new AAA during the next CAS
period.

Donor Cooperation

Overall coordination i s maintained under the umbrella o f the PRSP using the
65.
Consultative Group (CG) process, where IDA plays a leading role. Specialization among
donors i s emerging. For example, IDA covers education and the health sector, and i t s
coordination at the sector level has worked w e l l with DFID (IBTA2 and SAC2), the
Swiss (Health and Energy), IDB (Dushanbe water), and U N D P and KFW and DFID
(CLD). As mentioned before, the Pamir Power Project represents a good example o f
donor/government/privatesector partnership. However, more attention needs to be paid
to donor coordination, including through strengthening the donor coordination function in
the Dushanbe office. The new PRSP could serve as conduit for improved coordination.
Building the basis for SWAps in the future should also help with donor coordination. In
response to advice from the bank and other donors, the Government set up an Aid
Coordination Unit (ACU) under the Office o f the President. The A C U plays the central
role in coordinating donor activities and the Government’s public investment portfolio.

Attachment 2
Page 19 o f 25

IV. LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Tajikistan continues to face the dual challenge o f maintaining the rapid pace o f
66.
economic growth and arresting the deterioration o f i t s basic services, which i s eating
away the potential for long-term growth. The challenge lies in channeling the limited
internal and external resources to key priority areas. The effective use o f these limited
resources, however, requires clarity o f objectives, good project design, capacity to
implement, and coordination among all stakeholders. In each o f these areas, much i s
required in Tajikistan. The selectivity and the effectiveness o f interventions continue to
be high priorities, given the scope o f the reconstruction needs and the limited capacity to
mobilize resources internally and externally.
The goals set in the FY03-05 CAS remain valid, but the approach needs
67.
adjusting. The long-terms goals o f fostering private sector development, improving
services to people, and building market institutions remain o f utmost importance in

Tajikistan. However, although progress has been made towards achieving these goals, the
community driven approach to development has not taken root as hoped for in part because
the Government and donors were slow to come together behind it. A more sector-oriented
approach may be needed to demonstrate the value o f engaging all levels o f government,
communities, and donors in the provision o f public sector services. I t is encouraging that
the Bank made a special effort to engage the government in a dialogue o n the key priorities
and approach when embarking o n the new CAS preparation. This has allowed for a clearer
identification o f shared CAS goals and results for the next four years.

68.

To increase effectiveness, the CAS should select fewer outcomes and
concentrate all its instruments to deliver these outcomes. Given the capacity and
recourse constraint faced by the Government and the Bank in Tajikistan, the Bank
program should focus on a highly selective set o f outcomes. A t the same time it should
ensure that i t s instruments - policy, investment, TA, and community operations - all
support the same outcomes.

69.

To be realistic, the CAS should take into account the political economy
considerations. The lack o f Government buy-in in some areas has delayed the

implementation o f the SAC2 and has affected the effectives o f institution building and
TA efforts. Tajikistan’s experience corroborates with the lessons from other LICUS
countries that in weak institutional environments, development policy lending needs to
focus on simple, politically feasible reforms and be backed by sector-specific projects,
capacity-building, and communication campaigns.

70.

Capacity constraints are most effectively removed when (a) efforts are targeted
at meeting concrete objectives; (b) capacity building is mainstreamed in investment
operations and; (c) emphasis is placed not only on the passage of legislation but also
on its implementation. Limited capacity has affected the speed and effectiveness o f the
CAS implementation. Future assistance should focus on removing the capacity
constraints. In this regard, capacity building should not be pursued in isolation f i o m the
reform program. I t should b e directed towards specific objectives and closely linked to
project implementation. In addition, i t i s important to use existing government structures

Attachment 2
Page 20 o f 25
rather than create new project implementation bodies. Should the creation o f PIU be
necessary, it i s important to ensure that their functions are fully mainstreamed into the
implementing agency before the end o f the project. Lastly, the design o f laws or
regulations should be accompanied by concrete and realistic implementation plans.
For AAA to be effective, it has to be programmatic, participatory and pay
greater attention to implementation. The Bank Group should seek direct government
participation in selecting the areas and issues to be covered by the AAA, in carrying out
the analysis, and in discussing policy implications and developing implementation plans.
Interaction with government counterparts (the process) should receive the same level o f
attention as the analytic work (the product). Since a rich body o f AAA has been recently
completed, the new CAS should concentrate o n i t s implementation rather than creating

7 1.

new analytic work.

Looking ahead, the Bank should seek to play the role o f a catalyst to mobilize
72.
additional resources in order to achieve nationwide scaling up in a resource constrained
environment. The interventions financed under the present CAS were designed to test
new policies and approaches. However, to move from these pilots to nationwide
coverage, the new IDA strategy will have to be more narrowly focused in terms o f
priorities and will have to find ways o f increasing the impact o f donor and government
resources under common strategies. To this end, the Bank Group should build on i t s
comparative advantage o f a knowledge institution and help the Government develop
sector reform platforms and build donor coalitions around them. M o v i n g towards
SWAPSand other forms o f donor partnerships and coalitions, should help in this regard.

Attachment 2
Page 21 o f 25

Table 1: Summary o f the CAS Completion Report

Situation at the
beginning o f the
CAS period
'overty headcount ratio to
75% by 2006
qew national survey o f living
itandards completed
l a t a baseline established and
,eliable measurement tools
leveloped for monitoring and
:valuating outcomes o f the 9
vlDG targets indicated in the
?RSP

CAS Objectives
4. Stimulating Growth
Enhancing macro-economic
stability

Private Sector Development
and Financial Sector
Regulation framework for
microfinance adopted
(Some of the expected CAS
outcomes in this area
overlapped with outcomes
under improving public
rector performance and are
considered below.)

-

Y

Lessons for the next
CAS

Situation at the end
of the CAS period
L

Poverty headcount ratio
was around 80%.

Poverty level decreased to
64%.

Information o n poverty
patterns was deficient.

The national survey o n
living standards has been
completed
Progress made to
establish baseline to
measure MDG targets,
but task not vet comdete.

Economic growth has a
positive impact o n poverty
reduction.
There i s a need to improve the
understanding o f the link
between growth and poverty.

Good progress in
achieving macro-stability,
but the situation remained
fragile, because o f the
narrow tax base and
heavy debt burden.

Significant
macroeconomic
improvements: inflation
at single digit (7%),
public external debt
halved to around 40% o f
GDP, tax collection up to
16% o f GDP, but quasifiscal deficit remains h i g h
(around 20 %).

Sustainability o f prudent
nacro-economic management
is needed to maintain positive
xonomic growth outcomes.

Small share o f the private
sector in the economy
(45%)

Share o f the private sector
increased to 50%

More efforts are needed to
improve the investment
climate.

Poor investment climate
contributed to very l o w
levels o f investment.

Efforts were made to
reduce the costs o f
regulation o n businesses
(registration, inspections,
court settlements, etc.)
but surveys do not reflect
significant gains.

I t i s important to examine the

Weak financial sector.

Significant improvements
in the financial sector;
however, i t s ability to
satisfy the demands o f the
productive sectors i s not
adequate.
The microfinance
regulation was adopted in
2004.

l i n k s o f regulatory reform
w i t h public administration and
c i v i l service reforms and to
pay attention to the behavior
o f local government.

Further strengthening o f the
financial sector i s needed to
increase the confidence o f the
public in the financial sector
and to increase the ability o f
the financial sector to channel
resources for productive uses.

Attachment 2
Page 22 o f 25

Table 1: Summary o f the CAS Completion Report

Lessons for the next
Situation at the end
Situation at the
o f the CAS period
beginning o f the
CAS
CAS seriod
Over rrching CAS Objective: Reduce the level o f p verty

Poverty headcount ratio to
75% by 2006
Yew national survey o f living
Standards completed
Data baseline established and
reliable measurement tools
jeveloped for monitoring and
:valuating outcomes o f the 9
UDG targets indicated in the
PRSP
CAS Objectives
A. Stimulating Growth
Enhancing macro-economic
stability

Private Sector Development
and Financial Sector
Regulation framework for
microfinance adopted
(Some of the expected CAS
outcomes in this area
overlapped with outcomes
under improving public
sector performance and are
considered below.)

Poverty headcount ratio
was around 80%.
Information o n poverty
patterns was deficient.

1 Poverty level decreased t o

Economic growth has a
positive impact o n poverty
reduction.

64%.

The national survey o n
living standards has been
completed

There i s a need to improve the
understanding o f the link
between growth and poverty.

Progress made to
establish baseline to
measure MDG targets,
but task not yet complete.
Good progress in
achieving macro-stability,
but the situation remained
fragile, because o f the
narrow tax base and
heavy debt burden.

Significant
macroeconomic
improvements: inflation
at single digit (7%),
public external debt
halved to around 40% o f
GDP, tax collection up to
16% o f GDP, but quasifiscal deficit remains high
(around 20 %).

Sustainability o f prudent
macro-economic management
i s needed to maintain positive
economic growth outcomes.

Small share o f the private
sector in the economy
(45%)

Share o f the private sector
increased to 50%

M o r e efforts are needed to
improve the investment
climate.

Poor investment climate
contributed to very l o w
levels o f investment.

Efforts were made to
reduce the costs o f
regulation o n businesses
(registration, inspections,
court settlements, etc.)
but surveys do not reflect
significant gains.

I t i s important to examine the

Weak financial sector.

Significant improvements
in the financial sector;
however, i t s ability to
satisfy the demands o f the
productive sectors i s not
adequate.
The microfinance
regulation was adopted in
2004.

'

l i n k s o f regulatory reform
with public administration and
c i v i l service reforms and to
pay attention to the behavior
o f local government.
Further strengthening o f the
financial sector i s needed to
increase the confidence o f the
public in the financial sector
and to increase the ability o f
the financial sector to channel
resources for productive uses.

Attachment 2
Page 23 o f 25
Situation at the
beginning o f the
CAS period

Situation at the end
o f the CAS period

Lessons for the next
CAS

The quality o f power and
water services continues
:o be in a critical
situation.

strategic selectivity needed to
iddress infrastructure needs
;iven size o f required
:xpenditures versus available
'esources.

Infrastructure
Improve the safety, reliability
and efficiency o f water
service provision in
Dushanbe
Strengthen the institutional
and financial capacity o f the
Dushanbe Vodokanal
Develop and implement a
program for rehabilitation o f
municipal infrastructure
services at the sub-national
government level

The infrastructure
inherited f r o m Soviet
times deteriorating.
The quality o f water
increasingly a health
threat.
Energy coverage large but
quality o f supply poor.
Public enterprises not
financially sustainable.

[mplementation o f the
Dushanbe water project
has proceeded at a slower
pace than expected. The
institutional basis (private
operator, program design,
government support) are
now in place for
accelerated
implementation.

rechnical assistance needs to
)e buttressed to help improve
p a l i t y and strengthened
mblic utility companies at the
iame time.

The project o n municipal
infrastructure has not
been approved yet.
Progress has been made
in identifying potential
investments.

B. Improving delivery of
social services and
community development
Human Development
Strategy to contain spread o f
TB and H I V i A I D S put in
place
Immunization survey and a
strategy for strengthening the
immunization program
completed
Preparation o f the education
and health budget based o n
activityipopulation costing
carried out
Budget allocations to health
and education increased by
0.2 % o f GDP annually*
More cost effective health
and education delivery by
switching from norm- to cost
based activity.

Strategy for A I D S and

The social sectors were
under-funded

TB i s in place.

Basic health and
education indicators had
been deteriorating since
independence.

A strategy to strengthen
immunization i s in place
and under
implementation.

TB and A I D S surfaced as

Heath and education
budgetary allocations
have increased albeit at a
l o w pace.

a new heath threat in the
region.

Per-capita funding
mechanism i s being
piloted with positive
results.

Small targeted operations do
not seem to be enough to
reverse the decline in health
and education outcomes. The
Government and donors need
to increase efficiency and
scale up efforts to achieve
nationwide impact.
The targets set were very
ambitious given the resources
available and the technical
capacity in government.
Improved technical assistance
i s needed to achieve more
significant outcomes.

Attachment 2
Page 24 o f 25
Table 2: Summary o f the CAS Completion Report
CURRENT STATUS
IDAAmount
Status

PROJECTS PLANNED IN THE CAS
Project
IDAAmount
FY
(US$M)
20
FY03 Education Support and
Empowerment
10
FY03 Banking and Private
Sector Sutmort
10
FY04 SAC3

I

Community
Agriculture and
Watershed

FY04

I

1

Dropped
Under

10

FY05
FY05

FY05

I

Infrastructure

Under
preparation
Preparation
completed;
Lacked
IDA
resources
in FY05
D e layed
due to lack
o f IDA in
FY05

10

Approved

10

SUBTO AL

Land Registration and
Cadastre
FY05 Energy Loss Reduction
Project
SUBTOTAL
GRAND TOTAL
RGIONAL PROJECTS
FY05
Central Asia AIDS
FY05

I
1
I

I

18

1

Approved

I

18
28
58

~

Approved

I

25

Attachment 2
Page 25 o f 25
Table 3: Planned Versus Actual Non-Lending Deliverables
PRODUCT PLANNED IN CAS
Public Expenditure and Institutional
Review (PEIR)
Country Procurement Assessment
Report (CPAR)
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (CFFA)
STATSCOM Grant for Strengthening
the Statistics Department
Micro-enterprise lending (Seminar and
Paper)
Scale up C D D in Central Asia
AIDS/TB Regional Review
Consultative Group
Utilities R e f o d E n e r g y Sector Note
WE31 Courses/Seminars o n Education
Reform and Social Protection
Support for PRSP Implementation and
Monitoring
Trade & Transport Work

I,
FY03FY03-

I FY03-

'I

Knowledge Management (GDLN,
WBI. Gatewav)
Regional Work o n Water and Energy

b;
I FY05

FY03 -

National Environnemental Action Plan
TA
Health Sector Note
Povertv Assessment Update
Business Environment Study

IDF Grant on EmPowerim Mahallas
Country Economic Memorandum

Social Dimensions o f Regional
Differences
Gender Assessment Study
Future Directions in Agriculture
Social Protection TA
IDF on Strengthening Public
Procurement Svstem

E%-

'

I

CURRENT STATUS
Completed FY04

Completed FY03

I

Completed FY03
Put in place in FY03
Completed FY03
FY03
Completed FY04/FY05
Completed FY04/FY 05
Completed FY05
OngoingKompleted
Ongoing
Regional report completed
Dialogue ongoing
Ongoing
Completed FY05
Ongoing
Completed FY04
Completed FY04
Completed as Investment
Climate Assessment
Dropped
Has been replaced by a series o f
policy notes (Public Sector
Wages, Aviation, Remittances)
Nearing completion
Completed FY05
Nearing completion
Under Preparation
Approved

I

Attachment 3
Page 1 o f 3
Attachment 3: Medium-Term M a c r o Outlook

Tajikistan’s medium-term economic prospects are expected to remain broadly
1.
favorable during the FY06-09 CPS period. In the base case for this period, real output i s
projected to grow at 8% in 2005, and subsequently stabilize at about 6-7% during 200609 (see Table below). The growth i s expected to come from:
0

0

Continued strong inflows o f worker’s remittances. Remittances from Russia and
some other countries are expected to grow further. These broad-based remittances
fuel domestic demand in services and construction and are a significant factor in
poverty reduction. It i s likely that remittances will fuel small-scale private sector
investment and help develop the financial sector. Key risks to the continuing strong
inflow o f remittances include a possible visa regime in Russia and a downturn in
Russia’s economy.
Further improvements in productivity. Stability and a slowly improving business
climate are allowing more efficient use o f its stock o f physical and human capital.
Continued farm privatization to farm workers i s expected and would continue to
improve their incentives and improve yields. The planned reforms o f the cotton
sector and effective implementation o f farm debt resolution strategy are set to unlock
significant potential. Informal and individual entrepreneurs are likely to benefit
substantially from stability and marginal improvements o f the business climate,
increasing productivity by resorting to longer and more sophisticated production
processes that involve more people with higher skills. K e y risks include internal or
regional political instability, and delays or reversals o f economic reform.
Annex Table: K e y Macroeconomic Indicators

2000
Percentage change
Real GDP
Exports GNFS
Imports GNFS
Inflation
Share o f GDP (“36)
Exports GNFS
Imports GNFS
Current account balance
Net FDI
General Government Revenues*
General Government Balance**
Nominal exchange rate change(TJS/USO)***
Extemal Debt Sustainability Indicators (“36)
TDO/GDP
Debt ServiceiExports GNFS
NPVExports GNFS
NPViGeneral Government Revenue

Note:

*
**
***

Includinggrants
Includingextemally funded PIP
*‘-’‘- Depreciation

2001

Actual
2002

Estimate

2003

2004

Base Case

Low Case

2005-10

2005-10

8.3
10.4
8.8
32.9

10.2
3.4
15.4
38.6

9.1
14.4
3.3
12.2

10.2
7.6
15.2
16.4

10.6
8.6
12.3
7.1

6.5
7.9
8.1
6.2

4.0
5.3
6.9
10.0

86.7
88.6
-6.2
2.4
13.8
-5.6
-47.3

64.7
76.7
-6.6
0.9
14.9
-3.1
-27.4

62.0
75.0
-2.7
2.9
16.6
-2.4
-17.3

56.9
73.5
-1.3
2 .o
17.3
-1.8
-12.4

50.4
69.6
-3.9
13.1
17.9
-2.7
3.3

46.7
65.0
-4.3
2.5
18.1
-4.1
-2.9

44.4
64.3
-6.8
2.2
16.3
-5.5
-4.9

125.1
8.7
88.7
558.6

92.2
7.5
105.5
457.9

81.0
8.7
95.1
355.6

66.4
6.6
84.2
276.6

39.6
29.0
82.6
202.7

38.4
6.2
76.9
173.1

44.5
6.9
85.6
202.6

Attachment 3
Page 2 o f 3
0

0

Increased and more effective donor-funded public investment. In 2003, investment
flows under the Public Investment Program (PIP) were even below the 3% o f GDP
l i m i t agreed with the IMF. The low PIP investment levels o f the past were largely the
result o f Government’s limited absorption capacity, a lack o f counterpart funds,
which delayed the disbursement o f funds already pledged by donors, and sometimes
donor-specific red tape and lack o f coordination. Government capacity has since
increased somewhat, the debt situation has dramatically improved, and there has been
progress in donor coordination. As a result, it i s likely that annual PIP levels can
increase to 4.5% o f GDP. And as the priority-setting, planning, and execution
process o f public investment improves in line with the PRSP, the quantity and the
quality o f public investment are expected to increase. K e y risks include setbacks in
specific public sector reforms geared to improving PIP planning and execution and
possible shifts in donor priorities.
Export revenues from aluminum, cotton, and electricity and related foreign
investments. Aluminum, cotton, and electricity contribute more than 80% o f export
eamings and perhaps one-third o f budget revenues. Cotton sector reforms could help
to strengthen cotton yields and exports in the coming years. Aluminum and
electricity exports are expected to remain near present levels during the CPS period,
but some large investment projects in this area might start to materialize. Key risks
for export revenues include price deteriorations for cotton or aluminum and
disruptions in rail transit through Uzbekistan, which carries more than 90% o f goods
exports.

Under prudent fiscal and monetary management, inflation would stabilize at about
2.
6% a year. The fiscal surplus, excluding PIP, i s expected to tum into a small deficit in
2005, as public expenditure increases in priority areas, and Tajikistan bears the cost o f
patrolling the Tajik-Afghan border after the withdrawal o f Russian troops. Strong import
growth and a decline in the terms o f trade will widen the current account surplus to more
than 4% o f GDP, but much o f this i s probably being financed through unrecorded
remittances. Public sector extemal debt will remain below 40% o f GDP, and the ratios o f
debt to exports and general government revenue will be favorable.
In a l o w case, lack o f progress in addressing governance, SOE accountability, and
3.
structural weaknesses would have negative implications for growth, fiscal and debt
position. In addition, the extemal shocks associated with a decline in world prices o f key
exports would lower GDP growth and widen the current account and fiscal deficits. The
key extemal debt sustainability indicators would deteriorate but remain w e l l below the
HIPC benchmarks. More serious disruptions o f macroeconomic stability would occur if
there i s intemal political instability, or if extemal political disruptions affect the rail
transit through Uzbekistan, or if the visa-free access o f Tajik migrant workers to Russia i s
withdrawn.

Looking beyond the CPS period, a critical question i s how the capital stock to
4.
GDP ratio will normalize over the next 15 years. Tajikistan’s physical and human capital
stock, mostly dating back to Soviet times, has deteriorated considerably over the past 15
years. But i t remains far greater than a country w i t h a GDP per capita o f US$3 10. A

Attachment 3
Page 3 o f 3
race i s o n to leverage the fading advantage o f the Soviet capital stock between now and
2020. Ln one extreme, GDP will grow slowly and the capital stock will continue to
plunge due to l o w investment, leading to a GDP per capita o f below US$450 in 2020. In
another extreme, GDP will continue to grow at almost the present pace, with investment
levels sufficient to reverse the decline in physical and human, potentially leading to a
GDP per capita above US$l,OOO in 2020.

Attachment 4
Page 1 o f 4
Attachment 4: Debt Sustainability Analysis

Tajikistan's extemal debt profile has changed significantly since Independence.
1.
Starting from zero debt stock in 1991, extemal debt accumulated during the nineties due
to the loss o f transfers from Russia, a difficult market transition experience, political
conflict that led to a multi-year c i v i l war, weak capacity and poor governance. Total
extemal debt stock peaked at US$1,227 million in 2000 (128% o f GDP) before declining
to $837 m i l l i o n in 2004 (39.6% o f GDP).
To improve debt sustainability, the Government pursued various strategies. In
2.
1995, i t refrained from issuing guarantees o n state-owned enterprise debt to bilateral
partners. From 2000 to 2004, the debt to GDP ratio improved continuously due to a
combination o f rapid growth and borrowing restraint. Since early 2000, the Government
began to limit foreign borrowing on public investment projects to 3% o f GDP and only
o n concessional terms, while real GDP growth averaged 10%. In 2004, a major debtasset swap deal with Russia further reduced the debt stock.

I

3.
These efforts
helped to stabilize
key debt indicators.
The ratio o f total
Total stockofedema1debt
1226.5
1017.2
1009.8
1031.1
837
external debt stock
Total debt services
71
81
90
58.9
303.8
to GDP declined
TIxYm(%)
125.1
92.2
81.0
66.4
39.6
from 125% in 2000
B b t service/xGG (%)
8.4
11.4
11.8
6.7
29.0
to 40% in 2004.
N
P
w
a(%)
E8.7
105.5
95.1
84.2
82.6
However, the ratio
NPVGwemmmt Revenue (%)
558.6
457.9
355.6
276.6
XI7
o f debt service to
Source: Ihe WbddBank
exports spiked in
2004 due to repayments to Russia under the debt-to-asset-swap agreement.
4.
The debt-to-asset swap concluded with Russia in 2004 which significantly
improved Tajikistan's debt sustainability. The agreement signed in October 2004
lowered Tajikistan's debt by US$305.7 m i l l i o n stock (including debt stock o f US$299.7
million and interest o f US$6.1 million). Inreturn, Tajikistan granted to Russia ownership
in the Nurek space tracking station in Tajikistan (US$242 million), offset the National
Bank o f Tajikistan's claims o n the Central Bank o f Russia (US$12.3 million), and
committed to invest US$50 m i l l i o n in Sangtuda on behalf o f Russia during the period
2005-08.

Attachment 4
Page 2 o f 4

I

5.
Total stock o f
external debt stood at
US$837 m i l l i o n at the end
o f 2004, equivalent to
cmw
USEK
23%
11%
39.6% o f GDP. About
two-thirds o f external debt
i s owed to multilateral
creditors, notably World
Bank, IMF, and ADB.
The World Bank credits
accounts for about oneh a l f o f Tajikistan's total
multilateral debt. Bilateral
debt makes up about onefourth o f total external debt, o f which Uzbekistan i s now the largest bilateral- creditor,
followed by Russia and the United States.
Tajikistan'sb b t Profile 2004

Debt Sustainability under the CPS Scenario

The CPS i s fully aware o f the new operational framework for Debt Sustainability
6.
Assessments in Low-Income Countries (LIC) recently approved by the Boards on April
12,2005. However, ajoint DSA, using the l o w income country framework, cannot be
conducted at this time because the IMF already conducted the DSA recently in the
context o f the 2004 Article I V consultation and Fourth Review o f the PRGF presented to
i t s Board in March, 2005. The Bank and the IMF teams, therefore, agreed to conduct a
joint annual D S A in the context o f the Sixth PRGF Review planned in November 2005.
The DSA outlook under the base case scenario' appears favorable over the
7.
medium-term. Tajikistan's long-term debt sustainability begins to improve only after
2006 when the NPV o f debt declines in relation to GDP, exports, and revenue. After a
sharp increase in debt service associated with the debt-for-asset swap with Russia in
2004, Tajikistan's debt service burden significantly improves from 2005 onwards,
reflecting stable ratios o f debt service to exports and to revenue. Further, most o f these
indicators remain below the thresholds for weak policy LIC, except for the ratio o f NPV
to GDP. The latter slightly exceeds the threshold o f 30% due to a projected slow down in
GDP growth from 10.6% in 2004 to 8 and 7% during 2005-06. A simulation also shows
that the IDA grant has no significant impact o n the debt sustainability as key debt
indicators remain similar to those with IDA credit.

average o f 6.5% over the CPS period (2005-10). Inflation i s expected to stabilize at around 6% reflecting continued
prudent management of fiscal and monetary policies and a stable somoni. The Government will limit its external
borrowing to finance public investment programs on concessional terms at about 4-5% o f GDP, and the overall fiscal
deficit including PIP i s forecasted to increase to about 4.1% o f GDP. Continued strong inflows o f workers' remittances
will contribute to a moderate current account deficit estimated at about 4-4.5% o f GDP over the projection period. The
CPS envisages an annual I D A allocation o f 100% grant in the amount o f USS23 million in FY06, and credit in
subsequent fiscal years.

Attachment 4
Page 3 o f 4

A sensitivity analysis indicates that Tajikistan’s debt sustainability i s vulnerable
8.
to external shocks but still remains favorable over the medium-term. The l o w case
assumes that an external shock associated with a sharp reduction in the prices o f
aluminum and cotton in 2005 and 2007 will lower GDP growth to an average o f 4% over
the CPS period. Both the current account deficit and fiscal deficit are expected to further
widen compared to those o f the base case. The ratios o f NPV o f debt to GDP and
revenue sharply increase and exceed the thresholds o f 30 and 200% in 2006, respectively,
but subsequently decline. The high case scenario envisages an accelerated growth o f 9%
per annum, favorable prices o f aluminum and cotton and strong remittance inflows.
Under this case, the current account deficit i s expected to fall and stabilize at a lower
level than that o f the base case, while the overall fiscal deficit declines and tums into a
small surplus at the end o f the period. All key external debt sustainability indicators are
expected to improve and remain below the thresholds for weak policy LIC.

Attachment 4
Page 4 o f 4
Tajikistan: Debt SustainabiityAnalysis

2004

CAS Base Case
CAS Base Case (with IDA grant after FY 06)
Low Case
High Case
Threshold for Weak Policy LIC

68
68
68
68
100

CAS Base Case
CAS Base Case (with IDA grant after FY 06)
Low Case
High Case
Threshold for Weak Policy LIC

34
34
34
34
30

CAS Base Case
CAS Base Case (with IDA grant after FY 06)
Low Case
High Case
Threshold for Weak Policy LIC

191
191
191
191
200

CAS Base Case
CAS Base Case (with IDA grant after FY 06)
Low Case
High Case
Threshold for Weak Policy LIC

29
29
29
29
15

CAS Base Case
CAS Base Case (with IDA grant after FY 06)
Low Case
High Case
Threshold for Weak Policy LIC

82
82
82
82
25

2005

2006

2007

NPV of debt to Exports
65
68
63
68
63
65
76
72
68
67
62
62
100
100
100
NPV of debt to GDP
30
31
33
31
33
30
32
34
32
31
32
29
30
30
30
NPV of debt to Revenue
177
183
168
177
183
167
189
201
183
166
170
152
200
200
200
Debt Service to Exports
5
6
6
5
6
6
6
6
7
5
5
6
15
15
15
Debt S e r ~ c to
e Revenue
15
15
16
15
15
16
16
16
17
14
14
14
25
25
25

Average
20082010

59
61
69
58
100
28
27
30
25
30
153
148
166
129
200
6
6
7
6
15
16
16
17
13
25

Attachment 5
Page 1 o f 2

Attachment 5: Central Asia Regional Cooperation Program
In 2004, the Bank prepared a Central Asia Regional Framework Paper, which listed
1.
several critical regional cooperation areas such as trade and transport, water and energy, and
communicable diseases, as well as several thematic areas such as anti-money laundering,
education and business development. The Bank Group i s supporting cooperation in these
areas, primarily through analytical work and convening activities and through lending when
conditions warrant. W h i l e the region has considerable distance to go o n the cooperation
front, there are some encouraging indications o f progress.
In the area o f water and energy, at the request o f four o f the Central Asia Presidents,
2.
the Bank i s developing a blueprint for a Water and Energy Consortium as a basis for
improved regional management o f these resources. The Bank provided diagnostic studies o n
the watedenergy nexus o f the Syr Darya river basin and recently completed the Regional
Electricity Export Potential Study, a key input into the rationalization o f Central Asia’s
domestic and export investments in power. The study finds that the region has substantial
potential for exporting power but that major new generation projects will be feasible only i f a
way can be found to ensure demand from markets outside the region (Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Iran, China and Russia).

O n trade and transport facilitation, the Bank Group i s working with the Asian
3.
Development Bank under the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Organization
(CAREC). I t has carried out trade audits o n several individual countries, amalgamating this
work into a Trade and Transport Facilitation in Central Asia. Recently, the Bank brought
together customs, road sector and railways professionals from around the region to present
the findings o f our Trade and Transport Facilitation in Central Asia report and to share
experience from the Bank’s involvement in the South-Eastem Europe trade and trade
facilitation program.
O n communicable diseases, the Bank has carried out regional assessments o f the
4.
extent o f HIVIAIDS and TB in Central Asia and has been supporting an active regional
dialogue on these issues. For example, a regional TB conference, jointly with KfW, i s
scheduled for M a y 2005. In March 2005, IDA approved a US$25 m i l l i o n Central Asia
Regional H I V / A I D S Control Project, the first regional project prepared under the Bank’s
Central Asia Regional Framework Paper. The Bank hopes to put in place a Regional TB
operation, jointly with KfW, in FY07.
On anti-money laundering, the new anti-money laundering specialist based in the
5.
Bank’s Central Asia Regional Office in Almaty and co-funded by UNODC, i s finding
considerable support for her efforts to raise the profile o f money laundering issues in the
donor community and among Central Asian governments. The early signs are encouraging.
O n education, the Bank i s working to raise the profile o f education issues and
6.
challenges throughout Central Asia, especially the need to stem the decline in facilities and

Attachment 5
Page 2 o f 2

standards. T o highlight this critical issue, the Bank i s planning a regional workshop focusing
on preparing the region’s youth for a global future toward the end o f the fiscal year.
O n business development, IFC has put in place two regional facilities for
7.
microcredit and leasing development. The Bank Group has also been supporting the
formation o f the Central Asia Business Associations and i s looking for opportunities to
integrate this support into the Trade and Transport Facilitation work.

Attachment 6
Page 1 o f 3

Attachment 6: Country Financing Parameters

1.

The Country Financing Parameters (CFPs) for Tajikistan were first established in
August 2004, and reviewed during the preparation o f this CPS. Changes in the Bank’s
financing criteria serve the purpose o f facilitating operations, accelerating disbursements
and project implementation and thus timely achieving the development objectives. At
present, there are two projects which make use o f the CFPs: Education Modernization
and Community Agriculture and Watershed Management Projects. Although it i s too
early to assess the full impact, the initial experience o f these two projects shows that the
added flexibility contributed to proactive resolution o f many implementation-related
issues.
2.
Cost sharing. The use o f the new cost-sharing criteria will help make project
implementation less complicated. The Bank may finance up to 100% o f individual
project costs. At the same time, country ownership o f individual projects would continue
to be key, and Government financing and participation o f other donors will be
encouraged. Measures to ensure ownership o f Bank-financed projects include aspects
such as integration o f the Bank projects in the Government’s Public Investment Program
(PIP), as well as use all o f the available instruments -both Government and donor
financed - to support a shared sector strategy. In addition, the CPS i s proposing to move
gradually to SWAps, which should help secure greater Government ownership. Finally,
the Bank and the Govemment started a process o f gradual mainstreaming o f the P I U into
the relevant ministries and agencies.
3.
The Bank’s financing share in individual projects would be determined by
project-specific considerations, and i s expected to below the upper limit in most projects.
As discussed in the CPS (see par. 60 and 78), the Bank expects to cofinance many
projects with other donors (e.g., Municipal Infrastructure Project, Community and Basic
Health Project, Energy Loss Reduction Project, and Lake Sarez Risk Mitigation Project).
In SWAPS(planned in the health and education sectors) financed by Government and
other donors, the Bank’s financing share i s typically low. Project design considerations
in community-led development projects suggest that contributions from beneficiaries and
local communities are generally expected in such projects (e.g., Rural Infrastructure
Rehabilitation Project, Community Agriculture and Watershed Development Project, and
Land Registration and Cadastre System Project).

4.
Recurrent costfinancing in the current portfolio i s mainly for project operating
costs; and going forward i s expected to continue to remain at current modest levels. N o
country-level limit i s set o n recurrent cost financing, given the overall fiscal and debt
situation. In determining recurrent cost financing in individual projects, the Bank would
take into account sustainability issues at the project and sector levels. Factors promoting
sustainability include: (i)
the Bank’s approach o f streamlining PIUs into executing
agencies; (ii)
the current inclusion o f recurrent expenditures into the Budget as part o f

Attachment 6

Page 2 o f 3

counterpart funding; and (iii)
the improving linkage between the PIP, MTEF and annual
state budget.

5.
Local costfinancing. Government resources from taxes and expected domestic
borrowing are expected to only cover part o f the overall development program
requirements: 17% o f planned development investment i s proposed to be financed from
Government’s o w n resources, and the remaining 83% are expected to be donor-financed’.
The current portfolio and pipeline includes projects in agriculture, irrigation, energy,
water supply, and education and health where a considerable portion o f project-related
items are procured locally. A majority o f the Bank investment lending disbursements in
recent years have been for local costs (61% in FY03 and 66% in FY04). The financing o f
foreign expenditures alone will not enable the Bank to assist in financing o f individual
projects.
6.
Financing of taxes and duties. In general, the Tajik taxes are not considered
excessive and there i s currently no discriminatory adverse treatment o f Bank-financed
projects. Customs duties range from 0 to 15%, but donor-funded public projects are
exempt from the customs duties except for the customs administration fee o f 0.15%.
Major taxes relevant in Bank-financed projects are profit tax o f 25%, personal income tax
ranging from 8% to 13%, and VAT o f 20%. Social charges are 25% to be paid by the
employer and 1% by the employee. Projects that receive funding from international
financial institutions are exempt from a number o f taxes and duties, most importantly
from taxation and duties o n imported goods. VAT under donor-financed projects i s
reimbursed within a 30-day period2.

’

According to the Government’s PIP, the total amount o f public investment for 2005-2007 i s estimated at
US$444 million, where US$370 m i l l i o n i s planned to come f r o m donors, US$50 m i l l i o n will be the
Government’s contribution, and US$25 million will be contributed by local communities, etc.
The Bank would not finance VAT that would be reimbursed to implementing entities, since these are not

’

project costs in the first instance.

Attachment 6

Page 3 o f 3

Table 1: Tajikistan Financing Parameters

I

Item
Cost sharing. L i m i t on the
proportion o f individual
project costs that the Bank may
finance

Parameter
up to 100%

Recurrent costfinancing. Any
limits that would apply to the
overall amount o f recurrent
expenditures that the Bank
may finance

No countrylevel limit
o n recurrent
cost
financing

Local costfinancing. Are the
requirements for Bank
financing o f local expenditures
met, namely that: (i)
financing
requirements for the country’s
development program would
exceed the public sector’s o w n
resources (e.g., from taxation
and other revenues) and
expected domestic borrowing;
and (ii)
the financing o f
foreign expenditures alone
would not enable the Bank t o
assist in the financing o f
individual Droiects?
Taxes and duties. A r e there
any taxes and duties that the
Bank would not finance?

Yes

No

~~~

ExplanatiodRemarks
Country ownership o f individual projects
would continue to be key, and Govemment
2nd other donor financing will be
Zncouraged. The Bank’s financing share in
individual projects would be determined by
project-specific considerations and i s
expected to be below the upper limit in most
projects. In SWAPS,the Bank’s financing
share i s typically low. Project design
considerations in community-led
development projects suggest that
contributions from beneficiaries and local
communities are generally expected in such
Droiects
Appropriate justifications for recurrent cost
financing would be presented at the projectlevel regarding: (i)
sustainability o f project
achievements; (ii)
the implied future
budgetary outlays; and (iii)
the clear
demonstration o f sustainability o f Bankfinanced recurrent costs.
The criteria for Bank’s financing o f local
costs are met. Therefore, the Bank can
finance local and foreign costs in any
proportions as needed for individual projects

Currently, there are n o taxes or duties in
effect that are considered excessive or
discriminatory against Bank-funded projects.
At the project level, the Bank would consider
whether taxes and duties constitute an
excessively high share o f project costs.

Attachment 7
Page 1 o f 6
Attachment 7: Achieving Millennium Development Goals: An Assessment

1.
This attachment presents (i)
the resource implications in achieving the MDG, (ii)
a
table outlining the MDG targets as they apply to Tajikistan, (iii)
the current situation, (iv)
prospects for achieving the goals, and (v) the Bank CPS instruments that would support
these goals. This attachment draws extensively on the U N D P Millennium Goals Needs
Assessment Report for Tajikistan o f April 2005.
MDG Costs: The total estimated cost for achieving the key MDGs targets by
2.
2015 in food security, gender, education, health, and water and sanitation i s in the order o f
US$12.9 billion. The annual per capita cost o f meeting the above MDGs targets i s in the
order o f US$ 119 in 2005, rising to US$183.2 in 20 15. The UNDP report evaluates two
scenarios:
Financing under the Baseline Reform Scenario assumes that there will be no
significant improvements in the economic, institutional and structural
environments o f the country; there will be a modest increase in the government
spending for financing MDG priorities and the total amount o f aid remains

unchanged over time. Under this scenario, (a) GDP growth stays at 5%; (b) the tax
collections increase to 19% as a share o f GDP by 2015, and (c) the government
expenditure for MDG related investments remains at 3 1% o f the total budget.
Based on these assumptions, the Government expenditures for covering the MDG
investments will be in the order o f US$1.5 billion, or 12% o f total MDG costs.
The estimated total private contributions will be in the order o f US$5.7 billion, or
45% o f total MDG costs, and the total donor contributions will b e in the order o f
U S $ l . l billion, or 9% o f total MDG costs. In this case, the amount o f additional
financing needed will be in the order o f US$4.5 billion, which is 35% o f total
MDG costs.

(ii) Financing under the High Growth Scenario: The high growth scenario assumes
acceleration o f the economic, institutional and structural reforms, leading to (a)
GDP growth at 7% during 2007-2015,' (b) tax collection as a share o f GDP
increasing from the current level o f 15% to 24% by 20 15; and (c) government
rechannelling 50% o f the state expenditures into financing MDG investments by
20152. Based on these assumptions, the Government will be able to release an
additional US$2.3 billion for the MDG investments, covering US$3.8 billion, or
30% o f the total MDG costs, assuming that private and donor contribution stay at
the same level as in the baseline scenario. In this case, the amount o f additional
Pnancing needed will be in the order o f US$2.0 billion, or 16% o f total MDG
costs.

Under high reform scenario the projected GDP growth in 2005 i s 9%, in 2006 will be 8%
Assuming that the global market prices on cotton and aluminum remain favorable for Tajikistan

Attachment 7
Page 2 o f 6

Attachment: Assessing the Likelihood o f Achieving the MDG Goals in Tajikistan
Millennium
Development
income
poverty

Targetfor
Tajikistan: 41 %
of population
living below
Purchasing
Power Parity
(PPP) US$2.15
per day by 2015

universal
primary
education

Target for
Tajikistan:
Achieve
universal
secondary
education
(grades 1-9)

Present Situation
Poverty: as PPP at
US$2.15 per day:
Baseline (1999) - 8 1%

Prospects for
Achievement by 2015

The decrease in
poverty has been
largely due to "one o f f
factors." There has
been a substantial
Most Recent (2003)decrease in US$2 a
64%
day poverty between
Malnutrition
1999 and 2003. For
(children under 5) in
the rate o f poverty to
be halved by 2015, an
2003 :
annual real per capita
Acute- 4.7%
Chronic- 36.2%
economic growth rate
o f 3.7% would be
needed during the
Iodine deficiency
period 2003 to 20 15
among population:
Goiter incidence- 15% assuming n o increase
in inequality. This
Prevalence o f anemia
could happen but i s
in:
likely to be difficult to
maintain. Child
Children- 37%
Pregnant women- 48% malnutrition i s a major
problem which i s not
being addressed o n a
major scale. I t i s
unlikely that the
hunger and malnutrition MDG target
will be achieved. At
this stage i t i s assessed
that the poverty MDG
may be met.
A high birth rate and
enrollments are
declining standards in
declining rather than
education service
rising. Enrollment
delivery increase the
rates in primary
likelihood that
education remain high, Tajikistan will not
but lower secondary
maintain universal
primary education.
enrollment was only
about 88% in primary
The school age
schooling and 88% in
population i s likely to
secondary schooling in increase by 50% by
2003, down from close 2015.
to 100% before 1990.

CPS Instruments
The proposed
Living Standard
Assessment o f
2003 will update
the poverty
indicators. In
addition, the
Cotton
Development
activities, Ferghana
Valley, Cadastre
and Land
Registration, and
Community
Agriculture and
Watershed
Management
Projects will
support economic
development in the
area o f small- and
medium-sized
enterprises and the
agricultural sector.

The ongoing
Education
Modemization
Project and
proposed SWAP
will help to reform
the education
sector.
Tajikistan has been
proposed for an
Education for All
grant. The Bank
will also work

Attachment 7
Page 3 o f 6
Millennium
Development

Present Situation
I t i s important to note

that data are not
always reliable. For
example, the TLSS
data suggest that 1 in 5
children may not be
attending school
% o f girls completing
9 years o f education:
76%

Prospects for
Achievement by 2015

CPS Instruments

With continued
support from the
international
community, the goal
o f having all boys and
girls complete the full
9 years o f basic
education could be
met

Aosely with other
ionor agencies to
ry to maximize the
mpact towards the
:ducation MDG.

All the data suggest
that the gender equity
MDG target i s

The ongoing
Education
Modernization
Project i s providing
thematic grants
through which
schools will
prioritize needs and
make plans to
encourage
enrollment and
attendance by girls
and vulnerable
students.

There are big
differences in survey
and admin data for
both IMR and U5MR.
However, all data official, survey and
estimates - indicate
that Tajikistan i s
unlikely to meet the

The Community
and Basic Health
Project would help
improve the basic
health services in
selected districts,
especially in
remote areas where
the poorest are

% o f rehabilitated
schools: 45%

Gender
equality in
primary
education
Targetfor
Tajikistan:
Eliminate
gender
disparity in
primary and
secondary
education
preferably by
2005, and in all
levels of
education no
later than 2015

Reducing
under-five,
mortality by
two thirds
Targetfor
Tajikistan:
Reduce by at

% o f schools with
access to drinking
water: 50%
Gender balance at
primary levels remains
high, but i s changing
to the detriment o f
girls and i s below the
girlboy ratio o f 1.
There i s also evidence
in both urban and rural
areas that poor boys
are either not enrolling
or not attending school

unlikely to be met

Ratio o f girls to boys
in primary and
secondary education
(2004): 88%
Ratio o f literate
women to men, 15-24
vears old (2004): 98%
Infant mortality rate
(1999-2001): 86.9 per
1000 live births
(Demographic Survey
2002)

Under 5 mortality rate
(2002): 118 per 100
live births (UNICEF

Attachment 7
Page 4 o f 6
Millennium
Development
mortality rate
between 2005
and 2015

1

1

Reducing
maternal
mortality by
three quarters
Target-for
Tajikistan:
Reduce by at
least three
quarters the
maternal
mortality ratio,
between 2005
and 2015
(Target
maternal
mortality rate:
30 per 100,000
live births)
Combat
HIVIAIDS,
malaria and
other diseases
Target-for
Tajikistan: Halt
by 2015 and
begun to
reverse the
incidence of
HI V/AIDS,
malaria and
other major
diseases

I

Present Situation

Prospects for
Achievement by 2015

CPS Instruments

2002)

child mortality MDG
target by 20 15

Maternal mortality rate
increased sharply in
the early 1990s from
42 per 100,000 births
in 1990 to 87 per
100,000 in 1994
(TransMONEE) and
most recently, (2003):
120 per 100,000 live
births*

MMRs are o f serious
concern. The target is
unrealistic because the
value for the baseline
data i s considered to
be too low.

located, as well as
strengthen the
institutional
capability (both at
the center and
district levels) to
carry out health
care reforms.
Same as above

The real situation
about the spread o f
HIV/AIDS in
Tajikistan i s difficult
to assess due to
uncertainty about the
accuracy o f the official
data. The most recent
figures point to an
alarming jump: from 4
in 1999 to 34 in 2001
(or 0.5 per 100,000
people in 200 l),
and
Tajikistan in 200 1 had
just one reported case
o f AIDS -- the first
one

Currently very low
incidence o f HIV but
this i s rising fast.
Actual rate i s
estimated to be 10-20
times higher than the
official rate. T B
incidence may be
increasing again.
There were 1,200 new
cases officially
registered in 1998.
The situation i s far
worse than that now

Total HIV positive
population (2004):

There i s a significant
difference between the
official data and
international estimates
o f MMRs. MMR
target unlikely to be
met without major
investment, capacity
building and political
support

The situation i s
expected to worsen
and HIV/AIDS rates
are expected to rise
due to increasing. use

An ongoing
regional HIV/IDS
study will serve as
a basis for future
Bank interventions
in t h i s area

Attachment 7
Page 5 o f 6
~

Millennium
Development
Goal

Present Situation
198.
Malaria cases detected
5,428 (2003).
Prevalence (2004) :
53.7 per 100,000 (151
cases o f acute malaria)
T B DOTS coverage,
detection and recovery
(2002): 13%, lo%,
69%

Ensuring
environmental
sustainability
(including
halving the
proportion of
people without
access to safe
water)
Targetfor
Tajikistan:
Maintain the
current
proportion of
land covered by
forest, and
increase
reforestation by
13,000 ha a
year;
Improve
disaster
preparedness,
integrate Hyogo
framework into
national
development

Mortality rate: 9.5 per
100,000
Notification (2004):
64,6 per 100,000
UNICEF 2000 data
shows that 93% o f
urban population and
47% o f rural
population had access
to an improved water
source. The 2000
MICS report showed
that 40% o f the
population uses
drinking water that i s
piped into their
dwelling, yard or plot.
The quality o f drinking
water in Tajikistan i s
very low. Most recent
estimates show that
access to safe water
stands at (2004):
52.1%
Proportion o f land
covered by forest
(2000): 3% o f total
territory.
Ratio o f protected
areas (2001): 21.5% o f
total territory

Prospects for
Achievement by 2015

CPS Instruments

3 f narcotic

drugs in
recent years. The new
national HIV/AIDS
strategy w i l l focus on
prevention, including
public education o f
youths, reduction o f
transmission among
high-risk groups
(intravenous drug
users, commercial sex
workers).
It i s unlikely that the

HIV/AIDS MDG
target w i l l be met

Despite a recent slight
increase in access to
piped water, i t i s
unlikely that the water
MDG w i l l be met.
The water supply
infrastructure in
Tajikistan i s poor, thus
access to piped water
certainly does not
guarantee safe
drinking water.
Incidence o f some
water-borne diseases
(typhoid, dysentery
and hepatitis) dropped
during 1997-2002, but
diarrhea increased.

The ongoing
Dushanbe Water
Supply and
proposed
Municipal
Infrastructure
Projects would
focus on water
management and
water quality issues
in selected regions.

Millennium
Development
Goal
strategies and
establish Early
Warning System
CountVwide

Present Situation

Proportion o f
population using
solid fuels (2002):

Prospects for
Achievement by 2015

CPS Instruments

f

Attachment 9
Page 1 o f 3
Attachment 9: Key Partnerships

1.
Energy Sector. There are several successful partnerships in this sector. The
public-private partnership (PPP) for the Pamir Private Power Project, where the Aga
Khan Fund and IFC contributed US$11.5 million in equity, I F C contributed an additional
US$4.5 m i l l i o n in debt, complemented by an IDA financing (through the Government) o f
US$lO million, i s recognized as a best practice model o n h o w Government and private
partners can work together o n providing infrastructure services to a highly impoverished
rural population. In addition, IDA and the Secretariat for Economic Cooperation o f the
Swiss Government (SECO) agreed recently to jointly support the domestic energy sector
reform through IDA’s Energy Efficiency and Loss Reduction Project (FY05) in the
amount o f US$18 million and SECO’s grant in the amount o f US$8 million. Moreover,
the Bank Group i s working closely with other important players in this sector such as the
ADB, which has committed US$61.7 million’ to the sector, Islamic Development Bank
(IDB), which has committed US$17.3 million for the transmission o f rehabilitation and
small hydro development, and the Kuwait Fund (KfW) with US$10.5 m i l l i o n for
rehabilitation o f the distribution network in Dushanbe. The Bank Group will seek to
forge new partnerships during this CPS period to support the Government’s agenda in
exploiting the country’s hydro resources to realize i t s electricity export potential.
2.

Health. Partnerships have been a critical part o f the health sector reform process

in Tajikistan and their range and scope have increased substantially in recent years. The
US AID-funded ZdravPlus program, the Swiss-funded project Sino and WHO programs
have played an important role in conceptualizing and designing the I D A ’ s Community

Basic Health Project currently under preparation and has designed their o w n programs to
complement the activities proposed under this project. In addition, the Swedish
Intemational Development Association (SIDA) has agreed to provide US$8 million in
cofinancing for this project and to delegate project management to the Bank while s t i l l
taking part in the policy part o f project supervision. S I D A will also support the sector
through separate initiatives such as direct grants to 1-2 NGOs to help strengthen the
primary health care service delivery in Tajikistan. These activities will be closely linked
to those anticipated under the IDA project. The Bank and S I D A are also in discussions
with WHOiEURO in Copenhagen and the DFID-WHO Health Policy Analysis Project in
the Kyrgyz Republic about a possible twinning arrangement between the Kyrgyz and
Tajik Health Policy Analysis Unit and a medium-term technical supervision and support
arrangement from WHO/EURO.

A broader group o f donors, including U N I C E F and ADB, has been active in
3.
policy dialogue around implementation o f the Basic Benefit Package and per capita
financing in the health sector. M a n y o f these partnerships are expected to continue
during the project. In particular, policy dialogue o n financing and organizational reform

’

The US$22.4 m i l l i o n financing for the Regional Transmission Project, i s part o f a two-country project by
ADB with Uzbekistan and Tajikistan. Although both parties have signed the respective loan agreements
w i t h ADB, the loans are not effective, because the Power Trade Relations Agreement between the two
countries i s not yet signed. Excluding these funds, ADB’s committed financing amounts to about US$40
million.

Attachment 9
Page 2 o f 3
issues has become increasingly a multi-donor affair, w i t h extensive informal
collaboration and even joint missions. These will continue and are likely to become
progressively more formal as the MOH’s capacity to coordinate donors improves with the
implementation o f “Health Summits” and other activities proposed under the Community
Basic Health Project.

4.
Education. In 2003, IDA, with the IMF’ support under PRGF, launched a new
initiative o n education sector reform, supported through the Education Modernization
Project and other assistance to the Ministries o f Finance and Education. ADB and GTZ
later o n joined this initiative with their support to the development o f the National
Education Development Framework (NEDF), while U N I C E F and UNDP have been
providing support to the education MDG costing. T o complement the activities o f the
Education Modernization Project, IDA, USAID, OSI, GTZ and AKF are closely
collaborating in supporting the introduction o f per capita funding to schools in 5 pilot
rayons; IDA, the British Council, OSI, and AKF are providing support to curriculum
modemization and textbook development, and UNICEF, AKF and IDA are jointly
assisting the Ministry o f Education o n the establishment o f a modem student assessment
system. For example, KfW has given a grant o f US$6.6 m i l l i o n to implement the
education and other social service projects in the Khatlon Oblast.
Private and Financial Sector Development: The World Bank Group - (IDA,
5.
IFC, and MIGA) i s working together with the EBRD and ADB to develop a joint strategy
for the private and financial sector development. In the financial sector, I F C and EBRD
are already working together o n upgrading the banking system and providing financial
resources for intermediation to the private sector. IFC, with support from U S A I D , and in
cooperation with ADB, have developed the legal framework and are working o n the
regulatory framework with the National Bank to support the growth o f microfinance.
Following on IFC’s work, funded by SECO, to put in place the legal and regulatory
framework for leasing, I F C has approved a regional facility to fund leasing operations
and will provide technical assistance, with funding from SECO, to leasing support
intermediaries which engage in leasing operations. Also with SECO funding, I F C will
begin work in FY2006 to develop the legal and regulatory framework to support the
development o f housing finance and commence a program to develop better corporate
govemance in financial intermediaries.

6.
I F C and EBRD have closely coordinated to develop the Micro and Small
Enterprise Facility to provide funding for micro enterprises coupled with technical
assistance provided by SECO, EU, Japan and U S A I D . I F C i s working with AKFED and
KfW to develop a full service micro-finance bank with I F C and KfW both providing
equity and loan financing and C I D A providing grant funding for startup expenses. IFC,
jointly with SECO and USAID, have created the regional Central Asia Small Enterprise
Fund (CASEF) to provide equity financing to entrepreneurial local enterprises in
Tajikistan and other Central Asian Republics. IFC, with SECO support, completed in
2003, the first baseline SME survey o n the private sector business environment in
Tajikistan which has been published and widely discussed with Government, donors and
the private sector. Based on the initial survey, IFC, with support from SECO, i s working
on a program with the Government to reduce the high level o f inspections faced by the

Attachment 9

Page 3 o f 3

private sector and i s also preparing to commence in mid-FY2006 the second SME Survey
on business environment. These surveys are meant to be a useful tool for both the
Government and donors to identify obstacles to private sector development and measure
the success o f programs carried out to improve the business environment. The Bank
Group i s planning to continue working together with other donors in strengthening the
financial and private sectors.
R u r a l Finance: IFC, with donor support from SECO, invested in, and oversees
7.
through its PEP program, a pilot project in Khojand, the Farm Ownership Model, which
i s designed to demonstrate the effectiveness o f alternative means o f providing rural
farmers with access to financing, critical farm inputs and training in best farming
practices to improve yields. Based o n early results, IFC and SECO will provide
additional funding to expand the program in Khojand from the initial 366 farms to over
1000 farms. IFC, working with C I D A and USAID, will soon commence work to
replicate the Farm Ownership Model for rural finance in Southern Tajikistan.
Treasury/Budget Reform. IDA, IMF, DFID and the European Commission
8.
(EC) are collaborating closely o n the implementation o f the public expenditure reforms.
IDA’SPEIR (FY04) has served as an important basis for dialogue in this area. IDA will
continue i t s support in this area through the proposed Policy Based Credit, PRSC, Rapid
Response TA project and programmatic PER, ad will actively seek cofinancing o f these
activities by other donors. Jointly w i t h DFID, IMF, and EC, it will support further
elaboration o f the medium-term budget framework, the shift to per capita funding in
education and health, and the modemization o f the treasury system at central and local
levels.

NSIFT. The National Social Investment Fund (NSIF) o f Tajikistan, which i s
9.
aiming to reduce poverty by providing support to community generated initiatives, has
provided a platform for donors willing to contribute to this purpose. DFID has
contributed US$2.7 million to build the N S I F ’ s capacity, and help find new ways to
foster linkages and knowledge sharing with l i n e ministries and the PRSC process. In
addition, SIDA has expressed a strong interest to participate in the NSIF. The ongoing
IDA review o f the NSIF’s operations should help redesign the N S I F and make i t more
effective and efficient, which should help to attract additional donor participation.
Statistical Capacity. IDA i s in the process o f forging partnerships with donors to
10.
help the State Statistical Committee o f Tajikistan implement the multi-year plan for
statistical reform, which i s estimated at around U$4.5 million. Several donors, such as
the IMF, ADB, EUROSTAT, UNDP, UNICEF, DFID, SIDA and the Swiss Agency for
Development and Cooperation (SDC) are already working together to support the
implementation o f this plan. C I D A has also expressed interest and may j o i n the other
partners. Out o f the total cost o f US$4.5 million, US$872,000 will be provided by the
Government. The remaining US$3.7 million i s to be funded by the Bank’s STATCAP
facility, EUROSTAT (around US$650,000) as well as DFID, SIDA and SDC, which will
help fund the remaining amount.

Attachment 10
Page 1 o f 3
Attachment 10: Discussions with Civil Society

1.
During the CPS preparation, the Bank Group carried out discussions with
representatives o f civil society organizations and the private sector. The purpose o f these
discussions was to receive direct feedback from the beneficiaries o f the Bank Group
projects, to discuss the lessons learnt from the current CAS implementation, and to hear
their views about the future role o f the World Bank Group in Tajikistan. The Bank
Group team explained the new results-based approach and discussed with the participants
the proposed broad CPS strategic objectives for the next four years.

2.
In general, participants welcomed the results-based approach and agreed o n
the broad thrusts o f the Bank’s assistance in Tajikistan. Participants have also
appreciated the candidness and objectivity o f the CPS document and i t s approach o f
helping the country to address i t s short- and long-term development challenges. The
fiduciary issues, (ii)
monitoring, evaluation and
discussion focused on: (i)
sustainability o f the Bank-supported
coordination o f donor assistance, (iii)
interventions, (iv) PRSP implementation, (v) taxation, (vi) access and high cost o f
private sector financing, and (vii) environmental aspects. A brief summary o n these
issues i s presented below.
3.
Fiduciary issues. The participants saw improved financial accountability as a
key area o f Bank engagement. They welcomed Bank-supported public sector financial
accountability measures, such as introduction o f the practice o f IAS audits in the state
owned enterprises like TadAZ. In addition, the participants were positive about the use
o f the sector-wide approach in future Bank lending. However, they cautioned against
using the government systems for channeling resources because o f the problems with
public financial accountability and procurement systems as w e l l as weak government
agencies’ capacity at central and local levels. The Bank Group team informed the
participants that it would continue paying adequate attention to financial accountability
and procurement issues, and that it counted o n strengthening o f the c i v i l society
oversight.
Monitoring, evaluation and coordination o f donor assistance. Several
4.
participants raised the issue o f greater involvement o f the c i v i l society in project
preparation and implementation. In this regard, participants pointed out that: (i)
sometimes donor projects were prepared without considering the needs o f the
beneficiaries; (ii)
often c i v i l society i s consulted for formality purposes only; and (iii)
beneficiaries have little or no say during implementation.
I t was mentioned that community participation i s o f crucial importance in the
5.
rehabilitation o f education facilities in rural areas, which are in a near-crisis condition. In
particular, participants raised the issue o f corruption and l o w quality o f project outputs
because o f the lack o f accountability by local authorities and project contractors and
inadequate involvement o f communities in some donor projects. Some participants felt
that despite the elaborate procurement and financial management procedures, corruption

Attachment 10
Page 2 o f 3
i s s t i l l taking place, as demonstrated by the poor quality and excessive cost o f
rehabilitated or constructed facilities.

Inadequate coordination o f donor activities was another issue pointed out by the
6.
participants. They asked donor to coordinate better their activities. They complained
that there were cases when several donors, while working in the same community,
propose different approaches and support the establishment o f parallel community-based
organizations, are still widespread.

7.
The Bank Group team thanked the participants for the frank discussion and
stressed that it would seek to increase civil society and beneficiary participation at all
stages o f Bank-supported activities. On the issue o f corruption, the Bank Group stressed
that i t takes any allegation o f corruption in Bank projects very seriously and that it has a
special Department o f Institutional Integrity (INT) that focuses o n such matters. I t also
mentioned that the joint Government/Bank Action Plan o n Portfolio Performance
envisages conducting technical audits in cases where there are doubts about the quality
and actual cost o f procured works and goods.
8.
Sustainability of Bank G r o u p Projects. Some participants questioned the
sustainability o f Bank supported interventions. They gave the example o f Parent-Teacher
Associations (PTAs), which dissipate after the donor project ends, due to the lack o f
hnding and relevant regulatory basis. Another example brought up during the discussion
was the Black Book to be held by all private businesses which was introduced by the
Government in order to comply w i t h the SAC2 relevant conditionality. The purpose o f
the Black Books was to reduce the frequency o f inspections o f the private sector by the
state control agencies. However, in the opinion o f the participants, it has not led to
visible changes in the number or intrusiveness o f inspections. The Bank Group team
agreed that project sustainability i s o f particular importance, and mentioned that one o f
the rationales for introducing the results-based approach in CPSs was to make the Banksupported interventions more realistic and sustainable. I t also mentioned that the
particular cases mentioned above will be referred to the relevant task teams.
9.
P R S P Implementation. It was pointed out that some Government officials, both
at the central and local levels, were poorly informed o n the content o f PRSP. In addition,
the PRSP i s not sufficiently taken into account when developing new national legislation,
sector and regional policies. Moreover, there i s very little information and feedback
available on the implementation progress and results. In this respect, the participants
welcomed that the new CPS i s being based o n the PRSP as a way to reinforce it.
Some participants argued that the PRSP program has had little impact o n poverty
10.
reduction, which was due to factors such as workers remittances, favorable terms o f
trade, and political stability. I t was also mentioned that i t i s difficult to measure the
poverty impact o f PRSP-oriented donor-funded projects in Tajikistan. The Bank Group
team mentioned that there was s t i l l much room for improvement in the implementation
and monitoring o f the PRSP and i t s linkage to the public expenditures and in particularly
to donor-funded investments, and that the Bank intends to assist the Government in

Attachment 10

Page 3 o f 3

developing the next PRSP and in improving the PRSC process during the next CAS
period.
Taxation. The participants stressed that the current tax regulations and their
11.
implementation have a negative impact on the private sector development, both in urban
and rural areas. Private sector representatives questioned the newly introduced single tax
in agriculture. A representative o f a Jamoat (rural self-government body), while
acknowledging i t s advantages, such as increased transparency, lower administrative
costs, better use o f agricultural land and possible increase in budget revenues, mentioned
that there were clear disadvantages, such as unclear reasons for the manifold increase o f
the tax rate. This could lead to a massive loss or sale o f land use rights by farmers and to
land degradation in the long-term. Other participants mentioned that the tax legislation
does not provide incentives to entrepreneurs to make capital investments. In addition, the
new tax law does not differentiate between the non-profit and for profit organizations.
The Bank Group informed the participants that it will continue advising the government
o n the best taxation practices in order to build a fair and conducive to private sector
development system o f taxation.

12.
Access and High Cost o f Private Sector Financing. Among the issues pointed
about by participants in this regard were: (i)
lack o f financing for maturities greater than
1 year; (ii)
high interest rates with the international organizations charging even higher
interest rates than those charged by commercial banks; and (iii)
cumbersome and rigid
procedures for obtaining financing. The Bank Group informed the participants that the
IFC, jointly with EBRD, have been working w i t h the banks to build their capacity,
improve the regulatory framework, and make available resources for lending.
13.
Environment. The c i v i l society representatives stressed that preserving the
environment i s a major long-term challenge. In view o f this, they stressed that the
country’s development should be environmentally sustainable. Future possible large
energy and infrastructure projects and the industries, such as the aluminum smelter
TadAZ, coupled with the country’s weak institutional and regulatory framework, pose
considerable risks for environment. In this respect, civil society representatives asked for
greater Bank involvement in resolving the country’s environment problems. The Bank
Group responded that environmental issues will continue to be addressed in the context
o f relevant Bank-financed projects.

Attachment 11

Page 1 o f 2

Attachment 11: WBI Activities in Tajikistan

Tajikistan will continue to be a focus country for W B I ’ s program as part o f the Central
1.
Asia program. So far, W B I ’ s activities in Tajikistan have focused o n three broad areas:
0

0

0

A program targeted at senior Government leaders and focusing o n strategic leadership
issues related to the reform process was launched in 2004. T w o workshops have been
held to date during which Tajik ministers, Deputy Ministers and the heads o f various
agencies shared experiences and knowledge with their peers from countries where the
reform process i s further advanced. Following the initial event in Istanbul, with
senior leaders from Russia, Lithuania and Turkey attending, a follow up leadership
seminar in Warsaw was combined with the Region’s CPS consultation meetings with
the Government in early 2005.
A program supporting the development o f the private sector was started in 2005
through a joint WBI-FIAS-MIGA Investment Climate Workshop. I t focused o n ways
to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework, improve implementation capacity,
and increase public-private partnerships. The workshop introduced international best
practices and approaches adopted in other countries, and included discussions o n
linkages between policy interventions in different sectors and h o w they affect growth.
Initial activities pursuing the community development and social inclusion agenda, as
outlined in the previous CAS, through a combination o f country specific analytical
work and a regional program linking and supporting regional NGOs. These activities
were discontinued in 2004 as the overall Bank program shifted towards strengthening
o f the local and regional public administration structures.

Consultations o n the scope and content o f activities for FY06 and beyond were carried
2.
out with the Country Management Unit, Country Team and select Government officials during
the preparation o f the CPS. These consultations confirmed that WBI support should continue in
the first two areas mentioned above while, the community development program should be
replaced by activities to strengthen c i v i l service capacity, especially in the field o f public
expenditure management.

The leadership seminars for senior level officials will continue to use the very successful
3.
peer-to-peer knowledge sharing format used to date. Topics would b e selected based on the
Government demand. For FY06, this would likely include an activity o n public sector
management/public expenditure management. The detailed scope and content o f the private
sector developmenthvestment climate activities will be determined based o n the outcome o f the
June 2005 workshop.
W B I ’ s civil service capacity strengthening program would form part o f a broader Bank
4.
initiative including support for the new Institute o f C i v i l Servants (the only state institution
tasked with the training o f state employees with a particular focus o n public sector reform both at
the central and local level). The Institute i s supported by an IDF grant. Detailed activities would
be determined in collaboration with the Tajikistan country team.

Attachment 11
Page 2 o f 2

5.
In addition, Tajik participants would continue to be invited to MI’S
regional and
global learning events, as deemed appropriate by the Country Office. For FY06, this would
likely include three Central Asia programs in trade, WTO accession issues and export promotion.

CAS Annex A2 - Tajikistan at a glance
Europe i3
Central
Tajikistan
Asia

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2004

Lowincome

6.7
250
1.7

473
2,570
1,217

2,310
450
1,038

2.0
2.7

0.0
0.2

1.9
2.3

63
69
31
91
3
103
104
102

30
58
82
44
75
39
92
99
a5

1993

2003

2004

0.52
39.2
61.9
10.8
41.1

1.6
14.7
56.9
-2.0
25.4

2.1
12.8
50.4
-6.4
23.3

-39.9
1.4
100.9
1.6

-1.3

-3.9

79.5
5.5

52.7
24.5

2003

2004

2003-07

2.1
0.4
3.1

10.2
6.9
14.4

10.6
8.0
7.6

7.9
5.7
8.0

1983

1993

2003

2004

23 3
46 5
32 4
30 2

27 1
37 6
31 5
35 3

12 7
47 3
90 3

81 7
83
73 5

87
69 6

1983-93

1993-03

2003

2004

-7 2
-1 7
0.2
-6.3

14
-0 1
-0 2
63

15 1
84
83
34

18 8
-14 4

-8 1
-3 9

74

-9 3
09

90 6
33

-48
15.2

Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

6/29/05

Development diamond*
Life expectancy
.-

Average annual growth, 1998-04
Population (“A)
Labor force (%)

GNI
Per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1998-04)
Poverty (“A of population below nationalpoverfy line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulation)
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 75+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

64
26
67
87
36
55
1
88

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

-

Tajikistan
Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1983

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenffGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savingslGDP
Current account balancelGDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debffGDP
Present value of debffexports
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

1983-93 1993-03

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

-4.9
-7.3

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

I

Economic ratios*

I

Trade

I

Domestic
savings

I

___

Investment

I
-

Indebtedness
I

Tajrkistan

~

Low-income group

~

1

-GDI

-15

*GDP

1
-Exports

llOIlmports

Note: 2004 data are preliminary estimates.
*The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its incomegroup average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

~~

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

j

1993

2003

2004

7,343.7
1,127.9

16.4
27.9

7.1
17.0

33.3
-15.2
-20.9

17.3
4.8
-1.8

17.9
5.4
-2.7

1993

2003

2004

456
230
117
41
639
157
125
34

799
430
193
54
1,003
81
165
82

915
573
162
62
1,247
101
20 1
102

46
57
80

66

97
68

72
112
64

1993

2003

2004

470
686
-215

884
1,142
-259

1,047
1,446
-399

-16
25

-90
329

-80
399

Current account balance

-207

-20

-81

-5
-6
-7

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

209
-2

59
-39

135
-54

-9
-1 0

2
1.37E-2

135
3.1

189
3.0

1993

2003

2004

522
0
0

1,234
0
199

1,094
0
243

7
0
0

59

333

1

I

11
10
68
9
0

0
18
-17
32
0

0
#N/A
-46
272
0

0
0

8
IO
0
10
1
8

11
45

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1983

Tajikistan

~

Government Finance
(!A of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusideficit
TRADE
(US$ miliions)
Total exports (fob)
Aluminum
Cotton
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1983

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ m//l/ons)
Exports of goods and services
imports of goods and services
Resource balance

1983

Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ m//l/onsj
Conversion rate (DEC, /oca//US$)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ m////ons)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt setvice
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

1983

0
0

0
0

0

0

45
2
43

I

Inflation

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
1,400
1,200

I

97

98

99

00

E2 Exports

02

01

03

a Imports

I

Current account balance to GDP (%)
0
1
-2

-3
-4

-a

A - IBRD

B -IDA

C - IMF

-

D Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F -Private
G -Short-term

~~

Development Economics

6/29/05

-

CAS Annex 8 2 Tajikistan
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 06/27/2005

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementationa
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number as'
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a*
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a * d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a*
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2002

2003

2004

2005

10
1.7
10.0
0.3
40.0
19.3
18.3

11
2.4
0.0
0.0
9.1
11.7
11.2

10
3.0
20.0
18.6
20.0
18.6
15.7

9
3.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
32.4

Yes
817.0
81.7

Yes
1246.0
113.3

Yes
1292.0
129.2

Yes
1139.0
126.5

Since FY 80

9
203.6
22.2
26.5

Last Five FYs
6
139.8
16.7
3.2

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

-

CAS Annex B3 -4BRDIIDA Program Summary Tajikistan
As of 06/28/2005

Proposed IDA Lending Program
Fiscal Year
2006

Project ID
Basic Health

10.0

Ferghana Valley

13.0

Municipal Infrastructure

15.0

Policy-Based Credit (PBC)

10.0

Result
2007

10.0

Cotton Development

15.0

Poverty Alleviation Ill

5.0

Policy-Based Credit (PBC)

Result
2009

48.0

Rapid Response TA; Treasury;
Procurement; Statistics
Central Asia Tuberculosis

Result
2008

US$m

2.0

32.0
10.0

10.0

Education SWAP

15.0

Health SWAP

15.0

Result

30.0

Overall result

120.0

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Ta-jikistan
Tajikistan - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2002-2005
2002

IFC Original Commitments (US$m)

Sector (YO)

Agriculture and Forestry
Oil, Gas and Mining
Utilities
Textiles, Apparel & Leather
Information
Finance 8z Insurance
Wholesale and Retail Trade
Professional, Scientific and Technical Services

Total

2003 2004

2005

13.10

0.50

0.665

0% 100%
16% 0%
61%
0%
23%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
0%

100.0% 100.0% 100%

100%

1.58

16%
30%
0%
0%
22%
32%
0%
0%

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

22%
32%
46%
0%
100%

34% 100%
66%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100% 100%

0%
100%
0%
0%
100%

-

CAS Annex B4 Summary of Nonlending Services -Tajikistan
As Of Date 06/27/2005

Product

Completion FY

Recent completions
CFAA
CPAR
PER
Health Sector Note
Poverty Update
Financial Sector Assessment
PSlA of Farmland Privatization
Utilities Reform Study
Strength Nat Stats Grant
ICA
Strategic Gender Assessment

FY03
FY03
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05

Underway
NEAP TA
Social Dimen of Reg
Trade Diagnostic Study
Policy Sector Wages Note
Agric. Review
Aviation Note
Planned
Social Protection
Banking Sector TA
Private Sector Policy Note
Programmatic PER
Programmatic Poverty Work
Health 8, Education IFA
Policy Notes
Energy Dialogue

Annex 8 4

Audience a

Objective

125.00
130.00
525.60
29.80
259.60
143.50
72.30
195.00
56.50
196.90
85.00

GovernmentlBanWDonors
GovernmentlBanWDonors
GovernmentlBanWDonors
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBanWDonors

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS, PD
KG, PD
KG
KG, PS
PS, KG
PS
KG, PS, PD
KG, PD

FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05

140.80
107.80
234.40
85.70
120.00
75.00

Government
Government
Government
GovernmentlBanWDonors
Government
GovernmentlBank

KG
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

FY06
FY06
FY06
FYO6-08
FYO6-08
FYO6-07
FY06
FY06

120.00
85.50
80.00
270.00
250.00
120.00
150.00
50.00

GovernmentlBank
Government
GovernmenVBanWDonors
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
GovernmentlBank
Government
Government

KG
PS
KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PS
PS

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Cost (US$OOO)

Annex B5

Tai ikistan Social Indicators
Same regionlincome group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (Yo of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1975-80

1985-90

1997-2003

Europe &
Central
Asia

4.0
2.8
34.3
5.6

5.3
2.9
31.7
5.1

6.3
0.8
27.6
2.9

472.2
-0.1
63.8
1.6

2,311.9
1.9
30.4
3.7

210

2,580

440

4.2
3.8

1.5
3.2

Lowincome

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOMEKONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (YOof income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

32.6
7.9
40.8

0.9
2.8

77
78
76

77
82
72

85
88
83
58
93
47

91
98
80

75
89
70

89'
82
36**

92
90

65
67
44

66
64
69

69
67
72

66
63
69

68
64
73

58
57
59

94
121

92
119

76"'
95

29
36

80
123

190
129

168
106

293
204
100
71

317
136
58

319
268
689
38

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age.
2005 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

CAS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators

2000

.4ctual
2001

2002

2003

100
25
27
40

100
25
36
31

100
24
36
31

100
22
36
32

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment

81
17

99
7

98
9

~ x p o r t s(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

66
67

87
89

15.9
20

1087
179

Estimate

Projection
2008

2009

100
20
21
45

100
20
20
47

100
19
19
49

100
19
17
50

87
12

84
12

82
12

80
12

78
12

48
67

48
67

48
67

48
66

48
66

48
66

-6.4

-6.2

-5.8

-5.8

-5.9

-6.1

-5.9

23

25

28

30

32

34

36

1553
236

2078
310

2338
342

2550
366

2757
387

2979
410

3220
435

3481
46 1

9.1
-1.3

10.2
11.1

10.6
8.5

8.0
3.8

7.0
8.5

6.0
6.2

6.0
6.0

6.0
6.0

6.0
6.3

from 1997 prices)
6.1
8.0
6.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.3

8.0
1.2
1.2

8.4
1.2
1.2

5.9
1.1
1.o

4.9
1 .o
1.o

3.9
1 .o
1.o

3.9
1.o
1.o

3.9
1 .o
1.o

3.9
1.o
1.o

2004

2003

2006

2007

100
24
34
32

100
22
25
40

100
21
24
42

100
21
23
44

94
14

90
14

92
12

89
12

65
77

62
75

57
74

50
70

7.5

-2.3

4.0

-2.0

-4

7

17

25

980
158

1 IO4
175

1238
192

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1997 prices)
Gross domestic product at market pr
3.7
8.3
10.2
Gross Domestic Income
-0.2
6.8
7.7

Indicator

1999

2010

National accounts (as YOo f GDP)

Gross domestic produc?
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Gross domestic savings

Gross national savings'
Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GDP per capita (US$)

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated
1.6
Gross domestic product at market pr
Total consumption
1.1
Private consumption
1.1
Balance o f Payments (US% millions)

Exports (GNFSjO
Merchandise F O B

718
666

849
788

714
652

768
699

884
799

1047
915

1132
985

1229
1070

1320
1I 4 8

1420
1233

1532
1331

1656
1438

Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

733
693
-16
35
-10

868
81 1
-19
37
-6 1

847
777
-133
131
-73

929
824
-161
184
-33

1142
1003
-259
329
-20

1446
1247
-399
399
-8 1

1576
1361
-445
44 1
-98

1704
1471
-475
468
-107

1834
1580
-513
500
-120

1978
1703
-558
536
-135

2141
1842
-609
578
-152

2309
1986
-653
624
-159

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & omn

21
38
42
-4
-57

24
40
21
18
27

9
20
36
-16
52

36
14
12
2
-16

32
32
30
2
-4

272
-1 86
-188
2
48

40
63
61
3
41

84
74
71
3
-20

69
89
86
4
-9

76
96
92
4
-7

79
119
1I 4
5
-17

84
128
121
6
-22

7

-29

-8

-1

-39

-54

-46

-30

-30

-30

-30

-30

-2.0

-12.1

-13.0

-16.7

-19.2

-19.0

-18.6

-18.6

-18.7

-18.9

-18.8

10.5
17.2
145.1
7.3

3.7
-16.2
-25.7
14.9

14.7
7.0
22.8
-1.1

6.9
14.6
3.8
12.5

5.9
14.6
33.9
8.0

12.5
7.7
13.7
9.2

5.1
8.6
-6.0
6.0

5.2
7.3
-1.3
5.3

5.3
7.5
-1.4
5.2

5.4
7.9
-1.7
5.4

5.4
8.1
-1.1
5.4

Change in reservesd

Memorandum items
-1.4
Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR97 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
9.4
Primary
13.6
Manufactures
64.3
Merchandise imports (CIF)
-11.9

-

CAS Annex 87 Key Exposure Indicators -Tajikistan
A a O f ~ M W S

1,213

1,233

1,226

1.017

Net diSburSa"tS (USSm)'

74 3

48.2

26 0

58

Total debt service (IDS)
(USSm)'

65 5

52 7

71 1

81 1

1878
91 9
10 1
67 6

171.8
1135
7.3
70 4

144 4
125 1
84
73 0

28 5

31 5

64.8

95.8

Total debt outstanding ana
disbursed (TDO) (USBm)'

1.031

837

914

991

157

67 4

77.5

903

589

303 8

142 5
92 2
11 4

88 5

1308
61 0
11 8
88 1

1167
664
67
SO0

37 5

36 1

40 9

130 1

154 5

1890

1,007
(16 3)

1,078

1,169

1,276

76 8

87.1

91 4

106 9

1143

63.9

73 0

84.3

95.0

95 5

1052

79.9
39 6
28 0
93 0

80.8
39.1
5.6
03.8

Bo6
38 3
59
942

81.7

63
84.8

82.3
38 1
66
95 3

83 3
382
82
95 8

840
381
73
96 3

42 9

64 3

68.7

70 2

71.5

72 6

72 6

72 2

198 8

243 4

273.4

303.4

333.4

363.4

393 4

423 4

1,391

Debt and debt service indicators
TDO/XG~
TDO/GDP
TDSiXGS
CancessionaUDO

IBRD exposure indicators 1%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferredcreditor DSpubIic
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TOO (US$m)d
Of which presmt wlue of
guarantees (USBm)
Share of IBRD p d o l i o (%)
IDA TDO (US&n)'

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasiequity f
MlGA

M l ~ guarantees
n
(USB~)

a Includes putwic and PUWCMQuaranteed debt pnvge mwuarameed use of IMf wed6 and net sbn.
term Eapnal
b 'XGS' demtes expo@ of W s and s e w s indudins- workers r e m m a m
c Prelened credltom are IDA ADB me IMF IDB and EU
d Includes present value Of guarantees
e Includes equw and quasi-equw types of Mth ban and equly instrvmemb

383

8
C

e

3

= I

m

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Tajikistan
Tajikistan
Statement o f IFC's
Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
As o f 06/27/2005
(In U S Dollars Millions)
Committed
FY Approval
2003
2002
2005
2002/ 2004
2002

Oustanding

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
Company
Giavoni
0.0
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0
0.0
0.0
Pamir Energy
4.5
3.5
0.0
0.0 0.0
3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.0
SEFAKFEDMBTt0.0
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
SEF FOM
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
SEFTelecomTech 0.2

Total Portfolio:

5.4

7.2

0.0

0.0

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan Equity Quasi Partic

0.7

6.5

0.0

0.0

