d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
 the World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

Report No. 43385-UZ. 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

AND  

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY  

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN 

FOR THE PERIOD FY08-FY11 

May 14, 2008 

Central Asia Country Unit 
Europe and Central Asia Region 

The International Finance Corporation 
IFC Department for Southern Europe and Central Asia 

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the 
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without 
World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of April 25, 2008) 
Currency Unit = Uzbekistan Sum  

US$1 = 1303.92 Sum FISCAL YEAR 

(January 1 to December 31) 
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
Metric System 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

EBRD 

CAS 
CBU 
CIS 

ADB 
Asian Development Bank  
AML/CFT Anti-Money Laundering and 
Combating the Financing of 
Terrorism 
CAREC Central Asia Regional Economic 
Cooperation 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Central Bank of Uzbekistan 
Commonwealth of Independent 
States 
European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development 
Extractive Industries Transparency 
Initiative 
ESW 
Economic and Sector Work 
EU 
European Union  
EurASECEurasian Economic Community 
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment 
FSU 
Former Soviet Union 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GTZ 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische 
Zusammenarbeit (German Technical 

EITI 

Cooperation  

IDA 

HBS 
IBRD 

Household Budget Survey 
International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development 
ICARDA International Centre for Agricultural 
Research in the Dry Areas 
International Development 
Association 
Institutional Development Fund 
International Finance Corporation  
International Financial Institutions 
International Monetary Fund 
Interim Strategy Note 
International Water Management 
Institute 
Japanese Trade & Industry 
Organization 

IDF 
IFC  
IFIs 
IMF 
ISN 
IWMI 

JETRO 

JICA 

PEFA 

OSCE 

OECD 

POPs 
PPP 
PRSP 
SDC 
SECO 

Japanese International Cooperation 
Agency 
KfW 
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau 
LSA 
Living Standards Assessment 
NGOs 
Non-governmental Organizations  
MDGs Millennium Development Goals 
MIGA  Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency  
Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development 
Organization for Security and Co-
operation in Europe  
Public Expenditure & Financial 
Accountability 
Persistent Organic Pollutants 
Purchasing Power Parity 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
Swiss Development Corporation 
Swiss State Secretariat for Economic 
Affairs 
Shanghai Organization for Security 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
United Nations  
United Nations Development 
Programme 
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund 
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund 
UNODC   United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime 
USAID  United States Agency for 
International Development 
WBG 
World Bank Group 
WHO World Health Organization 
WIS 
Welfare Improvement Strategy 

ShoS 
SME 
UN 
UNDP 

 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The World Bank Group appreciates the collaboration of the Government of Uzbekistan 
in the preparation of this CAS, and the open and thoughtful discussions from which it has 
benefitted.  The team would like to extend special thanks to Mr. Rustam Azimov, First Deputy 
Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Ms. Galina Saidova, First Deputy Minister, 
Ministry of Economy.  The extensive consultations conducted with the Donors, Uzbek civil 
society and academia allowed the WBG to understand more clearly the country’s challenges 
and achievements.  The WBG team is indebted to all those who participated in these 
consultations.  
The preparation of this CAS has been a team effort, which included hands-on 
involvement and thorough contribution of the Uzbekistan WB/IFC country team. Members of 
the core team working on the CAS include Mehrnaz Teymourian, Andrea Kucey, Cathryn 
Summers (ECCU8), Dilnara Isamiddinova, Sevara Abdusamatova, Elena Klementyeva, 
Matluba Mukhamedova, Irina Tsoy (ECCUZ), Roland Clarke, Saumya Mitra, Eskender 
Trushin, Jariya Hoffman, Yulia Mironova, Jana Kunicova, Zakia Nekaien-Nowrouz (ECSPE), 
Peyvand Khaleghian, Maureen Mclaughlin, Rekha Menon, Cem Mete, Flora Salikhova 
(ECSHD), Christophe Bosch, Janis Bernstein, Jane Ebinger, Franz Gerner, Maurizio Guadagni, 
Dilshod Khidirov, Rick Pollard, Mahwash Wasiq, Rinat Iskhakov (ECSSD), Andrea Mario 
Dall'Olio, Brett Coleman (ECSPF), Pascale N. Kervyn De Lettenhove, John Ogallo, Naushad 
Khan, Fasliddin Rakhimov (ECSPS), Tomasz Telma, Kaikham Onedamdy, Ulugbek Tilyayev, 
Antoine Courcelle-Labrousse, Tania Lozansky, Vsevolod Payevskiy (IFC).  We would also 
like to thank Mr. Tevfik Yaprak for his invaluable guidance to the team. 

Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Team Leaders 

IBRD 

Shigeo Katsu 
Annette Dixon 
Loup Brefort & Ekaterine 
Vashakmadze 

IFC 

Declan Duff 
Shahbaz Mavaddat 
Gorton De Mond, Jr. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... i 
I. 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 4 
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT....................................................................................................... 5 
A. Political Background, Governance and Civil Society...................................................... 5 
B. Regional Significance ...................................................................................................... 6 
C. Economic Context ............................................................................................................ 7 
D. Poverty, Socioeconomic Inequality and the MDGs ...................................................... 11 
III. 
COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM ................................................................ 14 
A. Country Vision:  the Government’s WIS....................................................................... 14 
B. Donor Partnership in Support of Uzbekistan’s Economic Development Objectives .... 17 
IV. 
BANK ENGAGEMENT IN UZBEKISTAN: LESSONS LEARNED ......................... 18 
A. Background .................................................................................................................... 18 
B. The Interim Strategy ...................................................................................................... 18 
C. Progress Under the ISN ................................................................................................. 19 
D. Lessons Learned from the Last CAS and ISN Implementation ..................................... 21 
E. Rationale for CAS Engagement ..................................................................................... 23 
V. THE WBG SUPPORT FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WIS .................................. 23 
A. Main features of the CAS .............................................................................................. 24 
B. Stakeholder Consultations ............................................................................................. 26 
C. Mechanisms for Bank Group Engagement .................................................................... 27 
D. WBG Proposed Activities in Support of the WIS Objectives ....................................... 28 
VI. MONITORING IN A RESULTS FRAMEWORK ....................................................... 37 
VII. POTENTIAL RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES ............................................ 39 

 
 
 
 
 
TABLES 

Table 1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2003-2007 ................................................. 7 
Table 2: Medium-term Economic Projections, 2008-2011............................................... 11 
Table 3: Poverty Rates, 2000-2005 ................................................................................... 12 
Table 4: Summary of the Results Based Framework........................................................ 38 

FIGURES 

Figure 1. Contribution to GDP growth, 2003-2007 ............................................................ 8 
Figure 2. Net exports as % to GDP, 2003-2007 ................................................................. 8 

BOXES 

Box: 1: IFC helps Uzbekistan Improve the Business Environment ................................. 20 
Box: 2: Voice of the Beneficiaries .................................................................................... 21 
Box: 3: Assessing the World Bank’s AAA  in Uzbekistan .............................................. 28 
Box: 4: Uzbekistan – Undertaking Governance Work in a Difficult Environment .......... 33 

ANNEXES 

ANNEX 1: Results Matrix ................................................................................................ 43 
ANNEX 2: Matrix of Main Donor Activities in Uzbekistan for 2008-2010 .................... 53 

ANNEX TABLES 
Annex A2:  At a Glance Table. ……………………………………………………….…60 
Annex B2:  Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management……..63 
Annex B3:  IFC Investment Operations Program..………………………………………64 
Annex B3:  IBRD/IDA Program Summary ……………………………………………..65 
Annex B3:  IFC Investment Operations Program..………………………………………66 
Annex B4:  Summary of IDA/IFC Advisory Services ………………………………… 67 
Annex B6:  Key Economic Indicators …………………………………………………..68 
Annex B7:  Key Exposure Indicators ……………………………………………..….…70 
Annex B8:  Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio (IFC) ………71 
Annex B8:  Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) ……………………………..73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

i. 
The Government of Uzbekistan has been following a gradual approach to 
economic reform to minimize the social costs of transition.  Market-oriented reforms 
have been slow and selective and focused on a few areas (e.g., current account 
convertibility, adjustment of energy prices, privatization through lease-holding of 
collective farms, gradual improvement in business environment and modernization of the 
treasury).  In recent years, the Government improved its macroeconomic performance 
and significantly diversified exports.  While the development model adopted by 
Uzbekistan has brought benefits, it has also had opportunity costs, as evidenced by the 
slow reduction of poverty and lower improvement in living standards than in reforming 
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries.  Constraints on the growth 
potential of the private sector have dampened job creation, at a rate below the growth of 
the working age population.  In response to this challenge, the Government approved its 
first Poverty Reduction Strategy paper (PRSP) – the Welfare Improvement Strategy 
(WIS)1 - in September of 2007.  The WIS is a comprehensive framework to sustain high 
growth and address poverty and living standards issues.  The strategy is built on the 
policy of granting a greater role to market principles within a gradualist approach to 
structural reforms.  
ii. 
Of the four key commitments which the Government made to the Interim 
Strategy Note (ISN), three were carried out (maintaining macro stability, improving 
portfolio performance, and preparing the WIS) and the remaining one (timely access to 
data) was carried out partially.  The quality of the working relationship between the Bank 
and the authorities has improved and productive relationships have been established in a 
number of key areas, including some aspects of Governance, where the authorities have 
cooperated with the Bank under the Primary Health Care sector Governance Assessment, 
which opened up significant opportunities for engagement and dialogue in this area.  The 
authorities have also been willing to allow significant elements of citizens’ voice and 
participation during the design and implementation of the projects.  A particularly notable 
example of this (and a radical departure from previous practice) is the introduction of 
public sector accountability mechanisms by stakeholders through the activation of school 
boards in the Basic Education project. 
iii. 
Key Government commitments made to the ISN in support of private sector 
development were carried out. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) SME Survey 
has been continued, in the framework of business enabling environment (BEE) work and 
for further legal and regulatory reforms to establish a better framework for microfinance 
and mortgage lending.  IFC has continued to maintain a good working relationship with 
its Government counterparts which resulted in the development of significant legislative 

1 The WIS and the associated JSAN was discussed by the Board on January 24, 2008 (Report No 41799-
UZ). 

 i

 
 
                                                 
and procedural improvements in the business environment, including in streamlined 
registration, permits, inspections, business liquidation and tax reporting procedures that 
are expected to free up US$45 million for the SME sector.  These reforms enabled 
Uzbekistan to improve its “Doing Business” rating by seven places.   
iv. 
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), rooted in Uzbekistan’s own vision (the 
WIS), sets out the planned lending and advisory support to the country from the World 
Bank Group (WBG) over the period FY08-11.  The new CAS will rely both on the 
implementation of ongoing WBG projects and the development of technical assistance 
and new lending.  Six Bank projects in the current portfolio will continue during the CAS 
period.  These are concentrated in key areas of support for human development: 
improved access to safe water, improved health status, improved incomes in rural areas, 
and protection of the environment.  The average annual International Development 
Association (IDA) allocation to Uzbekistan was approximately US$77 million over the 
last three years (IDA 14).  The indicative 3-year allocation for the IDA 15 period 
corresponding to that of the CAS is SDR 195 million, with final allocation for the Fiscal 
Years 2010 and 2011 determined annually through the IDA Performance Based 
Allocation (PBA) system.  New IDA lending of about 2-3 projects per year will continue 
to focus on the development of economic opportunities in rural areas, where the majority 
of the poor live; on improving delivery of basic municipal services as well as reforms in 
health and education; promoting sound environmental management, 
regional 
development and the contribution of Uzbekistan to the provision of global goods.  The 
size of the projects will be determined based on the overall IDA envelope available.  IFC 
will continue its active engagement in advisory services in the areas of BEE and financial 
sector development; provide funding and advisory services to support financial 
intermediation to micro and small business enterprises, particularly in rural areas in 
collaboration with IDA; increase its direct lending to SMEs; and seek opportunities to 
finance and provide advisory services to support energy and infrastructure development 
with private sector participation.   
v. 
The CAS is built around a dual track approach, where in addition to the core 
program, the WBG will focus its analytic work on key areas to increase consensus with 
the authorities.  The advisory program will be focused on enhancing the environment for 
shared growth, including through promoting good governance and assistance in 
implementation of the WIS; as well as selected demand-driven analytical and capacity-
building support in priority sectors, including activities to promote regional cooperation. 
A CAS monitoring framework has been built around an explicit results framework 
(Annex 1) of existing and currently planned activities.  The evaluation of progress against 
these results will take place in the mid-term review.  In the event of significant progress 
in key areas, and project proposals consistent with the CAS strategy, additional activities 
outside of the core program may be supported by the WBG.       
vi. 
The present CAS faces four critical risks: (i) Fiduciary risks which are rated as 
high due to weak Public Finance Management (PFM) capacity and accountability 
mechanisms, and lack of transparency particularly in procurement.  To mitigate this risk, 
the WBG will assure that adequate resources are allocated to fiduciary supervision of 
projects and project implementation arrangements will seek to strengthen procurement 
procedures.  In addition, financial management arrangements for new projects would 

 ii

 
 
build on the lessons of existing practices, but would be cautious in any move to make use 
of country systems, and focus rather on the improvement of transparency and 
accountability at a sectoral and project level; (ii) Development effectiveness.  To ensure 
the development effectiveness of the proposed program, all projects are assessed through 
a results framework and by beneficiary monitoring.  The WBG will closely monitor the 
CAS implementation, and in case of adverse developments, will reassess the level and 
focus of its engagement; (iii) Exogenous risks.  These include possible regional tensions 
over water and energy, reduction in regional growth rates or reductions in flows of 
remittances or commodity prices, all of which could directly or indirectly affect internal 
political stability, and security.  Managing exogenous risks will require close cooperation 
with the Government to encourage Uzbekistan’s continued international engagement and 
integration.  The above risks, if they materialize, may hinder the country’s ability to fully 
utilize its IDA allocation.  Uzbekistan also faces natural disaster risk.  The current CAS 
recognizes lessons from past engagement and builds clear linkages to the Disaster Risk 
Management (DRM) agenda.     
vii. 
Executive Directors may wish to consider the following issues for discussion: 

• Do the Directors endorse the strategic approach proposed in the presented CAS? 

• 

• 

Is the proposed program sufficiently aligned with the country’s own strategy? 

Is the level of engagement adequate to address the developmental challenges? 

 iii

 
 
 
 
 
I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
The proposed Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) builds on the experience of 
three previous CAS’s and intensive dialogue during the Interim Strategy period. 
The previous CAS (FY02-04) expired on June 30, 2004.  The level of assistance of that 
CAS was set at US$350 million over three years, half International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development 
(IBRD) and half 
International Development 
Association (IDA) lending.  In practice, only US$100 million was provided for 2 
projects.  During FY05, the Bank approved a US$40 million Health project that had been 
identified in the previous CAS.  The Interim Strategy was adopted for FY07-08.  It 
included one lending operation of US$40 million in Basic Education, the first phase of 
which was approved by the Board on October 26, 2006.  In addition the Avian Flu 
Influenza project was approved by the Board on May 18, 2007.  The new CAS covers the 
period FY08-11 and provides direction for Bank operations and Economic and Sector 
Work (ESW) during this period. 
2. 
Uzbekistan is an upper low income  resource rich, doubly-landlocked 
country, strategically located in the heart of Central Asia.  It is the world's fifth 
largest cotton producer and second-largest cotton exporter.  Major raw materials exports 
include gold, natural gas, copper and other non-ferrous metals and construction materials.  
The country possesses a young and educated labor force, rich agricultural resources and 
has significant economic potential.  Uzbekistan accounts for one-third of the region’s 
population, and its economic and social prospects are critical both for the 27 million 
Uzbeks, and for the neighboring region comprising of Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz 
Republic, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan.  
3. 
During the Soviet era, increasing cotton production in conditions that lacked 
incentives for sustainable agricultural practices led to the massive expansion of 
irrigated lands, overuse and unbalanced application of agrochemicals and the 
depletion of water resources.  This has severely degraded the quality of large tracts of 
land and reduced the Aral Sea to almost one-tenth of its original volume.  The country 
seeks to gradually lessen its dependence on primary agriculture while developing its 
mineral and hydrocarbon potential, further diversify its economy by expanding the share 
of services and manufacturing in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and address serious 
environmental challenges. 
4. 
In contrast to the majority of the Commonwealth of Independent States 
(CIS) countries, Uzbekistan has adopted a gradualist state-led development 
approach, in which features of an open-market economy are introduced to the existing 
command and control system in a step-by-step manner.  The guiding principle of reform 
for the authorities is to reduce the risk of being subject to external influences in the 
political and economic spheres.  This has been manifested through – inter alia – a policy 
of minimizing public debt, accumulating considerable external reserves and cultivating 
wheat on irrigated land for food security and self-sufficiency.  Adherence to this model is 
also based on the fundamental belief of Government that this approach is necessary: (i) to 
first build up Uzbekistan’s domestic real sector economy before it can face open 
competition in the global marketplace with any chance of success; and (ii) to maintain 
social and political stability in an ethnically heterogeneous and potentially volatile region.  

 4

 
 
5. 
This paradigm has resulted in a gradual economic and a less severe social 
transition than that experienced in most countries of the CIS.  A policy of high public 
spending during the transition years has mitigated the impact on human capital and on the 
quality of infrastructure compared with other countries in the region.  Market-oriented 
reforms have been slow and uneven and progressed only in the areas which matched 
Government’s development model and where support for reforms has prevailed over 
vested interests (such as the introduction of current account convertibility in 2003, the 
realignment of energy prices, the privatization through lease-holding of collective farms, 
the adoption of measures to improve the business environment for small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs) and the modernization of the treasury).  In recent years, the 
Government also achieved a strong macroeconomic performance.  However, in spite of 
high growth rates achieved in recent years, the cost of the gradualist approach to reform 
in Uzbekistan was an insufficient utilization of the country’s economic potential. The 
emphasis on large capital intensive projects, many of which were in the public sector, and 
slow private sector development proved to be insufficient to create the number of jobs 
required to absorb the growth of the working age population. 

II. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT  

A.  Political Background, Governance and Civil Society 

6. 
Uzbekistan has a strong executive system with few checks and balances.    
After the break-up of the Soviet Union in 1991, the ruling Communist Party of 
Uzbekistan was restructured as the People's Democratic Party of Uzbekistan, with Islam 
Karimov retaining the leadership.  A referendum in 1995 extended President Karimov’s 
term of office until 2000.  He was re-elected to the presidency in 2000 and in December 
2007.  The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) has criticized 
the elections as failing to meet international standards. At the same time, however, 
observers from a number of countries and other organizations assessed the conduct of the 
elections positively.2  In 2005 following the suppression of the Andijan uprising, relations 
with the US and the European Union (EU) deteriorated.  Following US criticism of the 
Uzbek government, cooperation between the two governments in many spheres was 
reduced and US assistance to Uzbekistan was considerably cut.  The EU imposed 
sanctions in the form of an arms embargo and visa restrictions for senior officials.  
However, these sanctions were relaxed in October 2007 and are now being reviewed.  
7. 
Economic management and governance remain characterized by low 
transparency, and limited voice and participation of citizens.  The restricted 
dissemination of basic economic and social information, and questions regarding the 
reliability of some data, is a serious impediment to strengthening the accountability of the 
authorities, to encouraging public participation in policy-making debate and to allowing 
civil society to play a constructive role in contributing to the effective monitoring and 
evaluation of implementation and results of state programs. However, the Government 

2 OSCE/ODIHR, LEOM, Republic of Uzbekistan, Presidential Elections 2007, Interim Report (5-15 
December, 2007).  

 5

 
 
                                                 
has indicated that it is working to enhance information dissemination and increase 
involvement of civil society in the implementation of state programs. 
8. 
The activities of civil society have historically been tightly controlled. In 2005, 
legal and administrative controls on non-governmental organizations (NGOs) were 
tightened and scores of NGOs were denied mandatory re-registration with the Ministry of 
Justice, and have been forced to close their operations.  Despite this, a significant number 
of domestic NGOs continue to operate in the social, and, to some extent, the 
environmental spheres. The WBG has been able to continue operating a Small Grants 
Program, albeit with fewer potential beneficiaries.  Recently, a number of international 
NGOs including Human Rights Watch and the International Red Cross have reached  
agreements with the Government paving the way to a resumption of their activities in the 
country.  Moreover, there are emerging examples of more cooperative relations between 
civil society and Government representatives, particularly at the local level.  

B. Regional Significance  

9. 
Uzbekistan is strategically located in the heart of Central Asia.  The design 
and development of much of Central Asia’s transport, energy and irrigation infrastructure 
during the Soviet Union created extremely tight links of mutual dependency between the 
Central Asian Republics which were managed centrally in a borderless manner.  Since 
independence, Uzbekistan has pursued a policy of national self-sufficiency.  In the 
absence of the alternative effective arrangements, the coordinated management of the 
Regional infrastructure systems has been disrupted and the benefits of close economic 
integration and cooperation have been missed.   
10. Major opportunities for mutually beneficial cooperation in water-energy and 
inter-regional trade remain under-exploited.  The management of the water-energy 
nexus has become a highly controversial and sensitive issue between upstream countries 
(Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan) and downstream countries (Uzbekistan,3 Turkmenistan 
and, Kazakhstan 4 ).  Cross-border trade is complicated by unintegrated processes and 
procedures.  Purely national solutions, particularly those that involve by-passing 
Uzbekistan, are expensive and potentially destabilizing.  Regional powers including 
China, Iran, Pakistan and Russia have stepped up diplomatic efforts to engage with 
Uzbekistan, including in the context of the Shanghai Organization for Security (ShoS) 
and the Eurasian Economic Community (EurASEC).  The International Financial 
Institutions (IFIs), including the World Bank, are providing support to the process of 
regional cooperation through the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC) 
forum.  Nevertheless, relationships with direct neighbors remain rather tense. 

3 The two great rivers of Central Asia, Amu Darya and Syr Darya, with their tributaries are the main source 
of water for Uzbekistan, 95 percent of which is used in the agriculture sector. 
4 Irrigation water is however less strategically important for development of Kazakhstan. 

 6

 
 
 
                                                 
C. Economic Context  

11. 
Uzbekistan experienced a relatively modest decline in real GDP (20 percent 
compared to more than 40 percent average in the CIS) between 1990 and 1995 following 
the breakup of the Soviet Union.  The initial recovery of 1996-2003 was marked by 
modest but consistent growth (4 percent on average) followed by a strong economic 
rebound with average growth of 7.3 percent between 2004 and 2006 and 9.5 percent in 
2007.  Uzbekistan is among the few countries in the former Soviet Union (FSU) which 
have seen an increase in population during the transition years5 (from 21 to 26.8 million) 
in contrast to many countries of the CIS, which have seen a dramatic decline 6 in 
population.  As a result, it is only in recent years that per capita incomes have begun to 
increase significantly.  With a gross national income (GNI) per capita (Atlas method) of 
US$730 in 2007 (Table 1) and GDP per capita of US$2,394 at purchasing power party 
(PPP) Uzbekistan is classified as an upper low income country.   

Table 1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2003-2007 
2003 

10.1 
396 
4.2 
420 
1651 

Economy 
    GDP, bln USD 
    GDP per capita, USD 
    GDP real growth 
    GNI per capita, USD, Atlas method 
    GNI per capita, PPP, current international $ 
National accounts (% GDP) 
     Exports of goods and services 
     Imports of goods and services 
Consolidated Public finance (% GDP) 
    Public Revenues 
    Public Expenditures and net   lending 
    Fiscal balance 
    Augmented government balance 
    PPG Debt (Gov't debt) 
Prices 
   Consumer prices (official, eop) 
   Consumer prices (IMF, eop) 
Balance of Payments  
    CAB, as % GDP 
    FDI, as % GDP  
    Gross official reserves, mln USD 
    Gross reserves (in months of imports) 
Monetary 
    M2, as % GDP 
10.3 
    Credit to private sector , as % GDP 
27.5 
Source: Uzbek authorities, IMF and World Bank staff estimates.  

8.7 
0.7 
1659.0 
5.1 

37.3 
30.6 

33.4 
33.3 
0.1 
0.1 
41.5 

3.8 
7.8 

2004 

12.0 
465 
7.7 
460 
1808 

40.2 
32.7 

32.2 
31.6 
0.6 
0.6 
35.5 

3.7 
9.1 

10.1 
1.6 
2147.0 
6.3 

12.2 
24.5 

2005 

2006 

14.3  
547  
7.0 
530 
1970 

37.9 
28.7 

30.8 
29.6 
1.2 
1.2 
27.0 

17.0  
643  
7.3 
610 
2155 

37.5 
25.9 

31.4 
29.6 
1.8 
5.2 
20.8 

7.8  
12.3  

6.8  
11.4  

13.6 
0.6  
2895.2 
7.9  

19.1 
1.1  
4459.4 
10.7  

14.4  
21.8 

15.2  
17.4 

2007 

22.3 
830 
9.5 
730 
2,394 

40.3 
30.2 

31.7 
28.5 
3.2 
3.9 
13.2 

6.8 
11.9 

19.3 
3.3 
6613.9 
13.5 

16.3 
15.0 

5 Period between 1990 and 2000. 
6 This in based on official information. A census has not been conducted for several years and the 
information may not be accurate.  

 7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
12. 
Economic growth is supported by stable macroeconomic management, 
promotion of sectoral investments identified as priority by the Government,  
favorable terms of trade and a buoyant external environment since 2003.  The 
industrial and manufacturing sectors are undergoing a process of public investment-led 
modernization, through active localization and import substitution programs, especially 
in strategic sectors, including car manufacturing, home electronics, machinery building 
and chemicals.  Export growth has been driven by high commodity prices (including for 
cotton, gold and gas) and also by increased volumes of exports of industrial and 
manufacturing goods, particularly capital intensive goods (cars, airplanes, cement, 
electric cables, etc.) to the rapidly growing markets of key trading partners (Russian 
Federation, Kazakhstan, and others).  Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) more than doubled 
between 2005 and 2007, albeit from a low base (FDI was estimated at 3.3 percent of GDP 
in 2007).  Investment also flows to housing, retailing, food processing, light industry, 
textile, car manufacturing and supplies.  The services sector is developing rapidly and 
asset prices are at historically high levels.  The inflow of workers remittances from 
Russia and Kazakhstan give additional boost to domestic demand (remittances are 
estimated between 10-17 percent of GDP in 2007). 

Figure 1. Contribution to GDP growth, 2003-2007 Figure 2. Net exports as % to GDP, 2003-2007 

10 

8 

6 

4 

2 

0 

9.5 

7.7 

7.0 

7.3 

4.2 

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 

   services

   trade and catering

   construction

   agriculture

   industry

Total, economy

7.3

7.2
5.1

cotton

2003

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

9.8 
(0.6% exl. gold) 
2.7 

7.4

3.6
2.8

1.5

0.0

-0.6
-1.9
foodstuffs ferrous and 
non-ferrous 
machinery and
equipment 
energy
metals 
-6.8 
-9.2 
-10.8 

2005

2007

13. 
Commodity price booms for major Uzbek exports account for a substantial 
share of economic growth during the recent period of economic expansion. 
Uzbekistan remains a net exporter of energy, cotton and minerals and became a net 
exporter of foodstuffs in 2007 (Figure 1 and 2).  Construction and services sectors also 
showed substantial economic growth in response to increased domestic demand, while  
growth in agriculture was lower than overall economic growth.  The export expansion 
also caused growth in transportation and trade services.  Uzbekistan has managed to 
capitalize on rapidly growing neighbors – China, Russia and Kazakhstan – to increase 
exports of machinery and chemical products to these and other countries. 
14. 
The resulting inflows of foreign exchange have considerably strengthened the 
external position over the past five years, but also created a dilemma for the 
authorities.  The current account has improved from small deficits in the late 1990s to an 

 8

 
 
 
average surplus of 14 percent of GDP in 2003-2007. Gross official reserves have risen in 
2007 by 1.6 times compared to 2006, and were the equivalent of 13 months of imports.  
The exchange rate, which was depreciating in nominal and real terms, has recently started 
to appreciate.  The large, partly unsterilized7, foreign exchange inflows, combined with a 
policy of nominal depreciation of the sum, have fuelled the growth of monetary 
aggregates, which have in turn put additional pressure on inflation8.  Since 2004, broad 
money has been growing by close to 50 per cent annually. This, in combination with the 
global inflation pressures and continued adjustment in relative prices, complicates the 
task of the Central Bank in controlling inflation. 
15. 
The fiscal position has also strengthened, supported by buoyant revenues 
from the commodity sector.  Although the direct tax burden has steadily decreased, 
(e.g., the profit tax rates in commodity sectors declined from 18 percent to 10 percent 
during 2004-2007), the consolidated budget has been in surplus since 2003.  Public debt 
has been reduced to less than one sixth of GDP in 2007 from over 40 percent in 2003.  
With current tight external borrowing policies maintained, the debt to GDP and debt 
service to exports ratios should decline further.  The Government is expected to maintain 
fiscal prudence and keep the consolidated budget in surplus during the CAS period.  
16. 
The outlook for 2008 is positive with real GDP expected to grow by 6-7 
percent over the CAS period.  These projections are more conservative than the official 
Government projections, in that they recognize that some of the current growth is based 
on the commodity price boom, itself fueling a strong demand for Uzbek exports of 
industrial goods and services (labor) from key neighboring trading partners, and that the 
official projections may be overoptimistic on the favorable impact in the short term of 
current gradualist reform policies.  Nevertheless, it is expected that growth will continue 
to benefit from bringing under-utilized resources into production even if structural 
reforms proceed at a modest pace.  Investment demand will continue to remain strong 
driven by modernization needs.  In addition, to an active public investment policy, 
interest from private investors in some key economic sectors is also likely to be 
sustained.  Indeed, Uzbekistan recently strengthened its ties with Russia and China and 
relations with many important trading and investment partners such as South Korea, 
Malaysia, India, Japan and the Arab States, are close.  Private consumption, which grew 
at a modest rate of 3.8 percent over 2003-2007 when net exports and fixed capital 
formation grew at 11 and 35 percent on average over the same period, is projected to 
boost domestic demand from envisaged wage and salary increases and the likelihood of a 
gradual loosening (or at least no further tightening) of trade restrictions.  
17. 
There are currently no major macroeconomic imbalances in Uzbekistan, but 
the authorities will need to be vigilant in the face of potential external shocks and 
continue to exercise prudence in managing the economy.  The Bank’s macroeconomic 
forecast for the CAS period provides for a gradual acceleration in the pace of expansion 
of domestic demand and a corresponding reduction in external surpluses.  The rise in 

7 The Capacity Building Unit (CBU) has sterilized some of the inflows, through the creation of a Reserve 
Fund (Fund for Reconstruction and Development). 
8 The International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff calculates inflation using the authorities’ source data and 
applying international methodology.  The IMF is providing technical assistance to the authorities on 
National Accounts through a resident advisor in the Statistics Committee.  

 9

 
 
                                                 
inflation as a result of increases in food and other commodity prices in 2007 is expected 
to continue in 2008 with a gradual decline in later years.  This assumes the absence of 
serious external shocks and the continuation of gradual economic reforms.  With fairly 
diversified sources of growth, strong external position, and the limited openness of its 
trade and financial sector, in the short term Uzbekistan may initially be in a better 
position than other more open economies to withstand adverse external shocks, including 
the current international financial liquidity crisis. Simultaneously, Uzbek banks have 
limited exposure to foreign banks, with modest external borrowing, thus running little 
risk of contagion from foreign banks suffering from the credit crunch.  
18. However, various distortions in the economy could undermine economic 
growth unless these issues are addressed.  In order to achieve the high growth rate 
envisaged by the authorities (about 8 percent), it is the WBG’s view that additional 
reforms are needed.  These include further liberalization of trade and exchange systems, 
particularly as regards the availability of imported inputs and the necessary foreign 
exchange, development of the financial sector and improvements in the business 
environment and investment climate, to stimulate private sector development.  In 
addition, the currently strong external and fiscal positions may hide weaknesses in the 
economy if there were to be a reversal of the foreign exchange inflows.  In the event of 
negative external developments, there is a risk of the reversal of reforms with a return to 
even more central control and protection in response to the external shock.  In this regard, 
Uzbekistan is in a position to take advantage of the current buoyant economic 
environment for accelerating the implementation of structural reforms.  
19. 
Basic infrastructure may also emerge as one of the constraints to faster and 
more widespread growth in the future.  Uzbekistan has generally maintained its 
infrastructure (roads, irrigation network, electricity, gas distribution) in better condition 
than have some of its neighbors and has continued to invest in selected basic 
infrastructure projects throughout the transition period.  Nevertheless, it is facing a major 
challenge going forward:  the stock of infrastructure assets it inherited from the Soviet 
Union is extremely large for a country of Uzbekistan’s GDP per capita and a large part of 
it may already be beyond its technical-economic life.  As a result, the financing needs 
required to ensure that the provision and the quality of infrastructure services support 
future growth objectives will be immense in both urban and rural areas. 

 10

 
 
D.  Poverty, Socioeconomic 
Inequality and the MDGs  

20. With per capita income 
of US$730 (Atlas based) in 2007, 
Uzbekistan 
is an upper 
low 
income country. 
 Calculations 
based on a food-only consumption 
basket 
and 
a 
poverty 
line 
estimated at 2100 kilo calories per 
day suggest that slightly over one 
quarter of the population could 
still be considered poor (Table 3) 
in 2007.
 Given 
its 
large 
population, Uzbekistan accounts 
for a significant share of the poor 
in all of Central Asia, and its 
economic prospects are key to the 
region as a whole.  

9

Table 2: Medium-term Economic Projections, 2008-2011 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
(percent change) 
7.0 
6.5 

8.0 

Real GDP 
Consumption (per 
capita) 
Exports 
Imports 
GDP Deflator 
Terms of trade 

6.0 

5.6 
10.3 
14.2 
10.0 
-2.4 

9.5 
34.5 
28.9 
5.6 

8.1 
20.1 

7.5 
15.2 
27.8 
17.0 
6.0 

6.5 
6.2 
13.8 
10.8 
13.3 
9.6 
15.0 
12.0 
-6.6 
-3.5 
(percent of GDP) 
12.8 
11.8 
34.6 
34.5 
29.8 
29.4 
4.8 
5.1 

15.3 
34.9 
30.0 
4.9 

CAB 
Budget revenues 
Budget expenditures 
Fiscal Balance 
Public & 
Guaranteed Debt 
11.1 
9.7 
8.7 
Fixed investment 
21.0 
20.3 
19.3 
Source: Uzbek authorities, IMF and WB staff estimates.  

21. 
Based on available data, recent growth appears to have had a relatively 
modest impact on poverty reduction (Table 3).  In Uzbekistan a one percent increase 
in mean consumption leads to a one percent decrease in poverty, which is small when 
compared to the experience of other countries in the region. 10  A disaggregated data 
analysis 11 shows that the consumption of households at the very bottom of the 
consumption distribution and the consumption of those who are at the top of the 
distribution improved much more than others during 2003-2006 period.  Since there was 
not as much movement around the poverty line, the poverty elasticity of economic 
growth remains relatively modest.   

9 The Bank’s regional poverty study (Growth, Poverty and Inequality in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, 
October 2005) puts the share of people in Uzbekistan living on less than US$2.15 a day (in Purchasing 
Power Parity terms) at 47 percent, comparable to levels in the Caucasuses or Moldova, but below levels in 
the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan. 
10 The average elasticity of poverty to growth in consumption per capita between 1998 and 2003 is -3.1 for 
Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russian Federation and Ukraine.  In low income CIS, the average elasticity is closer 
to what is observed in Uzbekistan, at -1.4 (World Bank 2005).  
11 Based on 2007 Living Standards Assessment (LSA). 

 11

 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
2003** 

26.2 
22 
28.7 

2005** 

25.8 
18.3 
30 

2004** 

26.1 
18.8 
30.3 

2002** 

25.3 
21.1 
27.7 

2000-
2001* 

27.5 
22.5 
30.5 

National 
Urban 
Rural 

Table 3: Poverty Rates, 2000-2005 

Source: Uzbekistan Living Standards Assessment, World Bank, 2002. 
** Authors’ calculations based on Household Budget Surveys. The 
poverty line used is based on a food only consumption basket, 
equivalent to 2100 calories per day, considered an acceptable minimum 
level for a wheat based diet such as in Uzbekistan. 

22. 
The 
low elasticity 
is a 
reflection of the type of growth 
and 
its 
associated 
limited 
distributional effect across 
the 
population.  The findings from labor 
market analyses conducted under the 
LSA Update in 2007 12 suggest that 
key reasons for this relatively low 
growth elasticity, especially for the 
middle deciles, are constraints on 
greater private sector development in the formal sector and therefore dynamic job 
creation, and the persistence of underemployment in the informal sector.  Although a 
generous system of public transfers and subsidies, as well as large flows of remittances 
contributed to reduction of extreme poverty, the population of the working age has grown 
considerably faster than formal sector employment since the mid 1990s.       
23. 
The overall improvement in the macroeconomic situation has therefore not 
been reflected in a widespread significant improvement in the standards of living of 
the population.  Because so many people still directly or indirectly derive their income 
from agriculture or agriculture-related activities in the rural areas, and because the 
traditionally labor-intensive micro- and small business private sector is limited to 45.7 
percent of GDP, the recent upturn in overall economic growth has yet to be translated in 
significant and widespread improvements in many people’s living standards.  Greater 
economic liberalization, to allow increased imports of consumer goods and improve the 
environment for private investment, would contribute greatly to improve prospects for a 
more pro-poor growth.   
24. 
There are significant differences across regions – with rural areas showing 
more poverty than urban areas.  As shown by the LSA, rural poverty has a number of 
causes, including declining soil quality in some places, the absence of non-agricultural 
jobs in most rural areas, and generally lower access to public goods.  Environmental 
conditions are also a particularly important factor in regional variation in poverty rates.  
Karakalpakstan and Khorezm are at the tail-end of irrigation systems with insufficient or 
unreliable access to water and have been severely affected by the Aral Sea crisis.  Here, 
as well as in other parts of Uzbekistan, water logging and soil salinity have continued to 
reduce the ability of those in the rural communities to raise their incomes.  With the 
tightening of budget constraints for state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and utility price 
adjustments in recent years, a newly emerging concern is the urban poor, particularly in 
smaller regional towns. 
 This regional diversity also translates into persistent 
socioeconomic inequalities, although consumption inequality is moderate compared to 
the rest of the FSU (the Gini coefficient is estimated at around 0.368).    
25. 
Since independence, food-security policies increased self sufficiency and 
partly isolated Uzbekistan from the effects of the current global price increase.  
Food imports are relatively small and related to specific items, such as vegetable oils. 

12 The World Bank, Report No. 40723-UZ. 

 12

 
 
                                                 
  
Uzbekistan is a net exporter of fruits and vegetables and has achieved wheat self-
sufficiency.  The country officially imports relatively small quantities of wheat and flour 
from Kazakhstan because of quality considerations.  However, the isolation from global 
price trends is not permanent and pressure on food prices will continue to increase.  This 
will inevitably place an additional burden on the poor, particularly in urban areas.  In 
rural areas, the impact will be less, since production for self-consumption in household 
plots (the so called “Dekhan farms”) is widespread.  
26. 
Relative to its per capita income, Uzbekistan records favorable health 
outcomes.  It has not seen the decline in life expectancy that has characterized several 
CIS states and MDGs in health appear achievable.  However, a survey funded by the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) in 2006, reveals that infant mortality was still 
around 48/1000 in 2006.  The Bank’s LSA further revealed that poor people’s access to 
health services, particularly the services provided by the hospitals, is impeded by 
significant out-of-pocket payments, and that the input-based financing system has led to 
significant regional inequalities in standards of service.  Reforms in primary health care, 
supported by the WBG, have improved governance and accountability in the health 
sector, increased availability of funding and other medical inputs for rural PHCs and 
increased financial autonomy of SVPs.  These reforms have resulted in improvements in 
quality and availability of health services as attested by beneficiaries’ surveys. 
Uzbekistan however still faces challenges in maternal health, nutrition, HIV/AIDs and 
TB.  These last diseases have been spreading at an exponential rate in Central Asia and 
have emerged as a key challenge for public policy over the coming years.13  However, for 
these issues, appropriate policies and strategies have been developed and the Government 
has been effective in implementing them.  
27. 
Results in education are also favorable.  Uzbekistan’s spending on education 
remains high; equal to and even exceeding levels in some Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) countries (although a significant part of this is 
investment in new vocational training institutions).  This has allowed primary and 
secondary school enrollment rates to be maintained, although some concerns persist over 
the quality of education and also over attendance rates particularly in rural areas.    
Existing studies (including the Bank’s Public Expenditure Review (PER) further suggest 
that the cost-effectiveness and labor market relevance of spending, particularly on 
vocational secondary education, is low.  Statistics on learning achievement based on a 
measurement of skills rather than knowledge carried out through a random statistical 
sampling of schools are not nationally available, and a systematic analysis of access 
issues has not been carried out.  Further work is needed both to develop an adequate 
monitoring system and to improve targeting of government expenditures.  The 

13 The recorded HIV infection rates in Uzbekistan (estimated at over 3,500 at end-2003, up from 230 at 
end-2000) remain low.  However, as elsewhere in the region, there are worrisome signs of very rapid 
growth due to expanding use of drugs, especially in urban areas.  Moreover, international experience 
suggests that the actual number of people infected may be 5-10 times higher than officially recorded rates. 
The Government has approved a National Strategy for Prevention of HIV/AIDS, and successfully applied 
for a grant from the Global Fund against AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM).  Uzbekistan (together 
with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan) is also an active participant in a US$27 million 
Regional AIDS Control project to minimize the human and economic impact of HIV/AIDS epidemic. 

 13

 
 
                                                 
Government, with support from the WBG and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), is 
increasingly focusing on student assessment and reforms in school governance.   

III. 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM  

A. Country Vision:  the Government’s WIS  

28. 
The Government of Uzbekistan has endorsed the MDGs.  For Uzbekistan, the 
main goal under the MDGs translates into a reduction of the poverty rate from 27.5 
percent in 2000 to 14 percent in 2015.  The Government has been increasingly concerned 
by the disconnect between the impressive economic results of recent years and the 
relatively modest reduction of poverty.  Aggregated GDP growth in 2002-2005 was 24.9 
percent, but the number of poor for the same period was reduced only by 2 percentage 
points.  
29. 
In response to this challenge, the Government approved its first Poverty 
Reduction Strategy paper (PRSP) – the Welfare Improvement Strategy (WIS)14 - in 
September of 2007.  The WIS is a national strategic document for the social-economic 
development of the country over the period 2007-2010.  It was prepared by an 
interdisciplinary team of government experts under the leadership of the Ministry of 
Economy, with analytical support of the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP), ADB and the WBG.  The WIS is a comprehensive framework to address 
poverty and living standards issues built on the policy of granting a greater role to market 
principles within a gradualist approach to structural reforms.  It aims at improving the 
living standards of the population through sustaining a robust and inclusive economic 
growth, developing a modern and diversified globally competitive economy, enhancing 
the quality of public services and reducing inter-regional inequalities in socio-economic 
development. 
Poverty Diagnosis: 
30. 
The WIS provides a candid assessment of poverty level and trends in the 
country relying primarily on the Household Budget Survey (HBS) data.  The quality 
of poverty monitoring and the capacity for poverty analysis, including that related to non-
income dimensions of poverty and access to services, require further strengthening.  
Increased access to information and encouraging broad-based discussion of development 
challenges that the country faces, would enhance the possibility of analysis of the critical 
poverty-growth related issues and deepen the understanding of the linkages between 
policy actions and pro-poor growth.  

14 The WIS was discussed by the Board in January. 2008. 

 14

 
 
                                                 
Macroeconomic Framework and Main Policy Areas in the WIS:15 
31. 
The WIS highlights the role of maintaining sustainable high rates of 
economic growth as a main instrument for poverty reduction.  This goal is to be met 
by a combination of continued stable macroeconomic management, state-led 
industrialization policy and acceleration of structural reforms in selected areas.   
• Improvement of the business environment and tax reform.  The WIS recognizes 
the need to enhance private sector development through a gradual reduction of state 
regulation in the economy and reducing the costs of doing business.  The WIS does 
not elaborate much, however, on the reduction of transaction costs, streamlining of 
customs procedures and simplification of certification and licensing. 
• Trade.  The WIS contains a candid discussion of the shortcomings of the trade regime 
and trade practices, but does not contemplate comprehensive changes to the current 
trade regime and practices. The Government however proposes to anchor its gradual   
trade liberalization to the process of harmonization with the EurAsEc and, in the 
future, through joining the World Trade Organization (WTO). For the time being, 
however, the Government intends to continue encouraging the build up of the 
industrial base of the country, using localization and import substitution as 
mechanisms to achieve this objective.   
• Financial sector reform.  The WIS includes a list of financial sector reforms needed 
to further enhance financial deepening and to strengthen the role of banks in economic 
development, as well as to improve the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.  
The WIS, however, would have been strengthened had the document explicitly 
included a road map for the further development of the financial sector over the next 
three years. 
• Rural sector development and environmental management.  The WIS recognizes 
the importance of agricultural growth for improving the livelihood of people and 
emphasizes the close link to environmental issues including sustainable irrigation and 
water management systems, soil improvement and drainage, more efficient use of 
water resources and the importance of cost recovery.  The WIS, however, does not 
envisage the gradual reform of the state procurement system for cotton, although it 
may well have a huge potential to improve income and unleash new opportunities for 
growth in the rural economy.   
• Improving the performance of utility and communal services in large and small 
cities, towns and villages.  The WIS proposes rehabilitation and extension of water 
supply, sewerage and solid waste management systems, the reduction of physical and 
commercial losses in the electricity and gas systems, the installation of energy 
efficient heating systems including options to decentralize inefficient Soviet-era 
systems.  It also proposes the development of appropriate market based pricing 
systems for utilities, so as to combine efficiency with financial sustainability and 

15 For a detailed joint Bank-IMF assessment of the WIS please refer to the Joint Staff Advisory Note dated 
January 24, 2008 (Report No 41799-UZ). 

 15

 
 
 
                                                 
protection of vulnerable social groups.  In the field of public utilities, the Government 
strategy calls for private sector participation.   
• Strengthening human development.  The WIS recognizes that, although the 
Government pays special attention to the development of social services, including 
health and education, the quality of these services still needs to be improved. 
Therefore, continued public investments and more efficient financing mechanisms in 
education and health, would be needed to ensure that the poor contribute to and benefit 
from economic growth.  The WIS focuses on achieving the MDG’s and envisions 
improvements in primary, emergency and specialized health care, preventive health 
measures, and a gradual transition to output-based financing.  In education, the 
Government’s objective is to maintain a high literacy rate. The Government’s 
priorities therefore include providing 12 years of mandatory free education and 
improving the quality of primary and secondary education while maintaining universal 
access. 
• Improving the functioning of the labor market and social protection systems.  
The WIS recognizes how critical the strengthening of the social protection programs is 
to protect the poorest sections of population.  The WIS also stresses gender equality as 
one of its goals and contemplates targeted government interventions to support 
investment and job creation in less advantaged regions of the country and ensure 
equality of access to services regardless of the place of residence.  However, the WIS 
does not provide a detailed program on how to improve the (pro-poor) targeting 
performance of social assistance programs, although it highlights the importance of 
programs targeted to the poor households.  The WIS contains clear labor market 
objectives, but specific policy actions, regulatory changes and measures will have to 
be elaborated in the course of implementation.   
• Improving governance.  The WIS includes measures on administrative reform, 
improvements in policy-making structures and in strengthening the role of the 
legislature 
in oversight of 
the executive, greater access 
to 
information, 
decentralization, as well as longer term reform of the civil service.  It proposes to 
tackle the challenge of more transparent and efficient allocation of resources through 
reforms in public expenditure management and introduction of a robust monitoring 
and evaluation mechanisms.  However, the WIS does not propose an actionable plan 
of measures to implement the stated objectives.  
32. 
Broad participation of both line ministries and civil society would enhance 
WIS implementation.  As noted in the Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN), the 
implementation of the WIS will be challenging and will require Government’s further 
efforts to: (i) set clear priorities amongst policies, programs and investments through 
costing and cost/benefit analysis; (ii) establish methods and institutions for monitoring 
and evaluation; (iii) sharpen policy analysis in selected sectors and detailing the measures 
to be taken in support of sector goals and (v) strengthen public and civil society 
participation.  
33. 
The authorities have recognized the central importance of technical 
assistance and external advice in WIS implementation.  Their request for such 
involvement from the donor community is encouraging.  The preliminary estimate for TA 
support across the WIS agenda that would be provided by a combination of largely local 

 16

 
 
and selected international experts amounts to approximately US$6 million over an 
implementation period of three to four years.  The Government has initiated and will 
continue to seek grant funding support from donors to meet these technical assistance 
needs.  It should be recognized, however, that progress on understanding and addressing 
the poverty challenge will depend both on funds being available for TA support for WIS 
implementation and on willingness by all partners and Government to cooperate and 
advance a more open dialog and improved information sharing. 

B. Donor Partnership in Support of Uzbekistan’s Economic Development 
Objectives16 

34. 
There is a relatively small group of donors active in Uzbekistan and overall 
external funding decreased during the ISN period.  However, there is strong support 
among all donor agencies for coordination and harmonization of activities.  There is 
extensive collaboration in capacity building, as illustrated recently in the joint 
involvement of the UNDP, ADB and the WBG in support of the Government’s 
preparation of the WIS.  There is also considerable collaboration at the project level in 
the health sector in partnership with the United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID) and ADB.  In the areas of irrigation and drainage, the Bank has 
active partnerships under its existing projects with the number of international agencies. 
The Government of Japan is a source of significant trust funding through the Japan Social 
Development Fund (JSDF) and Japan’s Policy and Human Resources Development 
(PHRD) in support of activities planned in this CAS.  The ADB and the WBG conduct 
Joint Portfolio Reviews with the Government, and where possible use the same 
implementation arrangements.  UNDP and the World Bank have also coordinated to 
provide support for improved monitoring and evaluation systems in the context of 
implementing the WIS.   
35. 
Uzbekistan is party to all of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
(UNODC’s) regional projects (which are supported by other donors including the 
WBG).  These projects are focused on drug abuse prevention and treatment, HIV/AIDS 
prevention, and counter-narcotics enforcement all of which promote regional cooperation 
and coordination.  The WBG and UNODC have also collaborated in the delivery of 
capacity building workshops in the context of the AML/CFT Mentor Program since 
Uzbekistan enacted an AML/CFT law (in 2004), created a financial intelligence unit, and 
ratified the major United Nations (UN) Conventions17 covering money laundering and 
terrorism financing.  These workshops covered role and functions of a Financial 
Intelligence Unit, training on international AML/CFT obligations and best practices. 
36. 
The WBG 
is working closely with the IMF on 
issues related to 
macroeconomic stability and economic management.  The Government is cooperating 
fully with the IMF, in particular in the context of the Article IV review, and is benefiting 
from continued IMF’s Technical Assistance (TA).  IFC has been working with the 

16 For more detailed information on donor partnership please refer to Annex 3.  
17 UN Convention Against Illicit Trafficking of Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances;  the UN 
Convention for Suppression of Financing of Terrorism;  and the UN Convention Against Transnational 
organized Crime (Palermo Convention). 

 17

 
 
                                                 
Government on addressing regulatory obstacles in the business environment for SMEs 
and improving the legal framework for housing finance, and with private sector on 
improving access to finance for SMEs.  Funding for IFC’s regional advisory services, 
such as leasing, the mortgage program and the SME banking advisory, has been provided 
by IFC trust funds, the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) and the 
Netherlands. 

IV. 

BANK ENGAGEMENT IN UZBEKISTAN: LESSONS LEARNED 

A. Background 

37. 
The operational environment for the Bank in Uzbekistan has been difficult 
for many years.  The previous CAS (2002-2004) attempted to establish a framework for 
policy dialogue and set policy triggers for various scenarios.  This approach proved to be 
ineffective, given the authorities gradualist state-led development strategy.  Triggers were 
often perceived as imposed external conditionalities, and there was thus little ownership.  
In addition, the fact that Uzbekistan had little need for external financing provided little 
incentive for active cooperation with the Bank in areas that were not clearly demand-
driven by the government.  Reforms which did take place came about from the gradual 
absorption of technical and project work over a number of years and the slow but steady 
build up of ownership and generation of a critical mass for reforms.  In view of the good 
macroeconomic performance and buoyant growth over the past few years, the 
Government perceives its strategy to be successful and therefore has little motivation to 
fundamentally revise it in the short term. 

B. The Interim Strategy 

38. 
A CAS was prepared in 2005 for discussion at the Board, but was eventually 
switched to an Interim Strategy Note (ISN) approved in July 2006 as questions arose 
on developmental effectiveness of the proposed program.  The ISN included financing 
of one project together with technical assistance and analytical advisory services to 
support the development of the WIS and ensure local stakeholder participation for 
increasing development effectiveness.  The IFC’s program focused on advisory services 
aimed at improving the business environment and legislation, as well as increasing access 
to finance to MSMEs and establishing the basis for the development of housing finance.  
The ISN was intended to give the Government and Bank staff a focused opportunity to 
work together to address areas of difference, while continuing to demonstrate good 
cooperation in the implementation of existing lending operations.  A key question for the 
Interim Strategy was the process by which readiness to return to a standard assistance 
framework would be reviewed.  
39. 
The Government and the Bank agreed on assessing the results against four 
basic benchmarks to be achieved in the short-term: (i) finalization of PRSP/WIS; (ii) 
stable macroeconomic management; (iii) improved portfolio performance and (iv) timely 
access to data.  It was agreed to look at the totality of progress during the ISN, not 
treating each result area as a necessary pre-condition for moving ahead.  In addition, it 
was agreed to carry out a governance assessment to be conducted jointly with the 

 18

 
 
Government in a sector selected by the authorities and where the Bank was active 
(health).   
40. 
In addition, in preparation of the ISN, the Bank reviewed jointly with the 
Government future reform priorities against the authorities’ own policy plans. 
Incomplete structural reforms were documented as a list of policy actions in the ISN as a 
guide for this review, noting that priorities could shift in reflection of the dialogue.  As 
had been the case with the triggers under the previous CAS, however, the Government 
expressed the view that, while there was no fundamental disagreement on the need to 
ultimately move 
in 
the areas 
indicated, 
internal consensus on 
the 
timing of 
implementation of many reforms did not yet exist and could hardly be secured under the 
ISN.  In this context, the policy actions specified in the ISN were a framework for 
organizing policy dialogue with the authorities and included governance, poverty 
monitoring, agriculture policy, financial sector, business environment and trade.   

C. Progress Under the ISN  

41. On all four benchmarks, results have been achieved.  The WIS has been 
developed and approved by the government. Macroeconomic management has been 
prudent and stable, and growth high.  There have been significant improvements in the 
portfolio, although still subject to heavy bureaucratic processes that slow down project 
implementation.  While data sharing remains somewhat ad hoc and its timely provision 
inconsistent, the government has made genuine attempts to respond to data requests. 
Finally, the dialogue and collaboration established in the context of the governance 
assessment in the primary health care sector has been a success. 
42. 
During the ISN period, the Uzbek authorities succeeded in maintaining and 
strengthening macro-economic stability.  They continued the gradualist approach they 
have pursued since independence and advanced on a few of the structural reforms areas 
identified in the ISN.  Although progress has been less than anticipated, actions were 
taken in those selected areas the government itself had committed to move on during the 
short ISN period.  Progress was noted, for instance, on the launching of the preparation 
for privatization of one of the major state-owned bank (Asaka Bank), on the initiation of 
privatization of urban land, on the completion throughout the country of the 
transformation of collective farms (“Shirkats”) into private leaseholds and on the slow 
but noticeable improvement of the business environment for SMEs (reduction of taxes, 
number of inspections and reporting requirements; reliance on court rather than 
administrative decisions; reduction in number of permits and licenses to start business 
activities; shortening of enterprise bankruptcy procedures, etc.).   
43. 
The overall quality of the working relationship between the WBG and the 
authorities has improved during the period of the ISN.  One example was the 
Government’s close collaboration with the Bank team during the preparation of the WIS 
and joint work on poverty diagnostics.  Another encouraging sign in the improving 
relationship between the Government and the WBG team is that the Government 
recognizes the shortcomings of the WIS as well as the challenges of its implementation 
and has recently indicated its interest in receiving TA to support the implementation of 
the WIS.  The Government is also very appreciative of IFC’s Private Enterprise 

 19

 
 
Partnership (PEP) TA services, and has been encouraged by this work to make 
improvements in the business environment for SMEs and establishing the legal basis for 
housing finance (Box 1).  

Box: 1: IFC helps Uzbekistan Improve the Business Environment 

IFC’s SME Survey and the BEE work has included the following accomplishments which in part led to Uzbekistan 
improving seven places in the “Doing Business” report:  
• Assisted in developing 9 Presidential Decrees, expected to free up $45 million for the SME sector. The 
project has worked closely with government agencies to improve the business environment leading to streamlined 
registration, permits, inspections, business liquidation and tax reporting procedures.  
• Conducted 5 nationwide surveys of the SME sector. These annual surveys have provided the basis for more 
than 150 policy recommendations, 100 of which have been fully or partially adopted by the government. 
Introduced risk-based management in inspections. The project has helped to implement risk-based 
management at all 33 inspectorates across the country. 
Provided trainings for over 2,200 government officials. Trainings have been provided on new regulatory 
procedures, such as risk based inspections, inspections checklists and the streamlined registration process. 
Increased awareness on the new procedures. The project developed and disseminated easy-to-read information 
materials on inspections and business registration procedures to SMEs. 
• Created 11 inspections checklists. The project developed checklists for the Fire and Sanitary Inspectorates, to be 
used by both agencies in the course of inspections of business entities. 

• 

• 

• 

Source: Doing Business 2007.  

44. 
Strong progress has also been made in portfolio performance, which resulted 
in upgrading all of the problematic projects to “satisfactory” status and in a 
significant improvement in disbursement ratios.  As of March 2008 the Uzbekistan 
portfolio has no problem projects (as opposed to 2 problem projects at the time of the 
ISN), resulting in a 100 percent Proactivity Index.  This portfolio improvement effort was 
also supported by high disbursement ratios (24 percent in FY07 and 20 percent in FY08 - 
above the current ECA average of 14.5 percent).  Critical systemic issues are common for 
all IFIs and across the Bank's portfolio (e.g., contract award delays, slow project start and 
weaknesses in project monitoring and evaluation systems). To address these problems the 
Country Office has intensified work with the Government on project implementation 
through the Joint Technical Group and the Portfolio Action Plan reviews and is also 
providing support for improving monitoring and evaluation. 
45. 
Perhaps the most significant achievement during the ISN period was in 
project implementation.   Some projects were able to implement important policy 
components and innovative features (e.g., Rural Enterprise Support project (RESP) has 
been able to support privatization of collective farms (“Shirkats”), Health I and II have 
contributed to a major reform in the financing of primary health care, Basic Education 
supported the development of parental participation in school governance, etc).  Under 
the Basic Education project, two important governance improvement measures (the 
activation of school boards, and progress in standard student assessments, measured 
against the State Standards for Public Education (GOS OSO))  were agreed upon with the 
Government.  Notwithstanding much evidence of stronger engagement and a more 
trusting relationship with the WBG, the dialogue and progress are not as smooth as they 
could be. 
 An area causing continuing bureaucratic complications 
in project 
implementation is the process of contract expertise of public procurement.  As a result, 

 20

 
 
 
 
 
project implementation remains fraught with unnecessary delays and complications 
despite recent improvements.  

46. General access to data has improved, but unpredictability and ad hoc data 
provision continues, and more work needs to be done by the WBG and the 
authorities to ensure smooth data exchange in the future.  On the WBG side, 
streamlining economic and sectoral data 
requests 
that can prove onerous, 
acknowledgement that information requested may not be readily available and requires a 
special effort to collect and/or analyze, and establishment of clearer linkages between 
Bank requests for detailed data and Bank’s output would probably help increase trust and 
improve collaboration.  On the government’s side, automatic and timely routine 
fulfillment of its obligations as regards data sharing deriving from its membership in the 
WBG should become the norm. 
47. 
During the ISN period, engagement on governance issues was also 
strengthened.  The Bank has been able to conduct regular Beneficiary Assessments for 
projects under implementation.  Beneficiaries and civil society are very positive about 
project benefits and delivery of results on the ground (Box 2).  In addition, cooperation 
with the authorities in the discussion on selected governance dimensions such as PFM, 
HR management and even procurement was encouraging, as it demonstrated that a 
careful, selective dialogue on governance is possible.  The Primary Health Care 
Governance assessment has now been completed and will be shared and discussed with 
the government in April 2008.  Building on these experiences, the CAS will strengthen 
the dialogue on selected governance issues through projects as well as dissemination and 
advocacy work.  

Box: 2: Voice of the Beneficiaries 

A beneficiary assessment on selected projects was carried out at the ISN Mid-term Review, in March-April 2007.  
Beneficiary views on project outcomes were sought on the Bukhara-Samarkand Water Supply (BSWS), Rural Water, 
and the RESP, and the Health II projects.   Heath II project focus group discussions were carried out in Khorezm and 
Karakalpakstan regions.  A summary on BSWS, Rural Water Supply and RESP is based on social assessments 
conducted under these projects in FY07.  The beneficiary assessment provided useful information on project results, 
especially ones that depend on new institutional developments in respective sectors such as agriculture and primary 
health.  A summary of key findings on the impact of WB-supported projects is presented below: 
• Nearly 44,000 people got access to safe water and over 800,000 receive improved quality and quantity water in 
South Karakalpakstan 
• 
90 percent of covered population have access to water and 75-87 percent satisfied with water supply services 
• Over 5,000 farmers benefited from improved irrigation 
• Over 11mln rural population using improved medical services in over 2,300 refurbished primary care centers 
• 
The incidence of infectious diseases has reduced 

Source: World Bank project supervision surveys and consultations.  

D. Lessons Learned from the Last CAS and ISN Implementation 

48. 
In preparation for this CAS, the lessons of the CAS Completion Report (CAS 
CR) of the previous FY02-04 CAS and of the ISN implementation have been.  The 
CAS CR concludes that, notwithstanding the slow overall pace of reforms, there were 
successes during the CAS period at the sectoral level, particularly in the implementation 

 21

 
 
 
 
of projects targeting improved public service delivery and benefiting from strong local 
stakeholder support (health, water supply, and municipal services).  Government 
ownership of the reform process in these areas has allowed the Bank to orient public 
policy attention towards improving the efficiency of public service delivery as well as 
issues affecting poor people’s access to basic services.  The intensive dialogue around the 
LSA was the first time poverty issues were openly discussed with the Government.  This 
experience suggests that development results can be achieved even against the 
background of a difficult overall policy dialogue and significant remaining differences on 
economic policy and the pace of structural reforms.  However, the CAS CR18 cautions 
against expecting much more movement in areas where the Government’s approach 
differs from that of the Bank.  By diverting attention towards areas of disagreement, the 
Bank missed opportunities to contribute to enhanced living conditions and income 
earning opportunities for the poor that were feasible even under the prevailing policy 
regime, according to the CR.   
49. Over the years, the policy dialogue between the Government and the WBG 
has proved effective when demand-driven, specific and clearly articulated, like in 
the reform of health financing.  Officials are often keen to receive and act upon the 
Bank’s advice and capacity building activities (for example in utility reform and housing 
finance).  The dialogue has largely failed, however, when perceived by the Government 
as supply-driven or in areas where the Bank and the Government have different time 
frames and overall approaches, such as in reform of the cotton sector.  Several important 
lessons emerged from past experience, which have been factored into the design of the 
FY08-11 CAS.  They include:  
• Positive development outcomes in support of basic human needs and improved living 
standards can be achieved within the prevailing policy environment of Uzbekistan.   
• The WBG interventions are likely to be more successful in areas where common 
ground exists.  While the Bank will need to continue to advocate reform on a broad 
front, the use of CAS triggers will be avoided.  A move toward a deeper engagement 
will be facilitated by assisting the authorities prepare areas for enhanced engagement 
outside basic human needs. 
• Shared ownership is key to successful engagement and can be strengthened through 
the use of pilots, demonstrating and communicating success, and involving 
stakeholders and beneficiaries in the design and implementation of projects.  Building 
on the WIS as an explicit guide to Government’s own priorities and objectives, 
should also serve this purpose. 
• The WBG experience in Uzbekistan clearly demonstrates that investment projects 
rather than stand alone ESW or TA have been the most effective ‘entry points’ for 
policy dialogue and ultimately reform as they demonstrate effectiveness impact 
through concrete results. 
• Future Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) will need to consider carefully both 
the Government’s demand for advice and the readiness to provide access to data. 

18 Distributed to the Board in August, 2005. Report No. 32293-UZ. 

 22

 
 
                                                 
• 

Involving a wider group of stakeholders both in the preparation and dissemination of 
AAA to build a constituency for reform.  
• There is a need to tackle limited capacity for project implementation through 
renewed attention to generic issues such as the public procurement process.   
Incorporation of Project Implementation Units (PIUs) into Government Ministries 
can promote the longer term objective of gradual integration of the WBG operations 
into government systems.  Notwithstanding this longer term agenda, the Bank 
should remain uncompromising in its defense of the highest standards of fiduciary 
management, which is rightly regarded as important to mitigate governance risks. 

• 

E. Rationale for CAS Engagement  

50. 
The progress achieved under the ISN indicates that the WBG support to 
some key Government priorities can achieve effective results.  The proposed CAS 
framework will allow the consolidation of results, expansion of the areas of engagement 
and the establishment of the Bank as a trusted partner.  It will allow engaging the 
authorities in areas where there is potential for common agreement, particularly to 
increase the effectiveness of service delivery through good governance.   
51. 
Consultations with non-government stakeholders in Uzbekistan indicated 
that a majority of local development partners support the Bank’s continued 
financial assistance and advice.  There is a consensus that the WBG assistance should 
focus in areas which they regard as critical to improve people’s livelihoods, rather than 
disengagement leading to increased isolation.  Moreover there is a broad-based consensus 
that this is an appropriate role for IFIs (ADB has a similar approach).  As was previously 
discussed, engagement has only been effective when sustained and long term. 
52. 
Finally it is important to recognize that given the regional importance and 
close linkages to neighboring states, engagement and development in Uzbekistan has 
the potential to bring benefits well beyond Uzbekistan’s borders.  The importance of 
regional stability cannot in this context be underestimated.  The Bank’s experience and 
analysis of regional issues suggests that the potential costs of Uzbekistan disengaging 
from the regional dialogue are high, given the country’s strategic location and its role in 
the future development of the entire Central Asia region.  These concerns warrant 
continued efforts by the international community to advocate the benefits of greater 
cooperation with the country’s neighbors.  

V. 

THE WBG SUPPORT FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WIS 

53. 
There is broad agreement between the Government, the WBG the donor 
community and other stakeholders on the overall direction and end-result objectives 
of the economic strategy of the Government expressed in the WIS.  There is also a 
consensus on the need to accelerate the pace of poverty reduction and persistent socio-
economic inequalities.  Thus, support to the market based elements of the Government’s 
growth agenda provides broad areas for effective engagement with the Government.  
Nevertheless, there is a difference of views on the pace of transition.  

 23

 
 
54. 
Based on lessons learned during the previous engagements, the current CAS 
will be results-based.  Levels of engagement will be calibrated by the degree of 
government ownership of an agenda which is shared by the WBG.  This differs from past 
approaches in three important respects: (i) it recognizes that the same result may be 
achieved with different policy instruments and thus provides flexibility in devising a 
reform program adapted to the country’s needs; (ii) it relies on joint agreement over 
shared target outcomes, thereby offering the potential for significantly greater client 
ownership; and (iii) the assessment of progress towards an agreed intermediate target 
would be made taking into account direct feedback from project beneficiaries and other 
affected stakeholders, and would allow for adjustments upward or downward to reflect 
exogenous factors outside the project’s direct control.  Moreover, the results framework 
adopted does not encompass Uzbekistan’s entire development agenda but concentrates on 
those areas where – as a result of joint ownership and agreement – the Bank expects to 
make a difference.  

A. Main features of the CAS  

55. 
Overall, the proposed approach in the current CAS is to recognize that the WIS 
provides for different possible levels of engagement: 
• At the first level in the areas identified as WIS priorities upon which there is mutual 
agreement on a reform sequence and content, which supports: (i) poverty reduction 
and improvement of living standards of the population and (ii) global goods 
provision. 
• At the second level, (i) in the areas where the Government and the World Bank agree 
on broad directions and ultimate objectives of the reforms, but where further  
engagement is necessary to identify common ground, reform sequence and timing and 
to agree upon detailed work programs; and (ii) if there develops openings during the 
CAS period, in areas which, in the Bank’s view, may be key for sustainable growth 
and poverty reduction but where the Government, while it may be willing and open to 
receive information and advice on alternative options has not yet committed to 
implement reforms.  
In addition, the WBG would continue to help facilitate increased regional 
cooperation, in particular through its support for Uzbekistan’s involvement in 
CAREC activities. 
56. 
An important feature of the CAS is to demonstrate through concrete results the 
central role of better governance and accountability in improving service delivery.     
57. 
At the first level, in areas where there is strong engagement on the part of 
Government and where the WBG has a successful track record, the CAS will actively 
support the government in implementing its own reform agenda through ESW, TA and 
lending activities.  This includes areas of common agreement such as: maintaining stable 
and sustainable macroeconomic performance; supporting economic growth through 
improving the business environment and investment climate; supporting development of 
agriculture services; improving public service provision (in ways which also reduce 
poverty) in areas such as irrigation, drainage and soil improvement, delivery of municipal 

• 

 24

 
 
services and  health and education.  These are all areas where the WBG and the 
Government have had a sustained and very productive collaboration over the years, but 
where the needs for further advice, capacity building and financial resources remain 
immense.  Additionally, the CAS will support specific activities related to the provision 
of global public goods, particularly related to carbon emission reduction and climate 
change issues, and communicable diseases. 
58. 
At the second level, where broad agreement exists but where programs, 
sequencing and timetable remain to be articulated, work will be conducted during the 
CAS period, initially through ESW and TA, to establish the details and feasibility of 
future engagement, including as needed through lending.  Areas of focus under this 
second strategic pillar will include: support for further financial sector liberalization and 
modernization.  Indeed, the WIS emphasizes the need to enhance financial deepening and 
the role of banks in economic development.  Building upon the WIS’s welcome 
commitments to measures to improve governance, dialogue will also continue on 
improvement in this area, including as regards data availability, transparency, and 
accountability to citizens on the delivery of basic services.  In the area of social 
protection, the WBG will engage with the authorities through dialogue and AAA 
activities to improve the targeting of social assistance.  In addition, the CAS will aim at 
improving 
the fiduciary environment and capacities 
through promoting good 
international practice of PFM based upon PEFA type instruments.        
59. 
The CAS proposes to explicitly recognize areas where there is currently no 
agreement between the Bank and the authorities on the introduction of some 
features of a full-fledged market economy and the completion of transition, but 
where the authorities are willing to learn from international experience, to consider 
alternative options and to conduct joint analytical work.  While the Bank would 
respect existing differences in approaches, it could nevertheless continue a low profile 
and opportunistic dialogue in order to reconcile these different approaches in the future.  
For instance, although the WIS contains a candid discussion of the shortcomings of the 
trade regime and trade practices, the authorities remain committed to the program of 
localization enacted by Presidential Decree no PP-386 dated June 22, 2006 aimed at 
ensuring a more rapid introduction of new production technologies, wide use of local raw 
materials, and increased production of modern competitive goods. Dialogue in this area 
in the short term would have to accept the basic premises of the authorities and be 
confined to ensuring that protectionist policies are applied efficiently and revised once 
some of their main objectives have been achieved.  Additionally, the Bank will explore 
the interest of the Government for peer exchanges with officials from other countries 
facing similar technical or policy challenges to exchange views without the Bank "in the 
room".  Such an approach has already been successful in public finance reform through 
the PEM- PAL (Public Expenditure Management – Peer Assisted Learning) program in 
which Uzbek officials have been participating.  This could complement the more classic 
Bank provision of analytical work as a foundation for dialogue, and sometimes creates a 
more candid and open space for authorities to re-visit policy choices or stances.  
60. 
The CAS will also support continued engagement of Uzbekistan to advance 
the CAREC agenda of accelerating economic growth and the raising of living 
standards by encouraging economic cooperation in the central region.  By fostering 

 25

 
 
and facilitating regional cooperation in transport, trade, energy and other key areas of 
mutual interest, the CAREC program helps Central Asian and neighboring countries 
realize their immense potential in an increasingly integrated Eurasia.  By partnership with 
multilateral and other international agencies, the CAREC program is a proactive 
facilitator of practical, results-based regional projects and policy initiatives critical to 
trade expansion, sustainable development and meeting new challenges.   
61. 
The CAS will provide an opportunity to contribute to mainstreaming 
regional cooperation in Uzbekistan through facilitation or allocation of resources 
towards: (i) knowledge and capacity-building to strengthen the understanding of what is 
at stake in regional cooperation and the benefits from more effective transport, trade and 
energy systems; (ii) the development and implementation of special project initiatives 
that address emerging interests or concerns of CAREC countries and that contribute to 
broadening and deepening regional cooperation; (iii) contribution to the design and 
development of country ownership of sector strategies to guide regional transport, trade 
and energy initiatives; and (iv) business development by giving an opportunity to Uzbek 
business enterprises to participate in regional cooperation fora.   

B. Stakeholder Consultations 

62. 
During consultations for the preparation of this CAS, 19 the Government 
expressed its broad agreement with the proposed priority framework for WBG’s 
assistance under the CAS.  Discussions with civil society representatives were also very 
supportive of the proposed strategy and participants expressed their keen desire to see the 
WBG continue and increase its support and activities in Uzbekistan.  Overall the 
consultations indicated that the new CAS’s focus on basic human needs and improving 
living standards is the right one, with many stakeholders also soliciting increased 
involvement of the WBG in improving the enabling environment for development of the 
private sector.  
63. 
The consultations also highlighted the growing optimism over future 
economic developments in Uzbekistan, which need to be factored into the 
implementation of the CAS.  The CAS does this through its annual monitoring 
framework, as well as the mid-term review scheduled after two years.  Consultations with 
civil society stressed the importance of involving civil society in the design and 
monitoring of projects, and the desire of civil society to be closely involved in the 
implementation of World Bank activities. The government has also indicated its 
willingness to consult with stakeholders in the course of implementation of the WIS. 

19 In preparing the CAS, an outline of key issues and a preliminary results framework were presented and 
discussed with the Government, donors, and civil society. CAS consultations were held in Bukhara, Navoi, 
Khorezm and Fergana regions, in the Republic of Karakalpakstan and the city of Tashkent.  All visits 
included meetings with local government officials and with stakeholders’ group comprising of 
representatives of civil society organizations, research and academia, entrepreneurs, farmers and media. 
Overall the consultations covered about 40 local government officials and about 300 representatives of 
various audiences. In addition to face-to-face discussions, the country office designed and implemented an 
Internet-based online CAS consultation facility to receive feedback, comments and suggestions for the 
widest possible audience.   

 26

 
 
                                                 
C. Mechanisms for Bank Group Engagement 

64. 
Proposed lending engagement will focus on: investments (i) that impact directly 
on income/quality of life of citizens, particularly the poor: in rural (education, irrigation 
and drainage, water supply and sanitation, agriculture credit, health, energy efficiency 
and reliability) and urban areas (education, health, solid waste management, wastewater 
management) and support furthering/deepening of sectoral reforms; and (ii) that support 
Uzbekistan’s contribution to addressing global public goods and climate change issues 
(gas flaring, carbon finance) and promotion of the regional cooperation agenda.  The 
Bank program would include 2-3 projects per year, the size of which will depend on the 
amount of IDA resources determined by the Performance Based Allocation (PBA) 
system and will be in line with the priorities mentioned above.  The RESP II project 
(US$68 million 20 ) is presented to the Board together with the CAS.  The Bank is 
preparing two projects for FY09 delivery, Basic Education – Phase II and Ferghana 
Valley Water Resource Management Phase-I.  Also under preparation in FY10 are a 
Health project and a Small Town Infrastructure project. 
65. 
Uzbekistan is a blend country.  In recent year however, difficulties have been 
encountered in using the full IDA allocation.  Hence there has been no active 
consideration of IBRD borrowing.  At this stage, the authorities have not indicated an 
interest in borrowing on IBRD terms.  If this changes, eligibility for renewed access to 
IBRD might be considered during the mid-term review of the CAS, even at GNP per 
capita levels below the usual IDA operational cut-off, if significant reform progress is 
made and if disbursements accelerate considerably.  In this case a creditworthiness 
assessment would be necessary. 
66. 
Proposed non-lending engagement will focus on: (i) key sectoral and cross 
sectoral areas where Bank group supports Government’s reform efforts, promote good 
governance as a way to improve efficiency and effectiveness and quality of service 
delivery and where the ESW is needed to deepen research and strengthen capacity.  This 
engagement will seek to build on existing activities and develop new approaches towards 
dissemination and advocacy of selected governance reforms.  For example, the WBG will 
seek to engage the government in discussing the issues that underlying low governance-
related Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) indicators.  The WBG will 
also develop new approaches towards discussing efficiency constraints related to 
procurement issues.  
67. Other non-lending engagement would – inter alia - support for the 
deepening/strengthening the WIS and building up capacity for monitoring and evaluation 
of its impact; programmatic TA in economic evaluation of and prioritization of 
investment projects; growth and poverty diagnostics; dialogue on increasing the 
efficiency of the protectionist trade regime; AAA activities in social protection to 
improve targeting, diagnostic of macroeconomic vulnerability; TA focusing on efficiency 
of service delivery and user accountability for efficient and sustainable use of water;  
dialogue on business environment; etc.); and (ii) activities that are linked to ongoing or 
future regional programs, to exploit synergies and promote regional exchanges and 

20 Equivalent of SDR 41.3mn.  

 27

 
 
                                                 
cooperation.  

68. 
These AAA activities are geared to advocate and prepare the ground work 
for reforms, consistent with the two levels of engagement proposed in the CAS.  In 
line with lessons learned under the previous CAS, particular attention would be placed on 
joint analytical work with the Government, with a focus on providing just in time TA to 
maximize the impact of the AAA program, taking into account the lessons of recently 
completed AAA impact assessment (Box 3).  The pace of progress will, however, 
ultimately be determined by the Government’s own agenda and political will. 

Box: 3: Assessing the World Bank’s AAA  in Uzbekistan 

What have been the impacts and effectiveness of the analytic and advisory activities (AAA) that the World Bank has 
provided to the Government of Uzbekistan?  To answer this question, the Bank’s country office in Tashkent 
collaborated with the World Bank Institute Evaluation Group in early 2008 to assess a series of technical assistance 
activities and economic and sector work. 
On the whole, the Bank’s counterparts rated the AAA favorably.  Officials in several ministries noted their appreciation 
of the Bank’s analyses, their typically high quality, and the level of knowledge and expertise represented among the 
Bank’s staff and consultants involved in the AAA. 
Opportunities for improvement related to a desire to make the Bank’s reports as practical as possible as opposed to 
complex and theoretical and to ensure that the material is accessible, desirably through brief reports with effective 
executive summaries.  Clear identification of development objectives was occasionally lacking.  In some instances, 
objectives identified in concept notes were not evident or well addressed in the completed report.  Several reports 
overwhelmingly emphasized summary or description of an “existing situation,” which is already likely to be well 
known within the government, at the expense of proposed options for change and how to implement them.  
Effective distribution of completed reports and their dissemination to promote achievement of the AAA’s development 
objectives were identified as major opportunities for improvement.  Although the AAA had led to six reports, all 
completed between 2006 and mid-2007, none had been formally published or were available in the Public Information 
Center in Tashkent or on the Bank’s website.  None were internally available to Bank staff at the ImageBank, the 
mandatory repository for completed economic and sector work.  In several instances, key government officials had 
either not received reports pertinent to their responsibilities – or at least had no recollection of having received them.  
Such a situation clearly diminishes the Bank’s opportunities to influence policies or reforms.   
To strengthen the Bank’s AAA, the review recommended the development of a standard framework that can be used to 
develop and implement effective concept notes, an enhanced role for the country office at each stage of the AAA cycle, 
substantive involvement of government officials in the development and review of concept notes, and a substantial 
increase in attention to publication and dissemination.  A systematic postmortem and review of each completed activity 
with appropriate government officials about two months after a report’s completion can also improve the impact and 
effectiveness of the Bank’s AAA. 
Source: World Bank: Assessment of the effectiveness of the AAA assistance in Uzbekistan. 

69. Overall, the CAS lending and AAA program is proposed to be flexible to 
allow for adjustment to reflect client demands and the extent of agreement on policy 
issues during implementation.  At the same time, in response to Government’s decision 
to undertake reforms, the country management team will provide appropriate lead-time 
for project preparation and sector work to ensure quality and adequate participatory 
process.    
D. WBG Proposed Activities in Support of the WIS Objectives 
70. 
The WBG will support government priorities through four main pillars: 
• Enabling environment for shared growth  
• 
Increasing economic opportunities in rural areas 
• 
Improving service delivery  
• Managing environmental and global goods provision  

 28

 
 
 
Pillar 1: Enabling environment for shared growth  
71. 
Continued sound macroeconomic management is key to sustaining growth and 
this CAS pillar will be supported by regular macroeconomic policy dialogue, in 
conjunction with the IMF.  The Bank will work with the authorities on issues of 
macroeconomic vulnerabilities and long-term sustainability through a series of targeted 
economic issues notes.  One of the key issues in the WIS – the link between economic 
growth and the reduction of poverty – could be more closely investigated jointly with the 
authorities under a Programmatic Poverty Analysis.  
72. 
Institutional support for WIS implementation.  The WIS contains a large 
agenda of structural reforms to promote further and more pro-poor economic 
development.  However, limited capacity and political constraints will dictate a 
sequenced implementation of this agenda as the WIS does not imply a fundamental shift 
in economic strategy.  The Bank will therefore proceed cautiously in providing support 
only where there is clear evidence of progress in implementation.  One area in which the 
Government and the Bank have established common ground is the need to improve the 
efficiency of public resource management.  The Bank would provide analytical support 
through a Programmatic Public Expenditure Review (PPER), which would provide 
support to the authorities in agreed areas of public financial management reform (initially 
agreed focus areas include assistance in the Medium-Term Budget Framework (MTBF), 
and a review of municipal financing arrangements), and might include benchmarking 
through PEFA type assessments.  In addition, the WBG proposes to address the 
Government’s request for support in implementation of the WIS through a WIS TA, 
which will focus on supporting the authorities in improving prioritization, economic 
evaluation and costing of public investment projects, for which the WIS provides only 
preliminary estimates, through focused ESW and the mobilization of donor resources.  In 
conjunction with other donors, the WBG will also provide assistance in strengthening 
monitoring and evaluation, of the WIS, including through greater stakeholder and 
beneficiary group participation.  This support would also extend to assisting the 
authorities in the design of necessary “mid-course” corrections, as required in the light of 
results achieved.  
73. 
Private Sector Development, Business Environment and Investment Climate. 
Further development of the private and financial sectors is crucial for sustained growth 
and poverty reduction – as recognized by the WIS.  The Government has been reluctant 
to borrow for TA, but the WBG will continue to engage in policy dialogue in those areas 
in response to the authorities’ interest in understanding policies and regulations that affect 
the structural areas of the CPIA.  Other AAA work on private and financial sector issues 
would be undertaken in close collaboration with the IFC, IMF and the EBRD. In 
addition, the WBG will provide support to the development of the private sector in rural 
areas by building on the positive experience of the RESP (see paras 84 and 85). 

 29

 
 
 
 
 
74. 
For the purposes of private sector development and to encourage informal 
activities to move to the formal economy, the Government should continue implementing 
reforms aimed at increasing the efficiency of government, as well as sustain the policy of 
reducing direct government intervention in entrepreneurial activities and simultaneously 
developing the tools for indirect economic regulation based on market principles.   The 
IFC has devoted substantial resources to help develop the private sector and to advisory 
services for project identification as well as capacity building in the financial sector.  
Despite these efforts, it has been difficult for IFC to identify bankable projects and attract 
foreign investors due to limited foreign investment and the difficulty for private sector to 
operate.  In light of this, IFC’s activities in the country have been heavily focused on 
advisory services, particularly in the financial sector, for capacity building and on 
improving the business environment.    
75. 
Going forward, IFC is increasing its operations in Central Asia in order to support 
more competitive businesses, improve access to finance and contribute to the sustainable 
and equitable development of the region.  In Uzbekistan, IFC focuses on increasing 
access to finance for MSMEs, particularly those in rural areas such as the Ferghana 
Valley and Karakalpakistan.  In addition to supporting the improvement of the business 
environment, IFC will strengthen the financial sector by promoting the development of 
microfinance, leasing, housing finance and institution-building of local banks and will 
seek to create a private microfinance bank with other IFI’s.  IFC will also support the 
development of an efficient credit bureau system.  Furthermore, IFC will seek 
opportunities for new investment in agribusiness and general manufacturing such as in 
construction, retail and distribution; this may be in the form of more direct investment to 
small enterprises.  Uzbekistan’s rich oil and gas resources can potentially attract large 
FDI if the authorities make progress in introducing transparency in the sector.  IFC will 
seek to selectively engage with companies in the oil, gas and mining sectors, subject to  
public disclosure of revenue payments made to the Government, on a pilot basis, as a 
means of encouraging greater overall transparency, and hence investment, in the sector.   
76. 
As a landlocked country, efficient cross-border trade and trade facilitation 
infrastructure, logistics and intergovernmental agreements are important, yet Uzbekistan 
is only ranked 129 in the Logistic Performance Index.  A regional advisory services 
project to promote PPP in infrastructure is being scoped.  However such a project would 
be contingent on serious commitment on the part of the Government.  Finally, in the 
financial sector, the Government is working towards the privatization of the NBU and of 
Asaka Bank, two major players, whose share in the total assets of the banking system has 
reduced in the period of 2000-2007 from 80% to 46%.  Should banking privatization 
progress during the CAS period, IFC would be prepared to consider advisory services and 
financing to support these privatizations.  
77. 
Under the World Bank/UNODC mentor program, several technical training 
workshops were delivered 
to build desired capacity on AML/CFT standards. 
Nevertheless further World Bank AML/CFT technical assistance would be made  
available upon request from the authorities, should they wish WBG support to address 
issues raised by the FATF regarding compliance of the current Uzbek legal framework 

 30

 
 
with an internationally recognized AML/CFT regime. 21  Progress to re-establish such a 
framework would also assist in attracting foreign investment, particularly in the financial 
sector, and in so doing would facilitate increased IFC support. 
78. 
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) has currently no 
outstanding exposure in Uzbekistan but could also provide support.  Going forward, 
MIGA would consider opportunities to support foreign investment in Uzbekistan through 
the provision of political risk guarantees.  MIGA's assistance will mostly depend on the 
country's progress on implementing reforms and foreign investors' demand.  
79. 
Finally, an Accounting and Auditing Report on the Observance of Standards and 
Codes (ROSC) is currently being conducted for Uzbekistan and the report will be 
delivered to the government before the end of June 2008.  Based on this assessment, the 
WBG will engage the Government in the development of an action plan to further 
improve accounting and auditing practices in Uzbekistan as this critical for private sector 
development, with a view to ultimately consider adoption of the International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS) including International Accounting Standards (IAS). 
80. 
Promoting Good Governance.  The key governance challenges in Uzbekistan lie 
in weak mechanisms for interaction between the Government, private sector and civil 
society,  centralized decision making and control; low transparency and instances of self-
censorship.  The strength of the state combined with the lack of checks and balances 
suggests that changing such an environment will be a slow process. However the 
authorities have demonstrated that where poor governance can be shown to be an 
impediment to efficiency there is a clear willingness to improve governance.  Some of the 
most important examples are recent improvements in PFM through introduction of a 
Treasury, and in the business environment through the simplification of regulations, 
which should also lead to a decline in the unofficial payments faced by SMEs engaged in 
those procedures 22 .  In addition the successful engagement of the authorities on 
governance issues in the area of primary health care and in education through the creation 
of mechanisms for parent feedback and influence on the running of schools shows how it 
is possible to incorporate governance issues into sectoral dialogue.  
81. 
Thus the governance agenda can be supported through on-going projects and 
directly in areas where the government is willing to borrow for sector investment, 
through design features of the projects themselves.  In addition to project design 
governance issues can be addressed through stakeholders’ involvement, TA and dialogue 
maintained during project preparation and throughout the project supervision period.   

21 In early 2007, three Decrees (Presidential Decrees of 12 Jan 2007; 20 Feb. 2007 and 27 April 2007) were 
enacted suspending the obligation for financial institutions to report certain transactions to a financial 
intelligence unit until the year 2013, while in February 2008 an "Amnesty" Decree was enacted imposing 
penalties on anyone who questions the legality or origin of financial resources deposited in an Uzbek 
financial institution. Although adopted with the intention of improving public confidence in the banking 
system, the effect of these decrees was to prompt the Financial Action Task Force to post a public 
statement on its website on February 28, 2008 (http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/16/26/40181037.pdf) 
expressing serious concerns that these Decrees "effectively repeal the AML/CFT regime."  
22 Indeed, the IFC SME survey shows an overall decline in the unofficial payments, in particular for those 
procedures where reforms have been undertaken.  

 31

 
 
                                                 
82. 
There will be engagement on governance issues through a number of vehicles. 
The first involves a focused dialogue with the authorities on measures that address poor 
governance outcomes.  The dialogue will need to be based on exposure to international 
experience, including through such instruments as PEMPAL and other peer-learning 
tools.  In particular, it is proposed that Internal Audit and/or procurement Community of 
Practitioners events could be organized under the PEM-PAL program in Uzbekistan.  
83. 
The second will be to build upon the detailed governance assessment in the 
Primary Health sector which was carried out with strong support and excellent 
collaboration from the authorities (Box 4).  The WBG will continue its intensive work 
with the Government focused on improvement of efficiency of public service provision 
through existing “governance entry points” where there is real Government ownership, 
prompted by concerns over poverty reduction and persistent socioeconomic inequalities, 
and by the recognition and acceptance that governance improvements can clearly 
improve efficiency; and greater accountability would significantly improve quality of 
service delivery.  This approach would include (i) involving civil society in monitoring 
efforts for social services provision; (ii) promoting managerial flexibility and 
management objectives in state-owned providers of social services, as well as rule-based 
approach (improve corporate governance of providers); (iii) expanding private provision 
of social services and client choice, where appropriate; and (iv) continued data collection 
and dialogue on business environment through IFC-PEP.   

Pillar II: Increasing economic opportunities in rural areas 
84. 
Rural development.  Agriculture is an important sector of the Uzbek economy, 
accounting for 24 percent of GDP, 33 percent of foreign exchange receipts, and 41 
percent of employment.  This pillar is aligned with the WIS’ calls for investment into 
rural services for reducing rural poverty and overcoming regional disparities.  It will also 
support the Shirkat23 reform which significantly improved the farm incentive structure, 
but also increased rural unemployment, and created new needs for the newly independent 
farmers to gain access to skills, inputs and credit.  Two major obstacles prevent the 
Shirkat reform achieving its full economic benefits: 
− The state procurement system for cotton and wheat creates 
important 
disincentives for cost effectiveness and productivity improvements 24 .  As a 
consequence, cotton yields have stagnated in Uzbekistan since independence;  
− Demand from the newly independent leasehold farmers for access to services 
such as extension and medium term finance to purchase agricultural equipment 
far outstrips available supply, although leasing, in particular, has registered a 
significant development in the past years. 

23 Shirkats are cooperative farms which took over the management of the Soviet-era collective farms.  The 
recent reform caused important structural changes to agriculture and resulted in the establishment of around 
200,000 new independent farmers with an average size of 15-20 ha each.  The total land area managed by 
the new farmers is around 2 million ha, from the restructuring of 1,600 collective farms.  Non-tradable 
leases of up to 50 years are inheritable although full private ownership of land is not yet allowed.    
24 See for example Country Economic Memorandum, 2003; Policy Note on Cotton Taxation, June 2005. 

 32

 
 
                                                 
Box: 4: Uzbekistan – Undertaking Governance Work in a Difficult Environment 

The ISN identified governance as an important focus of the Bank’s analytical and advisory work in Uzbekistan during the 
interim period. The governance study has focused on the health sector – more specifically, on primary health care (PHC) at 
the local level; a sector selected by the Government itself, where reforms were being implemented and where the Bank and 
other donors have actively supported such efforts in the context of the Health I and II projects.  It was decided that two 
oblasts, one representing an advanced reformer (Ferghana), and a later reformer (Samarkand), would be the focus of the 
analysis; it was also agreed that a survey as to the quality of service delivery would also be undertaken.   
To assure the government’s buy-in of the findings and recommendations, the study was conducted in close collaboration 
with the authorities at both the central and local levels.  In particular, the Ministries of Health and Finance (including their 
subordinated departments at the oblast and rayon levels) actively supported Bank missions and the surveys conducted in 
August and September 2007.  The Bank regularly informed the central ministries and local government of its agenda and 
activities, and formed an inter-ministerial working group comprising government officials in Finance and Health to discuss 
the relevant governance issues.  Mission members held a number of consultations with government stakeholders (service 
providers, health care managers, regulators and policy makers), and invited local government officials to participate in field 
missions.  The team also discussed findings and highlighted issues with the central ministries at the end of each visit.  
Preliminary findings of the assessment indicate that implementation of the (ongoing) health reforms over the past several 
years has had a positive impact on governance.  Continued government commitment to the comprehensive health reform 
agenda, combined with the implementation of treasury modernization (piloted in Samarkand in 2006), has improved the 
effectiveness of local government in the provision of health services.  The reforms have increased the budgetary allocation 
to health facilities, and thereby the availability of medical supplies, equipment, and repair and maintenance.  The 
introduction of per-capita financing and autonomy in financial management for rural primary health facilities has improved 
funding predictability and accountability in management and the use of public funds.  The introduction of a modern 
treasury system has increased reliability in the flows of funds, reduced delays in cash releases, and improved transparency 
and financial reporting.  Further, staff training and the introduction of a development account for incentives and material 
techniques has improved incentives among health workers and their performance.  The surveys’ findings also confirm that 
consumers are generally satisfied with the reforms:  health service has improved in term of access, quality, and 
affordability, especially in areas where health reform is more advanced (Ferghana and the rural area).  Health workers have 
indicated they are more content and motivated because they have been provided with updated skills and the necessary 
medical supplies, equipment and good infrastructure; staffs have also responded to being acknowledged and rewarded for 
good performance. 
Source:  Assessment of Governance Constraints to Health Service Delivery, World Bank, 2008.  

85. 
The Bank’s approach in the CAS will be to demonstrate ways in which rural 
incomes, in particular, can be effectively increased, through a variety of pilot 
interventions in support of pricing and marketing reforms in the cotton sector, enhanced 
credit to rural enterprises and farmers, the development of microfinance through the 
existing banking system and the exploration of alternative rural employment and earning 
possibilities, particularly for the country's population of unemployed youth.  The Rural 
Enterprises Support project (RESP I) brought important benefits in the project areas 
because it complemented the Shirkat reform by providing farmers with credit, access to 
finance, and improved irrigation and rehabilitation infrastructure.  The newly independent 
farmers significantly increased their independence from the state by becoming the owners  
of farm equipment and becoming less dependent on State machine tractor parks for their 
mechanization.   This proved an effective boost in the process of privatization which 
produced clear results in terms of increased yields and productivity (see FAO evaluation 
of RESP Project).  These pilot interventions will be accompanied by AAA targeted at 
agricultural reform to continue the intensive policy dialogue carried out under the 
existing RESP and the proposed scaled up Second Rural Enterprise Support project 
(RESP II) in FY08 to significantly enlarge the project area.     
86. Water resource management, irrigation and drainage.  Consistent with the 
WIS objectives of “improving the system and increasing the efficiency of water resource 
management including investment in land improvement”, and “development of an 
integrated sustainable water management system for supply of irrigation water”, the Bank 

 33

 
 
 
will support financing of  projects that will build upon the achievements of the Drainage 
Irrigation and Wetlands Improvement project and that would rehabilitate and modernize 
irrigation systems, support more cost-effective supply and use of irrigation water, 
improve on farm land management, and introduce modern technology and institutional 
development for improved irrigation.  Bank-supported projects, starting with the 
irrigation and drainage component of the proposed RESP II in FY08 and proposed 
Ferghana Valley Water Resource Management Phase-I project in FY09 will continue to 
further strengthen the capacity of water user associations (WUAs) and to introduce more 
efficient irrigation practices and mechanisms of accountability and good governance.   
Pillar III: Improving service delivery 
87. 
Household survey data analysis suggest that significant declines in poverty 
reduction can be achieved by a combination of policies that encourage economic growth 
(and thus enable productive job opportunities) while at the same time increasing the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the delivery of public services.  Despite Uzbekistan's 
relative success in the social sectors, the WIS highlights the importance of further 
improving service delivery and ensuring adequate financing and promotion of cost-
effectiveness in service provision (reform of municipal utilities and health and education 
financing) .  Lending interventions in the health, education and municipal services sectors 
would aim at saving public resources through creating incentives at the service delivery 
level and strengthening local accountability and sectoral governance, thus providing 
support to the Government in reaching the above WIS objectives.  An important feature 
of all WBG interventions in this area will be to demonstrate through concrete results the 
central role of better governance and accountability in improving service delivery.     
88. Municipal services sector development and financing.  Support in the 
municipal sector is envisaged for targeted investment in the areas of solid waste 
management, water and wastewater management and, possibly, to promote community-
based heritage protection25.  Municipal sector support activities would be designed and 
implemented in a programmatic manner, drawing upon advisory sector work on the 
management of municipal services and infrastructure.  To the extent that an environment 
conducive to PPPs develops, IFC could also become involved in financing investments in 
this sector. 
89. 
In rural water supply and sanitation, the Bank will build upon the ongoing 
Water Supply, Sanitation and Health project, that supported the provision of safe drinking 
water along with improved hygiene education for the Republic of Karakalpakstan and 
Khorezm Oblast, and strengthened institutional capacity for management, operation and 
financial performance of the regional water supply and sewage utilities.   A review of 
rural infrastructure and communal services is expected to establish a new approach to 
sustainable decentralized basic service delivery in rural areas with a particular focus on 
supporting/expanding rural communal services in Karakalpakstan as a part of the Aral 
Sea Initiative. 

25 The Bank will also explore additional income generating possibilities in cultural tourism following the 
successful implementation of the TFESSD financed pilot community-based cultural tourism and heritage 
protection activities in FY05-08.   

 34

 
 
                                                 
90. 
Starting in 1996, the Government’s health sector reforms, supported by Bank’s 
Health I and II projects, focused on rural primary care aimed aims to shift the system’s 
focus from secondary care to primary care.  The reforms included restructuring of health 
facilities and rationalizing the health system; introducing the role of general practitioner, 
and increasing financial incentives to health workers.  These were implemented along 
with the reform of SVP financing mechanisms.  Implemented initially in only three pilot 
oblasts, the Government is now rolling out the reforms nationally and they will cover the 
entire country by end-2008.  The reforms have improved governance and accountability 
in the health sector.  SVPs are now the first point of contact in the health system and the 
rural population has expressed increased satisfaction with services compared with three 
years ago. 
91. 
The Government is committed to continue strengthening primary care, but 
recognizes that to reap further efficiency gains, restructuring of the hospital sector needs 
to be undertaken.  Future assistance to the sector envisages a combination of investment 
operations, technical assistance and analytical work to support deepening of ongoing 
reforms in the sectors focusing on secondary care, improvements in medical education 
and quality of care, implementation of drug policy and implementation of a multi-sectoral 
public health strategy.  Further technical assistance and analytical work in the areas of 
nutrition, food safety and hospital reform including the role of private sector in health is 
envisaged.  The development of PPPs in the hospital sector will be reviewed. Finally, it is 
envisaged to provide further support during the CAS period for implementing a multi-
sectoral public health strategy focusing on areas of nutrition, food-safety and HIV/AIDS 
through investment and analytical work.  This would include strengthening the regional 
response to infectious diseases control through scaling up existing and future regional 
investment and analytical operations. 
92. 
The proposed CAS program of support in the education sector will focus on 
enhancement of quality and strengthening governance in the sector.  The Basic Education 
project started in 2007 supports the Government’s new basic education program, which 
addresses the previous bias in the provision of funding for education towards specialized 
secondary education and includes important policy innovations such as teacher incentives 
and greater involvement of locally elected school boards.  Further lending support for the 
sector during the CAS period is not excluded, but would be decided on the basis of initial 
results achieved under the recently started project.  AAA is envisaged in support of the 
Government’s priority regarding the need to improve vocational education and training 
and better align it to the existing and future needs of the job market.    
93. 
In the area of social protection, the WBG will offer to work closely with the 
authorities to further strengthen targeting.  The first years of the proposed CAS will be 
limited to analytical work, and only in case of mutual agreement the Bank may consider 
preparing a lending operation in this area.  
Pillar IV: Environmental management, disaster risk management and global goods 
provision 
94. 
Environmental Management. As highlighted 
in 
the country’s National 
Environmental Action Plan, adopted in 1998, and subsequent environmental strategies 
developed for the country, the most important environmental challenges confronting 

 35

 
 
Uzbekistan are the pollution of soil, air, and water resources; reduced flora and fauna; 
and inadequate management of industrial, hazardous, and municipal solid waste.  In 
addition, low water use efficiency has caused widespread waterlogging and soil 
salinization.  In recognition of these challenges confronting Uzbekistan, the Bank will 
support the Government’s two new programs promoting environmental sustainability: the 
Environmental Security Strategy of the Republic of Uzbekistan and the National Strategy 
for Renewable Energy Sources.   
95. 
In the context of AAA, the Bank will work with Government and other 
stakeholders to identify specific areas in these strategies that can be supported in the 
coming years.  Cooperation modalities explored will include World Bank loans and 
Global Environment Facility (GEF) and carbon finance resources.  In the case of the 
latter it is notable that there is very strong demand from government officials to build on 
previous work on carbon finance26.  Second, building on the Bank’s earlier involvement 
addressing poorly managed municipal solid waste, and an IDF Grant in strengthening the 
country's environmental management institutions, the Bank will consider providing TA to 
strengthen the management of industrial and hazardous waste (industrial, medical) and 
identify investment needs.  Third, the Bank may also support the Government in 
addressing threats to public health and the environment from persistent organic pollutants 
(POPs) Uzbekistan would be eligible for GEF grant funds for the preparation and 
implementation of a plan to manage POPs if it decided to ratify the Stockholm 
Convention on POPs.   
96. 
Disaster Risk Management, Weather Forecasting, and Adaptation to Climate 
Change. It is estimated that two thirds of Uzbekistan’s population and economy are at 
risk from at least two disasters, such as earthquakes, floods, droughts or landslides – the 
poor being disproportionately vulnerable to them.  Climate change is expected to 
exacerbate natural disasters associated with hydro-meteorological conditions, with 
associated damages particularly impacting the rural economy. 
 Since reducing 
environmental disasters is key to reducing macro-economic risks and improving welfare, 
the Bank will support activities to prevent, mitigate and adapt to disaster and climate 
change risks, through AAA and mainstreaming in investment projects.  These may 
include drought proofing of agricultural activities, modernizing “Hydromet”  services, 
and reducing financial vulnerabilities of the economy and the population to the adverse 
impacts of disasters and climate change through market-based risk transfer mechanisms 
(such as catastrophe insurance and weather derivatives). 
97. 
The Bank will also support the authorities’ interest in achieving energy 
efficiency, and developing pilot renewable energy investments.  The introduction of 
energy-efficient technology would contribute to helping industry meet environmental 
challenges and will assist in reducing losses in the electricity and gas systems and support 
increase of the financial viability of the electricity and gas utilities, in a socially 
responsible manner.  Loss reduction would reduce the need of further tariff increases, and 

26 An IEG assessment in January 2007 gave the Bank’s work on carbon finance the highest rating of all the 
ESW assessed.  The government officials were consistent in their praise of the Bank’s assistance with 
carbon finance as well as the quality and practicality of this assistance.   

 36

 
 
                                                 
coupled with the design of an adequate social safety net will increase affordability and 
will alleviate the financial burden notably for the poor. 
98. Global Public Goods.  During the period of the ISN, the Bank strengthened its 
outreach and capacity building program on carbon finance related matters.  During the 
CAS period, the Bank will work with the Government and project entities to develop the 
carbon projects that have been accepted and bring them to closure through signature of an 
Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement.  While opportunities under the CDM 
mechanism are presently limited by the Kyoto commitment period and international 
uncertainties, the Bank’s Carbon Partnership Facility (CPF) 27 provides significant 
opportunities in Uzbekistan to develop sectoral or programmatic carbon projects, 
particularly in the energy sector.  
99. 
In partnership with agencies such as the World Health Organization (WHO), 
UNICEF, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and others, the 
positive engagement with the Uzbek authorities experienced throughout the ISN on 
fighting communicable diseases will continue during the CAS period (e.g., avian 
influenza, animal health, TB and HIV/AIDS).  
Regional Cooperation 

100. Specifically during the period of the CAS, it is envisaged to support a number of 
activities through CAREC (Transport and Trade Facilitation, Energy), or in coordination 
with CAREC, in the case of some CAREC second tier activities such as  regional public 
goods including cross-border environmental issues (water-energy and climate change 
impacts), communicable diseases, and disaster management.  On water, energy and 
related regional issues the following activities are contemplated:  (i) an Independent 
Assessment of the Regional Impacts of Vakhsh River Basin Development (to start in 
May 2008), (ii) An Action Plan for Improving Weather and Climate Service Delivery 
(Hydromet) in Central Asia (started in March 2008), (iii) A Roadmap for Adaptation to 
Climate Change in the Amu Darya River Basin (to start in May 2008), (iv) possibly, a 
Regional Disaster Risk Management and Adaptation Program.  

VI. 

MONITORING IN A RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

101. The Bank’s AAA and project supervision and preparation work during the initial 
CAS period will be closely tied to the results framework contained in Annex 1.  Table 4 
summarizes the main elements of the results-based framework agreed between the WBG 
and the GoU.  It lists the main development outcomes which the CAS aims to influence 
over the longer term, the principal problems or challenges in reaching those outcomes, 
and the shorter term outcomes that the CAS is designed to contribute to directly over the 
period of its implementation.  

27 The CPF was approved by World Bank’s Board on September 25, 2007 and takes a step towards 
implementation of large-scale and long-term greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction activities 
worldwide.  It is also envisaged that the CPF will include a Carbon Asset Development Fund to support 
program development and preparation of necessary “carbon” documents.  

 37

 
 
  
   
                                                 
Table 4: Summary of the Results Based Framework 

• 

More effective service 
provision 

Main Country Goals 
Principal Problems 
Goal I: Enabling environment for shared growth 
Maintain prudent 
• Capacity constraints, both 
macroeconomic 
institutional and technical 
management and make 
Inadequate Monitoring and 
growth more pro-poor 
Evaluation system for WIS 
implementation 
• Lack of transparency in PFM 
• 
Insufficient accountability to citizens 
for the quality of public service 
delivery 
Improve the business 
• Substantial state control over 
environment 
economy 
Goal II: Increase income and economic opportunities in rural areas 
Increase agricultural 
• Cotton and wheat – dominant crops 
productivity and 
and subject to state order system  
farmers incomes 
• Stagnating cotton yields 
• Poor rural financial services 
• High net taxes on agriculture 
• Poor state of irrigation system 

Goal III: Improve service delivery 
Increased access to safe 
• System deterioration 
water 
• 
Incomplete coverage 
• Unsustainable financing 

Outcomes to be Influenced by WBG Support 

• Macroeconomic policy formulation is informed by 
enhanced analytical research and international 
experience 
• The Government is equipped with a M&E system  

• PFM reform is informed by good international 
practice by PEFA type assessments 
• Civil society has better access to information on 
public services 
• Government implements a system of screening 
legislation for its impact on the private sector  

Increase incomes for rural population resulting from 
increased productivity of farming though: 
• 
Improved irrigation and drainage system   
• 
Improved soil quality as measured by: 
• 
Include the international price of by-products to 
establish the state procurement price for cotton 
Increased capacity and financial viability of the 
WUAs   

• 

• 

Improved access to safe and sustainable water 
services through technical (upgrading treatment 
plants, replacing pipes), financial and institutional 
measures  
• Sustainable plan adopted for municipal water 
services 
• More efficient financing mechanisms 
• 
Improved health in targeted areas through better 
equipped health clinics with better training 
Improved access to fortified foods 
Improved learning in targeted areas through new 
teaching materials and resources for the teachers 
as well as improvement of teacher training system  

• 
• 

Increase access to 
quality basic education 

Improved health 
indices particularly in 
rural population 

• 
Inefficient hospitals 
• Poor health equipment, practices and 
training 
• Poor diet and nutrition 
• Teachers have inadequate supplies of 
teaching materials and resources and 
do not use advanced teaching 
technologies widely enough  
• Goal IV: Environmental management, disaster risk management and global goods provision  
More efficient use of 
• Excessive water use and water 
• Rehabilitation of irrigation & drainage works & 
natural resources 
logging in agriculture 
increased water use efficiency;  strengthening of 
• Uncontrolled municipal solid waste 
river basin organizations & WUAs 
and industrial waste disposal 
• Reduced environmental risks from poorly 
managed municipal and industrial waste, & POPs 
• Energy inefficiency and emission of 
greenhouse gases 
• Mobilize carbon finance resources in support of 
• Vulnerability to disaster, weather 
energy efficiency & loss reduction (incl. gas 
risks and climate change 
flaring) 
• Strengthen capabilities to prevent, mitigate and 
adapt to disaster risks and climate change 

Improved disaster risk 
management 

102. 
In addition, for each ongoing and new project, a monitoring framework will be 
designed that specifies how progress will be measured, how implementation risks 

 38

 
 
 
 
particularly in the fiduciary area will be mitigated, and how the benefits of Bank lending 
for the people of Uzbekistan will be verified.  The results framework will be further 
refined during the course of CAS implementation. Progress on results, measured against a 
set of target outcomes and implementation milestones, as well as the lending program for 
the next FY, will be reviewed with the Government at the time of the annual CPPR.   

103. Building on work undertaken in the context of the existing portfolio, the results-
based approach of the CAS will focus attention in all interventions on defining and 
achieving measurable outcomes.  In this regard, the CAS will contribute to improved 
monitoring of service delivery standards, greater accountability at the point of delivery 
and feedback to allow for corrections and policy improvements.  The WBG will seek to 
involve civil society as much as possible in its monitoring and evaluation work, making 
use of social and beneficiary assessments and consulting with all stakeholders on project 
outcomes.  The focus on results will be supported by institutional support for the WIS 
implementation. This aims to build capacity in the Government for monitoring and 
evaluation, including through greater stakeholder and beneficiary group participation.  It 
will also act as an instrument for the monitoring of outcomes under the CAS.  The WBG 
will leverage its capacity building work in this area with additional donor funds.   

104. The achievements of the results matrix will be discussed with the Government on 
an annual basis during the annual Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) 
(carried out jointly with ADB during the last two years).  The mid-term review would be 
another opportunity to review progress towards agreed results, and also to consider any 
appropriate adjustments to the CAS.  To facilitate this process, the Bank will engage in 
ongoing training and capacity building of key Government counterparts.  Monitoring of 
portfolio performance will be done through two main channels.  Firstly, the established 
regular meetings of a Joint Technical Working Group between the Government and the 
Bank’s Country Office will provide day to day support in resolving systemic and project 
specific issues.  Secondly, the Bank will also seek to consult at regular intervals with 
project beneficiaries and wider stakeholders on the outcomes of its interventions, 
including the involvement of NGOs.  Such an iterative process is necessary to ensure 
improvements in several areas such as establishing a reliable baseline for monitoring. 

VII. 

POTENTIAL RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES  

Fiduciary Risks 
105. Uzbekistan made some good progress in public financial management 
through the introduction of a modern treasury system, which will greatly improve 
financial reporting and transparency for the use of public resources.  With support 
from an IDF grant, the Ministry of Finance is also implementing a project aimed at 
establishing an institutional framework for modern internal audit function. Uzbekistan, 
however, has a centralized power structure with few checks and balances. The CFAA of 
2004 indicated that that there were significant risks that budget funds may not be used for 
their intended purposes due to the fragmentation and opacity of the budget. While there 
has been some progress in reducing the fragmentation of the budget, and certain increase 
in transparency since then these problems persist.  It will be a challenging task for the 

 39

 
 
 
Bank to implement any broad-based reforms in improving governance and accountability. 
Nevertheless the active Uzbek participation in PEM-PAL activities and the moves 
towards reform of the budget and treasury systems indicate that engagement through a 
PEFA (Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability) type assessment, under the 
PPER, could be productive and move forward the public finance reform agenda in a 
manner consistent with the authorities’ vision.  The CAS strategy also proposes to engage 
the government in improving financial management and governance at sector and project 
levels, involving the civil society to play some role, where feasible.  
106. Fiduciary risks remain high due to weak public finance management 
capacity and inadequate accountability mechanisms, including particularly the lack 
of an effective 
independent external audit function 
in public expenditure 
management.  At the project level, the CFAA noted that the key financial management 
weaknesses are weak budgeting and internal control structures within PIU’s (and also 
public bodies), which is partly the result of the lack of skilled staff.  Nevertheless despite 
these weaknesses, project financial management arrangements have been judged to be 
satisfactory.  In addition, the 2003 CPAR noted that the public procurement framework in 
Uzbekistan suffers from a multiplicity of uncoordinated regulations, a lack of 
transparency in the whole process and in particular in bid opening, with a large potential 
for petty corruption. Moreover one of the major obstacles to transparent procurement has 
been the process of price verification of winning tenders.   
107. The WBG will continue to use and improve the current systems to implement 
on-going projects.  Financial management arrangements for new projects would build on 
the lessons of existing practices but would be cautious in any move to make use of 
country systems.  Such a move would be gradual, but would accelerate depending on 
demonstrable commitment by the authorities to strengthen public financial management 
systems and accountability mechanisms.  The CFAA and the CPAR identified broad 
weaknesses in public financial management and procurement arrangements which 
indicate high fiduciary risk.  They also identified broad (and probably impractical) reform 
agendas with little government ownership.  Nevertheless, progress is being made with 
budgeting and financial management under the reforms linked to the establishment of the 
Treasury.   
108. The WBG will focus on building in accountability mechanisms at a sectoral 
and project level, identifying issues of efficiency which can be addressed through 
greater accountability (as was shown by the governance assessment of the health 
sector). 
 Thus Project implementation arrangements would seek to strengthen 
procurement procedures and to link project activities with development outcomes.  The 
WBG will also develop new approaches towards discussing efficiency constraints related 
to procurement issues as part of its efforts to engage the Government on the importance 
of public procurement reform and the need to bring domestic practices more closely in 
line with accepted international standards.  In the meantime, an internal Government 
circular has been developed with input from the WBG to try and smooth the process of 
contract registration and improve the cooperation between the PIUs and the Agency for 
Foreign Economic Relations, responsible for reviewing all foreign contracts with public 
entities. 

 40

 
 
Risks to Development Effectiveness  
109. The effectiveness of development assistance in Uzbekistan depends strongly 
on the maintenance of a good dialogue and common understandings between the 
Bank Group and the authorities in the agreed focus areas of the CAS.  A loss of such 
common understanding as a result of a stalling of even the gradualist reform process 
could potentially reduce the effectiveness of assistance in achieving development goals.  
To ensure the development effectiveness of the proposed program, all projects are 
assessed through a results framework and by beneficiary monitoring.  The WBG will 
closely monitor CAS implementation and in case of adverse developments in broad 
policy fields or in project specific areas, which may put at risk the development 
effectiveness of the program, will reassess the level and focus of its engagement.  Among 
current areas of concern in this area is the impact of recent Decrees that are seen as 
moving the legal framework of Uzbekistan away from an internationally recognized 
AML/CTF regime and has the potential to cause difficulties in international banking 
relationships and to limit the range of foreign investment available to the country, 
including from the IFC. 
Exogenous Risks  
110. The continued tensions over the use and exchange of energy and water have 
the potential to undermine trade and economic cooperation between Uzbekistan and 
its neighbors.  In particular concerns about the use of water by Tajikistan and 
Turkmenistan could lead to a deterioration of relations.  A fall in regional growth and the 
potential outlet for rural migration could feed tensions and become linked to growing 
political extremism (or at least the fear of such extremism by the government).  The result 
would likely be increasing the isolation of the Uzbek government.  Further risks include a 
deterioration of the security situation in Afghanistan and the increased trade in drugs. 
111. Uzbekistan’s vulnerability to exogenous economic shocks. 
 Economic 
performance over the past few years has been strong.  Nevertheless, the reliance of the 
country on high commodity prices, as well as on the demand for goods and labor from its 
rapidly growing partners, whose continued high growth is itself highly dependent on 
continued high commodity prices, represents a potential risk for the future.    
112. The existence of exogenous risks could threaten internal political stability 
and security.  In addition to presenting a direct threat, these tensions may generate a 
government’s response in which moves towards economic freedom are reversed, and 
political activity focuses on maintaining power and security rather than economic 
development.   
113. Managing risks will require that the Bank Group work cooperatively with 
the Uzbek Government to encourage Uzbekistan’s continued 
international 
engagement and integration.  Given the very high level of uncertainty in the region, this 
CAS is perhaps best seen as setting out a broad engagement strategy rather than as a 
detailed blueprint for Bank Group support, which would in any case imply a return to the 
failed conditionality of the past.  
Natural Disaster Risks  

 41

 
 
114. Uzbekistan has faced severe natural disasters in the recent past—drought of 
2000/2001 affected 1.1 million and an earthquake in 1992 affected about 50,000 (EM-
DAT 2008). About two thirds of the population as well as about two thirds the GDP are 
at economic risk from two or more hazards (WB/Columbia University 2005). The 
previous CAS progress report draws several lessons pertinent to Disaster Risk 
management (DRM) in the country, for example, the Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and 
Health (RWSP), which was used effectively as a tool for disaster mitigation during the 
drought of 2000/2001, and in mitigating the environmental consequences of the Aral Sea 
disaster.   The current CAS has recognized these lessons and has clear linkages to the 
agenda of DRM in Uzbekistan through several projects such as the Drainage, Irrigation 
and Wetlands Improvement (Phase I) project, and new AAAs such as the Disaster Risk 
Mitigation and Adaptation, Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation.  

 42

 
 
ANNEX 1: Results Matrix 

Issues and Obstacles 

CAS Outcomes/Measurement 
indicators  

Country Development 
Goals 
PILLAR 1. Enabling environment for shared growth  
Institutional support for WIS implementation and Promoting Good Governance 
Maintain macroeconomic 
Capacity constraints, 
Macroeconomic policy 
stability 
both institutional and 
formulation  is informed by 
technical 
enhanced analytical research and 
Limited exposure to 
international experience and 
broad international 
shows ability to respond 
experience  
adequately to internal or external 
shocks 

Contain inflation: 
Baseline (IMF): 12% (2007) 
(Official government figure 
is 6.8%)  
Target: 6 % (2008-2011) 

Reduce poverty rate: 
Baseline: 25% (2006)  
Target: 20% (2010) 

Shortcomings in 
assessment of non-
income dimensions of 
poverty 

Inadequate Monitoring 
and Evaluation system 
for the WIS 
implementation 

The Government adopts 
techniques consistent with 
international practice  in 
carrying out and analyzing 
Household Budget and Labor 
Force Surveys  

The Government is equipped 
with a M&E system for assessing 
implementation of the WIS and 
adapting it where necessary.  

Milestones 

Bank program 

Constructive dialog with the 
authorities takes place on 
macroeconomic policies to ensure that 
aggregate demand is consistent with 
macroeconomic stability, and potential 
external shocks to the economy  

The government provides timely 
access to official statistic data and 
carries out joint analytical work with 
the WBG 

WIS monitoring framework is 
developed and implementation started; 
Improved statistical indicators 
integrated in WIS M&E process 

Core Macroeconomic Dialogue 

Growth vulnerability assessment, 
under the Programmatic CEM 
AAA 

Dialogue on Poverty trends AAA 

Dialogue on Social Protection 
targeting AAA 

IDF grant on Monitoring and 
Evaluation (ongoing) 
Just in time assistance in WIS 
implementation support  

Partnership:  IMF, UNDP, ADB 

Increase the Efficiency of 
Public Financial 
Management  

More Effective Service 
Provision 

Lack of transparency in 
PFM 

Insufficient 
accountability to 
citizens for the quality 
of public service 
delivery 

Aspects of Public Financial 
Management reform process are 
benchmarked by  PEFA type 
assessments   

Increased transparency in the 
utilization of public resources as 
measured by:  

Agreement is reached on 
benchmarking elements of the PFM 
system and the reform process, 
including a possibility of a joint PEFA 
assessment 
Treasury uses good practice tools to 
manage expenditures 

Programmatic PER 

Guidance and TA support for 
Treasury implementation 

 43

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Milestones 

Bank program 

IDF Grant on External and 
Internal Audit (ongoing) in 
conjunction with the PPER (see 
also above) 

Just in time assistance in WIS 
implementation support  

Dialogue on Good Governance to 
improve public service delivery 
AAA (e.g. Education/Hospitals 
and/or municipal services sectors) 

Follow-up dialogue based on 
results of Governance assessment 
in the Primary  Health sector 

Partnership:  IMF, UNDP, ADB 

Country Development 
Goals 

Issues and Obstacles 

Low transparency, high 
secrecy and self-
censorship   

CAS Outcomes/Measurement 
indicators  
• Regular publication of summary 
Budget implementation reports 

Government implements first 
stages  of Internal audit reform 
documented in a coherent 
Internal audit strategy based on 
good international audit 
practices 

Development of Internal Audit 
Strategy and a comprehensive internal 
audit manual  
Training activities to enhance capacity 
for modern internal audit techniques 
tested through pilot audits  

Government adopts and begins 
to implement formal economic 
appraisal methodology for large 
investment projects 

Government adopts new 
accountability mechanisms on a 
pilot basis as a result of common 
work on Governance challenges 
in service delivery 

Dialogue on Governance 
challenges progresses and is 
gradually extended from sector 
specific to broader common 
issues 

Civil society has better access to 
information on in a least on 
major public service  

Up to 20 officials exposed to and 
obtain knowledge of economic 
appraisal techniques for investment 
projects. 

Primary Health Care Governance 
assessment findings are widely 
disseminated and set of actions to 
implement the findings are agreed and 
implemented  

Governance assessment  carried out in 
at least one other key public service 
delivery sector and results are 
disseminated 

Results of the Primary Health Care 
Governance assessment and other 
Governance assessments are publicly 
available 

 44

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development 
Goals 

Issues and Obstacles 

CAS Outcomes/Measurement 
indicators  

Milestones 

Bank program 

Private Sector Development, Business Environment and Investment Climate 
Improve the business 
Substantial state control 
Government adopts and 
environment 
over economy  
implements a system of 
Unstable and non-
screening legislation for its 
transparent regulatory 
impact on the private sector and 
and tax environment 
at least 4 pieces of legislation 
approved through the new 
system as measured by: 

Increase investment-to-GDP 
ratio 

Introduction a screening mechanism 
for policy proposals affecting 
businesses  
Reducing tax compliance costs for 
businesses through changes in Tax 
Code 
 Law prepared in consultation with the 
IFC PEP team “On Permits” is passed 
Law prepared in consultation with the 
IFC PEP team “On Credit 
Information” passed   
Annual  SME  surveys are conducted  

Mandatory deposits of cash receipts by 
enterprises are relaxed; the distinction 
between cash and non-cash payments 
is reduced 
Non-banking functions (including tax 
collection and non-essential reporting 
requirements) are eliminated in 
practice, as measured by SME survey 
Action plan to further improve 
accounting and auditing practices is 
developed and implementation started 
Increase exposure to international best 
practices in risk management, 
microfinance, and/or credit scoring 
Finalization of plan to bring strategic 
investor into Asaka Bank and 
announce tender 

Private sector investments by 
IFC. 

IFC PEP TA on BEE (active) 
Dialogue on Private Sector 
reform and development 

Partnership:  IMF, EBRD, IFC 

Follow-up dialogue based on 
results of Accounting and 
Auditing ROSC (active) 
IFC PEP TA on leasing, financial 
infrastructure and housing finance 
(active)  
IFC advisory services on Banking 
Association on its credit bureau, 
and with the Insurance Supervisor 
on an insurance glossary – might 
want to confirm with IFC. 
Dialogue on Financial Sector 
reform and development  
Partnership:  IMF, EBRD 

Baseline: 18.6%  GDP 
(2006) 
Target: 24%  GDP (2010) 

Increase share of SME in 
GDP 

Baseline: 42.1%  GDP 
(2006) 
Target: 52%  GDP (2010) 

Increase share of private 
sector 

Baseline: 45%  GDP (2006) 
Target: >45%  GDP (2010) 

Significant de facto 
controls over financial 
system, cash 
transactions, foreign 
currency convertibility  

Low public confidence 
in banks, in spite of 
recent improvements, 
partly due to their 
performance of non-
banking functions. 

Low risk management 
in banks 

Laws, regulations, and 
infrastructure generally 
sound, but 
implementation weak 

Weak accounting in 
SMEs limits quality of 
information for banks 

• SMEs report easier compliance 
with tax legislation and less 
harassment from the authorities, 
as measured by the IFC BEE 
survey 

Enterprises and financial 
institutions have greater control 
in financing, as measured by 
SME survey 

Government policy is informed 
by agreed assessments of 
financial sector performance  

 45

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development 
Goals 

Issues and Obstacles 

CAS Outcomes/Measurement 
indicators  

Milestones 

Bank program 

Increase productivity of 
agriculture 

Increase farmers’ incomes 

Low supervision 
capacity for insurance 
sector 
Potential program: IFC’s support of state bank privatization program, IFC’s involvement in housing finance TA, IFC investment projects oil and gas subject to disclosure of  
revenue payments made to the government, WB/IFC support for introduction of PPP in infrastructure AAA  
PILLAR II  INCREASE INCOME AND ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES IN RURAL AREAS 
Cotton and wheat – 
Increased incomes of rural 
dominant crops and 
population through: 
subject to state order 
system  
Stagnating cotton yields 
Poor rural financial 
services 
High net taxes on 
agriculture 
Food safety certification 
obstacle to export of 
selected agriculture 
products 
Administrative and 
volatile obstacles to 
exports 
Poor state of irrigation 
system 
Land degradation  and 
soil  erosion 
Excessive water use and 
water logging  
Land degradation and 
soil salinization 

1. Increased productivity of 
farming in a total area of 2 
million ha as measured by: 
          Yields of cotton, wheat,     
potatoes, fruits and 
vegetables, and silage corn  

IFC 1) agribusiness through 
banks, possibly with IDA support; 
2) support for access to 
microfinance in rural areas; 3) 
private agribusiness projects  

Increasing efficiency, 
effectiveness and 
environmental sustainability 
of irrigation and soil 
improvement 

Support to build capacity of the newly 
independent farmers in seven 
provinces 

Strategy for raising efficiency in water 
use is developed  

Fergana Valley Water Resources 
Management project (FY09) 

Implementation of the project on 
drainage diversion in priority areas  

Drainage, Irrigation and Wetlands 
Improvement project - I (active) 

Rehabilitation of selected drainage 
networks 

Water Sector Investment Planning 
study ESW (active) 

Achievement of accreditation of one 
food laboratory 

Rehabilitation of irrigation and 
drainage facilities is selected areas 

Rural Enterprise Support project 
RESP I (active) and II  

Agriculture review ESW 
Small towns/rural communal  
services project (FY10-11)  

• 

Improved irrigation and 
drainage system for rural 
producers  
- Area of irrigated land with    
adequate water supply is 
increased by 40,000 ha (RESP 
II area)  
- Area of irrigated land with       
adequate drainage is increased 
by 30,000 ha (RESP II area)  
- Area of irrigated land with 
adequate irrigation and 
drainage facilities is increase 
by 100,000 ha (Fergana 
Valley) 
Improved soil quality as 
measured by: 
- Water table below the ground 

• 

 46

Partnership: ADB, UNDP, 
USAID, IFC 
ICARDA, IWMI, SDC/SECO, 
KfW 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development 
Goals 

Issues and Obstacles 

CAS Outcomes/Measurement 
indicators  
       Baseline: 1.5 m (2007) 
         Target: > 2.0  m (2010) 

2. Enhanced farm access to 
commercial financial services in 
seven provinces as measured by: 
            500 new microcredit lines 

3. Including the international 
price of by-products such as 
vegetable oil to establish the 
state procurement price for 
cotton 

Milestones 

Bank program 

Introduction of improvements and 
reduction of advance requirements in 
the commodity exchange 

Adoption of a resolution allowing 
farmers to market above state-quota 
cotton within the RESP II area 

Capacity and financial viability 
of the Water User Associations is 
enhanced as measured by: 
- 
Increase amount of 
maintenance conducted by 
these WUAs from 30% to 
45% 
Increase water fee collection 
from 15% to 30% 
Potential program: IFC’s support to establish new micro-finance lending institution in rural area, Cultural Tourism and Heritage Protection Project/ESW (FY10-11), 
ESW/JSDF on Youth Development,  Irrigation Infrastructure project(s) 

Financial and institutional  support is 
provided to 84 Water User 
Associations (WUAs) 

- 

 47

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Issues and Obstacles 

Country Development 
CAS Outcomes/Measurement 
Goals 
indicators  
PILLAR III. Improved human development and social protection through improved basic services delivery 
Improved provision of safe water and sanitation 
Increased access to safe 
Safe water unavailable 
water 
or unsustainable due to: 

Milestones 

Baseline: 80% (2006) 
Target:  86.8% (2010) 

− System deterioration 
− Incomplete coverage 
− Unsustainable supply 
due to lack of financial 
resources 

Improved access to safe and 
sustainable water services in 
existing and future project areas 
measured by: 
- 
Increased proportion of 
population in the project areas 
with access to safe water 
- Higher average quality of 
water in project areas by  
(WHO/National standards) 
- Better financial performance, 
cost-recovery, billings and 
collection 

Treatment plant upgraded in Nukus 
and Urgench,  

Treatment plan design completed and 
work commissioned in B&S 

Replacement or rehabilitation of 
desalination plants in Karakalpakstan 
and Khorezm  

Pipe replacement in relevant areas  

Bank program 

Bukhara-Samarkand Water 
Supply Project (active) 
Rural Water Supply Project 
(active) 
Municipal Infrastructure 
management AAA  
Policy Note and TA dialogue on 
development of PPP approach in 
municipal services 
Municipal Services Project 
(FY10) 

Improved health indices 
Improved health status, 
particularly among the rural 
population 
− Infant mortality per 1000 
live birth  
Baseline: 14.9 (2005) 
Target: 12    (2010) 

− Maternal mortality per 
100 thous. live-birth 
Baseline: 29.2 (2007) 
Target: 24 (2010) 

Output based financing for hospitals 
introduced in all CRHs in at least 1 
oblasts 

Increasing number of Evidence-Based 
Medical guidelines used by GPs. 

Increased financing and use of primary 
and outpatient services 

Pooled contracting for drugs for SVPs 
introduced. 

Health II project (active) 
National Flour Fortification 
Project (GIAN-financed) 
Health III project  with focus on 
CRHs (FY10-11)  
Poverty Work AAA 

Nutrition Sector/ Food safety 
AAA 
Partnership: ADB, USAID, 
WHO, UNICEF 

Hospitals consume a 
large share of public 
health budget and their 
funding is still capacity 
and input based, leading 
to inefficiencies. 
However reforms are 
underway to introduce 
case-based funding . 
Insufficient medical 
supplies and equipment 
and lack of experienced 
professional staff 
impacting the quality of 
treatment.  
Little implementation of 
evidence based medical 

Access to quality Health Care 
enhanced through: 

• Output based financing of 
hospitals introduced as 
measured by: 
- Number of CRHs using case-
based financing 
Baseline :  0% (2007) 
Target:  100% in at least 1 
oblast (2010) 

• Increased financing for 
primary and - outpatient 
services as measured by: 
- % of health budget expenditures 
on PHC and outpatient care 
Baseline – 43% (2007) 

 48

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development 
Goals 

Reduced health risk from 
global pandemic 

− HIV/AIDS prevalence  

Issues and Obstacles 

practices.   
The procurement of 
drugs and medical 
equipment is not “best 
practice” in terms of 
efficiency and 
transparency.  
Diseases related to 
failure to fully adhere to 
the principles of healthy 
nutrition and food safety 
regulations.  

Inadequate in-country 
capacity to quickly 
diagnose and respond to 
risks of global 
pandemic. 
Threat to overall health 
due to rapidly rising 
HIV and TB infections 
Insufficient level of 
public awareness of 
measures of HIV and 
TB prevention 

Milestones 

Bank program 

CAS Outcomes/Measurement 
indicators  
Target – 50% (2010) 
- % of SVPs stocked with 
essential medicines 
Baseline – 45% (2007) 
Target – 60% (2010) 

• Increased utilization of 
primary care services 
- % of women who receive 
antenatal care in the early stage 
of pregnancy (up to 12-week 
pregnancy period 
Baseline – 85% (2007) 
Target – 95% (2010) 

• Anemia in fertile age women 
is decreased  
         The baseline 60% 
         Target 48% 

Avian Flu  grant project (active, 
grant) 
CA AIDS Control project (active, 
regional grant) 
Health II (IDA grant for 
HIV/AIDS) 

Partnership: FAO, WHO 

Heath risk from global pandemic 
is reduced through:   

Reduction in mother to child 
transmission of HIV/AIDs 

100% coverage of HIV+ve positive 
pregnant women with ARV treatment. 

• Improved HIV/AIDs 
prevention and control 
- Number of HIV-ve children born 
to HIV+ve mothers 
Baseline: 60%(2007) 
Target: 85%(2010) 

- % of HIV +ve pregnant women 
receiving ARV prophylaxis of 
vertical transmission of HIV 
Baseline: 90%(2007) 

 49

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development 
Goals 

Issues and Obstacles 

Inadequate veterinary 
services and food safety 
Insufficient incentives 
for animal owners to 
report diseases 

− Improved learning 
achievements 
Baseline: NA 

Improved basic education and learning 
Increase access to quality 
Inadequate availability 
basic education: 
of basic teaching and 
learning materials  
Poor children have less 
access to learning 
materials 
Learning achievement is 
deficient because some 
teachers lack knowledge 
of effective teaching 
practices 
Ineffective learning due 
to lack of cooperation 
between parents and 

CAS Outcomes/Measurement 
indicators  
Target: 100%(2010) 

- % of HIV +ve women receiving 
ARV treatment among those 
voluntarily requesting treatment 
Baseline: 70%(2007) 
Target: 100%(2010) 
• Improved seasonal influenza 
prevention and control 
Percentage of population at 
risk vaccinated  
Baseline: 50%(2007) 
Target: 100%(2010) 

- 

Number of AI diagnostic tests  
carried out annually on animal 
and human samples  

Schools adopt quality enhancing 
techniques, materials and 
participatory practices  as 
measured by: 
- % of schools where core set of 
educational materials is 
available 
        Baseline: 10% (2007) 
    Target: 80% (2011) 
- % of retrained teachers in 
project schools 
       Baseline: 5% (2007) 
   Target: 70% (2011) 
- % of project schools with active 
boards 
       Baseline: 75% (2007) 

 50

Milestones 

Bank program 

Basic Education Project I (active) 

Basic Education Project II (FY09) 

Education AAA 

Partnership: ADB, UNDP, 
UNICEF, SECO, KfW, JICA, 
JBIC 

Increased availability  and use of 
teaching and learning materials  

Teachers in project schools retrained in 
interactive teaching methods through 
school-based teacher training  

Activation of participation of School 
Boards and local community 
involvement in project schools.  

An assessment tool for standardized 
student assessment is developed and 
implemented. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development 
Goals 

Issues and Obstacles 

CAS Outcomes/Measurement 
indicators  
   Target: 85% (2011) 

Milestones 

Bank program 

teachers 
Although all the issues 
above are being 
addressed by 
Government with the 
support of the BE 
project.  
PILLAR IV. ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT, DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT, AND GLOBAL GOODS PROVISION 
Improving municipal solid 
Technical, institutional 
Municipalities in project cites 
Investment needs for waste disposal 
waste management  
and financial capacity 
improve collection, transfer and 
improvement are identified  
constraints 
safe disposal/treatment of solid 
waste , as measured by 
internationally recognized 
indicators and standards 

Solid waste collection and disposal 
improvements in project cities are 
initiated 

Improvement of energy 
efficiency 

High losses in electricity 
and natural gas sectors 
and unreliability of 
supply in rural areas  

Reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions 

Significant gas flaring 

High technical losses in 
the gas and electricity 
distribution networks 

Awareness on energy savings and 
renewable energy supply sources 
is enhanced in selected remote 
areas:  
- Number of Public service 
buildings in rural/remote areas 
equipped 

Reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions as measured by: 
• Emissions: Baseline: 121 mln. 
tons CO2,(2004)  

• Intensity: Baseline: 2686  tons 
CO2  per mln. 2000 ppp US$ 
GDP (highest in ECA)  

Pilot introduction of  alternative 
energy sources in health and education 
facilities in some remote areas  

Support to improvement of legislation 
on energy use 

Financial viability of energy 
companies further  improved 
Assistance to GoU to attract carbon 
revenues for eligible projects under the 
CDM of the Kyoto Protocol  

Agreement on the portfolio of CDM 
projects under CDM Funds utilization 
of the Kyoto Protocol is signed 

 51

ESW to identify investment needs 
Industrial and Hazardous Waste 
Management TA (follow up to 
IDF grant on improving 
environmental management 
institutions) 
Small towns/rural communal 
services project (FY10-11) 
Municipal Services Project (FY10 
Energy saving and renewable 
energy AAA 

Carbon Finance Shurtan Gas 
Flaring Reduction project (active) 

Carbon Partnership Facility 
(CPF):  sectoral or programmatic 
carbon project(s) (FY09 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development 
Goals 

Issues and Obstacles 

CAS Outcomes/Measurement 
indicators  

Milestones 

Bank program 

Increased portfolio of CDM projects 
under  the Kyoto Protocol as 
measured by:  
- Number of signed agreements 

Improved environmental 
and disaster risk 
management  

Analytical and technical 
capacity to analyze and 
evaluate environmental 
impacts   

Government adopts improved 
environmental management 
practices and capacities by: 

- 

Strengthening of policies and 
Institutions for environmental 
sustainability (institutional  
context components)  

Number of constructive dialogues with 
authorities and donors on Disaster Risk 
Management and climate change 
adaptation 

Regional Water-Energy dialogue 
ESW/TA (regional program) 
Disaster risk mitigation and 
adaptation AAA (regional 
program) 
Climate change mitigation and 
adaptation in the Syr Darya and 
Amu Darya River Basins AAA 
(regional program) 
Persistent organic pollutants 
(POP)  and environmental 
liabilities ESW/TA (regional 
program) 
Partnership: ADB, UNDP, IWMI, 
CAREC. UNECE 
Potential program: CF Solid waste project, CF Tashkent Combined Cycle Gas Turbine project, CF UzTransGaz (gas transmission) project, CF Gas distribution leakage 
reduction project, Energy efficiency / renewable project, or as component(s) of other investment projects (health/municipal services) (FY10-11), CF Gas distribution leakage 
reduction project, GEF Hydromet/Agromet ESW (regional program), GEF Past Environmental Liabilities, Environment ESW/TA (supporting CF and GEF projects). 

Preparation of the inventory  of 
persistent organic pollutants and 
implementation plan for safe 
storage/management 

Assessment of the climate change 
impact and its implications for 
irrigation and rural poverty  

 52

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 2: Matrix of Main Donor Activities in Uzbekistan for 2008-2010 

Sector/Thematic 
Area 

Agriculture and 
Natural Resources 

Education 

Donors’ Activities 

ADB: Loans: Ak Altin district Agricultural Development; Grain Productivity 
Improvement; Amu Zhang Irrigation Rehabilitation; Land Improvement; Agriculture 
Market Infrastructure Development; Agriculture Sector Development, Water Resources 
Management; Urban Water Supply, Western Uzbekistan Rural Water Supply; 
Kashkadarya & Navoi Rural Water Supply and Sanitation; Surkhandarya Water Supply 
and Sanitation.  TA: Agriculture Review and Planning; Implementation and Monitoring 
of Policy Reforms 
in Agricultural Sector; Agriculture Market Infrastructure 
Development; Water Resources Management; Djizzak & Surkhandarya Rural Water 
Supply & Sanitation; Improved Water Resources Management (regional TA) 
EBRD: Investigates the possibility of working with foreign strategic partners in agro-
processing and mining sectors as a way to promote foreign investment with introducing 
new technologies, enhancing business standards including adherence to international 
environmental standards. Loans: Microfinance loans to agribusiness: to small fruit and 
vegetable processing and other private food processing plants to expand their production 
capacities and increase market share.  TA: Provision of credit adviser for local banks on 
allocation of credit lines.  
Islamic Development Bank: Loans: Rehabilitation of Irrigational Network and 
Drainage System in Jizzak and Syrdarya; Reconstruction of the main Irrigation Canals 
of Tashsaka in Khorezm Province.  TA: Feasibility Study for Reconstruction of the 
main Irrigation Canals of Tashsaka in Khorezm Province 

EU/TACIS: Support to non-farm rural enterprises; agriculture information system; 
agriculture wholesale market development; solar heating plants 
USAID: Irrigation network management and on-farm water management activities; 
Agricultural linkages project 
UNDP: Feasibility studies of investment projects in irrigation 
JICA: Improvement of water management in agriculture; Improvement of water 
management of on-farm water-users association in Syrdarya and Tashkent provinces; 
Improvement of agricultural technology 
JETRO: Financing feasibility studies for Japanese companies on request in the mining 
and natural resources management (e.g. uranium and chemical products) 
Government of PRC: Reconstruction of irrigation objects; Training seminars and study 
tours to China on agriculture 
ADB: Loans: Education Sector Development Program; Textbook Development; 
Information and Communication Technology in Basic Education; Rural Basic 
Education; Basic Education Development. TA: Effective Management of Investments 
and Reforms in Basic Education; Rural Basic Education 
EU/TACIS: Vocational Education; University Networks; Restructuring of higher 
education (TEMPUS program) through financing grants to encourage interaction and 
balanced cooperation between universities in the partner countries and the European 
Community 

 53

 
 
 
 
 
Sector/Thematic 
Area 

Donors’ Activities 

KFW: Support to Vocational Education in construction and communal utilities sectors 
GTZ: Introduction of vocational training model, training of trainers at universities; 
Vocational Education and Training in agriculture, including in IT area  
SECO: Skills development project upscale in vocational education 
JICA: Vocational Education project 
UNICEF/UNESCO: Education Management Information System 
USAID: Basic Education support 
Government of PRC: Provision of ICT in Basic Education 
UNICEF: Early Childhood Development and Quality Basic Education 
Islamic Development Bank:  Loan:  Construction and Equipping of Secondary 
Schools  
JICA: Provision of scholarships to 20 students each year to study in universities on 
human resources development; Support to educational reform, retraining teachers to 
expand professional education 
ADB: Loans: Regional Power Transmission Modernization; Navoi Thermal Power 
Plant Modernization; Gas to Coal Conversion of Novo-Angren TPP; Construction of 
“Kamolot” Hydropower Plant; Installation of Turbo-Tender Units at Talimardjan and 
Syrdarya TPPs; Tashkent City Street Lighting.  TA: Navoi Thermal Power Plant 
Modernization; Gas to Coal Conversion of Novo-Angren TPP; Construction of 
“Kamolot” Hydropower Plant; Installation of Turbo-Tender Units at Talimardjan and 
Syrdarya TPPs; Tashkent City Street Lighting 
EBRD: Regional energy trade, energy-saving, metering  
JBIC: Thermal power 
UNDP: Assisting the Development of Biogas Technology in Uzbekistan; Clean Energy 
for Rural Communities in Karakalpakstan – Phase II; Renewable energy for rural 
communities 
Islamic Development Bank: Loan:  500KW Transmission Line of Guzar-Surkhan with 
autotransformer and two substations; 500 KW Sogdiana-Talimarjan Transmission Line 
and Substation 
Government of PRC: Construction of new power stations; Training seminars and study 
tours to China on power stations and electricity 
ADB: Loans: Clean Development Mechanism. TA: Clean Development Mechanism; 
Greenhouse Development 
UNDP: Biosphere Reserve; Enhancement of Environmental Indicators Database with 
GIS application to monitor the state of the Environment in Uzbekistan; Conservation of 
Tugai Forests and Strengthening protected Areas System in the Amu Darya Delta of 
Karakalpakstan; Establishment of the Nuratau-Kyzylkum Biosphere Reserve as a Model 
for Biodiversity Conservation; Support to the Environment and Energy Interventions; 
Kyoto protocol energy issues and development of alternative sources of energy, 

 54

Energy 

Environment 

 
 
 
 
Sector/Thematic 
Area 

Donors’ Activities 

Gender and 
Development 

Governance 

biogas/livestock technologies and new crops development 
UNEP: Elimination of ozone destruction materials  
SECO: Water Management and Disaster Risk Reduction 
GTZ: Stabilization of desiccated Aral Sea; Locust control 
JICA: Promotion of environmental protection through the establishment of an 
environmental monitoring system and waste processing; improving administrative 
capacity and technology relating to monitoring of natural disasters like earthquakes and 
landslides, provision of equipment and machinery  
JETRO: Kyoto protocol gas emissions reduction 
Government of PRC: Provision of diagnostic equipment for seismology and 
environmental monitoring points 
OSCE: Review of legal norms and their implementation in the area of transportation of 
toxic cargo and waste 
ADB, British Embassy, FINCA, NOVIB, JICA, IOM, Italian Embassy, Mercy Corps, 
OSCE, Embassy of Switzerland, USAID 
UNDP: Capacity Building of the Women’s Committee in Uzbekistan; Preparatory 
Assistance: Gender and Development Project 
UNICEF: Family and Community Empowerment 
ADB: Loan: Public Finance Management Reform. TA: Supporting Public Finance 
Management; Policy and Institutional Reform Support  
UNDP: Capacity building for civil society group; Improving Tax Administration in 
Uzbekistan; Reforming Tax System and Developing New Revision of Tax Code; 
Enhancing Legislative and Institutional Capacities of the Parliament, computers and 
software support to Parliament, and training; Enhancing the Capacity of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs to better respond to the Emerging issues of the new Millennium; 
Enhancing the Capacity of the University of World Economy and Diplomacy to Support 
the Foreign Policy of Uzbekistan; Improving Public Sector Management Skills through 
Building Training and Research Capacity of the State Academy for State and Public 
Construction under the President of Uzbekistan; Public finance reform, including 
introduction of MTBF, performance-based budgeting, and improvement of public 
procurement 
USAID: Grassroots efforts e.g. NGO development and civic advocacy, support for 
independent broadcast and print media, internet development, dialogue on judiciary law 
enforcement, judicial ethics, and judicial training; Support to anti-money laundering and 
anti-terrorism financing, border control and prevention of trafficking of people and 
illegal drugs SECO: Public Institutions and Services 
EU/TACIS: Enhancing the judiciary and rule of law, good governance, market 
regulatory reforms and building administrative capacity; Fight against terrorism, 
organized crime, drugs and human trafficking and corruption 

 55

 
 
 
 
Sector/Thematic 
Area 

Donors’ Activities 

Health, Nutrition, 
and Social 
Protection 

UNICEF: Local Capacity Building in Management of Basic Service for Women and 
Children; Social Policy development, Advocacy and Social Monitoring 
Islamic Development Bank: TA: Capacity Building for the Information Support and 
Foreign Investment Promotion Agency “UzInfoInvest” 
GTZ: Legal reform (training of lawyers in economic legislation 
JICA: Training of tax officials on improvement of tax administration 
OSCE: Development of website of the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection (jointly 
with Center for Economic Research) 
ADB: Loan: Woman and Child Health Development  
UNFPA/UNDP/UNODC/UNAIDS: Strengthening capacity 
in Family Planning; 
Reproductive health services, HIV/AIDS, drug-related morbidity and mortality 
JICA: Supporting healthcare reform by improving nurse training, maternal and infant 
health; Study on the reform of healthcare services in Navoi province to improve 
organization of health services; Improvement of primary health care in Tashkent and 
Jizzak oblasts; Support to social empowerment of disabled people 
KFW: TB program V, reproductive health, contraceptives, mother and child  
GTZ: Family Planning  
UK-DFID: Capacity building for GP training and education program, technical 
assistance for medical education, nursing education 
EU/TACIS: Preventive health care 
GTZ: Family Planning 
SECO: Health Care Reform 
WHO: Reducing the burden of communicable diseases; reducing the burden of 
noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), mental disorders, violence and injuries and the 
related major risk factors; addressing issues in maternal, child and adolescent health; 
strengthening the key functions of the health system to improve its overall performance, 
with special emphasis on primary healthcare and greater equity in health, and mother 
and child health  
UNDP: Promotion of the rights of disabled individuals through sport activities 
UNICEF: Improvement of maternal and child health and nutrition; Child protection; 
Young People’s Health and Development; Training of medical personnel on new born 
child survival, improvement of statistics of child and maternal mortality rates 
Islamic Development Bank: Loan: Equipping Hospitals with Modern Medical and 
Diagnostic Equipment 
USAID: HIV/AIDS; Primary health care financial reforms under World Bank’s Health 
II; Infectious deceases treatment and Anti-tuberculosis 
Government of PRC: Provision of medical equipment for hospitals 

 56

 
 
 
 
Sector/Thematic 
Area 

Poverty Reduction/ 
Improvement of 
Living Standards 

Private Sector 
Development 

Donors’ Activities 

UNDP: Regional development strategies, monitoring of MDG implementation, capacity 
building of the State Statistics Committee; Development of Capacities of the National 
Human Rights Institutions in Uzbekistan; Enhancement of Living Standards in Fergana 
Region; Enhancement of Living Standards in Karakalpakstan; Enhancement of Living 
Standards in Namangan region; Support to Welfare Improvement Strategy Process 
ADB: TA: Support of WIS Review and Preparation of the Next Stage WIS for 2011-
2013 
EU/TACIS: Poverty alleviation/raising living standards and protection of vulnerable 
social groups, particularly through PRSP approaches 
UNFPA: Increase awareness of the linkages between population, development, gender 
and poverty and their integration into poverty reduction strategies (advocacy, gender 
equity and equality, data collection, improve national capacity in demography and 
statistics) 
OSCE: Trainings for “Mahalla” institutions on equitable distribution of social 
allowances among the population and prevention of misconducts in the area of financial 
management at mahalla (self-governing bodies) level; Social monitoring in rural areas 
of Karakalpakstan, including monitoring of effectiveness of microcredit provision 
(ordered by the Fund for Salvation of Aral Sea) 
ADB: Loans: Small Enterprises and Microfinance Development. TA: Microfinance 
Development  
EBRD: Loans: Support to private sector investment and entrepreneurship through 
direct credits to local SMEs, microfinance loans through local banks for development of 
tourism, pharmaceuticals, cable production, telecom & media, non-banking financial 
institutions, light industry, and risk-sharing facility for local banks.  TA: Enterprise 
management organization and innovation survey; creation of an association of private 
hotels 
USAID: Support to SME, microfinance development 
UNDP: Microcredit programs; Micro-credit development for income generation and job 
creation in the Kashkadarya province of Uzbekistan. 
SECO: Support to Private Sector, including financing of IFC PEP surveys of SMEs 
KFW: Small business development; Microfinance and Housing Finance loans 
GTZ: Private sector development in Andijan, Termez and Karakalpakstan 
JICA: Commentary on the law on bankruptcy; Business courses in Uzbekistan-Japan 
Center for human resources development 
JETRO: Provision of seminars and exhibitions on Uzbekistan for Japanese companies, 
identification of promising business projects for Japanese companies 
OSCE: Development of commercial arbitrage; Protection of intellectual property rights; 
Protection of SMEs in light of anti-money laundering activities (jointly with UNDP); 
Support of private farmers in Ferghana and Bukhara provinces on timely provision of 
fertilizers, gasoline and other inputs through round tables with local banks, microcredit 

 57

 
 
 
 
Sector/Thematic 
Area 

Donors’ Activities 

Banking Sector 

Infrastructure 

Policy Dialogue 

institutions, and offices of public prosecutor; Provision of information and trainings in 
support of development of ecological tourism and community-based tourism in rural 
areas of Surkhandarya, Djizzakh and Tashkent provinces  
EBRD: Policy dialogue with the authorities on improvement of investment climate and 
supporting reform efforts. Monitoring of political and economic reforms in Uzbekistan 
USAID: Open dialogue on national democratic institute development  
Telecommunications EBRD: The Bank seeks opportunities 
to provide 
long-term 
financing 
to 
telecommunications and media private companies. This, however, is highly dependent 
upon improvements in the regulatory framework  
UNDP: Assisting the Government of Uzbekistan in the formulation and implementation 
of ICT for development policy; Capacity building for internet development in 
Uzbekistan – phase II 
Government of PRC: Provision of telecommunications equipment; Training seminars 
and study tours to China on transport and communications 
EBRD: Proactive approach towards the restructuring and privatization process of the 
Uzbek banking sector, with the ultimate goal of increasing the level of intermediation in 
the country. It will pursue this approach by working with Asaka Bank to create a 
demonstration case for successful restructuring and investment by a strategic foreign 
bank. Promoting competition in the banking sector through increasing the number of 
participating banks 
ADB: Equity: Equity Investments in two local banks.  TA: Financial sector 
infrastructure development; Support banking sector development 
Islamic Development Bank: Loan: Second Line of Financing to the National Bank of 
Uzbekistan 
ADB: Loans: CAREC Regional Road; Railway Maintenance; Road Rehabilitation.   
TA: Regional Infrastructure (Roads); State-Owned Road Enterprises 
EBRD: Loan: Finalizing the Tashkent Water Supply Improvement Project. TA: 
Assistance to the MoF on communal services regulatory framework (duration 1.5 
years). If management is to decide on having more TA to public sector, the main areas 
of TA would be grant financing of feasibility studies in communal utilities and 
financing of PIUs  
SECO: Basic infrastructure development in Energy and Water sectors 
JICA: Promoting the efficient use and maintenance of infrastructure by improving the 
management of public utilities, such as water and electricity supplies 
KFW: Loan and TA to support Electrification of railroad Tashkent-Angren; Water 
supply project 
Islamic Development Bank: Loans: Water Supply and Sewerage System in Tashkent; 
Construction of Water Supply and Ferghana and Margilan cities; Construction of Water 
Supply and Sewage Systems in Andijan and Urgench cities.  TA: Feasibility Study for 
Water Supply and Ferghana and Margilan cities; Feasibility Study for Water Supply and 

 58

 
 
 
 
Sector/Thematic 
Area 

Donors’ Activities 

Regional 
Development  

Trade and 
Investment 

Sewage Systems in Andijan and Urgench cities 
UNDP: Feasibility studies of investment projects in sewage and other communal 
utilities 
JICA: Improvement of road maintenance and road administration 
Government of PRC: Water measurement equipment in urban water supply; Railway 
transportation machinery and equipment 
UNDP: Regional development strategies  
JETRO: Strengthening of economic ties between the countries of Central Asia 
JICA: Regional development study in 10 districts of Karakalpakstan; Development of 
tourism and promotion of regional industries 
UNDP: Capacity building and strengthening foreign trade and investment promotion 
institutions in Uzbekistan; Industrial policy development for EurAsEC trade and 
transport integration; improvement of public investment policy through capacity 
building and strengthening of investment cycle 
USAID: Support of accession to the WTO 
JETRO: Potential transportation projects in framework of CAREC activities 
OSCE: Support to regional trade development through surveys of business on non-
official payments at customs (surveys ordered by Uzbek Ministry for Foreign Economic 
Relations, Investment and Trade) 

 59

 
 
 
 
 
 
 60

Uzbekistan at a glance

9/28/07

Europe &
Central
Asia

Key Development Indicators

Low
income

Uzbekistan

(2006)

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

26.5
447
1.4
37

460
24,114
0.0
64

2,403
29,215
1.8
30

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

16.1
610
2,250

2,206
4,796
9,662

1,562
650
2,698

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

7.3
5.8

6.8
6.8

8.0
6.1

(most recent estimate, 2000–2006)

Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

…
26
67
57
8

1
10
69
28
5

..
..
59
75
..

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

99
99
100
99

99
96
103
100

72
50
108
96

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

82
67

92
85

75
38

Net Aid Flows

1980

1990

2000

2006 a

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2005):
   Japan
   United States
   Germany

..

62

186

172

..
..
..

1
1
0

82
36
9

54
38
17

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

..
..

0.5
3

1.4
8

1.2
7

Long-Term Economic Trends

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

..
..

3.1
4.0

25.0
47.3

11.4
21.5

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

..
..

0.0
118

236.6
100

1,218.9
134

1980–90
1990–2000
2000–06
      (average annual growth %)
2.5
1.8
..
-0.2

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

16.0
..

20.5
24.7
13,361
13,760
  (% of GDP)
32.8
33.0
22.1
34.3

26.5
17,031

1.2
5.7

Agriculture
Industry
   Manufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

34.4
23.1
9.4
42.5

26.1
27.4
10.8
46.5

..
..
..
..

0.5
-3.4
0.7
1.1

6.9
4.3
1.8
5.8

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation 

..
..
..

61.4
25.4
32.2

61.9
18.7
16.3

50.8
15.3
22.3

..
..
..

..
..
-2.5

..
..
5.2

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

..
..
..

28.8
47.8
3.2

24.6
21.5
17.9

37.5
25.9
41.2

..
..

-3.7
-7.4

13.1
7.6

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2006 data are preliminary.  .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2005.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

15

10

5

0

5

10

15

70-74
60-64
50-54
40-44
30-34
20-24
10-14
0-4

percent

Age distribution, 2006

Male

Female

0

25

50

75

100

1990

1995

2000

2005

Uzbekistan

Europe & Central Asia

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

90

95

00

05

GDP

GDP per capita

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

 
 
 
 
 
 61

Uzbek istan

Ba lance o f Payments and Trade

2000

2006

(US$ m illions)
To tal m erchand ise exports (fob)
To tal m erchand ise im ports (c if)
Net trade in goods and serv ices

2,935
2,696
422

5 ,615
3 ,994
1 ,986

W orkers ' rem ittances and
   com pensation o f emp loyees (receipts)

..

..

Curren t accoun t balance
   as a % of GDP

216
1.6

3 ,221
18 .9

Reserves, inc luding go ld

1,273

4 ,459

Centra l Government F inance

(% of GDP )
Curren t revenue (inc lud ing gran ts)
   Tax revenue
Curren t expend iture

36.8
34.8
29.4

33 .8
29 .5
30 .5

Techno logy and Infrastructure

2000

2005

Overa ll surp lus /de ficit

-2.5

3 .4

Paved roads (% of total)
F ixed line and mobile phone
  subscribers (per 1 ,000 people)
H igh techno logy exports
  (% of manu factured exports)

87.3

..

H ighest margina l tax ra te (% )
   Indiv idua l
   Corporate

36
26

29
12

69

80

..

..

Externa l Debt and Resource F low s

Environment

(US$ m illions)
To tal deb t outs tand ing and disbursed
To tal deb t serv ice
Deb t relief (H IPC , MDR I)

4,634
883
–

4,226
788
–

Agricu ltural land (% of land area)
Fores t area (% of land area)
Na tiona lly protec ted areas (% of land area)

65
7.6
..

64
7 .7
4.8

To tal deb t (% o f GDP)
To tal deb t serv ice (% o f exports)

33.7
26.1

29 .5
14 .2

Freshwa ter resources per capita (cu. me ters)
Freshwa ter w ithdrawa l (% o f interna l resources)

..
357.9

623
..

Foreign direc t inves tment (ne t inflows)
Portfolio equity (net in flows)

75
0

45
0

CO2 em iss ions per capita (m t)

4.8

4.8

GDP per unit o f energy use
  (2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equiva lent)

0.7

0.8

Energy use per cap ita (kg of oil equ iva lent)

2,035

2,088

 World Bank Group portfo lio

2000

2006

(US$ m illions)

IBRD
  Tota l deb t outstanding and d isbursed
  D isbursem en ts
  P rinc ipal repayments
  Interes t payments

217
31
5
12

316
32
21
15

IDA
  Tota l deb t outstanding and d isbursed
  D isbursem en ts
  Tota l deb t service

0
0
0

26
13
0

Private Sector Deve lopment

2000

2006

T ime required to s tart a bus iness (days)
Cos t to s tart a bus iness (% o f GN I per cap ita)
T ime required to reg is ter property (days)

–
–
–

29
14 .1
91

IFC (fiscal year)
  Tota l disbursed and ou ts tanding portfo lio
     o f which IFC own account
  D isbursem en ts for IFC own account
  Portfo lio sa les, prepayments and
     repayments for IFC own account

8
8
2

15
15
4

Ranked as a ma jor constra in t to bus iness
   (% o f m anagers surveyed who agreed)
      Tax ra tes
      Access to /cos t of financ ing

1

8

..
..

18 .1
16 .0

MIGA
  G ross exposure
  New guarantees

10
0

0
0

S tock m arket cap ita lization (% of GDP )
Bank cap ita l to asset ra tio (% )

0.2
..

0 .3
..

Note : Figures in ita lics are for years o ther than those spec ified .  2006 data are prelim inary.
.. indicates da ta are no t available.  – indica tes observa tion is not applicable.

9/28/07

Development Econom ics, Developm en t Data G roup (DECDG ).

0

25

50

75

100

Con tro l o f co rrup t ion

Ru le of law

Regu la to ry qua l ity

Po l i tica l stab i l ity

Vo ice and accoun tab i l ity

Coun try 's pe rcen t i le rank (0 -100 )

higher values imp ly bet ter rat ings

2006
2000

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2006

Sou rce : Kau fmann -K raay -Mas tru zz i, W o rld Bank

Short-term , 
36 .496

IBRD, 298.92

O ther m u l ti- 
lateral , 487 .936

IDA , 11.492
IMF , 0

P riv ate, 1724 .353

B i lateral , 1666.37

Composition of tota l external debt, 2005

US$ mi l l ions

 
 
 
Millennium Development Goals

Uzbekistan

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and  2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)  

Goal 1: halve the rates for $1 a day poverty and malnutrition
   Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, % of population)   
   Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)   
   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)  
   Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)   

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
   Primary school enrollment (net, %)
   Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)   
   Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)   
   Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
   Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)   
   Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)   
   Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)   

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
   Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)   
   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   
   Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
   Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)   
   Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)   

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
   Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)   
   Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)   
   Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)   
   Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)   

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
   Access to an improved water source (% of population)
   Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
   Forest area (% of total land area)   
   Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)   
   CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)   
   GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)   

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development   
   Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)   
   Internet users (per 1,000 people)   
   Personal computers (per 1,000 people)   
   Youth unemployment (% of total labor force ages 15-24)   

Uzbekistan

1995
3.3
..
7.3
18.8

2000
19.2
27.5
3.9
7.9

..
..
..
..

..
44
6

75
62
91

..
98

..
56
76
..

93
52
..
..
4.3
0.7

68
0
..
..

..
99
95
..

98
42
7

71
59
99

24
96

..
68
93
4

87
61
7.6
..
4.8
0.7

69
5
..
..

1990
<2
..
10.9
..

78
..
99
..

94
47
..

79
65
84

..
..

..
..
68
..

94
51
7.2
..
6.3
0.7

68
0
..
..

2005
<2
..
7.2
..

..
97
95
..

98
40
18

68
57
99

..
..

0.2
..
113
39

82
67
7.7
4.8
4.8
0.8

80
34
..
..

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year olds)

ICT indicators (per 1,000 people)

125

100

75

50

25

0

2000

2002

2005

Primary net enrollment ratio (..)

Ratio of girls to boys in primary &
secondary education

100

75

50

25

0

100

75

50

25

0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2000

2002

2005

Uzbekistan

Europe & Central Asia

Fixed + mobile subscribers
Internet users

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  .. indicates data are not available.

9/28/07

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

 62

 
 
CAS Annex B2 -
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

As Of Date 
01/23/2008 

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment 
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management 
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 

2005 

7 
4.3 
0.0 
0.0 
42.9 
53.8 
11.9 

yes 
1102.5 
122.5 

9 
332.2 
37.5 
55.4 

2006 

2007 

2008 

5 
4.5 
40.0 
33.7 
60.0 
59.5 
22.3 

6 
4.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
24.2 

6 
5.3 
0.0 
0.0 
16.7 
5.9 
16.8 

yes 
774.8 
110.7 

yes 
767.7 
127.9 

yes 
615.2 
76.9 

Last Five FYs 

5 
86.6 
40.0 
27.9 

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio. 
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP). 
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the  
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only. 
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, 
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year. 

 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex - B3 

Uzbekistan: IFC Investment Operations Program 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008* 

Commitments (US$m) 
Gross 
Net 

Net Commitments by Sector (%) 
Financial Sector 
Total 

0 

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) 
Loan 
Total 

0 

0 

0 

*  As of April 14, 2008 

3.00 
3.00 

100 
100 

100 
100 

0.00 
0.00 

0 
0 

0 
0 

 64

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary 

As of May 14, 2008 

 Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Programa 

Fiscal 
year 

2008 
(IDA-
14) 

Proj ID 

Rural Enterprise Support Project Phase II 

2009 

2011 

2010 

Result 
Ferghana Valley 
Basic Education II 
Result 
Small town / rural water supply in SyrDarya Oblast  
Bukhara & Samarkand Sewerage 
Results 
Health III  
Sewerage in Ferghana and Republic of Karakalpakstan 
Results 
Overall Result 
Preparation for possible delivery  under IDA-15, or early IDA-16 
     Irrigation and Drainage – Phase II 
     Rural Water Supply in Bukhara oblast 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(H/M/L) 

Implementation b  
Risks (H/M/L) 

H 

H 
H 

H 
H 

H 
H 

M 

M 
L 

L 
M 

M 
L 

 68.0 

 68.0 
 65.0 
 25.0 
 90.0 
65.0 
40.0 
105.0 
70.0 
40.0 
110.0 
373.0 

100.0 
15.0 

Note:  The program is indicative. The actual size of the projects in the pipeline will be 
determined in line with available resources determined using the IDA PBA system. 

a This table presents the proposed program for FY08-FY11. 
b For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high 
(H), moderate (M), or low (L).  

 65

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
CAS Annex B4 - Summary of IDA Advisory Services -

As of April 21, 
2008 

Product 
IDA 
Recent completions 
Cotton Taxation Study 
Nutrition review I 
PER 2 
Municipal Sector Review 

UZ Poverty Assessment 

Underway 
Governance Assessment (Health Sector) 

Health and Nutrition Review 

Water Sector Investment Planning Study 
Adv. On  Dev. Of Treasury Syt TA 
Accounting & Auditing ROSC 
PSD/FSD Dialogue 

Planned 

WIS TA 
Governance Assessment in Municipal Sector 
Growth and Poverty Dialogue 

Completion FY 

Cost 
(US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objectiveb 

FY06 
FY06 
FY06 
FY07 

FY07 

FY08 

FY08 

FY09 
FY09 
FY09 
FY09 

FY09 
FY09 
FY09 

Trust Fund 
Trust Fund 
100.9 
244 

Gov/WB/Donor/Public 
Gov/WB/Donor/Public 
Gov/WB/Donor/Public 
Gov/WB 

156 

Gov/WB/Donor/Public 

326 

85 

260 
82 
100 
100 

300 
120 
200 

Gov/WB 

Gov/WB/Donor/Public 

Gov/WB/Donor/Public 
WB/Gov 
Gov/WB 
Gov/WB 

Gov/WB/Donor/Public 
Gov/WB 
Gov/WB 

KG, PS 
KG, PS 
KG, PD 
KG, PS 
KG, PS, 
PD 

PS 
KG, PS, 
PD 
KG, PS, 
PD 
KG, PS 
KG 
KG,PS 

KG, PS, 
PD 
PS 
KG 

____________ 

a.  Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 
b.  Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving. 

 66

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B4 - Summary of IFC Advisory Services 

Product 

As of May 06, 2008 

Completion FY 

Underway 
CA Mortgage (Uzbekistan share of Regional 
project) 
Advisory services to Hamkorbank-III 
CA Leasing Facility (Regional project) 
SME Policy Development-IV 

Planned 
SME Policy Development-V 

CA FM Infrastructure (Uzbekistan share of 
Regional project) 
CA Infrastructure Scoping (regional Scoping 
project) 

FY10 

FY10 
FY10 
FY09 

FY11 

FY11 

FY10 

____________ 

a.  Government, market participants, donor, public dissemination. 
b.  Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Cost 
(US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objectiveb 

1,580 

290 
2,240 
713 

930 

500 

1,000 

Gov/Market participants 

KG/PS 

Market participant 
Gov/Market participants 
Gov/WBG/Donor/Public 

Gov/WB/Donor/Public 

Market participants/ 
Gov/WB 
Gov/WB/Public/Market 
participants 

KG, PS 
KG/PS 
KG, PS, 
PD 

KG, PS, 
PD 
KG, PS 

KG, PS, 
PD 

 67

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 68

CAS Annex B6 - Uzbekistan - Key Economic Indicators 

Actual      
2005 
2006 

Estimate 
2008 

Projected 
2010 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP) 
Gross domestic producta 
   Agriculture 
   Industry 
   Services 

2004 

2007 

2009 

2011 

100 
31 
26 
43 

100 
28 
23 
49 

100 
26 
27 
46 

100 
24 
30 
46 

100 
24 
31 
45 

100 
23 
32 
45 

100 
23 
33 
44 

100 
22 
33 
45 

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
   Government investment 
   Private investment 

68 
24 
5 
19 

64 
22 
4 
18 

66 
21 
4 
18 

70 
19 
3 
16 

71 
21 
3 
18 

74 
20 
3 
17 

75 
19 
3 
16 

76 
20 
3 
17 

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

40 
33 

38 
29 

38 
26 

40 
30 

41 
33 

41 
34 

41 
35 

41 
37 

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

32 
34 

36 
40 

34 
41 

30 
34 

29 
36 

26 
33 

25 
31 

24 
29 

Memorandum items 
Gross domestic product  
(US$ million at current prices) 
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

12030 

14308 

17031 

22308 

27195 

29884 

32654 35479 

460 

530 

610 

730 

880 

1040 

1160 

1240 

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 97 prices) 
Gross domestic product at market 
prices 
   Gross Domestic Income 

7.7 
7.7 

7.0 
7.0 

7.3 
7.3 

9.5 
9.5 

8.0 
9.4 

7.0 
5.1 

6.5 
5.9 

6.0 
5.4 

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 97 prices) 
   GDP at market prices 
6.5 
5.8 
6.0 
   Total consumption 
6.2 
3.2 
0.9 

8.1 
0.5 

6.7 
7.5 

5.8 
6.5 

5.3 
6.2 

4.8 
5.6 

Balance of Payments (US$ millions) 
  Exports (GNFS)b 
      Merchandise FOB 
   Imports (GNFS)b 
      Merchandise FOB 
  Resource balance 
  Net current transfers 
  Current account balance 

4837 
4263 
3928 
3061 
909 
356 
1216 

5416 
4757 
4101 
3310 
1315 
658 
1949 

6390 
5615 
4404 
3614 
1986 
1222 
3248 

8991 
8026 
6736 
5730 
2255 
1990 
4307 

11186 
10103 
8948 
7720 
2238 
1975 
4153 

12192 
11024 
10295 
8822 
1897 
2039 
3820 

13369 14630 
12123 13302 
11501 13290 
9740 11199 
1868 
1340 
2131 
2225 
3840 
3378 

  Net private FDI 
  Long-term loans (net) 
    Official 
    Private 

187 
-89 
78 
-168 
-802 
-512 

88 
-212 
28 
-240 
-1076 
-748 

194 
-152 
29 
-182 
-1726 
-1564 

734 
-303 
156 
-460 
-2583 
-2155 

311 
95 
38 
57 
-3300 
-1259 

368 
131 
47 
83 
-3072 
-1247 

433 
135 
31 
104 
-3184 
-1224 

510 
150 
23 
127 
-2866 
-1173 

  Other capital ( incl. errors & omissions) 

  Change in reservesd 

Memorandum items 
Current account balance (% of GDP) 
10.1 
13.6 
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
7.6 
9.2 
Real annual growth rates ( YR97 prices) 
  Merchandise exports (FOB) 
25.8 
6.3 
  Merchandise imports (CIF) 
19.1 
8.1 

19.1 
11.7 

19.3 
10.1 

15.3 
8.2 

12.8 
6.3 

11.8 
5.7 

9.5 
3.8 

13.7 
5.6 

37.7 
38.2 

15.2 
27.8 

13.8 
13.3 

10.8 
9.6 

10.3 
14.2 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B6 - Uzbekistan - Key Economic Indicators 

Actual      
2005 
2006 

Estimate 
2008 

2007 

35.2 
28.7 

6.4 
0.6 

16.3 
46.2 

30.8 
30.5 

0.2 
0.7 

14.4 
54.2 

34.4 
30.7 

3.7 
0.4 

15.2 
36.8 

(continued) 

Projected 
2010 

2011 

34.5 
29.4 

5.1 
0.1 

16.9 
20.3 

34.5 
28.9 

5.6 
0.1 

16.9 
16.6 

2009 

34.6 
29.8 

4.8 
0.1 

16.8 
24.1 

34.9 
30.0 

4.9 
0.2 

16.7 
29.1 

118.0 
103.3 
114.2 

123.8 
103.3 
119.9 

128.5 
106.6 
120.6 

133.4 
110.6 
120.6 

145.8 
116.6 
125.0 

139.7 
117.6 
118.8 

138.7 
118.5 
117.0 

138.0 
119.3 
115.7 

15.7 

21.4 

21.5 

24.0 

17.0 

15.0 

12.0 

10.0 

2004 

32.2 
31.6 

0.6 
0.7 

12.2 
47.8 

Public finance (as % of GDP at 
market prices)e 
  Current revenues 
  Current expenditures 
  Current account surplus (+) or 
deficit (-) 
  Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators 
  M2/GDP 
  Growth of M2 (%) 

Price indices( YR97 =100) 
  Merchandise export price index 
  Merchandise import price index 
  Merchandise terms of trade index 

  Real interest rates 
  GDP deflator (% change) 

a.   GDP at factor cost 
b.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services." 
c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants. 
d.  Includes use of IMF resources. 
e.   Consolidated central government. 

 69

 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Actual      
2005  
2006  

Estimated 
2008  

2009 

Projected 
2010  
2011 

2007  

4226 
-372 
787 

4106 
-152 
920 

3505 
-253 
842 

3259 3179 
-224 
-69 
666 
599 

3077 3093 
-103 
84 
611 
448 

76.3 
29.5 
14.2 
37.6 

4.9 
18.3 
0.6 
299 

62.3 
24.1 
14.0 
38.5 

5.8 
21.2 
0.7 
291 

38.0 
15.7 
9.1 
45.7 

8.2 
17.7 
0.5 
278 

24.6 
12.0 
5.0 
43.5 

22.2 
10.6 
4.2 
42.7 

8.9 
26.3 
0.4 
273  

9.8 
29.8 
0.4 
249 

19.8 
9.4 
3.9 
42.0 

9.3 
29.9 
0.3 
221 

18.4 
8.7 
2.7 
40.8 

12.0 
39.2 
0.3 
191 

0 
116 

CAS Annex B7 - Uzbekistan - Key Exposure Indicators 

Indicator 

Total debt outstanding and disbursed (TDO) 
(US$m)a 
Net disbursements (US$m)a 
Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a 

Debt and debt service indicators (%) 
   TDO/XGSb 
   TDO/GDP 
   TDS/XGS 
   Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%) 
   IBRD DS/public DS 
   Preferred creditor DS/public   DS (%)c 
   IBRD DS/XGS 
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d 

2004 

4833 
-157 
871 

97.9 
40.2 
17.7 
36.0 

4.2 
16.2 
0.6 
312 

0 
70 

0 
91 

0 
5 

0 
11 

0 
23 

0 
41 

   Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
   IDA TDO (US$m)d 
IFC (US$m) 
   Loans 
   Equity 
MIGA 
   MIGA guarantees (US$m) 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
a.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital 
b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances. 
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for 
International Settlements. 
d. Includes present value of guarantees. 
e.  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments. 

31.4 
2.4 

26.7 
1.8 

0 
52 

8.0 
1.5 

19.2 
1.8 

10.2 
1.5 

 70

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex - B8 (IFC) for Uzbekistan 

Uzbekistan 
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio 
As of March 2008 
(In USD Millions) 

Committed 

Disbursed Outstanding 

FY Approval 

Company 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quas
i Equity 

*GT/R
M 

Partici  
pant 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity 

*GT/R
M 

Partici  
pant 

1997 
ABN AMRO Uzbek 
2000/ 2003 
Asaka Bank 
2000 
SEF Elma Cheese 
1998/ 1999 
SEF Fayz 
2001/ 2007 
SEF Hamkorbank 
2001 
SEF Parvina 
1996/ 2001/ 2003 
UZBEK LEASING 
Total Portfolio: 

         -  
        2.7 
        0.0 
        0.0 
        3.2 
         -  
        1.5 
        7.4 

        1.0 
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -          0.6 
        0.5 
         -  
        1.5  
        0.6 

         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  

         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  

         -    

         -  
        1.0 
        2.7 
         -  
        0.0 
         -  
        0.0 
         -  
        2.2 
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -          0.5 
        4.9 
        1.5 

         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
        0.1 
         -  
        0.1  

         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  
         -  

         -   
         -   
         -   
         -   
         -   
         -   

         -   

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products. 
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types. 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B8 - 

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As Of Date 04/21/2008

Closed Projects

9

IBRD/IDA *

Total Disbursed (Active)
          of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
          of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
          of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

 157.95
 20.33
 332.23
 110.43
 490.18
 130.76
 105.75
 0.00
 105.75

Active Projects

Project ID

P094042
P049621
P009127
P051370
P046043
P009121
Overall Result

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/

IDA

15
20
25
40

100

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0.17

13.67
13.85

15.82
16.93
34.54
29.93
1.70
6.84
105.75

12.29
12.56
2.41
17.74
1.70
20.51
67.22

0.85

1.70
6.84
9.39

Project Name

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating
Development 
Implementatio
Objectives
n Progress

Fiscal Year

IBRD

BASIC EDUC
BUKHARA/SAMARKAND WS
DRAINAGE, IRRIG & WETLAND
HEALTH 2
RUR ENT SUPPORT
RURAL WS & SAN

MS
MS
S
MS
S
S

MS
MS
S
MS
S
S

2007
2002
2003
2005
2002
1998

20
35

36.14
75
166.14

72 

 
 
 
 
 
