Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 22180-RO

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

ROMANIA

May 22, 2001

South Central Europe Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

The International Finance Corporation
Southern Europe and Central Asia Department

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
|The last Countiy Assistance Strategy for Romania was discussed by the Executive Directors|

|in May 1997 (Report No. 16559 RO).l

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

(Exchange rate as of May 11, 200 1)

Currency Unit = Romanian LEI (ROL)
US$ = 28,412 ROL

GOVERNMENT'S FISCAL YEAR

January 1 - December 31

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

CEM 
CGAS 

CEC 
CEFTA 

APL 
BCR 
CAS 
CDF 

Adaptable Program Loan 
Romanian Commercial Bank 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Comprehensive Development 
Framework 
Romanian Savings Bank 
Central European Free Trade 
Agreement 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Government Anti-Poverty 
Commission 
CONPET Commercial Enterprise for Crude 
Oil Transmission 
Directly Observed Treatment 
Shortcourse 
European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development 
European Commission 
Europe and Central Asia 
European Investment Bank 
Emergency Medical Services 
European Union 
Euro 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Financial and Enterprise Sector 
Adjustment Loan 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environment Facility 
Gross National Product 
Intemational Accounting Standards 
Intemational Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development 
Intemational Finance CoTporation 
Intemational Financial Institution 

EC 
ECA 
EIB 
EMS 
EU 
EUR 
FDI 
FESAL 

FRY 
GDP 
GEF 
GNP 
IAS 
IBRD 

DOTS 

EBRD 

IFC 
IFI 

IMF 
ISPA 

JPR 
M&E 
MIGA 
MTES 
NATO 
NGO 
OECD 

International Monetary Fund
Instrument for Structural Policies for Pre-
Accession
Joint Portfolio Review
Monitoring and Evaluation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium-Term Economic Strategy
North American Treaty Organization
Non Governmental Organization
Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development
OED 
Operations Evaluation Department
PAL 
Programmatic Adjustment Loan
PAYG 
"Pay-as-you-go" Pension System
PCF 
Prototype Carbon Fund
PDSR 
Social Democracy Party of Romania
PER 
Public Expenditure Review
P&PG 
Public and Publicly Guaranteed
PSAL 
Private Sector Adjustment Loan
PSC 
Pension Supervision Commission
SAPARD Special Accession Program for Rural
Development
SBA 
Stand-By Arrangement
SMEs 
Small and Medium Enterprises
SNIF 
State Land Reclamation Company
SOE 
State-Owned Enterprise
SOF 
State Ownership Fund
STD 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases
TB 
Tuberculosis
UK DFID United Kingdom Department for
Intemational Development
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for Intemational
Development
World Bank Institute

UNDP 
USAID 

WBI 

The World Bank Group Team

IBRD 
Vice President: 
Johannes F. Linn 
Country Director: 
Andrew N. Vorkink 
CAS Team Leaders: Myla Taylor Williams 
Carlos B. Cavalcanti 
CAS Team Members: Romania Country Team 

Vice President: 
Director: 
Manager: 
Task Leader: 
_

IFC
Assaad Jabre
Khosrow Zamani
Sujata Lamba
Arthur Karlin

ROMANIA: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ...........................I

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................

I. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT .......................................................

I

1

.I

A. 
Introduction 
B. Political Developments .1
C. Social and Economic Developments 
D. CDF Findings 
.7
E. The Government's Development Program and Recent Policy Actions 
F. Romania's Unfinished Structural Reform Agenda 
.9
G. Economic Prospects, External Environment, and External Financing ........................ 11

.2

.7

II. WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ................................................ 15
A. Lessons of Experience ........................................................ 
15
B. Country Assistance Strategy FY02-04 ....................... 
................................. 
16
C. World Bank Portfolio Management ........................................................ 
29
D. World Bank Group Decentralization ........................................................ 
30

III. RISKS .................................................... 

IV. EXPOSURE MANAGEMENT .................................................... 

V. CONCLUSION .................................................... 

31

32

34

TABLES:

Table 1: Poverty and Inequality in Romania ............................................................ 
3
Table 2: Main Macroeconomic Indicators ............................................................
4
Table 3: Macroeconomic Prospects ........................................................... 
13
Table 4: Romania's External Financing Requirements and Sources (2001-2003) .......... 15
Table 5: IBRD Lending Program: FY02-FY04 (US$m) ................................................. 18
Table 6: Lending Scenario and Triggers ........................................................... 
20

Table 7: Romania IBRD Exposure Percentage Ratios - 2001 - 2003 ............................. 33

TEXT BOXES:

Box 1: Relations with the European Union ............................................................ 
Box 2: Poverty Profile ............................................................
Box 3: Gender Dynamics ............................................................

2
3
6

ANNEXES:

Annex A2: Romania at a Glance
Annex B2: 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: Bank Group Program Summary
Annex B4: 
Summary of Non-lending Services
Annex B5: 
Social Development Indicators
Annex B6a: Key Economic Indicators - Accelerated Reform Scenario
Annex B6b: Key Economic Indicators - Slow Reform Scenario
Annex B7a: Key Exposure Indicators - High Case Lending Scenario
Annex B7b: Key Exposure Indicators - Low Case Lending Scenario
Annex B8a: Status of Bank Group Operations
Annex B8b: Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B9: 
CAS Country Program Matrix
Annex B 10: CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Annex C: 
Summary of Feedback on Draft CAS
Annex D: 
Romania and the EU Grant Programs
Annex E: 
Corruption in Romania
Annex F: 
Ethnic Minorities
Annex G: 
CDF Findings in Romania
Annex H: 
Barriers to Romania's Business Environment
Annex I: 
WBI Activities

THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR ROMANIA

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. 
This document is presented to the Board at a time when Romania is turning away from its
legacy of erratic macroeconomic management of the 1990s. After almost a decade of uneven
reform efforts, the new Government that took office in December 2000 has begun laying plans
for reforms needed for a successful economic transition, and eventual accession to the European
Union (EU). The key challenge ahead is turning these plans into sustained actions.

Country Context

2. 
The starting point for the transition process in Romania was, in many respects, more
difficult than in other countries in Central and Eastern Europe. Pre-transition policies
emphasized self-reliance, which resulted in excessive focus on heavy industry and large
infrastructure projects. During the 1980s, the rapid repayment of the US$11 billion foreign debt
(20 to 30 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP)) imposed severe strains on the population,
with deep cuts in imports and a widening of the technological gap. Towards the end of the 1980s
the Romanian economy was on the verge of collapse and no attempts to reform had yet been
made.

3. 
Given this difficult legacy, and seeking to protect vested interests and minimize the social
costs associated with the transformation to a market economy, during the 1990s the Romanian
authorities took a gradualist and piecemeal approach to reform. The imposition of hard budget
constraints and privatization of state-owned enterprises were significantly delayed. While social
concerns were understandable, this strategy failed to produce sustainable gains in either
economic or social conditions. Given the experiences of the last ten years, the costs of a hesitant
reform path have been higher than if a bolder approach to structural transformation had been
adopted at the outset. Poverty has increased sharply, with the share of the population living
below the national poverty line doubling in the second half of the 1990s, from 20 to 41 percent.

4. 
Lack of political will to reform, and constrained institutional and governance capacity are
at the root of Romania's less-than-satisfactory economic performance and worsened social
conditions. These two issues are evidenced by Romania's very high levels of enterprise arrears,
that reached, at end-1999, 42 percent of GDP; frequent changes in legislation, with a strong
reliance on emergency measures and few efforts to build the institutional capacity to enforce the
new legislation, or to carry out new responsibilities; and an unattractive business environment.
The instability in the legal framework and the delays in building needed administrative capacity
have an acute impact on the delivery of health care and social assistance, especially to the poor,
and on the business environment needed to attract foreign direct investment and private sector
development. Many of these problems were reported during consultations held in 1999-2000, as
part of the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) initiative, for which Romania is a
pilot country. These consultations revealed a clear consensus among Romanians around the
development objectives of poverty reduction and EU accession, and widely held views that

ii 

Executive Summary

meeting these objectives would, in turn, require economic growth, strengthening of public
institutions, greater access to opportunity, a strong social safety net, and sustainable development
and protection of environmental and natural resources.

5. 
Cognizant of these widely held views, the newly elected Government has identified its
priorities along the same lines. The Governnent's program lays the basis for a pragmatic
approach to reforming the economy and raising living standards by improving the quality of
Government services and creating an attractive business environment. An important milestone
will be reaching agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on a Stand-By
Arrangement, which would facilitate Romania's access to international capital markets, progress
toward EU accession, and ability to attract foreign direct investment. Accordingly, the
Government is in active discussions with the IMF on a macroeconomic framework and a
possible Stand-By Arrangement.

6. 
In addition, the Government has taken action in a number of structural reform areas,
including: (i) termination of all directed credit programs and all Government financing of rural
and agricultural credit; (ii) a signed share sale-purchase contract for Banca Agricola; (iii)
establishment of an Anti-Poverty Commission in the Office of the Prime Minister; (iv) and
initiation of a 30 percent reduction in public administration staffing levels. In addition, the
Government has committed to take action on several other fronts, in particular further
privatizations.

7. 
Other important development challenges still remain, however, particularly with regard to
further enterprise privatization, reform of the banking and financial sector, restructuring and
deregulation of the energy sector, fiscal decentralization, land privatization and continued reform
of the agriculture sector, access to quality education in rural areas, and reform of the pension
system to ensure sustainability in the context of an aging population.

8. 
The Government needs to demonstrate a sustained commitment to accelerated reform and
avoid reverting to a stop-and-go pattern of reform implementation, to secure complementary
external financing. Romania's recent developments place the country in a particularly
advantageous position to pursue accelerated reforms. After three years of negative real GDP
growth rates, the Romanian economy began growing again in 2000, and is projected to reach
around 4 percent real GDP growth rate in 2001. The economic recovery has been driven partly
by a strong growth in exports, primarily the re-export of processed inputs from EU countries.
The sustainability of the current economic recovery will depend on the new Government's
ability to implement a coherent set of economic reforms, but will also be vulnerable to external
shocks.

Country Assistance Strategy

9. 
The Bank Group's country assistance strategy presents two very distinct lending
scenarios. If Romania reverts to pursuing a hesitant pace of reforms, Bank Group assistance will
be very limited, centered on a few poverty-focused interventions, and significantly reduced from
the levels of Bank Group support over the past four years (the low case). If, on the other hand,
Romania sustains accelerated reforms, Bank Group assistance will support a broad set of
structural and sectoral reforms to accelerate growth and pave the way for Romania's eventual

Executive Summary 

iii

accession to the EU, in addition to an enhanced program of poverty focused interventions (the
high case).

10. Adjustment lending would be important to support the accelerated reform scenario.
Because of the Government's heavy structural reform agenda, adjustment loans account for
about one-half of planned lending volume during FY02-04. The first such operation would aim
at supporting reforms encouraging private sector development. This would be achieved through
the proposed Second Private Sector Adjustment Loan (PSAL 2) program -- a follow-up to the
PSAL 1 program. As a second stage, and post-PSAL 2, the Bank would support the
Government's program of reforms of the institutional, regulatory, and governance framework, as
well as continued reforms in the enterprise, financial and energy sectors. The Bank is
considering supporting this reform agenda through a series of programmatic adjustment loans
(PALs). The programmatic instrument would provide greater adaptability for step-by-step
institutional reforms, capacity building that involves significant policy content, and an economy-
wide scope that goes beyond individual projects. The use of a programmatic approach would
depend on the country's ability to strengthen its procurement and financial management
frameworks. 
Programmatic lending will be grounded in clear country commitment and
capacity to reform, structured in a series of operations supporting a medium-term reform
program, and disbursed on the basis of completed actions. Their content will be underpinned by
the results of the Bank's advisory services (e.g., the forthcoming Public Expenditure Review).
To prepare the ground for the possible use of programmatic adjustment lending, the Bank is
assisting Romania to strengthen its procurement and financial management frameworks.
Following the completion of the FY00 procurement assessment, a Country Financial
Accountability Assessment is planned for FY02-03.

11. High-case lending scenario. Under this scenario, Bank commitments would increase to
a maximum of $995 million during FY02-04, with three or four operations per year, in contrast
to lending commitments totaling nearly $600 million during FY98-00 (including adjustment
lending). This increase would be mainly due to adjustment lending (up to $550 million over the
three-year period) to support the policy reform agenda associated with the accelerated reform
scenario. Adjustment lending would be aimed at supporting private sector development and
institutional and governance reforms, and would complement sector reforms under individual
investment loans. Non-lending services in a high-case scenario would include at least four
studies per year, plus several grants, technical assistance, and World Bank Institute (WBI)
training in key areas of reform. 
IFC will complement the Bank's efforts in private sector
development by focusing on four key areas: restructuring of municipal infrastructure,
marshalling financing for post-privatization restructuring; supporting capital markets and SMEs
development, and selected private sector investments in the forestry sector. Overall, the level of
IFC activity will depend very much on the extent of improvements in the enabling environment
for business in the country.

12. 
Triggers. The high-case lending scenario would be triggered by Romania's progress in
establishing a macroeconomic environment conducive to lower inflation and sustainable growth,
as well as moving forward in the following key policy areas: (i) conclusion of the privatizations
and work-outs initiated under PSAL 1; (ii) initiation of the privatization and work-out process for
a number of remaining large state-owned enterprises; (iii) an agreement on a plan and timetable
for reducing energy arrears; (iv) an irrevocable agreement on the method and timetable for

iv 

Executive Summarv

privatization of Romanian Commercial Bank (BCR) and the Savings Bank (CEC);
(v) improvements in the financial sector legal and supervisory framework; (vi) an agreement on
the process for developing an anti-corruption strategy; and (vii) the approval of agreed social
assistance legislation (minimum income guarantee and social assistance framework law).

13. 
Low-case lending scenario. In the low-case lending scenario, Bank lending would be
significantly reduced to a total of $60 million during FY02-FY04. The number of Bank
operations would also be significantly reduced, to one or two per year. Lending instruments for
FY02-04 would consist of one second-phase adaptable program loan, two technical assistance
loans, and one investment loan. This minimal lending program would focus on reducing poverty
and building capacity on a modest scale, and would be complemented by non-lending advisory
services aimed at maintaining the policy dialogue with the authorities. This includes several fast
turn-around policy notes (e.g., on energy sector issues), a Public Expenditure Review, and a
Country Economic Memorandum focusing on EU accession.

Risks and Exposure Management

14. 
The Bank Group assistance strategy faces risks. The most important risk is political, and
stems from potential divisions within the Government that would delay the articulation and
implementation of a reform program. It took the previous Government nearly three years to put
in place a reform program that could be supported by the international financial community, and
this delay had an adverse impact on economic performance. If the new Government adopts a
similar approach, it runs the risk of eroding the support of international financial institutions and
access to credit markets, as well as triggering a steep deterioration in economic performance and,
possibly, external financing difficulties. The new Government's room to maneuver is much
more circumscribed than in the mid-1990s because of the external debt build-up and the
depletion of the country's human and capital stock.

15. 
Political risk, while high, is mitigated by three factors. First, in contrast to the previous
Government, the new Government is not a coalition and has shown signs of acting in a more
disciplined and decisive fashion in some reform areas. Second, there is broad political consensus
around the goal of Romania's joining the EU. This should create additional momentum for
reforms. Third, the international community has shown a clear commitment to continue to
engage Romania in an active dialogue, including contacts at very high levels and regular
participation in international events. The Bank in particular has maintained, and will continue to
maintain, a strong presence in the country, including the provision of analytical and advisory
services, even in the low-case scenario.

16. A fragile fiscal position and relatively large external financing needs over the next three
years pose interrelated economic risks. Without early and decisive action to limit public
spending and lending by state-owned banks, there could be a loss of confidence in economic
management. These economic risks are exacerbated by the slippage in fiscal consolidation in
late 2000 and early 2001 that eased pressures on state enterprises to restructure, and are likely to
put additional strain on the balance of payments. Over the next few months, therefore, the
international financial community is likely to assess the new Government's commitment to
reform by how well it manages its fiscal policy.

Executive Summary 

v

17. An important issue for the Bank Group is the composition of Romania's external debt, as
the debt structure contains a high percentage of public and publicly guaranteed (P&PG) debt,
particularly preferred creditors. Total debt outstanding (including short-term) was approximately
$10 billion at the end of 2000 (or about 27 percent of GDP), of which nearly 70 percent was
P&PG debt, and P&PG debt service accounted for 58 percent of total debt service, for a debt
service ratio of 11 percent. The share of P&PG debt service is expected to reach 70 percent by
2002 in both the high-case and low-case lending scenarios, due to the undisbursed pipeline ($557
million as of January 2001).

18. 
The World Bank is the largest creditor, accounting for about 20 percent of the total debt
outstanding and nearly 15 percent of P&PG debt service at end-2000. The Bank Group's CAS
for Romania has been developed to ensure that further increases in exposure are closely matched
by increases in overall creditworthiness as well as by proportionate burden sharing among the
IFIs. The longer the high case is sustained, the more the Bank's relative exposure would be
expected to decrease over time, as private sources of P&PG financing would be increasingly
available under an accelerated reform program. In the low-case lending program, however, due
to the undisbursed pipeline of $557 million (as of January 2001), and the likelihood of
Romania's difficulty in accessing private financing, the Bank's relative exposure would remain
high, even in the medium term.

Conclusion

19. While the new Romanian Government has taken a number of actions that signal its
intention to accelerate the pace of reform relative to that of its predecessors, it will be important
for this Government to demonstrate during the remainder of 2001 a sustained commitment to
accelerated reform. It could make significant and sustained progress in fiscal management and
structural reforms - particularly in the area of privatization - and hence adopt a program that
could receive support from the Bank and the IMF. This would usher Romania into the high-case
scenario by the end of this calendar year. Alternatively, the new Government could take a more
hesitant approach to reforms, or even reverse past progress in some areas. This would result in a
significant decrease in Bank Group support for two reasons. In the policy environment implicit
in the low-case scenario, the Romanian Government should not commit its citizens to additional
debt obligations, not least because Bank Group financing would not generate the growth needed
to service the debt. In addition, there would be exposure and creditworthiness concerns on the
Bank's side.

20. 
The Government will need to weigh the political as well as economic implications of its
chosen pace of reform. However, with poverty reduction and EU accession as the long-term
outcomes for which Romanians are striving, the Government is likely to conclude that the
political and economic considerations converge rather than conflict. Should the Government
pursue this conclusion in a sustainable way, the World Bank Group stands ready to support the
Government's efforts to break critical bottlenecks in the reformn process by ensuring
improvement in the delivery of key services to the poor, moving forward on critical and
irreversible steps of the privatization programn, and helping to lay the foundations of key public
sector institutions.

vi 

-Executive Summarv

Agenda for Board Consideration

21. 

The Executive Directors may wish to discuss the following issues:

* 

Is the proposed dual scenario approach appropriate, given Romania's track record on
reforms?

* Does the proposed World Bank Group strategy adequately support Romania's top
priorities as identified during CDF consultations, namely, poverty reduction and EU
accession?

Are the proposed scenario triggers appropriate?
Does the proposed World Bank Group strategy adequately address and mitigate against
country and implementation risks?

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

1

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR ROMANIA

I. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. 

Introduction

1. 
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Romania was presented to the Board on
June 3, 1997. This CAS has been prepared jointly by the Bank and IFC with input from MIGA.
The document was discussed in draft form with the Romanian Government, which endorsed the
assistance strategy. The document also benefited from extensive in-country consultations with
civil society (see Annex C).

B. 

Political Developments

2. 
The November 2000 elections brought back to power the center-left Romanian Party of
Sccial Democracy (PDSR) that had governed the country from 1992 to 1996. The PDSR
returned to power against the backdrop of worsening social and economic conditions for the
Romanian population in the second half of the 1990s. The outcome of this election signaled
expectations that a more cohesive and organized political grouping, such as the PDSR, would
have greater success in achieving Romanians' broadly shared goals of poverty reduction and
accession to the European Union (EU) (see paras. 14-15).

3. 
These objectives will need to be pursued, however, under significantly different political
and economic circumstances than those that prevailed during PDSR's first tenure in office. The
new Government can ill-afford to disregard the popular objective of EU accession. EU support
of Romania's accession depends, in turn, on the Government's adopting reforms that will lead to
Romania's becoming a functioning market economy - a condition it has not yet met, according
to the latest EU regular report on Romania's accession (see Box 1).

2 

Romania: Countrv Assistance Strategy

Box 1: Relations with the European Union

The EU opened accession negotiations with Romania on seven of the 31 chapters of the Acquis
Communautare in early 2000. Six of these chapters have been successfully closed, and the new
Government is now elaborating position papers on eight other chapters. The new Government is also
preparing an Action Plan for the Medium-Term Economic Strategy (MTES). The Action Plan will
identify economic and structural reform measures broadly in line with EU policies, that could be supported
by IMF and World Bank programs. This Action Plan for the MTES will guide day-to-day decision
making on econoniic reform to move the Romanian economy toward becoming a functioning market
economy. Romania is receiving substantial EU assistance under EU PHARE programs, and two pre-
accession facilities (the Special Accession Program for Agriculture and Rural Development (SAPARD)
and the Instrument for Structural Policies for Pre-Accession (ISPA)). Total disbursements under these
three programs in 2001 could amount to as much as Euro (EUR) 650 million, or around 0.5 percent of
Romania's GDP (see Annex D).

C. 

Social and Economic Developments

4. 
The starting point for the transition process in Romania was, in many respects, more
difficult 
than 
in other countries 
in Central and Eastern Europe. 
Pre-transition policies
emphasized self-reliance, which resulted 
in excessive focus on heavy industry and large
infrastructure projects. This strategy led to the depletion of domestic energy sources, and
induced a costly dependence on imports of energy and raw materials. During the 1980s, the
rapid repayment of the US$11 billion foreign debt (20 to 30 per cent of GDP) imposed severe
strains on the population. As there was no growth in exports (in dollar terms), imports from the
west were cut roughly in half over the decade in order to repay the debt. The technological lag
increased significantly as a result. Towards the end of the 1980s the Romanian economy was on
the verge of collapse and no attempts to reform had yet been tried.

5. 
Given this difficult legacy, and seeking to protect vested interests and minimize the social
costs associated with the transformation to a market economy, during the 1990s the Romanian
authorities took a gradualist and piecemeal approach to reform. The imposition of hard budget
constraints on the enterprise sector and privatization of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) were
significantly delayed. While social concerns were understandable, this strategy failed to produce
sustainable gains in either economic or social conditions. Given the experiences of the last ten
years, the costs of a hesitant reform path have been higher than if a bolder approach to structural
transformation had been adopted at the outset. Poverty has increased sharply, with the share of
the population 
living below the national poverty line (defined as 60 percent of average adult
equivalent consumption) doubling in the second half of the 1990s, from 20 to 41 percent (see
Table 1 and Box 2).

6. 
The worsened economic and social conditions were the result of slow and at times erratic
implementation of reforms. Only in mid-1999 did the previous coalition Government embark on
an ambitious program of macroeconomic stabilization measures and structural reforms. The
reform program was supported by the Bank (via the first Private Sector Adjustment Loan (PSAL
1)) and by the Fund (via a Stand-By Arrangement (SBA)). The centerpiece of the
macroeconomic program was a strong fiscal correction, supported by tight monetary and
incomes policies and an exchange rate policy designed to help restore external competitiveness.
The Government's program also included improvements in the tax regime and to the legal

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

3

framework for financial transactions, the closure of Bancorex (the country's flagship state-owned
bank, that at the time had 70 percent of its loans classified as doubtful or non-performing), and
programns to mitigate the social impact of enterprise reforms.

Year 

GDP growtih 

Table 1: Poverty and Inequality in Romania
1996 1997 1998 1999

3.9 

-6.1 

-5.4 

-3.2

Poverty (at national poverty line)

Poverty headcount (percent) 

19.8 

30.8 33.8 

41.2

Total number of the poor ('000) 

4,488 6,945 7,609 9,252

Consumption shortfall as percent of poverty line 

22.7 

25.7 

27 

---

Extreme poverty headcount ( percent) 

5.1 

9.5 

11.7 

16.6

Inequality (Gini Index, consumption) 

0.30 

0.28 0.30 

---

'At market prices, calculated from 1993 prices
Source: National Statistical Institute and Romania Integrated Household Survey

7. 
The reform program resulted in an improved economic performance into the latter half of
2000. The large corrections in the fiscal deficit, the exchange rate and the tight monetary stance
narrowed the current account deficit, and restored foreign exchange reserves to more
comfortable levels. The banking system was stabilized and the privatization process was finally
accelerated, which allowed the successful completion of the PSAL 1 program. Economic growth
responded slowly to the program, but after three years of negative growth rates, the economy
began to recover in 2000, with a 1.6 percent growth rate (that would have been higher, had it not
been for a drought in the summer of 2000).

Box 2: Poverty Profile

The poverty profile that emerges from Romania is one where poverty is widespread but mostly shallow,
with some deep pockets among households with many children and households headed by farmers, the
unemployed, and ethnic Roma. The poverty incidence is also high in the Northeastern region of the
country, where there is high concentration of farners. Farmers account for 16 percent of the poor, with a
poverty incidence of almost 60 percent. Households headed by unemployed account for about 11 percent of
the poor, with a poverty incidence of almost 70 percent. Roma-headed households account for just under 7
percent of the poor, but their poverty incidence reaches almost 90 percent. Among pensioner-headed
households, poverty is higher for those earning lower pensions (e.g., farmers, survivors) and pensioners who
retired before 1997, when benefits were under-indexed to inflation. Among employee-headed households,
the risk of poverty is highly correlated with the number of children in the household, although poverty is
also high for households where the main income eamer has a seasonal job, lower educational attainment, or
a low paying job. The gender of the head of household does not appear as a determining factor in the
poverty status.

8. 

Despite the initial promising results from the reform program, the coalition Government
was unable to sustain progress on reforms past mid-2000 due to external factors (the drought and
rising energy prices) and pre-election pressures. More importantly, the Government began to
loosen fiscal policies and delayed structural reforms in the run-up to the elections. A higher-

4 

Romania. Country Assistance Strategy

than-programmed budget deficit resulted from excessive real wage growth in the public sector
and from growth in arrears, and was a major reason for the cessation of the Government's
agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) late last year.

9. 
Stabilization remains a key challenge. Romania's annual inflation rate is still very high,
at around 40 percent (see Table 2). This amounts to a very regressive tax on the poor and
shortens the investment horizon of enterprises. While there were efforts to reduce the fiscal
deficit in 1999, fiscal consolidation has been slower than required for macroeconomic stability,
and many of the expenditure reduction measures introduced could be easily reversed, with
adverse effects on the current account. The improvement in external competitiveness is due
primarily to adjusting the exchange rate in lockstep with inflation.' This policy has allowed
exports to recover and grow, and provided an opportunity to rebuild foreign exchange reserves.

GDP growth (%) 

Table 2: Main Macroeconomic Indicators
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
7.1 
3.9 
-6.1 
-5.4 
-3.2 
1.6
1,400 1,450 1,420 1,430 1,520 1,640
-1,732 -2,611 -2,360 -3,112 -1,302 -1,200
-7.4 
-6.7 
-7.5 
-3.8 
-3.4
4.8 
-5.2 
-5.5 
-3.7 
-3.8

-4.9 

-3.4 

GNP per capital (US$-Atlas method) 

Current Account Balance (US$ million) 

Current Account Balance (% of GDP) 
Consolidated Government Budget Balance 

(% of GDP)

Inflation (CPI, y-o-y % change) 

Unemployment rate (%) 2

32.3 
9.5 

38.8 154.8 59.1 45.8 
40.7
6.6 
8.9 
10.4 
11.5 10.5

1) Excluding non-convertible currencies.
2) As percent of total active civil population.
Source: Romanian National Commission for Statistics, 1999.

10. 
Lack of political will to reforn and constrained institutional and governance capacity are
at the root of Romania's less-than-satisfactory economic performance and worsened social
conditions. These two issues are evidenced by (i) Romania's very high levels of enterprise
arrears to the banking sector and utilities, (ii) frequent changes in the legislative framework, and
(iii) an unattractive business environment. The Government therefore needs to accelerate
privatizations and strengthen the legal framework as well as enforcement capacity.

11. 

Very high levels of enterprise arrears. Enterprise arrears reflect the politicization of the
allocation of credit as well as weak creditor rights and institutional capacity to enforce them.
Banks and utilities have been used to subsidize enterprises. At end-1999, enterprise arrears
reached the astounding figure of 42 percent of GDP. They were evenly distributed between state
and private sector enterprises, and included arrears to the budget, the banking system, and
suppliers. Arrears in tax payments and contributions to the social security system accounted for
just over 8 percent of GDP, a significant subtraction of needed revenues from the budget. In
addition to these indirect transfers, many enterprises receive direct budget transfers and
preferential access to credit from state-owned banks. Enterprise arrears to the banking system,
over two-thirds of which were arrears on principal repayments, accounted for just under 6.5
percent of GDP. The largest share of inter-enterprise arrears, however, was to suppliers (18

ITwo other factors contributing to growth in exports were the recovery of growth in EU countries, and the reduction in Romania's tax on profits
from 38% in 1999 to only 5% in 2000.

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

5

percent of GDP), primarily energy utility companies that were unable or unwilling to enforce
payment discipline on industrial consumers. This happened despite the price of energy inputs
(oil, gas, electricity and district heating) being set below either world market levels (oil and gas),
or cost recovery levels (electricity ancd district heating).

12. 

Frequent changes 

in legislation and weak institutional capacity. Due to a lack of

political consensus, previous governments have relied heavily on emergency measures.
Legislation has often been unclear and frequently modified, and there is too much discretion in
interpreting the law. In addition, there has been little consideration of the need to build the
institutional capacity required either to enforce the new legislation or to carry out new
responsibilities. This has hindered public agencies' ability to implement new laws and
regulations effectively, and has compounded the problem of scarce financial resources for their
operations. In this maze of laws, regulations and overlapping Government agencies, corruption
is perceived as a serious problem (see Annex E).

13. 
The instability in the legal framework and the delays in building needed administrative
capacity have an acute impact on the delivery of health care and social assistance, especially to
the poor, and on the business environment needed to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) and
private sector development, in turn to promote growth.

* The allocation of resources for health care services has been disrupted by the transition
from a centrally managed system that has no checks and balances to an insurance-based
system. While revenues are collected from employees in an insurance-based system,
expenditures are defined in the annual budget and usually set at around 85 to 90 percent
of revenues. This allows the short-term surplus of the Health Insurance Fund to go
towards reducing the public sector's consolidated deficit. It also allows the Government
to keep the formula for redistribution non-transparent, as it uses redistribution primarily
as a tool for addressing collection compliance problems in lagging regions rather than for
increasing equity. Not surprisingly, Romania ranks among one of the lowest spenders in
health care in Central and Southern Europe, and has significantly worse basic health
status indicators than its neighbors. Romania's infant mortality rate in 1998 was 20.5 per
thousand live births, which is very high when measured against 9.5 in Poland and 14.4 in
Bulgaria (see Box 3). The maternal mortality rate was 40.5 per hundred thousand live
births in Romania, compared to 4.8 and 18.7 in Poland and Bulgaria, respectively. These
indicators also varied considerably across the country, with the infant mortality rate
ranging from 14 in Bucharest to 27 in Tulcea.

* The delivery and, until recently, the financing of social assistance (cash transfers) have
been delegated to local Government without due consideration to their administrative
capacity or their ability to fund these programs. This has led to inequalities in the
provision of these services across regions and among certain socioeconomic groups,
especially vulnerable groups such as children, women, and ethnic minorities (see Annex
F). Because many of these expenditure responsibilities are mandated, many local
Governments are coping with these mandates by not funding the full obligation --
something that is allowed because the legislation is vague and there is little incentive to
monitor the implementation of these programs. Furthermore, in those instances where
mandates were being fully funded, it was found that cash transfers were poorly targeted,

6 

Romania: Country Assistance Strategv

and coverage of the poor was modest, except for child allowances. Coverage is
especially low in the case of the homeless and children at risk. An exception has been the
provision of childcare services. Under socialism the Government placed an undue
emphasis on institutional care. With the decentralization of these services there has been
a shift toward community-based care.2 The sustainability of this trend, however, will
require strengthening the capacity of local Government to deliver social services,
adequate financing, and greater involvement of communities and civil society.

Box 3: Gender Dynamics

While the figures on maternal mortality in Romania are appalling, there are many areas where the statistical
data indicate a large degree of gender equality. For instance, in 1998 the enrollment rate across all education
levels was 64.8% for females and 63.1% for males. The gross enrollment rate in higher education was 27.9%
for women and 23.1% for men. The employment rate was 43.1% for women and 53.4% for men. The
registered unemployment rate was 10.5% for women and 10.2% for men. There are other areas where more
needs to be done to achieve greater equality, nevertheless. For example, the average wage differential
(female workers earn about 80% of the average for male workers) leads to lower pension benefits for female
pensioners, especially since women usually have shorter accumulation periods. This needs to be considered
in the design of social protection policies. Also, more remains to be done to ensure equal opportunities in the
work place by, for instance, increasing access to childcare (more readily available in the socialist era). The
Romanian Government is aware of these problems, and recently adopted a National Plan of Action for Equal
Opportunities for Women and Men. While many of the solutions to these problems require a long-tern
change process, this is amenable to acceleration under a high economic growth scenario and the resulting
increased demand for skilled labor, especially in the service sectors.

* Weak institutional and governance capacities also undermine the business environment.
Private entrepreneurs report having problems with enterprise, land and tax registration, as
well as in their dealings with the customs administration and the courts. Excessive taxes
and regulations reflect the instability 
in the legal framework mentioned above, and
provide fertile ground for the high levels of perceived corruption, as documented by the
recent surveys conducted by the Bank, and the growth of the informal economy. Indeed,
over the last decade, the size of the informal economy as a share of GDP is estimated to
have climbed steadily, from 6.7 percent in 1992 to 21 percent in 1999. While informal
activities are most prevalent in industry (accounting for 8.6 percent of GDP in 1999,
compared to 3.3 percent in 1992), their growth has been faster in services such as
wholesale and retail trade, and hotels and restaurants, with a combined contribution to
GDP of 6.5 percent of GDP in 1999, up from 1.4 percent in 1992. The most important

contribution of the informal economy is, however, in employment in rural areas. Many
displaced industrial workers have taken up informal jobs in rural area activities that are
neither taxed nor burdened by high payroll taxes. (Payroll taxes account for just under 40
percent of gross wages.) As a result, subsistence farming has increasingly become an

economic safety valve for households, with just over one half of all households in
Romania reporting owning farmland, even though holdings are frequently too small to be
commercially viable. The labor force surveys report that approximately 
two-fifths of
those employed are in agriculture, and that over half of their income results from
production for their own consumption.

2 This has been supported by the Bank-financed Child Welfare Reform loan.

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

7

D. 

CDF Findings

14. 
The Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) initiative launched in Romania in
1999 has helped to shape the new Government's development agenda. Recognizing the
difficulties that Romania has faced since 1990 in reaching consensus within the country on its
medium- and long-term development priorities, the Bank agreed to the Romanian authorities'
request that Romania be included among the pilot group of countries for the CDF. Accordingly,
the CDF initiative in Romania has been specifically aimed at building consensus for a
development strategy.

15. Romania's being a CDF pilot country gave members of its public, private and civil
sectors the opportunity to articulate a shared perception of the main priorities for achieving
sustained development over the next ten years. Extensive consultation sessions were held in
1999 and 2000 (see Annex G). These consultations revealed a clear consensus around the goals
of poverty reduction and EU accession. More specifically, they revealed the following
development priorities and constraints: frustration with the ineffectiveness of the legal
framework in particular, and public institutions in general (this was seen by many as the most
urgent problem); a keen desire to become part of Western Europe via EU accession; an urgent
need to improve Romanians' access to economic and social opportunities; frustration with
Romania's poverty in the midst of "natural wealth"; a plea for knowledge transfer on how to
adapt production to market demand, and how to organize a market economy more generally; a
legacy of distrust that impedes partnerships and risk-taking behaviors; and a continued reliance
on Government, despite distrust of it. The findings are consistent with the Bank's diagnosis and
have informed the Government's Development Program.

E. 

The Government's Development Program and Recent Policy Actions

Development Program

16. 
Immediately after being sworn into office in late December 2000, the new Government
obtained Parliamentary approval of its "Governing Program for 2001-2004." This program sets
out what the new Government intends to accomplish during the next four years, and draws from
both the Medium Term Economic Strategy presented in 1999 to the EU (which the PDSR
endorsed when it was in opposition) and the findings of the CDF consultations (in which the
PDSR participated). The major objectives of the program are to restore economic growth,
reduce poverty and unemployment, fight corruption, and accelerate integration into the EU and
the North American Treaty Organization (NATO). The program lays the basis for a pragmatic,
rather than abstract, approach to reforming the economy and raising living standards by
improving the quality of Government services, including the regulatory functions and the
judiciary, and creating a business environment which attracts foreign and domestic investors,
including in new small and medium enterprises and in privatizing state entities.

17. 
The new Government's immediate priority has been to ensure economic stability. The
previous Government's program, agreed with the IMF in August 1999 under an SBA, went off
track in late 2000. The SBA expired in February 2001. The new Government is now in active
discussions with the IMF toward reaching an agreement on a new program. The policy agenda
has therefore been dominated by short-term measures to limit the public sector deficit.

8 

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy

Recently Policy Actions

18. Cognizant of the importance of moving quickly with implementing its program, the new
Government has made recent progress in the following specific areas:

* Termination of all directed credit programs and all Government financing of rural and
agricultural credit, as agreed in the context of the World Bank -financed Rural Finance
Project, approved on March 29, 2001.

* Clarification of the ownership of the assets of the Commercial Enterprise for Crude Oil
Transmission (CONPET, the national oil pipeline company). The new Government's
decision on CONPET's assets, reached in the first days of its administration, made it
clear that CONPET cannot be owned or operated by an enterprise involved in
exploration, refining or supply of oil. This decision guarantees greater competition in the
market. It is also consistent with Government plans to develop an action plan for the
energy sector that identifies the closure of non-viable enterprises, the privatization of
others, and the restructuring of enterprises that will remain in the state's hands.

* Signing of a contract for the sale of Banca Agricola. On April 13 the new Government
signed a share sale-purchase contract to sell the agriculture bank, Banca Agricola, to a
consortium including the Austrian bank, Reiffeisen Zentralbank Oesterreich, and the
Romanian American Enterprise Fund. Banca Agricola is one of four remaining state-
owned banks. It accounts for 4 percent of banking assets in the country. Its privatization
is a major step forward in the Government's exit from the banking sector, and builds on
the closure of Bancorex in 1999.

* Confirmation that the Government will proceed with privatization agreements reached
under the first Private Sector Adjustment Loan (PSAL 1). After a slow start on the
privatization front, the new Governnent has indicated that it will proceed with the
privatization of at least 30 large state-owned enterprises from its current portfolio. These
enterprises would be offered for privatization in pools of five enterprises to sales agents
to be engaged using international tenders. The Government has also agreed on contracts
for the technical closure and environmental work related to at least 10 coal mines and to
the further reduction of losses incurred by six mining companies.

* Recent establishment of a Government Anti-Poverty Commission (CGAS) subordinated
to the Office of the Prime Minister. The key function of the CGAS is to evaluate and
monitor the poverty reduction impact of Government and development partner programs.
Building on ex ante analysis of the poverty and income distribution, this new commission
aims to promote coherent and sustainable poverty reduction initiatives. CGAS officials
have already been closely involved in the final stages of preparing the Social Sector
Development project and are expected to play an important role in the implementation of
this project.

* Trimming of public sector staffing levels across the board by 30% now under
implementation, to reduce the fiscal burden of the public administration. While such
dramatic reductions in staff inevitably raise concerns, they signal the new Government's

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

9

intention to deal with the public sector wage bill by reducing staff rather than
compressing wages. It is also consistent with the new Government's program, which
identifies public administration reforn as a central objective.

F. 

Romania's Unfinished Structural Reform Agenda

19. While the new Govermment is starting to take action on several fronts, a number of
important development challenges remain, as discussed below.

20. Enterprise privatization. Wllile many small enterprises were privatized in the early years
of the transition, including all the shops and service outlets, almost all large industrial enterprises
remain under state ownership. 
'This includes the Regies Autonomes, so-called strategic
enterprises and public utilities, which represent around 20 percent of employment in the
economy. These enterprises have not yet been included in the privatization program, and remain
largely unrestructured. As a result, the state still holds shares in around 6,000 enterprises and
accounts for about three-quarters of industrial output. While the private sector accounts for
around 60 percent of GDP, most of its activities are in the service sector.

21. 
Banking and financial sector reforms. While there are 40 licensed commercial banks
operating today in Romania, the four state-owned banks account for about one-half of all
banking assets, with most loans being made to loss-making state-owned enterprises. The
Government still needs to make an irrevocable decision regarding how, and in what timeframe, it
intends to privatize the Romanian Commercial Bank (BCR), and the Savings Bank (CEC). This
will be an important step toward ending the practice of channeling funds from the banking sector
to loss-making enterprises. Otherwise, the perception that the Government will always step in to
deal with bad assets problems will only serve to perpetuate the problem of weak corporate
governance. Also, actions to raise the private sector's participation in the banking system will
need to move in parallel with the strengthening of bank supervision, and improvements in the
legal framework and incentive structure to resolve commercial disputes.

22. Energy sector reforms. Oil prices in Romania track world levels, albeit with a lag. Gas
wellhead prices, which should be aligned with import prices, are by contrast one-fifth of the
imported cost. Electricity and district heating prices are also heavily regulated, with prices to
both household and industrial consumers significantly below cost recovery levels. The recent
decision to postpone and scale down the adjustment in electricity prices and the announced
decision to reduce natural gas prices raise concerns. An agreement reached with the previous
Government had committed Romania to increase gas prices for domestic producers to world
market parity by mid-2002. These continuing subsidies are one of the major factors contributing
to Romania's fiscal imbalances. The fiscal situation and the weak financial position of
Termoelectrica (Romania's SOE for thermal power plant operations) are exacerbated by the fact
that the largest beneficiaries of these subsidies are state-owned enterprises which do not pay their
energy bills, even at the subsidized prices. The new Government therefore needs to phase out
energy subsidies (except district heating subsidies for the poor), improve tariff collection and
enforce service cut-off for non-payment. The Bank is currently assessing the situation in more
detail and working with the Government to develop a program of remedial actions.

10 

Romania: Countrv Assistance Strateg

23. 
Fiscal decentralization. Fiscal decentralization began in earnest in 1998. While
legislation has given local authorities control over their own revenue collection, there has been
limited progress in providing local governments with autonomy concerning expenditures. The
new Government's program specifically calls for acceleration of decentralization, with further
allocation of responsibilities for the delivery and financing of public services to local
Governments. This will require more specific policy initiatives, including laws that deal with
control of- and associated expenditure responsibilities for - public property, whether national or
local, as well as expenditure responsibilities for social assistance. Accelerated decentralization
will also call for a more effective system of transfers, a more appropriate degree of consolidation
of local governments, measures to build a professional and meritocratic civil service, and steps to
strengthen and simplify the legal and regulatory framework for locally provided public services.

24. 
Landprivatization and agriculture sector reforms. While land privatization began early
in the transition process (1991) through the restitution of land used by large cooperatives to the
former owners, almost two-thirds of the land transferred through restitution went to elderly
farmers, with the remainder to younger, generally poorer households. Most farrns today are
small semi-subsistence units of about two hectares, run by owners with limited farming skills
and with weak integration into factor and commodity markets. The productivity of many
households is further reduced by the limited physical capacity of elderly household heads. These
structural problems will require public and private investment in rural marketing infrastructure,
and increased research and extension aimed at integrating small households into commodity and
input markets. Meanwhile, the privatization of state farms, which are chronic loss-makers,
remains a critical unfinished task. These farms tie up substantial portions of arable land (17
percent in late 2000) that is the best in the country. While agricultural subsidy allocation was
improved through the establishment of an input-voucher scheme, the new Government's decision
to allocate most of the budget transfers to "advanced producers" with no ceiling on the transfer
per beneficiary will benefit primarily large land holders. Allocations to state farms were also
allowed, which may well have the result of slowing their privatization.

25. 
Education reform. Romania's basic education indicators are quite favorable. There is
almost universal access (95 percent) to compulsory education (grades 1 through 8), although it is
lower in rural areas and among some ethnic groups. Gross school enrollment at all levels is 64
percent. The management of the system is evolving from a highly centralized structure where
national authorities have responsibility down to the level of instructional implementation, to a
system that gives local administrations more autonomy. At the county (judet) level, School
Inspectorates are acting as de-concentrated branches of the Ministry of Education and Research.
Elected local authorities have been asked to assume responsibilities for most pre-university
school functions, such as rehabilitation and maintenance of school buildings and, more recently,
teachers salaries and text books. While decentralization has been accompanied by measures to
maintain central monitoring of outcomes (e.g., there is a national learning assessment exam), the
results suggest that there are still significant disparities in access to and quality of education in
rural versus urban areas. While 46 percent of Romania's school-age population lives in rural
areas, only 6 percent of its secondary school students and 1 percent of higher education students
come from rural areas. The new Government will need to put in place a cost effective, more
equitable distribution system for education services. This will call for investment in teacher
training, curricula development, and resource materials, to upgrade the quality of education in
rural areas.

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

11

26. 
Pension reform. Romania's old age insurance system is comprised of a publicly
managed "pay-as-you-go" (PAYG) defined-benefit plan, including special regimes for certain
categories of occupations, a contributory supplemental retirement plan, and a mostly non-
contributory program for farmers. Participation in the old age insurance program is mandatory
for all salaried workers. The self-employed and those with civil contracts are covered on a
voluntary basis. Contributions currently average around 37.5 percent of gross wages, which are
fully paid for by employers. The system absorbs 8 percent of GDP and faces three major
problems: evasion, the abuse of early retirement and disability pensions which absorb eight
percent of GDP, and preferential provisions for a large number of occupational categories.
These factors have seriously compromised the financial viability of the pension system, with large
deficits in the short term (particularly when the farmers' pensions are taken into consideration), and
a doubtful long-term viability due to the imbalance between promised benefits and required
contributions in the context of an aging population and a high dependency ratio. (For each
pensioner in 1999 there were only 1.3 contributors.) Contribution rates would need to rise to 62
percent in 2050 to finance the current replacement rate (70 percent of average wages). To make
Romania's pension system sustainable, the new Government will need to establish a multi-pillar
system, i.e., one that includes privately managed pension funds. This, in turn, will require a
significant reduction in inflation and development of capital markets, including a regulatory
framework.

G. 

Economic Prospects, External Environment, and External Financing

Economic Prospects

27. After three years of negative real GDP growth rates, the Romanian economy began
growing again in 2000, and is projected to reach, under accelerated reforms, around 4 percent
real GDP growth rate in 2001. The economic recovery has been driven by a strong growth in
exports, primarily the re-export of processed inputs from EU countries, and a moderate
expansion of the economy in the run up to the elections and their aftermath. The setting of the
real exchange rate at a competitive level, the achievement of some fiscal consolidation, and the
initiation of bank and enterprise privatization have helped in this economic recovery.

28. 
The sustainability of the current economic recovery will depend on the new
Government's ability to implement a coherent set of economic reforms. In the short run, such
reforms would include implementing a sound fiscal policy that maintains primary surpluses,
hardening the budget constraints for enterprises, and making visible progress on enterprise and
bank privatization. This should spur growth by shifting resources - capital and labor -to the
emerging private sector, and should lead to lower inflation, which in turn should improve the
country's prospects for more equitable growth. Over the longer run, the sustained growth will
depend on improving the environment for new investment, hence on implementing a governance
reform program that would stress transparency and accountability in Government, improvements
in public sector management, and strengthening of parliamentary and judicial oversight.

29. Under an accelerated reform scenario, real GDP growth could average at least 4.5
percent per annum during the 2001-03 period. (See Table 3 and Annex B6a.) This growth
would be driven initially by the sustained growth in exports, followed by supporting policies
consistent with achieving and maintaining lower inflation and the increase in investment

12 

Romania: Country Assistance Strate.g

necessary to rebuild the country's productive capacity. These supporting policies would include
a tight fiscal policy, wage moderation, and improvements in competitiveness and efficiency.
Increased production would cause a surge in imports and lead to a widening of the current
account deficit. Higher foreign investment and access to financing from official and private
creditors would, however, finance this deficit and sustain the economic recovery. A sustained
recovery would encourage employmnent creation and enhance support to fiscal discipline and
policies fostering investment. This would lay the foundation for continued growth, with workers
moving from underemployment in agriculture and state-owned enterprises to jobs in the
emerging private sector.

30. 

The realization of this accelerated reform scenario hinges on three factors:

* Progress in moving ahead with the stabilization and structural agenda, including short-

term actions to ensure the achievement of agreed fiscal targets, and structural reforms that
reduce sources of quasi-fiscal deficits and improve overall public expenditure
management. The short-term actions include reducing arrears to the budget and state-
owned utility companies, privatizing large commercial state-owned enterprises, and
reforming the pension system that currently consists only of a "pay-as-you-go" defined
benefit plan. The structural reforms include strengthening the Government's budget
management capacity to improve prioritization and the efficient use of funds, as well as
measures to improve the inter-governmental finance framework.

e 

Increasing the value added of Romania's exports to EU markets. This in turn will

depend on Romania's ability to attract foreign investment flows into industries with
export potential, as well as its ability to reduce delays in customs procedures at various
stages, caused by either cumbersome bureaucratic procedures or outright corruption.
This is especially important since most of Romania's trade with the EU is based on
processing of imported inputs for further export. Sustaining export growth will also
depend on the country's ability to maintain external competitiveness in the face of larger
capital inflows. This will require a sound fiscal policy, able to offset the aggregate
demand impact of these inflows and a possible appreciation of the currency. This will
require in turn an acceleration of the privatization program, especially of state-owned
banks and large state-owned commercial enterprises. These enterprises continue to place
large demands on fiscal resources either directly through budget transfers, or indirectly
through the build-up of tax and inter-enterprise arrears.

* Raising private investment rapidly from the current very low levels, while gradually
introducing measures to increase savings and ease private sector access to credit from the
financial sector. To spur investment, the Government needs to take measures to improve
the business environment by facilitating entry of new firms and eliminating barriers for
the operation of existing ones. These measures include simplifying the tax system,
streamlining procedures for enterprise registration, and discontinuing the current practice
of channeling funds through the banking system to the state sector. Actions to increase
domestic savings include moving forward with bank privatization, restricting the size of
public sector deficits, and introducing a funded pillar (i.e., privately managed funds) in
the pension system.

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

13

31. 
The slow reform path would result from the inability to carry out structural reforms to
support macroeconomic stabilization, such as imposing hard budget constraints on large SOEs
(e.g., in the energy sector) and eliminating politicized bank lending by divesting state banks.
The Government's fiscal stance would significantly deteriorate, recovery would be choked off,
and financial instability might ensue. This situation could manifest itself through a swift rise in
inflation and/or a rapid worsening of the external current account. (See Table 3 and Annex B6b.)
Access to international capital markets would be lost, and foreign direct investment flows would
decline significantly from present levels. Without bilateral or international financial institution
(IFI) support, the external financing gap would be bridged by dwindling external reserves. Even
if a full-blown external crisis were avoided in the next three years, there would still be a sharp
slowdown in economic growth.

Table 3: Macroeconomic Prospects
_ Actual 
Accelerated Reform 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 

GDP at market prices, real growth (%) 
Current Account Balance as % of GDP 
Consolidated Budget Deficit (% of GDP) 
Consumer Price Index (% change) 
Source: World Bank staff estimates.

External Environment

1.6 
-3.8 
-3.7 
45.7 

4.0 
-4.2 
-3.7 
30.0 

5.0 
-4.8 
-3.0 
22.0 

5.0 
-5.8 
-2.5 
15.0 

Slow Reform
2002 
2003

0.5 
-5.5 
-4.3 
32.0 

-2.0
-6.1
-5.0
38.0

2001 

3.4 
-4.9 
-3.8 
33.0 

32. 
Romania's economic prospects will be strongly influenced by its external environment,
given the importance of EU markets for the country's exports, its large external financing needs,
and the contribution that external investors can make in bringing managerial and marketing
expertise to new and existing enterprises. Four external factors stand out which would influence
Romania's economic prospects over the next few years: (i) progress in integration with the EU;
(ii) regional stability in the Balkans; (iii) possible terms of trade shocks; and (iv) access to
international capital markets.

33. 
Integration into the European Union. Romania's integration into the EU would have
strong positive effects on its economy. The EU is already its main trading partner, accounting
for 70 percent of total exports. It is also Romania's most important source of foreign direct
investment. An economic slowdown in Europe would weaken the demand for exports, reduce
investment flows, and possibly slow down the accession process (e.g., EU grant program funding
might be reduced). To mitigate this risks, Romania needs to deepen trade links with the EU by
making investments to meet quality standards and improve the business environment (see
Annex H).

34. Regional stability. Political instability and further escalation of conflicts in neighboring
countries would have deleterious effects on Romania's growth prospects and disrupt the current
economic recovery. These risks are mitigated, however, by recent events in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (FRY), which harbor the possibility of an improved environment for economic
recovery. Romania will benefit from the enhanced opportunities for trade and from increased
demand for economic services resulting from the end of sanctions, the potential reopening of

14 

Romania: Countr Assistance Strategi

transport traffic along the Danube River, and the need for reconstructing FRY's infrastructure.
An active role for the Stability Pact should also help lower these regional risks.

35. External Shocks. Romania's dependence on energy imports - the country imports three-
quarters of its oil and natural gas consumption - makes it vulnerable to increases in energy
prices. A sharp increase in energy prices from current levels could hurt its balance of payments
position and limit its ability to import needed investment goods. To alleviate this risk, the
country needs to take steps toward aligning domestic energy prices to world market levels, and
manage its external reserves prudently.

36. 

Access to international capital markets. While Romania's foreign debt profile does not

anticipate a concentration of repayments, there are still substantial financing needs over the next
three years. A temporary loss in access to international capital markets, as in the first half of
1999, would lead to a slowdown in growth by forcing the country to use domestic savings to
meet external obligations.

External Financing

37. 
Romania's external position has improved over the last two years. This is particularly
true for the current account and the debt-servicing schedule. The former benefited from
improved terms of trade following the sudden currency devaluation in March 1999. The Lei
depreciated against the US dollar by 30 percent at that time (20 percent in 1999 vs. 1998), and
has depreciated more or less in lockstep with inflation ever since and has kept its real value
constant (see Annexes B6a and B6b). As a result, the current account deficit dropped from 7.0
percent of GDP in 1998 to 3.8 percent in 1999, and is estimated to have remained in that range
for 2000.

38. 
The debt-servicing schedule has improved primarily because of the large repayment of
external debt obligations in 1999 when, like other emerging market economies, Romania
temporarily lost access to international capital markets in the aftermath of the Russia crisis.
Increased access to grant funding from the EU has also reduced the country's external financing
requirements. Since 1999, when Romania was invited to open accession negotiations, EU
financial support to the country has followed an upward trend. Grants from the EU could reach
as high as EUR 650 million yearly through 2006, to fund projects ranging from infrastructure
and environment to agriculture and regional development. These grant funds are disbursed,
however, only as eligible projects and programs are put forward to the EU (see Annex D).

39. 
Romania's external financing requirements are expected to remain high (see Table 4).
Under an accelerated reform path, remaining extemal financing needs, including a build-up in
reserves, would average US$4.6 billion per year over the next three years. Assuming increased
access to private capital markets, and a doubling of foreign direct investment flow by 2003,
official creditors would meet just over 12 percent of Romania's external financing needs, net of
principal repayrnents. Under the sustained growth scenario, a rapid increase in FDI, which in
turn would depend on significant progress in structural reforms, would contribute significantly to
financing the current account deficit. Hence structural reforms and macroeconomic performance
are closely linked.

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

15

Table 4: Romania's External Fina ncing Requirements and Sources (2001-2003)
(US$ million) 
Actual 
Accelerated Reform 
Slow Reform
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2001 
2002 
2003
-3,287 
-4,187 
-4,382 
-4,658 
-3,406 
-2,100 
-1,545

Overall External Financing 

-1,926 
-1,494 
-119 
-962 

4,382 
1,700 
1,983 

394 
400 
300 

-2,472 
-1,351 
-136 
-835 

4,658 
2,000 
1,658 

244 
450 
550 

-1,830 
-1,564 
-101 
-13 

-2,018 
-2,210
-1,494 
-1351
-119 
-136
1,412 2,016

3,406 
900 
1,807 

2,100 
650 
1,150 

1,545
400
745

145 
350 
350 

134 
250 
50 

133
250
151

Current Account Deficit 

-1,400 

Principal Repaymnents, of which: -959 

-1,622 

-1,564 

-101 
-1,002 

-91 
-928 

Requirements

IBRD 
Increase in Reserves 

Overall Financing Sources 
3,287 
Foreign Direct Investment 
1,009 
Disbursement of Long-Term 1,744 
Loans, of which:
IBRD 
EU Capital Grants 
Other Financing Flows 

384 
40 
494 

4,187 
1,350 
2,037 

297 
350 
450 

Source: World Bank staff estimates.

40. 
Under a slow reform approach, foreign direct investment and official creditors' financing
flows would be much lower and lead to a sharp drop in external reserves, which would be almost
completely depleted by the end of the projection period. (See paras. 88 - 94 for discussion of
risks, which would have a direct impact on external financing).

II. WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. 

Lessons of Experience

41. 
The 1997 CAS outlined four priorities for the World Bank Group's assistance strategy
during the period FY98-01: (i) promoting structural reform and private sector development; (ii)
fighting poverty and developing human capital; (iii) strengthening and rationalizing the role of
the state; and (iv) protecting and enhancing the environment. While these priorities were shared
by the Government, implementation of the CAS was constrained by the slow pace of economic
reforms.

42. 
There was, however, some progress in specific areas. Under the Bank-financed PSAL 1
program, the largest state-owned bank (Bancorex) was closed, privatization was initiated for
some of the largest SOEs, and a number of important reforms in agriculture were implemented.
A social fund for community development was established and is proving to be an effective tool
for poverty reduction in rural areas. Global Environment Facility (GEF) - supported efforts to
establish a biodiversity conservation and management program with local participation have
successfully introduced practices to ensure sustainability of natural resources.

43. 
This CAS takes into account two important lessons leamed during the implementation of
the 1997 CAS:

Engage in meaningful participation and consultation in project preparation and
overall policy dialogue. This reflects the finding that more was accomplished when

16 

Romania. Countrv Assistance Strate2

ownership of project objectives and the underlying reforms was strong. Engaging in
dialogue with the Government, other interested parties, and society at large carries a high
pay-off. Whether connected to specific lending operations (e.g., new privatization
methods, bank restructuring) or to the design of overall reforms (the October 1999
Conference on Romania's ten years of transition), these investments to increase
understanding on all sides have proven to help build broader consensus for reform.

* Take active role 
to support strengthening 
institutions 
for a market economy
(governance, anti-corruption, and business environment). The activities of IFC and

MIGA as well as the Bank have been constrained by an environment that is perceived by
the private sector as being over-regulated, and where there are still unresolved property
rights issues, and red tape and the perception of corruption are pervasive.

44. 
IFC. At the time of the 1997 CAS, IFC indicated that it would support the development
agenda in Romania through investment in (i) small and medium enterprise (SME) development
with loan facilities, credit lines and leasing company investments; (ii) other capital market
development via potential joint venture projects in bank and non-bank institutions; (iii)
infrastructure development via innovative private sector investments and advisory work in
privatization planning and specific privatization transactions; and (iv) investments in other
private sector industries via equity and debt support. Most of the progress in these objectives
was achieved during 1997-1998, however. After 1998 IFC activity in Romania slowed, limited
by the pace of reform in the country. While developmentally beneficial private sector
investments can be made even in a difficult environment, the pace of investment is constrained
by the slow pace of reforms, particularly with respect to infrastructure investments and
investments in the privatization of state-owned enterprises. A significant increase in investments
will require substantial strengthening of the environment for private sector activities.

45. MIGA. At the time of the 1997 CAS, MIGA had not yet issued any guarantees to foreign
investors in Romania. Since then, MIGA has insured three projects in the financial,
manufacturing, and services sectors, which together bring its total gross exposure to the country
to only $54 million. While investors registered preliminary application for a total investment
amount of about $500 million ($55 million in manufacturing, $200 million in services, US$45
million in finance, $100 million in infrastructure, and $100 million in oil and gas) since 1998,
this significant amount of preliminary applications has never been realized, in part due to the

poor business environment.

B. 

Country Assistance Strategy FY02-04

Strategic Focus and Programmatic Context

46. 
The Bank Group's assistance strategy for FY02-04 is built on the premise that while
Romania is turning away from its legacy of erratic macroeconomic management of the 1990s,
the new Government needs to demonstrate a sustained commitment to accelerated reform, in
order to secure complementary external financing and to pave the way for eventual EU
accession. If Romania reverts to pursuing a hesitant pace of reforms (see para. 31), Bank Group
assistance will be very limited, and significantly reduced from the levels of Bank Group support
over the past four years. Under these circumstances, Bank support would be limited to a few

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

17

targeted poverty interventions aimed at improving the delivery of key social services and
revitalizing the rural economy. If, on the other hand, Romania sustains an accelerated pace of
reform (see paras. 29-30), Bank Group assistance will be broader in scope, and support a
sustained reduction in poverty; that is, not only targeted poverty interventions, but also bold
structural and sectoral reforms to accelerate growth through private sector development and the
strengthening of public sector institutional capacity, and to pave the way for Romania's eventual
accession to the EU. 
In light of uncertainties about whether accelerated reforms will be
sustained in Romania, Bank assistance is organized around two lending scenarios (high and low),
one of which would be triggered by the end of 2001 (see Table 5 and Annexes B3a and B3b).
Complementing the Bank's assistance for private sector development, IFC would focus on
cutting edge areas of privatization, such as health care and the delivery of municipal services,
and support private sector development by marshalling financing for post-privatization
restructuring, assisting in capital markets development, and making selected private sector
investments.

47. 
The Bank's non-lending services (see Annex B4) would be an important component
under either assistance scenario. Both would include fast turn-around policy notes on relevant
issues for economic management, as well as in-depth studies on long-term development issues.
Topics that would receive in-depth attention include an assessment of poverty developments, a
review of public expenditures, and an analysis of the reforms needed in Romania's accession to
the EU. Other planned non-lending services include the program for monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) capacity building, a country financial accountability assessment, and several WBI
activities (see Annex 1).

Lending Scenarios and Triggers

48. High-case lending scenario. Under this scenario, Bank commitments could increase to a
maximum of $995 million during FY02-04, with three or four operations per year, in contrast to
lending commitments totaling nearly $600 million during FY98-FYOO. (See Table 5 and Annex
B3a). Adjustment lending would be important (up to US$550 million) to support the policy
reform agenda as outlined in the accelerated reform scenario. The first adjustment operation
(PSAL 2) would aim at finishing the private sector development agenda, begun under PSAL 1, in
the areas of privatization, banking, business environment, energy pricing, and social mitigation
measures. The main constraint to completing this agenda is the political will to implement these
reforms. A speedy implementation of the reforns supported by the PSAL 2 program would send
a signal to the domestic and external investment communities that the new Government is
committed to accelerating the pace of reforms.

49. As a second stage, and post-PSAL 2, the Bank would continue supporting the completion
of the privatization agenda (including utilities), as well as reforms of the Government's
institutional, regulatory and governance framework. This set of 
reforms requires careful
sequencing and a step-by-step approach. The Bank would therefore consider supporting this
component of the reform agenda through a series of programmatic adjustment loans (PALs).
These could amount to up to $400 million through FY06 or FY07, focusing on institutional and
governance reforms, completion of the privatization agenda, full transition to market-based
mechanisms in the utilities, infrastructure, and other network industries, and environmental

18 

Romania: Country Assistance Stratey

policy reforrns, structured in a series of three or four operations, the first two of which could be
prepared during this CAS period.

Table 5: IBRD Lending Progam: FY02-FY04 (US$m)

High 

ase 

FY02 
Private Sector Adjustment 300.0
2 (SAL)! Private Sector 
Institution Building 2 

40.0

(TA)

FY03 

FY04' 

Irrigation Rehabilitation 

75.0 Hazards Mitigation 

150.0

Rural Development 

40.0 Rural Education 

60.0 Health Sector Reform 2 
(APL)

20.0

Social Development Fund 

0 

Programmatic Adjustment 100.0 PrograAn)atic Adjustment 2 150.0
Building (TA)

Total
FY02-
04

Forestry Development 

25.0

otal 
ow 

ase 

415.0 
Social Development Fund 10.0 Rural Education 
2 (APL)
Forestry Development 
(TA)

10.0 

235.0 
Total FY04 
25.0 Environment (TA) 

345.0 995.0
10.0

Hazards Mitigation (TA) 

5.0

otal 
20.0 
25.0 
'7FYO4 program also includes a possible stand-by operation (Regional Development) for $50 million.

15.0 

60.0

50. 
The programmatic approach would provide greater adaptability for step-by-step
institutional reforms, capacity building that involves significant policy content, and an economy-
wide scope that goes beyond individual projects. Programmatic lending will be grounded in
clear country commitment and capacity to reform, structured in a series of operations supporting
a medium-term reformn program, and disbursed on the basis of completed actions rather than
future commitments.3 The use of a programmatic approach would depend on the country's,
ability to strengthen its procurement and fiduciary frameworks. Each operation will be
calibrated in line with evolving reform progress, and subsequent operations will build upon each
other to support the medium-term reform objectives. Their content will be underpinned by the
results of the Bank's advisory services (e.g., the forthcoming Public Expenditure Review). To
prepare the ground for the possible use of programmatic adjustment lending, the Bank is
assisting Romania to strengthen its procurement and financial management frameworks.
Following the completion of the FY00 procurement assessment, a Country Financial
Accountability Assessment is planned for FY02-03.

51. 
The above support would complement other sector reforms under individual investment
operations. For example, public institution building and governance reform would (i) reinforce
and facilitate reforms to be implemented under the proposed Rural Education Loan, and (ii)
assist in capacity building to be supported by investment operations in the forestry and health

See Task Force on the World Bank Group and the Middle Income Countries March 27, 2001 (SecM2001-0204).

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

19

sectors, as well as in hazards mitigation. Also, financial and energy sector reforms to be
supported by the proposed PSAL 2 and the subsequent PALs would create the enabling
environment needed for the successfiul implementation of the Regional Development loan, and
the privatization component supported by the same adjustment operations would similarly create
an enabling environment conducive to irrigation sector reforms. Other investment operations
would be targeted poverty interventions, particularly in rural areas. Non-lending services in a
high-case scenario would include at least four reform studies per year, plus several grants,
technical assistance, and WBI training in key areas of reform (see Annexes B4 and I).

52. 
Triggers. The high-case lending scenario would be associated with a path of accelerated
reform (see paras. 29 - 30). This scenario is predicated on the adoption and maintenance of a
macroeconomic framework and financing plan agreeable to the Bank. It also includes significant
progress in three key areas of the structural reform agenda: (i) enterprise and energy sector
reform; (ii) financial sector reform; and (iii) governance and institutional reform. Actions across
these three areas would constitute the structural reform program, and would be monitored as a
program, rather than a series of actions identified under separate lending operations. This
implies that performance throughout the CAS period will be measured broadly across all three
areas. For example, in the pre-PSAL 2 phase of the program, moving to the high case would
require progress in financial sector reform and governance and institutional reform, as well as in
enterprise and energy sector reform. As some of the specific triggers listed in Table 6 are
expected to be met only in the latter part of the CAS period, decisions on whether the triggers for
the high case are met at any particular point in time will require a judgment on the extent of
progress across all three areas. However, under the high-case scenario, the Bank would expect
all of the specific triggers listed in Table 6 to be met by the end of the CAS period.

53. 
Progress on structural reforms will be measured initially by actions indicating that the
country is moving toward the high-case lending scenario, and later by actions aimed at sustaining
the high-case lending scenario (see Table 6). The precise actions indicating that the country is
moving toward the high-case lending scenario include: (i) moving forward on the enterprise
privatization agenda agreed under PSAL 1; (ii) making visible progress on tackling the problem
of arrears in the energy sector; (iii) adopting social sector legislation aimed at mitigating some of
the distributional impact of enterprise privatization and the increases in energy tariffs; and (iv)
agreeing on the process for developing an anti-corruption strategy. Actions designed to sustain
the high-case lending scenario would, inter alia, include: (i) making further progress on
enterprise privatization, including the implementation of banking and energy sector privatization
plans; (ii) ensuring that most large SOEs and all banks are compliant with international
accounting standards for financial reporting; (iii) adopting and implementing an agreed anti-
corruption strategy; and (iv) developing rule-based equalization formulae for the allocation of
federal revenue grants to local councils.

20 

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy

Table 6: Lending Scenario and Triggers

* 

High Case 

The core conditions for moving to and sustaining the high case lending scenario are a
macroeconomic framework and financing plan agreeable to the Bank. In addition, the high
Lending to include adjustment case would require specific actions on (i) enterprise and energy sector reform; (ii) financial
lending (PSAL 2, then PALs) to sector reforms; and (iii) governance and institutional reform.
support 
transitional budget
expenditures, and 
investment Actions for moving to the high case (pre-PSAL2) include visible progress in the following
lending in reforming sectors. areas:
FY02-04 lending to total up to Enterprise and energy sector reform
US$995 million. 
* Privatization plan for large commercial SOEs identified under PSAL 1 (9 case-by-case, 5
work-outs, and at least 30 pooled);
Initiation of privatization/work-out process for large commercial SOEs (4 case-by-case,
including PETROM, and 30 pooled);
* Agreement on a plan and timetable for reducing the flow of energy arrears;
* Cost reduction and energy tariff increases for electric power plants; and
* Unbundling of electricity and gas industry SOEs and the adoption of acceptable regulatory
legislation.
Financial sector reform
* Elimination of directed credit and rural/agricultural credit programs;
* Divestiture of Banca Agricola, and an irrevocable agreement on method and timetable for
divestiture of BCR and CEC; and
Improvements in financial sector legal and supervisory framework, including NBR
supervision of credit co-ops. and plan for development of equity and capital markets.
Governance and institutional reform
* Adoption of agreed social assistance legislation (Social Assistance Framework Law and
Minimum Income Guarantee Law); and
An agreement on the process for development of an anti-corruption strategy.

-

 

Actions for sustaining the high-case lending scenario (post-PSAL2) include visible progress on
the above and in the following areas:

Enterprise and energy sector reform
* Offering for sale the SOEs noted above;
 
Timely implementation of plan to reduce energy sector arrears, and agreement on, and
subsequent implementation of, a plan to eliminate the overall stock of arrears;
: Ensuring that most large SOEs and recently privatized SOEs are compliant with IAS for
financial reporting;
* Privatization of at least 25% of gas distribution sector;
* Adoption of agreed privatization plan for electricity generation and distribution; and
* Offering for sale the remaining state-owned utilities/network companies.
Financial sector reform
* Satisfactory implementation of a privatization plan for CEC Bank;
* All banks compliant with IAS for financial reporting; and
* 
Implementation of agreed tax legislation for banks.
Governance and institutional reform
* Adoption and subsequent implementation of agreed anti-corruption strategy;
* Development of rule-based equalization formulae for allocation of federal revenue grants to
local councils; and
* Establishment of a Code of Ethics for civil servants.

Low Case Loans limited to Any one or more ofhigh-case triggers not met
targeted poverty interventions
and 
technical assistance for
institution building. FY02-04
lending to total up to $60 million.

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

21

54. 
In the remainder of this calendar year, the Bank is prepared to assist the Government in
meeting the triggers for moving to the high case scenario and the specific policy conditions for
PSAL 2. This will require continuation of the Government's ongoing dialogue with the IMF and
formulation of a macroeconomic program acceptable to the Bank. The Bank will continue to
support Romania's efforts to move to the high case through several reform-oriented investment
operations, in particular the Rural 'Finance loan (approved by the Bank's Board on March 29,
2001), the Social Sector Development loan (scheduled for Board consideration in June 2001),
and the Rural Development loan (for which Board consideration is planned in the first half of
FY02). The Social Sector Development loan supports pension reform, labor market adjustment,
more targeted and cost effective social assistance programs, and capacity building for policy
development and monitoring and evaluation. The Rural Development loan (see para. 63)
supports decentralization and complements EU assistance for local infrastructure investment. By
being actively engaged with the new Government in the context of these investment operations
during this transition period, the Bank can more effectively support the Government's early
momentum, which will, in turn, increase the likelihood of Romania's moving into the high case.

55. 
It should be noted that the investment loans made during this transition period would be
self-regulated, so as to ensure their viability even if Romania were to fall into the low case after
their being committed. For example, both the Rural Finance loan and the Rural Development
loan are two-part adaptable program loans (APLs), with their own set of clearly delineated
triggers for the second phase. If Romania were to move to the low case during the transition
period in the remainder of this calendar year, these loans would be limited to their respective
first-phase operation only. The proposed Social Sector Development loan would also be limited
to activities that do not depend on policy reforms, such as capacity building for poverty
monitoring and evaluation.

56. 
Low-case lending scenario. In the low-case lending scenario, Bank lending would be
significantly reduced (see Table 5 and Annex B3b) to a total of $60 million during FY02-04.
The number of Bank operations would also be significantly reduced, to one or two per year.
Lending instruments for FY02-04 would consist of one second-phase adaptable program loan,
two technical assistance loans, and one investment loan. This minimal lending program would
focus on reducing poverty and building capacity on a modest scale, and would be complemented
by non-lending advisory services aimed at maintaining the policy dialogue with the authorities.
This includes several fast turn-around policy notes (e.g., on energy sector issues), a Public
Expenditure Review, and a Country Economic Memorandum focusing on EU accession.

High-Case Program Instruments

57. 
The Bank Group's high-case program would focus on targeted poverty interventions,
promotion of growth through private sector development, and governance and institutional
reform.

(i) 

Targeted Poverty Interventions

58. 
The targeted poverty interventions would emphasize improvements in the delivery of key
social and infrastructure services, especially in rural areas. This should address problems of
inequitable access to education and primary health care services, as well as other community

22 

Romania: Countrv Assistance Strategy

services, across regions and among the most vulnerable groups -- children, women, and ethnic
minorities. The planned instruments to achieve these goals include the Social Sector
Development loan, a Health Sector Reform loan, a Second Social Development Fund loan, and
four operations aimed at revitalizing the economy in rural areas. More specifically:

59. 
Strengthening of the social safety net. The Social Sector Development loan would
support improvements in social protection policy, poverty monitoring and evaluation, the
transition to a multi-pillar pension reform (i.e., privately managed funds in addition to a "pay-as-
you-go" defined-benefit plan), and retraining programs to facilitate labor market adjustment (also
supported under the proposed PSAL 2 - see para. 64). It would also aim at strengthening the
social assistance system through better targeting of cash benefits, including heating subsidies as
the country moves toward aligning energy prices to world market levels under PSAL 2. Non-
lending services would include a poverty assessment, poverty policy capacity building, and a
pension reform study. Complementing the Bank's support for pension reform, IFC is assisting
the Government with technical assistance to establish proper supervision and licensing for
private pension funds, and is also exploring possibilities to invest in private pension funds, to
support the reforms as they develop in this area.

60. 
Improving the delivery of health services. The planned Health Sector Reformn loan (a
second phase of an adaptable program loan in FY04) seeks to support the transition to a
decentralized, market-oriented health system. The operation would aim to improve capacity in
the health sector for policymaking, finance, and management, to ensure efficient and equitable
allocation of resources, and to address the problem of informal payments for health care services
(common according to the recently completed Diagnostic Surveys on Corruption - see Annex E).
It will also support quality and efficiency improvements for primary health care in selected poor
and remote areas, beyond those targeted in the first phase of the project currently under way.
Finally, the operation would support, in collaboration with other donors, the modernization of
public health services in areas such as tuberculosis and AIDS/H1V prevention.

61. 
In addition, IFC is looking at the possibility of assisting the Ministry of Health in
developing a national strategy for private sector participation in the country's hospitals, and
implementing the strategy for metropolitan Bucharest. The objective is to introduce private
sector participation in the country's public health care facilities by improving management and
quality of care in public hospitals, and by attracting private sector capital in the construction,
renovation and rehabilitation of public hospitals and clinics. MIGA is currently underwriting a
project for the rehabilitation and expansion of a Bucharest hospital.

62. 
Strengthening community-based development. Romania is one of the first countries in
the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) Region to operationalize community-driven development
concepts in Bank projects. The most prominent initiative has been the Bank-financed Romanian
Social Development Fund, which is enabling the building of organizational capacity at
community levels. Many community organizations have been formed and received RSDF grants
for financing small rural infrastructure and income-generating activities. In light of the success
of this first-phase APL, a second phase of support for the Social Development Fund is planned
for FY02. (See para. 79 below regarding the low-case.) In addition, through its ongoing Child
Welfare Reform loan, the Bank will continue its support for phasing out the institutionalized
system of child care with an integrated program aimed at preventing child abandonment,

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

23

supporting family reintegration, and promoting local adoption, foster care, and community-based
group homes. Lessons from these operations would be reflected in the proposed Community
Networks Study and would provide insights into how to improve community-based development
initiatives that could be supported by future operations.

63. 
Revitalizing the economy in rural areas. Poverty in Romania is deeper and more
prevalent in rural areas. This reflects the collapse of agricultural production and the absorption
of displaced industrial workers in small farming production. A large share of Bank-financed
targeted poverty interventions over the coming years therefore focus on rural areas. These
include:

* 

3 

* 

* 

the Rural Finance loan (approved by the Bank's Board on March 29, 2001), which aims
at facilitating income-generating activities, on and off-farm. This operation will be
complemented by IFC activities supporting the financing of agriculture through
investments in networks of processing facilities. Several potential opportunities have
been identified. These projects would have strong linkages to local farmers and suppliers
and would help upgrade the farm production base. Work under these activities would be
complemented by the planned Rural/Urban Growth Study that would focus on the
economic interaction between urban and rural areas through commodities, labor, and
credit markets. This study aims at improving our understanding of the ways in which
rural-urban interactions facilitate or hinder regional economic integration and poverty
reduction, in particular for female-headed households. The findings would be factored
into possible second phase Rural Finance and Rural Development operations (both
planned for post-FY04).

the Rural Development loan, which would build an initial capacity for rural development
and provide funds for infrastructure activities in five judets (counties). Technical
assistance would be targeted to poor communes, which should result in their accessing
infrastructure financing. This loan will complement the EU's Special Accession Program
for Agriculture and Rural Development (SAPARD) to maximize funding for rural
infrastructure investments. It should also contribute to improved governance and more
participatory rural development planning in poor communities.

the Irrigation Rehabilitation loan, which would aim at increasing small farmers'
competitiveness by financing physical rehabilitation of deteriorated irrigation schemes, as
well as institutional refomns (such as development of water user associations, which in
tum would enhance social capital and community-based development). This operation
would also include property reforms to allow the transfer of management of on-farm
irrigation facilities to users.

the Rural Education loan, which would aim at reducing sharp disparities in quality of
and access to rural compulsory education (currently grades one through eight, and as of
2003 to extend through grade nine). In the high-case program, this would be achieved
through investment in the provision of teaching materials, equipment (including
information technology), teacher training in reformed curricula, and monitoring and
evaluation. The potential impact of this project is enormous, since forty percent of
Romania's school-age population lives in rural areas, and yet only six percent of

24 

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy

secondary school students and one percent of higher education students come from rural
areas. The loan would also assist the Government in its outreach to ethnic minorities in
rural areas. Work under this operation would be supported by the planned Education
Sector Review, which would take stock of lessons learned from the Bank's three ongoing
education projects and define the remaining sector reform agenda. (See para. 79 below
regarding the low case.)

(ii) 

Private Sector Development

64. 
The Bank Group's support to private sector development in the high case aims at laying
the foundations for the private sector-led growth necessary to sustain the poverty reduction
efforts. Higher growth will accelerate job creation and lift households living on incomes close to
the poverty line. It would also place the Government's fiscal position on a more sustainable
basis by reducing the burden of loss-making state-owned enterprises on the budget, and by
broadening the tax revenue base. This additional fiscal space will help to sustain the targeted
poverty interventions discussed above (see paras. 58 - 63). The program will focus on:

* privatization of the remaining state-owned enterprises, with emphasis on the unbundling
and eventual privatization of infrastructure and energy enterprises, as well as on
improvements in privatization procedures;

* adoption of market-oriented energy pricing policies and tariff collection mechanisms;

* reform of the financial sector through the privatization of state-owned banks, and
strengthening of the supervision and regulation of bank and non-bank financial
institutions;

* 

improvements in the business environment by lowering barriers to entry for firms and
joint ventures, simplifying the tax code, implementing internationally recognized
accounting and financial audit standards, introducing more effective and efficient
procedures for bankruptcy and liquidation, and strengthening corporate governance; and

* expansion of labor redeployment programs to support privatization -
including job
counseling, retraining, support to microenterprise development, and short-term
community public works programs.

65. 
The centerpiece of Bank support to private sector development is the proposed Second
Private Sector Adjustment Loan (PSAL 2) and the complementary Technical Assistance loan.
These operations are expected to support actions taken to meet the triggers for the high-case
assistance program (see paras. 52 - 53). In addition, they will support initiation of privatization
of remaining SOEs, to be completed under the PAL program. The implementation of continued
structural reforms in the enterprise and financial sectors under this operation will enhance
Romania's prospects for growth and reinforce the sustainability of its macroeconomic
stabilization. These reforms combined with a wide range of efforts to mitigate the social costs of
restructuring are expected to provide the needed resource cover for a smooth transition to a
genuinely market-based economy. These measures are also consistent with Romania's quest to
accede to the EU.

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

25

66. 
Subsequent to the PSAL 2 program under the high-case scenario, Bank assistance would
consider support for the completion of the Government's privatization agenda, particularly
privatization of the infrastructure and energy enterprises, as well as the remaining state
enterprises, through a series of proposed Programmatic Adjustment Loans (PALs) - (see paras.
49 - 50). Support could also come, if appropriate, through the Bank's partial risk guarantee
instrument.

67. After the structural reforms for promotion of growth are in place (i.e., post-PSAL 2), the
proposed Regional Development loan would support private sector development in an area
particularly hard hit by the economic transition, the Jiu Valley Region. This region is currently
almost completely dependent on coal mining for its economic viability. With the closure of non-
viable state-owned coal mines (supported by the Bank's ongoing Mine Closure and Social
Mitigation loan), large numbers of miners are out of work with limited local opportunities for
alternative industrial employment. The surrounding area does, however, have significant tourism
potential. The proposed activities would support capacity building for the local authorities and
other civil society stakeholders to work in partnership to articulate a local development strategy
that builds on the region's natural and human resources. Infrastructure investment (including
transport and waste management systems) and environmental clean-up of the Jiu River could
also be considered.

68. Non-lending services in support of private sector development in the high case would
aim at providing the underpinnings of the reform program under the proposed PSAL 2 and
subsequent PALs. These include a Financial Sector Assessment, Energy Sector Technical
Assistance, a Tax Policy Study, a Labor Market Assessment, and a Capital Markets Assessment.
In addition, grant funding would be sought for the development of a Jiu Valley Regional
Development Strategy that would help lay the groundwork for the Regional Development loan.

69. 
IFC will complement the Bank's efforts in private sector development by focusing on
four key areas: restructuring of municipal infrastructure, marshalling financing for post-
privatization restructuring; supporting capital markets and SMEs development, and selected
private sector investments in the forestry sector. Overall, the level of IFC activity will depend
very much on the extent of improvements in the enabling enviromnent for business in the
country. In the forestry sector, through a collaborative Bank Group approach, improvements in
the legislative framework have been achieved, and resulted in substantial private sector
investment in wood processing projects. In addition to investing in such projects directly, IFC
will continue to catalyze the entry of FDI into the country, where possible. Support for the
restructuring of municipal infrastructure enterprises could be achieved through the use of the
concession model and funding mobilization already used by IFC in the contract for the Bucharest
Water Supply Company. In another pioneering operation, IFC is considering the first privately
structured deal for municipalities investing in co-generation plants. This is being prepared for
two major cities in Romania and is based on carbon credit agreements under the Kyoto
Protocol. This would allow substantial savings in financing and other costs, and would include
technical advice on the privatization process in particular transactions.

70. MIGA will support the Government's efforts to attract FDI by offering technical
assistance for the development of investment promotion capabilities. MIGA could also have an
impact by issuing guarantees in the areas of banking (notably in support of SMEs and rural

26 

Romania: Country Assistance Strategv

finance) and infrastructure. Should the Romanian authorities make progress in their privatization
program, MIGA's political risk insurance could help bring in additional bidders as well as
additional financing by foreign banks. While MIGA has the ability to facilitate FDI, the level of
its activities in Romania will depend upon progress in improving the country's legal framework
and the business environment.

(iii) 

Institution Building and Governance Reform

71. 
The Bank Group's strategy to support institution building and governance reform in the
high case aims at assisting the Romanian Government to break key bottlenecks in an accelerated
reform scenario. These range from strengthening public expenditure management and improving
the inter-Governmental finance framework, to supporting regulatory and judicial reforms, and
assisting in anti-corruption strategies (see Annex E). The broad aim is to develop a culture of
accountability in the public sector. A series of programmatic adjustment loans (PALs)
mentioned above (see paras. 49 - 50) and several investment operations would support these
efforts. Given the cross-cutting nature of the Bank's assistance strategy for institution building
and governance reform, the relevant proposed operations fall into two broad categories,
described below.

72. Government capacity building. Critical to improving the efficiency of Romania's public
sector and to strengthening its public institutions is the decentralization of service delivery across
a range of sectors. In recent years the Government has undertaken a wide range of legislative
and fiscal reforms in order to devolve public sector activities to local Governments. Recent laws
on local public finance and local taxation have greatly increased the autonomy of local
Governments. Nevertheless, a number of issues remain and, as Romania moves closer to EU
accession, these will need to be addressed. The remaining inter-governmental issues fall into
two main categories: those measures needed at the national level to create the appropriate
incentives for subnational levels of Government, and those measures needed at the local level to
strengthen capacity and help subnational Governments respond effectively to the increasing
demands placed upon them. The PAL-supported program of reforms would focus on the
institutional and regulatory framework, and aim at improving municipal management and
delivery of local utility services. There is a strong sense of partnership in this area, both within
the Bank Group and between the Bank Group and its bilateral partners. USAID has had a long
presence in this area in Romania, and DFID has named Romania a priority country and is keen to
support these efforts.

73. 
In addition to addressing inter-governmental issues, Bank support for institutional reform
will focus on governance and anti-corruption efforts. PAL components would include the
development of systems for policy formulation and coordination, stabilization of the legal
framework, strengthening of public expenditure management, meritocratic and de-politicized
human resource (civil service) management, judicial reforms, anti-corruption measures, and
strengthening of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems that introduce accountability for
reform results. Non-lending services include a Public Expenditure Review, a Country Financial
Accountability Assessment, a follow-up governance surveys, and a Country Economic
Memorandum focusing on EU accession.

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

27

74. 

Environmental 

and hazard mitigation management. 

Environmental 

and hazard

mitigation management will become particularly important over the next several years, as the
Government completes enterprise privatization and land restitution. While legislation is being
aligned to conform to EU requirements, enforcement has been lagging behind, and
environmental management is largely delegated to the enterprises that focus primarily on
achieving production targets, without due consideration to environmental standards. In this
context, the country is ill-prepared to deal with the challenges posed by toxic spills and other
environmental hazards to which Romania is prone, especially in mining areas in the Danube
River Basin.

75. 

Bank assistance for environmental and hazard mitigation management would be
delivered through one of the components of the PAL program as well as a Hazards Mitigation
loan and three targeted, stand-alone projects related to environmental management. The PAL
program would include an environmental liability component to address the need for building
capacity, reforming environmental legislation, and establishing a consistent framework for
environmental liability and clean-up. This would greatly facilitate the Government's
privatization program. (See para. 80 below regarding the low case.) As part of its due diligence,
IFC would continue to ensure that, in accordance with Romanian law, privatization transactions
in which it is participating, either in a financial or advisory capacity, are done on the basis of a
satisfactory environmental assessment.

76. 
The Hazards Mitigation loan, cofinanced by a GEF grant, would assist in Romania's
efforts to mitigate the costs of damage from earthquakes (Bucharest is considered to be at high
risk of major damage), floods, droughts, toxic waste, and other natural and man-made disasters
which, taken together, regularly plague the country. In the high-case lending scenario, this
operation would focus on disaster preparedness and strengthening Romania's existing rapid
response capacity (including through information technology). This could include changes in
land-use planning, community involvement and education, flood protection works, safety of
flood control dams, some retrofitting of public buildings in Bucharest to meet earthquake
building codes, and the establishment of a national catastrophic insurance scheme. (See para. 80
below regarding the low case.)

77. 
This IBRD operation, to be cofinanced by a GEF grant, would support the development
and implementation of an environmental monitoring and flood warning system, as well as
priority rehabilitation investments for addressing toxic pollution stemming from the use of dams
to store mine tailings in the Danube River Basin.

78. 
In 1997, the export value of forest products was $860 million, and the sector's
contribution to GDP was approximately 5 percent. This contribution could be significantly
increased through improving the competitiveness of private sector forest industries. Romania is
in the midst of restitution of a large portion of its forest land to private owners. Sustainability is
therefore at risk. The Forestry Development loan planned for FY02 would finance institution
building to ensure a smooth transition during the restitution process and sustainable forest
resource management post-restitution, establishment of a national private forest owners
association, the creation of a public-private partnership for business development and advisory
services for wood products industries (inspired by the CDF consultations), support for public
awareness campaigns, and provision of infrastructure (roads) compatible with the Bank's

28 

Romania: Countrv Assistance Strategv

environmental safeguard policies. (See para. 80 below regarding the low case.) Two other
operations related to environmental management would include two GEF grants in the areas of
Energy Efficiency and Agricultural Pollution Control. In addition, there are several possible
projects for funding by the Prototype Carbon Fund (PCF).

Low-Case Program Instruments

79. 
The Bank Group's low-case program would limit its support to a few small operations
emphasizing poverty interventions, and institution building and governance reform. Included in
the poverty-focused operations would be the second infusion of funds for the Romanian Social
Development Fund (the same second phase APL as in the high case - see para 62 above) and a
Rural Education loan, much more limited in scope (e.g., primarily for teaching materials as
opposed to teacher training and monitoring and evaluation capacity building) than the
comparable high-case loan ($25 million versus $60 million), in light of the slow-down in reforms
that would trigger the low case.

80. Bank operations supporting institution building and governance reform would consist
of three loans in the area of environmental and hazard mitigation management:

* a Forestry Development loan limited to technical assistance for institution building and
significantly reduced in dollar terms from the comparable high case loan ($10 million
versus $25 million);

* an Environment loan limited to technical assistance for environmental regulatory capacity
building; and

* a Hazards Mitigation loan limited to a small amount of technical assistance ($5 million)
for natural disaster preparedness and rapid response capacity building.

Monitoring Outcomes

81. 
Success in the implementation of this CAS will depend to a large degree on the ability of
Romania's new Government to articulate and implement a coherent social and economic reform
program. If the scenario of accelerated reforms prevails, the indicators to assess progress in
implementation of this CAS would be measured against Romania's desired outcomes of poverty
reduction and EU accession, articulated during the CDF consultations. These indicators include
a reduction in the poverty headcount ratio; a reduction in maternal and infant mortality rates; a
narrowing of the gap between urban and rural secondary school enrollment; sustained real GDP
growth; a net increase in the number of registered SMEs; and favorable annual accession
progress reports by the European Commission (EC). The Bank will work closely with the
Romanian Government to specify time horizons for these indicators, as well as for indicators
measuring Romania's progress against the International Development Goals, in the context of
the Government's forthcoming Action Plan. The Bank will also help introduce monitoring and
evaluation systems for reform results. Monitoring will also be included in planned Bank-
financed projects, in particular in the Social Sector Development loan, the Rural Education loan,
and PSAL 2 and subsequent adjustment operations. In addition, the Bank will assess whether a

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

29

CAS update is warranted within the next 12-18 months, to take account of the Govermment's
forthcoming Action Plan.

Selectivity and Partnership

82. 
The Bank's comparative advantages relative to other development partners active in
Romania lie mainly in (i) policy advice and financial support for structural and sector policy
reform (e.g., strengthening of the social safety net, governance4 , enterprise unbundling,
institution building, regulatory frameworks, privatizations and enabling environments for private
sector participation), and (ii) support for poverty-focused investments (e.g., social protection,
community development), and investments in reforming sectors (e.g., rural finance, education,
health, environment). Other partners such as the EU and bilaterals (e.g., USAID and DFID) are
better suited to finance technical assistance, training, and public information activities, while the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and European Investment Bank
(EIB) are best placed to invest directly in large-scale activities (e.g., some municipal services)
shifting from the public sector to the private sector, and in some activities specifically geared to
compliance with very specific EU standards (e.g., national transport systems to be linked with
those in Western Europe). The Bank plans to continue its collaboration with the UNDP in the
areas of donor coordination, monitoring and evaluating capacity building, and regional
development.

83. 
The Bank's interaction with Non Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in Romania has
been generally positive during the past ten years. Until 1997, the degree of interaction was fairly
low due to both the nature of the Bank's activity as well as the low capacity of the NGOs to
engage with the Bank. 1997 was a turning point in the Bank's collaboration with Romanian
NGOs, as the Bank increased its proactivity in consultations with NGOs as well as in engaging
them in the preparation and implementation of Bank-financed operations in the social sectors.
Another reason for the improvement of Bank - NGO relations was the decentralization of the
Small Grants Program that has helped the Bank maintain consistent communication with the
non-profit community. An important qualitative step in the relationship with the NGOs was the
implementation of the CDF in Romania. The CDF consultations raised the quality and scope of
consultations with civil society and with the NGO community in particular. This interaction was
followed by regular meetings with Romania's representative on the ECANGO Committee as
well as by CAS consultations.

C. World Bank Portfolio Management

84. 
Integral to the Bank's assistance strategy is continued intensive portfolio management, in
order to improve the development impact of Bank lending. Since FY91, the Bank has financed
30 operations totaling US$ 3.2 billion in commitments, of which US$557 million remained
undisbursed as of January 2001.

4In 

the area of governance, the Bank is in a collaboration with the Stability Pact, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD), Council of Europe, UN Center for International Crime Prevention, and several bilateral agencies, notably USAID and the UK's DFID.
The Bank's comparative advantage in this regard is in diagnostics, analytical work and institutional reforms, while other partners focus on
deterrence and law enforcement.

30 

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy

85. 
Romania recently graduated from the "high risk country portfolio" category, and as of
FY01 the portfolio is rated 100 percent satisfactory for the first time in many years. Nonetheless,
this progress remains fragile and continued vigilance is required. The Joint Portfolio Review
(JPR) held in Bucharest in March 2001 identified five areas that are causing a number of
operations to lag behind schedule: (i) implementation capacity5 , (ii) counterpart funding6 , (iii)
financial management, (iv) project readiness, and (v) accountability. Specific actions to address
each of these issues were agreed, including the designation of a high-level Government official
to have Bank portfolio oversight responsibility.

86. 
The World Bank's Operations Evaluation Department (OED) has evaluated six projects
in Romania during the last five years. OED rated two of the loans - accounting for 44 percent of
dollars lent - as unsatisfactory or highly unsatisfactory (See Annex B2). OED's assessments of
the early projects (approved in 1991) were indicative of the country's as well as the Bank's lack
of experience with transition economies. Projects were large and complex relative to the
Government's capacity to implement them. This resulted in less than favorable project outcomes
and unlikely sustainability. Over time, the ratings have improved as the Bank and Government
have gained more experience. For exarmple, the Transport Project, approved in FY93 and closed
in FY99, accomplished significant institutional reforms under the leadership of a highly
professional agency empowered to implement the project. Unfortunately, the adjustment
operation (FESAL) that followed was again too complex and did not have the Government's full
support.

D. World Bank Group Decentralization

87. 
Bank Group management has recently decided to decentralize management of the Bank
and IFC's Romania programs. By bringing decision making closer to the Governments, donors
and stakeholders in Romania and elsewhere in Europe, this should improve the Bank Group's
client responsiveness, turn-around time, and development impact. It should also produce further
synergies among neighboring countries which face many of the same development challenges
over the next several years, including in the area of closer integration with the European Union.
The Bank's Country Director for South Central Europe (Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania) will be
based in a regional hub being established in Zagreb, Croatia, while IFC's Director will be based
in a regional hub in Istanbul, Turkey. This decentralization initiative is expected to be fully
implemented by end-2001.

5 The cross-cutting issue of implementation capacity has in part been due to the inconsistencies and ambiguities in laws and regulations
goveming public procurement. The Bank had previously advised the Government on this issue in the context of a Bank Country Procurement
Assessment Review in early 1999. The Bank, EU, and Govemment are now in discussions to finalize the legal framework for public
procurement, to ensure its consistency with eligibility criteria for EU accession as well as with the Bank's Procurement Guidelines.

6 Delays in provision of counterpart funds took on more significance this fiscal year, in light of the recent change in the Bank's cost-sharing limit
for Romania, from 75 percent (for countries in Category 11) to 60 percent (for countries in Category Ill). The Bank's country categories for FY01
are based on 1999 GNP per capita. Romnania's GNP per capita rose to $1,520 in 1999, from $1,430 the previous year. While Romania remained
within its previous limit of 75 percent, the newly reduced ceiling for Bank cost-sharing puts the current three-year rolling average at 62 percent,
or slightly above the new limit of 60 percent. As with other countries moved from one country category to another, Romania has two years
(FY01 and FY02) during which to transition to an average not exceeding 60 percent Bank financing of projects. The implication is that the
Govemment will need to ensure a larger Govemment share and/or cofinancing from other donors for future lending, as well as timely provision
of counterpart funds.

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

31

III. RISKS

88. 
The proposed Bank Group assistance strategy faces risks. The most important risk is
political, and stems from potential divisions within the Government that would delay the
articulation and implementation of a reform program, and SOE privatizations in particular. Such
delays could erode the support of IFIs and access to credit markets, as well as trigger a steep
deterioration in economic performance and, possibly, external financing difficulties. The new
Government's room to maneuver is much more circumscribed than in the mid-1990s because of
the external debt build-up and the depletion of the country's human and capital stock.

89. 
Political risk, while high, is mitigated by three factors. First, in contrast to the previous
Government, the new Government is not a coalition and has shown signs of acting in a more
disciplined and decisive fashion in some reform areas. Second, there is broad political consensus
around the goal of Romania's joining the EU. This should create additional momentum for
reforms. Third, the international community has shown a clear commitment to continue to
engage Romania in an active dialogue, including contacts at very high levels and regular
participation in international events. The Bank in particular has maintained, and will continue to
maintain, a strong presence in the country, including the provision of analytical and advisory
services, even in the low-case scenario.

90. A fragile fiscal position and relatively large external financing needs over the next three
years pose interrelated economic risks. Without early and decisive action to limit Government
spending and lending by state-owned banks, there could be a loss of confidence in economic
management. This in turn would result in a decline in the availability of external financing at
favorable terms for the country and make its balance of payments position vulnerable. These
economic risks are exacerbated by the slippage in fiscal consolidation in late 2000 and early
2001 that eased pressures on state enterprises to restructure, and are likely to put additional strain
on the balance of payments. Over the next few months, therefore, the international financial
community is likely to assess the new Government's commitment to reform by how well it
manages fiscal policy.

91. 
In addition to sound fiscal and external financing management, keeping the current
account deficit under control will require efforts to sustain exports and action to contain any
surge in imports driven by excessive domestic consumption. This will require sound exchange
rate management and progress on structural reforms, in particular enterprise adjustment and
public sector wage restraint. While the Government has given some early indications that it
intends to manage its fiscal situation carefully and pursue structural reforms, close monitoring
from the international financial community (including via the lending scenario triggers contained
in the Bank Group's assistance strategy) should mitigate these risks.

92. While further financial sector reforms are needed (see para. 21), the closure of Bancorex
and several small private banks has contributed to the healthiest banking sector since the
transition process began. Another factor that mitigates economic risks is the recent improvement
in Romania's external indicators. Romania now ranks around the middle of the group of
transition countries in indicators such as external debt to GDP ratio, the rate of growth of exports
of goods and services, the current account deficit and the alignment of the real exchange rate.
Romania also holds the same ranking on liquidity indicators, such as reserves to GDP, reserves

32 

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy

to imports, and reserves to short-term debt position. Finally, a considerable rebuilding of foreign
exchange reserves took place in 1999 and 2000, and this trend appears to have continued thus far
in 2001.

93. Despite these improvements, however, there are important risks of policy backtracking
that cannot be ignored. As mentioned above, the fiscal situation remains fragile, and delays in
addressing structural components of the deficit could easily lead to a deterioration of the balance
of payments and external financing difficulties. The structural components of the fiscal deficit
include large loss-making state-owned enterprises, such as the energy utilities, and the increase
in state bank lending to enterprises in financial distress. Despite a moderate external debt
burden, Romania has experienced liquidity difficulties in the past. While the country's financial
situation is now more comfortable, liquidity difficulties could arise again in the future,
particularly in the event of sustained policy slippage.

94. Another concern is Romania's ability to attract the necessary investment inflows. FDI
flows to Romania have, so far, been very low, despite their having reached a peak in 1998, on the
heels of the 1997 reform program. Through its sheer size, natural endowments and cost
competitiveness, Romania ought to be an attractive destination for FDI, but this hope has been
eroded by political instability, red tape, corruption scandals, and inconsistent economic policies
(particularly toward foreign investors). The forecasts are therefore moderately optimistic on the
grounds that the new Government will continue to engage the international community, and that
investors will support the return of Europe's second largest transition economy (after Poland) to
growth. FDI is essential for sustaining growth and the modernization of Romania's economy. It
is also essential to provide a source of external inflows into the balance of payments. If for
political or other reasons FDI continues to flag, sustained growth would not be possible.

IV. EXPOSURE MANAGEMENT

95. 
Romania started its transition in 1990 debt-free. Despite growth in its external debt,
Romania's total outstanding debt is still modest and is likely to remain so in the short or medium
term. As a share of GDP, external debt outstanding is now approximately 27 percent of GDP (or
82 percent of export revenues, a figure which is likely to decline gradually to about 76 percent by
2003 if GDP growth materializes as predicted in the accelerated reform scenario). To ensure
debt sustainability and maintain external creditworthiness, Romania's key challenge is to restore
fiscal and external balances to slow the rate of increase in foreign debt.

96. 
In the high-case lending scenario (see Annex B7a) total debt outstanding relative to
export revenues would decline from 82.4 percent in 2000 to 75.8 percent in 2003, as Romania
becomes increasingly integrated into the EU and Central European Free Trade Agreement
(CEFTA) economic structures, with exports continuing to expand faster than growth. By
contrast, in the low-case lending scenario (see Annex B7b), both total debt outstanding and
export revenues would remain fairly flat through 2003.

97. 
For the Bank Group, an important issue is the composition of Romania's external debt, as
the debt structure contains a high percentage of public and publicly guaranteed (P&PG) debt,
particularly preferred creditors. Total debt outstanding (including short-term) was approximately
$10 billion at the end of 2000 (or about 27 percent of GDP), of which nearly 70 percent was

Romania: Country Assistance Strategy 

33

P&PG debt, and P&PG debt service accounted for 58 percent of total debt service, for a debt
service ratio of 11 percent. The share of P&PG debt service is expected to reach 70 percent by
2002 in both the high-case and low-case lending scenarios.

98. 
Because of the major role IFIs have played in Romania's external financing, preferred
creditors (IBRD, EBRD, IMF, and EIB) account for a high percentage of P&PG debt service (see
Table 7)7. Preferred creditors' share of P&PG debt service is expected to rise from the current
30 percent level to 33 percent in 2002 (31 percent in the low case scenario) and to 37 percent in
2003 (35 percent in the low case scenario).8 While this would exceed the Bank's exposure
guideline (35 percent), it is worth noting that this is due to earlier lending decisions, made when
Romania was facing difficulties in accessing private sources of external financing. Furthermore,
under both lending scenarios, the preferred creditors ratio would be well below its level in the
period prior to 1997, when the ratio was in the 60 percent range.

99. 
The World Bank is the largest creditor, accounting for about 20 percent of the total debt
outstanding and nearly 15 percent of P&PG debt service at end-2000. The Bank Group's CAS
for Romania has been developed to ensure that further increases in exposure are closely matched
by increases in overall creditworthiness as well as by proportionate burden sharing among the
IFIs, given the limited quantities of IFI financing available worldwide.

Table 7: Romania IBRD Exposure Percentage Ratios - 2001 - 2003

Actual 

2000 

30.5 

19.6 

14.6 

2001 

26.0 

20.0 

10.2 

High Case 
Lending Program 
2002 

32.9 

20.8 

11.9 

2003 

36.9 

20.4 

14.2 

2001 

25.2 

19.2 

10.0 

Low Case
Lending Program
2002 

31.2 

20.0 

11.5 

2003

34.9

19.9

13.7

Preferred Creditor Share of Public and 
Publicly Guaranteed Debt Service
IBRD Share of Total Debt Outstanding 
and Disbursed
IBRD Share of Public and Publicly 
Guaranteed Debt Service

100. The longer the high case is sustained, the more the Bank's relative exposure would be
expected to decrease over time, as private sources of P&PG financing would be increasingly
available under an accelerated reform program. In the low-case lending program, however, due
to the undisbursed pipeline of $557 million (as of January 2001), and the likelihood of
Romania's difficulty in accessing private financing, the Bank's relative exposure would remain
high, even in the medium term.

7 Like the Bank, the EIB and the EBRD have significantly increased their exposure to Romania in recent years. EBRD's share of Romania's
P&PG debt increased from 2 percent in 1993 to 13 percent (at $528 million) in 1999. The EIB, active in financing primarily infrastructure
projects within the framework of the Stability Pact, has seen its share of Romania's P&PG debt increase as well, from 0.5 percent to 6.4 percent
(at $411 million) over the same period. The IMF's exposure remains low, in part because Romania has not completed any of the past programs
with the Fund.

8 In the low case, since there would be limited options for extemal finance and the Bank's pipeline would continue to disburse, the preferred
creditor ratio would continue to rise for several years and exceed the Bank's exposure guidelines. Under the high case, the preferred creditor
ratios would decline in the medium term, despite the higher disbursements from preferred creditors, because of the increasing availability of other
sources of extemal finance.

34 

Romania: Country Assistance Strateg

V. CONCLUSION

101. While the new Romanian Government has taken a number of actions that signal its
intention to accelerate the pace of reform relative to that of its predecessors, the remainder of
2001 will be an important period for this Government to demonstrate a sustained commitment to
accelerated reform. It could make significant and sustained progress in fiscal management and
structural reforms - particularly in the area of privatization - and hence adopt a program that
could receive support from the Bank. This would usher Romania into the high-case scenario by
the end of this calendar year. Alternatively, the new Government could take a more hesitant
approach to reforms, or even reverse past progress in some areas. This would result in a
significant decrease in Bank Group support for two reasons. In the policy environment implicit
in the low-case scenario, the Romanian Government should not commit its citizens to additional
debt obligations, not least because Bank Group financing would not generate the growth needed
to service the debt. In addition, there would be exposure and creditworthiness concerns on the
Bank's side.

102. The Government will need to weigh the political as well as economic implications of its
chosen pace of reform. However, with poverty reduction and EU accession as the long-term
outcomes for which Romanians are striving, the Government is likely to conclude that the
political and economic considerations converge rather than conflict. Should the Government
pursue this conclusion in a sustainable way, the World Bank Group stands ready to support the
Government's efforts to break critical bottlenecks in the reform process by ensuring
improvement in the delivery of key services to the poor, moving forward on critical and
irreversible steps of the privatization prograrn, and helping to lay the foundations of key public
sector institutions.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter Woicke

By:

Sven Sandstrom 

Washington, D.C.
May 21, 2001

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Romania at a glance

Europe & 
Lower-
Cenb'at middle-
Asb 
Incom 

POVERTY and SOC:AL 

Romanb 

Development diamond'

1S90
Population, mid-year (rni/iona) 
GNP per caPit (A&as method, US$) 
GNP tAllas method, US$ bions) 
Average annual growth, 1993-99
Population 
Labor force (%) 

22.5 

475 
2,150 
1 ,022 

2,094 
1,200
2,513

Life expectancy

1.470 

32.9 

4.) 
-02 
0.5 

0.1 
0.6 

1.1
1.2 

GNP 
per 
capita 

Gross

, 

primary

Most recent estimate (latst year avalable, 199349) 
Poverty I% of population bo ow national povetyylne) 
Utban populatn (% of total plon) 
Life exoCetanCy at birth (years) 
1nfan nmotality (per 1,000 live bths) 
Chd alrutrtin I 
onfchi7dren under5 
Access to improve water source (% o populaf ion) 
Illiteracy ( of population age 15+) 
Gross pmaryenrolimrrt (%ofschoo 
Male 
Female 

.

enrollment

41
56 
69 
21 

67 
69 
22 
8 

43
69
33
15 
86
16
114 
114 
11i

.. 

Access to safe water

62 
2 
104 
104 
103 

3 
100 
101 
99 

lation) 

Romania
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 

1989 
41.5 
26.8 
20.9 
29.5 
29,7 

1996 
41.5 
21 A 
23.7 
13.3 
14.0 

199011
34.0
19.9 
30-1
15.7
16.4
4.8 
1.5 
27.5 
31.3
26.6
90.3

Economic ratios'

GDP (US$ bilios.. 
Gross domestic rnvesterntGDP 
Exports ofgoods and services/GOP 
Gross domestic savirngsGDP 
Gross rnonal savInsGDP 

39.6 

Trade

Curent account alarnce/GDP 
interest paymrentsWGOP 
Total deWGOP 
ToW debt servie/exports 
Present value of debt/GOP 
Present value of debtlexports 

.. 

6.1 
02 
26 
18.9 

-7.0 
1.1 
24,1 
23.5 

Domestic

.

Investment

Savings 

\ 

'

1.4 

.. 

.. 

.. 

Indebtedness

197949 1W949 

1996 

19S9 

2000"9

(average annu31 gowth)
GOP 
GNP pm capita 
Exorts of goods and services 

1.5 
1.2 

-1.5 
-1.4 
4.6 

-5.4 

-3.2 
-2.9 
8.8 

2.t 
.. 
24,6

RoIna
- - - Lower-middle-income group

-5.7 

.. 

5.9 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of Investment and GDP (Y.)
10

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

15.7 
56.4 

16.1 
36.5 
26.5 
47.4 
72.7 
14.0 
31.8 

15.5
36.4 
26.9
48.1 
69.6 
14.7 
34.3

s

.. 

27.9 
58.9 
11.6 
18.2 

s 
10-

4

.. 

.. 

-

GDI 

e GDP

.. 

1979-49 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)
3

(averatge annual growth) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

1.2 
-1.9 

-10.2 
-3.0 
-3.3 
-5.4 
-4.6 
-0.8 
-8.6 
14.4 
-5.9 

4.0 
-4.0 

3
70

.. 

-3.1

-0.4 
0.1 
2.8 
-5.7 
4.4 
-1.7 

-5.9 
-4.9 o
-2.3 
4.7 
-5.1 
-3.1

10

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

94 

94 

96 

97 

98 9

-

-

xports 

imporns

1.7 

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the couintry (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Romania

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)
300

Domestic pri.e.s 

(% change) 

0

Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

.. 

1.1 
-0.9 

59.1 
54.0 

45.8 
46.4

200

3.2 

Government finance
(5/ of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Currentbudget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

0 -

l

-- 

51.0 
31.1 
13.5 

30.1 
-1.2 
-5.0 

33.3 
-0.8 
-3.4

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99

.. 
.. 

-GDPdeflator 

-

CPR

TRADE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

(US$ rnitlions)
Total exports (fob) 
Textiles 
Metals 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

.. 
.. 

10,487 

8,3D2 

8,503 
1,310
502 
5,652
10,392
417 
1,251
2,689 

15,000

.. 

1,583 

508 
5.238 
11,838 
523 
1,687 
3,206 

10,000

.. 

7,056 
8,437 
124 
4,728 
2,148 

.

s,o__

.. 
.. 

o

93 

94 

99 

96 

97 

98 

99

Export price index (1995=100) 
Importpriceindex(1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

.. 
.. 

93 
99 
93 

95 
98 
97 

97
101 
95

*Exports 

*Im horts

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services 
Importsofgoodsandservices 
Resource balance 
Net income 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

10,133 11,321 
11,428 
8,887 
-1.295 
2,434 
-358 
80 
0 
2,514 
-1,160 
-1,354 

9,519 
12,798 
-3,279 
-392 
753 
-2,918 
2,075 
843 

9,870 
11,381
-1,511 
-403 
626
-1,288
1,461 
-173 

0

i
-4_1111

.. 

-1,653 
1,791 
-138 

-9.

_o0

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$) 

.. 

.. 

3,792 
3,657
8,875.8 15,332.8

-

19.3 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composliton of 1999 debt (US$ mill.)

3,583 
590 
0 

1,087 
0 
0 

10,014 
1,442 
0 

9,367
1,662 
0 

G:940 
09 

A: 1,862

~ 

.6

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

142 
54 
0 

1,941 
756 
0 

2,303 
150 
0 

3,138
170 
0

C 459

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Privatecreditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

0 
151 
1,680 
0 
0 

0 
-1,188 
-432 
0 
0 

134 
-132 
254 
2,040 
130 

192
14 

:1.302

-327 

F:4.115

1,007
-709 

E 990

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

340 
142 
7 
135 
47 
88 

0 
0 
727 
-727 
29 
-756 

66 
153 
69 
84 
82 
3 

.. 

A- IBRD 
B-IDA 
C - IMF 

E -
iateral
D-Othermulitilateral F-Private
G - Short-tern

315 
83 
233
88
145

Development Economics

ROMANIA
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Annex B2

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$'000)f 
Average Supervision (US$'000/project) g 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

16 
2.6 
19 
21 
25 
30 
11 

no 
1688 
89 

17 
2.5 
6 
13 
12 
25 
17 

yes 
1542 
86 

21 
2.9 
9 
12 
10 
12 
17 

yes 
2073 
99 

19
3.4
0
0
5
8
20

yes
2902
138

Memorandum Item 
Projects Eval by OED by Number 
Projects Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
35 
6
3117 
795
31 
33
31 
44

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY), excludes GEF.
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or ffU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation
progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only. Ratio shown for 2001 is projected based on the
actuals of the first six months of the fiscal year.
f. FY00 (actuals) and FY01 (planned) include direct and indirect. Earlier years are direct costs only.
g. Includes costing for projects that closed during the fiscal year.

Annex B3a

ROMANIA
Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IBRD High-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year 

Project 

US$(M) 

Strategic 
Rewards 

HII)b 

Implementation

Risks (H/M/L)b

b

2002 

2003 

2004 c 

Private Sector Adjustment 2 (SAL)/ 
Private Sector Institution Building 2 (TA) 
Rural Development 
Social Development Fund 2 (APL) 
Forestry Development 
Total FY02 

Irrigation Rehabilitation 
Rural Education 
Programmatic Adjustment 1 (PAL) 
Total FY03 

Hazards Mitigation 
Health Sector Reform 2 (APL) 
Programmatic Adjustment 2 (PAL)/ 
Public Institution Building (TA) 
Total FY04 

TOTAL FY02-04 

H 
H 
H 
H 
H 

M 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 
H 

300.0 
40.0 
40.0 
10.0 
25.0 
415.0

75.0 
60.0 
100.0 
235.0

150.0 
20.0 
150.0 
25.0 
345.0

995.0

H
H
M
L
M

M
L
H

M
H
H
M

a/ Proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b/ Project ratings indicate whether the strategic reward and implementation risks are expected to
be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).
c/ FY04 program also includes a possible stand-by operation (Regional Development) for $50 million

Annex B3b

ROMANIA
Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IBRD Low-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year 

Project 

Strategic 

Implementation

US$(M) Rewards 

imkleMenato

(H/M/L) b Ris ks (H/M/L)

2002 

2003 

2004 

Social Development Fund 2 (APL) 
Forestry Development (TA) 
Total FY02 

Rural Education 
Total FY03 

Environment (TA) 
Hazards Mitigation (TA) 
Total FY04 

10.0 
10.0 
20.0

25.0 
25.0

H 
H 

H 

10.0 M 
5.0 M 
15.0

TOTAL FY02-04 

60.0

L
M

M

L
L

Annex B3c

ROMANIA
Bank Group Program Summary

Global Environment Facility (GEF) Program

Fiscal year 

Project 

GEF 
GEF 
US$(M) 

Strategic 
Rewards
(/L)aRisks 
(HIMIL,)

Implementation
HML

2002 

2004 

Energy Efficiency 
Agriculture Pollution Control 
Total FY02 

Hazards Mitigation b 
Total FY03 

TOTAL FY02-04 

H 
H 

M 

10.0 
7.3 
17.3

5.0 
5.0

22.3

H
M

L

a/ Project ratings indicate whether the strategic reward and implementation risks are expected to
be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).
b/ Cofinancing IBRD Loan.

Annex B3d

ROMANIA
IFC and MIGA Program
FY 1998-2000

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

FINANCIAL SERVICES 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
MOTOR VEHICLES & PARTS 
TIMBER, PULP & PAPER 
OTHER
Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other
Total 

1998 

1999 

2000

44.6 

12.8 

15.0

76.0
0.0 
24.0

100.0

100.0

100.0 

100.0 

100.0

100.0 

100.0

46.0 
32.0
22.0

100.0 

100.0 

200.0

MIGA guarantees (gross portfolio in US$m) 
MIGA guarantees (gross portfolio in %) 

35.2 
1.2% 

43.1 
1.2% 

35.2
0.8%

Annex B4

ROMANIA
Summary of Nonlending Services

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (USSOOO) Audience b Objective

Recent completions 
Health Sector Strategy 
Financial Sector Review 
Education Finance Advisory Note 
Country Procurement Assessment 
Rural Finance Review 
Childcare & Women's Labor Force Participation 
Anti-Corruption Diagnostic Study 
Country Economic Memorandum 

Underway 
Local Social Services Delivery Study 
Romania Global Gateway 
Legal/Judicial Sector Diagnostic Review 
Public Expenditure Review 
IDF: Economic Communications Capacity 
IDF: Capacity Building for Macro Analysis 

Planned 
Poverty Assessment d 
Education Sector Review 
Energy Sector Study and TA 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment d 
Rural/Urban Growth Study 
Community Networks Study 
Financial Sector Assessment 
Tax Policy Study 
EU Country Economic Memorandum d 
Regional Development Strategy r 
Poverty Policy Capacity Building d. f 
Pension Study 
Governance Surveys 
Labor Market Analysis d 
Capital Markets Assessment 

99 
99 
99 
00 
00 
01 
01 
01 

01 
Ongoing 
01 
02 
02 
02 

02 
02 
02-04 
03 
03 
03 
03 
03 
04 
04 
04 
04 
04 
04 
04 

Actual
84 
145 
33 
80 
175 
20 
56 
450 

Budgeted
290 
75 
45 
299 
47 
31 

Planned
40e 
100 
150 
100 
145 
100 
135 
145 
425 
30 
90 
200 
30 
100 
145 

G, B 
KG, PS
G, B 
KG, PS
G 
KG, PS
G, B 
PS
G, B 
KG, PS
B, PD 
KG
G, D, B, PD KG, PD, PS
G, B, PD 
KG, PD, PS

G, B 
G, D, PD 
G, B, PD 
G, D, B 
G, PD 
G 

KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PD, PS

G, D, B 
KG
G,B 
KG,PS
G, B 
KG, PS
G, B 
PS
G, B 
KG
G, B, PD 
KG, PS
G, D, B 
KG, PS
G 
PS
G 
KG, PS
G, D, B, PD KG, PD, PS
G, B, PD 
KG, PD, PS
G,B 
KG, PD, PS
G, D, B, PD KG, PD, PS
G, B 
PD, PS
G, B 
KG, PS

a. High case unless otherwise noted.
b. Government (G), donor (D), Bank (B), public dissemnination (PD).
c. Knowledge generation (KG), public debate (PD), problem-solving (PS).
d. Included in low case scenario.
e. To be supplemented by trust funds.
f. Grant funding to be sought (e.g., JSDF).

Rornania Social Indicators

Latest single year 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-98 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME

GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 

Food pnce index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to safe water
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrtion (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth

(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

21.2 
1.0 
46.2 
2.6 

22.7 
0.5 
51.4 
2.3 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

3.5 
6.1 

.. 
., 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

70 
67 
72 

35 
43 

184 
112 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.

1 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

2.2 
6.9 

88 
89 

67 

71 
91 
50 

88 
95 

..

70 
67 
73 

26 
32 

228 
114 

.. 

22.5 
-0.2 
55.7 
1.3 

21.5
20.4
27.9

1,360 
563 

509

28.2
8.9
37.3

2.9 
3.6 
9.9 

100 
100 
100 

62
69
10

97 
97 

69 
66 
73 

21 
25 

256 
122 
41

Annex B5

Same region/income group
Lower-
middle-
income

Europe & 
Central Asia 

474.7 
0.1 
66.2 
1.6 

886.5
0.9
57.7
2.5

2,200 
155 

1,740
131

4.0 
5.1 
8.8

100 
100 
99 

91 
89 

69 
65 
74 

22 
26 

283 
120 

3.0
4.9

94
95
93

89
89

68
65
72

35
44

244
137

Annex B6a
Page 1 of 2

Romania - Key Economic Indicators: Sustained Reform Scenario

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry ( incl. construction) 
Services 

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS) 
Imports (GNFS) 

Gross domestic savings 

Memorandum items
GDP, (USS bn at current prices) 

GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

100 
20 
39 
41 

81 
21 

28 
33 

19 

100 
19 
40 
41 

83 
23 

28 
37 

17 

100 
18 
36 
46 

86 
21 

29 
36 

14 

100 
15 
33 
53 

87 
19 

24 
32 

13 

35 

35 

35 

1,400 1,450 1,420 

41 

1,430 

100 
14 
33 
53 

84 
18 

30 
34 

16 

34 

... 

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1993 prices)
Grossdomesticproductatmarketp 
7.1 
3.9 
Gross Domestic Income 
3.9 
3.3 

-6.1 
-6.2 

-5.4 
-6.0 

-3.2 
-2.8 

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1993 prices)
Gross domestic product at market p 
7.4 
4.2 
-5.8 
-5.2 
Total consumption 
11.1 
8.3 
-7.7 
-0.1 
Privateconsumption 
13.2 
11.2 
-9.5 
-0.1 

-3.0 
-9.3 
-10.5 

100 
13 
35 
52 

84 
17 

33 
38 

14 

37 

... 

1.6 
1.5 

1.6 
2.1 
-0.8 

100 
14 
34 
52 

85 
19 

36 
42 

15 

38 

...

4.0 
4.0 

4.0 
2.0 
2.0 

100 
13 
33 
54 

85 
21 

37 
45 

18 

40 

5.0 
5.0 

5.0 
4.0 
4.0 

100
12
32
56

85
21

38
46

18

43

5.0
5.0

5.0
4.0
4.0

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS) 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS) 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Net private foreign direct investmen 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital, net2
Change in reserves3
Memorandum items
CA balance as % of GDP 
Resource balance 
Annual growth rates (US$ values)
Memo: Exports nominal growth 
Memo: Importsnominal growth 

9,404 9,648 9,955 
9,519 
9,870 12,120 13,707 15,078 
16,435
7,910 8,085 8,431 
8,302 
8,503 10,367 11,809 12,990 
14,159
11,306 12,503 12,349 12,798 11,381 14,042 16,088 18,019 19.821
9,487 10,555 10,411 10,927 
9,595 12,050 13,563 15,191 16,710
-1,902 -2,855 -2,394 
-3,279 
-1,511 
-1,922 
-2,381 
-2,941 
-3,386
369 
593 
579 
753 
626 
860 
959 
1,215 
1,113
-1,774 -2,571 -2,137 
-2,918 
-1,288 
-1,400 
-1,622 
-1,926 
--2,472
417 
263 1,224 2,040 
1,007 
1,009 
1,350 
1,70(0 2,000
783 
628 
980 
108 
-45 
1100 
767 
849 
824
707 
1217 
336 
-131 
14 
785 
467 
449 
324
77 
-589 
644 
239 
-59 
315 
300 
400 
500
317 
1897 1598 
-73 
499 
219 
500 
300 
500
257 
-217 -1665 
843 
-173 
-928 
-995 
-923 
-852

-5.0 
-5.4 

28.6 
44.6 

-7.3 
-8.1 

2.2 
11.3 

-6.1 
-6.9 

4.3 
-1.4 

-7.0 
-7.9 

-1.5 
5.0 

-3.8 
-4.4 

2.4 
-12.2 

-3.8 
-5.2 

-4.2 
-6.2 

21.9 
13.9 
25.6 
12.6 
(Continued)

-4.8 
-7.3 

10.0 
12.0 

-5.8
-7.9

9.0
10.0

Romania - Key Economic Indicators: Sustained Reform Scenario

(Continued)

Annex B6a
Page 2 of 2

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)4

Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 
Primary Deficit 
Consolidated Budget Deficit 
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
total credit growth (%) 

Price indices( YR93 =100)

RealExchangeRate 
RER: Previous year= 100 
Real interest rates 
Consumer price index (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 
NMemo:
L.ending rate to non-bank (% pa) 
NBR Discount Rate 

31. 
28.9 
2.4 
5.3 
0.8 
-1.4 
-3.4 

25.3 
71.6 

... 

111.0 
4.7 
12.3 
32.3 
35.3 

28.9 
28.3 
0.6 
5.2 
0.9 
-2.8 
-4.8 

28.0 
66.0 
... 

99.0 
-11.0 
12.2 
38.8 
44.6 

28.4 
28.4 
0.0 
4.8 
3.0 
-0.8 
-5.2 

24.9 
104.9 
... 

106.0 
7.1 
-35.8 
154.8 
146.7 

30.1 
31.3 
-1.2 
3.7 
0.4 
-0.1 
-5.5 

27.3 
48.9 
... 

134.0 
26.5 
-1.4 
59.1 
55.0 

33.2 
34.1 
-0.9 
2.9 
0.3 
1.8 
-3.8 

26.3 
44.9 
... 

110.0 
-17.4 
13.8 
45.8 
46.4 

32.1 
35.1 
-3.0 
2.1 
1.8 
1.4 
-3.7 

25.0 
43.0 
24.6 

111.0 
-0.4 
... 
45.7 
50.3 

35.7 
33.6 
2.1 
6.1 
0.8 
1.0 
-4.0 

23.8 
28.1 
32.0 

109.6 
-1.2 
...
30.0 
29.0 

36.7 
33.3 
3.4 
6.4 
0.8 
0.0 
-3.0 

24.4 
26.6 
30.0 

36.7
32.3
4.4
6.9
1.0
-0.5
-2.5

24.4
26.6
30.0

109.3 
-0.3 

109.0
-0.2

22.0 
21.0 

15.0
14.0

48.6 
39.6 

55.8 
35.0 

63.7 
47.2 

56.9 
38.0 

65.9 
35.0 

... 

... 

...

... 

... 

...

1. GDP at factor cost
2. Projections include EU capital grants (Phare, SAPARD, ISPA).
3. Includes use of IMF resources.
4. Consolidated central government.

Annex B6b
Page I of 2

Romania - Key Economic Indicators: Slow Reform Scenario

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculturc 
Industry incl. construction) 
Services 

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS) 
Imports (GNFS) 
Grossdomestic savings 

A.lemorandumn items

Gross domestic product
GDP, (IUSS million at current prices) 
GNP per capita (1JSS, Atlas method) 

100 
20 
39 
41 

81 
21 

28 
33 
19 

100 
19 
40 
41 

83 
23 

28 
37 
17 

100 
18 
36 
46 

86 
21 

29 
36 
14 

100 
15 
33 
53 

87 
19 

24 
32 
13 

100 
14 
33 
53 

84 
18 

30 
34 
16 

100 
13 
35 
52 

84 
17 

33 
38 
14 

100 
14 
34 
52 

85 
19 

34 
41 
15 

100 
15 
33 
52 

85 
18 

34 
43 
14 

100
16
32
52

85
17

34
43
13

35 
35 
35 
1,400 1,450 1,420 

41 
1,430 

...

34 

37 

37.5 

36.8 

364

Real annual growth rates (/o, calculated from 1993 prices)
Giross domestic product at market pri 
7.1 
3.9 
Gross Domestic Income 
3.9 
3.3 

-6.1 
-6.2 

-5.4 
-6.0 

-3.2 
-2.8 

1.6 
1.5 

3.4 
3.3 

3.4 
3.6 
3.8 

0.5 
0.0 

-2.0
-2.3

0.5 
1.0 
1.4 

-2.0
-2.3
-2.8

-5.2 
-0.1 
-0.1 

-3.0 
-9.3 
-10.5 

1.6 
2.1 
-0.8 

9,519 9,870 12,120 12,605 12,643 12,390
8,302 8,503 10,367 10,781 10,814 10,597
12,798 11,381 14,042 15,210 15,666 15,509
10,927 9,595 12,050 13,050 13,441 13,307
-3,279 -1,511 -1,922 -2,605 -3,023 
-3,120
753 
626 
860 
880 
850 
850
-2,918 -1,288 -1,400 -1,830 -2,018 
-2,210
2,040 1,007 1,009 
900 
650 
400
108 
-45 
1,100 
433 
-332 
-666
-131 
14 
785 
233 
-332 
-641
239 
-59 
315 
200 
0 
-25
-73 
499 
219 
500 
300 
425
843 
-173 
-928 
-3 1,400 
2,051

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1993 prices)
Gross domestic product at market pri 
7.4 
4.2 
-5.8 
Total consumption 
11.1 
8.3 
-7.7 
Private consumption 
13.2 
11.2 
-9.5 
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS) 
Merchandise FOB 
Imiports(GNFS) 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital, net2 
Change in reserves 

9,404 9,648 9,955 
7,910 8,085 8,431 
11,306 12,503 12,349 
9,487 10,555 10,411 
-1,902 -2,855 -2,394 
369 
593 
579 
-1,774 -2,571 -2,137 
417 
263 
1.224 
783 
628 
980 
707 
1,217 
336 
77 
-589 
644 
317 
1,897 1,598 
257 
-217 -1,665 

M14emorandum items

CA balance as % of GDP 
Resource balance % of GDP 
Annual growth rates (USS values)
Memo: Exports nominal growth 
.Ntemo: Imports nominal growth 

-5.0 
-5.4 

28.6 
44.6 

-7.3 
-8.1 

2.2 
11.3 

-6.1 
-6.9 

4.3 
-1.4 

-7.0 
-7.9 

-1.5 
5.0 

-3.8 
-4.4 

2.4 
-12.2 

-3.8 
-5.2 

21.9 
25.6 

-4.9 
-6.9 

4.0 
8.3 

-5.5 
-8.2 

0.3 
3.0 

-6.1
-8.6

-2.0
-1.0

(Continued)

Romania - Key Economic Indicators: Slow Reform Scenario
(Continued)

Annex B6b
Page 2 of 2

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices) 4
Current revenues 
31.3 
Current expenditures 
28 9 
Current account 
2 4 
Capital expenditure 
5 3 
Foreign financing 
0 8 
Primary Deficit 
-I 4 
Consolidated Budget Deficit 
-3.4 
Monetary indicators
M2iGDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
total credit growth (%) 
Price indices( YR93 = l00)
Real Exchange Rate 
RER: Previous year= 100 
Real interest rates 
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator(% change) 
Memo: 
Lending tate to non-bank (% pa)
NBR Discount Rate 

111.0 
4.7 
12.3 
32.3 
35.3 
48.6 

25.3 
71.6 

39.6 

28.9 
28.3 
0.6 
5.2 
0.9 
-2.8 
-4.8 

28.0 
66.0 

99.0 
-11.0 
12.2 
38.8 
44.6 
55.8 

28.4 
28.4 
0.0 
4.8 
3.0 
-0.8 
-5.2 

24.9 
104.9 
... 

106.0 
7.1 
-35.8 
154.8 
146.7 
63.7 

30.1 
31.3 
-1.2 
3.7 
0.4 
-0.1 
-5.5 

27.3 
48.9 
... 

134.0 
26.5 
-1.4 
59.1 
55.0 
56.9 

33.2 
34.1 
-0.9 
2.9 
0.3 
1.8 
-3.8 

26.3 
44.9 
... 

110.0 
-17.4 
13.8 
45.8 
46.4 
65.9 

32.1 
35.1 
-3.0 
2.1 
1.8 
1.4 
-3.7 

25.0 
43.0 
24.6 

110.0 
-0.4 
na
45.7 
50.3 
... 

31.8 
33.8 
-2.0 
2.9 
... 
1.0 
-3.8 

25.0 
36.0 
35.0 

31.3 
32.3 
-1.0 
3.1 
... 
-1.3 
-4.3 

25.0 
38.0 
46.0 

30.6
30.6
0.0
2.5

...
-2.5
-5.0

24.0
44.0
52.0

107.0 
-2.7 

104.9 
-2.0 

102.1
-2.7

33.0 
34.0 
... 

32.0 
31.0 
...

38.0
42.0)

35.0 

47.2 

38.0 

35.0 

... 

... 

...

1. GDP at factor cost
2. Projections include EU capital grants (Phare, SAPARD, ISPA).
3. Includes use of IMF resources.
4. Consolidated central government.

Amnex B7a

Romania - Key Exposure Indicators: Accelerated Reform Scenario

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed(TDO)(US$m) 

6,666 

8,519 

9,477 

10,014 

9,367 

9,991 

10,764 

11,652 

12,459

Net disbursements (US$m) 

995 

2,150 

1,475 

176 

-588 

1,100 

774 

888 

807

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m) 
Memo: P&PG debt service 
Memo: Private debt service 

967 
... 

.,. 

1,228 
... 

... 

1,540 
... 

... 

2,303 
... 
... 

3,138 

... 

... 

2,288 
1,336 
952 

3,332 
2,094 
1,238 

2,975 
2,070 
905 

2,813

1,977

836

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDOIXGS 
Memo: XGS mn US$ 
Memo: GDP, bn US$ 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Memo: IBRD debt service 
Memo: Preferred creditor DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public DS 
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRDTDO(US$m) 
Memo: IBRD net flows 

70.9 
9,404 
35 
18.8 
10.3 

88.3 
9,648 
35 
24.1 
12.7 

95.2 
9,955 
35 
27.1 
15.5 

.. 

.. 

.. 

105.2 
9,519 
41 
24.1 
24.2 

.. 

6.3 

... 

... 
63.1 
0.6 
844 

5.9 

... 

... 
54.7 
0.6 
1009 

7.0 
... 
... 
28.6 
1.0 
1305 

9.2 
... 
... 
30.5 
1.6 
1443 

94.9 
9,870 
34 
27.5 
31.8 

.. 

7.9 
... 
... 
22.7 
1.7 
1662 

82.4 
12,120 
37 
27.2 
18.9 

..

14.6 
195.0 
408.2 
30.5 
1.6 
1955 
293 

78.5 
13,707 
38 
28.2 
24.3 

77.3 
15,078 
40 
28.8 
19.7 

75.8
16,435
43
29.1
17.1

10.2 
214.0 
545.0 
26.0 
1.6 
2152 
197 

11.9 
246.0 
680.8 
32.9 
1.6 
2428 
276 

14.2
280.0
730.4
36.9
1.7
2536
108

Guarantees (USSm) 

1546 

1832 

2038 

2152 

2249 

2398 

2583 

2330 

2492

IFC (US$m)2
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity 
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

... 
... 
... 

4.1 
3 
1 

0 

0 

16.4 
5 
12 

93.1 
53 
41 

106.5 
66 
41 

113.0 
74 
39 

100.0 
80 
20 

125.0 
100 
25 

150.0
125
25

0 

16 

35 

43 

35 

20 

20

1. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short- term capital.
2. IFC projections for 2001-2003 are indicative only.

Annex B7b

Romania - Key Exposure Indicators: Slow Reform Scenario

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)' 

6,666 

8,519 

9,477 

10,014 

9,367 

9,991 

10,434 

10,090 

10,118

Netdisbursements(US$m) 

995 

2,150 

1,475 

176 

-588 

1,100 

443 

-344 

-632

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m) 

967 

1,228 

1,540 

2,303 

3,138 

2,288 

3,312 

2,869 

2,607

Memo: P&PG debt service 
Memo: Private debt service 

... 
... 

... 
... 

... 
... 

... 
... 

... 
... 

1,336 
952 

2,084 
1,228 

2,004 

1,823
783

865 

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDOIXGS 
Memo: XGS mnUSS 
Memo: GDP, bn US$ 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 

70.9 
9,4C4 
35 
18 8 
103 

88.3 
9,648 
35 
24.1 
12.7 

95.2 
9,955 
35 
27.1 
15.5 

105.2 
9,519 
41 
24.1 
24.2 

94.9 
9,870 
34 
27.5 
31.8 

82.4 
12,120 
37 
27.2 
18.9 

82.8 
12,605 
38 
27.7 
26.3 

79.8 
12,643 
38 
26.3 
22.7 

81.7
12,390
38
26.8
21.0

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 

6.3 

5.9 

70 

9.2 

7.9 

14.6 

10.0 

11.5 

13.7

Memo: lBRD Debt Service 
Memo: Preferred creditor DS 

... 

... 

... 

... 
... 

... 
... 

195.0 
408.2 

209.0 
525.8 

231.0 
624.7 

249.0
636.5

... 

... 

... 

Preferred creditor DS/public DS 
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m) 
Memo: IBRD net flows 

63.1 
0.6 
844 
128 

54.7 
0.6 
1,009 
227 

28.6 
1.0 
1.305 
371 

30.5 
1.6 
1,443 
84 

22.7 
1.7 
1,662 
233 

30.5 
1.6 
1,955 
293.2 

25.2 
1.7 
1,999 
44.0 

31.2 
1.8 
2,015 
16.0 

34.9
2.0
2,012
-3.0

Guarantees (US$m) 
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

1,546 

1,832 

2,038 

2,152 

2.249 

... 

...

IFC (US$m) 

... 
... 
... 

4.1 

16.4 

93.1 

106.5 

113

Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity 

3 

5 
12 

53 
41 

66 
41 

74 
39 

... 

...

1 

... 

...

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0 

0 

0 

16 

35 

43 

35 

20 

20

1. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.

Annex B138

Closed Projects 

44

IBRD

Total Disbursed 

(Active) 

of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

ROMlANI-A
Status of Bank CGroup Operations (Operations Portfolio)

419.8

13.7
4,052.4
2,984.4
4,472.2
2,998.0
551.8
28.0
579.8

Project ID 

Project Name 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

Development 
Objectives 

Implementation 
Progress

P008777 

P008784 
P008776 
P008794 
P036013 
P008778 
P008793 
P039250 
P044614 

P034213 

P008788 

P055495 
P058284 
P049200 
P039251 
P056337 

P043882 

P(065041 
P008797 
TOTAI.A 

Petroleum Sector Rehabilitation 

Education Refontn 
Employment and Social Protection 
Power Sector Rehabilitation 
Railway Rehabilitation 
Bucharest Water Supply 
Higher Education 
Second Roads 
Schools Rehabilitation 
CGeneral Cadastre and lIand
Registration 
Tciecomnilunications 
Clhild Welfare Reform 
C'ultural Ficritage 
Social Developmeint Fund 
Private Sector institutioni Buildinig 
Mine Closure and Social Mitigationi 

Agriculture Support Services 

Trcade andt Transport Facilitation in

Southeastemii Europe 
Health Sector Retoriii 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 

S 
S 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 

S 
S 

1994 

1994 
1995 
1996 
1996 
1997 
1997 
1997 
1998 

1998 

1998 

1998 
1999 
1999 
1999 
200)) 

2000 

2)0(0 
2000 

Amounts 
in llSS Millions 

Differencc

Expected:
Disbursen

Fiscal Year 

lBRD 

Cancel. Undisb. 

Orig.

175 0 

5(.0 
55.4 
11(.() 
120()) 
25.0) 
50.0 
I SO() 
7(0.0) 

25.5 

30.( 

5.t) 
5 ( 
10.) 
25) 
44.5 

ILt 

11.1) 

0.( 
(.0 
33.5 
0.() 
0.0 
0.0 
0.) 
1:).1) 

0) 

7.0 

.)) 
().0 
(). 
1.1 
0.() 

()() 

79.1 

20.8 
36.2 
60.1 
42.5 
10.2 
29.5 
32.4 
59.3 

23.7 

17.5 

3.6 
4.4 
3.8 
!.73 
43.5 

1() 9 

1 7 i 
4() 
I)19.1 

0) 

.) ( 
41.(0 

16.8 
4(0.0 
551.6 

79.1

20.8
35.8
93.6
41.1
10.()
29.5
-30.1
34.4

7.0

21.4

2 7
1,5
3.8
44
12.1

0.4

-().3
3.1
372.3

Annex BSb

ROMANIA

Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of January 2001
(In US Dollars Millions)

FY Approval 
Company 
1999 
Ambro 
1998 
Banc Post 
1998 
Bilstein Compa 
1996 
Danube Fund 
1998 
DemirRomania 
1997 
Efes Brewery 
1998 
FCR Fund 
1998 
Garanta 
1998 
Krupp Compa 
1997/98/00 Mobil Rom 
1997 
Rambox 
1994/98/01 Romlease 
1998 
Small Bus. Loan 

Held 

Disbursed

Loan Equity Quasi Partic 
8.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 10.0 
0.0 
1.9 
0.0 
0.0 
1.9 
0.0 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0 
4.3 
3.2 
0.0 
0.0 
8.2 
0.0 
0.0 
6.0 
0.0 
10.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
6.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.6 
55.0 
0.0 10.0 180.0 
1.5 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0 
4.0 
0.8 
0.0 
0.0 
3.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
5.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0
0.0 
0.0 
10.0 
0.0
1.9 
0.0 
0.0 
1.9
0.0 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0
4.3 
2.6 
0.0 
0.0
8.2 
0.0 
0.0 
6.0
0.0 10.0 
0.0 
0.0
0.0 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0
4.9 
0.0 
0.0 
2.1
40.0 
0.0 
10.0 160.0
1.5 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0
4.0 
0.8 
0.0 
0.0
3.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0

Total Portfolio: 

92.1 18.2 20.0 190.5 

73.2 

17.5 20.0 170.0

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan Equity Quasi Partic
3.0 
0.0 
3.0 
0.0
4.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0

2001 Banca Romaneasca 
2001 Romlease Restr. 

Total Pending Commitment: 

7.0 

0.0 

3.0 

0.0

Revitalization of 
Economy in Rural 

Areas 

Annex B9
Page 1 of 15

EU/SAPARD,
DFID, USAID,

ACDI/VOCA,
Dutch aid, GEF,
community-
based
organizations
and NGOs

* 

Continued 
agricultural policy 

dialogue with 
Government, e.g., 
providing feedback 
on subsidy design 
issues 
* Delivery of policy 
advice on rural and
agricultural risk
management
* Delivery of policy
advice on rural-
urban aspects of
regional
development
Prototype
decentralized
protected area
management plans
effectively operating
at three forested
sites in the
Carpathian range

* 

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
TARGETED POVERTY REDUCTION

* 

Low elementary 
school enrollment 

* 

Shift emphasis to 
student learning 

* 

Completion of state 
farms privatization 

Lending: 
a 
Rural Education 

* 

in rural areas 
* Very few 
university students 
from rural areas 
* A learning 
tradition that 
emphasizes 
accumulation of 
facts rather than 
independent 
thinking needed 
for a market 
economy 
Poor access to 
education for 
children of certain 
ethnic minority 
groups (e.g., 
Roma) 
* High incidence of 
poverty in rural 
areas 
* Limited rural 
opportunities due 
to inefficient factor 
and agricultural 
commodity 
markets, to which 
small semi- 
subsistence farm 
households have 
limited access 
Inadequate rural 
access to well 
maintained 
infrastructure 
(roads, water, 
supply, sanitation) 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

outcomes, to increase 
accountability 
Invest in education in 
rural areas to make 
access more equitable 
Involve local 
communities in 
education system 
* Reorient governance 
system to support the 
above 
* Maintain a stable 
market-oriented 
policy environment 
Improve local 
ownership and 
sustainability of rural 
infrastructure 
Facilitate access to 
finance in rural areas, 
as a way to support 
private sector growth 
in farm and off-farm 
income 
Invest in agriculture 
extension programs 
and job-training 
programs 
Strengthen absorptive * 
capacity, including at 
community and local 
government levels, to 
take advantage of 
large sums of EU 
SAPARD grant funds 
available through 
2006 and cnsure 
efficient, sustainable 

* Agricultural 
subsidies (if any) are 
transparent, well 
targeted, affordable, 
minimally distorting, 
and temporary 
* Withdrawal of the 
public sector from 
the management of 
on-farm and related 
off-farm irrigation 
facilities, and 
replacement of 
subsidies to SNIF 
with direct transfers 
to farmers (e.g. with 
irrigation vouchers) 
* GOR abstention from 
introducing directed 
credit programs and 
funds financing rural 
and agricultural 
credit 
Improved local 
government and 
community 
maintenance of 
infrastructure 
Improvement in 
access to health 
services in rural areas 
Establish 
decentralized
capacity for protected
area and conservation
planning including
local community
participation

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* Rural Development 
* 
SDF 2 
* Rural Finance 
* Health Sector 
Reform 2 
Irrigation 
Rehabilitation 
Portfolio: 
Education Reform 
* Higher Education 
Schools 
Rehabilitation 
* General Cadastre 
SDF I 
.Mine Closur & 
Soia Closure 
Social Mitigation 
* Agriculture Support 
Services 
* Health Sector 
Reform I 
* Biodiversity 
Conservation
Management GEF
Grant
* Agriculture Pollution
Control GEF Grant
Nonlending:
* CEM/EU CEM
PER
Education Sector
Review

* 
* 

rural investments 

I

Annex B9

Page 2 of 15

Improvement in 
Delivery of Health 
Services 

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
TARGETED POVERTY REDtUCTION

* 

* 

Progress toward 
trigger indicators 
Implementation 
progress 

DFID, Swiss
Agency tbr
Development
and
Cooperation,
Open Society
Institute,
USAID

* 
* 

Lending: 
* Health Sector 
Reform 2 
PALs 
Public Institution 
Building 
Portfolio: 
* Health Sector 
Reform I
* Bucharest Water
Supply
Nonlending:
* CEM/EU CEM
PER
* Anti-Corruption
Diagnostic

* 

* 

* 

* 

Poor health 
indicators relative 
to EU 
Inefficient 
allocation of 
resources 
Informal payments 
needed to access 
healthcare services 
* Medical 
professionals paid 
low wages 
Poor access to 
primary health care 
services in some 
areas 

* 

* 

* Develop more 
effective programs 
for tobacco control, 
TB control, and 
prevention of STD 
and HIV/AIDs 
Strengthen 
govemance of new 
health insurance 
houses at local 
levels 
* Develop planning 
and policy tools for 
better resource 
allocation from the 
center 
Improve quality and 
cost-effectiveness of 
primary, essential 
hospital and 
emergency care 
Increase training of 
staff in management 
and primary care. 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Increased patient 
compliance with 
DOTS in 80% or 
more Judets 
Increased 
HIV/AIDS 
awareness 
Financial results 
and viability of 
regional health 
insurance houses 
* Reduced variation 
in available 
facilities and health 
professionals 
between judets 
* Reductions in case
fatality rate in areas
provided with new
emergency and
intensive care
equipment and
training
* Response times for
EMS attendance at
major emergencies
reduced to less than
8 minutes
50% or more
pnmary care
practices in Phase I
judets trained
according to
guidelines

* 

Outreach to Ethnic 
Groups 

* 

I 

i 

* 

Poverty more 
severe among 
certain ethnic 
minorities (e.g., 
Roma), who are 
Isolated from the ! 

* 

Ensure better 
targeting of social 
assistance to those 
most in need 
Support community- 
ased develoDinent 

* Database and web- 
site on ethnicity 
established by Q2 
2002 
Ethnic integration 
D orograms designed 

* 

* 
* 

Lending: 
SDF 2 
Social Sector 
Development 
* Rural Education 
Portfolio. 

* Grant in support of 
ethnicity programs
operational Q4
2001
* RSDF outreach to
ethnic minorities 

EU, NGOs

_

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
TARGETED POVERTY REDUCTION

Annex B9
Page 3 of 15

rest of the 
economy and 
social str-uctures 

initiatives 

by Q4 2001 

* Social services to 
target vulnerable 
groups, including 
poor women 

* Database 
established by Q4 
2001 

* Disparity in 
eaming power of 
women versus men 
* Women not given 
same economic 
opportunities as 
men, due to
traditional attitudes
in the workplace
and in the home

* SDF I 
Nonlending: 
* CEM/EU CEM
*PER
* Education Sector
Study
* Poverty Policy
Capacity Building
* Labor Market Study

Lending: 
* Social Sector 
Development 
Nonlending: 
* Pension Study
* Labor Market Study

functional by Q4
2001

* Social service sub- NGOs
projects targeted to
women established
by Q4 2001

EU, SAPARD,
LEB

* Low social capital * Create opportunities 
in Romania after 
for more proactive 
so many years of 
community 
authoritarian rule 
participation in 
* Low level of trust 
decision-making by 
makes horizontal 
local authorities, 
collaboration 
particularly in 
difficult 
investment-related 
* Communities' 
activities 
access to resources * Create stable 
limited as a result 
channels of 
* Low level of 
communication 
interaction 
between local 
between local 
authorities and 
authorities and 
communities 
their constituency 
impairs 
participatory 
decision-making I 

* 

Increased 
Lending: 
community 
* SDF 2 
participation in 
* Rural Development 
local govemment 
* Forestry 
decisions 
Development 
* Open, participatory * Rural Education 
budgeting by 
* Hazards Mitigation 
selected local 
Portfolio: 
govemments 
* SDF I 
Improved 
* Biodiversity 
community based 
Conservation 
capacity for 
Management GEF 
participation in 
Grant 
planning for 
Nonlending: 
sustainable rural 
* Community 
development and 
Networks Studv 
use of natural 
resources 

* 

.____________________________________________ 

* Sub-projects 
designed and 
implemented by the
poor under SDF I
and 2
* At least 5
municipalities
implementing
participatory
budgeting by Q4
2002
* Establishment of
functioning forest
owners
associations, and
forest industry
advisory services
and outreach
program

Establishment of

I * 

Economic and Social 
Equity for Women 

Promotion of Social 
Capital through 
Community 
Development 

Annex B9
Page4 of 15

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
TARGETED POVERTY REDUCTION

participation in

protected area and
conservation
planning and
management at three
forested sites in the
Garpathian
mountains

Improved Child 
Welfare 

Pension Reform 

* 

Some poor 
families turn their 
children over to 
state institutions 
for lack of 
resources to 
provide for their 
children 
themselves 
* No effective 
transition system 
for teens old 
enough to leave 
state institutions 
* Bleak future of 
crime, drugs, and
prostitution

* Break the cycle of 
child abandonment 
by offering family 
support systems and 
services 
* Offer community- 
based care as 
alternative to 
institutions 
Improve targeting of 
social assistance to 
those most in need 

* 

* 

* MIS and child 
tracking system 
fully functional Q4 
2001 
* Number of 
institutionalized 
children reduced 
Services provided 
to street children 
* Development of 
pilot linking social 
assistance to 
prevention of 
abandonment of
children

* 

Lending: 
Social Sector 
Development 
Portfolio: 
* Child Welfare 
Reform 
* Health Sector 
Reform I 
Nonlending: 
* CEM/EU CEM 
PER 
Local Social Service
Delivery Study

* 

.

* High pension tax 
rates on the current 
workforce and 
employers drives 
many to the grey 
economy 
Low retirement 
age 
Indexation makes 
pension one of 
highest cost items 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Improved targeting of 
pension payments 
Improved pension 
administration 
Establishment of 
multi-pillar pension 
system, to include 
private pension funds 
accumulated as a 
savings base 
Sound regulation and 

* 

* 

* 

* CNPAS fully 
Lending: 
established by Q2 
Social Sector 
2002 
Development 
Pillar 2 law passed 
PALs 
by Q4 2001 
Porfolio: 
* Pension 
Employment & 
Supervision 
Social Protection
Commission (PSC) Nonlending:
established by Q4 
* CEM/EU CEM
2002 
PER
Pension Study

* 
* 

* 

EU, DFID

* 

* MIS implemented 
at Judets level by
Q2 2002
36 child welfare
sub-projects
implemented by Q4
2002
6 street children
sub-projects
implemented by Q4
2002

* 

USAID

* 

* 

IT system for 
pensions installed
by Q4 2002
PSC built up to
viable regulatory
body by Q4 2003

ROMANIA COtJNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
TARGETED POVEIRTY REDtUCTION

Annex B9
Page 5 of 15

Effective, Targeted 
Delivery of Social 
Assistance 

in state budget 
* Fiscally 
unsustainable

situation in light of
aging population 

* Govemment's 
Minimum Income 
Guarantee 
Program is 
inefficient, 
underfunded 
(dependent to large 
extent on 
municipal 
budgets), and 
unsustainable 

supervision of private
pension funds

* 

* New legal framework 
Institution building at 
central and local 
levels 
* Built-in flexibility for 
local governments to 
be more responsive 
to needs of the poor 

* 

Social Assistance 
Framework law 
passed by Q4 2001 
* MIG law passed by 
Q4 2001 
* MIG financed from 
state budget at 
0.4% of GDP by 
Q1 2002 
Targeting 
coverages 
improved by 25% 
by Q4 2003 

* 

* 

* 

Lending: 
Social Sector 
Development 
Portfolio: 
Employment & 
Social Protection
* Child Welfare
Reform
Nonlending:
* CEM/EU CEM
PER
Local Social Service
Delivery Study
* Pension Study

* 
* 

.

* 

* 

EU, DFID

2 Social Assistance 
pilots completed by
Q4 2001
IT system installed
by Q4 2003

Annex B9
Page 6 of 15

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT

Macroecononlic 
Stabilization 

* 
High extemal debt 
* High inflation 

* 
Low growth 
* Budget deficits 
largely driven by 
heavy subsidies to 
enterprise sector, in 
the form of tax 
arrears and low 
energy prices 

* 

Improving public 
expenditure 

* 

management, aiming 
at achieving greater 
fiscal discipline 
Privatizations and 
liquidations of large 
loss-making SOEs 
* Transition to 
market-based energy 
pricing 

Structural Adjustment 
of Financial Sector 

* 

* 

State-owned banks 
dominate sector and 
effectively 
subsidize loss- 
making enterprises 
Inadequate 
supervision and 
regulatory 
framework in bank 
and non-bank 
sectors 
* High interest rates 
and state 
borrowings crowd 
out private sector 

.

* Privatization or 
liquidation of state- 
owned banks 
(including BA, 
BCR) 
Bring credit 
cooperatives under 
supervision 
authority of NBR 
* Modemize 
regulatory 
framework for banks 
and non-bank 
financial 
intermediaries 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Improved law 
Lending: 
enforcement and 
PSAL 2/PIBL 2 
regulatory framework * 
PALs 
in the banking sector 
Portfolio: 
* Adequate legal and 
PIBL I 
regulatory framework Nonlending: 
for capital and equity 
PER/EU CEM 
markets 
Financial 
Improved corporate 
Sector 
govemance of banks, 
Assessment 
including enhanced 
management 
operations and 
financial 
performance

* 
* 

Finalizing of 
privatization 

IMF (in lead),
EU

process started
under PSAL I
Introduction and
completion of new
privatization
projects, including
National Rail

Freiaht Systemr

National Salt
Company and
National Mineral
Water Company

* 

.

* 

Lending: 
* 
PSAL 2/PIBL 2 
* 

PALs 
Portfolio: 
PIBL I 
Nonlending: 
PER/EU CEM 
* Macroeconomic 
Management IDF 
Grant 
* Energy Sector 
Study/TA 

* 

* 

Reduced losses 
of national 

* 

companies and 
Regies 
Autonomes 
* Reduced fiscal 
and quasi-fiscal 
costs related to 
support for loss- 
makers 
Enforcement of 
hard budget 
constraints 
* Adopt new 
energy pricing
policies and tax
regime
* Reduce payment
arrears by SOEs
Progressive
reduction in
thermal energy
subsidies

* 

IMF, EU,
USAID

* 

* 

Full privatization of 
banking sector 
Improvements in the
Law on Credit
Cooperatives
* Adequate bank
infrastructure
systems such as
Payment and
Clearing systems,
use of IAS, Deposit
Guarantee Fund,
Risk Classification
System

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT

Annex B9
Page 7 of 15

borrowing 
* Under-developed 
capital and money 

market structure in 
primary and 
secondary markets 
* Weak banking and 
capital market 
infrastructure 
* Weak institutional 
capacity in the 
banking system 

.

* Strategic plan and
blueprint for
developing capital

.

and equity markets
Strengthen the
National Securities
Commission and the
Insurance
Commission
* Develop and
strengthen Deposit
Insurance, Credit
Bureau, Credit
Rating system, and
Payment and
Clearing System
Technical assistance
for banks in credit
and risk
management,
treasury operations,
branch management,
loan workouts and
debt recovery, etc
* Licensing or exit of
credit cooperatives
for supervision and
regulatory oversight
by the NBR
* Require IAS for
financial reporting
by banks 

_

Structural Adjustment 
of Enterprise Sector 

* 

* 

* 

_ 

Losses and inter- 
enterprise arrears 
burdening state 
budget 
Low investment 
levels 
Low value added of 

Seek strategic 
investor(s) through 
international 
investment bank for 
Petrom, natural gas 
production 
companies and gas/ 

* Reduced arrears to 
utilities, other 
commercial 
creditors, and the 
budget 
* Unbundle energy 
sector to achieve 

| 

* 
* 

Lending: 
PSAL 2/PIBL 2 
PALs 
Portfolio: 
.
PIBL I 
Petroleum Sector 
Rehabilitation 

* 

IMF, EBRD,
EIB, EU/ISPA

* 

Liberalization and 
privatization of 
network industries,
including majority or
strategic sales under
market conditions of
SOEs in the oil, gas

Annex B9
Page 8 of 15

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT

exports 

electricity 
distribution 
companies 

and electricity
distribution sectors

* 

efficient industry 
* Powcr Sector 
structures 
Rehabilitation 
* Offer energy 
* Railway
companies and 
Rehabilitation
assets to strategic 
a Telecommuni-
investors 
cations Reform &
Streamline legal and 
Privatization
policy frameworks 
Support
for independent 
* Mine Closure &
functioning of 
Social Mitigation
regulatory agencies Noniending:
* Dilute govemment 
PER/EU CEM
share in 
* Anti-Corruption
RomTelecom and 
Diagnostic
privatize National 
* Energy Sector
Radio 
Study/TA
Communications
company

* 

Strengthening of 
Business Environment 

* Complex tax 
payment procedures 
* Changeable SME 
facilities 
* Bureaucratic 
business 
registration 
procedures 
* Costly labor rules 
* Cumbersome 
customs operations 

* 

* 

Establish business 
environment task 
force with members 
from public and 
private sector 
Simplify tax 
payment procedures 
* Develop plan for 
reducing labor rule 
costs 
* Develop an anti- 
corruption strategy 

* 

Significant growth 
in the number of 
registered 
enterprises, and 
gradual increases in 
overall employment 
generation from the 
SME sector 
* A broader fiscal 
base and more 
systematic and 
standardized 
collection 
procedures 
Improvements in 
corporate 
governance and 
shareholder 
protection 
* More effective and 
efficient system of 

* 

* 

* 
* 

Lending: 
PSAL 2/PIBL 2 
* PALs 
Portfolio: 
PIBL I 
Petroleum Sector 
Rehabilitation 
* Railway 
Rehabilitation 
* General Cadastre 
.
Cultural Heritage 
Trade & Transport 
Facilitation 
Energy Efficiency 
GEF Grant 
Nonlending: 
PER/EU CEM 
* Anti- 
Corruption 
Diagnostic 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* Removal of
administrative
barriers to
establishing and
operating
businesses in
Romania
Improvements in
the building permit
process
* Abolition of special
funds
Introduction of
more equitable and
efficient taxation
Imolementation of
sound,
internationally
recognized
accounting
standards and

* 

* 

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT

9 .. 

.

. ~~~~~ .

.

.

. ~~~~~ .

. z .

. ~~~bankruptcy 

and 

liquidation 

* 

* 

Sustained increase 
in commercially 
funded investments 
in energy efficiency 
Reduce GNG 
emissions 

* 

Grant financing: 
GEF Energy 
Efficiency 

* 

Annex B9

Page 9 of 15

financial audit

requirements

Facilitate 
functioning of a
commercial
revolving fund for
energy efficiency
investments

GEF

Development and 
implementation of 
commercially viable 
energy efficiency 
investments 
financed by a 
dedicated, market-
based financing
facility

Establish M&E 
system for social 
impact of PSAL 2 
program 
Funding of labor 
redeployment 
services (with built- 
in incentives for 
seeking altemative 
employment) for 
dislocated workers 
stemming from 
privatizations or 
liquidations, for 
some transition 
period 

Improved Energy 
Efficiency 

Redeployment of 
Dislocated Labor 

* 

* 

High energy 
intensity reduces 
competitiveness of 
Romanian industry, 
burdens balance of 
payments with high 
energy import bill, 
and increases 
environmental 
problems

Low mobility of 
labor force 
Heavy dependence 
by labor on 
employment by 
unprofitable state- 
owned enterprises 

Information 
Technology 

* 

* 

_ 

Low investment in 
IT sector 
Brain drain as IT- 
skilled youth 
emigrate to work 
elsewhere (nearly 
one-third of 
Romania'ts IT 
l 
l 
graduates 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 

* 

* M&E system 
established by Q4 
2001 
Labor 
Redeployment 
Program (LRP) 
services provided to 
35,000 workers a 
year 
Job counseling 
services provided to 
all unemployed 

* 

* 
* 

Lending: 
PSAL 2/PIBL 2 
Social Sector 
Development 
Portfolio: 
Employment & 
Social Protection 
* Mine Closure & 
Social Mitigation 
Nonlending: 
Local Social Service 
Deliver Study
PER
CEM/EU CEM
Education Sector
Review

* 
* 
* 

* 

* 

EU/RICOP, US
Department of
Labor

* M&E reports 
reviewed and 
discussed with 
Govemment
(ongoing)
(LRP) operating
fully, reaching
35,000 clients a year
* Micro-credit funds
operational (4 by Q4
2002)

* 

New Govemment 
Ministry to give IT 
strategic focus 
Increase access to IT 
Use IT to improve 
quality of and access 
to education at all 
levels 

* 

* 

* 

Use IT to implement 

* 

Adopt modern IT 
strategy and policy, 
including e- 
govemance and 
rural service access 
Establish enabling 
legal and regulatory 
framework 
Adopt IT curricula 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Lending: 
Rural Development 
PIBL 2
Rural Education
PALs
Public Institution
Building
Portfolio:
* 
Rural Finance 

EU, Private
Sector

l 

l

Annex B9
Page 10 of 15

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT

in schools 

emigrating every 
year) 
* Uneven access to IT 

cost-saving 
efficiencics in public 
scctor (e- 
government) 
* Create enabling 
environment for 
private sector 
participation 

* 
PIBL I
* Telecommunications
Reform &
Privatization Support
Nonlending:
* Romania Global
Gateway
eCAS
InfoDev

* 

* 

ROMANIA COtI'NTRY ASSISTANCE STRATIEGY MA'I'RIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
GOVERN ANCE AND INSTITUIJIONAl. REFORM

Annex B9
Page I I of 15

with Minimn I 
Corruption 

.

* 

} Efficicnt Public Scclor 
* Development oJf 
t * Widespread 
corruption 
comprehensive 
perccived by and 
anticorruption 
experienced by the 
strategy, focusing on 
population 
preventive as well as 
* Corruption closely 
enforcement aspects 
linked with 
Full implemention of 
qualities of public 
the Civil Service 
administration 
Law, strengthened 
* Corruption in the 
provisions on 
formation of laws, 
meritocratic 
rules and decrees. 
depoliticized decision 
making 
Imptoved budget 
preparation and 
exccution 
* Establishment of a 
regime of openness 
with free access to 
state information, 
without excessive 
penalties for 
disclosing vaguely 
defined state secrets 
Strengthened 
transparency in party 
financing 
Strengthened 
oversight by 
Parliament, the 
Judiciary, civil 
society and extemal 
audit 
Establishment of 
civil service Code of 
Ethics 

* 

* 

 

.

* 

* 

* 

|LI.ending: 
PALs 

* 
* P'ublic Institutionl 

Detailed, 
monitorable, 
sectoral action plans 
(e.g., health, courts) 
Building 
to reduce corruption Portfolio: 
and improve 
Trade & Transport 
efficiency 
Facilitation 
Increased use of 
* Health Sector Reform 
rule-based 
Nonlending: 
equalization 
* CEM/EU CEM 
formulae to allocate 
PER 
general revenue 
* Anti-Corruption 
grants to local 
Diagnostic Study 
councils in a manner * 
Local Social Service 
that is transparent, 
Delivery Study 
predictable and less 
D Legal/Judicial 
dependent on 
Assessment 
subjective 
judgments 
Increased local 
govemment decision 
making ability and 
accountability 
Establishment of 
system of regular 
monitoring and 
evaluation of 
government policies 
and programs 
Strengthen 
capacities and 
independence of 
Court of Accounts 
* Reduced prevalence 
of informal 
payments 
* Reduced turnover of 
civil servants 

_ 

* 

* 

* 

LJSAID, EU,
UNDP, DFID,
Stability Pact
Anti-CorruptionI
initiative,
OECD, Council
of Europe, UN
Center for
International
Crime
Prevention

.

| * Bank to help with 
TOR for 
development of AC 
Strategy 
. More vertical 
dialogue budget 
formulation process; 
earlier availability of 
reliable budget 
forecasts 
Strengthen 
professionalism of
civil service; remove
ambiguities of
political versus noni-
political
appointments
* Development of
implementation
capacity of free
access to information
law (e.g., clear
guidelines for civil
servants on how to
comply with
requests, clear advice
to citizens how to file
a request)
* Development of
Code of Ethics, with
detailed plans for
training and
implementation
* Detailed plan for
enforcing rules on
transparency in party
and campaign
financing

Annex B9
Page 12 of 15

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL REFORM

following elections
*Greater budget
predictability

* 

* 

Free access to state
information not
otherwise legislated
to be secret
Public debate on
draft laws and
regulation
* Greater enforcement
of existing rules on
disclosure of party

financing

* Development of 
system of regulatory 
impact analysis 
* DraRl laws publicly 
available for 
discussion before 
vote 
* Develop capacity at 
the local level to 
deliver infrastructure 
and social services 
effectively 

* Greater dialogue with USAID,
civil society and 
EU/ISPA,
business associations UNDP, DFID,
on proposed 
Stability Pact
legislation- 
Anti-Corruption
mandated public 
Initiative,
hearings 
OECD, Council
* Detailed plan for 
of Europe, UN
monitoring of 
Center for
implementation of 
International
public sector reforms Crime
Training, including 
Prevention
financial
management,
provided

* 

* 
* 

Lending: 
PALs 
Public Institution 
Building 
Portfolio: 
* Trade & Transport 
Facilitation 
* Health Sector Reform 
Nonlending: 
IDF Grant for Eco- 
nomic Comunications 
* CEM/EU CEM 
PER 
* Anti-Corruption 
Diagnostic Study 
Local Social Service
Delivery Study
Legal/Judicial
Assessment

* 

* 

* 

.

Improved Policy 
Formulation, 
Coordination, and 
Implementation 

* 

* 
* 

Policy reversals 
Instability of legal 
framework 
important obstacle 
for business 
* Excessive reliance 
on emergency 
decrees 
* Legislation and 
reforms not 
implemented 
Inconsistencies in 
the legislative 
framework 
* Excessive and 
vague regulations 
* Non-transparent 
and inefficient 
law-making 
process 
* Weak 
administrative 
capacity at the 
local level to 

* 

* 

Improved analysis, 
consultation and 
deliberation of the 
merits, costs and 
benefits of policy 
proposals 
Strengthen policy 
formulation 
capacities in both 
Cabinet and line 
ministries 
* Build incentives for 
implementation of 
public sector reforms 
Improve and make 
transparent policy 
formulation process 
Establish business 
environment task 
force with members
from public and
private sector
Increased awareness
of need for reform

* 

* 

* 

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL REFORM

Annex B9

Page 13 of 15

deliver
infrastructure and
social services

Local Govemment 
Capacity Building 

* 

* 

Losses and inter- 
enterprise arrears 
burdening state 
budget 
Low investment 
levels 
* Decreasing 
quality of 
municipal service, 
due to lack of 
efficiency in 
operations and 
capital for 
investments along 
with inadequate 
institutional 
capacity 

* Liberalize market, 
adopt competitive 
industry structure, 
strengthen regulatory 
framework, 
seek/expand private 
sector participation in 
electricity, oil, gas, 
telecoms, railways 
Improve conditions 
for private sector 
involvement in 
delivery of local 
public utility services 

* 

* 

* Reduced arrears to 
utilities, other 
commercial creditors, 
and the budget 
Streamline legal and 
policy frameworks 
for independent 
functioning of 
regulatory agencies 
* Provide quality 
municipal services at 
affordable prices 
Increase efficiency of
service delivery
through the private
sector
* Create environment
for economic and
sustainable municipal
financing

* 

* 

Lending: 
PALs 
* Rural Development 
SDF 2 
Portfolio: 
* Bucharest Water 
Supply 
Nonlending 
PER/EU CEM 

* 

* 

IMF, EBRD,
EIB, EU/ISPA

* 

Promote policy 
changes that will 
increase the role of
the private sector in
the provision of
municipal services
* Create a framework
that would promote
private sector
partcipation and
sustainable municipal
financing

Improved National 
Preparedness for 
Natural Disasters 

________ 

l 

t 

_ 

* Bucharest at high 
risk of major 
earthquake damage 
* Romania regularly 
suffers from 
drought and 

* 

flooding 
Poor arc 
particular!, 
vulnerabie 
* No effcctive 
national svstem for 
coping with such 

* 

* 

Institution building 
for national 
emergency response 
capacity, with 
effective networking 
between central and

local authorities
Update buiiding 
codes in light of
lates- technology,
retrofit selected
public buildings
Introduce national 

i

Lending: 
* Hazards Mitigation
(IBRD & GEF)
Nonlending:
* CEM/EU CEM

Private sector

_ 

_ --- 

_

Annex B9
Page 14 of 15

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL REFORM

Strengthening of Forest 
Resource Management 

emergencies 

* Restitution of 
forest land is 
putting rich natural 
resource at risk of 
short-term 
exploitation with 
long-term 
consequences 
Forest resources 
could be developed 
in sustainable 
manner with 
higher value added 

.

* 

* 

* 

* 

catastrophic
insurance scheme
Institute

environmental
monitoring and flood

waming system

Institution building 
centrally/ and locally 
to ensure smooth 
transition during 
restitution process 
Investment in 
infrastructure (roads) 
Establish public- 
private partnership 
for business 
development and 
advisory services for 
wood products 
industries 

Toxic Site Management 

* 

No clear 
mechanism for 

resolving liability 
issues, with 

inhibiting cffect on 

* 

Institution building 
for response 

capacity, with 
effective networking 

between central and 

* Adoption of 
National Forest 
Policy and Strategy 
(finalized in Dec. 
2000) 
* Capacity for 
supporting and 
monitoring 
sustainable 
management of 
public and private 
forest resources 
* No loss of forest 
cover or 
biodiversity 
Increased 
contribution to 
GDP derived from 
sustainable forest
management
Increased public
awareness and
support for
sustainable
management of
forest resources

* 

* 

* 

Lending: 
Forestry 
Development 
Portfolio: 
* General Cadastre 
* Biodiversity 
Conservation 
Management GEF 
Grant 
Nonlending: 
PER 
* CEM/EU CEM 

* 

Lending: 
Hazards Nlitigation

* 

GEF Grant
Portfolio:

* Agriculture

Forest owners
associations,
forest industries,
private
investors, NGOs

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Forest owners 
associations 
established 
Effectively trained 
and equipped forest 
inspectorate and
outreach services
Forest management
information system
Improved
infrastructure for
environmentally and
economically
sustainable forest
management (forest
roads)
Forest industries
advisory services

GEF

ROMANIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX
HIGH CASE: FY 2002 - 2004
GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL REFORM

Annex B9
Page 15 of 15

Biodiversity and 
Natural Resource 
Conservation 

* 

* 

local authorities 

some 
privatizations 
Inefficient 

response to toxic
emergencies

Fragile ecosystems * 
at risk due to land 
restitution process 
and resulting 
changes in land 
use 

* 

Establish inter- 
sectoral, participatory 
planning and 
sustainable 
management capacity 
in biodiversity 
conservation 

Pollution Control
GEF Grant
Nonlending: PER

Portfolio: 
* Biodiversity 
Conservation 
Management GEF 
Grant 

Establishment of 
new systems for 
decentralized, 
participatory 
planning and 
management of 
protected areas and 
biodiversity 
conservation in the 
production 
landscape 
Increased 
awareness of the 
needs and 
opportunities for 
sustainable 
conservation of 
biodiversity 

* 

Prototype 
GEF, natural
decentralized 
resource owners
protected area 
and managers
management plans 
(e.g., Romsilva,
effectively 
private forest
operating at three 
owners, farmers,
forested sites in the water
Carpathian range 
authorities, etc.)
* Capacity to 
local
develop, implement 
government,
and monitor a 
NGOs the
prioritized national 
academic
conservation 
community
strategy, including
catalyzing
establishment of
decentralized
systems for
protected area and

conservation

management at

priority sites

Harnessing of 
Renewable Energy 
Resources 

.

* 

Romania has 
considerable 
renewable energy 
resources (hydro) 
and excess thermal 
capacity 

Possible carbon 
trading projects to 
rehabilitate 
hydroelectic units 
and decommission 
thermal, and/or 
several foicst-based

__________ 
______ 

___________activitics 
__________ 

* Develop integrated 
least cost program 
of hydropower 
rehabilitation and
themial power
decommissioning

Lending: 
* Carbon Credits (PCF) 

* Availability of 
renewable capacity 
enhanced

PCF, private
sector

_ 

_ 

_

ROMANIA
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
ontac 
performance 

Major issue 

Country 
priority 

Bank 
priority 

Reconciliation of
country and Bank
priorities

Annex B IO

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 

Public sector 

Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 

Health, nutrition & population 

Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development 
Environment 

Social development 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 

Private sector 
Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

Poor 

Good 

Fair 

Good 

Good 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 
Fair 

Fair 

Poor 

Poor 
Fair 

Good 

Low growth 

New SME growth 

Corruption 

High 

High 

High 

Equal job opportunities and pay 

Low 

High

High

High

Low

Rural education 
Health financing and primary care
alth 
access
Pension reform 

High 

High

Moderate Moderate

High 

High

Rural poverty 
Regulatory framework 

High 
High 

High
High

Community development 

Moderate High 

Major focus of Social
Development Fund and
Rural Development

loans

Regulatory framework and bank 

High 

High

privatization

Business environment 
High 
Pricing and regulatory framework Moderate 

High
High 

Private sector participation and 
investment 

High 

Moderate 

Active dialogue

European institutions in
lead for investment

Annex C
Page 1 of 8

SUMMARY OF FEEDBACK ON
WORLD BANK'S DRAFT COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR ROMANIA

The CAS Consultation Process

The Bank Group's assistance strategy takes account of feedback received in the
course of in-country consultations with the Government and other stakeholders on its
draft of the Romania Country Assistance Strategy (CAS). The Bank gave a draft of the
CAS to the Government in January 2001, for its review and comment. In February the
Government sent detailed comments to the Bank. Many of them were aimed at
describing Romania's performance over the past eighteen months in more positive terms
and to note the challenges that inhibited more progress. In response, the Bank made
several revisions but retained the candor and objectivity needed for a CAS. Other
comments from the Government related to specific instruments of assistance. For
example, the Government requested continued assistance from the Bank and IFC in
information technology and communications, and in the area of private sector
participation in municipal infrastructure and services. The document was modified to
reflect these areas of Bank Group assistance more explicitly. It was also agreed that once
the new Government has been in office for about a year, it will consider with Bank
management the possibility of a CAS update.

Feedback was also obtained during focus group sessions hosted by the Bank, and
from comments received electronically from the World Bank's eCAS website, on which
the draft CAS was posted (web address: www.worldbank.org/romaniacas). These
comments were submitted either via email to the Bank's Romania CAS team, or via a
public discussion space ("chat space") on the eCAS website. Seven focus group sessions
were held: five in Bucharest with Parliamentarians, Government economists, private
sector representatives, union leaders, and NGOs and think tanks; and two in the Jiu
Valley, one with NGOs and the other with local public officials.

The eCAS website has been quite active since its launch on January 18, 2001,
with more than 4,000 "hits" to date. The level of interest in the draft CAS has been high,
and the feedback received, including from some Romanians working or studying abroad,
has been constructive and thoughtful. It was largely incorporated into the final version of
the CAS.

Maior Cross-Cuttinig Themes

A number of cross-cutting themes emerged and are summarized below:

* Need for Action - Romania lacks an action-oriented roadmap for its development,
and the capacity to translate words into concrete actions. Despite the many strategies

Annex C
Page 2 of 8

developed in the last 11 years, Romanians do not have a clear idea about how the
various strategies relate to each other, to what extent they will, in fact, to be
implemented, and how. In 1999 the National Strategy for Sustainable Development,
signed by all partners including representatives of the civil society, articulated a
strategy with a broad base of support. However, without legal standing, that strategy
cannot be considered a meaningful national strategy. The development agenda
proposed in the CAS needs to be harmonized with the new Government's Action
Plan. In addition, the Romanian Government needs to strengthen significantly its
implementation capacity. This is a major challenge.

* Need for Selectivity - The objectives need to be prioritized and translated into
specific, phased and time-bound actions to be taken, in order to reach stability,
profitability and openness. lThe Government needs to take political decisions as to
relative priorities, and develop its multi-year Action Plan on that basis. One way to
set priorities would be to identify the existing resources and the likely "quick wins."
Also stressed is the need to finalize whatever action once started. It would be better
to work on only 15% of the objectives but to conclude them successfully, than to
embark on all of them but leave them unfinished.

- Linkages Among Objectives - There is a need for linkages and cause/effect
relationships among Romania's objectives presented in the CAS, as well as phased
timing for actions to address ithem. All development pillars need to be equally strong
and consolidated, and their construction should rely on the third level (the
development objectives) where activities need to be correlated across the strategic
pillars - e.g., strong forestry management (under the fifth pillar) can be achieved only
in close linkage with rural development (under the third pillar) and improved
legislation (under the second pillar).

D Need to Integrate GAS Objectives with IMF and EU Programs - There should be a
correlation between the first strategic pillar (promotion of economic growth) and
agreements with the IMF (Stand-By Arrangement) and EU (Medium-Term Economic
Strategy).

* Need for Political Resolve to Reform - Until now, the Government has taken only
half-steps toward reform. This half-step approach has led only to losses of the
resources involved and to incomplete reforms. Therefore some Romanians can see
the cost of reform but not its benefits.

* Need for Greater Role for Civil Society in Romania's Development - The
Government needs the support of civil society in order to succeed. The Government
should therefore institute a communications program to explain to citizens how they
can benefit from Government's actions, in order to enlist their support for these
reforms. Equally, there will be more public support for reforms if the public sees that
the Government considers itself accountable to the Romanian population for
delivering on the reform agenda. This accountability should be formalized through
more than just the next round of elections. Specifically, periodic evaluations of the

Annex C
Page 3 of 8

implementation process should be available to the public, and civil society should
collaborate with the Government in the design of this monitoring system. The
Government should also work with civil society as a partner for achieving Romania's
development objectives (e.g., in regional development). One way to formalize this
partnership, as well as to reinforce accountability, would be to make each Ministry's
existing State Secretary responsible for Parliamentary relations, also responsible for
the Ministry's relations with civil society. In parallel, civil society needs to take more
responsibility for Romania's development, and not wait for the Government to devise
all of the solutions. Given their prestige within Romanian civil society, religious
leaders might consider how they could play a larger role in this regard than they
typically have in the past.

* Need for Change in Romanian Mindset - A change in the Romanian mindset is
needed if the country is to succeed in (i) institutional reform to strengthen the rule of
law (the first strategic pillar), (ii) shifting from a supply-driven to a demand-driven,
client/customer service- oriented economy, and (iii) building a proactive society in
which civil society and the private sector take initiatives on their own and in
partnership with the Government, rather than expecting the Government to solve all
problems. This requires, inter alia, adult training and new approaches in curricula for
school-age children. The Government should enlist the private sector as a partner in
this endeavor.

D High Case is Only Option - Of the three lending scenarios, only the high case should
be considered, as it is the one which corresponds to the Government's program aimed
at accelerating economic growth. The other scenarios would mean giving up any
hope for improvement in Romania.

Romania's Development A2enda

Much of the feedback focused on the different elements of Romania's
development agenda as portrayed in Figure 1 (the Roman temple) in the draft CAS, with
the two outcomes of poverty reduction and EU accession supported by five strategic
pillars, which in turn are underpinned by a number of development objectives. These
specific comments are summarized below:

Poverty Reduction and EU Accession as Key Outcomes - There is widespread
agreement that poverty reduction is critical, and time is of the essence - not only if the
poor are to survive, but also if Romanian democracy is to survive. Some feel that the
only meaningful outcome is poverty reduction, from which EU accession will naturally
follow. Others feel that the key outcome of poverty reduction should be replaced with
economic growth (currently shown as the first of the five strategic pillars). One tends
either to see economic growth as the means by which to achieve poverty reduction, or
poverty reduction as a by-product of the ultimate objective of economic growth for its
own sake.

Annex C
Page 4 of 8

Five Strategic Pillars - Most of those who commented on the draft CAS consider
the first two pillars - promotion of economic growth and institution building to
strengthen the rule of law - to be the most important. There is consensus that institution
building to strengthen the rule of law is a prerequisite to economic growth, and therefore
more urgent in terms of sequencing multiple priorities. There is general agreement that
the other three pillars - greater access to opportunity, strengthening of the social safety
net, and natural resource and environmental protection and sustainable development - are
valid as well, but there is somewhat less of a sense of urgency with regard to them.

Development Objectives - The feedback on the development objectives is
discussed below, correlated to the relevant Strategic Pillar:

Promotion of Economic Growth

> A consistent and forceful message in the electronic feedback is that both the
Government and the Bank should specifically and urgently address the need to
mitigate against the exodus of Romania's educated young adults to economies with
higher salary opportunities (the "brain drain"). It is stressed that one of Romania's
greatest assets is its human capital, particularly its young people; yet too many are
leaving the country for better opportunities in Western Europe or North America. A
critical mass of this intellectual elite is needed back in Romania. The Government
should create incentives for them to return to work not only in the private sector, but
in the public sector as well. Specific proposals include establishing Romania's first
public administration and management university program, a system of post doctoral
scholarships, and a national program of research grants in academic centers of
excellence.

> The new Government needs to compensate for its predecessors' delays in reforms by
accelerating long overdue actions in areas critical to spurring economic growth,
namely, financial sector reform, enterprise reform, and utilities reform (including
demonopolization). Otherwise, the majority of Romania's assets will remain in the
public sector as a drain on the Government's budget, and economic growth will
continue to be at best slow, or yet again negative. At the same time, programs need to
be implemented to facilitate the reabsorption into the workforce of labor dislocated by
these structural changes.

> Much of the feedback focuses on the need for growth promotion as a vehicle for job
creation. Job creation is seen as a national priority, especially in economically
depressed regions such as the Jiu Valley, e.g., through tourism development. (A
specific project proposal has been posted on the eCAS website's discussion space for
the Government and Bank's consideration.) This in turn will require investment in
infrastructure and environmental clean-up, for which the local population should be
hired to the maximum extent possible. It is also stressed that job creation will
facilitate pension reform and health sector reform.

Annex C
Page 5 of 8

> The Government should ensure that the size of the fiscal deficit is tied to the rate of
economic growth, so that the gap between the two is not inflationary.

> The private sector should play an active role in the development of market
mechanisms. There are many actions the private sector could take on its own,
without Governnent involvement or intervention, but this will require the private
sector to organize and mobilize itself for this purpose. The Govermnent should work
with the private sector as its partner in furthering the transition to a market-based
economy. To that end, the Government should establish professional, non-political
agencies to deal with the business community and to engage in active dialogue and
consultation.

0 Support for the development of small and medium-sized enterprises (SOEs) should
not take the form of the excessively generous facilities included in the 1999 law for
SMEs, as these run counter to a market economy.

> The Government should foster partnerships between academia and the private sector
to engage in applied research in strategic areas where Romania has competitive
advantages.

v Strengthening of the business environment should include the establishment of a
public agency similar to the Small Business Administration in the U.S., which makes
small loans to qualifying start-up firms.

> The private sector should be allowed to take the lead in infrastructure. For example,
water treatment and supply should be privatized.

9 The following should be added to the list of development objectives aimed at
promoting economic growth: (i) stimulation of investment, particularly foreign direct
investment (FDI), which will create jobs; (ii) formation of capital markets; (iii)
nurturing of the information technology (IT) and e-commerce sectors (e.g., through
the establishment of a "technology park"); (iv) development of the leasing market; (v)
improved corporate governance, including better accounting and audit standards,
training and effective enforcement; (vi) strengthening of the agriculture sector; and
(vii) improvement of Romania's image, including through innovative use of the
worldwide web.

Institution Building to Strengthen the Rule of Law

> To attract FDI and to stimulate the development of Romania's private sector, the
country's legal framework must be stabilized and corruption significantly reduced.
Anti-corruption efforts should be concentrated initially on a few specific areas with
the potential for "quick wins" - e.g., registration of cars, registration of firms.

> The private sector, especially the foreign investment community, is part of the
corruption problem, to the extent that they pay bribes to public officials.

Annex C
Page 6 of 8

Decentralization, anti-corruption policies, and elimination of bureaucratic red tape are
critical to both private sector development and efficient use of public resources. This
will require significant capacity building. With respect to decentralization, capacity
building should include training of 
local officials in management, project
development, and proposal writing.

0 Enforcement of tax collection should be a high priority, not only to strengthen the
rule of law but also to increase the resources available for public investment and
provision of public services -- particularly in rural areas, where taxes are generally
not collected and the lack of public services contributes to rural poverty.

It is widely agreed that protection of property rights is of utmost importance, not only
as part of strengthening the rule of law but also as a prerequisite for private sector
development and agricultural and rural development.

Labor courts should be established.

> Feedback emphasizes the need for political reform, particularly in two respects. One
is that the national political culture should embrace more readily the spirit of
compromise, in order to move the country away from contentious fragmentation and
the resulting paralysis. The other is that politicians should be required to disclose the
sources and amounts of their political contributions, in the interest of transparency.
Equally, legislation to eliminate perceived and real conflicts of interest of public
officials is needed.

*Greater Access to Opportunity

> Rural development is very important, particularly in terms of EU accession.

> Priority should be given to ensuring Romanians' access to quality healthcare.
Particularly vulnerable are children in rural areas. Paramedic training is proposed.

> It will be extremely important to eliminate the current constraints to the mobility of
Romania's workforce. This will require more fluidity in the real estate market, better
infrastructure (especially transport), and affordability of transportation costs (whether
for commuting or for relocating) in relation to one's wages.

> Improved quality of education is important, particularly in rural areas, where students
rarely progress to secondary or higher education. It is noted that only 2-3% of
university students are from rural areas. Roma children are also generally excluded
from the education system, especially after grade 4. In addition to policy reforms and
school construction and rehabilitation, education reforms should include training for
teachers in rural areas and community awareness raising.

Annex C
Page 7 of 8

Strengthening of Social Safety Net

There is widespread support for the reinstatement of pension reform, to which the
Government should give high and urgent priority, for a number of equally significant
reasons. One is that the current pension scheme is an unsustainable fiscal burden
leading to macroeconomic vulnerability and instability. It is postulated that if tax
rates were lower, tax revenue would actually increase because more firms would
enter the formal economy, which would strengthen the Government's fiscal position
and thereby move Romania closer to a high-case scenario. A second and related
reason is its importance to SME development. With tax rates so high in order to
cover the Government's pension obligations, many SMEs are forced into the gray
economy. Third, pension reform is critical to reducing poverty among the elderly
population.

> Social assistance programs need to be reformed in order to provide incentives for the
unemployed to rejoin the workforce. Currently, a person's social assistance payments
are often higher than his or her potential wages would be, if employed. This results in
the perpetuation of unemployment. In addition, social assistance needs to be better
targeted, to ensure that it goes to those in most need rather than to those who are most
vocal about their need.

Priority should be given to training of social service providers.

> The Government has created too many child welfare agencies since 1996. This has
made collaboration with NGOs extremely difficult. Family social services should be
strengthened with the aim of preventing, and reducing the incidence of, child
abandonment. Staff of state-run institutions need training. A three-way partnership
among the Government, the private sector, and NGOs needs to be strengthened to
address the needs of children infected with HIV (mainly due to contaminated medical
procedures).

Consumer protection should be included as a development objective.

Natural Resource and Environmental Protection and Sustainable Development

> Anti-pollution enforcement should be so effective, and penalties for violations of
environmental regulations so severe, that a non-compliant firm would no longer be
financially viable.

> Policies for pollution control and for biodiversity conservation need to be mutually
reinforcing.

> Biodiversity conservation should be integrated with policies relating to restitution of
land. Otherwise, there is great risk of deterioration of Romania's natural resources
during the land restitution process.

Annex C
Page 8 of 8

> Romanians need better access to information about the EU's environmental
standards.

Client Survey

Eighteen months prior to the CAS consultations, the Bank conducted a client
survey as input to the CAS. There were nearly 600 respondents (an 80 percent response
rate), including Government officials, private sector representatives involved in Bank
projects, journalists, and non-Governmental organization (NGO) representatives. The
survey was conducted by an independent private organization, to ensure professionalism
and confidentiality. The results indicated that (i) the Bank should engage in wider
participation and consultation in project preparation and overall policy dialogue; and (ii)
the Bank should take a more active role in the areas of business environment and
institution building aimed at strengthening the market economy. The CDF process and
this CAS are intended to be responsive to this feedback, by emphasizing consultation and
the development themes identified.

Annex D
Page 1 of 2

Romania and the EU Grant Programs

PHARE
The PHARE program was launched in 1989, following the collapse of the communist
regimes in Central and Eastern Europe. It is intended to help these countries reconstruct their
economies. Originally, it assisted only Poland and Hungary, but it has gradually been
extended to cover thirteen Central and Eastem European countries today (Albania, Bosnia-
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia).

For the period 1995-99, funding under PHARE totaled roughly EUR 6.7 billion and
covered 15 sectors, the main five of which were:

* 
infrastructure (energy, transport, telecommunication);
* development of the private sector and assistance for businesses;
* education, training and research;
* environmental protection and nuclear safety; and
-
agricultural restructuring.

At the same time, PHARE is the main financial instrument for the pre-accession
strategy for the ten Central and Eastern European countries (CEECs) which have applied for
membership of the European Union. Since 1994, PHARE's tasks have been adapted to the
priorities and needs of each CEEC.

The revamped program with a budget of over EUR 10 billion for the period 2000-
2006 now has two specific priorities, namely, institution building and financing investments.

Following the proposals put forward by the Commission in its Agenda 2000
communication in July 1997, new forms of pre-accession aid have been added to that already
provided by PHARE. These are:

* aid to agriculture (SAPARD); and
* structural measures to bring the level of environmental protection and of transport
infrastructure development in the applicant countries closer to that of the European
Union (ISPA).

SAPARD

The Special Accession Program for Agriculture and Rural Development (SAPARD)
aims at helping CEECs implement the acquis related to the common agricultural policy, and
at supporting the competitiveness of the sectors concerned, job creation and sustainable
economic development in rural areas. The measures financed for this purpose focus on
investment in farms, improving the processing and marketing of agricultural and fishery
products, developing and improving rural infrastructure, developing and diversifying
economic activities, particularly with the aim of creating altemative sources of income,
renovating and developing villages, and protecting and conserving the rural heritage.

Annex D
Page 2 of 2

Priority is given to operations designed to improve the effectiveness of the market,
quality and health standards, with attention being paid to environmental conservation. The
SAPARD instrument has been allocated EUR 150 million for Romania annually through
2006.

ISPA

The Instrument for Structural Policies for Pre-accession (ISPA) is the European
Commission's instrument for helping the ten CEEC candidate countries to adapt to the EU
environmental and transport rigors in the view of accession. The Community assistance
granted under ISPA contributes to ithe objectives laid down in the accession partnership
agreements for each beneficiary country, and to corresponding national programs for the
improvement of the environment and of transport infrastructure sectors. ISPA contributes to
the funding of environment-related projects including waste management, air pollution or
water supply, as well as to the development of railways, roads, ports and airports, taking into
account requirements for sustainable transport. ISPA has an annual budget of about EUR
I billion, of which around EUR 230 rnillion are for Romania.

RICOP

The RICOP is the European Union's grant program aimed at providing budget
support for costs associated with restructuring, job creation, initiatives for encouraging
employment, financing micro-businesses, social mitigation measures (including severance
pay), and technical assistance. The initial RICOP allocation of EUR 100 million for
Romania in late 1999 expired on March 31, 2001, with only 0.5 percent of it actually
disbursed, due to limited absorptive capacity. Negotiations for a second allocation are

planned.

Source: European Commission

Annex E
Page 1 of 2

Corruption in Romania

Two recent World Bank studies shed light on the problem of corruption in Romania.

The report, Anticorruption 

in Transition-A Contribution to the Policy Debate, unbundles

corruption into two conceptually distinct forms of corruption: 
(i) "administrative
corruption," defined as corruption surrounding the implementation of laws, rules, and
regulations; and (ii) "state capture," defined as corruption that affects the actual design of
laws and regulations themselves. Both forms of corruption have pernicious effects on growth
and equity alike. Based on a cross-country survey of over 3,000 enterprise managers in 22
transition countries, the report provides a comparative perspective on the severity of both
forms of corruption for businesses. Among Central and Eastern European (CEE) countries,
the survey suggests that Romania has relatively high levels of administrative corruption. The
level of state capture was not as high as reported in several other CEE countries but was
notably higher than in the more advanced reformers.
Recognizing the need to address the problem of corruption, the Government of
Romania requested the World Bank to prepare a diagnostic study of corruption. The report,

Diagnostic Surveys of Corruption in Romania, was based on interviews with some 1,800

enterprise managers, public officials, and households. The survey results confirm the
perception of widespread corruption throughout many governmental structures, and also
show that a large number of Romanians-public officials, enterprise, and households-
experience corruption firsthand. Enterprise managers also report being significantly affected
by various forms of state capture. More than four in ten enterprises said their firms were
significantly affected by the corrupt misdirection of parliamentary votes to support narrow
interests. Although state capture has many sources, the surveys indicate that non-transparent
candidate and party financing plays an important role in supporting capture. Firms that make
political party contributions were significantly more likely to engage in state capture and
more likely to pay bribes generally.

41%

50%

40% 

30% 

20% 

36% 

i]percent of household
Income paid In bribes
(among those that paid)

*percent of households that
did not seek medical care
even though It was needed

19%

10; % 

1

10% ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~2

0%1

low Income households 
less medium income households 
than I million leilmonth 
to 3 million lellmonth 

I 

high Income households more
than 3 millon el/month

Note: The left bar ,inCludes only those households which reponed paying bribes and reported the amounts o1 those bnres and overall
household incone. Sample sizes were 19, 68. and 54 households. Tre right bar shows the percentage of households that did not seek
medical care even though it was required. Sample sizes were 96. 143, and 82.

Annex E
Page 2 of 2

The level and pattern of corruption impose significant costs detrimental to Romania's
development. Besides the well-knowvn disincentive for investment and growth, corruption
has a disproportionate impact on the poor. Since unofficial payments often mimic flat taxes,
the poorest households pay a larger share of income in bribes than the wealthier households.
While the regressive nature of unofficial payments may be the most visible way that
corruption hurts the poor, it is by no means the most worrisome impact on the poor. The
impact that corruption has on access to key services, and the unaffordability of unofficial
payments for the poorest, may lead those that need state assistance the most to go without.
For example, the poorest households were significantly more likely to go without health care
treatment, even if it was needed, than those more fortunate.
Addressing administrative corruption and state capture will require a broad-based
program that brings transparency and accountability to political life and to public
administration. Although the needed reforms may meet with resistance, the experience of
other countries shows that progress, can be made. Slovakia has recently passed a law
guaranteeing the public free access to all state information that is not specified in legislation
to be secret, while a Slovak NGO has prepared a brochure to inform public officials how to
comply with requests. Latvia has developed an anticorruption program focusing on
prevention, education, and enforcement that has been sustained through several changes in
Government. Poland has enacted reforms that eliminate the politicization of civil service
appointments. Lithuania has successfully used income and asset declarations to remove
allegedly corrupt officials from their positions.
The climate for reforms is positive in Romania. The new Government is putting anti-
corruption initiatives and other public administration reforms high on their agenda. And if
the CDF and CAS consultations are any indication, the Romanian public is eager to hold thie
Government accountable for results in this area. Developing a comprehensive, monitorable
anticorruption program will help to improve the efficiency and quality of government
services and strengthen trust in political and state institutions.

Sources: World Bank, 2000, Anticorruption 
in Transition-A Contribution to the Policy
Debate; World Bank, 2001, Diagnostic Surveys of Corruption in Romania. The surveys on

which the former report was based were undertaken in cooperation with the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development. The surveys on which the latter was based were
undertaken in cooperation with Management Systems International, an implementing partner
of USAID.

Annex F
Page I of 2

Ethnic Minorities

Romania is an ethnically diverse country, with significant populations of ethnic
minorities. Ethnic Hungarians constitute approximately seven percent of the population.
Romania has the largest Roma population in Europe, estimated at between 1.5 and 2 million
people, or eight to ten percent of the total population. Estimates of the size of the Roma
population vary significantly. Household surveys and censuses often do not distinguish
respondents by ethnicity, and even when ethnicity is included, a range of issues arise,
including undersampling of areas where Roma are likely to reside, difficulties in locating and
identifying populations which may not be officially registered, and problems with self-
reporting.
The socioeconomic status of the Roma minority poses one of the most significant
development challenges for the country. Despite the dearth of quantitative information, there
are growing indications that the living conditions of Roma have deteriorated since the
collapse of communism in 1989. Results from the Romania Integrated Household Survey
(RIHS) indicate striking levels of poverty among the Roma, in comparison with other groups.
For three survey years (1995-97) the poverty rate among Roma was significantly higher than
that among other population groups, and reached 79 percent in 1997, in comparison with the
national poverty rate of 31 percent. Conversely, ethnic Hungarians have lower poverty rates
than the national average.

Poverty in Romania by Ethnicity, 1995 and 1997
% of Survey 
Poverty Rate 
Population 
(1997)

1995(%) Share 1997 

Ronianian 
Hungarian 
Roma 
Other 
Total 

89.8 
6.8 
2.3 
0.3 
100.0 

24.5 
22.8 
76.4 
23.5 
25.3 

87.4 
6.1 
5.4 
1.1 
100 

Poverty 
Depth 

Poverty
Severity

Share 1995 1997 1995 

1997

86.6 
6.0 
6.3 
1.1 
100 

6.1 
5.7 
28.2 
6.4 
6.4 

7.3 
6.7 
33.2 
8.9 
7.9 

2.2 
2.2 
13.1 
2.6 
2.4 

2.7
2.3
17.1
3.6
3.0

(%)

29.7 
28.4 
78.8 
32.6 
30.8 

Source: Romania Integrated Household Survey, 1995 and 1997.
Note: The poverty line is 60 percent of adult equivalent consumption. Population percentages differ from
estimates above due to undersampling and low self-reporting of minorities.

Poverty among Roma is related to a complex combination of interrelated factors.
Educational attainment is low relative to other population groups, and recent survey data
suggest that these gaps are increasing. The share of the Roma population that had not
completed basic school education (grades one through eight) grew from 36 percent in 1994 to
44 in 1998. As a result of low education status, Roma were frequently among the first to be
laid off at the outset of restructuring, and have faced significant barriers to labor market
reentry because of low skills and discrimination. In both rural and urban areas, Roma
communities are frequently concentrated in settlements with poor infrastructure and lacking
basic utilities such as water, sanitation and electricity. Because of quasi-legal housing
arrangements, some Roma lack the documentation necessary for enrolling in school and
claiming social assistance and health benefits.

Annex F
Page 2 of 2

Roma women face dual challenges arising from their ethnicity and gender, although
information on this population group is limited. Because of early childbearing (sometimes
before age 15) and substantial family responsibilities, Roma girls tend to drop out of school
earlier than their male counterparts, and hence are less equipped for the labor market. Roma
women have heightened health risks stemming from poor reproductive health, including high
numbers of closely spaced births, inadequate prenatal care and poor nutrition. There is also
some evidence that Roma women are increasingly involved in prostitution and are at higher
risk of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS. This is an area where further
analysis is needed.
Over 70 percent of street children are Roma. Roma boys are disproportionately
represented within the juvenile delinquent population, as poverty and sometimes outright
discrimination drive them to petty crime. Those adolescents who end up on the streets are
more likely to engage in male prostitution and be exposed to sexually transmitted diseases.
The new Government has taken some initial steps toward addressing the conditions of
the Roma. A Sub-Secretariat for Roma Affairs has been established within the Ministry of
Public Information, and is chargecd with drafting a strategy for the Government. The
Ministry of Education has also umdertaken important steps, including adopting anti-
discrimination policies and reserving places for Roma in secondary and university education.
The EU is closely monitoring the status of Roma as part of the political criteria for accession,
and is providing support for community-based projects through the PHARE program. The
Bank will support social inclusion by ensuring that issues of ethnicity are addressed
appropriately in its operations, especially through its financing of projects in the education
and social protection sectors.

Annex G
Page 1 of 3

CDF Findings in Romania

CDF consultations were held in Bucharest as well as various locations around the
country in 1999 and 2000. There were more than 500 participants: leaders of industry, labor,
academia, religion, the media, other parts of civil society, and local and national Government
officials, as well as members of the political opposition - some of whom are now in the
newly formed Government. Widespread consensus emerged around the following themes
regarding Romania's development constraints and priorities:

* Frustration with the legal framework and public institutions: A top priority among union
leaders and management (of both public and private enterprises) was restitution of
property and better protection of property rights. There was also broad agreement among
all participants that the legal framework is in need of repair. The approval of emergency
ordinances by the Cabinet, while often more expeditious (and on which Bank operations
have come to rely), creates confusion vis a vis the legislative authority of Parliament. It
also leads to an unstable legal environment where laws often change, as well as
inconsistencies among various laws such that citizens do not know which law pertains.
In addition, the enforcement of laws is often uneven (e.g., tax collection) or non-existent.
There was widespread frustration with bureaucratic procedural requirements, e.g., for
establishing and maintaining a private firm. There was also a general perception that the
provision of public services is more politicized than professional, and that anti-corruption
measures are needed. Participants felt that all of these factors create risks which
discourage private investment.

* A keen desire to become "Western" via EU accession, but also a lack of understanding of
the requirements: A driving ambition for virtually all participants was for Romania to
become a member state of the EU. However, there did not seem to be an equally
pervasive understanding of what would be required of Romania to attain this goal. The
focus was more on the higher standard of living, democratic society, and good
governance associated with EU accession, and less on the implications for current vested
interests and the interim dislocations that such social and economic transition would
entail.

* An urgent need to improve access to opportunitv: There was general agreement that the
Romanian standard of living needs to be improved, and that this could happen only with
significant public investment in education, health, infrastructure, and rural development.

* Frustration with Romania's poverty in the midst of "natural wealth": Participants
consistently lamented that while Romania at one time was known in Europe and beyond
for its agricultural production, quality furniture carved from its high-value forests, and
natural beauty (particularly at locations on the Danube and Black Sea), and continues to
have high potential in these areas, Romania now seems unable to exploit these
opportunities and is a poor country.

* The need to take risks and a plea for knowledge transfer on how to adapt production to
market demand: There was a widely held view that Romanians are technically very
competent and that their experience with a state-dominated economy at least provided
them with an understanding of design and production from a technical standpoint.
However, they appreciate that a market-oriented economy requires additional expertise

Annex G
Page 2 of 3

which they lack, inter alia an understanding of market forces, how to adapt production to
cater to market demand, and how to access information about markets. Equally
important, they recognize that a change in attitudes is needed to facilitate the risk-taking
that private sector commercial activity requires.

* A legacy of distrust that impedes partnerships: Romania's oppressive past, and its pre-
transition regime shrouded in secrecy and betrayal (it was not uncommon for citizens to
pass incriminating informnation about persons close to them to the Secret Police), have left
the country with a legacy of distrust. There is a distrust of Government, in part for this
reason but also because the public's expectations for the economic transition have not
been met. Many people are worse off now than they were before the transition.
Romania's major political parties, of which there are nearly a dozen, do not collaborate
effectively when they form a coalition Govemment. There is no shared ideology that
allows them to form natural alliances. Instead parties resemble interest groups and
alliances are determined more on an opportunistic and therefore temporary basis. This
adds to a distrustful environment, in which political leaders know that party alliances are
unstable. It is therefore more difficult for political consensus to emerge within either the
legislative or executive branches of Govemment. The legacy of distrust also makes
business partnerships difficult to fonm, both within the private sector and between the
private and public sector. This hinders private sector development.

* Continued reliance on Government despite distrust of it: Despite their readily
acknowledged distrust of Government, participants consistently made it clear that they
expect the Govemment to solve their problems. They typically did not recognize the
ability that they might already have as private citizens or as private sector firms to
mobilize and to act on their own behalf. The participants generally did not feel
empowered to improve their situation and instead felt it was up to the Government, i.e.
the samne Govemment they distnist. Social capital and public activism are weak.
The above themes translate to a development agenda summarized in the schematic
diagram below, in which the two major desired outcomes are poverty reduction and EU
accession. These are to be achieved through the promotion of economic growth, institution
building to strengthen the rule of law, greater access to opportunity, strengthening the social
safety net, and natural resource and environmental protection and sustainable development.

ROMANIA'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

Anex G
Page 3 of 3 

_

Pt I 

A 

DEVELOPMENT 

OBJECTIVES

* 

* 

* Macro 
Stabilization 
Structural 
Reform of 
Financial 
Sector, Capital 
Markets, 
Enterprise and 
Utilities Sectors 
Strengthening 
of Business 
Environment 
Public/Private 
Sector and 
Private Sector 
/Academia 
Partnerships 
Incentives to 
Stop "Brain 
Drain" 
Private 
Participation 
Infrastructure 
and Energy 
Investment 
National 
Transport 
Systems 

in 

in 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* Curtailed 
Corruption 
* Government 
Transparency 
and 
Accountability 
* Elimination of 
Red Tape 
* 
Political Reform 
* Public 
Administration 
and Civil Service 
Reform 
* Civil Society 
Participation 
* Objective, Stable 
Judicial & Legal 
Framework 
* Decentralization 
of Government 
* Local Capacity 
Building 
* Restitution of 
Property and 
Protection of 
Property Rights 

* 

* Redeployment of 
Dislocated Labor 
* Equitable Access 
to Education 
* Creation & 
Sharing of 
Knowledge 
through IT and 
Public 
Awareness 
Campaigns 
* Health Sector 
Reform 
Investment in 
Local 
Infrastructure 
* Rural 
Development 
* Outreach to 
Ethnic Groups 
* Economic & 
Social Equity for 
Women 
Promotion of 
Social Capital 
through 
Community -
Based
Development

* 

* 

Improved Child 
Welfare 
* Pension Reform 
* Effective, 
Targeted Delivery 
of Social 
Assistance & 
Services 
Improved 
National 
Preparedness 
for 
Natural Disasters 

* 

* 

Strengthening
of Forest
Resource
Management
* Toxicity
Management
- Crisis
Management
- Site
Liability/
Clean-Up
Mechanisms
* Biodiversity
and Natural
Resource
Conservation
* Harnessing of
Renewable
Energy
Resources
Improved
Energy
Efficiency
R Anti-Pollution
Regulatoq
Framework &
Enforcement

* 

Annex H
Page 1 of 2

Barriers to Romania's Business Environment

There are a number of administrative barriers to the registration and operation of
private enterprises in Romania. Examples cited in a recent report by the Foreign Investment
Advisory Service (FIAS) include the following:

Company registration. Company registration is based on an "Operations Approval"
document obtained from the Mayor's Office. To obtain this document, enterprises must
present as many as eight different prior approvals (sanitary, electric network connection,
natural gas hook-up, environmental, prevention and extinguishing of fires, sewer system
connection, water management, and thermal network hook-up) The process is therefore
extremely time-consuming. Also, special licenses are often required at the company
registration stage, and obtaining these licenses is usually a time-consuming process since
procedures are not always clearly established. Typically, the firm must first obtain a
registration approval in principle, to be submitted to the trade registry. After business
registration the firm must apply for the actual license, authorization, or approval from the
same Ministry. Also, while many special licenses are justified on the grounds that they are
required for activities that affect public health and safety (food and drug production and
distribution, transportation, and construction, water and waste water treatment), many others
such as tourism are not.

Tax registration, assessment and payment. Tax registration is cumbersome. It
requires unnecessary steps such as a pre-approval by the General Department of Public
Finance (GDPF) in the form of a certificate and substantial original documents that duplicate
those required by the Trade Registry. Tax assessment and payment are also fraught with
problems. Accounting principles and methodologies are not clear and change constantly.
Payment procedures are time-consuming and require a vast amount of paperwork.

Labor regulations. Romania's labor regulations are reasonably consistent with those
of other countries in the region. However, the Ministry of Labor issues new regulations
frequently, many of which are confusing and inconsistent with prior regulations in effect.
Employer reporting requirements are substantial. Workforce reporting is required every time
an employee's status changes (e.g., from part-time to full-time), and employers must do so
within a certain number of days after the change has occurred. To report, the employer must
submit three copies of labor contracts to the local Chamber of Labor. Monthly reports
providing proof of payment of contributions to the Social Protection Fund, Unemployment
Fund, and Health Insurance Fund are also required. Employers must pay a monthly
commission of 0.75 percent of their total gross salaries to the Ministry of Labor to support
the local Chamber of Labor. In addition, employers must pay 30 percent of their employees'
gross monthly salaries to the Social Insurance Fund, five percent to the Unemployment
Benefit Fund, seven percent to the Health Insurance Fund, and one percent to a risk and
accident fund for disabled persons. Tnvestors view these contributions, which sometimes add
up to twice or more one's basic salary, as prohibitive.

Annex H
Page 2 of 2

Customs. Customs procedures have been rapidly modernized and are now in line
with EU declaration procedures. Ninety percent of customs entry points have been
computerized. Significant technical assistance and financial support from international and
bilateral agencies have accomplished this. However, implementing the new procedures is
proceeding slowly. Private companies complain that some of the systems put in place (e.g.,
drawbacks) have never worked, and there is a serious lack of information on customs
procedures. Moreover, corruption of customs officials is perceived to be widespread (see
Annex E). Finally, there appears to be overlapping and sometimes serious friction between
customs authorities and other state officials such as the Economic Police (of the Ministry of
Interior) or the Financial Guard (of the Ministry of Finance), which confuses investors and
disrupts the collection of tariffs.

Land purchase and registration. Most of the land suitable for new investment still
remains in the public domain (under the control of ministries, local authorities, and state-
owned enterprises) and is difficult for private investors to access, either through purchase or
long-term lease. Privately owned land is easier to purchase, but the supply is limited. More
importantly, the risk for investors purchasing land is very high due to the incomplete land
registration and slow restitution process. Seventy percent of the land titles issued have been
challenged in the courts.

Court system. Romania's court system is weak. Court procedures take about two
years to complete and judgments are highly unpredictable. The courts for commercial
matters are understaffed and insufficiently skilled. In 1998 about three-quarters of the judges
were less than 30 years old. Officials often lack expertise in specialized commercial fields
such as intellectual property issues. Corruption is reported to be a serious problem in the
judiciary.

WBI Activities

Annex I
Page 1 of 1

The substantial involvement of WBI in Romania over the past two years has
established a broad network of local partners providing a solid base for leveraging the
outreach of training activities. More than 300 participants attended WBI training in the
areas of 
intergovernmental fiscal relations, decentralization, civic association and
participation, investigative and business journalism, urban and city management, health and
pension reformn, social funds, financial sector, and capital markets. Looking forward, WBI
plans to increase its efforts to bring cutting-edge knowledge by using new dissemination
technologies such as distance learning via internet and videoconference. This should provide
opportunities for learning from other countries' experiences. WBI activities will continue to
give priority to human development issues by offering training and policy workshops in the
areas of health financing, education reform, pension and social protection.

WBI's governance program will continue to include work with parliamentarians, civil
society, and public officials to attain concrete impact at the country level. The focus of the
program centers on effective use of public resources and on implementation of rules,
regulations, and policies, at the national and sub-national level. To strengthen the linkages
between corporate responsibilities and sub-national governance, WBI will continue to
provide training in decentralization, local Government finance, corporate governance, and
business ethics. The Financial Sector Leaming Program will cover topics such as the
banking system, capital markets, financial sector policies, insurance and contractual savings,
and rural and micro finance. These planned activities will support the promotion of
economic growth and the creation of an enabling environment for private sector
development.

While most WBI programs would be triggered only under a high case lending
scenario, there are two exceptions. One is WBI's work on environment - the Clean Air
Initiative and the Environmental C'ompliance and Enforcement Program -
that aims at
contributing to the objective of protection and sustainable management of natural resources
and the environment. The other is the Street Children Initiative, that involves local NGOs
and partner organizations in strengthening the institutional infrastructure and capacity for
improving the opportunities of the most vulnerable.

