Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 22932 ES

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF El SALVADOR

November 2, 2001

Central America Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the perfornance
of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
US$1 = 8.75 Colones

FISCAL YEAR
January I - December 31

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ANDA 

CAESS 

APL 
ARENA 
CABEI 

CAN 
CAS 
CB 
CBI 
CEL 
CEM 
CIDA 

CG 
CNR 
COVIAL 
CPI 
CPO 
CSO 
CTE 
DIGESTIC 

National Water Company ANTEL 
National Telecoms Administration 
Adaptable Program Lending 
National Republic Alliance 
Central American Bank of Economic 
Development 
Salvadoran Company for Electricity 
Distribution 
Country Assistance Note 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Central Bank 
Caribbean Basin Initiative 
National Power Company 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Canadian International Development 
Agency 
Consultative Group 
National Registry Center 
Salvadoran Roads Fund 
Consumer Price Index 
Consumer Protection Office 
Civil Society Organizations 
Telef6nica Company 
National Directorate for Statistical and 
Census 
Economic Development Institute 
Community Education Program 
National Household Survey 
European Union 
Foreign Direct Investment 
National Liberation Front 
Social Investment and Local 
Development Fund 
FODES 
Fondo de Desarrollo de El Salvador 
FSAP 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
FUNDAPYME Foundation for the Sustainable 
Development of the Small and 
Medium Enterprises 
Foundation for the Development 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environment Facility 
International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development 
Inter-American Development Bank 
Institutional Development Fund

EDI 
EDUCO 
EHPM 
EU 
FDI 
FMLN 
FISDL 

FUNDE 
GDP 
GEF 
IBRD 

IDB 
IDF 

IFAD 

LAC 
LIL 
MIGA 

MINED 
MOE 
MOH 
NDC 
NFPS 
NGOs 
OED 
ONI 
OPS 
PHRD 

International Fund for Agricultural
Development
IFC 
International Finance Corporation
IGD 
Deposit Guarantee Institute
IMF 
International Monetary Fund
INFOCENTROInformation Center
ISDEM 
Salvadoran Institute oi'Municipalities
KfW 
German Credit Institute for
Reconstruction
Latin America and the Caribbean
Learning and Innovation Loan
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Health
National Developmenl Commission
Nonfinancial Public Sector
Non-Governmental Organization
Operations Evaluation Department
National Investment Office
Panamerican Health Organization
Special Fund for Policy and Human
Resources Development; Policy and
Human Resources Development Fund
Agricultural Sector Reform Project
Coffee Producers Association
National Investment Promotion
Agency
Quality Assurance Group
Environment Secretariat
Medium-Scale Enterprises
Technical Assistance
Central American University
United Nations Development
Programme
United Nations Children's Fund
United States Agency for International
Development
Value Added Tax
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Development Report
World Trade Organization

QAG 
SEMA 
SMEs 
TA 
UCA 
UNDP 

PRISA 
PROCAFE 
PRO.ESA 

VAT 
WBG 
WBI 
WDR 
WTO 

UNICEF 
USAID 

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Lead Economist: 
Task Manager: 

David de Ferranti 
Donna Dowsett-Coirolo 
Ian Bannon 
Jose R. L6pez-CAlix (LCSPE) 

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Chief: 
Task Manager: 

Assaad Jabre
Bernard Pasquier
Toshiya Masuoka
Kalim M. Shah

The team acknowledges the contributions of several colleagues in the LAC region, as well as Damien
Shiels (MIGA), and Vicente Ferrer-Andreu (WBI).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EL SALVADOR'
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .....................................................................

1. BACKGROUND .....................................................................

I

1

POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 

2

II. POLITICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT ............................................................2
.....................................................................
POVERTY, SOCIAL AND GENDER CONDITIONS ..................................................................... 3
......................................................4

ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 

III. THE RECONSTRUCTION STRATEGY AND THE DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ............... 8

GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND RECONSTRUCTION PRIORITIES ...................
FRAMEWORK FOR RECOVERY AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT ........................................

8
8

A. Sustaining Efforts to Reduce Poverty and Promote Social Development .......... 9
B. Accelerating Growth and Developing New Opportunities ............................... 12
C. Fine Tuning the Role of the Public Sector ....................................................... 
15

IV. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ........................................................... 18

A. Progress Since the Last CAS .................................................................... 
18
B. The proposed Bank Group Assistance Strategy ................................................ 20
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS'ACTIVITIES 

.................................................................. 24

V. CAS PROGRAM MONITORING AND RISKS .................................................................... 25

BOXES

Box 1: OED's Country Assistance Note ........................................... 

............. 20

Box 2.: MIGA Support to the New Foreign Investment Promotion
Agency (PRO.ESA) ........................................................ 
Box 3.: Benchrmarks 2002 - 05 ........................................................ 

23
25

TEXT TABLES

Table 1: El Salvador: Progress Toward the International Development

Goals .....................................................................
1
Table 2: Key Economic Indicators, 1996-2001 .......................................................7
Table 3: El Salvador. World Bank, IDB and Donors Assistance (FY97-04)
................................................................................................................................ 24

FIGURES

Figure 1. El Salvador - Share of Households in Poverty (%) ................................ 20

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
perfornance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

ANNEXES

Al COUNTRY AT A GLANCE
B1 COUNTRY PROGRAM PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 2001-04
B2 SELECTED INDICATORS OF BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND
MANAGEMENT
B3 PROPOSED IBRD BASE-CASE LENDING PROGRAM (FY02-04)/IFC ANfD

MIGA PROGRAM FY98-2001

B4 SUMMARY OF NONLENDING SERVICES
B5 SOCIAL INDICATORS
B6 KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS
B7 KEY EXPOSURE INDICATORS
B8 STATUS OF BANK GROUP OPERATIONS / STATEMENT OF IFC's COMMITTED
AND DISBURSED PORTFOLIO
B9 CAS SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES

C A Poverty Profile of El Salvador

D THE IMPACT OF THE EARTHQUAKES ON EL SALVADOR
E CAS 1997-0 1 PROGRESS TOWARDS COUNTRY BENCHMARKS
F CAS CONSULTATIONS WITH CIVIL SOCIETY AND OTHER STAKEHOLDERS
G DONOR INDICATIONS OF SUPPORT AT THE MADRID CG MEETING,

MARCH 7, 2001.

MAP 

IBRD NO. 27213

Executive Summary

i. 
The last Country Assistance Strategy for El Salvador was discussed by the Board on
February 19, 1997. The new CAS was under preparation when the Government decided to
introduce the U.S. dollar as legal tender in late-1999. After some revision to reflect this
development, the CAS was being finalized when the country was struck by two powerful
earthquakes in January 13 and February 13, 2001. In agreement with the Government, CAS
preparation was put on hold as the World Bank Group (WBG) mobilized to help with the
emergency, including assessing with the IMF the macroeconomic impact, restructuring projects
to help meet immediate reconstruction needs, and preparing for a Consultative Group (CG)
meeting in March 2001. While not altering significantly El Salvador's long-term development
objectives, the earthquakes have necessarily had a major impact on the content and phasing of the
country's public investment program, and on the volume and composition of support from the
international donor community. The proposed CAS for the FY02-04 period takes these changes
into account.
ii. 
The CAS covers the remaining three years of the present administration. It is presented
together with a proposed operation to support an emergency reconstruction for the health sector,
where the Government and donor community have agreed that the Bank would concentrate most
of its new reconstruction-related lending.

iii. 
The CAS was prepared in close consultation with the Government and stakeholders. It
benefited from an innovative and participatory consultative process with civil society
representatives, international donors and authorities. Results from the consultations revealed
substantial common ground on essential elements of a national agenda, such as the need for
increased efforts in social and basic infrastructure investment, rural development, the need to
address crime and violence, decentralization and environment deterioration. The consultation
also highlighted some areas where differences remain, such as privatization or concessioning of
public services, dollarization and the timing and strategy of decentralization. The design of the
CAS also draws on OED lessons and the results of our own assessment of the implementation of
the previous CAS.

iv. 
El Salvador faces a formidable challenge, not only to rebuild a shattered economy in the
midst of a difficult external environment, but also to promote faster growth to sustain and deepen
its poverty reduction agenda.

v. 
In the context of peace consolidation and the strengthening of democracy, structural
reforms have transformed El Salvador's economic and social landscape. These have included
trade liberalization, financial sector strengthening, re-privatization of the financial sector and
other state enterprises, pension reform and the improvement of the competitiveness environment
for private investment, and, since January 2001, the decision to move toward a bi-monetarism
regime. As a result, the economy has become more diversified, relying on services and
manufacturing exports, increasingly deregulated and dependent on private-led growth. In this
context, the government views the bi-monetarism regime as one pillar of a broader effort to
preserve stability and reactivate the economy, speed up insertion into the global economy and
make the country more attractive to investors.

vi. 
Reforms were also accompanied by sustained poverty reduction efforts, which steadily
contributed to a significant improvement in social conditions. In the 1990s, extreme poverty was
reduced by almost half, net enrolment in primary education increased by almost 10 percentage

points, infant mortality was reduced by about 40 percent, and population with no access to safe
water was reduced by half. At the outset of the new centurv. El Salvador was on track to meet
most of the 2015 International Development Goals several years in advance.

vii. 
Since the late-nineties, however, the economy has faced several adverse external and
internal shocks. In the midst of deteriorating terms of trade, and sluggish growth in the U.S. and
Central America, the earthquakes caused loss of life and significant damage to physical arid social
infrastructure. The impact, which was particularly severe in the Western and Southeni regions,
has altered the country's poverty map and refocused investment priorities and their geographic
targeting. The September I Ith events in the U.S. have led to a projected 0.5 percent cul into the
growth rate in 2001 and I percent in 2002-03.

viii. 
The overall thrust of the CAS is to help El Salvador rebuild critical social infrastructure,
while supporting the country's medium-term poverty reduction agenda, which aims to reduce
national poverty 
from 44-45 percent by 2001 to 35-40 percent by 2005. 
It focuses on three
interrelated efforts to reduce poverty and promote social development, accelerate growth and
develop new economic opportunities, and fine tune the role of the public sector.

ix. 
The CAS proposes a base case lending scenario of US$270 million over FY02-04,
including five planned operations for emergency and basic health care extension, judicial reform,
rural community development, environmental services and land administration. The base case
would also provide some flexibility to advance one or more operations from the next CAS period
(basic or secondary education, local development, urban poverty or youth at risk) for up to US$50
million if a strengthened fiscal performance allows the Government to sustain a more robust
public investment program and project execution proceeds as planned. In a low case scenario the
Bank would limit new lending to the priority emergency health sector and judicial operations,
which is about sixty percent of the proposed FY02-04 base case lending amount. Triggers to
move into a low case would be a deteriorated macroeconomic framework, a weakened fiscal
revenue performance and an unsatisfactory portfolio performance.

x. 
IFC and MIGA strategy would complement Bank support for private sector devel.opment.
IFC has been addressing the needs of Salvadoran private sector through support to small and
medium enterprises 
(SMEs), a regional private equity fund, a cement company, a power
distributor, a local bank and regional credit rating agency, as well as in infrastructure through
investments 
in regional power and telecom development companies. 
In addition, 
lechnical
assistance has supported 
the drafting of the private pension 
law, the training arid skills
development of Salvadoran SMEs, and regional training in banking and leasing services. 
IFC's
strategy will be to continue to work with the private sector in support of its recovery and medium
term growth focusing on both investments in the country (especially in financial markets, private
infrastructure and agribusiness) and through the development of regional financial and physical
infrastructure 
in Central America. For its part, MIGA will remain focused on boo.ting 
the
institutional capacity of PROESA, 
the national foreign investment promotion agency.

xi. 
The previous positive experience in development impact and cost effectiveness of Bank
operations in El Salvador, as evaluated by OED, suggests the need for strong ownership based on
up-front consensus 
for 
reform, 
selectivity while preserving 
an adequate division of
responsibilities with the IDB, and close interaction between financing and quality advisory
services. These lessons are reflected in the design of the proposed FY02-04 CAS.

xii. 
The main formal analytical outputs will be a Country Economic Memorandum 
(FY03)
focusing on the constraints to faster growth, a poverty diagnostic (FY02) to assess the impact of

the earthquakes on El Salvador's poverty map; studies on social protection and decentralization
(FY03); fiduciary work on a country procurement assessment (FY03) and a country financial
assessment (FY03); and follow-up FSAP activities, especially in the areas of prudential
regulations and payment system.

xiii. 
The CAS faces four major risks. First, the large number, variety and complexity of
immediate reconstruction tasks could divert somewhat the Government's efforts from its
medium-term development agenda, thus delaying priority poverty reduction programs.
Authorities are acutely aware of this risk and have made a serious effort to take it into account in
the design of this public investment program. Second, given the bi-monetarism regime on the
one hand, and the adverse international environment on the other, Salvadoran prospects for faster
growth are critically dependent on productivity improvements, based on rapid human capital
accumulation, flexible labor policies and improvements in the domestic investment climate.
Third, fiscal imbalances associated with reconstruction work could affect price stability and
public investment. The Government is committed to avoid of this risk and is redoubling its
efforts to improve tax and customs administration, and is carefully monitoring fiscal
developments in close consultation with the Fund. Fourth, obtaining Congressional approval for
new borrowing may become more difficult as the next elections approach. This risk may be
minimized by close consultation with the Legislature from the earliest stages of project
preparation. On balance, the Bank believes these risks are reasonable and manageable for El
Salvador, especially considering the significant reconstruction and external challenges lying
ahead, low overall debt burden and excellent record in policy reform and debt management.

xiv. 

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

* Are the proposed CAS priorities an appropriate response to the development challenges
facing El Salvador in the aftermath of the earthquakes?

* 

Is the proposed combination of lending and non-lending services appropriate to El Salvador's
development needs?

* Are the CAS risks identified adequate?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THIE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON
A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR

I. BACKGROUND

1. 

Context. The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for El Salvador was discussed by the
Board on March 6, 1997 (R97-27). The new CAS was under preparation when the Government decided
to introduce the U.S. dollar as legal tender in late-1999. After some revision to reflect this development,
the CAS was being finalized when the country was struck by two powerful earthquakes in January 13 and
February 13, 2001. In agreement with the Government, CAS preparation was put on hold as the World
Bank Group (WBG) mobilized to help with the emergency, including assessing with the IMF the
macroeconomic 
impact, restructuring projects 
to help meet 
immediate 
reconstruction needs, and
preparing for a Consultative Group (CG) meeting in March 2001. While not altering significantly El
Salvador's long-term development objectives, the earthquakes have necessarily had a major impact on the
content and phasing of the country's public investment program, and on the volume and composition of
support from the international donor community. The FY02-04 CAS takes these changes into account.

1990 1999 
28.2 
16.7 
22 
12 

TABLE 1. EL SALVADOR: PROGRESS TOWARD THE 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT GOALS 

2. 
A Decade of Post-Conflict Recovery. Since the end of its 12-year civil war in 1991, El Salvador
has made remarkable progress in a process of social, economic and political transformation. A small
lower-middle income country, with a population of about 6 million sharing an area of 21,000 km 2 -and
with more than I million migrants living mostly in the U.S.-El Salvador is one of the most densely
populated countries in the Western Hemisphere. With a limited natural resource base and no remaining
agricultural frontier, it made enormous efforts to enter the 215S century as an open and competitive
economy. A one-decade 
long vision of peace
consolidation, democracy strengthening, sound
economic policies, rapid insertion in the global
economy, 
and 
focused 
efforts on poverty
reduction through human capital investment and
public sector modernization have helped 
the
country to rebuild its economic, social, political
and institutional structure. At the onset of the
new centuryt El Salvador was on track to meet
t,E
most of the 2015 International Development
Goals 
(Table 1). Despite 
this progress,
however, a decade after the conflict ended, the
country still struggles with some issues common
to many post-conflict countries: 
a significant
poverty reduction agenda to address, especially
in rural areas; political polarization 
and a
shifting balance of power which complicate
implementation of development activities; a low
tax base which constrains the level and quality
of public investment and services; and high
levels of crime and violence, stemming partly

Target 
Reduce extreme poverty by half (%) 
Reduce malnutrition by half (weight % 
of children under 5) 
Universal net primary education 
enrolment (% of relevant age group) 
No gender gap in primary education 
(girls/boys ratio) 
Reduce infant mortality by 2/3 (per 
1,000 live births) 
Reduce maternal mortality by /4 (per 
100,000 live births) 
Full access to reproductive health 
(contraceptive prevalence rate) 
AIDs growth reversion (rate per 10,000 
people) 
National environment strategy 
Reduce population w/o access to safe 
water by half(% of total)

No Yes 
53 
26 

148 

120 

2.7 

7.2 

47 

60 

53 

30 

70 

78 

NA 

1 

Source: World Development Report. 

from the conflict period itself, which impose a
high social cost and affect 
the 
investment
climate.

2 

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strategy

3. 
According to the CAS consultations, there is fairly widespread agreement that rising crime and
violence, slow and inadequate administration of justice, sluggish growth, and the 
insufficient social
investment, are perceived as the country's major constraints to development (Annex F). Moreover, the
difficulties of achieving and sustaining political consensus on specific legislative actions among political
actors hinder the country's ability to achieve its development goals.

4. 
The 2001 Earthquakes Forced a Refocusing of Investment Priorities. On January 13 and
February 13, 2001, two powerful earthquakes hit El Salvador, leaving 1,159 persons dead, 8,0:3 injured,
and more than 300,000 families homeless. They not only destroyed significant physical and social
infrastructure, but also have redrawn the country's poverty map: while the most acute poverty had been
concentrated in the Northern and Eastern areas of El Salvador, poverty has now worsened in the Western
and Southern regions where the earthquakes struck hardest, largely coinciding with the country's coffee
belt (Annex D). The estimated total damage to physical assets of US$1.6 billion is equiva!lent to one
eight of El Salvador's GDP. Social infrastructure and housing in rural areas and small towns suffered the
worst damage, although physical 
infrastructure-public works, water supply and sewerage, electricity-
also sustained some heavy losses. While the earthquakes have not changed the country's 
long-term
development agenda, they have forced the Government to refocus public expenditures over the next few
years toward reconstruction needs and efforts to reactivate economic activity in the worst affected areas.

II. 

POLITICAL, 

SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT

Political Developments

Democracy Consolidated, but Consensus-Building Is Difficult. Since 1989, three broad-based

5. 
elections including participation of the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN)
have laid the foundations for a stable democracy. The Alianza Republicana AVacionalista (ARE.NA) party
has successively won the presidency. The current Flores Administration 
took office in June 1999 after
winning 
in the first round with 52 percent of the vote,' but lost its working majority 
in the 2000
Congressional elections to the FMLN. During the 1990s when ARENA controlled the Executive and had
a working majority 
in Congress, 
it implemented an impressive modernization and structural reform
agenda. The shift in the balance of power represents the workings of a healthy democracy, bul given the
Constitutional and legal framework in place, it has also made the decision-making process more difficult.
In particular, since a two-thirds majority 
is needed in Congress to approve new public debt and
international treaties (including most amendments to external loans), 
the Executive needs te negotiate
actively with the opposition to achieve broad bipartisan support on a much wider range of matters than is
the case in many countries.

6. 
Forging a National Vision. The previous Government appointed an independent and broad-
based National Development Commission (NDC) charged with proposing a National Plan (Plan de
Nacion) based on nationwide consultations. The current Government also followed a consultative process
to prepare its program (Nueva Alianza) and in the second half of 2000 opened a dialogue witlh Congress
(Mesa de Concertaci6n) to deal with approval of external loans, public investment, and the 20')1 budget.
In November 2000, the Government endorsed the recommendations of the NDC and agreed to amplement
an ambitious US$900 million 4-year investment plan targeting the country's four poorest regions. These
promising efforts at building a national dialogue were, however, 
interrupted by two ev,ents: 
the
Government's decision in late 2000 to adopt the U.S dollar as legal tender and the earthquakes in early
2001. The former led to a temporary breakdown in the dialogue with the opposition in Congress, but in
February 2001, following the earthquakes, the Government agreed with the FMLN on the approval of the
2001 budget, the placement of Treasury bonds and approval of a number of external loans provided they

Congressional elections are scheduled for March 2003 and Presidential elections for March 2004.

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strateey 

3

were focused on reconstruction needs. Reconstruction needs will necessarily entail postponing part of the
investments proposed by the NDC, but the consultation process followed by the CAS indicates a broad
national consensus on a number of important areas, including education, rural development, the need to
address crime and violence, modernization of the judicial system, decentralization and the environment.
While these areas of agreement provide an encouraging base on which to build a longer-term
development agenda, important differences remain, especially in termns of further privatization or
concessioning of public services, dollarization, and the timing and content of decentralization.

Poverty, Social and Gender Conditions

7. 
Considerable Progress in Reducing Poverty during the 1990s. The previous CAS targeted a
reduction of the national poverty rate, as measured by official household surveys, to 35-40 percent by
2005. Declining poverty trends in the nineties were encouraging, suggesting that the target would be met
several years in advance. According to official estimates, during the 90s, the share of national households
living in poverty decreased by 18 percentage points, but remained high at 41percent (55 percent in rural
areas) (Annex C). Despite high urban growth, urban poverty experienced a dramatic fall of 21 percent,
whereas rural poverty improved by a more modest 11 percent. Major improvements occurred in extreme
poverty (11.5 percentage points), rather than in moderate poverty (7 percentage points). Two factors
appear to have mainly contributed to this progress: economic growth and remittances. Poverty trends
follow quite closely changes in per capita GDP-a one percent increase in per capita GDP growth rate
reduces extreme poverty by 1.2 percent. Remittances, in turn, have raised consumption among the rural
poor and extreme poor, helped to reduce urban income inequality, and contributed to raise housing
improvements, primary school enrollment, and investments by small businesses. Migration has also had
the positive effect of reducing the demographic pressure on limited economic opportunities and the often
highly degraded natural resource base. However, migration also represents a drain on human capital and
has distorted the demographic structure of the country in terms of active/inactive population and gender
distribution.

8. 
The Changing Nature of Poverty. While progress in reducing poverty over the last decade has
been impressive, El Salvador faces new challenges as it attempts to consolidate and extend these gains:
(i) the economic slowdown hits the poorest households hardest; (ii) social spending continues to be
intensified, but the scope to do so is limited by the relatively weak revenue base; (iii) just under half of
the rural population remains employed in agriculture, where poverty is clearly linked to the long-standing
decline of sectoral activities and rural incomes; and (iv) urbanization increases rapidly in absolute terms
due to internal migration-the number of new urban poor was more than three times the number of new
rural poor during 1991-98. These factors have, of course, been exacerbated by the effects of the recent
earthquakes.

9. 
The Earthquakes Have Redrawn the Poverty Map. Although data on the earthquakes'
destruction are only preliminary, damage to social and physical assets is estimated to have increased
poverty levels in the coffee belt. These areas did not traditionally have the highest rural rates, but they
suffered the brunt of the impact of the earthquakes, and more recently in 2001, a drought. Social
infrastructure damage was particularly extensive. About 40 percent of the public schools reported
moderate-to-severe damage; one-half of public hospitals and about one-third of health posts were
disabled; 30 percent of housing was destroyed, leaving one-fifth of the population homeless; and 41,400
small and micro enterprises suffered significant losses. The earthquakes also caused: (i) a short
interruption of the Panamerican highway, thus reducing commercial activities and trade for almost a
month; (ii) a short-term consumer price increase due to supply bottlenecks; (iii) a temporary 10 percent
reduction in school enrollment; and (iv) increased labor participation by women to cope first with
emergency relief activities and then with housing reconstruction and altemative economic activities to
offset the loss of income.

4 

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strate_ey

10. 
Mixed Gains on Inequality. The Gini coefficient for household income inequalily declined
from an estimated 0.69 in 1973 to about 0.50 in 1995, but has since stagnated at that level. From 1991 to
1997, the share of income received by the lowest 10 percent increased from 0.9 to 1.9 percent. while that
of the upper 10 percent decreased from 41.5 to 32.8 percent. At the same time there is little evidence that
the reforms of the 1980s in general, and land reform in particular, improved the value of beneficiary
assets of farmers. For their part, remittances have had a more positive impact on income dis:ribution in
the rural areas, but their impact on growth is limited by the fact that only a small share (perhaps 10
percent) of total remittances is devoted to investment.

11. 
Gender. A 70 percent female labor force participation rate is comparable to that of the UJnited
States. Female unemployment rates are lower than those of males in both urban and rural areas, and
educational attainment is similar for both sexes. The percentage of men and women in professional and
managerial occupations 
is the same-about 14 percent in professional and 3-4 percent in mranagerial.
Women have also made significant 
inroads 
in the political arena-women's 
participation 
in the
Legislature incrcased from 3.3 percent in 1984-87 to 16.7 percent in 2000. 
Important ger.der issues
remain, however, relating mostly to violence affecting males, wide disparities in mortality, maternal
mortality, 
teenage pregnancy and women's access 
to health services and productive 
resources,
particularly in rural areas. Male violence is among the highest in the region. Violent death rates are
about 10 times higher for men than for women, with young men aged 15-24 being the most affected.
While economic and social violence affects young men disproportionately, domestic violence against
women is widespread. Male participation in gangs and teenage pregnancy are among the leading causes
of school drop-outs, which in turn affects labor market opportunities. 
Suicide rates of both men are
women are among the highest 
in the region. El Salvador has the greatest gender dispaTity in life
expectancy in Central America, with women on average living six years more than men. Nonetheless,
maternal mortality is 120 per 100,000 live births in a country where 87 percent of births are attended by
health care professionals. Adolescent fertility at 131 per 1,000 among 15-19 year olds, is highl compared
to an average of 74 for the region.

Economic Conditions and External Environment

12. 
An Economic Transformation. 
Over the past decade, successive administrations have
undertaken 
significant 
stabilization 
and adjustment efforts. 
Structural 
reforms 
included 
trade
liberalization, 
financial sector strengthening, re-privatization of the financial sector and other state
enterprises, comprehensive 
tax reform, pension reform and 
improvement of the competitiveness
environment for private investment. Trade liberalization lowered tariffs to 5-10 percent on intermediate
goods and to 15-19 on consumption goods. Most state banks were re-privatized in the early 1990s and
prudential regulation and supervision was strengthened through approval of a new banking 
law in
September 1999 and a law for non-bank financial intermediaries 
in 2000. Privatization of electricity
distribution was completed, the state telephone company (ANTEL) was divided in two companies in 1978
and 100 percent of the Government's shares in the new company INTEL and 65 percent of the new
company CTE were sold, as well as 71 percent of its shares in a state-owned sugar mill, and tvo thermal
electricity plants. Tax reform included the introduction of the VAT in 1991 and increase in its rate in
1995, and income tax simplification. Pension reform introducing private pension funds and downsizing
the public sector system was implemented in 1998. Regarding competitiveness, 
in 1999 and 2000,
Congress approved two legislative packages comprising: an investment law, reform of the Commercial
Code, reform of the law of commercial registries, creation of the Superintendency of Commercial
Obligations and a new accounting law. Compared to the mid-1980s, the economy has been transformed:
from highly dependent on agriculture to services and manufacturing; from a closed to an open economy;
from highly dependent on coffee to a more diversified export structure; and from public- to private sector-

El Salvador: Country Assistance StrateeV 

5

led growth. The Heritage Foundation ranked El Salvador at the top of LAC free-market reforming
countries and one of the freest in the world in 2000.

13. 
Growth Remains Low. Despite the country's impressive economic transformation and prudent
macroeconomic policies, growth remains low. Following an economic boom in the early 1990s, growth
slowed, averaging 3 percent in 1996-2000. A number of factors have contributed to the slowdown:
falling export prices-coffee and sugar-in 1996-7, the impact of Hurricane Mitch in late 1998, and an
adverse external environment since 1999, including the further decline in coffee prices, loss of regional
competitiveness due to the depreciation of the Guatemalan Quetzal, increased competition for
nontraditional and maquila exports to the U.S. market, higher world oil prices, and an increase in crime
and violence which have been a disincentive to investment. Uncertainty surrounding the Presidential and
Legislative elections in March 1999 and March 2000 also contributed to weaken public finances and,
through the offsetting impact of tighter monetary policy, led to lower growth.

14. 
Approved in late 2000, the Monetary Integration (bi-monetarism) Law reflects the Authorities'
intention to reactivate the economy, speed up insertion into the global economy and make the country
more attractive to investors. The Law establishes gradual full conversion of banking deposits to dollars,
prevents the central bank (CB) from printing further colones, allows to set local prices and contracts in
both currencies, defines a 3-tier reserve requirement for commercial bank deposits at the CB with a
prudential liquidity buffer, and allows the CB to finance the recently created Instituto de Garantia de
Dep6sitos (IGD) as new lender of last resort. Its main expected benefits are lower inflation rates as
devaluations are eliminated with no currency risk; enhanced monetary, fiscal and financial discipline as
required to preserve stability; additional foreign investment flows attracted by a credible exchange regime
and a more competitive financial sector; and sustained economic recovery prompted by expected lower
domestic interest rates and lengthened loan-terms. During 2001, and despite the earthquakes, the inflation
rate remains low, new maquila investments are materializing and domestic interest rates- falling by an
average of 500 basis points-are 
supporting reconstruction investment. Last July, El Salvador
successfully placed US$354 million in international bonds under very favorable conditions (para. 21).

15. 
Structural Constraints Affect Growth Prospects. Although the economy has been affected by
adverse external developments, it also faces some important domestic constraints. Tax revenues as a
share of GDP have averaged only 10.3 percent over the past five years, which limits the Government's
ability to expand social and productive infrastructure more quickly. Growth, export performance and
poverty reduction prospects are also affected by the continuing slump in the agriculture sector. The rural
economy remains highly dependent on coffee exports, while indications are that lower international
coffee prices may not be a temporary phenomenon but rather respond to structural changes in the world
coffee sector. The economic modernization and the creation of an appropriate business environment that
took place in the 1990s is expected to generate new sources of growth, especially in urban areas, but these
changes have not materialized at a rate sufficient to generate enough employment to draw labor from, and
reduce poverty in, the country's more depressed rural areas. Export diversification has relied mainly on
the steady expansion of the maquila sector, whose exports have been growing at double digit rates since
the mid-nineties, but this is an area where El Salvador will face increasing competition from low-wage
exporters, especially under a fixed exchange system, and the need under WTO rules to end income tax
holidays and other special incentives for manufacturing export companies by January 1, 2003. Preserving
productivity gains is essential to remain competitive in world trade. The experience of other LAC
countries illustrates the importance of having skilled human capital, especially high levels of education,
and sustaining a favorable investment climate in raising productivity and attracting foreign direct
investment into higher value added activities. As table 2 shows, FDI remained low relative to GDP (1-2
percent) over the past five years (except for privatization proceeds in 1998). Although El Salvador is
making a major effort to liberalize its economy, make its public sector more efficient, and improve

6 

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strategv

education coverage, quality and technical skills of the labor force, it has a long way to go to catch up
with more advanced developing countries.

16. 
The Economic Disruption Caused by the Earthquakes is Serious but Manageable. Prior to
the earthquakes, the Bank's base case projections for 2001 onwards pointed to a moderate recovery in
growth in the range 3.5-4.5 percent and low inflation of about 3 percent (Table 2). According to joint
IMF and Bank mid-year estimates, 
the earthquakes and U.S. slowdown would reduce somewhat
economic growth (and increase poverty levels) to 3-3.5 percent in 2001, but it would recover to 4.0-4.5
from 2002 onwards. 
Following September I 1th events in the U.S., Salvadoran growth rates have been
further revised downward to 2-2.5 percent in 2001 and to 3-4 percent from 2002 onwards (Annex B6).
These rates would result from the reconstruction program, which should have an offsetling positive
impact on growth due to higher public spending, the fact that key productive infrastructure experienced
relatively minor losses, and a modest recovery in the external environment. On the demand side,
reconstruction spending and imports would generate temporary, but manageable 
fiscal and extemal
imbalances. Assuming the Government copes with the emergency by limiting the 
increa,e in public
spending to about I percent of GDP in 2001: (i) the overall fiscal deficit would rise to about 3.8 percent
of GDP; (ii) a good share of additional public spending would spill over into imports, thus increasing the
external current account deficit to about 4.7 percent of GDP; and (iii) additional financing from
multilateral and bilateral sources, and the recent US$354 million international bond issue, would close
medium-term financing gaps. Additional borrowing could keep debt service at 8.5 percent of exports of
goods and services, remittances could reach about 14 percent of GDP, and the reserve position could
improve by US$180 million. As a result, the impact of September I1 events in the U.S. on Salvadoran
poverty could result in an accumulated increase of about 2.5 percentage points over 2001-04. Temporary
macroeconomic 
imbalances are expected to be corrected thereafter provided the Government imnproves its
fiscal stance, including the adoption of measures to increase revenues, shifts expenditures tovward priority
needs, offsets 
the costs of the pension reform program, and maintains a prudent ex:ernal debt
management strategy.

17. 
El Salvador Faces a Difficult External Environment. As a small open economy, 1l Salvador
is vulnerable to adverse external developments, 
including: 
(i) a longer than expected slowdown in the
world economy, especially in the U.S. and Central America; (ii) loss of export competitivenes, following
dollarization and an eventual strong dollar; (iii) declining terms of trade; and (iv) uncertainty over the
sustained competitiveness of maquila exports.

18. 
Although throughout the 1990s, Salvador's exports remained competitive despite the appreciation
of the colon stemming from the fixed exchange rate, external demand for its traditional exports has
weakened substantially. Between 1993-2000, the col6n appreciated 
in real effective terms, but the
volume of nontraditional and maquila exports grew strongly, averaging over 14 percent a year.
Productivity improvements, low inflation, moderate wage increases, and a relatively flexible labor market
prevented the erosion of competitiveness. Moreover, the real appreciation has stemmed primiarilv from
the strength of the U.S. dollar. However, continued slow growth or recession in the U.S. would severely
impact exports and, to a lesser extent, remittance flows. Demand from the rest of Central Amcrica is also
weak, as regional growth has slowed considerably. With a fixed exchange rate and a weakening world
economy, efforts to boost productivity, contain wage bill increases based on increased labor flexibility,
find new markets, explore possibilities to attract foreign investment 
in higher value-added goods and
services, and keep domestic inflation low will be essential.

19. 
In the 1990s, and as a result of export diversification, terms of trade volatility had a limited
impact on the economy. High imports and the trade deficit (above 26 and 17 percent of GDP) were not a
concern before the earthquakes, as their impact on the current account was offset by remittance flows
(about 13.5 percent of GDP). 
In 2001, however, a severe deterioration in the terms of trade-almost 
a

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strateey 

7

halving of coffee prices (and the effects of drought on coffee production) and a doubling of oil prices-
coupled with strong growth in reconstruction imports are expected to widen the current account deficit to
about 4.7 percent of GDP. Provided the terms of trade do not worsen further, this effect would be
temporary, offset by higher official transfers, and the projected positive impact on remittance flows of the
18-months extension of the Temporary Protection Status to Salvadoran illegal immigrants in the U.S.

20. 
Maquila exports and employment could be affected by WTO rules on removing special tax
incentives (para. 15) and the WTO agreement to phase out trade barriers on textiles and clothing.
Projected to continue growing at double digits in the medium-term, as a result of an expanded benefit of
the Caribbean Basin Initiative, Salvadoran maquila exports could be hit by the global trade agreement
scheduled to enter in full effect in January 2005. Such agreement requires WTO member countries, like
the U.S., to progressively reduce barriers to trade in these products, thus bringing increased competition
among countries exporting to the U.S. and a potential decline in Salvadoran exports and employment.

Table 2: Key Economic Indicators, 1996-2001

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000(p) 

2001(e) 

2001(e)

REAL GROWTH RATES

GDP growth 
Inflation (% CPI end-period) 

KEY MACRO-INDICATORS (IN PERCENT OF GDP)

Gross Domestic Investment 
O/w Private Sector 
Gross National Savings 
O/w Public Sector 
Current Account Balance 
Gross Reserves (months of imports) 
CurrentPrivateTransfers 
Foreign Direct Investment 

PUBLIC SECTOR ACCOUNTS (IN PERCENT OF GDP)

TotalNFPSRevenueandGrants 
Total NFPS Expenditure 
Central Gov. Deficit (nct. grants) 
Central Gov. Deficit(excl. pension cost) 
NFPS Deficit (ic. grants) 

PUBLIC DEBT (IN PERCENT OF GDP)

1.7 
7.4 

15.2 
10.9 
13.5 
1.9 
-1.7 
5.3 
11.6 
0.1 

16.5 
19.0 
-2.1 
-2.1 
-2.5 

4.2 
1.9 

15.1 
11.4 
16.0 
1.9 
0.9 
4.9 
11.8 
-1.0 

14.8 
16.6 
-1.1 
-1.1 
-l.8 

3.5 
4.2 

17.5 
13.8 
16.8 
1.0 
-0.7 
5.2 
12.3 
7.2* 

15.0 
17.6 
-2.1 
-2.1 
-2.6 

3.4 
-1.0 

16.3 
13.2 
14.0 
0.4 
-2.3 
4.9 
12.3 
2.4 

14.9 
17.7 
-2.1 
-2.1 
-2.8 

17.0 
14.2 
13.8 
-0.4 
-3.2 
4.5 
13.6 
1.2 

15.5 
18.6 
-2.2 
-2.0 
-3.1 

Total Public Sector Debt 
29.4 
30.2 
27.4 
29.3 
28.4 
O/w Domestic 
5.0 
6.1 
5.4 
6.8 
6.9 
O/w External 
24.4 
24.1 
22.0 
22.5 
21.5 
External Debt Service(% ofXGS) 
16.8 
13.0 
17.2 
11.8 
9.8 
Note: p = preliminary; e = estimate. * Includes privatization proceeds for 6.8 percent of GDP.
Sources: Central Bank of El Salvador; Ministry of Finance; and Bank staff estimates.

Before- 
After-
Quakes Quakes

2.0 
4.3 

3.5-4.5 
3.0 

2-2.5
3.2

17.8 
14.8 
14.3 
0.2 
-3.5 
4.9 
13.6 
1.3 

14.9 
17.8 
-2.5 
-1.8 
-2.9 

31.9 
7.5 
24.4 
9.7 

18.0
14.6
13.3
-0.7
-4.7
4.3
14.1
1.1

15.3
19.5
-3.8
-3.1
-4.2

29.7
4.4
25.3
8.5

21. 
Exposure and Creditworthiness. El Salvador is an investment grade-rated country that has
recently placed successfully a US$354 million bond. This placement was oversubscribed, issued at 10
years with a spread of 350 basis points over US T-bills. This good profile is explained by El Salvador's
conservative debt management strategy: paying-off short-term debt, lengthening maturities, and, more
recently, limiting contracting of new external debt to almost exclusively reconstruction needs. Under a
conservative extemal financing scenario, including reconstruction spending and assuming new loans with
long maturity (multilateral) and favorable conditions, external public debt should peak at around 26
percent of GDP by 2003, but gradually decrease below pre-earthquakes levels by 2010. In the same
period, the public debt service ratio should remain close to 9 percent of total exports. IBRD debt service
as a share of total public debt service would continue decreasing slightly from 16 percent in 1997 to about
7 percent by 2003. IBRD debt service as a share of exports would also remain substantially below I

8 

El Salvador: Country Assistance Straeigy

percent over CY02-04. The preferred creditor debt service share would remain around 76 percent in the
same period, although the IBRD share would only represent about a tenth percent of it (Annex B7).
Credit risk is acceptable considering 
the country's structural constraints to growth and external and
internal challenges in the medium-term (paras. 15, 75), while having an exceptionally 
low overall debt
burden coupled with the country's good record in servicing its external debt and maintaining a prudent
debt management strategy.

III. THE RECONSTRUCTION 

STRATEGY AND THE DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

22. 
Country Vision. Throughout the 1990s, successive governments have maintained a consistent
country vision. As a small, densely populated country with scarce natural resources, El Salvador's future
prospects rest on the drive and energy of its people. Migration and the resulting remittances provide a
breathing space, but over the longer term the country has no option but to compete 
in a rapidly
globalizing world economy. To do this, it must count on a stable macroeconomic framework, a flexible
and well-educated labor force, efficient and extensive infrastructure coverage, a modern and agile public
sector, a stable and predictable business environment, an accessible and transparent judicial svstem, a
continual protection of citizen rights, property and life, and the empowerment of its people to participate
and share in the benefits of economic growth. This vision has guided development efforts over the past
decade, but the changing political landscape and ideological differences will necessarily affect the pace at
which the country's ongoing transformation can proceed. The earthquakes represented a temporary
setback, as the Government reorients short-term priorities and spending allocations 
to cleal with the
disaster, but the longer-term country vision remains unchanged.

Government Development Objectives and Reconstruction Priorities

23. 
Development Strategy. In line with the country vision, the Government's development strategy,
articulated before the earthquakes, centered around four pillars (Alianzas) aimed at focusing on poverty
reduction through human capital investment, reactivating the economy and speeding up insertion in the
global economy, 
improving public services and justice administration, and ensuring ernvironment
sustainable development. 
In addition 
to prudent macroeconomic management, 
the Government's
program 
included a number of critical structural reforms: (i) completing trade reform with enhanced
Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) access and free trade agreements with Mexico, Canada, Panama,
Dominican Republic and others; (ii) completing the privatization process by selling its remaining stake in
the telephone company, and the concessioning of airports, ports and railroads; (iii) further sirengthening
prudential regulations and supervision of the financial sector, and capitalization of the Guarantee Deposit
Institute (IGD); (iv) lowering the fiscal burden of the old public pension system; (v) completing second-
generation public sector modernization reforms; (vi) implementing the education reform program; and
(vii) advancing on decentralization and local development.

24. 
Following the earthquakes, the Government has had to adapt its medium-term public investment
program to focus on urgent reconstruction issues (and the corresponding geographic locations affected by
the earthquakes), while attempting to continue the pursuit of longer-term development objeclives. Some
of these may, however, take more time to achieve given the need also to maintain macroeconomic
stability, the difficult prospects for obtaining Congressional approval for non-reconstructiont 
loans, and
the limited availability of concessional external assistance to address medium-term investmenl needs.

Framework for Recovery and Sustainable Development

25. 
El Salvador faces the difficult challenge of responding to the earthquake reconstruction needs,
while recovering momentum 
in poverty reduction and accelerating economic growth. To meet this

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strateey 

9

challenge, the Government will need to carefully balance the urgent reconstruction needs with the longer-
term development agenda. The Bank Group's assistance program-both ongoing operations which are
already addressing key issues in El Salvador's longer-term development agenda as well as new lending
and non-lending assistance-supports 
the Government's Alianzas, and it is focused on three areas:
poverty reduction and social development, growth and public sector reform. Growth and poverty
reduction objectives will require more than simply recovering pre-disaster income and poverty levels, but
also seeking to promote pro-poor growth accompanied by reduced crime and violence, and increased
participation and empowernent. In this respect, employment-creation activities, empowerment of local
governments and communities to become more productive and self-sustaining. Public sector reform will
require increasing public resources, shifting of social and basic infrastructure spending toward the
communities' own identified needs, and decentralization of public investment to speed up public service
delivery. Modest Bank efforts to support environment sustainable development would be included as part
of the public sector reform agenda.

A. Sustaining Efforts to Reduce Poverty and Promote Social Development

26. 
The current Government planned a three-pronged approach to poverty reduction: restoring a high
level of economic growth, improving access to social services and developing a strong safety net. These
continue to be valid objectives. In the aftermath of the earthquakes, however, there is a critical need to
rebuild essential social infrastructure which has been damaged or destroyed, while extending provision of
decentralized basic services to the poorest areas. The Government considers that the reconstruction
process offers a unique opportunity to catalyze innovative local efforts in the most affected
municipalities, supported by an upgraded financial management and managerial capacity of line
ministries, FISDL and local governments.

27. 
Earthquake Damage to Social Infrastructure. Social infrastructure was particularly affected
by the earthquakes (para. 9). The Government has already taken a number of measures during the
emergency relief and rehabilitation phases to assist these groups before the rainy season including, inter
alia: (i) financing debris collection through municipalities; (ii) organizing temporary shelters to house
over one-tenth people left homeless; (iii) providing temporary housing to about 184,294 most vulnerable
families in the areas most affected financed by FISDL (and about 22,000 through NGOs); (iv) appointing
FISDL and the army to be in charge of organizing collection of debris and build temporary housing as a
complement to municipalities' efforts before the rainy season started; and (v) initiating school
reconstruction and moving forward with hospital rehabilitation. These measures, as well as those dealing
with damage to main roads and water infrastructure, have been supported by various donors, in particular
IDB and CABEI.

28. 
WBG support. Complementing IDB assistance, the Bank agreed rapidly to reprogram about
US$38 million under the ongoing Education Reform (Ln. 4320-SV) and Secondary Education (Ln.
4224-SV) Projects to address school reconstruction needs. Capitalizing on the extraordinary participation
of rural communities in the most-affected areas, loan reprogramming focuses on qualitative-including
anti-seismic design-reconstruction of 594 destroyed or severely damaged schools, rehabilitation of 560
moderately damaged schools, school grants for minor repairs in 986 schools, replacement of textbooks
and other educational materials lost, nutrition programs, debris cleaning and other earthquake-related
activities. Agriculture and rural infrastructure sectors were also affected, and therefore under the ongoing
Agricultural Sector Reform and Investment Project (Ln. 3576A-SV) the Bank provided financing for
emergency rural infrastructure needs. Finally, because of the devastating impact of the earthquakes on
health infrastructure, the Government requested that the Bank concentrate its new lending on restoring
operations of six major hospitals, some of which will require complete replacement and others
rehabilitation and partial reconstruction. Since processing of a proposed health project was well advanced

10 

El Salvador: Country Assistance StrateEg

at the time, the Bank incorporates 
this assistance as an emergency reconstruction component 
Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction and Basic Health Services Extension Project (FY02).

in an

29. 
Poverty and Social Protection. Tackling poverty, in particular rural poverty, remains a key
priority. Structural problems in agriculture, including low productivity for basic grains, low international
coffee prices due to world supply re-composition, difficult access to main basic services, and inadequate
rural roads have severely limited new investment and entrepreneurship in the sector. The nawtral resource
base is in many areas highly degraded, including in particular soil erosion, loss of natural habitats and
forest cover and water contamination. This is exacerbated by the adverse effect of natLural disasters
(hurricanes, droughts). Nearly three quarters of economically active women in rural areas are employed
in some non-farm activities and a disproportionate number of males have tended to migrate to urban
centers and abroad. Hence, a strategy to address rural poverty needs to emphasize improved access to
basic services, agricultural diversification, natural resource management and the generation of jobs and
incomes in the non-agriculture rural activities. 
It also needs to explore affordable, cost-efiective safety
net options for particularly vulnerable groups.

30. 
WBG Support. Based in part on the 1994 Poverty Assessment and a subsequent coriprehensive
Rural Development Study, the Bank's ongoing assistance program in El Salvador has had strong rural
focus. More than half of the outstanding portfolio is concentrated in the education sector, where the Bank
is the leading donor. Within the context of a long-term national education strategy, Bank-financed
investments under the Education Reform (Ln. 4320-SV) and Secondarv Education (Ln. 4224-SV)
Projects have emphasized increased coverage and quality of basic and secondary education for low-
income students in rural and marginal urban areas, supported increased partnerships xvitl the private
sector and communities and 
institutional modernization of MINED (paras. 33-34). 'I'he planned
Earthquake Emergency and Basic Health Services Extension Project 
(which will Mcin]de hospital
reconstruction in response to the earthquake - paras. 27 and 36) would also focus on rural health services.
The Agricultural Sector Reform and Investment (Ln. 3576A-SV) and Land Adminisiration 
(Lu.
3982-SV) Projects support activities aimed at raising the productivity of small and medium farmers and
improving the security of land tenure. Most recently, the Bank and IDB have been working with the
FISDL, which finances small-scale social and economic 
infrastructure, 
to develop a strategy for its
decentralization and strengthening of local governments. However, after the earthquakes strulck, the size
of FISDL's planned investment program has been reduced and it was decided that IDB woulci finance this
program, while the Bank would concentrate new earthquake-related financing on the health sector. The
Government has also asked the Bank to explore options for supporting community-based rural productive
activities, 
in partnership with IFAD. The Bank is working with the Ministries of Economy and
Agriculture on the issue of rural economic reactivation, and a possible Rural Community Development
Project (FY03) would aim to address the problems of rural small and medium enterprise creation,
productive infrastructure and assets at the local level, and rural technologies. The Bank is planning to
provide some technical cooperation through FISDL, and in the event that the government allocates a
larger share of the public investment program for local development, 
it would consider providing
assistance in the outer years of this CAS period or the beginning of the next.

31. 
The rural focus of the Bank's assistance program notwithstanding, the rapid rate of urbanization,
increases in urban poverty and crime and violence in El Salvador have led the Bank to provide analytical
and technical assistance towards these issues. In December, 2000, the Cities Alliance, a consortium of
donors and urban development agencies led by Habitat and the Bank, provided a grant to design a master
development plan for and to help establish institutional capacity for comprehensive policy reform on1
urban poverty in Metropolitan San Salvador. An ongoing Central America-Urban Review (FY02) is
examining access by the urban poor to basic services, and determining the quality and reliability 
in the
delivery of such services to the poor in three Central American capitals, 
including San Salvador.
Municipal authorities of the San Salvador metropolitan area have signaled interest in receiving both Bank

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strateev 

11

technical and financial assistance, building on the work initiated under the Cities Alliance. For the time
being, given the Government's understanding with Congress to focus new external borrowing on the
earthquake response (San Salvador City was not seriously affected by the earthquake), cooperation on
urban issues is likely to remain on a technical level, although project financing may be anticipated in the
early stages of the next CAS period. Meanwhile, the metropolitan area is benefiting from support under
the Land Administration Project (Ln. 3982-SV) (about 20 percent of investments are directed to
regularization and registration of property in San Salvador); the Basic and Secondary Education (Lns.
3945-SV and 4224-SV) projects finance activities in marginal urban areas; one of the hospitals to be
reconstructed under the proposed Earthquake Emergency and Basic Health Services Extension Project
(FY02) is located in the metropolitan area; and the proposed Judicial Modernization Project will benefit
the entire country, especially urban areas where violence is expanding.

32. 
Finally, at the Government's request, the Bank is providing technical assistance in support of the
efforts to develop a post earthquake poverty map, which will offer additional insights into the effects of
the earthquakes and allow better targeting of public and donor reconstruction expenditure at the municipal
level; and it is also preparing an updated poverty diagnostic and a social safety net assessment that will
examine the nature of vulnerability of low income groups, so as to generate proposals for improving the
social safety net under a social protection strategy.

33. 
Education. Human capital development is fundamental not only for poverty reduction, but also
as an essential part of El Salvador's strategy to improve its international competitiveness and develop new
sources of growth. Since the end of the conflict period, successive administrations have assigned high
priority to expanding coverage and improving quality of education, especially through the highly
successful EDUCO program. The nationally agreed 10-year (1995-2005) Education Reform Plan
focuses on five objectives: expanding pre-primary and primary education coverage in rural and low-
income urban areas, reducing illiteracy, expanding access to secondary education for low-income groups,
improving the quality of education at all levels, and enhancing the efficiency of education by completing
the Ministry's modernization program.

34. WBG Support. The Bank has been a major supporter of El Salvador's education sector over the
years, and a key partner in the design and implementation of the highly successful EDUCO community-
based education program that has been instrumental for expanding coverage of basic education in both
rural and marginal urban areas. Ongoing education projects-the soon-to-close Basic Education Project
(Ln. 3945-SV), the Education Reform Project (Ln. 4320-SV), and the Secondary Education Project
(Ln. 4224-SV) -account 
for over fifty percent of the Bank's portfolio. Bank assistance under the
Education Reform Project (Ln. 4320-SV), the first phase of an APL, is supporting the Education
Reform Program to ensure that a least 90 percent of the children complete basic education (grades 1-9),
with emphasis on the poorest rural and urban marginal areas and a shift in priorities from extension of
coverage to achieving quality primary education standards. The on-going Secondary Education Project
(Ln. 4224-SV) is extending a participatory approach to support secondary education, broadening its
coverage in rural areas, financing school rehabilitation and maintenance, improving its cost effectiveness
with an enhanced role for the private sector, upgrading the content and relevance of the curricula, and
bringing increased attention to female students who show a higher dropout rate. In response to the
increasing problem with youth at risk, the Bank is accelerating implementation of the Secondary
Education Project to support youth education and life development, including special secondary education
programs to support coverage extension, a school to work transition program and activities for out of
school at risk youth and the Bank envisage the second stage of the APL and a follow-up Secondary
Education project shortly thereafter, possibly in FY04 and FY05, respectively. IFC will support private
sector education initiatives, especially in tertiary education, through direct investments and technical
assistance. Recently, IFC completed a regional (including El Salvador) technical assistance project,

12 

El Salvador: Country Assistance Stratery

financed by Italian and IFC 
trust 
funds, 
to evaluate 
the climate 
investments and to identify potential projects with the private sector.

for education 

and health 

sector

35. 
Health. El Salvador's health indicators 
lag with respect 
to the LAC region, and the earthquakes
have further constrained 
the previously 
scarce supply of health services, placing a large part of the
population 
in most 
affected 
areas 
at high 
risk. Moreover, 
the quality of service 
delivery 
is
administratively 
and clinically poor, as efficiency of public sector provision 
is low and costs are relatively
high in relation 
to outcomes. Malnutrition 
is also high among several key groups such as pregnant
women and children under 5 years old. HIV/AIDS does not appear 
to be a major concern yet, but the
number of reported cases is increasing. 
Since the early nineties, successive Governments 
have indicated
an interest 
in health 
reform, but this process has been constrained 
by lack of consensus 
on sector
priorities, problems with the delivery of essential health and nutrition services and limited capacity and
managerial constraints 
in the Ministry of Health (MOH). Because of these difficulties, 
only in the late
1990s was the design of the health sector reform completed. 
The new Government 
created a National
Commission 
for health reform which has been working under 
the new priorities 
reformulated 
by the
earthquake needs. Looking 
to the future, the Government places high priority 
in the reconstruction 
effort
and it is seeking 
to take advantage of this effort to spearhead broader changes 
in the organization 
and
delivery of publically-financed 
health services, extend basic health and nutrition coverage 
in the rural
areas and modernize 
the MOH through a more community-based 
approach 
to primary care provision, 
the
decentralization 
of its financial management 
and some outsourcing of service provision 
through NGOs.

36. 

WBG Support. Bank assistance 

in the preparation of a basic health project was well advanced

when the earthquakes hit. As previously noted, a proposed Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction and
Basic Health Services Extension Project (FY02) will now incorporate support to reconstruct 
seven

major hospitals, as well the extension of basic health and nutrition coverage 
in the northern 
region and in
the catchment 
area of the hospitals 
to be rehabilitated or rebuilt, 
the institutional modernization 
of the
Ministry of Health, 
improving hospital care and extending essential health and nutrition services through
community-based 
outreach and support selected priority national health 
issues 
including detection and
control of HIV/AIDS. 
IFC will support health 
initiatives 
from 
the private 
sector 
through direct
investments 
and technical assistance. As indicated above, IFC recently completed 
a regional 
technical
assistance project 
to evaluate 
the climate for health sector 
investments and to identify potential projects
with the private sector.

37. 
Engendering Development. 
The Bank's assistance 
strategy will address gender challenges by
supporting 
activities 
in its education, health, 
rural development 
and judicial 
sector projects 
that: 
(i)
provide 
reproductive and sexual health services for women and men to reduce fertility, 
teenage pregnancy
and maternal mortality; 
(ii) introduce violence prevention 
and youth programs 
in self-awareness, 
conflict
resolution, 
family planning, 
and parenting 
skills 
to address 
school drop out, 
lack of employment
opportunities, 
rising levels of violence, alcohol and drug abuse, and high rates of teenage pregnancy 
in the

education system, community level programs, and the media; (iii) reduce gender stereotypes transmitted

through 
teaching methods and materials; 
(iv) improve battered women's access 
to justice through judicial
reform programs; 
(v) improve 
the availability of affordable 
child care and male participation 
in it to
address domestic violence, 
teenage pregnancy, 
and gang violence; 
and (vi) develop rural development
programs attending women's agriculture 
technology and credit needs.

B. Accelerating Growth and Developing New Opportunities

38. 
While supporting direct poverty-targeted 
interventions, 
the Government 
recognizes 
that restoring
faster growth within a stable macroeconomic 
framework 
is essential 
to address poverty. 
Preserving
macroeconomic 
stability 
is seen as a pre-condition 
to stimulate growth, 
raise 
incomes and generate
employment. 
Private 
sector-led 
growth will require deepening 
the Government's 
competitiveness

El Salvador: Country Assistance Stratezv 

13

agenda, improving infrastructure, and continuing their efforts to strengthen the financial system. In
addition, the Government is aware that dealing with crime and violence is critical, both to improve the
investment climate as well as to improve welfare.

39. 
Stabilization Agenda. Maintaining low inflation, while financing temporary macro-imbalances
due to the earthquakes is a pre-condition for protecting the poor against further income losses, and
stimulating broad-based economic growth to reduce poverty. The magnitude of projected reconstruction
expenditures is creating fiscal pressures, and the Government is aware that it will need to phase
previously planned investments to create fiscal space to finance reconstruction. In 2001, the overall fiscal
deficit will necessarily rise and will require additional efforts to return to a sustainable fiscal position as
reconstruction needs begin to decrease. The Government assigns a high priority to a prudent fiscal stance
and aims to reduce the overall fiscal deficit to about 3 percent of GDP by 2003 through a combination of
measures, including improved tax administration and removal of major tax exemptions, increased non-tax
revenues, further cuts in non-priority expenditures, restructuring of public debt from high-cost short-term
debt to lower-cost and longer-term financing, and measures to lower the Government's net pension costs.
In the medium-term, improving fiscal sustainability is needed to increase public savings and investment,
as well as reducing the vulnerability of the financial system. A prudent fiscal stance is essential in El
Salvador's monetary regime, since in the absence of a lender of last resort, any losses in the financial
system directly affect fiscal accounts and ultimately the external accounts. Average total domestic
investment, private investment and national savings rates remained remarkably low and stable in the
1990s, around their average of 16, 13 and 14-15 percent of GDP respectively, but those rates are below
LAC averages of 21-22, 14 and 18-19 percent of GDP respectively, and insufficient for restoring pre-
earthquake inroads on poverty. According to Bank estimates, a 3.5 per-capita growth rate would require a
minimum investment rate of 18-19 percent of GDP, roughly 1-2 percentage points above its present level,
financed by a similar increase in national savings. Reconstruction expenditure will boost investment to
these levels temporarily, but the biggest challenge is to make these rates sustainable, particularly with
respect to private investment, in the medium term.

40. 
WBG Support. Together with the IMF, the Bank has maintained an active policy dialogue and
close collaboration in support of the Government's monetary, fiscal and financial sector reform agendas.
In preparation for the Consultative Group meeting, the IMF and the Bank prepared a joint
Macroeconomic Assessment of the Impact of the Earthquakes (FY01). A joint IMF-Bank Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)(FY01) was completed in 2001 and the authorities endorsed all of
its major recommendations, including strengthening least-cost procedures for closing troubled banks,
financing of the Guarantee Deposit Institute (IGD), prudential regulations for non-bank financial
intermediaries, consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates and upgrading of payment system
clearances and settlements. IFC has supported the financial sector, not only as a source of long-term
financing, but also with Technical Assistance and the financing of innovative transactions and non-bank
financial institutions which tend to have a greater impact on the SME sector. The Government has
requested follow-up WBG just in time assistance in the form of advisory services. A Country Economic
Memorandum (FY03) is planned to analyze structural constraints to Salvadoran growth in the medium-
term.

41. 
Fostering Growth and Private Sector Development. Given its geographical proximity to the
U.S., relatively low labor costs, a dynamic entrepreneurial sector, a rapidly developing banking sector and
a decade of sustained and comprehensive structural reforms, El Salvador has significant potential for
private sector driven, export-led growth. These advantages, however, have yet to be translated into high
and sustained growth. The Government's strategy has been to increase growth by raising productivity,
but despite clear signs of higher productivity, high growth remains elusive. El Salvador had the second
highest growth in total factor productivity in LAC during the 1990s (2.3-2.5 percent). Productivity gains
were based on the opening-up of the economy, renewed use of installed capacity following the end of the

A4 jlEl 

Salvador: Country Assistance Strate2y

conflict, the fruits of accelerated deregulation, a low wage bill privatization leading to higher competition
and technological progress (especially in telecoms), and increased and sustained investments i . education
and physical infrastructure.

42. 
While a number of external and domestic factors explain El Salvador's low growth performance
(paras. 13, 15), and much remains to be done to continue to improve competitiveness, 
there is also a need
to better understand the linkage between structural reforms and growth, and the economy's furure growth
prospects. The implementation of the new U.S. Trade Act, will permit El Salvador to capture more
investment in the apparel and textiles sectors, although excessive concentration in these sector, alone will
not be sufficient to sustain high growth. Supported by the Competitiveness Enhancement: Loan (Ln.
3946-SV), the core agenda for private sector development consists of further improvements in business
competitiveness and physical 
infrastructure, as well as increased 
investment 
in human capital and
sustained efforts in enhancing access to knowledge through INFOCENTROS (para. 49). Future gains in
competitiveness should come from attracting new industries with technology that boosts productivity over
the medium-term; more efficient, competitive and diversified financial and pension servic. s; modern
basic infrastructure, especially in rural transport, ports, urban services and tourism; enhanciiig technical
capabilities of private sector enterprises and labor: 
reducing transaction costs through further de-
regulation, free trade agreements and open access to public information; and opening new credit
opportunities to the small- and medium-enterprises, 
like those generated with the recent apploval of the
Mutual Guarantee Society Law (Lev de Sociedadles de Garantia Reciproca). 
IFC will contilue to help
improve the competitiveness of Salvadoran industry through (i) its investments in private infrastructure,
wvith a special focus on regional projects; (ii) direct investments, not only in the manufacturing but social
sectors as well; and (iii) its capital markets support. On-going technical assistance projects aimed at
project identification and development 
in the social sectors will also foster growth and private sector
development. Additionally, the Bank - IFC joint SME department has nearly finalized its work on an
SMIE Map for El Salvador. The Map is a diagnostic assessment of the business environment as it impacts
SMEs, including the identification of gaps in the provision of key financial and non-financ al services
both by the public and private sectors. Based on the work already done, IFC is working with
lFlUNDAPYME a local consulting company belonging to the FUNDES network, to strengthen its capacity
to deliver such services to SMEs.

43. 
Basic Infrastructure. 
El Salvador has made good progress 
in the modernization of its
infrastructure. As mentioned earlier, privatization of electricity distribution has been completed, and the
Government has sold two thermal electricity plants and the majority of shares in the telecorr company.
Thle Government expects to negotiate concessions with the private sector to operate geothermnal plants.
Roads and water 
infrastructure have 
traditionally been supported heavily by IDB an d CABEI.
Consequently, 
these donors financed earthquake reconstruction needs in these sectors under ongoing
projects, with the Bank financing only minor repairs 
to power transmission under the on-going Energy
Sector Modernization Project (Ln. 3920-SV). To support improvement of the legal, institiutional and
regulatory framework and promote private investment in the power sector, the IFC approved a US$120
million investment in the Salvadoran distribution networks. This investment supports the e.xpansion of
the distribution networks, mainly into rural areas, and rehabilitation of the companies' existing networks
in order to increase reliability and reduce technical losses. IFC also approved $15m in financing for a
regional power development company focusing on renewable and co-generation projects.

44. 
Reducing Crime and Violence: A Multidimensional Approach. Curbing rampant crime and
violence 
is a pre-condition for improving governance, promoting economic recovery and attracting
foreign investment. El Salvador is one of the most violent countries in Latin America, and in the world.
I lomicide rates in El Salvador for 1998-77 per 100,000 habitants-were 
almost 4 times higher than the
average for LAC. Participants in CAS consultations ranked it as the main problem facing the country
(Annex F). A recent survey of Salvadoran businesses placed crime and violence as the major constraint
to private investment. A survey carried out in 1999 revealed that about 44 percent of the population felt

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strategy 

15

insecure and a similar percentage had no confidence in the judicial system's ability to punish delinquency.
Although El Salvador experienced violence before the conflict, recent studies suggest important changes
between wartime and post-conflict violence: (i) violence is no longer located mainly in rural areas but has
moved to the main cities; and (ii) violence has moved from the northern and eastern wartime departments
to the western departments-Santa Ana, Sonsonate and Ahuachapan. A number of factors have been
proposed to explain the staggering level of violence that has carried over into the post-conflict period,
including land and income inequality, high number of out-of-school and unemployed youth who are at
risk, employment opportunities, urbanization, the deterrence capacity of the state measured by the
number of police and judicial forces, and the resources for and efficiency in processing delinquency. In
addition, other forms of violence, such as domestic violence and the prevalence of gangs (maras) are
surfacing.

WBG Support. 

45. 
It is clear that addressing El Salvador's crime and violence problem will be a
long-term undertaking which, given its multidimensional nature, will need to rely on a wide range of
interventions and a concerted effort on the part of the country's development partners. The Government
has developed a comprehensive plan based on the creation of the National Council of Public Security and
the Ministry of Security (Gobernaci6n). It has also implemented the Social Peace Program with some
early successes. Reforms to the criminal and penal codes have been submitted to Congress for its
approval. To deal with preventive actions while addressing education shortcomings, the on-going
Secondary Education project addresses urban youths' education needs. These programs complement an
IDB-supported Instituto de Menores, a center devoted to re-educate former maras and prepare them to
deal with employment opportunities. The ongoing Social Protection study, which will be part of the
Poverty Assessment, will assess existing institutions providing support to violence-prone groups. In
response to its findings, a LIL on Youth at Risk (FY04) could be developed. Finally, as a critical
building block in providing prompt and accessible justice, a proposed Judicial Reform Project (FY02)
that will take into account the design and implementation of a medium-term modernization plan aimed at
upgrading the judicial system's performance from a socio-economic angle, will provide assistance to the
Supreme Court, the National Judicial Council and the Procuraduria General. Broad consultations have
been carried out with one-third of judges, court administrators, lawyers, bar associations, businesses,
NGOs, municipalities, government institutions, donor representatives, media, law faculties, women
associations, indigenous associations, and labor unions. Financed by a PHRD grant, a survey on the
access to justice by the poor, and problems and needs of the administration ofjustice are being developed.
USAID, UNDP, IDB, Spain, and Canada are also supporting activities in the judicial sector. Although it
will mainly target large urban centers, where a large majority of business, commercial, labor and family
related disputes are delayed and pending, it will also focus on areas most damaged by the earthquakes.
Special attention will be given to broadening access to justice by the poor and disadvantaged groups,
developing alternative dispute settlement arrangements, re-mapping judicial districts, improving court
procedures and legal assistance programs, enhancing quality services through a new supervision
mechanism of judges and other professionals in the sector, studying the possibility of introducing oral
procedures in civil courts, and developing a judicial career. Finally, the project will also define an
investment profile for rehabilitating critical judicial infrastructure destroyed in the municipalities most
affected by the earthquakes.

C. Fine Tuning the Role of the Public Sector

46. 
After almost a decade of reforms, El Salvador has made considerable progress in modernizing
and refocusing the role of the public sector. Building on this progress, the Government now needs to
focus on second-generation reforms aiming to: (i) deepen the public sector modernization program to
increase efficiency and improve governance; (ii) tackle the emerging decentralization and local
development agenda; and (iii) strengthen capacity in environmental management and disaster
preparedness and mitigation.

16 

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strategy

47. 
Public Sector Modernization and Improved Governance. Although the public sector is small
and its reform agenda related to privatization, social security and deregulation is well advaznced. it has a
way to go in establishing a modern, efficient and accountable public sector. A recent study of six
dimensions of governance worldwide reflecting comparative perceptions of a large number of enterprises
and citizens, found that El Salvador does very well in terms of its regulatory framework; slightly less than
average 
in terms of promoting voice and accountability, preserving political stability, developing
government effectiveness and controlling corruption; but poor in terms of enforcing the rule of law.
Second generation public sector reforms will need to focus on: (i) transform a relatively centralized
structure; (ii) develop of a medium-term expenditure framework and improve budget for,nulation and
execution; 
(iii) promote a professional civil service, with improved hiring standards, performance
evaluation and a merit-based remuneration system capable of attracting and retaining skilled staff; (iv)
build financial and management capacity in local government in line with its decentralization agenda; and
(v) rely on new 
information and communication 
technology (such as c-Government) 
to improve
transparency, accountability and access to public services. 
In the near term, sound governance requires
ensuring a participatory and transparent handling of reconstruction assistance. To address the above
issues, the Govemrnment has recently created an Office to deal with corruption 
in the Comptroller
General's Office and appointed the National Commission for International Cooperation to bL in charge of
social and financial auditing of external assistance. Members of this commission include representatives
from the municipalities. the Catholic church, NGOs, the private sector and the NDC.

48. 
WBG Support. Given their potential impact on the efficient implementation of reconstruction
programs, 
initially, and on promoting broad based growth 
in general, completing public sector
modernization and improving governance remain major CAS objectives. All ongoing and proposed
Bank-assisted projects include components aimed at either institutional modernization oir institutional
strengthening. The ongoing Agricultural Sector Reform and Investment Project (Ln. 3576A-SV), for
example, is supporting the reorganization and institutional development of the Ministry of Agriculture,
the Land Administration Project (Ln. 3982-SV) 
is helping to establish an efficient and modern
national property cadastre and registry, and the Basic and Secondary Education Projects (Lns. 3945-
SV and 4224-SV) are supporting continuous strengthening and modernization of the Ministry of
Education.

49. 
On a broader scale, the ongoing Bank-supported Public Sector Modernization Project (Ln.
4082-SV) is addressing institutional restructuring of ministries, streamlining bureaucracy and procedures
for service delivery, strengthening the regulatory framework and the capacity of regulatcry agencies,
completing remaining concessions, development of an efficient civil service, and automation of public
services (e.g., government permits, electronic payments and hospital appointments) through innovative
INFOCENTROS. The authorities propose to build, operate and franchise 100 telecenteres 
in the near
term. These centers will catalyze the provision of a commerce, computer training centers, internet access
and popular courses such as rebuilding of earthquake-damaged houses. IDB and IMF are sLIpporting the
development of an integrated financial management system and unification of Customs and Internal
Revenue Directorates 
in the Ministry of Finance. Complementing 
this ongoing assistance, the Bank
proposes 
to carry out several analytical studies 
that would define a future agenda: a Country
Procurement Assessment Report (FY03) that will build on informal advisory assistance provided by the
Bank on the new Procurement Law, and a Country Financial Accountability Assessmenif (FY03) that
will evaluate progress on integrated financial management, budget procedures and control, ancd define
next steps. The Bank has also been providing assistance to Congress through a recently approNed IDF
Grantfor Strengthening of Congress (FY02) that will focus on the modernization of legal databases and
improved access by lawmakers.

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strateey 

17

50. 
Decentralization and Local Development. Given the sheer magnitude of earthquakes damage
and the pressing claims of affected populations to participate in their own reconstruction process, the
Government sees decentralization as essential for the execution of the reconstruction strategy and for
poverty reduction. Its interpretation of decentralization is broad: de-concentrating and transferring more
responsibility to 
local governments and communities, improving territorial equity, enhancing
municipalities' capacity to raise tax revenues, and promoting local participation and accountability by
small rural communities. Supported by FISDL and ISDEM, increased participation and empowerment by
municipalities and local beneficiaries is expected to facilitate an efficient targeting, execution,
monitoring, auditing and evaluation of social spending. Since 2001, national consensus on a
decentralization and local development agenda has been developing. A 1999 national survey on
governance reported that 58 percent of Salvadorans believe municipalities perform better in solving local
problems than the Central Government. The same survey indicated that one out of two Salvadorans
believe municipalities should be entrusted with greater decision authority and resources. The
Government's strategy aims to promote participation in local management, improve the quality of service
delivery to the population, and strengthen local capacity to assume broader financial management
responsibilities in the use of transferred resources. The Government still needs to address several issues:
the institutionalization of a local development consultative body, the definition of its scope of work and,
from that, the institutional strengthening of FISDL and ISDEM; and specific actions, regulatory
framework timetable and approach for decentralization of specific sectors. In the medium-term, however,
there appears to be broad consensus to: move FISDL away from its traditional social fund financing role,
toward that of a-normative and technical-municipal development agency; develop a municipal fiscal
reform; transfer responsibility for basic infrastructure-water and sanitation, rural roads and electricity-
activities to municipalities; encourage effective participation of non-Government stakeholders; and
strengthen communities and municipalities, especially in poorer areas.

51. 

WBG Support. The Bank is supporting Government efforts to define a decentralization strategy
through a Decentralization Study (FY02), and related workshops featuring intensive discussions among
the Government, Congress, the broad-based Consultative Group for Local Development, FISDL, NGOs
and key donors. Broad consensus has developed on the need to take advantage of on-going
reconstruction programs to test a decentralized execution process, particularly in most affected/poorer
areas. Supported by IDB, the Govemment appointed FISDL as the central agency to support
decentralized execution, monitoring and auditing of the emergency relief programs, like debris cleaning,
temporary housing and shelters, and food distribution. This has allowed FISDL to take advantage of the
emergency to catalyze improved local governance and accountability via support to participatory
municipal planning and program implementation processes, encourage private investment at the local
level by offering technical support and training communities-including project monitoring and
evaluation-to municipalities, promote equity by using its poverty map to allocate reconstruction
resources to municipalities, and build bridges with the Central Government for meeting community
demands for basic and social infrastructure. The Bank will continue to work with the Government in
supporting the preparation of a decentralization strategy through analytical work and advisory services.

52. 
Environment Sustainability, Disaster Preparedness and Land Rights. The effects of the
earthquakes were exacerbated by El Salvador's environmental vulnerability. Natural resource
degradation is closely related to rural poverty, as poor subsistence farmers suffer from low yields and
productivity and involuntarily contribute to environment degradation: three fourths of the territory, where
70 percent of basic grains cultivation takes place, is subject to serious soil erosion. Particularly
vulnerable to soil erosion, the Upper Lempa River Basin, with a population of 305,000 and an area of
3,587 square kilometers is the largest watershed and important from a biological, trade and eco-tourism
point of view. Degradation affects adversely agricultural productivity and exacerbates the damage caused
by natural disasters. Only 12 percent of El Salvador's land area still has forest cover and less than 2
percent of the original primary forests remain. Most fresh water sources are contaminated by chemical
and industrial discharges. Urban pollution and the incidence of gastrointestinal illnesses are both high.

18 

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strategy

No vulnerability assessments based on watersheds, basins and identification of flood prone areas exist to
prevent catastrophic losses from natural disasters.

53. 
WBG Support. Although the IDB and USAID have the lead in supporting 
the policy and
institutional environmental agenda, the Bank has engaged in several critical issues. The Bark assisted in
the design of a National Environment Management Strategy, and facilitated 
IDB preparation of a
sustainable development project 
in the Upper Lempa River Basin. The Bank would support an
Environmental Services Technical Support Project (FY04) to assist the new Ministry of Environment in
piloting the concept of environmental services and strengthening protected areas management, as a
complement 
to planned Global Environment Facility (GEF) for biodiversity protectiorn in the El
Salvadoran part of the Mesoamerican Biological Corridor. Supported by an ongoing medium-n-size GEF
grant and in partnership with PROCAFE, the Salvadoran Coffee Promotion Foundation, tl-!e Bank has
helped to promote biodiversity-friendly systems in shaded coffee areas with certification criteria and
marketing campaigns , and by supporting technological change to a high quality and biodiver;ity-friendly
new industry. 
In partnership with the IDB, the Bank under an IDF Grant has supported the Center for
Prevention of Disasters 
in Central America (FY99). The objectives of this grant are to support
vulnerability and risk assessments, 
training for public and private officials, carrying oat of small
emergency response tests, and raising awareness about ways to reduce risks at the local level. Finally, the
ongoing Land Administration Project (Ln. 3982-SV) has become a key input not only for land cadastre
and registration activities, but for disaster mitigation and prevention (e.g. hazard mappa.1g) and for
identifying the best available, risk free areas in which to resettle the population in the aftermath of the
earthquake. Project accomplishments include: the establishment of a unified land registry and cadastral
system under a single institution (CNR); CNR compliance with an ISO 9000 certification prc,cess: active
participation by civil society in the regularization of land in key departments; 
internet access to land
records; agreement between the CNR and metropolitan San Salvador to develop and share cazlastral data;
and initial participation by selected municipalities in the maintenance and use of the cadastre nformation.
Based on continued satisfactory 
implementation, 
the Bank expects to support a follow-on Land
Administration II Project (FY04) in the outer years of this CAS period or the beginning of the next.

[V. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. Progress since the Last CAS

54. 
The previous strategy. The previous CAS underscored that the overriding priority was peace
sustainability and centered 
its vision around the Government's concept of competitiveness 
for all.
Supported by sound macro-policies, export competitiveness had to be enhanced by addressing supply-side
constraints through a competitiveness program. The goal was to transform the country fronm a war-torn,
highly divided society, to one based on greater economic and social participation and an externally
competitive market-based economy. 
The Government's 
strategy was 
to 
increase El Salvador's
competitive base through higher productivity. This was to be achieved through enhanced .ompetition;
improved financial and capital markets and physical infrastructure; 
investment in human 
apital, and
access to knowledge. 
In addition to preserving stability, reaching this vision faced four nter-related
challenges: 
enhancing competitiveness, 
social development, modernizing 
the public 
,ector, and
improving environmental management. The Bank took a very selective approach, 
in Lhoosing its
interventions to address each challenge.

55. 
Overall Results. During the CAS period, the Government succeeded 
in maintailing 
an
appropriate macroeconomic framework even under unfavorable external conditions, but the outcome of
Bank's assistance efforts were mixed. 
In part this was attributable to revisions to lending assistance
during CAS implementation to address the effects of Hurricane Mitch in late 1998, and the new political

El Salvador: Country Assistance Stratezy 

19

realities resulting from Presidential and Congressional elections in late 2000. As elections approached,
the Executive found it difficult to obtain Congressional support for the ratification of external loans; new
lending was curtailed and already approved loans suffered long effectiveness delays. The possibilities of
obtaining Congressional support for new lending did not improve with the change in Government. As a
result, of the planned FY98-00 base case scenario of six operations for an estimated commitment of
US$300 million, only two, but critical operations materialized, both for education totaling US$146
million. While new lending was less than anticipated, the overall quality of the ongoing portfolio was
maintained and all loans have been rated satisfactory or highly satisfactory.

56. 
On the positive side, the Bank supported successful efforts in education, private sector
competitiveness, public sector modernization and land tenure security. Major achievements included: (i)
expanding the community-based education program EDUCO, which surpassed its original goals and was
completed on schedule; (ii) public sector reform and competitiveness programs, which supported a
successful privatization of telecom and electricity distribution and pension reform efforts, and the
establishment of a regulatory framework that placed El Salvador among most open economies in the
world; and (iii) development of the land cadastre and modernization of the land registry.

57. 
Other efforts, however, were less fruitful. The institutional mandate of the FISDL, which had
been the executing agency for small-scale social and rural infrastructure construction, was fundamentally
altered by the Congressional mandate in 1998 to use it as a channel for the six percent of budgetary
resources directed to municipalities in fulfillment of the new law of municipal transfers (FODES). This
was not fully accepted by the municipalities, which expected that FISDL financing should be incremental
to, and not part of, the six percent of transfers. This in turn provoked a shift of strategy for dealing with
local development from which the FISDL is only just emerging, since it no longer channels FODES

resources. Three other Bank projects-Agricultural 

Sector Reform (Ln. 3576-SV), Energy Sector

Modernization (Ln. 3920-SV) and Basic Education (Ln. 3945-SV)-were also amended to support
Hurricane Mitch priorities. But, as a result of modifications to the FISDL's role, efforts to develop a
comprehensive social and rural development strategy, built on the findings and recommendations of the

FY98 Rural Development Study and the FY98 Rural Finance Study have yet to be finalized.

Client Consultation and Civil Society Dialogue. The earthquake emergency has opened

58. 
extraordinary opportunities for a dialogue between the Government and civil society on how best to
involve the Bank's support to reconstruction and poverty reduction programs. CAS preparation followed
an innovative consultation process (Annex F). Before setting CAS policy priorities, a consultation was
held in San Salvador in April 2001 to integrate both the Government and Civil Society Organizations'
(CSOs) views. Results from the consultations revealed substantial common ground among participants
and contributed to shape the Bank program in several ways, including: (i) the importance of preserving
the medium and long-term main focus of its assistance, despite earthquake emergency needs; (ii) the need
for preserving social-education and health-rural development and basic infrastructure needs as the top
priorities in its pipeline; (iii) the importance of addressing emerging new priorities like crime, violence
and gender-related issues-youth and domestic violence, teenager pregnancy-, urban poverty and
disaster mitigation; (iv) the likely prospects to slowdown the local development and decentralization
process, so as to implement priority emergency programs first; and (v) requests for further flexibility and
presence in situ from the Bank in dealing with reconstruction and development needs.

59. 
OED Review. An OED evaluation of the Bank's assistance over the previous decade rates it as
fully satisfactory in terms of development impact (Box 1). As noted by OED, the reforms carried out
created the conditions for faster growth, reducing poverty, addressing gender differences, and to develop
the private sector. On-going projects showed high performance ratings. It also noted that according to
the QAG, El Salvador had neither projects nor commitments at risk. To maintain the effectiveness of its
assistance, the Country Assistance Note suggested that the Bank should keep aligning its medium term

20 

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strate_ev

objectives with those of the Government, even if at times it stepped up its program to mitigate disasters,
such as the earthquakes.

Box 1: OED's Country Assistance Note
The Country Assistance Note provided a long-term assessment of the relevance, efficacy and efficiency ( f the Bank's
assistance to El Salvador. The CAN noted that since 1991, the Bank had lent US$540 million for 13 Frojects in El
Salvador. Of these, 8 had been rated by OED, and ranked very high in terms of all indicatoTs-outcome,
development impact, sustainabilitv, and Bank and borrower performance--compared to averages for bhh the LAC
region and the Bank as a whole. El Salvador also ranks among the Bank's most cost effective count res for doing
business. All of adjustment lending (US$125 million) and investment lending in education, hec.lth, energy,
agriculture and land titling, public sector modernization and enhancing competitiveness were given satisfactory
ratings. Small loan for technical assistance and administrative reform also performed satisfactorily andl sector work
considered was timely, relevant and of good quality for the country strategy.

The outcome of Bank assistance was highly satisfactory, both because of Bank and Government actionm who shared
the same objective and worked to solve problems and to anticipate challenges. The substantial institutonal change
supported by the Bank improved economic management, governance and financial accountability, and management
in all sectors. The performance of the economy in the 1990s and the deepening of reforms indicate that the good
outcome of the assistance is likely to be sustained.

60. 
Lessons of Previous Experience. The assistance proposed in this CAS also takes the following
lessons of our previous experience into account:

* Needfor Strong Ownership based on Up-front Consensus for Reform. Because cf the political

changes, the slow consensus-building nature of El Salvador's political process, and the extremely
selective nature of its portfolio, Bank support should focus on development programs-including
those supporting 
reconstruction--that 
already have achieved ownership based ort an a priori
meaningful degree of consensus and that do not appear to the political opposition and civil society as
imposed from the outside.

* Focus on Selectivity, while Preserving an Adequate Division of Responsibilities witht the IDB. El

Salvador's ability to carry out development projects is constrained by its fiscal situation. The IDB is
El Salvador's main external financier. As a result of these factors, Bank support should be very
selective and focused on high priority activities where the Bank has a clear comparative advantage
based on the Bank's worldwide technical expertise. Approximately half of the loans in the Bank's
portfolio have parallel IDB financing, 
including 
those for education, power and public sector
modernization.

- The Government Values the Bank's Holistic Approach to Development, Quality Tec hnical Advise

and Consensus-builder Role. Regardless of whether a lending instrument is considered, El Salvador
continues to seek the WBG's advisory support on comprehensive development 
issues and quality
technical advise on priority issues. As a result, non-lending services should continue to figure
prominently in the assistance program.

B. 

The Proposed Bank Group Assistance Strategy

61. 
The CAS presents a strategy for the FY02- 
04 period, covering the final three years of the Flores 
Administration. 
The CAS has an overarching 
poverty reduction objective, aiming to contribute to
government's 
intentions to reduce national poverty 

to 35-40 percent bv 2005 (Figure 1). It supports 
three 
interrelated development objectives: 

(i) 
sustaining efforts to reduce poverty and promoting 
social development; 
(ii) accelerating growth and 
developing new opportunities; and (iii) fine tuning 

i_

6 

40

Figure 1. El Salvador - Share of Households
in Poverty (%)

\ 

_ 

1991 

Target: Reducethe

povertvri eto3540
percent b year 2005

EartLquaket

_ 

_l

1995 

2_1NI 

2

El Salvador: Country Assistance Stratezy 

21

the role of the public sector The reshuffling of public investment priorities resulting from the recent
earthquakes has resulted in a refocusing of the Bank's assistance program, in terms of the number and
size of operations and their sequencing.

62. 
Several factors are critical for the CAS success. First, there is a need to preserve a sound
macroeconomic framework, supported by a strengthened fiscal and monetary position, as a pre-condition
for maintaining low inflation, supporting the best of pro-poor policies, and making sustained inroads on
poverty while reconstruction proceeds. Second, there is a need to strengthen structural reforms and
advance competitiveness programs as the reconstruction efforts go forward, so that these ultimately bring
new income opportunities to the poor. Third, efforts to address key public sector institutional constraints
that prevent efficient service delivery must continue as they will ultimately produce more effective
implementation of the reconstruction and development programs and improved governance. Fourth,
efforts to curb crime and violence are important to allow the private sector to continue taking
responsibility for creating employment under a framework of enhanced security. Finally, efforts at
developing and putting in place a decentralization and local development agenda are necessary to create
and sustain an informed and participatory approach to poverty reduction.

63. 

Bank Lending Scenarios and Triggers. The Bank's ongoing operations already address many

of the issues on El Salvador's development agenda. The CAS, therefore, outlines a selective base-case
lending program of about US$270 million over the next three years (FY02-04), with five planned

operations: Earthquake Emergency and Basic Health Care Extension (FY02, $145 million), Judicial
Reform (FY02, $10 million), Rural Community Development (FY03, $25 million), Environmental

Services (FY04, $10 million), and Land Administration II (FY04, $30 million). Each operation would
address the strategic objectives of the reconstruction plan and be supported by wide consultations with
Civil Society Organizations (Annex F). The lending program is responsive to current macroeconomic
conditions which limit the aggregate volume of public investment and counterpart funding, to other
available external financing, and to the Government's desire to preserve a prudent external debt profile.
In addition, in FY04 and within the base case scenario the Bank could support an additional operation(s)
up to US50 million chosen among those now planned for FY05-07 period, in the event that (i) a
strengthened fiscal stance allows the Government to undertake a somewhat more ambitious public
investment program extending beyond immediate reconstruction needs, and (ii) project execution
proceeds as originally planned. Candidates, in order of priority based upon actual needs and portfolio
performance, would include Basic Education III (the next stage of the APL), Secondary Education II,
FISDL, Urban Poverty and for a Youth at Risk LIL. A low-case scenario would consider limiting lending
only to priority Earthquake Emergency and Basic Health Care Extension and Judicial Reform projects.
The triggers to move to a low-case scenario would be: (i) a deteriorated macroeconomic framework; (ii)
a weakened fiscal revenue performance, with the ratio of central government revenue falling below 11
percent of GDP; and (iii) an unsatisfactory portfolio performance reflected as over 25 percent of ongoing
operations rated unsatisfactory.

64. 
Bank Analytical and Advisory Services. Analytical and advisory services, both formal reports,
informal policy notes, and just-in-time advisory services will continue to be an important component of
the Bank's assistance program. In the recent past, the Bank has completed a fiscal sustainability analysis

under the Macro-Assessment of the Impact of the Earthquakes (FY01) and a Financial Sector

Assessment Review (FY01) (FSAP), both carried out jointly with the IMF. The Bank is preparing a

Central American Urban Review (FY02) and a Central American Gender Review (FY02), all of which
contain in-depth analysis of El Salvador. These key pieces are supporting advisory services, the design of
lending assistance, and the elaboration of the CAS. Over the CAS period, the Bank proposes to carry out
a Poverty Diagnostic (FY02), a Decentralization Study (FY02) a Social Protection Review (FY02), a
(FY03) focused on growth, a Country Financial Accountability
Country Economic Memorandum 
Assessment (FY03) and a Country Procurement Assessment Report (FY03)-all 
key analytical pieces

v _________________________________________ 

__ __ 

__1_ 

f1 Salvador: Country Assistance Strategy

that will support the achievement of CAS objectives. While it is difficult at this stage to determine for
what topics the Government would seek our advisory services, the Bank expects that less formal "just in
time" advisory assistance could be requested in areas such as the implementation of the design of
cadastre-strengthening 
laws, drafting of regulations of the new procurement 
law, drafting of a new
decentralization 
law, the creation of a national investment promotion strategy, and carrying out surveys
on the business climate with a focus on small businesses. The Bank also plans follow-up sL pport to the
recent FSAP, especially 
in the areas of prudential regulations and payment systems, where 
the
Governiment has already requested our advice.

65. 
The WBI has also been very, active in providing non-lending assistance. El Salvador is invited to
participate in most WBI training activities in Central America. WBI is currently increasing efforts to
work with the Universidad Centroamericana Jose Sime6n Cafias (UCA) in a program of training trainers
and professors and in running joint training prograrns to "scale up" operations and further disseminate
training efforts in El Salvador. WBI is also expanding the netwo'ork of distance learning cer:ters, and El
Salvador is anxious to join the network to access a muchi broader range of training programs. Previously
schedtuled WBI Activities in El Salvador include: Training of Trainiers in Risk Analvsis anid the Basic
Core Principles (FY99), Development Debates-El Salvador (FYOI), Urban & City Managemlent (FY01-
02). Introduction to the Internet for Teaching and Learning (for teachers), a Module on "Evaluation and
Performance Monitoring in Education (FY01) and a National Dialogue Workshop (FYOI). Other FY01-
02 activities in Central America include dissemination of the WDR on Poverty and Development: A
consultation with NGOs, Regional Forum of the Latin American Non Profit Sector, Clean /tir Initiative
for Latin American Cities Launching Workshop, Economic Globalization and Sustainable Dlevelopment
in Central America. Pricing in Water and Waste Water, and Mlicro-finance and Rural Finrmce. Urban
Land Management and Municipal Management for very stnall municipalities.

66. 
Bank Portfolio Management and Issues. The ongoilg portfolio 
ilcludes 
loans supporting
important aspects of Bank assistance for El Salvador's 
longer term development goal,. 
Portfolio
management, and the related technical and advisory support that is provided in the course of project
supervision, will therefore continue to be an important aspect of our assistance program, especially in the
education sector where about 50 percent of the portfolio is concentrated. The Bank's portfolio includes
eight projects, totaling US$352 million net of cancellations. of which US$186 millicn 
remained
undisbursed as of June 30, 2001. Net transfers were about US$27 million in calendar 2000. Project
implementation 
is good, and the main issue affecting all projects 
relates to effectiveness delays
(Salvadoran 
legislation requires 
that foreign borrowing be approved twice by its Cong;ress before
effectiveness--once before signing, and then after signing). As an extreme example, the loan for the
Secondary Education Project approved in FY98 took almost two years to become effective alier approval,
in part because 
it was being considered by Congress during the electoral 
transition period. The
Glovernment is aware of the problems that these delays create, and the Bank is currently as a matter of
routine working to inform Congressmen about profile proiects silce project preparation. This process will
contribute to reduce effectiveness delays. An informal Country Strategy Implementation Review (CSIR)
wvas carried out in March 2001 during the process of C'AS formulation.

67. 
International Finance Corporation (IFC). IFC's strategy complements that of th( Bank in its
support for private sector development. 
IFC's support for El Salvador's competitiveness agenda has been
multifaceted and concentrated not only on investments and TA within El Salvador but also regional
projects and TA. El Salvador was included in IFC's Extended Reach Initiative pilot program and three
investments in SMEs were approved under the associated Small Enterprise Fund. In addition, a US$10
million investment was approved in a private equity f'und targeted at medium-sized companies 
that, in
particular, have regionally focused strategies and a FY97 US$25 million investment 
in a Salvadorian
cement company to assist in its modernization and expansion. Further support to the private sector is
being provided through a regional Technical Assistance project, financed by Italian Trust Funds, that

El Salvador: Country Assistance Stratezy 

23

provides assistance to SMEs in the areas of (i) project development, (ii) training, technical assistance and
skill development, and (iii) identifying sources of funding for projects. In infrastructure, IFC approved a
US$15 million investment in a regional power development company that will invest in small- to
medium-sized renewable and co-generation power projects in Central America, and a US$8.3 million
investment in a regional telecom company. Most recently, building on the Bank's Power Technical
Assistance Project, IFC recently approved a US$120 million investment (including syndications) in
Salvadoran electricity distribution companies. The investment will be used to expand the distribution
networks, mainly into rural areas and rehabilitate the companies' existing networks in order to increase
reliability and reduce technical losses.

68. 
IFC has also been very active in the financial sector. The Corporation reviewed and provided
advice to the Government on the private pension law and, when private pension companies were
permitted, invested in one to support sector reform. A US$25 million credit line to a Salvadoran bank
was approved for to provide on-lending to SMEs and to assist the bank in strengthening is capacity for
project analysis and structuring through a TA component. Under this project, the Corporation also
assisted the bank in developing its environmental risk management capabilities. Regionally, investments
were approved for a bank and a credit rating agency. IFC support also included training courses in
banking and leasing in San Salvador aimed at the management of banks and leasing companies
throughout the Central American region. As of the end of June 2001, IFC's held portfolio in El Salvador
was US$70 million (including syndications). As indicated before, the Bank - IFC joint SME department
will be completing its SME Map for El Salvador and will continue to work with FUNDAPYME in
building its capacity to provide professional consulting services to Salvadoran SMEs.

and physical infrastructure in Central America. 

markets, private infrastructure and agribusiness) 

70. Multilateral 
Investment 
Guarantee 
Agency (MIGA). El Salvador became a member 

of MIGA in 1991 and has availed of both 
investment guarantees and technical assistance 
from the Agency. MIGA has issued 3 contracts of 
guarantee, two in the manufacturing sector and 
one in the financial sector, for a total of US$22 
million. As of June 30, 2001 MIGA has no 
outstanding contracts in El Salvador. On the other 

69. Within the overall WBG's objectives of poverty reduction and social development through
accelerating growth in the context of reconstruction, IFC's strategy will be to continue to work with the
private sector in support of its recovery and 
medium 
term 
growth 
focusing on both 

Box 2: MIGA support to the New Foreign Investment
Promotion Agency (PRO.ESA)
investments in the country (especially in financial Despite its top record in reforms, direct foreign investment
other than for privatization, remains low in El Salvador.
and through the development of regional financial At the request of the Minister for Economy, a MIGA team
is working closely with the PRO.ESA to develop its
foreign investment promotion capability and institutional
strengthening. This collaboration has evolved into a full
fledged assistance program that is expected to run for
another 12 to 18 months. As of September 2001 MIGA has
agreed to support PRO.ESA in its efforts to:
Develop an investment promotion strategy.
Build capacity among its staff and other key
indthe promotional process such as free
trade zones, industrial parks, (ventanilla urnica) investor
one-stop shop and foreign embassy personnel 
to
effectively promote El Salvador as host for Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI). This work is complemented by the
distribution of the MIGA investment promotion toolkit.
hand Ais 
Develop and imptement a client relationship
hand, MIGA Is executmg an ongomg techmcal management software to enable tracking and follow-up
contacts and investment projects.
Produce promotional materials aimed at El
Salvador's target market and sectors.
Renew and upgrade the internet site for the
agency, with a view to increasing the amount of statistics
and studies available to potential investors.
Prepare and execute outbound 
investment
promotion missions and eventual overseas offices.
Develop an effective aftercare program to
can play in the development of a small economy maintain relations with existing investors and encourage
reinvestment and expansions.

assistance program to boost the capacity of the 
main actors 
involved in foreign investment 
promotion. 
The primary recipient of this 
assistance is the newly created national investment 
promotion agency PRO.ESA. Based on the 
country's own experience in the past and the 
recent success some regional neighbors the 
Government recognizes the role FDI promotion 

executing an ongoing technical 

national es 

.
.

a 

.

.

.

24 

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strategv

like El Salvador. While employment is the obvious near term goal of any program to increase investment
levels, MIGA is also working with the Government to establish medium-term objectives that will move
the country up the manufacturing value added chain. This assistance is delivered through regular
interventions that are outlined in Box 2 and informal consultations upon request. Through ils informal
advice MIGA has written reports for PRO.ESA on topics such as the role of the Board ol Directors,
potential partnerships for more effective promotion. and strategy planning guidelines. Moreover, MIGA
has reviewed terms of reference for an image building campaign to be led by PRO.ESA, helped the
agency define goals for a public relations consultancv, and has recently offered to provide input on terms
of reference for sectoral studies.

Major Development Partners' Activities

71. 
Unlike some of the other Central American countries, El Salvador did not count 3n a large
bilateral assistance program before 
the earthquakes. Most external assistance was provided by
multilateral 
institutions, especially the IDB. Bilateral and other assistance has increased after the
earthquakes, but most of the US$1.4 million pledged at the Madrid CG meeting is devoted tco immediate
emergency needs, involves re-ordering of already planned activities (rather than incremental financing),
and part of it has yet to materialize. (Annex G).

Table 3. El Salvador. World Bank. IDB and Donors Assistance (FY97-04)

OBJECTIVES 

Area of Intervention 

Lending Partners 

TA Partners

Sustaining 
Efforts to 
Reduce 
Poverty and 
Promote 
Social

Development 
Accelerating 

Growth and 

Developing 
New 

Opportunities 
Fine Tuning 

the Role of the 

Earthquake Damage to Social CABEI, EU Countries, IDB, UN
Infrastructure 
System, WB
Poverty and Social Protection 
IDB, WB 
Education 
IDB, USAID, UNICEF, WB 
Basic H4ealth Care 
I DB, Spain, WB 

l

Stabilization Agenda 

Fostering Growth and Private 

IMF 

IFC, WB 

Sector Development 
Basic Infrastructure 

_

CABEI. IDB, IFC

Judicial Sector Modernization 
Public Sector Modernization 

IDB, Japan, Spain, WB 
IDB, WB 

and Improved Governance

Public Sector Decentralization and Local 

| CABEI, IDB 

Development 

Environmental Sustainability, 
Disaster Preparedness and

IDB, WB 

Land Rights 

_

1DB, UNDP, WB
IDB. WB
OPS, USAII), WB

IMF, WB

IFC, MIGA, WB

CIDA, USAID, WB
IMF, UNDP. USAID

KFW, UNDP, USAID,

WB

UNDP, USA ID, WB

72. 
Cooperation with the IDB. Over the years, the Bank has been able to establ sh a broad
division of responsibilities with the IDB, El Salvador's main lender. The IDB convened ancd chaired the
CG meeting for the reconstruction of El Salvador in March 2001, and Table 3 presents a summary of
multilateral and bilateral financing. The World Bank has taken the lead in assistance to F!rimary and
secondary education, with a particular focus on rural and marginal urban areas; land administration
property rights reform; private sector competitiveness; 
re-establishment of critical health services; and
judicial reform. The IDB has taken the lead in assistance to road infrastructure, water and sanitation,
environment 
sustainability, 
and 
local 
and urban development, 
including 
temporary 
housing
reconstruction. 
The thvo institutions provide complementary support in the areas of public sector
modernization and governance, and rural and energy sector modernization.

El Salvador: Country Assistance Strategv 

25

73. 
IMF. El Salvador has signed 
two precautionary 
stand-by agreements with the IMF since 1997
and is currently discussing 
a third possible agreement. 
The Bank has worked closely with the IMF not
only in the preparation 
of the FSAP and its follow-up activities, 
but also 
in the provision of technical
assistance 
to the Government 
on the operational 
arrangements 
of the monetary 
integration 
law and the
modernization 
of the Ministry of Finance, and in the joint assessment of the macroeconomic 
impact of the
earthquakes 
for the CG meeting.

V. 

CAS PROGRAM MONITORING AND RISKS

74. 
Country 
Program 
Performance
Indicators. 
Quantitative 
outcome 
and progress
indicators 
to monitor CAS progress need strike a 
balance 
between 
reconstruction 
objectives with 
longer 
term 
development 
objectives. 
Progress 
indicators 
of compliance with 
the previous CAS 
benchmarks 
are mostly 
satisfactory 
(Annex E). A 
set of 
leading 
base case and progress 
indicators 
(including 
a 
small 
subset 
of 
the 
international 
development 
goals 
set by 
the United Nations 
Conferences 
in the 1990s) as well as more specific 
benchmarks 
for 
some Bank operations will be 
relevant 
for the CAS (Box 3 and Annex B I). 

75. 

Risks. The CAS faces four main risks: 

e 

Government' 

Short-terni Reconstruction Bias. 

The 
large 
number, 
variety and complexity 
of 
immediate 
reconstruction 
tasks 
and 
limited 
domestic 
implementation 
capacity 
will 
likely 
delay 
project 
execution 
and/or divert 
somewhat 
the 
efforts 
from 
its medium-term 
development 
agenda, 
thus postponing 
priority 
poverty 
reduction programs. 
The Bank 
intends 
to continue working 
closely with Government 
and 
civil 
society 
in 
building 
institutional 
capacity, 
decentralizing 
and 
monitoring 
medium-term 
poverty reduction programs. 

.

* 

Country Overall Indicators
Per capita growth rate averages 2 percent in 2002-05
.
.
Reduction in the share of households in poverty to 35-
40 percent by 2005.
Increase in net primary education enrolment rate to
pre-earthquakes levels (78 percent) by 2004.
* Reduction of the infant mortality rate to 25 per 1,000
live births by 2005.
Reduction of the number of under weight children by
20 percent by 2005.
I* ncrease in the arnount of foreign investment flows by
20 percent by 2004.
Other Indicators of the International Development Goals
.
Bring the share of households in extreme poverty to
pre-earthquakes levels (16.7 percent) by 2004.
Girls' school primary enrolment maintained at least at
the same level as boys.
.
Reduce underreporting of HIV/AID cases from 50 to
25 percent by 2005.
Bank Indicators
.
Number of hospitals rebuilt/rehabilitated: 7 hospitals
by 2005.
Reconstruction/replacement of 413 schools by 2005.
Completion of the design of the Modernization Plan
for the Supreme Court by 2002.
Reduced time for complying with foreign investment
licensing requirements by 2003.
Set up the export matching grant mechanism for 50
firms by 2003.
a Approval of a road maintenance financing mechanism
and concessions of airport, ports and mail services to
the private sector completed by 2004.

* 

.

.

.

.

* External. 
External vulnerability 
factors are an
concern, given 
the high 
level reached by the current 
account 
in 2001 and the new bi-
increased 
monetarism 
regime 
that will 
reduce 
somewhat 
the capacity 
to respond 
to world 
shocks with
flexibility. 
Five external shocks could be particularly worrisome: 
a longer and deeper 
than expected
U.S. recession, 
a related sudden 
fall in workers' 
remittances, 
structLral competitiveness 
problems 
in
coffee, an end-of 
trade preferences 
under WTO new rules for textiles and clothing, 
and contagion
from an 
intemational 
financial 
crisis. 
The 
inelastic 
response 
of Salvadoran 
remittances 
to U.S.
growth, 
the prudent macro-management 
developed 
so far by authorities, 
lower domestic 
interest 
rates
resulting 
from 
the elimination 
of exchange 
risk, eflorts 
to boost productivity 
by accelerating 
human
capital accumulation 
and preserving a compctitive 
and flexible 
labor force minimize 
these risks.

26 

El Salvador: CountrA .ssistance Straterv

* Fiscal. Poor progress in addressing fiscal imbalances and obtaining approval from Congress for
issuing domestic debt would weaken counterpart funds and external financing of the reconstruction
and medium-term development program. Efforts by the authorities to raise non-tax revenues and cut
or reorient non-priority current expenditure, give high priority and promote consensus around the
reconstruction and development program, and monitor the fiscal accounts with joint support from the
IMF and the Bank minimize this risk.

* Political. Obtaining timely approval of external loans by the Legislature may become mole difficult
as the next round of elections approaches. Minimizing 
this risk will depend of fostering a
sustainable consensus on critical development priorities. Also the Bank, in agreemenril with the
Executive Power, will make every effort to inform and engage the Legislative Power. from the
earliest stages of project preparation.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter L. Woicke

By:

Sven Sandstrom 

Washington DC
November 2, 2001

El Salvador at a glance 

11/2/01

Latin 
Lower-
El America middle-
Salvador & Carib. 
income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development dlamond

2000
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

6.3 
1,990 
12.6 

516 
3,680 
1,895 

2,046 
1,140
2,327

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1994-00

Population (Y) 
Labor force (%) 

2.1 
3.4 

1.6 
2.3 

1.0 
1.3 

GNI 

Gross

per 

primary

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1994-00) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% oftotalpopulation) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1, 000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (%of school-age population) 
Male 
Female 

capita 

enrollment

47 
70 
30 
12 
74 
21 
97 
98 
96 

75 
70 
30 
9 
85 
12 
113 

42
69
32
11 
80
15
114 
116 
114

Access to improved water source

ElSalvador
Lower-middle-income group

.. 

.. 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

Economic ratios

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investmentlGDP 
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

3.6 
13.3 
34.2 
14.2 
12.3 

4.8 
13.9 
18.6 
1.2 
6.7 

12.5 
16 3 
25.1 
4.2 
14.0 

13.2
17 0 
27.6
1.8 
14.0

Trade

T

Current account balancelGOP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/exports 

0.0 
1.0 
25.5 
7.5 

-7.4 
1.6 
44.7 
16.6 

-2.5 
1.5 
39.9 
12.4 
30.1
79.7

-3.4 
1.9 
41.7 
10.3

Domestic 
savings 

.

In
Investment

s

.
.

.

Indebtedness

u1980-90 1990-00 

1999 

2000 2000-04 

-

(average annual growth)I

GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

0.2 
-0.8 
-3.4 

4.7 
2.6 
134 

3.4 
1.2 
6.7 

2.0 
0.4 
15.8 

3.6 
1.5 
9.9 

El Salvador

L_- Lower-middle-income group

_

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMYO

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Growth of Investment and GDP 1%)

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

i30

38.0 
21.9 
16.5 
40.1 

17.1 
26.2 
21.7 
56.6 

10.7 
29.1 
22.5 
60.1 

10.1 
30.2 
23.4 
59.6 

20
10
o

-10 
-20

9

Prvate consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

71 8 
14.0 
33.2 

88.9 
9.9 
31.2 

85.7 
10.1 
37.3 

88.0 
10.2 
42.7 

|-3

0_ GD1 

o- GDP

|

1980-90 1990-00 

1999 

2000 

Growth of exports and Imports 1%)
2

(average annual growth) 

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

-1.1 
0.1 
-0.2 
0.7 

1.3 
5.3 
5.3 
5.4 

6.9 
3.4 
3.7 
2.7 

-0.8 
3.4 
4.5 
1.9 

2520

15

10
5 

00

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

0.8 
0.1 
2.2 
0.4 

5.1 
3.0 
7.1 
11.3 

3.9 
2.8 
-5.6 
2.7 

3.6 
0.3 
5.3 
14.8

-5 

959 

00

-10

Exports 

OImports

Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

El Salvador at a glance 

1112101

Latin 

Lower-

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

El America middle- 

Salvador & Carib. 

income 

Development dlamond*

2000
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, USS) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

6.3 
1,990 
12.6 

516 
3,680 
1,895 

2,046 
1,140
2327

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1994-00

Population (I%) 
Labor force (%) 

2.1 
3.4 

1.6 
2.3 

1.0
1.3 

GNI 
per 
capita 

Gross
primary
enrollment

V 

-

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1994-00) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrtion (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-age population) 
Male 
Female 

47 
70 
30 
12 
74 
21 
97 
98 
96 

75 
70 
30 
9 
85 
12 
113 

42
69
32
11 
80
15
114 
116 
114 

Access to improved wate source

| 
| 

Salvador
Lower-middle-income group
L-

.

.. 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

IEconomnic ratIos'

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investmentVGDP 
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestic savingslGDP 
Gross national savingslGDP 

3.6 
13.3 
34.2 
14.2 
12.3 

4.8 
13.9 
18.6 
1.2 
6.7 

12.5 
16.3 
25.1 
4.2 
14.0 

13.2
17.0 
27.6 
1.8 
14.0

Trade
T

Current account balance/GDP 
Interestpayments/GDP 
Total debtVGDP 
Total debt servicelexports 
Present value of debtUGDP 
Present value of debUexports 

0.0 
1.0 
25.5 
7.5 

-7.4 
1.6 
44.7 
16.6 

-2.5 
1.5 
39.9 
12.4 
30.1
79.7

-3.4 
1.9 
41.7 
10.3

Domestic 
savings 
svn

_ 

.

, 

-

Investment

.. 

.
.

Indebtedness

1980-90 1990-00 

1999 

2000 2000-04

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

0.2 
-0.8 
-3.4 

4.7 
2.6 
13.4 

3.4 
1.2 
6.7 

2.0 
D04 
15.8 

3.6 
1.5 
9.9 

El Salvador

- Lower-middle-income group

1

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Growth of Investmnent and GDP l%)
30

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

38.0 
21.9 
16.5 
40.1 

17.1 
26.2 
21.7 
56.6 

10.7 
29.1 
22.5 
60.1 

10.1 
30.2 1 
23.4 
59.6 

2

s

o' 

-1' 

95 

\9/ 

97 

98 

00

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

71.8 
14.0 
33.2 

88.9 
9.9 
31.2 

85.7 
10.1 
37.3 

88.0 
10.2 
42.7

-30

GD1 

C-GDP

1980-90 1990-00 

1999 

2000 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(average annual growth)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

-1.1 
0.1 
-0.2 
0.7 

1.3 
5.3 
5.3 
5.4 

6.9 
3.4 
3.7 
2.7 

-0.8 
34
4.5
19

2520

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Importsofgoods and services 

0.8 
0.1 
2.2 
0.4 

5.1 
3.0 
7.1 
11.3 

3.9 
2.8 
-5.6 
2.7 

3.6 
0.3 
5.3 
14.8 

s 
'0

ss 

97 

98 

99 

00

-Exports 

0impports

_-

Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

EL SALVADOR: Country Program Performance Indicators 2001-04

DEVELOPMENT IMPACT 

DIAGNOSIS 

PROGRESS BENCHMARKS 

SERVICE/PRODUCTS

ANNEX B 1
Page 1 of 3

* Reduce national 
poverty rate, as 
measured by the 
Household Survey, 
to 35-40 percent by 
the year 2005, and 
national extreme 
poverty rate to pre- 
earthquake levels by 
2004. 

* 

* Reorient the poverty 
reduction strategy to 
take care of 
earthquakes 
reconstruction needs 
in health and 
education. 
Improve health 
status of poor 
populations by 
extending basic 
health services. 
* Continue increasing 
rural education 
coverage and quality 
through reformed. 
EDUCO expansion. 
* Consolidate reforms 
in basic and 
secondary education. 

A. POVERTY REDUCTION AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
* National poverty rates were at 41.3 
* The poverty rate decrease to 30-3 5 
percent in 1999, and national extreme 
percent in/before 2005 and the extreme 
poverty rates were at 16.7 percent in 
poverty rate decrease to pre- 
1999. 
earthquakes levels. 
* The earthquakes have increased 
* Assumption: Growth rates should 
national poverty rates between 2.6-3.6 
increase to at least 3.5 percent of GDP 
percent. 
in 2002 and 4 percent onwards. 
* Elasticity of extreme poverty to per- 
capita income is -1.2, and of moderate 
poverty is -0.67. 

* 

* Hospital infrastructure heavily 
damaged by the earthquakes. 
* Poor health, nutrition and indicators. 
Insufficient rural and secondary 
education coverage, especially in rural 
areas. 
* Poor quality of basic and secondary 
education. 

Health: 
* Reconstruction or rehabilitation of a 
total of 7 hospitals by 2005. 
* Reduction of the infant mortality rate
by 10 percent in participating 
communities, thus contributing to an 
overall rate of 25 per 1000 live births 
by 2005. 
* Reduction of the number of 
underweight children in beneficiary 
areas by 20 percent by 2005. 
* Underreporting of HIV/AID cases 
reduced from over 50 to 25 percent by
2005. 
Education: 
* Reconstruction of 106 schools 
destroyed and replacement of 307 high
risk school units (aulas) by 2004.
* Rehabilitation of 588 schools with
moderate damage and 1262 with minor
damages by 2004.
* Bring the net primary enrolment rate
back to pre-earthquake levels (78
percent) by 2004.
Implementation of the new school-

* 

Non-Lendine Services
* Country Economic
Memorandum (FY03).
* Poverty Profile (FY02).
* Poverty Diagnostic
(FY02).
* Urban Poverty Survey
(FY02).
Follow-up advice on
FSAP issues.

u 

Ongoing Proiects
a Education Reform.
Secondary Education.

* 

Proposed Proiects
* Earthquakes Emergency
and Basic Health Care
Extension (FY02).
a Secondary Education
(FY05).
* Urban Poverty Reduction
(FY04).

Non-Lendinz Services
* Social protection Study
(FY03).

EL SALVADOR: Country Program Performance Indicators 2001-04

DEVELOPMENT IMPACT 

DIAGNOSIS 

PROGRESS BENCHMARKS 

SERVICE/PRODUCTS

ANNEX B I
Page 2 of 3

based management model (in EDUCO
and urban schools) by 2004.
* Definition of a new curricula and
pedagogical model for secondary
education by 2003.
* Preserve constant the gender ratio at I
for school primary enrolment.

Reducing crime and 
violence. 

* 

B. ACCELERATING GROWTH AND DEVELOPING NEW OPPORTUNITIES
* Highest crime and violence rates in 
* Complete the design of the 
LAC. 
modernization plan for the Supreme 
Increasing youth and domestic violence 
Court by 2002. 
(maras) in cities. 
* Greater number of cases resolved by 
* Poor administrative capacity by 
the judicial system by 2004.
tribunals to provide prompt justice. 
* Reduced time for processing penal
cases by 2004.

Foster private sector 
development by 
increasing domestic 
competition and 
consumer protection, 
continue simplifying 
investment procedures 
and improving investor 
services. 

* 

Implementation of Competition, 
Consumer Protection and Investment 
Laws requires consolidation of 
implementation units. 
* Export clusters development require a 
matching grant mechanism. 
* The new investment promotion agency 
(PRO.ESA) needs consolidation. 
* Small and medium enterprises, 
especially in rural areas, have been 
heavily hit by the earthquakes. 

* Foreign investment flows should 
increase by 20 percent by year 2004. 
* Reduced time for complying with 
foreign investment licensing 
requirements by 2003. 
* Complete the Export Firms Matching 
Grant mechanism, thus benefiting at 
least 50 firms by 2003. 
* Up to 1,500 rural small and medium
enterprises operating with project 
financing support by 2004. 

* 

Proposed Projects
Judicial Reform (FY02).
* Youth at Risk (possible
LIL).

Ongoing Projects
* Competitiveness
Enhancement Technical
Assistance Project.
* Energy Modernization.
* 
IFC's Regional TA
project in Business
Development

Proposed Project
Rural Community
Development (FY03).

* 

Non-Lending Services
* Country Economic
Memorandum (FY03V
IFC Country Map on
Small and Medium
Enterprises (FY02).
* Survey on Business
Climate (FY02).

EL SALVADOR: Country Program Performance Indicators 2001-04

ANNEX B I
Page 3 of 3

DEVELOPMENT IMPACT 

DIAGNOSIS 

PROGRESS BENCHMARKS 

SERVICE/PRODUCTS

* 

* Complete the 
privatization agenda. 
Improve 
governance, 
transparency and 
efficiency in public 
services provision. 
* Promote 
decentralization and 
local development. 

C. FINE TUNING THE ROLE OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
* Concessions and institutional 
* Approval of a roads maintenance 
restructuring program to be completed. 
financing mechanism, and concession 
* Centralization of public services and 
of airport, ports and mail services 
limited empowerment of beneficiaries 
completed by 2004. 
at the local level. 
Implementation of E-Govermnent 
(supported by INFOCENTROS) by 
2003. 
* Approval of new public procurement 
norms. 
* Approval of a decentralization and 
local development agenda. 

X 

* Promote awareness 
about environment 
issues and improve 
disaster preparation, 
management and 
mitigation. 

* Little consensus and awareness of 
broad environmental issues and weak 
institutional policy and regulatory 
framework. 
Insufficient preparedness to handle 
natural disasters. 

* 

* 

* Upgrade the national environment 
management agenda. 
Increase the number of biodiversity- 
friendly coffee areas with certification
criteria. 
* Develop at least an annual training in 
natural disasters management. 

* 

Improve land 
security to improve 
farmer incentives to 
make investments in 
soil conservation. 

* Pending registration of at least 40 
percent of the national territory and 
development of a financially self- 
sustaining cadastral system for 
mapping and registration. 

* Complete regularization of 90 percent 
of parcels by 2005. 
* CNR, the national mapping and 
registration agency, becomes 
financially sustainable in 2005. 

* 

Ongoing Projects
* Public Sector
Modernization Technical
Assistance Project (jointly
with IDB).
Proposed Project
FISDL (FY04).
Non-lending Services
* Decentralization (FY02).
* Country Procurement
Assessment Report-
CPAR (FY03).
* Country Financial
Accountability
Assessment-CFAA
(FY03).
Proposed Project
* Environmental Services
TA (FY03).

* 

Non-Lending Services
IDF grant supporting the
Center for Prevention of
Natural Disasters.

Ongoing project
* Agriculture Sector
Reform Project.
* Land Administration 1.
Proposed Project
* Land Administration II
(FY04).

CAS Annex B2
Page I of I

El Salvador
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 

FY98 

FY99 

FY00 

FY01

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects under implementation a 
Average implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Numberac 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number ad 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

8 
2.4 
12.5 
10.7 
12.5 
10.7 
14.6 

no 
N/A 
N/A 

8 
3.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
10.8 

no 
N/A 
N/A 

8 
4.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
8.4 

8
5.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17.7

no 
611,154 
76,394 

yes
459,758
57,470

Memorandum Item 

Since FY80 

Last Five FYs

Project Evaluation OED by Number 
Project Evaluation OED by Amount (US$ million) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amount 

13 
352.3 
23.1 
26.0 

1
10.1
0.0
0.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for FY01).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning of the year,
Investment projects only.

* All indicators are for projects active in Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, which includes all active
projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3
Page 1 of I

El Salvador: Bank Group Program Summary
Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program a (FY02-04)

FY 

Project 

2002 Judicial Reform 
Earthquake Emergency and Basic Health Extension 

2003 Rural Community Development 
Environmental Services 

2004 Land Administration II 

Undefined c 

Subtotal for 2003

TOTAL CAS PERIOD FOR FY02-04 

$ Million 

10.0 
145.0 

25.0 
10.0 

30.0 

50.0

270.0

Strategic 
Implemnentation
Rewards (HIM/L'- Risks (HIMIL)-

H 
H 

H 
H 

M 

M
H

M
M

L

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, the table indicates whether the strategic rewards and implementation 
risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).
c. It is proposed to leave approximately US$50 million of the CAS period authorizaiton 
to be defined, depending on governments
ability to undertake a larger public investment program. Candidates would include any of the following projects, currently foreseen
for the FY05-07 CAS period:Basic Education IlIl (APL), Secondary Education, FISDL, Urban Poverty Reduction, and Youth at Risk (LIL).
Criteria for choosing among these potential projects would be actual needs and, where applicable, portfolio performance.

IFC and MIGA Program, FY98-2001

Category 

IFC Gross Approvals ($ million) 

Sector (%)

Cement and Construction 
Electricity Distribution 
Financial Services 
Manufacturing 
TOTAL 

Investment Instrument (%)
Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other 
TOTAL 

MIGA Guarantees ($ million) 

1998 

28.0 

0.0 
0.0 
93.0 
7.0 
100.0 

96.0 
4.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 

9.9 

Fiscal Year
1999 

0.7 

0.0 
0.0 
31.0 
69.0 
100.0 

38.0 
62.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 

5.5 

2000 

0.4 

100.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 

0.0 
100.0 
0.0 
0.0
100.0 

5.5 

2001

120.0

0.0
100.0
0.0
0.0
100.0

100.0
0.0
0.0

100.0

0.0

El Salvador: Summary of Nonlending Services

CAS Annex B4
Page I of I

Product 

Completion FY 

Amount (US$000) Audience a 

Objective 

b

Analytical Work/Reports

Recent completions
Community Education Strategy 
CEM/Private Sector Assessment 
Gender Strategy 
Rural Development Study 
Rural Finance 
Financial Sector Assessment (FSAP) 

Underway
Poverty Diagnostic 20000 
Urban Poverty Surveyc 
Decentralization Studyc 

Planned
Country Economic Memorandumc 
Social Protectionc 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment0
Country Procurement Assessment Report' 

Gender - Portfolioc 
Environmentc 
Coffee Farmers Price Risk Managementc 
Cities Alliancec 
Follow up to FSAPc 
Macro Managementc 

Institutional Strengthening of Congress 

FY95 
FY96 
FY96 
FY98 
FY98 
FY01 

FY02 
FY01-02 
FY02 

FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

Advisory Activities
FY02 - 04 
FY02 - 04 
FY02 
FY02 - 04 
FY02 - 04 
FY02 - 04 

IDF Grants
FY02 

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
c. Projected costs per fiscal year.

20 
280 
59 
232 
23 

40 
80 
30 

180 
60 
50 
50 

35 
45 
20 
25 
25 
30 

G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B,PD 
G,B 
G,B 
G,D,B,PD 
G,B 

KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS

G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B 

KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS

G,D,B 
G,D,B,PD 
G,B 
G,B 

KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS

G,B 
G,D,B 
G,B 
G,D,B 
G,B 
G,B 

KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS

200 

G,D,B 

KG,PD,PS

El Salvador Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regiontincome group

Annex B5
Paae 1 of 1

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME

GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumerprice index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNI) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-99 

4.1 
2.7 
40.4 
5.8 

.. 
.. 
.. 

490 
5 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

3.3 

66 
66 
65 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

58 
54 
62 

99 
160 

259 
193 

.. 
.. 

.. 

4.8 
0.8 
42.7 
4.2 

..
..
..

750 
19 
14 

.. 

.
.. 

.. 

3.1 

66 
65 
67 

51 

76 
47 

71 
54 

.. 

61 
56 
66 

63 
120 

410 
178 

.. 

85 

6.2 
2.1 
46.3 
3.2 

1,920 
118 
119

50.8
3.7
55.3

2.6 
2.5 

4.3 

78 
78 
78 

74 
88 
61 

75 
94 

12 

70 
67 
72 

30 
36 

207 
125 
120
90

Latin 
America 
& Carib. 

508.2 
1.6 
74.9 
2.6 

Lower-
middle-
income

2,093.0
1.1
42.9
2.1

3,800 
140 

1,200
137

3.3 
3.6 
7.4

91 

.. 
.. 

85 
93 
62 

90 
87 
9 

70 
67 
73 

30 
38 

2.3
4.8

99
100
99

80
94
69

87
87
9

69
67
72

32
40

207 
122 

191
133

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water
source data is 2000.

2001 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex 86
Page 1 of 2

El Salvador - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1997 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2002 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2001 

2003

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100.0 
13.0 
27.4 
59.6 

100.0 
13.4 
27.3 
59.3 

100.0 
11.9 
27.6 
60.5 

100.0 
10.7 
29.1 
60.2 

100.0 
10.1 
30.2 
59.6 

100.0 
9.7 
29.8 
60.6 

100.0 
9.7 
30.0 
60.3 

100.0
9.7
30.2
60.1

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Govemment 
investment 
Private investment 

97.7 
15.2 
4.2 
11.0 

95.8 
15.1 
3.7 
11.4 

94.4 
17.5 
3.6 
13.9 

95.8 
16.3 
3.1 
13.2 

98.2 
17.0 
2.9 
14.2 

98.5 
18.3 
3.9 
14.4 

97.7 
18.0 
3.6 
14.4 

97.2
18.0
3.4
14.6

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

21.1 
33.9 

24.1 
35.0 

25.2 
37.1 

25.1 
37.3 

27.6 
42.7 

29.0 
45.8 

29.1 
44.8 

29.1
44.3

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsC 

2.3 
13.5 

4.2 
16.0 

5.6 
16.8 

4.2 
14.0 

1.8 
13.8 

1.5 
13.3 

2.3 
13.3 

2.8
13.4

Memorandum 
items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNPpercapita(US$,Atlasmethod) 

10316 

11135 

11974 

12467 

13211 

14016 

14869 

15850

1680 

1800 

1850 

1910 

2110 

2150 

2190 

2300

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
Gross Domestic Income 

1.7 
0.2 

4.2 
4.9 

3.5 
2.6 

3.4 
2.8 

2.0 
1.7 

2.5 
2.3 

3.5 
3 3 

4.0
3.5

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
-0.6 
Total consumption 
-0.6 
Private consumption 
-0.7 

2.0 
-0.1 
-0.2 

1.3 
1.1 
1.1 

1.2 
1.0 
1.1 

0.4 
0.2 
0.0 

0.6 
0.6 
0.7 

1.6 
1.1 
1 4 

2.1
1.2
1.2

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise fob 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandisecif 
Resource balance 
Netcurrenttransfers 

2174.1 
1023.5 
3500.2 
2671.0 
-1326.1 
1194.9 

2682.3 
1359.2 
3896.2 
2973.4 
-1213.9 
1308.4 

3017.9 
1262.9 
4441.5 
3113.2 
-1423.6 
1477.3 

3135.1 
1190.1 
4650.7 
3191.8 
-1515.6 
1529.1 

3645.7 
1356.3 
5642.3 
3872.8 
-1996.6 
1801.3 

4060.0 
1311.8 
6412.9 
4480.8 
-2352.9 
1980.9 

4321.3 
1390.8 
6661.6 
4551.5 
-2340.3 
2056.8 

4610.3
1429.1
7018.1
4778.8
-2407.8
2192.5

Current account balance (after official grants) 

-175.4 

96.2 

-84.1 

-288.7 

-423.2 

-658.8 

-654.2 

-634.0

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Othercapital(net,incl. errors&omissions) 
Change in reservesd 

4.5 
296.7 
39.1 
-164.9 

-113.5 
206.7 
173.6 
-363.0 

861.0 
297.3 
-769.0 
-305.2 

301.8 
182.0 
6.9 
-202.0 

221.0 
206.8 
-53.6 
49.0 

185.0 
324.3 
329.5 
-180.0 

153.2 
274.9 
115.1 
111.0 

132.0
261.2
154.8
86.0

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) 
Net current transfers (% ofGDP) 

-12.9 
-1.7 
11.6 

-10.9 
0.9 
11.8 

-11.9 
-0.7 
12.3 

-12.2 
-2.3 
12.3 

-15.1 
-3.2 
13.6 

-16.8 
-4.7 
14.1 

-15.7 
-4.4 
13.8 

-15.2
-4.0
13.8

Exports volumes 
Imports volumes 

10.9 
-9.9 

21.1 
9.4 

-3.6 
3.8 

0.9 
-2.5 

15.8 
14.4 

0.7 
16.5 

9.2 
5.0 

7.8
4.4

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

El Salvador - Key Economic Indicators (Continued)

1996 

Actual 
1997 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2002 

2001 

2003

Public Finances ( % GDP market prices)e
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Capital expenditure 
Overall Balance surplus incl. grants (+) or deficit (-) 
Overall Balance (excluding pensions) 

Foreign financing (including grants) 
Grants 

12.6 
11.7 
3.2 
-2.1 
-2.1 

2.4 
0.2 

11.5 
10.5 
2.4 
-1.2 
-1.1 

1.9 
0.2 

11.6 
10.8 
3.0 
-2.1 
-2.1 

-0.1 
0.1 

11.2 
11.1 
2.5 
-2.1 
-2.1 

1.3 
0.3 

11.3 
11.7 
2.6 
-2.2 
-2.0 

1.5 
0.8 

11.7 
12.4 
3.6 
-3.8 
-3.1 

6.1 
0.5 

11.8 
11.9 
3.9 
-3.7 
-2.7 

4.3 
0.3 

11.9
11.8
3.7
-3.5
-2.3

2.3
0.1

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 

40.8 
15.5 

44.8 
18.8 

46.0 
10.4 

48.3 
9.1 

46.0 
7.8 

43.6
6.8

Price indices( 1990 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise importprice index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real effective exchange rate (% change)f 
Real effective exchange rate (% change)' 

Consumer price index (average, % change) 
Consumer price index (end of year, % change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

95.6 
103.2 
92.7 
3.8 
-10.1 

9.8 
7.4 
6.8 

92.0 
97.8 
94.0 
3.4 
12.2 

4.5 
1.9 
3.5 

74.8 
90.1 
83.0 
1.6 
-10.9 

2.6 
4.2 
4.0 

65.6 
89.2 
73.5 
1.0 
-8.5 

0.5 
-1.0 
0.5 

58.2 
89.7 
64.9 
5.1

..

2.3 
4.3 
4.0 

60.7 
92.9 
65.4 

64.8 
95.8 
67.6 

68.0
98.1
69.3

4.1 
3.2 
3.5 

3.0 
2.5 
2.5 

3.0
2.5
2.5

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. Based on consumer prices, a positive change denotes appreciation.
g. Based on unit labor costs, a positive change denotes appreciation.

Base case (most likely) scenario

El Salvador: Key Exposure Indicators

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Actual 

Estimate 

Pt ejected

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

(In millions of U, S. dollars, unless otherwise specified)

3,745 
2,517 
302 

4,064 
2,679 
294 

4,392 
2,640 
305 

4,975 
2,810 
310 

5,509 
2,845 
325 

6,235 
3,571 
415 

6,555 
3,891 
458 

6,864
4,200
497

398 
285 
43 

281 
263 
43 

36.3 
24.4 
148.4 
17.2 
16.8 

36.5 
24.1 
132.8 
13.8 
13.0 

14.8 
53.4 
2.5 
11.2 
282 
20 

16.0 
70.2 
2.1 
10.3 
275 
19 

322 
544 
48 

36.7 
22.0 
83.5 
18.2 
17.2 

8.7 
67.5 
1.5 
10.9 
287 
18 

354 
658 
39 

39.9 
22.5 
50.5 
12.4 
11.8 

5.8 
76.8 
0.7 
10.4 
293 
17 

324 
616 
42 

41.7 
21.5 
45.3 
10.3 
9.8 

6.7 
74.3 
0.7 
10.9 
309 
16 

366 
693 
52 

44.3 
25.3 
43.8 
9.1 
8.5 

6.5 
74.9 
0.6 
11.2 
400 
15 

358 
853 
65 

436 
25.9 
41.5 
9.7 
9.1 

6.8 
76.1 
0.6 
11.4 
444 
14 

362
981
73

42.4
26.0
39.0
9.7
9.1

7.0
76.7
0.6
11.5
484
13

External Debt

Total Debt Outstanding and Disbursed (DOD) 
Public Outstanding and Disbursed (DOD) 
Of which IBRD and IDA 

Public Sector Disbursements 
Public Sector Debt Service (TDS)a 
Of which IBRD and IDA 

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
Total DOD/GDP 
Public Sector DOD/GDP 
Public Sector DODIXGSb 
TotalTDSIXGS 
PublicSectorTDS/XGSa 

IBRD Exposure Indicators (%)

IBRD DS/Public DS 
Preferred Creditor DS/Public DSC 
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRDDOD/TotalDOD 
IBRD DOD ($m) 
IDA TDO ($m) 

a. Only includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, and use of IMF credits. Excludes private and short term det:t.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the BIS.

CAS Annex B8
Page ] of2

El Salvador: Status of Bank Group Operations
Operations Portfolio

Closed projects: 26 
Board 
Date 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements "'

Fiscal 

Year 

AtvPrjcsDevelopment 

Active Projects 

Objectives 

Implementation 

P 

IBRD 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. 

1993 P007167 Agricultural Sec. Reform 
1996 P040824 Competitiveness ENHA 
1996 P007173 Energy Sector Modernizatic 
1996 P007174 Land Administration 
1997 P007164 Public Sector Modern. 
1996 P007169 Basic Education 
1998 P050612 Education Reform 
1998 P041680 Secondary Education 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 

Total Disbursed (IBRD and IDA): 
of which has been repaid: 
Total now held by IBRD and IDA'b: 

All Projects
IBRD 
IDA 
600.1 
28.0 
273.4 
12.3 
316.5 
15.7 

40.0 
16.0 
65.0 
50.0 
24.0 
34.0 
88.0 
58.0 
375.0 

Total
628.1
285.7
332.2

0.0 
0.0 
23.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
23.0 

5.6 
6.2 
16.6 
26.6 
13.4 
0.3 
73.7 
43.4 
185.8 

5.6 
6.2 
39.6 
22.1 
13.4 
0.3 
65.7 
37.4 
190.3 

Frm

Rev'd

0.7
0.0
38.0
21.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
59.9

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
b. Including valuation adjustments for - $4.6 million.

CAS Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

El Salvador: Statement of IFC's Committed and Disbursed Portfolio
As of August 31, 2001
(In US Dollars Millions)

FY 

Committed 

Disbursed

Approval Company 

Loan 

Equity 

Quasi 

Partic. 

Loan 

Equity 

Quasi Partic.

2001 
1997/00 
1998 
1998 
1997/99 
1994196 

AFP Crecer 
CESSA Cemento 
CUSCATLAN Banco 
SEF Baterias 
SEFIMACSA 
TELEMOVIL 

Total Portfolio: 

0.0 
14.0 
25.0 
2.0 
0.0 
3.0 

44.0 

1.2 
2.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.0 

3.6 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 

0.0 
15.5 
0.0 
0.0 
00 
4.5 

20.0 

0.0 
14.0 
25.0 
2.0 
0.0 
3.0 

44.0 

0.8 
2.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.0 

3.2 

00 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0
15.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.5

0 0 

20.0

2001 

CAESSIEEO 

Total Pending: 

Approvals Pending

Loan 
45.0 

45.0 

Equity 
0.0 

Quasi 
0 0 

Partic.
75.0

0.0 

0 0 

75.0

El Salvador: CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
performance 

Major issue 

Country 
priority 

Bank 
priority 

Reconciliation
of country and
Bank priorities

CASS Annex B9
Page I of I

Poverty Reduction &
Economic Management
Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

good 
good 
good 
good 

extreme poverty 
stability 
efficiency/judicial system 
domestic violence 

high 
high
high 
high
high 
high
moderate moderate

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection/decentraliz. 

good 
good 
fair 

reconstruction/quality improvements 
physical reconstruction/low coverage 
reaching excluded groups 

high 
high 
low 

high
high
moderate ongoing dialogue

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

fair 
fair 
fair 

rural poverty 
'natural resource degradation 
exclusion/urban poverty 

high 
high 
low 

high
high
moderate ongoing dialogue

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
good 
Private sector 
good 
Energy 
good 
Infrastructure 
fair 

improved prudential supervision 
attract foreign investment 
regulatory strengthening 
financing mechanisms 

high 
high
high 
high
moderate moderate
moderate moderate

A POVERTY PROFILE OF EL SALVADOR

ANNEX C
Page 1 of 6

1. 
Widespread poverty remains a major threat to peace sustainability and political stibility, and a
constraint to sustained, faster and equitable growth in El Salvador. The previous Bank's CAS pointed
out to a reduction of the national poverty rates, as measured by Government household sur evys, to 35-40
percent by the year 2005. Such benchmark has to be achieved by promoting stability and faster growth,
making a better use of remittances, and enhancing business competitiveness and povtty 
reduction
programs. Declining poverty trends until 2000 were encouraging, 
leading to believe that benchmarks
were scheduled to be met several years in advance, but the 2001 earthquakes have temporarily reversed
the trend by increasing poverty levels-by 
a preliminary estimates of 2.6-3.6 percent-and 
abruptly re-
mapping poverty nationwide. 
If the country is to achieve reconstruction, while reaching ambitious goals
for poverty reduction and improvement of social indicators, growth will have to resume at a faster pace,
social investment will have to target earthquakes-affected areas and the poverty alleviation strategy will
have to shift toward decentralization with a local development focus, and empowerment wvith a cluster-
type partnership between local communities, NGOs and the private sector

A. Trends in Poverty

2. 
According to DIGESTYC estimates, the share of all households living in poverty has decreased
by more than 15 percentage points in the 1990s.) The share of all households 
in extreme poverty
decreased from 28.2 percent in 1991 to 16.7 percent in 1999; the share of all households in nioderate
poverty decreased in a similar fashion, from 31.5 percent to 24.6 percent; and as a result the 1 otal share of
households in poverty decreased from 59.7 percent in 1991 to 41.3 percent in 1999 (Table ]I

1991 

1992 

Table 1: Share of Households in Poverty in El Salvador, 1991-99
National 
Urban 
Rural
Extreme Moderate 
Total 
Extreme Moderate Total 
Extreme Moderate 
pover 
ov 
overtypoverty 
poverty 
poverty 
poverty 
poverty p 
28.2 
31.5 
59.7 
23.3 
30.5 
53.7 
33.6 
32.5 
27.7 
31.0 
58.7 
21.9 
31.0 
52.9 
34.0 
31.1 
1993 
27.0 
30.5 
57.5 
20.8 
29.6 
50.5 
33.8 
31.5 
1994 
23.9 
28.5 
52.4 
16.3 
27.5 
43.8 
34.8 
29.8 
1995 
18.2 
29.3 
47.5 
12.4 
27.6 
40.0 
26.5 
31.7 
1996 
21.9 
29.8 
51.7 
14.5 
27.9 
42.4 
32.3 
32.5 
1997 
18.5 
29.5 
48.0 
12.0 
26.7 
38.7 
27.9 
33.7 
1998 
18.9 
25.7 
44.6 
12.9 
23.1 
36.0 
28.8 
29.9 
1999 
16.7 
24.6 
41.3 
10.3 
22.5 
32.8 
27.4 
28.0 
Source: DIGESTYC/EHPM

T'otal
overty
66.1

65.0

65.3

614.6

f8.2
64.8

61.6
58.7
55.4

3. 

Such a globally positive picture does not allow to identify, however, a few challenge,:

* Slower poverty reduction in recent years. As the trend in poverty roughly matches clhanges in per
capita GDP (Figure 1) and per capita GDP growth has slowed down after 1996, this in turn has led to
a reduced rate of poverty reduction.

The extreme poor are those whose income is below the extreme poverty line defined using the cost of a food basket meeting
basic nutritional needs. The moderate poor (below defined as "poor") are those with income above the extreme poverty line, but
below the moderate poverty line which takes into account the cost of basic non-food needs. Total poverty is defined as the sum
of extreme and moderate poverty.

ANNEX C
Page 2 of 6

* Lower poverty reduction rates in rural areas. Rural poverty, with the highest levels, still is a

legitimate concern. The impact of poverty reduction has been much smaller in rural than in urban
areas, with the share of rural households in poverty decreasing by less than three percentage points.

* Despite decreasing relative poverty rates, the absolute number of urban poor has increased

significantly. Rural-to-urban migration has more than tripled the number of urban poor between
1991 and 2000, and urban poverty now accounts for 46 percent of total poor.

* Poorer households are more vulnerable to economic recessions than richer households. Poverty

decreased every single year throughout the 1990s, with one exception: the recession of 1996.
Estimates assessing who suffered the most from the 1996 economic downturn show that the drop in
income among poorer households was severe, and these households had not recovered by 1997. By
contrast, the richest 20 percent of households actually registered a gain in income over the period of
almost nine percent.

Figure 

1: Per-Capita 
G DP Growth 
and Percent Reduction 
Poverty 
and Extreme 
Poverty Rates, 
1991-1999

in

X- 

_ 

X 

_ 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

_ 

_ 

-

-

2 2

,, 

91-92 

92-93 

93-94 

94-95 

95-96 

96-97 

97-98 

98-99

-

-

- ~ Reduction 

in extreme e

-

-ReducYion 

in poverty

Per capita 

growth 

Year

B. 

The Impact of the Earthquakes on Poverty and Social Indicators

4. 
Pre-earthquakes projections indicating a steady decline in poverty rates reaching close to 30
percent in 2005 are now obsolete. Preliminary estimates of the augmentation of poverty levels due to the
earthquakes range between 2.6-3.6 percentage points (Table 2). Such increase means that at least about
162,500 additional people would have fallen temporarily below the poverty line-four-fifths of it in
extreme poverty-as a result of the disasters. The lower bound estimate is reported by FUSADES using
a methodology based on the extent of damage to physical assets.2 The upper bound estimate is reported
by UNDP and employs a similar methodology, but with different weighting factors. Both estimates
decompose poverty per- department and point-out not only to an effective deepening of rural/urban
poverty gaps, but to a re-mapping of poverty nationwide moving Center-South. The departments most
affected by the earthquakes were: La Paz, San Vicente, Cuscatlan and Usulutan, with significant double-
digit increases in poverty. Then, to a lesser extent, a second group of most-affected departments are

2Applied to departmental level data on earthquakes damage, it converts the loss of a stock of physical assets into a loss of flow
of income. Nationwide, they used an income loss estimate of 33.3 percent of damages to stocks, and this percentage is adjusted
for each department according to per-capita GDP. Applying these percentages to the estimated costs of the total physical
damages per department gives the estimated impact on departmental GDP. and thereby the proportion by which departmental
income was reduced. Finally, using the 1999 household survey, all incomes of all household in that department are reduced by
the same proportion, which allow to recalculate the headcount index of poverty and extreme poverty for each department.

Sonsonate, La Libertad and Santa Ana. For its part, the human development 
index also suffered a
setback in terms of the HD ranking worldwide, witlh El Salvador descending five positions, among 85
development countries. This downgrading reflects the deep negative impact of disasters estimated on
water and sanitation infrastructure, health services provision, education enrollment, food availability and
income losses, especially in most-affected departments.

ANlNEX C
Page 3 of 6

C. What Determines Povertv?

.

1 

l 

La Pazon 
La Uni6n 

Regression-based analysis suggests th it several

Table 2. Poverty Increases per
Department due to the Earthquakes
(in percent of poverni headcount) 
Department 
FUSADES UNDP 
lhousehold-related 
factors determine poverty, such as the
Ahuachapan 
0.8 
1 .1 
number of infants and children, gender-head, location, level
Cabanias 
0.0 
13.5 1 ownership and remittance flows. Households with a larger
0.2 
of education attained by the head, employment patterns, land
Cuscatlan 
7.8 
Chalatenan?o 
0.0 
0.0 
number of infants and children have a lower level of per
La Libertad 
3.8 
3.8 
capita consumption. and thereby a higher probability of
La Paz 
7.7 
18.4 
being poor. Households with a younger head and/or a
02 
female head are also more likely to be poor. Differences in
0.2 
0 per capita icome 
remain between departments even after
controlling for a wide range of household characteristics. As
expected, the department with the largest positive impact on
income is San Salvador. Income gains from education are
substantial: 
(i) A household with a head with university
studies has an expected level of per capita income 70 percent
higher than another household whose head has no education
at all; (ii) completing secondary schooling also brings a 30-
40 percent 
income gain versus no schooling; and (iii)
completing primary school brings in a 15-30 percent income
gain. However, no large differences prevail between income gains for household heads in urban and
rural areas, despite that there might be more opportunities for qualified workers in urban areas. and for
gender. As there is gender discrimination 
in pay and one salary typically does not enable a hcusehold to
emerge from poverty unless the education level of the working adult is very high, better education clearly
helps in escaping poverty, but it is not enough if only one household member is workirig, so that
employment patterns matter:

MoranMiel 
San Miguel 
San Salvador 
San Vicente 
Santa Ana 
Sonsonate 
Usulutan 
Nationwide 

0.0 
0.7 
0.9 
10.6 
2.0 
2.4 
5.7 
2.6 

0 184 

0.1

0.0 
1.3 
0.9 
15.8 
2.7 
4.4 
9.1 
3.6 

* Unemployment. Households with a head or spouse not workinig also have a lower per capita
income.
* Underemployment. Having a head or spouse seriously underemployed (i.e., working less than 20
hours per week) reduces expected per capita income by 10-40 percent. Milder undererr"ployment
(i.e., working between 20 and 39 hours a week) reduces per capita income by 5-20 percent.
* Sector of activity. Having a head belonging to the mining, manufacturing, electricity, construction,
commerce, transport, or service sector brings in a gain in per capita income of 20 to 70 percent as
compared to working in agriculture (the excluded reference category).
Informality. Self-employment is associated to a lower per capita income than salaried employment
(the excluded category in the regression). and the impact seems to be larger in rural than in urban
areas. There is a substantial gain from having a head being employed in the public sector as opposed
to working in the private sector, but this is not the case for the spouse. A head or a spouse working
in a firm that has above ten workers also brings in a gain in per capita income of about 20 percent.

* 

6. 
Non-farm activities and assets, such as land ownership, also help the rural poor to cope with
downturns. 
In rural areas, the very poor are concentrated among agricultural 
laborers and snmall-scale

ANNEX C
Page 4 of 6

farmers. When these groups engage in the non-farm sector, this tends to be in low-productivity activities.
Infrastructure endowment plays a significant role in the availability of non-farm employment, which
emphasizes the need for investments in basic rural infrastructure services. As access to formal credit
mechanisms remains very limited for the rural poor, rural savings facilities also appear to foster the
emergence of non-farm activities, which can help to cope with economic downturns, when reductions in
wage labor lead to increase self-employment more than proportionately.

7. 
Migration, especially to the U.S., is important due to remittance flows that play an important role
for the reduction and the composition of poverty.3 Private transfers from abroad reached 12-13 percent
of GDP in 1998-2000. This share is expected to peak at 14.1 percent in 2001 due to the earthquakes, and
then gradually decrease to its previous range in 2005. Poor households are less likely to receive
remittances, and among poor households who receive them, remittances represent a larger share of the
household's total income. Poor households are less likely to receive remittances than richer households
in both urban and rural areas, and among the households receiving remittances, the share of total income
represented by these remittances is higher for the extreme poor than the non-poor (Table 3). The long
term effect of remittances on community development is unclear, and in most cases evidence varies
according to specific local conditions, but suggests that most remittances are spent on consumer items.
In the most marginal rural areas, remittances improve household living conditions, but they do not
compensate for the lack of infrastructure and businesses that these communities experience and only a
relatively small share of remittances are invested in business-like ventures, this share being particularly
low for the extreme poor in rural areas. Nevertheless, in El Salvador, remittances have long-term positive
impact on spending for housing and schooling: they are used in a significant proportion for housing
improvements and have a larger positive impact on the probability of children being enrolled in school
than other sources of income. Finally, remittances from abroad tend to be inequality increasing in rural
areas and inequality decreasing in urban areas. This is because households with migrants are usually
poorer to start with, and the transfers they receive are smaller. Yet, while remittances tend to be poverty
reducing, not all remittance flows have the same impact on inequality.

Table 3: The Importance and Use of Remittances (percentages)

Non Poor 

Share of households receiving remittances
Urban 
Rural 

Remittances as share of income for those receiving them

Urban 
Rural 

Share of remittances which are invested
Urban 

Rural 

Source: FUSADES.

Moderate 
Poor 

Extreme 
Poor 

All
households

16.14 
18.65 

35.26 
45.15 

17.70 

15.19 

15.20 
13.33 

37.04 
51.64 

9.51 

7.54 

10.04 
8.30 

55.94 
57.11 

8.86 

2.78 

15.16
13.98

37.38
49.21

14.81

10.68

While migration has the potential of bringing benefits, it can also have negative effects. Migration may lead to long periods of
separations within families, with household heads or other members living away, and possibly providing for two households, one
at the place of origin, and one at the place of destination. Without remittances, migration may leave those left at home with fewer
resources, forcing children to drop of school and engage in various forms of labor. With remittances, migration may lead to
dependency at home. As for the migrants, they may be forced to live in poor housing conditions at their place of destination.
And although on average migration brings earnings gains, it also leads to higher risk and vulnerability, especially if the migrants
are young, poorly educated, and without good social networks.

ANNEX C
Page 5 of 6

D. 

Impact of Growth on Poverty and Other Indicators

8. 
Nationwide, a one percent increase in per capita income reduces the headcount of extreme poverty
by 1.2 percent (Table 4). A one percent increase in per capita income also results in a 0.7 percent decline
in the headcount index of poverty. For extreme poverty, the elasticity is larger, but the inilial level of
poverty is lower, so that the effect of a one percent growth on both groups is roughly similar. The same
reasoning can be applied to urban and rural areas: elasticity is larger in urban areas, but the level of
poverty is lower there, so that growth gains in percentage points of poverty reduction are similar.

Table 4: Elasticity of Poverty Reduction to Growth in El Salvador: National, Urban, and Rural
National 
Urban 
Rural
Extreme Moderate Extreme Moderate Extren ie Moderate
Elasticity for the headcount index 
-1.24 
-0.67 
-1.29 
-0.68 
-0.63 
-0.62
Source: World Bank staff using DIGESTYC household surveys.

9. 
Apart from reducing poverty, growth also improves non-monetary indicators of well-be ing. It has
positive impacts on a wide range of non-monetary 
indicators including 
infant mortality, under five
mortality, life expectancy at birth for health, adult illiteracy, gross enrollment in primary, seccndary, and
tertiary education for education; and access to safe water and telephones for infrastructure, Based on
Bank estimates over a world panel, the magnitude of each elasticity depends on the social indicator and
level of development of each individual country. For instance, in El Salvador (with a real per capita GDP
below $2,500 at PPP 1985 prices), a I percent growth increase is projected to result in a 0.15 percentage
(not percentage point) decrease in infant (i.e., under one year) mortality. Social indicators do improve
with a time-trend and urbanization also appears to have a larger impact on social indicators than growth.

E. 

Human Development Conditions

10. 
The level of the HDI observed 
in El Salvador is above that of Guatemala, Hor.duras and
Nicaragua, but well below that of Costa Rica and Panama. Overall, the performance of the country is
below the average for Central America (Table 5). Still, the level of the HDI or GDP per capita is in line
with expectations given the country's level of economic development.

Table 5: Human Development Index, 1997
PRSP Countries in Latin America 
HO 
BO GUY NI 
All 

CR 

Central America Countries
ES 
ES GU PA All
1997 1999

HDI index 1997 
Components of 1997 HDI
Life expectancy at birth 
Adult literacy rate (%) 
Combined gross enrollment 
Real GDP per capita (US$T) 
Life expectancy index 
Education index 
GDP index 
HDI and GDP ranking
GDP ranking 
HDlranking 
GDP-HDI ranking 
Source: UNDP.

0.64 

0.65 

0.70 

0.62 

0.65 

0.80 

0.67 

0.70 0.62 0.79 0.72

69.4 
70.7 
58 
3.3 
0.74 
0.66 
0.52 

61.4 
83.6 
70 
2.9 
0.61 
0.79 
0.56 

117 108 
114 
112 
+3 
-4 

64.4 
98.1 
64 
3.2 
0.66 
0.87 
0.58 

101 
99 
2 

67.9 
63.4 
63 
2.0 
0.71 
0.63 
0.50 

121 
121 
0 

65.8 
78.9 
64 
2.9 
0.68 
0.74 
0.54 

112 
112 
0 

76.0 
95.1 
66 
6.7 
0.85 
0.85 
0.70 

61 
45 
16 

69.1 
77.0 
64 
2.9 
0.74 
0.73 
0.56 

69.7 64.0 73.6 70.7
80.4 66.6 91.1 82.45
63 
47 
73 
63
4.1 
4.1 
7.2 
5.2
0.75 0.65 0.81 0.76
0.74 0.60 0.85 0.76
0.62 0.62 0.71 0.65

108 NA 
107 
100 
1 NA 

85 
56 
117 49 
-32 
7 

78
80
-2

ANNEX C
Page 6 of 6

11. 
There has been steady progress in El Salvador for improving education indicators, but the
objectives set by the Government for the years ahead call for faster gains. The gross enrollment rate in
basic education has increased from 83 percent in 1992 to 98 percent in 1997. The dropout rate in
elementary school has almost been cut in half over the same period, and the rate of repetition has been
cut by more than half. Illiteracy among the population between 10 and 65 years of age is now around 20
percent and steady. The Government has called for faster gains in the years ahead in its education reform
strategy. For pre-schools, the objective is to reach an enrollment rate of 45 percent by 2004. For
elementary school, the objective is to reach an enrollment rate of 85 percent by 2004. Moreover, the
share of all children enrolled in the elementary school who are behind in terms of age by more than two
years should be reduced from 15 percent to 10 percent by 2004. If these objectives are attained, apart
form the increase in enrollment, the reduction in repetition (and possibly absenteeism) in basic education
would help in ensuring that education budgets are used optimally.

12. 

There are, however, substantial differences in enrollment by age, gender, income and location.

* Differences by age group. Whereas more than 80 percent of children below 14 go to school, only
60 percent of those aged 15 to 17 do because some youths must work, choose to work, or must take
care of household duties as they can not afford to continue attending school.
* Differences by gender. The differences by gender are very small in terms of enrollment, but more
boys undertake paid work than girls, more girls undertake unpaid (domestic) work, and lower
repetition rates appear among girls.
- Differences by location. Enrollment rates are about 1 0 percentage points higher in urban than in
rural areas. Private and religious schools are much more used by households in rural areas, which is
not surprising given that the supply and the ability to pay are greater there. The repetition rates are
also much higher in rural areas.
* Differences by income group. School attendance rises with income, but the extent of work does
not. The problems of affordability in both urban and rural areas, and of the distance from schools in
rural areas, are more prevalent in the poorer income groups.

13. 
Despite overall progress in recent years, the poor still lack access to basic infrastructure services,
with perceived large differences between richest and poor households, and urban and rural areas; with
many middle-income households in rural areas having lower access than poor households in urban areas.
For the extreme poor, the cost of access to basic services-electricity, water, or sanitation-represents
about 3-13 percent of their income per service. 
In absolute terms, the value of access to basic
infrastructure services is often higher for the rich than for the poor (the rich have a higher willingness to
pay for the services). But in relative terms, as a percentage of their income, the value of access to basic
services is higher for the poor than for the rich.

* Water. Nationwide, only 6 percent of the households in the poorest income decile have access to
water within their house, as compared to 84 percent in the richest decile. Seven out often households
in the poorest decile do not have access to piped water, versus 9 percent in the richest decile.
* Sanitation. Nationwide, one third of the households in the poorest decile have no sanitation
infrastructure, versus three percent in the richest decile. Many poor households use ad hock facilities.
* Electricity. Nationwide, six out of ten households in the poorest decile have no access to electricity,
versus less than one percent in the richest decile.

Annex D
Page I of 3

THE IMPACT OF THE EARTHQUAKES ON EL SALVADOR

A. 

Background

1. 
During the last three decades, Central America has been hit by major natural clisasters.
Hurricane Mitch left a death toll of about 9,000 persons and more than US$6 billions in damages
in the region in 1998. Two powerful earthquakes also previously hit the region, one on
Guatemala City on February 1976 and another on Metropolitan San Salvador on October 1986,
causing extensive physical damage and loss of life. Seism-most affected areas have a common
factor: they are located in valleys surrounded by mountain ranges with volcanic origin. As the
smallest and most densely populated country in the region, and given its small natural resource
base and active volcanic network, El Salvador valleys are highly vulnerable to natural disasters.

B. 

Earthquakes Damage

2. 
On January 13 and February 13, 2001, El Salvador was hit by two powerful and
earthquakes. The first one measured 7.6 on the Richter scale and was Central America sirongest
in almost a century. Coupled with the second one of 6.6 magnitude, both earthquakes destroyed
physical and social assets, including several villages and towns; triggered massive mudslides on
the Cordillera del Balsamo, burying entire neighborhoods; and damaged major highways and
rural roads, cutting off villages and towns from the rest of the country. Preliminary estimates
indicate that it left 1,159 persons dead, 8,023 injured, and more than 300,000 families homeless,
thus affecting almost one-fifth of the Salvadoran population. Unlike the 1986 one, physical and
human damage to the capital city was miraculously light, but it contrasts to the impact on the rest
of the country. Most affected areas in the first quake were located in the Southern departments of
Usulutan, La Paz, San Vicente, La Libertad, Santa Ana and Sonsonate. San Salvador was cut
from the rest of the country for almost a week. The second quake further hit La Paz and San
Vicente and produced major damage to Cabafias. About thirty percent of the existing housing
stock was damaged, of which 45 percent of it was entirely destroyed. A significant nurnber of
public infrastructure was severely damaged, including more than half of hospitals, a third of
schools, the Presidential House which was evacuated, the Legislature Assembly and Supreme
Court, and about 97 municipalities (Box Dl).

3. 
Estimates of Damage and Replacement Costs. Preliminary consolidated estimates for
both earthquakes prepared by the GOES with the support of ECLAC (Table DI) suggest total
consolidated damages of US$1.6 billion, equivalent to 12 percent of El Salvador's GD)P, and
replacement costs of US$1.9 billion.

C. 

Response to the Disaster.

4. 
After the first earthquake, the Government set up several commissions to deal x',ith the
emergency. First, it activated the National Emergency Committee (COEN) to coordinate relief
activities. Second, it created the National Commission for Solidarity (CONASOL) 
to support
reception and distribution of direct cash and 
supplies contributions 
from the international
community. Third, it charged two ad-hoc commissions, one headed by the Minister of Economy
to draft the Reconstruction Plan, and another headed by the Technical Secretariat of the
Presidency 
to prepare the pledging document for the March 7 Consultative Group of Spain:
Unidos para Construir un Nuevo El Salvador. Fourth, it created the National Commission for

Annex D
Page 2 of 3

International Cooperation integrated by 4 majors, 2 representatives from the private sector
(FUSADES and ANEP), I from the Plan de Naci6n Commission, 1 representative from NGOs
and 1 representative from the catholic church. Such Commission is in charge of managing grants
offered during the CG meeting.

Box Dl. El Salvador: Damage Assessment of the Earthquakes

The Human ToUl. The earthquakes left 1,159 people died, 8,122 people injured, about 1,532,919
persons-about one fifth of the population-left homeless, and 41,400 small and micro enterprises broken. As a
consequence of the earthquakes, an estimated 158,015 people were placed in about 300 temporary shelters set up in
schools, stadiums and other open places located in nine departments: La Libertad, San Salvador, Santa Ana, San
Miguel, Usulutbn, Sonsonate, Cuscatlan, La Paz and San Vicente (the three latter mostly affected by the second
earthquake). Damage is estimated as follows:
3 Education. Estimates indicate that 594 schools were destroyed or severely damaged, 560 schools suffered
moderate problems and 986 suffered minor damage for a total equivalent to about forty percent of public
schools. As a result of the closing of the educational centers, national enrollment temporarily diminished by
about 
ten percent 
(150,000 students). 
The opening of 
the 
rainy 
season makes school
rehabilitation/reconstruction a top priority.
O Health. One-fourth of the health infrastructure network is useless. Of El Salvador's 30 public hospitals, 8
were evacuated and 15 reported severe damage. More than one-third of Health units (132 out of 354) and
2,294 hospital-beds were disabled due to the infrastructure shortcomings. The impact on rural health posts and
rural health clinics was concentrated on the most affected areas. Despite relief efforts, unsanitary conditions
have placed a large part of the population at risk of transmitted diseases, such as dengue and cholera
O Housing. This is the sector most heavily hit by the disaster due to the extensive use of bahareque and adobe as
construction materials by the rural population. About 62 percent of destroyed houses and 78 percent of
severely damaged houses were rural. The earthquakes destroyed housing for 149,528 families and produced
damage to 185,338 additional ones, which together represent about thirty percent of total housing. About 30
towns collapsed entirely. Vulnerable groups were mostly affected in the nine most affected departments: An
average of 60 percent of poor households and one third of female-headed families. Although temporary
housing solutions have been provided by authorities to face the rainy season, logistic problems and a limited
construction capacity (below 30,000 housing solutions per year) seem major problems on rural areas.
O Transport. Besides the Panamerican Highway, transportation was interrupted in about 500 rural roads.
Metropolitan San Salvador was temporarily isolated due to mudslides on the Panamerican highway from
both-west and east-access directions. Due to a San Vicente 6 kms. landslide of 200,000 cubic meters of
earth, present opening on the eastern side is only accessible via provisional roads. Several bridges located on
the Coastal Highway suffered structural damage. Transport infrastructure problems have raised transportation
costs, limited delivery of basic grains, delayed provision of emergency relief, and reduced domestic
commercial activity and trade within Central America.
O Agriculture. Coffee, basic grains and nontraditional export production suffered minor indirect datnage.
Fifteen percent of the coffee harvest was pending recollection. Due to labor scarcity, mudslides and rural road
access problems only 5 percent was completed. Coffee processing was also affected because of the partial
destruction of 27 beneficios. Basic grains scarcity has arisen from transportation rather than production
problems. Other exports products that suffered minor damage are flowers, fruits and vegetables.
O Water. About 15 percent of the urban population and 9 percent of the rural population were affected by
suspension of water provision mainly due to power outages, but this service was quickly restored. However,
about 1,400 pozos and 63,000 letrinas located in rural areas need urgent rehabilitation.
O Environment. The earthquakes have aggravated the already severe environment degradation of the Cordillera
del Balsamo and coastal affected areas and rendered them more vulnerable to earthquakes and hurricanes. The
main effects happened on deforestation (affecting coffee shadow trees), further loss of the agricultural frontier,
soil degradation, irrigation scarcity due to the loss of water basins, temporary diminution of fish production and
loss of tourism revenues in affected areas. In the medium-term, as many hillsides have become unstable,
mitigating vulnerability to landslides and flooding erosion rendering unproductive a number of fertile lands
should be a priority. In the short-term, however, incoming torrential rains are a major threat as mudslides
might produce further losses of physical and human assets.

5. 
In both cases, the GOES efforts were successful first in providing immediate
humanitarian assistance and in dealing with urgent infrastructure bottlenecks, then on dealing
with rehabilitation and reconstruction needs. The first after-quake emergency relief focus was on
rescuing disappeared people, distributing food, providing water and emergency health care to

Annex D
Page 3 of 3

affected communities and organizing temporary shelters. The Government also announced that
each family affected by the destruction of its house would receive US$69 for removing debris and
a handset of tools, whereas municipalities would receive a similar amount for collecting and
disposing 
them. Priority infrastructure 
tasks focused on the reopening of the Panamerican
highway, which partly re-opened in less than a week; minor repairs to power substanons and
transmission 
lines. re-establishment of normal provision of water supply. temporarily inlerrupted
due to power outings, and telecommunications. All essential services were brought tc, normal
after one week. Barely initiating rehabilitation efforts. Authorities had to suspend them (Ie to the
second earthquake, sending activities back to emergency relief tasks.

6. 
The reconstruction program has been executed under a decentralized and transparent
mechanisms. 
Decentralization started by jointly assessing damage 
impact and dis-ributing
emergency relief through the majors of the most affected municipalities. The CG document
contains 
the following division of labor: 
(i) the GOES is in charge of receiving official
assistance, whereas local governments and private firms are implementing 
it; (ii) the GOES is
preparing and executing major projects, local governments are in charge of small and local ones;
(iii) local governments are receiving technical assistance from the GOES to strengtl,en their
management capacity, as well as to help them build their own local social participatory rintworks;
(iv) donors are channeling their grants directly to local governments. NGOs, churches or other
executing agencies if they wish so, but they have to inform the GOES, so there is social auditinig.

Table DI. Preliminary Summary of Damages and Reconstruction Costs (USS Million)
Direct 
Indirect 
Total 
Recovery
Damage 
I Damage 
Damage 
Costs
938.8 
665.0 
1,603.8 
496.4 
120.3 
616.7 
190.4 
20.1 
210.5 
55.9 
16.5 
72.4 
250.1 
83.7 
333.8 
96.7 
375.6 
472.3 
3.2 
13.2 
16.4 
18.7 
4.4 l 
23.1 
74.8 
358.0 
432.8 
243.7 
95.6 
339 .3 
38.5 
54.6 
93.1 
205.2 
41.0 
246.2 
102.0 
0.5 
102.5 

TOTAL 
Social Sectors 
Education 
Health 
Housing 
Infrastructure 
Electricity 
Water and Sanitation 
Transport and Public Buildings 
Productive Sectors 
Agriculture, livestock, fishery/forestry 
Manufacturino & Trade 
Environment 
Emergency Relief 

1,943.9
1,456.9
269.9
24 0.1
946.9
240.6
M1.0
27.2
2033.4 1
104.4
14.0
9(0.4

142.0

T 

| 

| 

.

[ 

-

73.0 

73.0

Source: UNDP/ECLAC, F1 Terremoto del 13 de Enero de 2001 en El Salvador. LC/MEX.R.797, February 12. 20il y
El Salvador: Evaluaci6n del Terremoto del Martes 13 de Febrero de 2001, LC/MFX/1..45/Add.2. Fcbruar\ 23, 2001.

7. 
The international community swiftly responded to both disasters, benefiting from the
emergency response capability of the UN agencies and a number of countries. The primary focus
was to accompany the GOES in rescuing bodies, distributing food and medicines, establishing
communications abroad and organizing channeling of emergency relief from abroad. Bank staff,
as well as other multilateral agencies moved swiftly on the ground to support design cf a
Reconstruction Plan and restructure existing operations according to new priorities. Conm eyed by
the IDB. a CG meeling was held on March 7 in Spain, where the GOES asked for US$1.') billion
in reconstruction needs. The IMF and the WB staff have jointly contributed to the assessment of
the macroeconomic 
impact of the earthquakes and continued to work closely with the (rOES in
the monitoring of the economy. Upon request by authorities, the Bank has reoriented existing
loans to meet required post-disaster emergency needs and supported selective reconstruction
activities.

EL SALVADOR CAS 1997-01: Progress Towards Country Benchmarks

ANNEX E
Page 1 of 7

PROGRESS BFNCHMARKS 
SPECIFIED IN PREVIOUS CAS 

PROGRESS ACCOMPLISHED 

YEAR 
DELIVERED

SERVICE/PRODUCTS

Lending Services
* Proposed Social Investment
Fund for Local Development
Project jointly with IDB, KIW).
*Extensive stakeholder
consultation; throughout the
project preparation.

Non-Lending Services
* EDI: (i) Regional Program of
Partnerships for Poverty
Reduction; and (ii) LAC-NGO
Poverty Network.

Non-Lending Services
* Ongoing Rural Development
and
Rural Credit Studies.
* Workshops on rural
development strategy (jointly
with IDB).
Lending Services
Proposed Rural Development
and Natural Resources
Management Project(s).

Non-Lending Services
* Implementation of Program to
Improve Living Standards
Surveys (IDB/ECLAC/World
Bank).
* Proposed IDF Grant to
support Program.

DEVELOPMENT IMPACT 

Reduce National poverty rate, 
as measured by the Household 
Survey, to 3 5-40 percent by the 
year 2005. 

A. POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Agree with Government and 
The poverty rate decreased to 
key stakeholders on the strategy 47.5 percent in 1999 and, 
and operational mechanisms 
before the earthquake was on 
that will guide the new SIF. 
track to meet the target by 2002 

Reorient the poverty alleviation Begin implementation of the 
strategy, expanding the role of 
new SIFLD project, and extend 
the SIF by adopting a local 
piloting of local development 
development focus, and 
concept, expand cluster concept 
encouraging cluster-type 
to include private investors, 
partnerships between local 
NGOs, and production activities 
communities, NGOs, and 
generated by local 
private sector. 
communities. 

The new decentralization and 
local development strategy for 
FISDL was agreed with 
stakeholders and approved by 
the GOES in 2000. 

FY97 
-to- 
FY01

Raise rural growth and reduce 
rural poverty by improving 
agricultural policies and support 
systems, encouraging off-farm 
employment, and improving 
natural resource management. 

Improve poverty monitoring 
and strengthen local capacity to 
design, implement and analyze 
surveys for policy-making and 
impact evaluation. 

Rural Development and Natural Resource Management
Agree with the Government on Rural poverty decreased from 
a longer-term agriculture and 
66.1 percent in 1991 to 55.4 
rural development strategy, 
percent in 1999. 
following wide national 
consultations with stakeholders The rural development strategy 
to develop consensus. Begin 
was only partially implemented 
implementing the agreed 
due to Hurricane Mitch. 
strategy. Strengthen 
institutional and financial 
Improved national Household 
support for improved natural 
Surveys continue on a yearly 
resource management and 
basis and included a gender 
diversification of rural incomes. module in 1999.

FY97 
-to- 
FY0 I 

Agree on an action plan to 
improve the design and analysis 
of Living Standard Surveys, 
including development a gender 
module. 
Implement agreed action plan 
for the 1998 Household Survey.

EL SALVADOR CAS 1997-01: Progress Towards Country Benchmarks

DEVELOPMENT IMPACTI 

PROGRESS BENC(HMARKS 

SPECIFIED IN PREVIOUS CAS 

PROGRESS ACCOMPLIShIED 

YEAR 

SERVICE/PRODUCTS

DELIVERED

ANNEX E
Page 2 of 7

_ 

Education 

-___ 

Basic Education: Improve 
coverage, quality and 
community participation in 
basic education through 
extension of EDUCO. 

Expand pre-school coverage by 
21,000 students (20%) and 
basic coverage by 52,000 
students (6%); build 2,500 
classrooms; train 7,600 
Community association (ACE) 
members. 

Substantial Increments of 
coverage in Primary Education, 
especially through the EDIJCO 
model. Curricular Reforms at 
the basic education level, 
including design of study 
programs and lesson plans. 
Development of school-based
management strategies through
the creation of parental
associations to open and
manage rural schools (ACEs)
and to support school
improvements in urban schools
(CDEs).

Secondary Education: expand 
coverage and quality to support 
globalization agenda and to 
meet expected increase in 
demand, focusing on cost- 
effectiveness and community 
involvement. 

(i) Agree with Government on 
(i) The Government
strategy and policy framework 
successfully introduced
for expanding the coverage and 
legislative and administrative 
quality of secondary education; Reforms, at both the central 
(ii) develop appropriate 
Ministerial level as well as at 
mechanisms to encourage 
the regional level to improve 
community participation 
coverage and quality of 
following lessons from EDIJCO education;.(ii) at the level of 
and; (iii) agree on role of 
secondary education the CDEs 
private sector. 
are also planning, and 
implementing school 
imprc'cmcnt pr.ogranms usirg 
the EDUCO model; (iii) 
alliances with the Private Sector 
for co-implementation of
Education Investments.

FY97 
-to-
FY01

FY97 
-to- 
FY01 

_

Lending Services
*Ongoing Basic Education
Modernization and Secondary
Education projects (jointly with
IDB and UNDP).

Non Lending Services
* Ongoing Secondary
Education Study.
* EDI: (i) Study tour to New
Zealand and Australia to review
impact of education reforms;
(ii) Regional Seminar on
Effecting School Change in
LAC; and (iii) school-to-school

Netork (Internet forum for

Salvadoran students in El
Salvador and the IJSi)

EL SALVADOR CAS 1997-01: Progress Towards Country Benchmarks

DEVELOPMENT IMPACT 

PROGRESS BENCHMARKS 
SPECIFIED IN PREVIOUS CAS 

PROGRESS ACCOMPLISHED 

YEAR 
DELIVERED

SERVICE/PRODUCTS

ANNEX E
Page 3 of 7

Increase coverage and quality 
of basic health services, 
targeting poor rural areas, 
women and children. 

Implement reforms in 
The Government started a 
secondary education to improve campaign to expand coverage 
quality and expand coverage, 
of secondary education 
especially in rural areas. 
especially targeted to 
economically disadvantaged
communities through school
construction and scholarships.

Health

Support institutional 
These activities were not 
strengthening at the Ministry of 
carried out due to the 
Health, including (i) the testing 
postponement of Bank's Basic 
of at least 5 pilots for 
Health Reform Project. 
alternative delivery systems; (ii) However, the Bank did provide 
development reform proposals; 
the Government with technical
and (iii) development of a 
advise on health sector reform.
strategy to increase conmmunity
participation & service
decentralization.

FY98 
-to- 
FYO1 

Lending Services
*Proposed Secondary
Education Modernization
Project.

Non-Lending Services
*Policy advice on health
reform.
* EDI: Regional Seminar on
Health Sector Reform.

Gender
Promote gender as an integral 
Agree on and carry out a set of A gender component to be 
aspect of public sector 
activities to incorporate gender 
added to the project in FY02. 
modernization and the 
as integral part of the Public 
encouragement of a greater 
Sector Modernization Program. The gender component in the 
client orientation among public Develop 2 year action research 
Encuesta de Hogares de 
agencies, enhance gender 
plan for CENTA, within the 
Propositos Multiples was not 
responsiveness in CFNTA, and Bank's GINO Program. 
completed yet 
improve living standards survey 
Incorporate gender component 
design to better analyze gender 
in IDB/ECLAC/WB program to 
issues within the household. 
improve living standards, 
starting with the 1998 Encuesta 

de Hogares de Propositos 

Muttiples; hold 2-3 in-country 
workshops in 1997 to hel 

Non-Lending Services
* Participation in the Bank's
GINO Program Workshops and
Seminars targeting
stakeholders, government
agencies, CENTA, staff
responsible for survey design
and analysis, and the
Commission for Public Sector
Modernization.
* Proposed IDF Grant to

support Program to improve

Living Standards Surveys
(jointly with IDB, ECLAC).

FY98 
-to- 
FYO1 

El, SALVAD)OR CAS 1997-01: Progress Towards Country Benchmarks

ANNLX 1.

P'age 4 of 7

PROGRESS ACcONIPLISHED 

YEAR 

SERVICE/PRODI 

(IS

DELIVERED 

_ 

_ 

_

B. COMPET ENESS ENHANCEMENT 

' 
Commitments were postponed 
by the previous administration, 
but the current Government 
prepared a law and created the 
Consumer Protection Office. 
One option considered was the 
establishment of a better 
business bureau-equivalent. 

Full approval of two sets of
laws prepared under the project
by the National Assembly. In
partnership with FIAS, the 
project also created the National
Investment Office (ONI), a one-
stop window for foreign and
iocai investors. I he project
provided assistance to the
creation and design of
PROF.SA, the National
lnvestment Agency. 

DEVELOPMENI IMPACT 

PROGRESS BENCHMARKS 

SPECIFIED IN PREVIOUIS CAS 
design subset of questions.

Address gender-specific issues Reduce gender stereotypes in 
in education and health, 
textbooks, include sex 
particularly in opening more 
education in school curricula, 
career opportunities for female 
provide career guidance to 
students, reducing teenage 
counteract labor market 
pregnancy, and reducing 
stereotypes, and include gender 
domestic violence and sexual 
issues in teacher training.
crimes. 
Support public education efforts
to reduce domestic violence and
seek ways of providing support
to women affected by sexual
crimes.

Increase domestic competition Draft Competition and 
and consumer protection. 
Consumer Protection Laws 
presented to Congress and 
establishment of 
implementation units. 

Simplify investment procedures Draft Investment Law and 
and improve investor services. 
design of- software for the one- 
stop-window. 

Lending Services
*Ongoing Basic Education
Modernization Project;
*Secondary Education Project;
and proposed Primary Health
Sector Reform Project.

Lending Services
*Ongoing Competitiveness
Enhancement Technical
Assistance Project.

Non-Lending Services
*FIAS advisory and technical
support.

FY97

FY97

_

EL SALVADOR CAS 1997-01: Progress Towards Country Benchmarks

ANNEX E
Page 5 of 7

DEVELOPMENT IMPACT 

PROGRESS BENCHMARKS 
SPECIFIED IN PREVIOUS CAS 

PROGRESS ACCOMPLISHED 

YEAR 
DELIVERED

SERVICE/PRODUCTS

Promote adoption of 
intemational quality standards 
by local firms. 

Create system for certification 
and training in ISO 9000 and 
other firm-level quality 
management programs. 

Quality/Standards
This component was not 
supported by the previous and 
current administrations' 
decision to finance activities
through IDB grants.

Create movable assets registries 
and strengthen registries and 
protection for intellectual 
property. 

Improve public awareness of 
competitiveness program, and 
strengthen cooperation between 
public and private sectors. 

Implement action plan for legal After this component was
reforms and institutional design 
initially delayed by the previous
of registries for movable assets, 
administration, work has
modemization of commercial 
resumed on the legal framework
registries, and upgrading for 
required for Moveable Assets 
intellectual property protection. 
and on training sessions with
the National Registries,
members of the Government
and members of the Assembly.

Communications
Implement program of 
Several important activities: (i) 
seminars, media campaign and media campaign on 
study tours to examine 
competitiveness; (ii) permanent 
international experience; 
communications through the 
develop consultative and 
media; (iii) private sector 
monitoring mechanisms that 
involvement in the 
can analyze and disseminate 
implementation of Program's 
this experience; and continue 
components; (iv) major effort to 
work on parts of the 
institutionalize consultation
competitiveness program. 
mechanisms between the
Government and the private
sector.

FY98

FY98

FY97 
-to- 
FY01 

Non-Lending Services
*FPD advisory support.

Non-Lending Services
*EDI: (i) third study tour for
cross-section of Salvadorans;
(ii) organize in country network
of participants in
competitiveness study tours,
and agree on follow-up
activities.

Institutional restructuring to 
eliminate overlaps, and increase 
efficiency in the provision of 

C. PUBLIC SECTOR MODERNIZATION
Complete 8 institutional 
Partial accomplished. On its 
restructuring programs, 
way toward full completion in 
eliminate 12 programs, transfer 
2001 

FY97 
-to- 

Lending Services
*Ongoing Public Sector
Modemization Technical

EL SALVADOR CAS 1997-01: Progress Towards Country Benchmarks

ANNEX E
Page 6 of.7

DEVELOPMFN I IMPAC I 

public services. 

PROGRESS BENCHMARKS 
SPECIFIED IN PREVIOUS CAS 

4 institutions to the private 
sector, and relocate 9 
institutions.

PROGRESS ACCOMPLISHED 

YEAR 
DELIVERED

FY01 

SERVICE/PRODUCTS

Assistance Project (jointly with
IDB).

Simplify and redesign 
bureaucratic processes to 
increase efficiency and 
customer orientation. 

Debureaucratization
Launch 3-4 debureaucratization Partially accomplished. On its 
projects in 1996 and an 
way toward full completion in 
additional 12-16 projects 
2001 
thereafter. Survey public 
opinion on a regular basis to 
ascertain improved efficiency in 

service delivery from client

______ 

perspective.___
________ 
Improve capacity to manage 
Install and use Human 
civil service, monitor pay and 
Resources Information System 
employment policies. Establishi in all ministries. Approve and 
new legal fiamework to maniage implement new Civil Service 
human resources. 
Law. 

Human Resources Management 
The previous administration
postponed actions to be taken
on this componient. TIhe new 
one is only starting to work on
them.

Non-Lending Services
*EDI: (i) National Seminar on
Privatization and Public Sector
Management; (ii) National
Seminar on Improving Service
Delivery.

FY97 
-to- 
FY0 I 

......

FY01

Increase efficiency and service Approve legal framework for 
Legal fiamework for 
quality through privatization of 
privatization, develop and adopt privatization approved for 
infrastructure. 
regulatory frameworks for 
telecoms and power sector.
telecoms and power, restructure Currently preparing one for
power and telecoms companies 
ports and airports.
for privatization, and privatize.

Privatization.

FY97 

Non-Lending Services
*FPD advisory services.

Privatize pension system to
deepen capital markets, 
improve coverage and stimulate 
private savings. 

Prepare and approve new 
legislative framework for social 
security reform, including 
establishment of private 

This benchmark was met in 
1998. Four private pension 
funds are already operating and 
the law was approved.

FY98
-to-
FY0 1

__________pension 

funds. 

__ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

__ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_

P._ FNV1RONMFNT_T AN NATIFTR ^ '1. Rl,SOU'RCE MANAC.EMENT
Build consensus and awareness Carry out series of 
Several seminars have been 
of broad enivironlmenital issues. 
dissemination semiinars and 
supported and a permanent 
Complement efforts of other 
workshops to improve 
inter-net program supports 
donors to strengthen 
awareness and understanding of public awareness on 

FY97 
-to- 
FY01 

Non-Lending Services
*EDI: (i) Regional Seminar on
Economy Wide Policies and the
Environment; (ii) National

EL SALVADOR CAS 1997-01: Progress Towards Country Benchmarks

ANNEX E
Page 7 of 7

DEVELOPMENT IMPACT 

institutional policy and 
regulatory framework. 

Improve land security to 
improve farmer incentives to 
make investments in soil 
conservation. 

PROGRESS BENCHMARKS 
SPECIFIED IN PREVIOUS CAS 

serious environmental 
problems, provide a forum to 
link policy markers and 
stakeholders, and support 
informed consensus-building on 
required measures to address 
environmental issues. 

(i) regularize the registration of 
25% of the national territory 
and provide technical assistance 
and agricultural support 
services for 80,000 small 
producers (ii) regularize the 
land tenure of cases pending 
from the 1992 Peace Accords; 
and (iii) develop a financially 
self-sustaining cadastral system
for mapping and registration.

PROGRESS ACCOMPLISHED 

YEAR 
DELIVERED

environmental issues. 

SERVICE/PRODUCTS

Workshop on application of
Action Impact Matrix to policy
issues in land degradation and
soil erosion; and (iii) via the
Internet program and other
development education
initiatives, provide teachers
with tools and resources on
sustainable development.

Land Security
80% of parcels should be 
regularized by FY03; (ii) CNR, 
the national mapping and 
registration agency, is operating 
satisfactorily and would
become financially sustainable
in 200 1, provided that the law
for the Autonomy of the CNR is
approved.

FY97 
-to- 
FY01 

Lending Services
*Ongoing Agriculture Sector
Reform Project and Approved
Land Administration Project.

Annex F
Page I of 6

CAS CONSULTATIONS WITH CIVIL SOCIETY AND OTHER STAKEHOLDERS

A. 

Background

1. 
In late 2000, when the El Salvador country team began discussing preparation of the
CAS, it has a few concerns resulting from its past experience dealing with civil society
organizations 
(CSO). During the 1997 CAS consultation: participants only includcd Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs), were sporadic and authorities were not fully commiitted to
their organization. 
Prior efforts to involve other CSO in the Bank's work had not been
systematic, and despite the Government agreed to the CAS process, it did not participale in the
planning of the consultations. 
In fact, NGOs and the Government remained skeptical about the
value of the whole exercise. Fortunately, the dialogue process helped to provide sul-stantive
feedback on existing and new development 
issues. highlighted some antagonism betWeen the
Bank and NGOs, and did help to illustrate the urgent need to construct a closer working
relationship between the Bank and other CSOs.

2. 
The 1997 CAS consultations also illustrated a few operational 
lessons to take ilto
account in the preparation of future CAS: (i) although consultation objectives were defiied, 
the
agenda and participatory process turned-out 
to be open-ended, thus losing up to some degree the
possibility to lead to concrete outcomes; (ii) prior dissemination of information about the rules of
the game of the dialogue was limited; (iii) no facilitation was provided during the event: and (iv)
CAS confidentiality brought some degree of uncertainty and mistrust among participants. as thev
pointed out having little room to monitor CAS inputs and outcomes.

3. 
Two important developments, however, have contributed 
to change CSO perception
about the GOES, the Bank and the role of participatory processes sincc the end-of-the nineties:
The preparation of the Plan de .N,aci6n and the informal consultations that each Bank operation
has developed. Appointed in agreement with the civil society by President Calderon Sol in late-
1997, an independent Comision Nacional del Desarrollo led nationwide public consultations 
to
develop a shared development vision in a Plan de Naci6n. The Plan 's unveilment in 1 999, and
President Flores' endorsement 
in 2000, modified civil society perception about the GOES'
attitude toward CSO participation and in regards traditional exclusion of the poorest populations
from the construction of the development process. 
In parallel, during 1999-2000. Bank staff led
an un-precedent number of dialogues in addressing multiple CSO including: the network. of local
development organizations and majors, the judicial system, the health and education sectors,
think-tanks, private sector organizations and the l,egislature. Both processes changed 
two
popular misperceptions: The first one assuming that the GOES was opposed to anlv participatory
process per se, and the second implying that the Bank had made unilateral decisions ari.I barely
approached CSO for endorsing them, but nothing else. Furthermore, they set the ground for the
GOES' intention to build certain degree of consensus on key components of its national agenda,
as well as for an improved relationship between CSO and the Bank, which became aplarent 
in
the present CAS exercise.

B. 

The Process

4. 
Consultations were supported by an innovative "Options Finder" technology. 
IFhis is a
software tool that facilitates collection of a group's opinion about a set of questions 
in virtual
time; obtains responses anonymous; privileges group-instead 
of individual-responses; 
prevents
an open-ended agenda or un-connected views on key issues; and, most important, provides
quantified outcomes immediately, 
thus allowing objective comparison among inter- and intra-

Annex F
Page 2 of 6

groups responses. Ensuing participatory dialogues further expanded the participants' views
toward additional topics.

5. 
More than 250 national representatives of CSOs, Congress, and the Cabinet took part in
the Consultations held in San Salvador on April 3-6, 2001. A special session with donors and the
FMLN also took place. Following a very participatory screening with authorities, civil society
specialists and Bank staff to obtain a reasonable degree of representation and no gender-bias from
multiple 
stakeholders, participants were grouped 
in seven meetings with NGOs 
(social,
environment, gender, indigenous and church networks), majors (with national coverage), media
(TV, radio and press), private sector (industry, agriculture, banking, construction, commerce and
think-tanks), bilateral and multilateral donors, the Legislature and the Executive. The Comision
Nacional also provided written feedback on how to improve chances for success.

6. 
Each meeting followed a standard, still flexible format. The agenda started with a written
summary presentation on the CAS Brainstorming Note. 
It continued with the response to a
questionnaire previously drafted with broad contributions from El Salvador Bank team. Questions
did not receive prior clearance from the Authorities. Once the questionnaire was completed in
virtual time, the group's answers were immediately printed and distributed to participants. The
meeting finished with a traditional participatory dialogue, led by a facilitator, on the group's own
responses focused on a set of open questions previously defined, but still open to additional
feedback/comments from participants. The Bank committed itself to publish a summary report of
the consultation process as soon as it became ready, which happened less than two weeks later on
the two main national newspapers. The report remains available in the Bank's external web. The
whole process also received extensive media coverage, which enhanced its trust and transparency,
and was welcomed by all participants, including Authorities and the FMLN, who appreciated the
Bank's timely contribution to well needed consensus-building efforts around the reconstruction
and development agendas.

C. Main Results. 

7. 

On the National Agenda:

_ 

Figure Fl. Perception of Individual Group
Relationship Wlthe World Bank

(top-ranked percentage responses)

- Rising crime and violence and low 

Majors _ 

_ 

'

Executive 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

social investment rank highest as main 
economic and social problems. 
Slow 
and 
inadequate 
justice administration 
and 
insufficient 
consensus 
among
political actors rank as main political 

problems. 

Private Sector

Legislature

Media

Donors

NGO

0 

20 

40 

60 

so %

.

0 good U average * poo

A significant number of respondents
would like to learn more about the civil 
society-drafted Plan de Nacion (27%),
the official GOFS program 
la Nueva
Alianza (3 5%), and the CG document Unidos para la Reconstruccion (59%).
* More than four out of ten respondents believe the medium term government program should
suffer little or no modifications due to the reconstruction program.
* Social infrastructure rehabilitation (shools and health posts), housing reconstruction, basic
infrastructure rehabilitation, and disaster prevention and mitigation are the highest priorities
as reconstruction needs.

Annex F
Page 3 of 6

8. 

On the World Bank's 2001-04 Role:

* Financing 
loans (75%), supporting donor coordination (56%) and facilitating national
consensus-building (50%) are the main roles that participants would like the Bank to play.
* Reducing poverty 
(91%), promoting employment opportunities 
(82%) and 
reducing
vulnerabilities against crime and violence, weak land rights and natural disasters ('p6%) are
identified as the main strategic objectives for the CAS. Other objectives that receive lower
ratings are: supporting stability and faster growth (68%), strengthening participation by local
actors and governance (62%) and enhancing private sector competitiveness (62%).
* Seventy-six percent of respondents consider as adequate a balanced urban-cum-rural
approach to poverty reduction by the Bank (not just focused on rural poverty anymi )re) and,
as part of an effort to improve the quality of public spending, ninety-one percent t upport a
territorial targeting of Bank operations in agreement with the following criteria 
ii priority
order: local and municipal poverty levels (68%), earthquakes damage (68%), exi ;tence of
complementary resources-economies 
of scale-from 
other donors in the same gcographic
area (48%) degree of local and municipal organization (41%), and a-priori placemeri. on Plan
de Naci6n pre-determined areas (29%).
* Respondents expect the Bank's operations been executed with high transparency (9.1 %), nigh
efficiency (90%) and broad participation by beneficiaries (79%).
* Respondents have mixed opinions about their group relationship with the Bank: c third of
them considers 
it inadequate, another third considers 
it average, whereas the fmial t:hird
considers it good. A bad or regular opinion still prevails among NGOs, and in a less.r extent,
the media. Besides the GOES, however, a more positive opinion prevails among thle majors
and the private sector. Most negative perceptions are due to insufficient country knowledge
about the Bank and its policies, as well as to the lack of a liason-office in situ (Figure F ).

9. 

On the CAS strategic priorities:

* The reconstruction priorities for the Bank's immediate response roughly matcii above-
identified critical needs, but given their multi-sectoral scope, participants sugL,ested an
multi-sectoral
eventual 
approach by the Bank. 
* The medium-term priorities 
for the Bank's portfolio are in 
decreasing order (Figure F2): 
basic education and primary 
health 
(89%), 
rural 
development 
(84%), basic- 
rural 
roads-infrastructure

Figure F2. Perception of the Bank's Medium
Term Assistance Priorities (percentage of
responses rating them as high)

Basic Infrastructure

Rural Development

and Health 

9M NON N,l

Education 

_

-jM 

(71%) 

and 

state 

Public M odernization 

MMUNPOIll 

RMI

Urban Poverty

Local Development

Disaster M itigation

modernization 
including 
judicial reform (68%). Other 
priorities identified are: urban 
poverty 
reduction/slums 
upgrade 
(65%), 
disaster
mitigation 
and 
natural
resource 
and 
environment
management 
(60%), 
decentralization and local development 
(55%), and strengthening of the Financial sxstem
(21%). Gender appears as a crossover topic among all these priorities.

Financial Sector

-00"

ao 

20 

40 

60 

_

Annex F
Page 4 of 6

10. 

On the possible CAS Risks and Solutions:

* The main risks identified by respondents for the Bank's portfolio in the next four years are:
lack of political consensus at the Legislature (69%), low fiscal revenues (47%), low execution
capacity (44%), and less than clear delimitation between the reconstruction and medium-term
development agendas of the Government (43%).
* As proposed solutions to face these risks, respondents support a national fiscal agreement
(83%), a new framework to deal with external debt approval by Congress (76%), a civil
service reform (76%) and an explicit effort by authorities and project managers to distinguish
between their reconstruction and medium-term development objectives (75%).

D. What Else Did We Hear in the Ensuing Participatory Dialogues?

]1. 
In addition to responses to the survey's questionnaire, we received a rich set of
suggestions and recommendations that greatly vary in depth and scope, and not necessarily reflect
an agreement with the Bank's views. While there was solid support for the Bank's effort to
approach CSO directly, and even some degree of surprise at the GOES' apparent willingness to
allow the CAS process proceed with full transparency, there remained an attitude of increased
expectations about the ability of civil society to effectively influence the Bank's strategy in El
Salvador.

12. 
Relationship with the FMLN. Their representatives in Congress chose not to respond to
the questionnaire, but instead brought their main representatives in Congress to actively
participate in the consultations. The FMLN delivered an official letter to make sure their own
views were adequately reflected. Surprisingly enough, most of their national agenda and Bank
assistance priorities are similar to the ones above identified, but disagreements prevail with (i) the
broad perception that El Salvador's economic model is a successful story, as deep inequalities
still prevail; (ii) a few key components of the official national agenda, in particular the
dollarization and privatization processes; (iii) the genuine willingness of the GOES in developing
a credible consensus-building effort with CSO around the reconstruction and development plans;
and (iv) the perception that the Bank should assume a direct consensus-builder role, as they rather
insist that the Bank should simply be a dialogue facilitator, whose main effort has to be conveyed
by authorities. At the end of the meeting, the FMLN qualified the meeting as a positive step and
thanked the Bank for taking the initiative to do it.

13. 
Other priorities of the NationalAgenda. In the economic front, participants singled out:
foreign investment promotion (in particular maquila), tourism, challenges arisen from the
incoming ALCA, and migration patterns once remittance flows decline over time. In the social
front, they mentioned: domestic violence against women, AIDs expansion, sexual education to
reduce population growth, nutrition among poor children, and the need for teaching moral values
as priorities. In the political front, participants also identified: the need for an intensive education
program of Congressmen, deeper participatory mechanisms in public service delivery, long-due
electoral and territorial law reform, and corruption as important topics that should also be tackled.

14. 
The Critical Role of the Legislature. Congressmen were surprised by the strong results
of the consultation pointing out to their critical role in the development of the national agendaa nd
the Bank's future assistance. Consequently, they suggested to the Bank's team to develop a rather
direct approach to Congress representatives, in particular to the Finance Commission dealing with
external debt and since the early preparatory stages of the project. Congressmen would also like

Annex F
Page 5 of 6

continuous 
information exchanges on the Bank's operational work, in particular about projects
implementation.

15. 
Poverty and the Earthquakes. There was consensus that the poverty map !-as been
severely affected by the earthquakes, but disagreement on the best way to measure it. A comrnon
agreement with authorities and CSO on the methodology 
to measure poverty after the
earthquakes 
is needed, and technical support from the Bank was requested. Participr nts also
mentioned the convenience of introducing a set of indicators that allows to better mol- itor and
evaluate the projects impact on the future poverty-reduction strategy.

16. 
Education. 
The need for a comprehensive mid-term evaluation of the on-going
education 
reform was suggested. 
Although EDUCO 
is considered a successful practice
worldwide, 
strong local concems over the quality of primary education, slow pro lresi; in
secondary education reform, and the still prevailing myriad number of universities and technical
institutes were voiced.

1 7. 
Rural Development. This theme generated mixed views. On the one hand, r ural and
indigenous organizations underscored the need for a continuous support in this area that ihe Bank
has financed traditionally in El Salvador. On the other hand, private sector businessmen second-
guessed whether Bank financing should rather focus on rural credit mechanisms or ru-al basic
infrastructure. rather than in social investment.

18. 
FISDL. Regarding FISDL, views were also mixed. Most participants dic. not see
perceived 
improvements 
in FISDL work, but recognized that the GOES lacks of another fast-
response institution to deal with disaster management and social investments. Participaints also
recognized that the proposed Consultative Group and the strategy for local developmert should
also modify FISDL future role, but only if this is achieved through a participatory agireement
reached with COMURES. the majors and local organizations. They also indicated that the local
development strategy has been affected by the priority reconstruction work that is nowv on the
GOES' short-term agenda.

E. 

Conclusion and Lessons

19. 
The CAS consultations 
took note of previous CAS experience in many way,;. 
IThey
focused on the process, not the final product, and were preceded by multiple Bank Jfforts in
different areas, addressed multiple stakeholders, not just NGOs as representative of CSO: enjoyed
full commitment and support from authorities, who participated in their planning, as well as other
CSO informed sources; supported by "Options finder", they focused on CAS brainstorml lg ideas,
instead of being open-ended, with no hidden agenda and, coupled this with their summary report
publication and media coverage, ensured full transparency vis-a-vis some skeptical CSO.

20. 
As a result, and also partly due to their timing, consultations were very constructive, very
well received by stakeholders, provided useful inputs to the GOES and the Bank, and sl.owe 4 the
Bank's willingness to open a dialogue on main issues of the national agenda. Consultati ins xvere
developed at a critical time: Immediately following the CG meeting in Madrid, wheni mc,;t doolors
strongly insisted upon all political forces to unify their views around the reconstruction ag.,enda.

21. 
Consultations also left a few lessons on what could be improved 
in terms of CSO
representation, dealing with political partisanship and private sector group differences, and
deepening the content of the dialogues. Limited representation from CSO groups is aiways an
issue, and despite just a couple of complaints from NGO participants were expressed ciuring the

Annex F
Page 6 of 6

meetings, there is no doubt that there is always room for expanding the number and coverage of
invitees. More important as an issue, however, were perceived differences between private sector
representatives from the banking and industry on who should be conveying their meeting, or
between ARENA and FMLN Congress representatives on what criteria were used for conveying
a joint meeting or a certain number of deputes. These differences point out to the need for
providing full explanation about the purpose of the meeting to all participants in advance and for
carefully weighing group internal differences well before assuming as granted that selected
personalities will participate on the meetings just because an invitation was sent to them. If
necessary, but only as an extreme measure, a separate meeting could be preferred. Finally, there
is no question that some topics deserved further discussion and the time devoted to the meetings
was barely enough to initiate it. For instance, perceptions about FISDL work or the FMLN's
rejection of the privatization process deserved further discussion, but the already 3-hour
sessions-by 
far the longest ones of all-with majors and the FMLN had to be cut due to time
constraints, without really digging into it. Clearly, further project consultations will have to deal
with these special topics.

22. 
Options Finder proved to be an extremely efficient methodology to quantify and process
responses from multiple groups in a very short period of time. As responses were anonymous,
the exercise reflected full transparency vis-a-vis skeptical stakeholders. Majors and NGOs, in
particular, underscored that had they agree on the same set of issues explored, it would have took
them several days to do it, and still would not be sure they had reached the same conclusions.

23. Whereas the Bank's perceived role in El Salvador got a significant lift, preserving it in
the medium-term requires a continuous and enhanced field presence, as well as a systematic
effort in disseminating information about the Bank, mostly in Spanish. Staff also felt that NGOs
understood the need for approaching the Bank under a less dogmatic approach, more as a
potential development partner than as a traditional GOES ally. These organizations also
requested to continue participating on future project consultations and on new mechanisms to
enhance their participation in Bank projects, from executors to social auditors.

El Salvador
Donor Indications of Support at the Madrid CG Meeting, March 7, 2001

Annex G

Donor 

Canada 
France 
Germany 
Israel 
Italy 
Japan 
Norway 
Spain 
Sweden 
Switzerland 

United States 

Other Bilateral 
Bilateral 

EC 

CABEI 

iDB 
i FAD 

IBRD 

Red Cross 

UN 

Multilateral 

TOTAL 

Humanitarian 
Reconstruction
Emergency Repro- 
New 
Aid 
grammed I Resources
2.0 
300.8 
6.5 
13.8 

2.2 
1.9 
5 5 
1 

37 

13.5 
1.2 
27.9 
35 
0.6 

22 

9.9 
92.9 

10 

0.2 

0.1 

30 
1 15.3 
55.6 

148.5 

29.7 
1.2 
6.3 
10 0 
0.3 

69.8 

1.9 

22.0 

170.3 
170 

35. 0 

246.2 

316.0 

Donations 

Loans 

Total

9.6 
8.4 
5.5 
4 
3.7 
21.6 
1.2 
91.1 
9.1 
7.7 

-132 

18.1 
312 

47.1 

0.1 

-

30 
15.3 
92.5 

25.4 

27.5 

8 

3.8 
39.5 

0 
104.2 

127.2 

449.9 
37 

285 

899.1 

35.0
8.4
33.0
4.0
11.7
21.6
5.0
130.6
9.1
7.7

132

18.1
416.2

47.1

127.2

450
37.0

285.0

30.0
15.3
991.6

13.8 
3 
8 
8.1 
3.8 
73 
4.4 
0.8 
100 
7,9 
253.6 

35.2 

105 

279.6 
20 

250 

--- 

0 

689.8 

943.4 

404.5 

1,003.3 

1,407.8

MAP SECTION

IBRD 27213

80 00' 

08930' 

0900' 

88s30 

s8 001

T. San J--n 

j 

fI 

' 

'-. 6-- 

EL SALVADOR

To Puerto Borr 0) 
*XE 

/ 
/ 

\s 

\ 

o 

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

( 

X 

>^MALopLin 

?0 Son Ignoojo 

 

\ 

Lil 

DEPARTMENT CAPITALS

2X, < 3 

) 

9 

s 

6 9 N A T I O N A L C A P IT A L

G U A T E M A L A 

Lo k G>,,=>,'>EX 
a 

rS 

'PAV~~ 

-
-
5-- 
SECONDARY ROADS
'-- '--'--'-rlr: > O RAILROADS

ECONDARY ROADS

)o GuooL olo Cil 

y 

N_gg r T A 

t 

,- 

El C-- 0 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~MAIN 

PORTS

N t 

j}A N 

Tei~Ao 

;d.Snono 

i, 

-""'A- 

T 

RIVERS
DEPARTMENT BOUNDARIES
' INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

j CCondeooropoel, 
o 

< @ ueZAhpOEqUE 
j 

/ 

& 

---

18A00 

' 

'>r

FIC5 
1 

ol ell ~~~~~~~ 

S wh 

* 

s 

ri-A-wi-lcaa 

( 

t4,iS 

-\-+Sesuntpeqe 

* 

I 

I

GJx,co 
... 

;6. 

Trno 

tc 

=T

ICAF 

12 i 63t01AEJERO 
T.-h-9 

co;t-o)

e9A 

/ 

d 

/

F I O IABDIA 
F 

1

rv RFd M'RAZAN

A4' 

k

18
3R'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

0

USITED~ 

~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~S 
~ 

NTES 

-

STATS 

ORA...I

AESIC 

I 

- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
~~~~~> 

(cid:143)I~~~~~~~~~~'\ 

jucooron 

( ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ogooo~UaUTI 

7

COSTA ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~k0oI 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ ~ 

A8~~~~~~~~~8 ~j 

Zt 

UNI 0 N

/ 

P A C I F I C 

0 ~~~~~~~~ 

~~ A N 

'LIP

OCL 

O0AI 

0 

L 

' 

son10oooo 
ndn 
'UNITED5 
ES OF AMFRICA~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

90800JFE 

u 

5 

Al.,.~ ~ ~~~~~~~AGUT 

P

