d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of

The World Bank

Report No. 21957-BEN

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

INTERIM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF BENIN

March 22, 2001

Country Department for Benin
AFC13
Africa Region

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of December 14, 2000)

Currency Unit 

US$1.00 

CFA franc 1 million 

= 

= 

CFA Franc (CFAF)

739.2 CFAF

US$1352.81

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

FISCAL YEAR OF BORROWER
January I - December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
AfDB 
BCEAO 
BOAD 
CBO 
CET 
CFAA 
CFAF 
CPAR 
ECOWAS 
ECVR 
ELAM 
ESAF 
EU 
HIPC 
IBRD 
IDA 
IDB 
IFC 
MAP 
MIGA 
MTEF 
NGO 
NPV 
OHADA 

PAC 
PERAC 
PLWHA 
PRSC 
PRGF 
PRSP 
SAC 
SDD 
SONAPRA 

SSPR 
UJNDP 
WAEMU 

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Banque Centrale des Etats de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (Central Bank of West African States)
Banque Ouest-Africaine de Developpement (Development Bank of West African States)
Community Based Organizations
Common External Tariff
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Franc de la Communaute Financiere de l'Afrique (African Financial Community Franc)
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Economic Community of West African States
Enquete Legere aupres des Menages (Household survey in urban areas)
Enqute sur les Conditions de Vie en Milieu Rural (Household survey in rural areas)
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
European Union
Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Development Association
Islamic Development Bank
International Finance Corporation
Multi-Country HIV/AIDS Program
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium-term Expenditure Framework
Nongovernmental Organization
Net Present Value
Organisation pour l'Harmnonisation du Droit des Affaires en Afrique (Organization for the
Harmonization of Commercial Laws in Africa)
Port Autonome de Cotonou (Port of Cotonou)
Public Expenditure Reform Adjustment Credit
People Living with HIV/AIDS
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Structural Adjustment Credit
Social Dimension of Development Program
Societe Nationale de Promotion Agricole (National Company for Agricultural Promotion,
Cotton marketing parastatal)
Social and Structural Policy Review
United Nations Development Program
West African Economic and Monetary Union

Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Team leader 

Callisto Madavo
Antoinette M. Sayeh
Claude Leroy-Themeze

MEMORANDUM AND RECOMMENDATON OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON AN INTERIM
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BENIN

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................

INTRODUCTION ....................................................

I. 

BACKGROUND AND PROSPECTS ....................................................1
Background .................................................................
Political Developments ................................................................
Economic Developments ...............................................................
Social Developments ...............................................................
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework ................................................................
II. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ...................................................
Poverty ........................................................................
HIV/AIDS ................................................................
Gender Inequities ................................................................
Population Growth ................................................................
Weak Institutions and Weak Administrative Capacity ................. 
Governance ........................................
Competitiveness ..................................... 
Diversification and Vulnerabilities ..................................... 
Regional Integration: Opportunities and Challenges ..................................... 
111. THE GOVERNMENT'S INTERIM POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY ............................. 
Key Elements ......................................
Assessment ......................................
IV. THE WORLD BANK'S INTERIM ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ............................. 

.............................................. 

The Bank's Long-Term Assistance Strategy ..................................... 
Transition ......................................
Triggers for Moving to Consolidated Program Support ..................................... 
V. COLLABORATION WITH PARTNERS ..................................... 
Relations with IMF ................... 
Donor Coordination ................... 
VI. 
INTERIM ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ..................................... 
Analytical and Advisory Activities ..................................... 
Size and Composition of Lending ..................................... 
Portfolio Management ..................................... 
Enhanced HIPC Debt Relief ......................................
IFC and MIGA Activities ..................................... 
Preparing a full CAS ..................................... 
VII. 
RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION ..................................... 
External Environment ..................................... 
Domestic Risks ..................................... 
CONCLUSION ......................................

; 

i

I

2
3
5
6
8

8
8
11
11
11
13
13
14
14

15

15
16

16

17
18
19
20
20
20
22

24
24
25
25
26
26
26
26
27
28

TABLE OF CONTENTS (cont.)

Tables

Table I Economic Trends ................................................ 

Table 2 Social Indicators, Benin & SSA ................................................

Table 3 Medium-Term Macro-Economic Framework ................................................ 

Table 4 Bank Group Portfolio - FY01 ................................................ 

Table 5 Triggers for Consolidated Program Support ................................................ 

2

5

7

16

21

Table 6 Components of the Bank Assistance Program, FY 2001-02 ................................. 

............... 23

Table 7 Key Economic and Sector Work ................................................ 

24

Boxes

Box 1. CAS Consultations in Benin: Key Findings .........

4.......................................4

Box 2. Poverty ................................................
Box 3. The Need to Scale Up the Fight Against HIV/AIDS ................................................ 

Box 4. Anti-corruption ................................................ 
Box 5. The External Partnership ................................................ 

9
10

12
22

ANNEXES

Al Medium-Term Economic Framework

A2 Benin at a Glance
B2 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

B3 

Bank Group Program Summary

B6 Key Economic Indicators

B7 Key Exposure Indicators

B8 Operations Portfolio
B8 
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

MEMORANDUM AND RECOMMENDATON OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON AN INTERIM
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BENIN

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. 
Benin's development strategy has been broadly successful over the past decade, but
nonetheless it faces significant challenges in reducing poverty. Benin's economic performance during
the 1 990s represents a striking turnaround after nearly two decades of stagnation. Growth (an average of
4.5 percent per year) generally exceeded other economies in the region and productivity gains allowed per
capita incomes to rise (by about 1.7 percent on average). Except for the immediate aftermath of the CFA
franc devaluation (1994), consumer price inflation remained under 4 percent per annum. The
Government's structural adjustment program has been successful in establishing fiscal discipline, opening
up the economy, privatizing most public enterprises, and strengthening private sector incentives. Most
significantly, most social indicators improved steadily throughout the 1990s, particularly for education
and health. In addition, Benin's debt sustainability has markedly improved over last decade, as a result of
strong international financial support, as well as strengthened economic management and a strong
recovery in commodity exports, especially cotton. The country has received a high level of concessional
financial assistance for investment projects and its adjustment program, and the debt relief granted under
the Enhanced HIPC Initiative in July 2000 has secured its medium-term debt sustainability.

2. 
Notwithstanding these impressive results, with about 33 percent of the population remaining below
the poverty line,' poverty remains a major issue. To make greater progress in reducing poverty, Benin
must now address the more difficult longer-term challenges of diversifying the economy, building
effective public institutions, and promoting gender equality. Weak public institutions remain the
biggest constraint to development and poverty reduction. This is manifest in widespread dissatisfaction
with the availability and quality of public services, including health and education, a poorly performing
judicial system, and the perception of widespread corruption. Significant irregularities characterized the
most recent major privatization, while key reforms in the cotton sector are being threatened by vested
parties. Important cross-cutting reforms, to build capacity and improve service delivery, such as
decentralization and civil service reform, have proven difficult to implement. Gender inequality remains
pervasive in many dimensions of life in Benin, and gender gaps are widespread in access to and control of
resources, in economic opportunities, as well as in power and political voice.

3. 
Past assistance strategy. The previous CAS for Benin was presented to the Board in 1994.2 At the
time, Benin faced the challenge of deepening structural reforms to maximize the boost in external
competitiveness triggered by the 1994 devaluation of the CFA franc so as to accelerate growth and
poverty reduction. The Bank's assistance strategy supported Benin in meeting this challenge through
both lending as well as analytical and advisory activities. In particular, a third structural adjustment
program supported further improvements in the environment for private sector development and increases
in budgetary allocations for the social sectors.

4. 
IDA's long-term strategy. The Bank's long-term strategy, to be developed in a full CAS in the
second half of FY02, will seek to support the Government in addressing the longer-term challenges that
remain. It will draw on the forthcoming PRSP and the letter of development policy for the proposed

' See Box 2 on the quality of the official data.
2 IDA/R94-81, discussed on June 7, 1994.

-

ii-

Public Expenditure Reform Adjustment Credit. In particular, it will help the Government build the
capacity to manage its own resources effectively and to implement policies that will attract private
investment. While work will continue at the macroeconomic level to help raise economic growth and
maintain macro-financial stability, the emphasis in assistance will shift to the sector level and cross-
cutting public sector management issues. This will entail strengthening analytical and advisory activities
as input into the formulation and monitoring of the Government's poverty reduction strategy and a shift in
the Bank's lending modalities. Specifically, the CAS would envisage moving away from adjustment
operations combined with discrete investment projects, to supporting a comprehensive poverty reduction
strategy through consolidated program support. Traditional self-standing operations would continue only
where the benefits of separate implementation and financial arrangements appear to outweigh the
advantages of a more integrated approach to public financial resource transfers.

5. 
The interim assistance strategy. This interim CAS sets out a transitional phase towards this
vision. It will be followed by a full CAS once the PRSP is in place and medium-term objectives, policies,
and monitoring indicators have been firmed up. The key components of the 12-18 month interim
assistance strategy are support to Benin for: (i) addressing the weaknesses of the interim PRSP so as to
help it complete a strong PRSP; (ii) building the foundations for a progressive shift to consolidated
program support, based on a number of specific criteria; (iii) preparing 3 investment projects (cotton
sector reform program, HIV/AIDS, and power); and (iv) strengthening current portfolio management.

6. 
Risks. There are several risks that could affect Benin's ability to achieve the desired progress on
poverty reduction and which, therefore, constitute risks to the assistance strategy. First, the country
remains vulnerable to exogenous shocks, especially cotton price changes, which could affect rural
incomes and export earnings. The cotton sector reform is designed to increase the sector's flexibility and
its capacity to absorb international price shocks, although its timely implementation is currently being
jeopardized. Second, economic developments in Nigeria represent both a big opportunity and a big risk
for development and poverty reduction. Liberalization of Nigeria's trade policies and other structural
reforms there could reduce Benin's regional competitiveness. Benin's current efforts to become a more
efficient trade platform should help it benefit from the positive developments in Nigeria. The third major
risk is weak institutional capacity compounded by fragmented aid. Increased support for ownership and
responsibility by both government and beneficiaries through intensive analytical and advisory activities
(as proposed in the interim assistance program) should help strengthen national capacity. But there is
clearly a risk that improvements in capacity will be slower than desired. The final risk is that the
presidential election scheduled for March 2001 could distract attention from the content and objectives of
the poverty reduction strategy, and delay the implementation of the reforms described in the interim
PRSP. This is most likely a short-term risk in that virtually the entire political establishment has endorsed
the reform agenda. However, the presidential election could delay finalization of the full PRSP to the end
of 2001.

INTRODUCTION

1. 
The last CAS for Benin was presented to the Board in 1994. At the time, Benin faced the challenge
of deepening structural reforms to maximize the boost in external competitiveness made possible by the
1994 devaluation of the CFA franc so as to accelerate growth and poverty reduction. The Bank's
assistance strategy supported Benin in meeting this challenge through both lending as well as analytical
and advisory activities. Having achieved relative success in stabilization and in implementing first-
generation structural and sectoral reforms, Benin must now address the more difficult longer-term
challenges of reforming and building public institutions to make greater progress in reducing poverty. The
Bank's assistance strategy for Benin is adapting accordingly.

2. 
The Government's current strategy was described in an interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Pape?
discussed by the Board in July 2000 in the context of the HIPC Decision Point4 . As noted in the joint
World Bank-IMF Staff Assessment of the interim PRSP, more work is needed to complete a full poverty
reduction strategy. The Government's strategy is therefore evolving. Notwithstanding the plan to produce
a full PRSP by April 2001, it may likely not be completed before late-2001 (see paragraph 44). Pending
its finalization, the Bank has prepared an interim CAS to be followed by a full CAS in the second half of
FY02 once the full PRSP is in place and medium-term objectives, policies, and monitoring indicators
have been firmed up. The key objectives of the interim assistance strategy are to: (i) support Benin in
addressing the weaknesses of the interim PRSP so as to help it complete a strong PRSP; (ii) spell out the
Bank's vision of a progressive shift to consolidated program support; and (iii) present a focused program
of assistance for the transitional 12-18 month period.

1. BACKGROUND AND PROSPECTS

Background

3. 
Benin is a small low income country, with a population of 6.1 million and a per capita income of
$380 in 1999. The bulk of the population is dependent on agriculture, which accounts for close to 38
percent of GDP, nearly two thirds of employment and four fifths of merchandise exports. Exports are
highly concentrated in cotton, which represents on average 80 percent of total exports. The industrial
sector contributes less than 10 percent of output, consisting largely of cotton ginning and small
enterprises producing basic consumer goods for the local market. The large share of services reflects
Benin's role as a transportation and trading hub, especially for Nigeria, Benin's neighbor to the east, and
the landlocked countries to the north, Burkina Faso and Niger.

4. 
Overall performance since the last CAS in 1994 has been satisfactory. Real per capita income has
steadily increased and most social indicators have improved (see Table 1). The primary fiscal deficit has
been considerably reduced, and the overall balance of payments has recorded significant surpluses.
Notwithstanding these achievements, the economic and financial situation remains vulnerable to external
shocks and poverty a serious problem. The pace of reform has slowed in some areas, and improvement in
social services is uneven.

5. 
Benin's debt sustainability has markedly improved since the mid-1990s. This reflects strong
international financial support, as well as strengthened economic management and a strong recovery in
commodity exports, especially cotton. The country has received a high level of concessional financial
assistance for investment projects and its adjustment program, and was granted debt relief by Paris Club
creditors and other bilateral donors. Benin's improved external position has allowed the Govenment

3 IDA/SecM2000-357.
4 IDA/R2000-129.

-2 -

Table 1. Economic Trends

Population (million) 
Population growth (%) 
GDP (US$, billion) 
Real GNP per capita (Atlas method; US$) 
Real GDP growth (%) 
Real GNP per capita growth(%) 
Inflation (CPI, average, %) 

Fiscal balance (primary balance, % of GDP) 

Overall balance of payments (% of GDP) 
Gross international reserves (months of imports) 
Export growth (volume, %) 
Share of cotton exports (% of exports) 
Debt service to GDP ratio (%) 
Debt service to export ratio(%) 

1985-89 1990-95 1996-99 

1998 

1999

4.3 
3.2 
1.4 
325 
1.5 
-3.0 
3.4 

-13.5 

-3.3 
0.0 
-15.9 
49 
7.1 
46.7 

5.1 
3.0 
2.0 
360 
4.1 
1.1 
14.9 

-1.3 

0.7 
3.7 
1.5 
75 
5.0 
32.7 

5.7 
2.8 
2.2 
370 
5.2 
2.7 
3.7 

-1.7 

2.2 
4.0 
0.6 
83 
2.9 
16.8 

6.0 
2.8 
2.3 
380 
4.5 
2.5 
5.8 

0.0 

-0.1 
6.4 
11.5 
84 
2.6 
16.1 

6.1
2.8
2.4
380
5.0
1.9
0.3

-0.7

7.6
6.5
21.1
82
2.9
17.1

to remain current on external debt-service payments, and has contributed to the net foreign assets of the
Central Bank of West African States. The debt relief granted under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative in July
2000 has secured Benin's medium-term debt sustainability.

Political Developments

6. Since the 1990 National Conference which ended 17 years of centralized Marxist-Leninist policies,
Benin has been a multi-party democracy. In both the 1991 and 1996 presidential elections, the incumbent
lost and power was peacefully transferred to the elected president. The development of an independent
National Assembly, the emergence of a free press, greater scrutiny of political leaders' behavior, and
more vocal civil society groupings, have all reinforced the country's democratic institutions.

7. 
The relative political maturity demonstrated by the 1996 presidential hand-over which returned
Mathieu Kerekou to power, has strengthened economic reforms by providing continuity to a market-
oriented, private-sector led growth strategy. President Kerekou's Administration has since continued the
program of economic reforms, maintained sound macroeconomic policies, and made progress towards a
comprehensive poverty reduction strategy.

8. 
Nonetheless, Benin's political environment remains complex. Opposition parties gained a slight
parliamentary majority in the last legislative elections (March 1999) and relations between the Assembly
and the Government became very contentious. A new coalition Government was formed in June 1999
with the support of nine political parties. The responsibilities of the Ministry of Planning were increased
to include the coordination of the Government, and the Minister of Finance was re-appointed and
assumed the responsibility for economic policy. The administration has continued sound fiscal
management and implementation of the reform agenda. However, with presidential elections scheduled
for March 2001, the economic debate has become increasingly politicized. Most observers agree,
however, that the outcome of the elections is unlikely to change the direction of economic policy (see
paragraph 81).

Economic Developments

-3 -

9. 
The restoration of macroeconomic stability and the reduction of the role of the state have been
essential elements in Benin's growth performance over the past decade. The forthcoming Social and
Structural Policy Review estimates that around half the increase in growth is due to policies that directly
helped raise investment and exports, a third to fiscal reform, and the rest to improvements in health and
human capital. Benin started the decade in severe economic crisis with rapidly increasing external and
internal arrears, including 6 months of civil service salaries. Now it has a strong macro position and
public finances, as illustrated by its high external reserves (6.5 months of imports in 1999) and creditor
position vis-a-vis the regional Central Bank, the BCEAO. Although this is a positive outcome of
successive structural adjustment programs focused on strengthening macro-financial management, it also
reflects difficulties in carrying out a larger volume of development expenditure.

10. Microeconomic reforms, particularly trade liberalization and privatization, have changed the
incentives for private sector-led growth. At the end of the 1980's trade and most formal commercial
activity were dominated by the state, and the banking system, wholly state-owned, had collapsed. At the
end of the 1990s Benin had a sound privately-owned banking sector with efficient supervision by the
regional banking commission.5 The state had withdrawn from virtually all commercial activities, had
initiated the privatization of key energy and telecommunications infrastructure and is implementing a
broad liberalization program in the cotton sector!6 Benin's trade regime was the most open and its tariffs
the lowest in West Africa (largely adopted by other WAEMU members in the common external tariff
effective January 2000).

11. The assessment of Benin's performance in the 1990s nonetheless reveals a basic paradox: the
implementation of the broad development strategy has been broadly successful, both in terms of
economic growth and improved social indicators-yet there is a widely shared perception of unrealized
potential and unmet expectations due in part to the insufficient depth of some of the reforms, especially
those linked to sectoral policies and institutional reforms (see Box 1). Moving beyond stabilization and
adjustment to address the country's remaining development constraints and make major progress in
poverty reduction will require a long-term and holistic vision of development and institutional
transformation. Such a vision will need to be reflected in the PRSP.

5However, 

the financial situation of the banking system weakened over the past 18 months. An audit of two banks
(accounting for 22 percent of total bank assets) conducted by the regional banking commission revealed a sharp
deterioration in their financial health, serious management short comings, as well as violations of banking rules and
exchange regulations in the financing of SONACOP's (the petroleum products distribution parastatal) privatization.
6 Although the Government lifted SONAPRA's (cotton marketing parastatal) monopsony of purchases of seed
cotton and initiated follow-up reforms, recent developments give cause for concern that the reforms could be stalled
or even reversed.

NGOs, lclcmmnt 
In 

e 

enzs 

vilag elder and raiton 
rlers Thebe 
s reaton wt 
e 

S n t 

tiveo hs d iscussions was to00 ti)0
n

; (h 

fa 

na 

e 

= 

to 

s 

a 

io 

tmy

naora,tohepo.I 

detosgiIayreuepv 

gerpiiy 

hudbgietoralaaswi

to mrprvte=eooi 

lnt% 

=~e~a ~niia Gra A prvt.weik 

andmangdbring etis 

assistance 
to Bearal

Social Developments

-5 -

12. Rising per capita incomes have been a key indicator of Benin's success in the 1990's. After falling
steadily in the 1980s, per capita income growth has been positive every year since 1990 and exceeded 2
percent per annum since 1994. In the aggregate, income growth averaged 4 percent in the early 1990s
and accelerated to 5 percent after the devaluation of the CFA franc in 1994. Benin's economic growth in
the 1990's was thus one of the highest in West Africa and exceeded the average for low-income countries
world wide, as well as that of sub-Saharan Africa. Continent-wide, only a few countries (Uganda,
Botswana, and Mozambique) experienced higher growth.

13. Most social indicators improved steadily throughout the 1990s, particularly for education and
health, indicating broad success of the strategy with regard to both access to social services and
improvement of well being (see Table 2). Benin's score on the Human Development Index calculated by
UNDP rose by 12 percent between 1992 and 1998. However, because a substantial part of this
improvement was catching-up for the severe deterioration experienced in the 1980s, the trend should be
interpreted with some caution. Also, in a recent review of social developments, the authorities point to a
relative stagnation since the mid-1990s. And despite the improvement in social indicators, the extent of
poverty is sobering (see paragraph 22).

Table 2. Social Indicators, Benin & SSA

1990 

1999 1/

Benin 

SSA Benin 

SSA

GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$) 

Urban population (% of total population) 

Gross primary school enrollment (% of school-age 

population)

Male 
Female 

Literacy (% ofpopulation age 15+) 

Male 
Female 

Infant mortality (per 1,000 live birth) 

Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
HIV prevalence (% ofpopulation) 
Access to safe water (% ofpopulation) 

Urban 
Rural 

1/ 1999 or the latest available statistic.

360 
34 
58 

78 
39 
26 
38 
15 
104 
52 
35 

.. 

50 
79 
35 

540 
28 
76 

83 
68 
50 
60 
41 
100 
50 
38 

.. 

.. 

.. 

380 
42 
78 

98 
57 
39 
48 
21 
87 
53 
29 
4.0 
56 

71 
46 

500
34
78

85
71
61
66
50
92
51
32
8.0
43

74
32

14. Primary school enrollment also rose by more than a quarter in the 1990s, and, as a result, 4 out 5
school age children now attend primary school. The increase was large enough to compensate for the
deterioration of the previous decade. Thus, Benin's primary school enrollment rate moved from
considerably below to average for sub-Saharan Africa. With reference to the international development
goals, the gains for boys since 1990 are such that a continuation of the rate of enrollment growth would
lead to attaining universal primary enrollment well ahead of the 2015 target. But the gap between girls
and boys is such that at the current pace, universal primary enrollment for girls would not be attained
before 2014.

7Rapport 

Social 1997-98, Ministry of Planning, Republique du Benin, 2000.

- 6 -

15. 
Infant mortality fell by almost a quarter over the last ten years, again the largest improvement of
any country in West Africa. This moved Benin from about 5 percent worse than the sub-Saharan Africa
average in the late 1980s to about 5 percent better at the end of the 1990s. With these achievements,
Benin has laid a strong foundation for sustainable improvements in the living standards and well-being of
its population.

Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework

16. Current macroeconomic projections were prepared in the context of the HIPC decision point and
cover the interim PRSP period (2000-03). The Government's macroeconomic framework and the
structural reform agenda are consistent with achieving high private sector-led growth and reducing
poverty, and mostly reflect a continuation of current trends (see Table 3).

17. The economy is expected to increase slightly its growth performance from 5.2 percent on average
over the 1996-99 period to 5.4 percent in 2000-03. Growth of the primary sector is expected to slow from
6.0 percent on average in 1996-99 to 4.8 percent in 2000-03, mainly as a result of a drop in cotton
production in 2001. This would be compensated by an acceleration of growth in the secondary and
tertiary sectors, in particular trade and services.

18. To sustain this growth rate, the investment-to-GDP ratio is expected to increase from 17.6 percent
in 1999 to more than 20.4 percent in 2003, as government finances are strengthened and domestic
investment opportunities improve, with the private sector and the public sector contributing equally to the
increase. Public investment in the infrastructure and social sectors will increase, with private investment
rising as sectors become privatized, such as energy, telecommunications, and transportation. Higher
investment will also depend on implementing policies leading to higher domestic savings, which are
expected to rise from 6.4 percent of GDP in 1999 to 9.6 percent in 2003.

19. The external current account deficit would widen by 1.3 percent of GDP to just over 7 percent in
2000 before narrowing slightly to 6.5 percent by 2003. Benin is expected to continue to receive
substantial concessional financing. The objective is to achieve a small surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP by
2001-03 in the overall balance of payments. As a result gross international reserves would slowly
decrease from 6.5 months of imports in 1999 to 4.9 in 2003.

20. The Government will keep the overall fiscal deficit including grants below I percent of GDP, while
increasing budgetary allocations for health, education, and public investment in the context of a
comprehensive poverty strategy. Excluding interest payments and grants, the primary deficit will be kept
below 3 percent of GDP up to 2003 and the overall deficit below 4 percent over the same time horizon.
More details are provided in Annex 1.

- 7 -

Table 3. Medium-Term Macro-Economic Framework

1990-95 

1996-99 

2000-03

Projections

Growth, Investment, and Savings

Real GDP growth (%) 
Real GNP per capita growth (lo) 
Real GNP per capita (Atlas method, USS) 

Gross investment (% of GDP) 

Domestic savings (% of GDP) 
National savings (% of GDP) 

Cotton Sector

Production (thousand tons) 
Export price (CFA/lb) 
Exports (US$ million) 

Oil

Import price (S/BBL) 
Import to GDP ratio (°/) 
Oil dependency (real terms, 1990=100) 

Public Finance
Government revenue (% of GDP) 
Government expenditure (% of GDP) 
Primary balance (% of GDP) 
Overall balance (% of GDP) 

Balance of Payments
Exports growth (lo) 
Imports growth (%) 
Terms of trade (%) 
Resource gap (% of GDP) 
Exports (GNFS; % of GDP) 
Current account deficit (% of GDP) 
Gross International reserves (months of imports) 

External debt
Debt service to GDP ratio (°/) 

Debt service to export ratio (%) 

4.1 
1.0 
360 

15.5 

7.0 
11.6 

189 
280 
116 

15.7 
1.9 
119 

12.1 
19.9 
-1.3 
-7.9 

1.5 
6.6 
0.6 

-8.8 
15.6 
-4.9 
3.7 

5.2 
2.5 
370 

17.6 

7.5 
11.5 

349 
313 
192 

16.2 
2.5 
181 

15.3 
18.1 
-1.7 
-3.1 

0.6 
4.5 
-7.1 

-8.9 
17.4 
-5.8 
4.0 

5.0 

32.7 

2.9 

16.8 

5.4
2.9
400

19.9

8.4
13.5

346
425
215

26.6
3.1
226

16.2
19.5
-2.5
-3.7

-1.3
5.5
4.3

-9.1
15.7
-6.8
5.4

2.0

11.3

- 8 -

II. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

21. Having achieved relative success in stabilization and in implementing most first-generation
structural and sectoral reforms, Benin must now address more difficult longer-term challenges if it is to
make greater progress in reducing poverty. The most pressing of these are described below. More work is
needed to assess related development constraints and propose sound remedial policies. This work is
expected to be carried out in preparation of the PRSP and will, on that basis, be reflected in the full CAS.

Poverty

22. According to official data, poverty affected about one-third of the population in the mid-1990s.
The poor in Benin are concentrated in rural (80 percent of the poor) and sub-urban areas. Poverty also
affects more women than men. In rural areas, the poor are mostly subsistence farmers with limited
revenue opportunities, either as a result of inadequate means of production (laborers, small-scale farmers),
low-productivity soil (high pressure on land, environmental degradation), natural conditions (fertile soil
but inaccessible during rainy season), inadequate rural infrastructure, and labor shortages (due to high
dependency rates). In the south, lagoon fishermen are among the poorest owing to decreasing fish stock,
in turn mostly due to over-fishing. In the sub-urban zones, the poor are the under- or unemployed, who
cannot rely on traditional safety-nets. The main sources of vulnerability (affecting 23 percent of the
population in mid-I 990s according to official data) are the lack of employment or income opportunities,
compounded by poor rural infrastructure, inadequate water supply and sanitation, insufficient access to
health services and education, as well as high dependency rates. When poverty is defined as the inability
to satisfy basic needs, the situation was worse in 1995, with the incidence of human poverty being
significantly higher than monetary poverty (47 % versus 33 %). More details are provided in Box 2.

23. Poverty monitoring. Neither the Government nor the donor community have devoted sufficient
attention and resources to monitoring poverty outcomes. As a result, despite a number of surveys (see
Box 2), no consistent data series is available to indicate whether the number of poor or depth of poverty,
as defined by income or consumption, has actually increased or decreased (see paragraph 66 on plans to
improve poverty monitoring and analysis).

HI VIAIDS

24. With an official prevalence rate of around 4 percent, Benin could be on the verge of an exponential
increase which would have disastrous consequences for its development and poverty reduction objectives.
To prevent a generalized epidemic (i.e. prevalence rate of 7 % or greater), the Government needs to step
up the fight against HIV/AIDS, in particular in the following areas: (i) raise national authorities'
awareness with the view to increasing domestic budget resources allocated to HIV/AIDS related
interventions; (ii) develop a multi-sectoral approach and a comprehensive strategic framework; (iii)
organize and finance assistance and support to civil society organizations to reduce stigma, fear and
denial among the population, improve access to prevention and care, and to limit the social impact of the
epidemic; and (iv) support health services to improve prevention and treatment (see Box 3).

B But see concems about the quality of official data in Box 2.

- 9 -

BOX 2. POVERTY

teerf moaw ung.
Benin has conducted a series of official houschold surveys since the mid-1980s. The budget consumption survey of 1986-87 was
followed in the mid-1990s bv a series of rurat household surveys (ECVR). conducted by the Ministry of Rural Development and
supported by UNDP (1994-95), and urban household surveys (ELAM), undertaken by the National Statistical Institute (1995-96). While
these studies provide key information on povety in Benin, more research is neede to produce a reliable and robust picture of the
incidence and dynamics of poverty. In particular. the methodology used in these surveys raises concems with regard to the treatment of
the nonfood expenditure share in the calculation of the poverty line, the division of Benin into 12 agro-ecological zones. and the
comparability of poverty statistics across urban and rural areas and across time. Although the National Statistical Institute has conducted
a senshivity anlysis showing that the estimates of poverty incidence vary significantly with the methodology used in surveys. the
Govenment bas not revised its methodology for the most recent household surveys conducted in 1999 and 2000.

Pa) 

dynanmk

As no consistent data series is available to indicate whether the number of poor or depth of poverty, as defined by income or
consumption, has actually increased or decreased, the following assessment is bad on social and economic indicators.
Cangges in poveny boween nid-Us to mn&90s. On the basis of 1986-7 daa. it was estimated that 28 percent of the population fell
below the poverty line. The average expenditure shortfall of the poor relative to the poverty line was 29 percent. While these figures
suggest that poverty increased between 1986-87 and the mid-1990s& they do not adequately reflect the genral trend in living standards
over this period for two reasons. Both data points were affected by special econoniic circumstances: agricultural revenue was unusually
high in 1986-87, whereas inflation in the aftenmath of the CFA franc devaluation of 1994 had a detrimental impact on the revenue of the
poor in 1994. In addition, the study conducted in the mid-1990s used a higher threshold to define the poverty line. Indeed, sustained
economic growth and the imnprovements of the main social indicators (life expeccacy. aduk litacy rate, primary school enrollment,
water access, and health services access) point to a reduction of the incidence of poverty since the late 1980s - at least as far as human
povery is concered.
Change i povew si,we ,nid-9f Social and economic indicators point to a reduction in poverty since 1994, however, prelimainary
results of 1999-2000 surveys indicate that poverty incidece would have increased from 33 pecnt 
in rural areas to 38 since 1994-95 and
from 33 percent to 37 pent 
in urban areas since 1995-96. Given methodology shortcomings. these results should be considered with
caution. Annual real GDP growth, which rose to 4 percent in the early 1990s, received a boost to above 5 pcnt 
after the CFA franc
realignment in 1994, leading to higher per capita income. Education and health indicators also improved over this period. Between 1994
and 1999, the gross primary enrollient ratio rose frm 64 percent to 78 percnt due to the impact of ecornoic growth, urbanization. and
the priority given by the governmnt to basic education. Intint mortality declined from 94 to 87 deaths per thousand live births,
reflecting increased access to clean water, immunization coverage, utilization of public helth fiilities for matemal care, and, more
generally, government policies that favor primary health care, and child and matrnal health care, and improve the availability of low-
cost drugs.

Vhni*

The main sources of vulnwrabiiity are the lack of employrent or revenue opportunities, compounded by poor rural infrastructure.
inadequate water supply and sanitation, insufficient access to health services and educatior, and high dependency rates. In Februawy
1999, a workshop organized by the government with representatives of the civil society identified as the four most vulnerable groups
abanoned elderly people, children who are victims of child trafficking (including domestic servants and children smuggled abroad),
HIV/AIDS victims and their families- and women with low revenues (e.g.. women heads of household, women living in poor rural areas,
and illiterate women).
8wA-=Wpoftd pogronm andpaevty
* Debt reIef. Under the Enhanced HIPC initiative, the Bank has linked debt relief after the competiow point in Benin to anti poverty
measures. These include among others, the implementation of a poverty monitoring and evaluating systen, the adoption of medium-
term expenditure programs and perfirinnce indicators, the adoption of an anti-coruption strategy, the adoption of a privatization
strategy for paistat cotton company SONAPRA. the elimination of school fees in rural areas, and the meetng of quantitative targets
for immunization coverage.
* Commrnunty-based 
sociae services. Increasing ownership through greater community involvement in their development is thought to
be best at building social capital and achieving poverty reduction objectives. The Govemment and donors are actively involved in
this regard. The Bank is currently financing five projects or components of projects that provide assistance directly to communities
(Rural Water. Food Security. Borgou Pilot, Social Fund and Decentralized City management) amounting to USS94.1 million or
about 50 percent of the total portfolio. These projets undertaken on a pilot-scale basis were seen as a way to test different
approaches to direct assisace to communities.
* Government expenditure and budget reform. The wide-spread poverty incidence is related to the lack of pro-poor public spending.
The proposed PERAC would support Benin's far-reaching budget reforms to enhance the poverty impact of government
expenditures. 1he ministries will reorient their spending on the basis of sectoral strategies focussed on reducing povertv.
Performance-based budgeting would link budgetary spending to quantified poverty reduction objectives.
* Cotton Sector Reforms are designed to increase competition within the cotton setor with the view to raise its competitiveness and the
producers'share of sector revenue therby reducing poverty in cotton growing rural areas.

~~~~ 

* 

f~~~~t

a~

Iij~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

w 

uK~~~~io 

hhlII 

:11~~~~

I~~~~~~~~ 

Gender Inequities

25. Despite a vibrant debate in urban civil society, only limited progress has been made on gender
issues. For example, although girls' primary school enrollment has grown almost twice as fast as that of
boys, there remains a 41 percentage point gap between them (see Table 2). At current trends it would
take more than a decade to erase this gap. From a gender perspective, health indicators present a mixed
picture. Contraceptive prevalence is significantly lower in Benin than elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa,
resulting in higher birth rates and fertility rates. There remains unmet demand for family planning
services, particularly in rural areas. And prevalence rates of HIV/AIDS are significantly higher among
women than among men, especially for young women. Although a family law -- which among other
things would clarify women's rights regarding property and family issues -- has been prepared, it has
languished in Parliament for years. Men continue to represent the overwhelming majority of extension
workers and teachers, despite the stated intention of focusing more on assistance to women and girls.

Population Growth

26. 
If Benin's population continues to grow at the current rate of 2.8 percent per annum, it will double
in less than 25 years. The high rate of demographic increase will limit the potential for improving the
welfare of the population, put pressure on the growth and availability of productive resources, and
threaten the conservation of the environment, especially in the coastal zone. The challenge is to expand
the coverage of ad hoc programs amidst strong opposition that has been voiced recently by some religious
and conservative groups. The Government has recognized the importance of addressing the issue of
population and reproductive health, and adopted a National Population Policy in 1996. However, the
implementation of the population policy has been much slower than desirable because of lack of a sound
implementation strategy. In addition, new strategies and broader approaches are needed to maximize the
synergies between reproductive health services on one hand and other sectors such as education and rural
development on the other, as well as with the fight against HIV/AIDS.

Weak Institutions and Weak Administrative Capacity

27. The extensive consultations undertaken over the last three years indicate clearly that weak public
institutions remain the biggest constraint on development and poverty reduction in Benin and that
relatively little progress has been made in this regard. This is manifest in widespread dissatisfaction with
the availability and quality of public services, including health and education, a poorly performing
judicial system, and the perception of widespread corruption (see Box 4). It is also reflected in low
absorptive capacity and weak implementation capacity. The Government, the Bank and much of the
larger development community recognize that traditional aid approaches have failed to make
adequate progress, despite underutilized national technical capacity and the advantages of a very
open society and a dynamic civil society.

28. 
Important cross-cutting reforms to build capacity and improve service delivery have proven
difficult to implement. Over the last five years, devolution has been discussed and recommended by most
consultative forums, repeatedly supported by donors and has prompted studies, laws, decrees and
regulations. However, little of the envisaged reform is yet observable on the ground. Moreover, two sets
of crucial issues appear to be still largely unresolved. First, although devolution has been pursued in order
to give people a greater say in public service provision and ensure that differences between communities
are fully taken into account, the most recent legislative and regulatory texts are tilted toward control by
the state bureaucracy of most aspects of the actions that local elected governments might undertake.
Second, the revenue schemes still under discussion focus essentially on transferring the responsibility for
managing expenditures through transfers rather than fostering local autonomy and accountability by
creating a viable revenue base at the local level.

- 12 -

finanil fraud, public procut, 

oinvoicing, 

abe 

cr 

inthei 

services has b 

i 
te mia 

fretly. 
r 

tax and customs evasion,

19 Since the late 1070s

From the early i990s, with
ively to reot on corruption

Extent and d6oumnwodo

Corruption in Benin relating t 

scholtic frud ap 

ic 

corruptioninte police 
the s 
the re-eme ree 
of copetiti 

involving politic leade andpar 
h 
ic 
and agiutu6re ( 
l c 
). 
Severaademicsfand 
e 
ices 
or N(O leas 
have wriitt or spken in pubicabtcorpt 
b widelydfd.n 
veh 
lastd 
e 
t 
e ben 

ad vai 

g 

that documentte exein 

inivi 

with:crut pt.T 

su p 

e 
p 
such0as heath, edca 
ic ofcl 
s tein 
tor of Judicial
ie 
althogthir mees 
have not
ssionseof 
enquiry 
it uptn practices

0on

rne 

i 

we 

and I

0corruption 

No!t W~

in l3nin Thus there is n stist-ica ovriwtaold 
Nor hs teeyt 
benpbihd 
oilo 
anhrploile 

touches onthieg mmorality of corrupt practice and the need 

eabe 
neto decib 
nqiiiry int crrpton 
uh 

governance. stal:lish

ed authriatvely.00 

f hepulic discors

facilitateor pasticipatein crp 

aties 

1996, however, th 

rd

Mo,'alsatiSondeto 
ie ulaique, ;ia small anti-corptiong bura 
el emensS of corrup00tio.I 98the Prsdn 
reided overj th 

it a mnate 
to addressseveralimportant
irn 
tional de lutt Xcnte Ia corup 
,a;

Tbe Approvee 

ap 

teigwt 

r 

io s n 

o 

be Cwidrin 

or asertive ao

re Cous o 

oniidbyA 

AThesurent i

coletion, financial admin ¢1 i ; 
ic rc m n and 
cii ERvAntC n ersnaivso 
lea 
framXiie work 
the privt 
iioit, 
reeu 
etradaami 
atcptdi 
pb 
h 
B' 
is
corruptipon survey th 
wouldbreeatd 
iat 
romtie totitme toportrnay red 
i crupXkTVt 
practice. 
fX 

nistain, 

and 
th u iciry 

i S 

;th

dThecretiterton of the statg 
and atio psn waspreae 
in closecoensultto with; theBank.0 It remainsto.
be approved by8 Government fleshed o 
nd integated with on-ginad 
ftur 
rgams and p0Brojects Ban
aciiisad 
rjcsta 
relte 
losl y o nt-crrptoninclude 
aongoin goennc 
n corp 
ionurey,0'h 
the
0 PERAC, 
thpraation; of Lega and udcal Refor an folowuptothe CP 
andthe tCFA. Followu toth
Ban-suporedGovenaceandCrrpionS 
urvey, 
inkedtothraalyicalworkad 
atiite, 
il rovide a
tparticulary opportuneoaio 
for all pariesto collbrte andfoustheir 
anti-orption intrventions. Someof 
fleins proposedant-corutio nf initerntion9s tha relate to poiiclpocse 
andthe stegteing 
: Assebl, would bes be suprted by ther dfonors withtheir partiular omarative advantae. 
BOAR00 m post0;0000000'00000:00;000000 0 
00l00 aS0Q000000004-00000000iyV 
000:0:000 000 00 00 

of the Nat ioal t

0 00;l

; 

Asem " V_ 
l.::u 
lLL 

X 0 

E f;O 

t0 

f:.aSSf 

iLf 

00 

000i 
LL-LL

- 13 -

29. Civil service reform has long been discussed, but structural changes in this area have been much
less than in most others. Personnel management issues have proven difficult to resolve. In particular,
settling the gridlock over pay and classification inherited from the structural adjustment period,9 is an
absolute priority. A comprehensive strategy for civil service reform was prepared in 1997, including a
shift to a performance-based promotion and remuneration system, but has been stalled due to strong
opposition from the main civil service trade unions (who demand salaries corresponding to current grade
positions). Amendments to the 1998 law on the compensation system were adopted by the Government in
July 2000, but effective implementation is still pending approval of the National Assembly. If well
implemented, the new compensation system would permit more flexibility in wage management and
would resolve conflict resulting from the disconnect between the wage index and grade positions. To be
effective, it should be combined with a broader public sector staff management strategy addressing
pressing issues such as staffing, status, mobility, and performance. In particular, it should incorporate a
tangible and explicit counterpart to the accountability demands the new compensation system makes on
the civil service, including job enrichment, capacity for initiative, and easier mobility during career.

Governance

30. Government has initiated a number of anti-corruption measures over the last five years, but the
actual measures that have been taken to combat corruption have been neither wide-ranging nor assertive
(see Box 4). Furthermore, anti-corruption efforts have been managed autonomously by the different
branches of the Government. There is therefore a need for closer coordination. The various oversight
and auditing institutions lack the means to operate and the authority to ensure that action is taken on their
recommendations or findings, especially if this entails the sanctioning of individuals for wrongful acts.
The Government respects the constitutional provision for an independent judiciary, but the executive
retains important powers in relation to the judiciary'. The latter is inefficient and reported to be
susceptible to corruption at some levels. This reduces the quality of the rule of law and tarnishes the
legitimacy of government itself. Government, aware of these concerns, has established a Committee to
develop a national anti-corruption strategy to be finalized as part of the measures to reach the HPC
completion point. The strategy has the potential to be effective but implementation, especially the
avoidance of impunity and the application of sanctions, including the recovery of misappropriated funds,
will be key. A major area for improvement is the legal and institutional framework for privatization.
Also, divestiture must be used to put pro-competitive policies in place, so as to avoid the creation of
private monopolies." Furthermore, as underscored by the regional banking commission in a recent report,
irregularities with respect to the financing of the purchase of SONACOP raise concerns about the
propriety of the process. There is a need to ensure that the privatization of remaining public enterprises is
conducted with maximum transparency and fairness.

Competitiveness

31. Notwithstanding the achievements of the 1990s, limited competitiveness still hampers private
sector development. The levels of private investment and financial intermediation remain low.
Inadequate infrastructure increases transaction costs, and the supply of skilled workers is insufficient to
meet private sector demand generated by the market-friendly environment. Beyond completing the

9 Actual salaries are about one-fourth less than the amount indicated by the wage scale, because salaries- but not
advancement- were blocked from 1986 to 1991.
'O Benin is currently preparing a comprehensive reform of the judicial system with the assistance of the Bank.
" The Government initially envisaged a strategy to privatize SONAPRA that would: (i) maintain strong influence of
the state over the privatized company as the main shareholder; and (ii) sell 26% percent of its shares to a national
consortium that would include existing private ginners. This would de facto create a conglomerate between existing
private ginning companies and SONAPRA. Instead of improving competition in the sector, this would constitute a

deterioration compared to the present situation. Moreover, if this strategy were implemented, producers would be
much worse off, facing a unified block of ginning companies. The consequences for future growth, as well as for
the contribution of cotton to poverty reduction, would be adverse.

- 14 -

privatization program described in the I-PRSP, the remaining reform agenda includes: (i) further
streamlining business regulations to reduce red tape and transaction costs; (ii) overhauling the judiciary
system to reduce the costs of dispute resolution and contract enforcement; (iii) developing new vocational
and technical training programs with the active participation of the private sector to improve labor force
skills; and (iv) developing new sources of growth in which Benin has a comparative advantage.

Diversification and Vulnerabilities

32. Limited diversification of the economy leaves living standards exposed to the fortunes of a few
activities. Agriculture is dependent on cotton cultivation, which is also a major source of employment,
foreign exchange earnings, government revenue, and banking activity for the economy as a whole. The
challenge for rural development is to accelerate productivity growth in both the cotton and non-cotton
sectors through technology generation and diffusion, liberalization of input supply, effective exploitation
of the demand potential, and promotion of productive off-farm activities in rural areas.

33. Broad-based growth is also important for other sectors. The secondary sector contributes only 14
percent of GDP and its total share in the economy has remained stable over the last decade. It comprises a
limited number of companies, mainly cement factories and cotton ginneries. With only 3 percent of
produced cotton transformed in Benin, the textile industry has the potential to become a more substantial
source of growth. Trade and financial services are provided almost exclusively to Nigeria and the
landlocked countries to the North. In order to develop the industrial sector, Benin must improve the
efficiency of transport and port facilities, the soundness and adaptability of its private financial sector, and
reduce the cost of operating in Benin (wages, power, telecommunications).

Regional Integration: Opportunities and Challenges.

34. Benin is actively pursuing regional integration within the West African Economic and Monetary
Union (WAEMU), as well as within the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
Regional integration at the WAEMU level is well underway in a large number of areas (monetary policy,
banking registration and supervision, exchange rate policy, a regional capital market, convergence criteria
for fiscal policies, Common External Tariff (CET), and harmonization of indirect taxation, budget
classifications, and budget organic laws). Benin's strong economic and financial ties with both WAEMU
and non-WAEMU countries create special opportunities and challenges.

35. The bulk of intra-regional trade is with Nigeria. Benin is a key port of entry for trade with
landlocked Sahelian countries but is also a transit country between Nigeria and the two other major West
African economies - Ghana and C6te d'Ivoire. Benin is well-placed to benefit from renewed growth in
Nigeria. However, as policies improve in Nigeria, the challenge will be for Beninese traders to adjust to a
more open and competitive environment and for the Government to define appropriate commercial
policies compatible with the constraints of the WAEMU's CET.

36. Benin competes with Ghana and Togo as a key port of entry for trade with landlocked Sahelian
countries and the efficiency of its port and transport systems are therefore key. As a transit country
between Nigeria, and Ghana and C6te d'Ivoire, it will be a key player in policies to further integrate these
economies closer. In particular, it will be a member of any electricity power pool, a participant in the
proposed coastal gas pipeline, and a player in any efforts to improve sub-regional road infrastructure.

III. THE GOVERNMENT'S INTERIM POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY

- 15 -

Key Elements

37. The interim PRSP reiterates the Government's commitment to address poverty issues and makes
explicit reference to poverty reduction goals over the next fifteen years. It underscores rightly that
maintaining macroeconomic stability is a necessary condition for achieving high economic growth, and
that high growth itself is a key requirement for poverty reduction. It outlines a sound medium-term
macroeconomic framework and provides a policy matrix of structural reforms and sector policies
consistent with achieving higher growth and poverty reduction.

38. The structural reform agenda, as outlined in the interim PRSP policy matrix, reflects the present
objective of liberalizing the economy and draws on existing sector policies to promote private sector-led
growth. Policies to promote private sector activities will be aimed at fostering the overall competitiveness
of the economy and supporting new sources of growth especially in the agriculture sector. They will
include the fostering of a competitive environment in the cotton sector; the completion of the divestiture
program in the utility and infrastructure sector; further streamlining the business regulatory framework;
and removal of remaining price controls.

39. Cotton must play a key role in the poverty strategy. As outlined in the interim PRSP, the
Government has already taken significant steps to liberalize the cotton sector, with a view to increasing
farmers' income. It has lifted SONAPRA's monopoly on purchase of seed cotton and, together with
cotton ginners and farmers associations, is designing a new mechanism to secure credit repayments to be
put in place for the coming harvest. These two actions were pre-requisites to the privatization of
SONAPRA, for which the Government has appointed financial advisers to devise a strategy to ensure that
the privatization effectively increases competition in the sector.'2 Recent developments confirm that the
Govemment is under pressure to delay them.

40. The Government has adopted a divestiture strategy, including a revised regulatory framework for
the electricity and water sector that will be implemented over the next two years. In the
telecommunication sector a revised law has been drafted and submitted to the Parliament; adoption of the
implementing decrees and the divestiture of the company should be completed by end 2001. With respect
to the port, the Government is currently reviewing alternative management and ownership options, with
the view to implementing them before end 2002.

41. 
In the social sectors, low human capital is a key constraint to economic growth, while limited
access to basic social services is a major aspect of poverty. The interim PRSP outlines the key objectives
and related policies that need to be achieved in the education and health sectors. The focus is on
increasing access, reducing inequalities and improving efficiency. In addition to gradually increasing
budget allocations for these sectors, the Government is focusing on improving sector outcomes.

42. The Government confirms its commitment to improving governance, combating corruption, and
pursuing budget reform, all of which are needed for greater progress in reducing poverty. Recognizing the
key role of public expenditure as an instrument to achieve poverty reduction objectives, the authorities
have initiated a far-reaching budget management reform designed to improve the effectiveness of public
spending. Shifting from an input-based budgeting system to performance-based budgeting with an
explicit relationship between the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) and intermediate and
final objectives for poverty reduction would provide a means to ensure effectiveness of public spending
and a basis for monitoring budget performance and the impact on poverty. To ensure the effectiveness of
the MTEF, the Government is also reforming procurement, accounting, reporting and auditing systems
with the view to make them timely, credible and transparent.

12 See footnote 11.

Assessment

- 16 -

43. As noted in the World Bank-IMF Joint Staff Assessment of the interim PRSP, more work is needed
to complete a full poverty reduction strategy, in particular to strengthen the database; develop coherent
anti-poverty sector strategies; understand the roots of poverty; define priorities; further analyze poverty
implications and costs of various policy options; and build consensus among elected officials and the
public for the strategy. The JSA outlines the work program priorities to develop a high quality
participatory PRSP.

44. Although the PRSP process was formally launched a year ago, the road map is still vague. The
institutional framework has been revised and simplified, but is not yet fully in place. In late November
2000, the Govemment named a coordinator for the PRSP process, but the technical work has not yet been
initiated and the work program is still embryonic. The Govemment's plans are still vague on how the
participatory process will be organized and what the mechanisms for ensuring feedback will be. It is
therefore unlikely that a strong, credible PRSP could be finalized by the end of April 2001 as envisaged in
the interim PRSP. The Govemment, nonetheless, still holds to this timetable.

IV. THE WORLD BANK'S INTERIM ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

191
12

45. Following the devaluation of the CFA franc, a
new country assistance strategy was prepared and Table 4. Bank Group Portfolio - FY01
discussed by the Executive Directors in June 1994.
Its main objectives were to encourage and support 
IDA commitments (US$ m) 
the private sector supply response, and to ensure Number of projects 
adequate provision of basic social and infrastructural 
Sectoral composition (%)
services (see current IDA portfolio in Table 4). A 
Agriculture/Environment 
(
third structural adjustment operation (SAC III) was 
Education 
designed as a key element in the lending program 
Health/Social Funds 
proposed in the CAS. SAC III was expected to 
Transport/Urban 
consolidate the progress made under the first two 
Power/Water 
adjustment credits, and encourage the supply 
Private Sector 
response of the private sector to the increase in
competitiveness generated by the devaluation of the 
Undisbursed (USS m) 
119
CFA franc. After approval in June 1995, program GEF commitments (US$ m) 
6.8
implementation was delayed due to lack of political 
Number of projects 
I
support for the reform measures, and regained 
Undisbursed (US$ m) 
6.2
momentum only in May 1998. The credit was closed 
Undisbursed_(US$_m)_ 
6.2
in January 1999, more than two y ears behind schedule and after two waivers were granted to take into
account changing circumstances.'

13 
23
34

5

16

46. SAC III's accomplishments were decidedly mixed and implementation of ongoing projects in
education, health, and transport in support of the 1994 CAS objectives is far behind schedule. Most tax
and trade reforms were implemented and the regulatory framework improved. While budgetary
procedures were partially reformed and allocations to social sectors increased, actual expenditure
improved only marginally and the quality of the Public Investment Program remained unsatisfactory.
Procurement procedures were still inefficient, slow, and left open too many opportunities for corruption
despite a new procurement code. There was virtually no progress in public administration and civil
service reform.

47. The divestiture program took longer than planned. Over 1994-97, the Govemment took further
steps to liberalize the cotton sector by authorizing input distribution and cotton ginning by private

13 More details are provided in the implementation completion report for SAC III (No. 19483).

- 17 -

companies. This limited liberalization of the cotton sector, carried out within a still highly administrative
environment, led to mixed results. SONAPRA continued to rely on an administrative allocation of seed
cotton among private ginning companies, while cotton producers received a low share of international
prices. Poorly implemented changes in the sector have compromised crop years since 1998-99. In the case
of SONACOP, and despite efforts by the Bank, important issues such as petroleum product pricing
policies were not addressed and the Government was slow to authorize new entrants. As a result,
SONACOP has remained the main distributor and Benin continues to have one of the lowest density of
petroleum stations.

48. The Bank was successful in implementing a basic strategy of helping to restore a viable macro-
financial situation and to lay the foundations for accelerated private sector development and provision of
basic services. But progress in addressing institutional weaknesses has been much less than expected, in
particular in public resource management and market institutions (especially in cotton sector and
distribution of petroleum products). One lesson from this experience is that strengthening institutions
involves a broader constituency than that required for the macro-economic stabilization program managed
mostly by the Ministry of Finance. Over the last three years, the Bank also held a series of consultative
meetings with the Beninese population. The view that priority should be given to the needs of rural
population and women was largely shared. Participants also agreed on the need to give more attention to
institutional reforms to eradicate corruption, overcome the politicization of civil service and strengthen
the capacity of public institutions (see Box 1). The proposed interim assistance therefore focuses on
strengthening budget management, supporting further liberalization of the cotton sector, and supporting
the Government in the preparation of a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy. All of these require
bringing on board a larger group of stakeholders, in and outside government.

49. To strengthen the Government's capacity to carry out its own development and poverty reduction
programs, the interim CAS lays the ground for moving gradually away from traditional adjustment
lending coupled with project lending toward consolidated programmatic lending. This section outlines
key elements of the Bank's assistance strategy to be developed in the full CAS and describes the strategy
for the transition. It also indicates how progress on specific criteria will determine the pace of the
transition to the new strategy.

The Bank's Long-Term Assistance Strategy

50. The Bank's long-term assistance strategy will support the country's overall vision for poverty
reduction to be set out in the full PRSP. This would be best achieved if Bank's assistance, both financial
and intellectual, is embedded in national processes for dialogue and resource management. Our assistance
would therefore seek to underpin and enhance national ownership and programs, consistent with the
philosophy of the PRSP.

51. The Bank's strategy would be articulated around two related pillars:

* increasing analytical and advisory activities as input into the formulation and monitoring of the
Government's poverty reduction strategy; and
* consolidated programmatic lending as the most efficient way to finance that strategy.

52. The first pillar focuses on helping government define, refine, and implement growth and anti-
poverty strategies in key sectors, as well as on cross-cutting issues. Based on the gaps identified in the
interim PRSP, analytical and advisory activities (AAA) would focus on: (i) poverty diagnosis, poverty
monitoring and evaluation, and costing poverty programs; (ii) designing, refining and implementing
growth promoting strategies in key sectors; and (iii) preparing and implementing cross-cutting
institutional reforms (public resource management, devolution, decentralization, civil service, anti-
corruption, and judicial system). This work would support the Government's preparation of its own
sector-wide strategies and related programs. All these areas involve reforms that are at the heart of efforts
to improve public resource management, and would thus have an immediate operational impact.

- 18-

53. The second pillar of the vision consists of consolidated programmatic lending to support growth
and poverty reducing policies, in the context of well designed, multiyear program budgets. Such
financial support would be channeled through Benin's own budget management system and cycle,
consistent with the country's efforts to develop medium-term expenditure frameworks and to unify the
dual budget (recurrent and investment expenditures) developed largely to deal with the plethora of
discrete donor-led projects. This support could eventually take the form of annual singletranche poverty
reduction support credits (PRSCs), providing quick-disbursing financing to support the Government
budget. A consolidated financing instrument that supports government's own programs, relies on
government's own procedures, and which helps government design and carry out its own programs,
would enhance ownership, the hallmark of the PRSP process. A corollary advantage is that it would
necessarilyfacilitate donor coordination, to the extent that other donors join this approach, as the EU, the
AfDB, the Swiss and the Danes are all already prepared to do in Benin. Finally, this shift to consolidated
programmatic lending would free up resources to strengthen the Bank's AAA.

* 

54. The Bank would continue traditional self-standing operations where the benefits of separate
implementation and financial arrangements appear to outweigh the advantages of a more integrated
approach to public financial resource transfers. Separate operations may be justified by special
circumstances, including:
to support government projects that involve a substantial level of international competitive bidding, as
a way of the Bank providing external certification that government procurement will be handled
transparently and fairly;
to offset the specific fiscal costs related to policy reforms or negative transitory fiscal shocks (revenue
or expenditure) which could not be foreseen at the time of the budget formulation; and
to support highly visible, special activities, such as HIV/AIDS, where government has established an
autonomous implementation mechanism.

* 

* 

Such self-standing operations would, however, become the exception.

Transition

55. The transition period covered by this interim CAS will be used to ensure that key preconditions for
successful consolidated program support are met and to develop the strong ownership required to weather
shifts in personnel or political power. These pre-conditions include:
* 
strong and effective leadership at the Ministry of Finance of all budgetary management issues,
including those formally assured by the Ministry of Planning as evidenced by appropriate changes in
procedures and institutional arrangements;
* 
full commitment to the process elsewhere in the government and at senior political levels;
* a broad consensus between government and donors on key policy and management issues; and
* a reasonable degree of macroeconomic and political stability to ensure a relatively high level of
budget predictability.

56. As moving from stand-alone projects to programmatic budget support requires intensive and time-
consuming capacity building, we propose a gradual approach at both government-wide and sectoral
levels. At the government-wide level, a Public Expenditure Reform Adjustment Credit (PERAC, being
presented to the Board in parallel with this interim CAS) is designed to support government's public
expenditure management reforms necessary to improve its management of all public resources. In
particular, the Bank is working with the government to reform procedures and institutions and to build
capacity in the following seven areas:

- 19-

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

institutional issues including clarifying the roles of the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of
Planning; improving civil service management; and developing a clear vision of the roles of the state,
the private sector, non-governmental organizations, and civil society in service delivery;
improving budget preparation to help ensure that the process of formulating and arbitrating budget
requests is as transparent, open and contestable as possible, with the expectation that this will lead to
budgets that are more focused on poverty and development.
setting-up a MTEF including well articulated, rolling 3-year unified program budgets in key

ministries;

improving the budget reporting system to produce the financial information needed for monitoring,
evaluation, and audits;
improving procurement procedures and practice;

* developing monitoring and evaluating capacity, 
in particular the ability to produce information
needed to assess budgetary outcomes and impact, and to track expenditures; and
* building effective internal and external auditing capacity, especially of the supreme audit authority, to
enhance its ability to carry out both financial and performance audits.

The Bank would devote substantial administrative resources to help strengthen government actions in
these areas and to monitor improvement.

57. For sectors already engaged in the budget reform process (health, education, rural development,
roads, and environment) and those which would be gradually integrated, the Bank proposes to use current
IDA projects or initiate focused AAA to help the Government strengthen its sector-wide expenditure
programs as a basis for consolidated program support. The objective is to develop a single policy and
expenditure program for the sector under government leadership, moving eventually to a system in which
government procedures account for all funds and their disbursement. In particular, this would involve:
* building and developing sector knowledge;
firming-up sector strategy, policy framework, priorities, and addressing sector related poverty issues;
* 
* building management capacity in policy analysis, programming, costing, accounting, performance
and impact monitoring, and arrangements to ensure that evaluation results inform policy design;
strengthening implementation capacity including mechanisms to guarantee the quality and timeliness
of program delivery, as well as responsiveness to the end user; and

* 

* making progress toward national procedures and bringing all donor funding within the national
budget process.

Triggers for Moving to Consolidated Program Support

58. The pace of reform and institutional change will depend in part on progress in building capacity.
The transition to the use of government procedures for disbursing all aid would thus be gradual, as
capacity and confidence built and as other donors are able to adhere to this approach. Developing sector-
wide programs as a first step would give the flexibility to integrate sectors gradually as they become
ready. For instance, transport sector strategy and implementation capacity are more advanced than others,
in part because a sector-wide investment program, in place for some years, has helped build the
foundations for budget support. The proposed gradual transition strategy also increases incentives for line
ministries, as it will help justify larger and more predictable budgets in their sector. It should also
facilitate both other donors' enrollment in the consolidated program support approach, as is occurring in
the social sectors. In the health sector, external financing is mainly assured by only two donors- EU and
the Bank- who both support the approach. In education, the Bank is providing on average 17 percent of
external aid and AfDB 25 percent. Given the Bank's administrative budget and the Government's capacity

- 20 -

constraints, focused preparation of these sectors is expected to be gradual and extend beyond the period of
this interim CAS.

59. The decision to move to consolidated program support will essentially be a matter of judgement on
progress in areas listed in paragraphs 56 and 57, as evaluated in the full CAS. Specific triggers would fall
in the following five categories14 (see Table 5):
* Completion of a strong participatory PRSP. This includes satisfactory sectoral strategies and policies
supported by a medium-term expenditure framework with a strong poverty focus in key sectors (food
security and nutrition, water, sanitation, health, education, literacy, and feeder roads);

* Sound macro-financial management supportive of high sustainable economic growth, in particular
non accumulation of arrears and inflation kept below three percent;

* Sound policies for private sector development, in particular key policies for growth, as outlined in the
policy matrix of the I-PRSP. This includes satisfactory progress in implementing the proposed Cotton
Sector Reform Program (see paragraph 69), tangible progress in the privatization program, and
setting-up appropriate regulatory frameworks in privatized sectors;

* Progress in financial management (implementation of procurement code, government accounting and
reporting), budget preparation, monitoring of budget implementation, and strengthening of internal
and external auditing functions, as described in the PERAC;

* Satisfactory budget implementation, in particular improvement of absorptive capacity as measured by
a higher execution rate for development expenditure.
At the same time, for projects remaining in the portfolio, the Bank would expect to see a disbursement
rate of at least 25 percent.

V. 

COLLABORATION WITH PARTNERS

Relations with IMF

60. The IMF has supported Benin's economic reforn program with two Structural Adjustment Facility
arrangements and two three-year Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility arrangements. In July 2000,
the IMF Board approved a three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility arrangement. It supports the
Government's medium-term program aimed at achieving high and sustainable economic growth,
maintaining financial stability, and implementing a broad based poverty reduction strategy. The first
review took place in October 2000, and IMF Board discussion is expected in January 2001. Bank and
IMF staff have collaborated very closely from the beginning of Benin's reform efforts, and will continue
to do so, notably in supporting preparation of the PRSP.

Donor Coordination

61. The Bank works closely with the principal extemal partners in Benin (see Box 5). Donor
coordination in the 1990s was centered on sectoral round tables'5 which helped mobilize increasing
external financing but remained a weak coordinating instrument, according to a 1998 review of the
process. This review underscores the following shortcomings: (i) the lack of an overall development
strategy with a clear perpective on Benin's economic prospects; (ii) the need for a more frank assessment
and dialogue; (iii) the lack of coordination between the sectoral strategies; (iv) little prioritization in
public actions; and (v) the weaknesses and sometimes considerable delays in implementing the
recommended measures. In 2000, the authorities launched a third round of sectoral consultations with a

"4 Specific triggers also include the measures to reach the HIPC floating completion point (see IDA/R2000-129).
5 In the context of the discussions initiated during the 1992 Conference with it developments partners, six sectoral
roundtables have been organized in Benin (Transport (1993), Social Dimension of Development (1994), Private
Sector Development (1994), Health (1995), Rural Development (1995), and Education (1997).

round table on community development and employment. Other prospective areas include administrative
reforn, and local development in relation to devolution and decentralization.

- 21 -

Table 5: Triggers for Consolidated Program Support

Triggers 

Means of monitoring

Poverty focus

* Finalize a strong participatory PRSP 
* PRSP preparation monitoring
* Satisfactory sectoral strategies and policies * PRSP implementation monitoring
supported by medium-term program budgets
with a strong poverty focus in key sectors

Sound macro-financial management

* Non accumulation of arrears 
* Maintaining inflation below 3 percent 

* 
* 

Joint IMF-WB macroeconomic missions
Joint IMF-WB macroeconomic missions

Sound policiesfor private sector development

* Satisfactory progress in implementing cotton * Cotton sector reform project preparation and
sector reform program 
supervision
* Design and implement regulatory frameworks * Private sector development project supervision
in liberalized sectors
Implement privatization program 

* Project supervision

* 

Sound management ofpublic resources

* Substantial progress on Budget preparation * PERAC implementation progress reports
process
* Significant improvement in the planning and * PERAC implementation progress reports
implementation capacity of line ministries
* Progress in government financial management * CPAR, CFAA, PERAC implementation
(implementation of 
procurement code, 
progress reports
government accounting; monitoring of budget
implementation; strengthening of internal and
external auditing functions)
Improvement of absorptive capacity as * Annual Budget implementation review in the
measured by higher execution rate for 
context of PRSP/PERAC
development expenditure.

* 

Improved portfolio management

* 

Increase disbursement rate to at least 25 percent * Annual CPPR

- 22 -

relativelanc nfoed 
get 
Bdavel beent parotneising adBustmentin 
srt. 

>X%A'Wit!.!~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Wt 
=fi

f pubdica. Dnvestment. of te, Bank' Dnenma nJapsane strgthe with the
So or, 
te 
opucaginvst,ent isf 
e amcongs aou 
pte rs. The

62nj iThev wakdnepsesnfdono.Etra coriatidowa mequialnt sshae to 

aot1%ofragmeinted99 

ainldin, db re 

liete it 

principnes: icu aU 

(16on 
particexternly PRSanced invtest vement 
ins00) kDA 
(t4 dono oerdintiny 
) Band (7ould

62.bce (7 b 

ak of 

(n6 ,ssiDen 

dono 
(4 
trk 

andina (4ii) Thetirms 
paorfoios heav tiyragcented aid, ieframctred ( a

advantage is necessary for most development partners. Second, as indicated in paragraph 53, most major
donors support the shift to consolidated program support. This is seen as a major donor coordinating
instrument which would require and build both partnership and govemment ownership. In the interim,
several donors have indicated their willingness to support the Govearment in preparing a PRSP, including
in poverti diagnosis and monitoring, participation of civil society, and policy analysis.

VI. 

INTERIM ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

63. Selectivity in the Bank's interim assistance program has been enhanced both by administrative
budget constraints and donor consensus on assistance priorities. Given other donors' interest and work in
a number of the areas in which it is active, IDA must cultivate strong partnerships with others in its
assistance to the Govenment, and the PRSP process should help us do so. The following assistance
program is centered on supporting the preparation of a high quality PRSP and the shift to consolidated
program support. A summary of Bank assistance program by fiscal year is presented in Table 6.
64. The Bank is planning several analytical activities designed to support the Goveament in preparing
and implementing its PRSP. The full CAS, to be presented in the second half of FY02, will take stock of
progress, and lay out a full, multiyear program of analytical and advisory work and lending. The CAS will
be prepared in a participatory fashion, building on the Government's PRSP.

- 23 -

Table 6: Components of the Bank Assistance Program, FY 2001-02

FY01 

I 
Analytical and Advisory Activities

FY02

Advisory activities 
* Support to PRSP 
* Support to poverty analysis within the PRSP 
* Support on poverty monitoring 
* Sector strategies 
* Public resource management 
* Governance and corruption survey 

Advisory activities
* Support to PRSP
* Support to poverty analysis within the PRSP
* Gender strategy
* Sector strategies
* Sources of growth and competitiveness study
* Public resource management
* Public service delivery assessment
* Incidence analysis of public spending

Formal ESW 
* Social and Structural Policy Review 
* Country Financial Accountability Assessment 

Formal ESW
* Gender analysis note
* Governance and institutional assessment
* Country Procurement Assessment Report

* PERAC 

* Cotton Sector Reform Program 

* HIV/AIDS 

LENDING OPERATIONS

USS(M) 

10 

15 

15

* PRSC 

* Power VII 

PORTFOLIO

Clos. Date 

Clos. Date

EUS(AL)

60

30

* Food Security 
09/00 
* Rural Credit II 
12/00 
* Rural Water Supply 
12/00 
* Environment Management 12/00 
* Education Development 
02/01 
* Population and Health 
06/01 
* Transport Sector 
12/01 
* Borgou Pilot 
12/01 
* I" Decentral. City Mgmt 
06/03 
* Social Fund 
12/03 
* Distance Learning 
04/04
* Labor Force Development 06/04
* Private Sector 
12/04

t.b.d.: to be determined

* Transport Sector 
12/01
* Borgou Pilot 
12/01
* It Decentral. City Mgmt 
06/03
* Social Fund 
12/03
* Distance Learning 
04/04
* Labor Force Development 06/04
* Private Sector Development 12/04
* PERAC 
12/01
* Cotton Sect. Ref. Program 
t.b.d.
* HIV/AIDS 
t.b.d.

Analytical and Advisory Activities

- 24 -

65. Given the clear complementarities between the work needed to prepare the PRSP and the work
planned under the PERAC, and taking into account the relevant activities of the other donors, the Bank
proposes to focus its support for the preparation of the PRSP in public expenditure management areas, as
described in Table 6. AAA can be organized within four main areas: (a) analytical work on poverty issues
to support PRSP preparation; (b) the design and execution of government programs to promote growth
and to reduce poverty; (c) due diligence work on the management of public resources to build the
foundations for consolidated program support from external partners; and (d) the preparation of a broad
strategy to promote gender equality. As noted above, the Bank would seek to contribute to on-going
national efforts rather than replace them. The proposed AAA program, therefore, separates advisory
activities from formal economic and sector work to be delivered by the Bank. The country team will also
ensure that key ("due diligence") economic and sector work is brought up-to-date (see Table 7).

Table 7: Key Economic and Sector Work

Product 

Last completed 

Planned

Poverty note 
CEM/SSPR 
PER 
CFAA 
CPAR 

(FY) 

(FY)

1994 
1995 
1996-97 
... 
1999 

2002
2001
ongoing
2001
2002

66. The Bank's support for poverty analysis will be provided in the framework of the PRSP
preparation. It will include: (i) advisory activities in poverty analysis, and specifically the links between
poverty analysis findings and the design of the poverty reduction strategy and programs; (ii) the
production of a poverty note as an input for the PRSP, focusing on poverty dynamics and diagnosis as
well as specific analysis of rural poverty and gender; and (iii) incidence analysis of public spending in the
PERAC framework. The Bank will also support the definition and the establishment of a poverty
monitoring system in collaboration with the donors already involved.

Size and Composition of Lending

67. Consistent with the IMF's PRGF program, the Bank's lending scenario assumes that: (i) a sound
macro-economic framework will be maintained; (ii) the reform and institutional strengthening program
described in the interim PRSP will be sustained; and (iii) high levels of external support will continue.
IDA's FYO1-02 lending program would amount to US$ 130 million.

68. The PERAC is being presented to the Board along with this interim CAS. As noted above, the
measures the Government plans to put in place are critical underpinnings for the progressive shift toward
increased resource transfers via annual poverty reduction support credits. In that context, special attention
is given to strengthening financial management, including fiduciary safeguards. The supervision of
PERAC will necessarily be intensive in that it will seek to reinforce and monitor actions all along the
chain of expenditure planning and management, including an early start to the preparation of 2002
budget.

69. The Bank also plan to prepare and present three other operations in FY01 -02: (i) an HIV/AIDS
project (as part of the multi-country Aids Program) which will help refine and consolidate the various

- 25 -

AIDS initiatives that key ministries have included in the their 2001 program budgets (see Box 3); (ii) a
project to help strengthen producer institutions as part of the liberalization of cotton marketing
arrangements; and (iii) an electricity projec '6 (Power VII). While the first two programs could ultimately
have been incorporated into the Government's program budgets, separate arrangements would facilitate
their implementation since they are tightly focused on critical issues (see paragraph 54). The electricity
project involves a substantial level of international competitive bidding, and as argued above, therefore
needs a specific arrangement. Finally, preparation is underway for lending in judiciary reform, agriculture
services, and forestry management. These operations could be folded in the PRSC envisaged for FY02,
depending on progress made in preparation. The proposed PRSC would be preceded or accompanied by
the full CAS: it would require satisfactory progress on all of the triggers in Table 5, as well as fulfillment
of HIPC completion point measures. Proceeding with the Power VII operation would require satisfactory
progress on policies for private sector development, including the privatization program.

Portfolio Management

70. The FYOI portfolio consists of 13 projects (of which one is a GEF), with a net commitment of
US$191 million and an undisbursed balance of US$119 million (see Annex B8). Quality and
implementation performance of the portfolio has improved as evidenced by the increased disbursement
ratio (from 13% in FY98, to 21% in FY99, and to 24% in FY00). Country Portfolio Performance
Reviews are held every year and close monitoring of disbursement and procurement procedures are
enforced to further improve project implementation. Realism and pro-activity indices are fully
satisfactory at 100% in FY00. Out of the FYOI portfolio, four projects have closed or will close within 6
months. For the remaining 9 projects, the objective is to maintain a satisfactory status for all, and to
ensure that aggregate disbursements exceed 25 percent a year. In terms of formal output, the Bank
expects to produce 5 implementation completion reports in FYOI, and 3 in FY02.

Enhanced HIPC Debt Relief

71. 
In July 2000, the Board agreed that Benin had reached the Decision Point under the Enhanced
HIPC initiative. Total HIPC assistance was estimated at US$265 million in NPV terms, of whichIDA's
share would amount to US$84.4 million. Total debt relief expected under the enhanced HIPC initiative is
estimated to US$ 20 million per year in nominal terms. Following approval of Benin's decision point by
other donors, interim assistance will be provided as reduction or cancellation of debt service. IDA began
to provide interim assistance to Benin as a 50 percent reduction of debt service to IDA, and will continue
providing debt-service relief in the same manner after Benin reaches its completion point under the
initiative. Between 2000-14, the reduction of Benin's debt service to IDA would average about US$ 8.3
million per year. Resources made available under the I-PC Initiative will finance programs included in
the medium-term expenditure framework under preparation for social sectors, and specifically identified
in annual budgets.

72. The completion point is subject to Benin satisfying the agreed conditions and receiving adequate
assurances from Benin's other creditors of their participation in the proposed debt relief. The Government
estimates that it will be able to fulfill the completion conditions by mid-2001, but given the delays in
preparing a full PRSP, this now appears unlikely.

16 This project comprises: (i) the interconnection between NEPA (Nigeria) and CEB (Benin and Togo); (ii) the
interconnection of North Togo - North Benin to supply electricity to the cotton producing areas in the northern part
of the country and to villages and rural communities; (iii) a rehabilitation and extension of the distribution network
in Cotonou and other towns; and (iv) a capacity building component to improve regulation and environmental
monitoring.

IFC and MIGA Activities

- 26 -

73. 
IFC's portfolio is concentrated in the financial sector with three projects for US$500,000 in leasing,
insurance and banking. Two projects are pending commitment: a micro-finance institution, FINADEV,
and an insurance group, SOBAC. IFC priorities in Benin are to pursue investment in the banking sector
and in small and medium enterprises. IFC is also examining possible support to the West Africa Gas
Pipeline, in which Benin will participate.

74. MIGA has registered low investor interest in Benin and has no exposure in the country. In the past
year, however, a few investors have approached MIGA with a preliminary intent to obtain political risk
insurance coverage for projects in the telecommunications and real estate sectors, and MIGA will follow
up on these leads.

75. The full CAS will propose a joint strategy for the entire Bank Group that better exploits the
complementarities of IDA, IFC, and MIGA in supporting poverty-reducing private sector development.

Preparing afull CAS

76. 
In formulating the full CAS, the Bank will draw more systematically from the lessons learned in
implementing the 1994 CAS:
* The Bank (and wider donor community) needs to be more strategic and selective. Efforts to date
remain spread over a large number of sectors and issues, tying-up scarce government capacity, and
resulting in only modest tangible results. The proliferation of donor-supported projects (the public
investment program is donor-driven and unwieldy, with as many as 400 projects still listed), which
compete for scarce management capacity, is not the best use of external resources and tends to
undermine local initiatives.
* Within areas of its focus, the Bank's objectives need to be more modest, supporting reforms which
are owned by a broad constituency and within the Government's capacity to implement.
* The Bank must do more to ensure broad ownership of reforms before proceeding. This involves a
better understanding of how to assess ownership, as well as of the political and social factors that
influence it.
* Strong Bank support for further capacity building is critical and is best promoted on the basis of
strong government ownership.

VII. RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION

77. The five significant risks that could slow progress on poverty reduction in Benin are described in
paragraphs 78-82.

External Environment

78. The first risk is the economy's vulnerability to a further drop in cotton prices and/or in cotton
production. With exports of cotton and cotton products accounting for more than 80 percent of total
exports, significant drop in international cotton prices or disruption of the cotton sector would affect
growth and living standards. Benin's strong creditor position with the banking system and its sound public
finances provide some margin to absorb the fiscal consequences of a continued negative trend in the
external terms of trade. An addition, cotton sector reforms underway are designed to increase the sector's
flexibility and its capacity to absorb international price shocks. But recent developments indicate that
strong vested interests may yet delay or jeopardize them. Thus, although the Government has formally
lifted SONAPRA's monopsony on primary purchases of seed cotton reforms and initiated follow-up,
developments over the last few weeks give cause for concern that reforms might be stalled or even

- 27 -

reversed. Exceptional quick-disbursing assistance from donors may be required if negative shocks are
acute.

79. Second, economic developments in Nigeria represent both a big opportunity and a big risk for
development and poverty reduction in Benin. Thus far, Benin has benefited from policy distortions in
Nigeria, but recent stabilization there, accompanied by liberalization of its trade policies and other
fundamental structural reforms could reduce Benin's regional competitiveness. Successful structural
adjustment in Nigeria is expected to generate broad-based economic growth that could provide decisive
growth impulses for the region as a whole. Benin, with its long-standing trade ties to Nigeria, is well-
placed to benefit from an acceleration of growth there. To benefit from positive developments in Nigeria,
Benin should aim to become a more efficient trade platform by ensuring that its customs system operates
fairly and efficiently; by leading the WAEMU to adopt even more liberal and open trading policies; and
by ensuring that its infrastructure services are delivered at least cost (especially port and transport
operations).

Domestic Risks

80. The third major risk is that of weak institutional capacity, which could undermine planning and
implementation of government and donor programs. Past disbursement problems, difficulties in
organizing the PRSP process, and delays in preparing the PERAC reflect this weakness. Increased
support for ownership and responsibility by both government and beneficiaries through intensive
analytical and advisory activities (as proposed in this interim assistance program) should provide greater
incentives for strengthening national capacity. In addition, the assistance program includes an evaluation
of institutional capacity and governance issues to identify and prepare needed reforms. Nonetheless, there
is clearly a risk that improvements in capacity will be slower than desired.

81. Fourth, the presidential election scheduled for March 2001 could distract the authorities and other
participants from the content and the objectives of the poverty reduction strategy, and delay the
implementation of crucial reforms described in the interim PRSP. This is most likely a short-term risk in
that virtually the entire political establishment has endorsed the broad economic reform agenda. Clearly
however, the presidential election will delay the preparation of the PRSP (see paragraph 44).

82. Finally, Benin's inoperative PRSP institutional framework and the vaguely defined consultative
mechanisms may lengthen the decision-making process and delay the preparation of a coherent and
realistic strategy. And given the country's administrative and technical capacity constraints, timely
implementation of the PRSP work program is a significant challenge.

- 28 -

CONCLUSION

83. Benin remains a very poor country. To achieve its poverty reduction objectives in the medium- to
long-term, the Government must remain committed to implementing a sound, well-prioritized reform
program to tackle second-generation structural and institutional constraints. In the short-term, it is crucial
that the Government clarify its work-program for preparing a participatory poverty reduction strategy
consistent with its implementation and financial capacities. The Bank has played an important role in
supporting Benin's progress in the past. This interim CAS proposes to continue this strong support, in
particular to the PRSP, and to lay the basis for a more effective and poverty-focused management of all
public resources.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Shengman Zhang

Washington, D.C.
March 22, 2001

- 29 -

BENIN

INTERIM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Standard Annexes

Annexes:

Al Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework
A2 Benin at a Glance
B2 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
B3 Bank Group Program Summary
B6 Key Economic Indicators
B7 Key Exposure Indicators
B8 Operations Portfolio
B8 Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

-30 -

Annex 1

ME)jP!M-T:E MCROECONOMIC IFRAWMWO

I AAeri a strong export p 
mn in 99oing 
to a reducion in cotton stocks, merchandise export
growth s pjeed 
tolow t 
iat 
ls 
tan rea G go 
becuse of the constraints in the
-Driveln by higher investent needs,the volume of impors is expected 
cotton sector.~~~~~~f 
t
t 
ogr 
slightly faster than real

DP (respectively percent ad S'pecent.)
000* The ex erpa1ctirt'enfiXit(X 
Iexpected toide by 1.30 pSercent of GD? to justd over 7 perent in
20 00 befre 
rowngslighlyto 6.50t.:fAkfStX0ft 
percen t btt00 
y: 2003. :::
*4 AsanU oil impoter Bemin isl 0 
affected by theoil priceincrease couled with a stog dollar, but
tl~ inpac ontheb.Jneeof 
aymntsard rtai prcesis ikey t bemodrae. The impact of the oil

xo icrese om 2& prcet 
ofD? o 34 pecen ofD?,accontig 

fr abut ne hirdof he ideing

Batarnte 
qfPaymen*r 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ ~ ~ ~ 

t pp

* Project grants are 
projected o remain constant in rwallterms

,200.02t103'G,aSt:l 
paymnts Mareslt 
ros~ inernti~at eseveswoud slwlydeceas frm 6 moths~ tofimporftshi
>GP

this suppt is projected to decrease from prc ent 
Th ASA ective i 
stoa4ileama 
:fl surplus of0 .3S percent of G 

Im (~e)P inh l 

to 7.percent64 
in 2003
y 2 
d00103 
in the overall balan oft

and the overal deficit 4 perent 
o*r'tbe sae time 
porizty
* Piscal policy iee40' toward ma intaining aX balanced overall *fXIscal position,inclding graihs,while the
B~eninowil 
stegte 
taxad cutomo ps adm bastton.bodnthe tax4 base thruough the 1 
redu ctin stax

ex; end itr wilincrese 

fro1i.7esret 

f Wiabnt data a1999mto 0 p 

of 01)? i 0 

mly 

on

Annex A2

- 31 -

Benin at a glance 

12/19100

Sub-

POVERTYandSOCIAL 

Saharan 

Low-

Benin 

Africa 

tncome 

Development diamond'

Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP percapita(Atlasme#iod USS) 
GNP(Alasmethod USSbillons) 
Average annual growth, 1993.99 
Populfton (%) 
Laborforce(%) 
Most recent estImate latest year available, 1993-99) 
Poverty (% ofpopulaton belownatonalpoverye) 
Urban population (% of total populaton) 
Life expectancy at bkth (years) 
Infant mortality erO 1000 live birfhs) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to improved water source (% ofpopulation) 
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population) 
Male 
Female 

6.1 
380 
2.3 

642 
500 
321 

2,417 
410
988 

Lifeexpectancy

|

2.8 
28 

2.6 
2.6 

1.9 
2.3 

A

GNP 
per 
I capta 

Gross
primary
enrollment

9 

33
42 
53 
87 
29 
56 
61 
78 
98 
57 

34 
50 
92 
32 
43 
39 
78 
85 
71 

31 
60
77
43 
64
39
90 
102
86

Access to sate water

-

Benin -

Low-incomegroup

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 
1.2 
14.7 
12,8 
0.4 

1989 
1.5 
11.8 
12.8 
3.4 
7.1 

1998 
2.3 
17.1 
17.3 
8.6 
11.3 
-5.8 
0.8 
56.1 
16.1 

1999

IEconomic rattos
E

GDP (US$ billions) 
GrossdomesticinvestmnenVGDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross natlonalsavtngs/GDP 

2.4 
17.6 
16.7
6.4
11.7 
-5.9 
0.8 
58.6 
17.1

Trade

.. 

T

Cumrent account balance/GOP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debtGDP 
Total debt servioetexports 

-11.4 
0.3 
34.0 
2.5 

-4.7 
0.8 
82.7 
7.1 

Domestic 

Investment

ISavings 

/

Present value of debtVGDP 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

35.0 
218 3 

36.3 
221.0

-

Present value of debexports 

1979-49 19894-9 

1998 

1999 19993 

Indebtedness

(average annua g,owth)
GOP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

3.1 
-0.5 
-2.9 

4.6 
0.9 
0.8 

4.5 
2.5 
12.9 

5.0 
1.9 
16.0 

5.3 
2.7 
4.6

-Bnn 

Lo4omgu

--

Benin --- Low-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Gro 

ithof nve-tmentandGDP(%)

(% of GDP)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
Generalgovemmentconsumption 
Impons of goods and services 

35.0 
133 
8.9 
51.7 
91.6 
80 
27.1 

37.9 
12.8 
7.8 
494 
85.5 
11.1 
22 2 

38 6 
13.5 
8.2 
47.9 
83.8 
9.7 
27.8 

37.9 
13.8 
8.3 
6201f',
48.3 
1 O
1-20° 
10.1 ! 
83.5 
28.0 

I

1NA

9+ 

9s 

97 

90 

99

!401

-GDI -0-GDP

G

(average annual groth) 

197949 1989-9 
46 
5.2 
4.2 
4.1 
5.1 
5.8 
19 
4.2 
1.3 
48 
2 0 
3.2 
-8.4 
6 9 
-7 5 
3.4 
2.6 
4.7 

1998 
6.7 
0.9 
3.0 
3.8 
52 
-4.6 
3.3 
7.0 
5.3 

1999 
4.7 
3.2
6.5
5.8
1.7 
11 6
67 
4.0 
4 8

! Growth of exports and Imports (%)
T09

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Privateconsumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

1 

so 

s

1-4

-

Exports 

-Imports

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (In bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2

- 32 -

Benin

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)

Domestic prtces
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implcit GDP deflator 

5T

10.9 
13.0 

4.8 
2.2 

5.8 
4.2 

0.3
2.1 

2 T

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes curent grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

s0
0

13.0 
-9.0 
-2.4 

8.0 
-6.6 
-12.0 

15 5 
4.8 
-1.1 

16.1 
5.1 
-1.2

94 

95 

95 

97 

98 

99

1 

e

IGDP 

deflator -. *CpI

TRADE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)

(USS millions)
Total exports (fob) 
Cotton 
Crude Oil 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 

45 
29 
1 
6 
320 
80 
34 

92 
66 
21 
29 
223 
58 
23 

239 
202 
2 
35 
451 
138 
64 

236 
194 
0 
42 
461 
141
59 

50T

I

400

l* 

*

2

109

Capital goods 

206 

123 

253 

258

Export price index (1995=1C10) 
Import price index (1995= 100) 
Terms of trade (1995=1000) 

, 
,, 

62 
65 
96 

102 
106 
96 

94 
107 
88

' 

9 

4 

9i 

9 

7 

9b 

9

*rxports 

sImports

.. 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(USi millions)1979 
1989 

1998 

1999 

|Current account balance to GDP (%)

(US$ millions) 

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

176 
384 
-208 

302 
428 
-126 

399 
642 
-243 

397 
665 
-267

o-S 0 

i 

* 

l

12

Net income 
Net current transfers 

1 
71 

-38 
93 

-13 
123 

-18 
145 

j4E 

l

T1 I

Current account balance 

-135 

-71 

-133 

-141 

4

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

132 
3 

174 
-103 

142 
-9 

148 
-7 

I

I121

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$) 

14 
212.7 

3 
319.0 

296 
590.0 

319
614.8

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ miMlions) 

Compositton of 1998 debt (USS mill.)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

403 
0 
40 

1,242 
0 
253 

1,360 
0 
547 

1,350
0
515

Total debt service 

7 

26 

37 

67 

E: 380

lBRD 
IDA 

0 
0 

0 
3 

0 
9 

0 
1 0 

:4

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

36 
48 
106 
4 
0 

116 
126 
0 
1 
0 

79 
16 
0 
11 
0 

96
16
0
19
0

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
6 
0 
6 
0 
5 

77 
48 
1 
47 
2 
45 

21 
18 
5 
13 
4 
9 

26 
18 
6 
12
4
8

'A- IBRD 
| B- IDA 
| C - IMF 

E- Bilateral
D - Other multilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

Development Economics 

12/18/00

- 33 -

Annex B2

Benin - Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount I c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

14 
3.8 
14.3 
19.1 
14.3 
19.1 
13.1 

13 
4.3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
21.1 

14 
3.3 
7.1 
1.8 
7.1 
1.8 
23 

Yes 
$1,955 
$140 

Yes 
$1,280 
$98 

Yes 
$895 
$67 

13
3.5
15.4
4.5
15.4
4.5
6.9

Yes
$875
$74

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

32 
480.8 
12.5 
6.5 

7
121.1
14.3
9.9

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

- 34 -

Annex B6

Benin - Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

USS(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(I- HIMIL) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIM/L)

2001 

2002 

Cotton Sector Reform Program 
HIV/AJDS MULTI SECTOR 
PERAC 
Total 

PRSC 

POWER VII 

Total 

Grand Total 

15.0 
15.0 
10.0 
40.0

60.0 

30.0 

90.0

130.0

H 
H 

H 

H 
M 

M
M

M

M
M

Annex B6

- 35 -

Benin - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1997 

Estimate 
2000 

Proiected
2002 
2003

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2001 

100.0 
37.7 
13.7 
48.6 

100.0 
38.4 
13.9 
47.7 

100.0 
38.6 
13.5 
47.9 

100.0 
37.9 
13.8 
48.3 

100.0 
37.1 
13.8 
49.1 

100.0 
36.7 
13.9 
49.4 

100.0 
36.5 
14.1 
49.4 

100.0
36.1
14.2
49.7

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

92.0 
16.6 
6.4 
10.3 

94.4 
18.5 
6.7 
11.8 

93.4 
17.1 
5.7 
11.4 

93.6 
17.6 
6.0 
11.6 

93.7 
19.0 
6.9 
12.0 

92.2 
19.8 
7.5 
12.3 

91.0 
20.2 
7.4 
12.8 

90.4
20.4
7.5
12.9

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

19.1 
28.7 

16.2 
29.1 

17.3 
27.8 

16.7 
28.0 

15.6 
28.2 

15.7 
27.7 

15.7 
30.3 

15.8
29.5

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsC 

8.0 
9.1 

5.6 
10.9 

6.6 
11.3 

6.4 
11.8 

6.3 
11.5 

7.8 
12.9 

9.0 
13.7 

9.6
13.9

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
($US Million)
Gross national product 

2207.9 

2141.1 

2306.1 

2372.6 

2302.9 

2459.2 

2692.8 

2943.7

2161.8 

2111.3 

2292.8 

2354.5 

2287.8 

2442.9 

2678.3 

2928.7

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1991 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
5.5 
Gross Domestic Income 
2.9 

5.7 
6.1 

4.5 
5.4 

5.0 
2.6 

5.0 
5.0 

5.0 
5.1 

5.6 
6.1 

5.6
6.6

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1991 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
2.6 
2.7 
Total consumption 
1.3 
5.3 
Private consumption 
1.6 
5.8 

1.5 
1.1 
2.2 

1.9 
-0.3 
-1.3 

1.9 
1.7 
0.0 

2.0 
0.4 
-0.7 

2.6 
5.3 
5.8 

2.6
2.2
2.0

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

423.8 
262.5 
633.6 
444.4 
-209.8 
71.0 
-184.9 

346.8 
191.2 
622.8 
425.7 
-276.0 
143.4 
-162.4 

399.0 
239.3 
641.9 
450.5 
-242.9 
123.2 
-133.1 

397.2 
235.8 
664.6 
460.8 
-267.4 
144.6 
-140.9 

360.1 
209.5 
650.5 
458.3 
-290.4 
135.9 
-171.6 

386.4 
227.5 
682.0 
480.8 
-295.6 
142.4 
-169.4 

423.6 
250.7 
725.6 
510.7 
-302.0 
141.3 
-175.2 

464.4
278.6
781.3
550.7
-316.9
141.7
-190.3

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net inCl. errors&ommissions) 
Change in reservesd 

-6.3 
110.0 
83.0 
27.0 
139.2 
-58.1 

18.8 
75.9 
52.6 
23.3 
82.1 
-14.4 

18.1 
72.2 
58.9 
13.3 
51.9 
-9.1 

31.2 
103.0 
49.1 
53.9 
13.7 
-7.1 

23.7 
117.2 
82.2 
35.0 
23.3 
7.4 

28.3 
123.6 
62.4 
61.2 
46.4 
-28.8 

33.0 
102.0 
68.0 
34.0 
70.3 
-30.1 

37.1
111.2
73.9
37.3
98.9
-56.8

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Annual growth rates
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-9.5 

-12.9 

-10.5 

-11.3 

-12.6 

-12.0 

-11.2 

-10.8

14.5 
3.7 

-16.9 
9.4 

26.5 
7.0 

2.7 
6.6 

1.0 
13.1 

9.9 
6.2 

8.9 
5.0 

10.1
6.8

- 36 -

Annex B6

Benin - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Indicator 

1996 

Actual 
1997 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

Projected
2002 
2003

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

15.2 
13.1 
2.1 
6.4 
9.8 

14.6 
12.1 
2.4 
6.6 
8.4 

15.5 
10.7 
4.8 
5.8 
9.6 

16.1 
11.0 
5.1 
6.3 
8.8 

15.9 
12.3 
3.6 
7.1 
6.5 

16.0 
13.0 
3.0 
7.4 
6.8 

16.3 
12.8 
3.5 
7.4 
6.8 

16.4
12.7
3.7
7.5
6.9

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
GrowthofM2(%) 

Price indices( YR91 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCUf 

Real interest rates 
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

25.0 
11.3 

26.4 
17.1 

23.6 
-2.7 

29.7 
35.0 

29.3 
8.7 

29.6
9.3

442.2 
245.0 
180.5 
79.5 

16.8 
4.9 
6.7 

502.1 
270.5 
185.6 
78.0 

15.0 
3.8 
4.7 

420.9 
286.7 
146.8 
83.9 

.. 

5.8 
4.2 

389.0 
288.4 
134.9 
81.0 

.. 

0.3 
2.1 

422.8 
307.3 
137.6 

469.1 
311.3 
150.7 

480.6 
308.4 
155.8 

490.5
307.5
159.5

.. 

.. 

3.5 
5.1 

..

..

3.0 
2.9 

2.5 
2.5 

2.0
2.5

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7

- 37 -

Benin - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
1997 
1998 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2005 
2010 

Indicator 

1996 

1999 

2001 

2015

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)' Y

1375.6 

1335.0 

1360.1 

1349.6 

1346 3 

1352.9 

1418 4 

1538 6 

1614 9

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

111.6 

526 

61.4 

67.4 

50.2 

54.1 

70.4 

75.7 

81.6

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)'

45.7 

41.4 

37.8 

66.9 

62.5 

45.7 

36.9 

43 9 

72 8

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

253.8 
72.2 
7.3 
34.0 

383.2 
75.9 
13.0 
35.1 

340.9 
56 1 
16.1 
36.0 

345.8 
58.6 
17.1 
37.6 

364.2 
56.2 
16.9 
37.5 

325.0 
51.8 
11.0 
37.4 

240.0 
38.8 
6.2 
36.5 

180.8 
28.7 
5.2 
34 0 

126.6
20.4
5 7
33 0

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m) 
Of which present value of 
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

.. 

.. 

.

.. 

.. 

..

62.7 

65.3 

65.9 

56.4 

63.3 

70.4 

70.7 

69.5 

70 6

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

..

.. 

.. 

.

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.

..

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

520 

510 

547 

541 

535 

526 

480 

405 

311.0

IFC (US$m)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.

.. 
.. 

.
.. 

.. 

..
..

.. 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.

.. 

.

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

- 38 -

Annex B8

Closed Projects 38

Active Proets 

Benin - Status of Bank Group Opemtions (Operatiorns Portfolio)

Last FSR 

Supervision Pating 

Dlference Between
Expected and Actual

Oridinal Amount In USS Millioris 

Disbursements

Project ID 

Prjec Namee 

D 

Imlemenintion 

Fiscal Year 

IDA GRANT Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. Fmfn RiWd

P000120 
P000103 
P000121 
P0'0112 
Pi000118 
P000117 
P057345 
P035645 
P035648 
P067329 
P070204 
P037580 
P039882 

RURAL CFRDIT II 
EDUCATiON DEVELOPMEN 
RURAL WATER SUPPLY & 
EiWV. MANAEMENT PROJ 
POPULATIONAND HEALT 
TRANSPORT SECTOR 
BORGOU PILOT RSP 
SOCLAL FUiND 
1STDECEN.CITYMGMrT. 
Distai Leauing Pmjed - UL 
Labor Foce Developent Project 
NAT PARKS CONS.& MGT 
PRIVATE SECTOR 

U 
S 
S 
iiS 
S 
S 
iHiS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
ilS 
S 
U 
S 
S 

1993 
1994 
1994 
1995 
1995 
1997 
1998 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2000 
20D0 
2000 

3.8 
18 
9.8 
8 
28 
40 
4 
17 
28 
1.8 
5 
0 
30 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6.8 
0 

Total 

191 

6.8 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0.5 
6.8 
2.3 
3.7 
13.5 
15.3 
2.6 
10.7 
23.4 
1.7 
5 
6.2 
27.4 

0.5 
7.2 
2.5 
31 
17 
13.2 
1.8 
-0.4 
8.7 
13.9 
0.2 
0 
-1.3 

0.5
7.1
2.5
3
17
0
0
-2.8
0
0
0
0
0

119.1 

66.3 

27.4

Annex B8

- 39 -

Benin - Statement of IFC's

Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 9/30/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Com2anv 
1991/93/95 AEF BOAB 
1995 AEF Union Benin 
1994 Equipbail-Benin 

Loan Eguitv Ouasi Partic Loan Equity Ouasi Partic
0 
0 0.02 
0 
0 
0 
0.02 
0
0 
0.08 
0 
0 
0 
0.08 
0 
0
0 
0.1 
0 
0 
0 
0.1 
0 
0

Total Portfolio: 

0 

0.18 0.02 

0 

0 

0.18 

0.02 

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

1999 SOBAC 
2000 FfNADEV 

Loan Equitv Ouasi Partic
0 79.22 
0 
0
0 352.98 
0 
0

Total Pending Commitment: 

0 432.2 

0 

0

Annex B I I

- 40 -

Benin - Interim CAS Budget

COUNTRY CAS COSTED ON: 

4-Dec-00

TOTAL FY2001 - FY2003
GROSS ADMIN BUDGET ($,000) AS % OF
FY2001 FY2002 FY2003 TOTAL TOTAL

INTERIM CAS OBJECTIVE 

1 SUPPTTOPRSP 

669 
32 
927 

956 

-

1,625 
1,119 

25%/
17%

2 POET 

EUTO 

588 
1,000 
229 
766 
\i: 

-

3 E O 
R 
4 HUMAN CAPITAL 

-

1926 
392 

30%
6%

164 

-

5 GOVERNANCFX 

586 
7 7 

0 

0 l 2 

IE 
0%

-

1,352 

210 %

~6 

-

-- 

TOTAL 

2,877 3,603 

6,480 

100%

COMPARISON_(GROSS ADMIN BUDGET AND OUTPUTS) 

TOTAL AS % OF

BUSINESS PROCESS FY1998 FY1999 FY2000 FY2001 FY2002 FY2003 FY01-03 TOTAL BB

LENDING ($,000) 

1,056 

1,059 

1,120 

413 

410 

823 

13%

PORTFOLIO ($,000) 

1,954 

1,279 

894 

960 

1,160 

2,120 

33%

AAA (non lending) ($,000 
WOTHER 
($,000) 

272 
463 

653 
479 

531 
505 

651 
85 

945 
320 

1,596 
405 

25%
6%

CTRY PROG.SUP. 

($,000) 

-

-

-

768 

768 

1,536 

24%

TOTAL ADMIN BUDGET 3,744 

3,469 

3,050 

2,877 

3,603 

6,480 

100%

LENDING (no.) 

2 

1 

3 

3 

3 

6

VOLUME 

($ m) 

-

IBRD 

-

-

-

-

-

-

i

VOLUME (S m) - IDA 
PORTFOLIO SIZE (no.) 

21 
14 

26 
13 

37 
14 

40 
17 

90 
11 

-

130

8

UNDISBURSED BAL. ($ 

-

-

-

.

ICRs (no.) 

3 

2 

3 

1 

1 

2

AAA (NON-LEND) 
OTHER 
(no.) 

(no.) 

2 

2 

2 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

NTERIUst 
0%

TOAL(B.CF4F 

3,744"( 

3,46 

3,05 

2,B'77 3,803 

-

6,480300%

$UECS 0"$,OOP0 

C:f0 AL,d A$ 

I 

>A

lot]~~~~~~~Vu 

P 

P

