d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 19365 - CD

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF CHAD

May 28, 1999

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of May 28, 1998)

Currency Unit 
US$ 1.00 
SDR 1.0 

CFA franc (CFAF)
CFAF 629.7
US$ 1.34

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ATETIP 
CAR 
CAS 
CFA 
COBAC 
COTCO 
COTONTCHAD 
DRC 
ESAF 
ESW 
GDP 
IBRD 
IDA 
IFC 
IMF 
MIGA 
MINURCA 
MINUAR 
NGO 
PER 
PFP 
SAC 
SONASUT 
SOTEL TCHAD 
STEE 
TOTCO 
UDEAC 
UNDP 

Agence Tchadienne d'Execution de Travaux d'Interet Public
Central African Republic
Country Assistance Strategy
Communaute Financiere Africaine
Commission Bancaire
Cameroon Oil Transportation Company
Societe Cotonniere du Tchad (Cotton processing and marketing company)
Democratic Republic of Congo
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
Economic and Sector Work
Gross Domestic Product
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Mission des Nations Unies en Republique Centrafricaine
Mission des Nations Unies au Rwanda
Non-governmental Organization
Public Expenditure Review
Policy Framework Paper
Structural Adjustment Credit
Societe Nationale Sucriere du Tchad (National sugar company)
Societe des Telecommunications du Tchad (Telecommunications company)
Societe d'Eau et d'Electricite (Water and electricity utility)
Tchad Oil transportation Company
Union Douaniere et Economique de l'Afrique Centrale (Sub-regional tax and tariff reform)
United Nations Development Program

FISCAL YEAR
January 1-December 31

Vice President 
Country Director 
Sector Manager 
Task Team 

Jean-Louis Sarbib
Serge Michailof
Luca Barbone
Luca Barbone, Alain D'Hoore, Mary Barton-Dock, Michelle Keane

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REPUBLIC OF CHAD

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

SUMMARY

Chad is a poor country with limited prospects, unless it seizes the opportunity of exploiting its
oil. If well managed, oil exploitation could lead to substantial improvements in Chad's human
development and physical infrastructure, and allow the country to look forward to a period of
accelerated growth and improved human welfare indicators. There is a tangible chance that a
great number of its people could be lifted out of their deep poverty within one generation.
Without oil, development prospects remain limited and progress would be slower and more
difficult.

Intemational experience teaches that oil revenues can only make a positive developmental
difference if they are well managed. Given the present weakness of Chad's institutions,
preparing for the new era over the remaining years before oil revenues begin to flow, is the
biggest challenge faced by Government and civil society. A key role for the international
community and the World Bank will be to help Chad meet this challenge.

Preparing for the arrival of oil entails:

e Concerted and sustained actions to increase institutional capacity and enhance socio-
economic management;

= Developing adequate strategies to allow a substantial build-up of human capital when oil
resources come on stream;

e Removing constraints to the development of non-oil activities.

The Assistance Strategv proposed in this document aims to help Chad prepare to make the
best developmental use of its oil resources, and avoid the pitfalls encountered by other countries.
The strategy would support the transition to the oil era by improving the quality and
effectiveness of public institutions, and putting into place safeguards to mitigate the risks of oil
exploitation. It would address key infrastructural and human bottlenecks that constrain growth,
in order to obtain substantial poverty alleviation results and ensure that environmental and social
priorities are adequately addressed.

The strategy builds on the experience of the past few years, and broad consultations with
government and civil society. It proposes to concentrate Bank assistance in the critical areas of
education, health, transport and rural development, the main beneficiaries of the additional oil
resources. Key bottlenecks in energy and telecommunications will be tackled, with a view to
allowing the private sector to participate to the fullest extent.

Because of the importance and "lumpiness" of the oil project and related activities, the
Assistance Strategy proposes only two cases, hinging on progress in the implementation of the

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

measures required for a successful use of oil resources in the new millennium. The Base Case,
which prevails at present, would be maintained if the following triggers continue to obtain: (i)
sustained macroeconomic performance; (ii) successful portfolio implementation with particular
emphasis on sector-wide operations (health and transport); (iii) adequate sector strategies in four
priority sectors for poverty alleviation (health, education, transport, rural development); and (iv)
satisfactory implementation of the first steps of the institutional strengthening program for the
preparation of the oil revenue management.

Lending operations over the coming months include three key projects: support to the
construction of an oil pipeline from Chad to Cameroon (through a US$35 million IBRD loan),
and two IDA-financed capacity building projects aimed at developing government capacity to
manage oil revenues and civil society's participation in such management.

In addition to these projects, the Base Case foresees lending for US$210 million and a
substantial program of non-lending services. The former include: adjustment support (through
one or more operations) aimed at public expenditure reform and completing the remaining
reform agenda for a total of US$60 million; six investment operations, of which four in priority
sectors for poverty alleviation (health, education, transport and rural development, US$120
million) and two aimed at lifting infrastructure bottlenecks and promoting private sector
development (electricity and telecommunications, US$ 30 million).

Non-lending activities include policy dialogue on revenue management, and annual participatory
PERs, focused on the four priority sectors mentioned above, analytical support to strategy work
in the social sectors and in rural development, especially cotton liberalization, and the
implementation of poverty monitoring mechanisms.

Should the implementation of the reform program stall or should any Government action
or change in circumstances severely undermine implementation of the Oil Revenue Management
Program, the program would be scaled back considerably. Under such circumstances - the Low
Case scenario - no adjustment lending would be possible, loans related to oil development (if
already approved) would be suspended and appropriate remedies applied, and the lending
program would be limited to investment in the health sector. The program would then consist of
a total of US$40 million during the period covered by this CAS (in addition to the US$70 million
contemplated for the next three-four months). Policy dialogue on governance would be stepped
up and the non-lending program would focus on the actions needed to return to a satisfactory
implementation of economic reforms and public finance management.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

* The centrality of the exploitation of oil resources to Chad's development prospects, and the
adequacy of the measures proposed in this strategy to ensure adequate utilization of oil
resources and appropriate consideration of related environmental and social risks;
* The adequacy of the assessment of external and internal risks and of the remedies
proposed;
* The adequacy of the Bank's selectivity in intervention.

ii

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF CHAD

I. INTRODUCTION

1. 
Chad is one of the world's poorest countries. An estimated 80 percent of its population
of 7 million live with less than a dollar a day. The depth and pervasiveness of poverty is
striking, and only a small fraction of the population escapes its consequences: poor nutrition and
health, high child and adult mortality,
and limited access to basic amenities,
education opportunities and social
protection 
(Chart 
1). 
Among
disappointing 
indicators, 
those
reflecting 
female welfare 
are
poor, with maternal

Chart 1. Chad: Large Social Deficit 
(Chad vs. Sub-SaharanAfica) 

nChildswwaloddparticularly 

GDP per capita 

estimated at 827 per

>100,000 
live births, and girls' primary
enrollment rates at 41.6 percent.
Chad's rugged environment is also a
major constraint to development, and
a challenge for sustainable future
growth. Making a substantial dent in
poverty over the next few years is the
overriding objective for the country

L Gjrls' Enrollments</ 
/ 

Girls 

I 

Ero\me 

Chksurvalodds |mortality 
) 

Chad 

Pranary Enrollment 

Health Expendiures 

Accessto Safe Water 

and its partners in development.

2. 
There is no single cause for this extreme level of poverty. Much of Chad's modem history
has been marred by an unusual combination of many of the factors associated with poor
economic and social performance: political instability, culminating in outbreaks of violent
conflict; inadequate economic policies; rapid population growth, close to 3 percent per year; and
an unfavorable physical environment, with low population density over a large, landlocked, and
arid country. These factors have sharply curtailed economic growth and left the country with
little physical infrastructure, poor provision of social services, and weak institutions

3. 
In the mid-1990s Chad embarked on a dual transition, breaking with past political
patterns and taking its first steps towards economic reform. The Government simultaneously
initiated a democratization process and launched an ambitious macroeconomic stabilization and
structural reform program. Results on both fronts are encouraging.

4. 
Exploitation of oil resources will provide Chad with a unique opportunity to make up for
the accumulated delays on its development path and reduce poverty at an accelerated pace.
However, oil exploitation also presents a challenge, given weak institutions. The-challenge is to

1

learn from international experience, so as to make effective use of new revenues while mitigating
the risks associated with their sudden increase.

5. 
The Assistance Strategy proposed in this document aims to help Chad prepare to make
the best developmental use of its oil resources, and avoid the pitfalls encountered by many other
countries in the exploitation of natural resources. The strategy would support the country's
transition to the oil era by improving the quality and effectiveness of public institutions, and
putting into place safeguards to mitigate the risks of oil exploitation. It would aim to address key
infrastructural and human factors that constrain growth, to obtain substantial poverty alleviation
results in the short and medium termn, and ensure that environmental and social priorities are
adequately addressed.

II. ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL CONTEXT

6. 
When the last CAS was presented to the Board on February 15, 1996, Chad was
contemplating a major political transition and had started to address a financial crisis that had
crippled its economy and the operations of Government. Over the past three years, considerable
progress has been achieved on both fronts.

7. 
Political Transition. In the early 1960s, soon after independence, Chad entered a cycle of
political and social instability triggered by political mismanagement. A spiral of violence and
arned conflicts developed, fed by personal feuds, political opposition, foreign intervention, and
ethnic tensions. Permanent insecurity linked to the presence of more than a dozen "political
military groups" in constantly shifting alliances impeded economic activity and claimed
thousands of lives. It was not until the early to mid-1990s that conditions came about for a
peaceful and lasting resolution of internal disputes. A more inclusive form of government
started to materialize. Under the present administration, a serious effort of transition towards
democracy has taken off, and a measure of political stability has been achieved. Presidential
elections were held in mid-1996; in April 1997, legislative elections led to the installation of
Chad's first democratically elected, multi-party Assembly. The government has pursued a policy
of "national reconciliation" building on the "war fatigue" of both the population and most leaders
of "political-military groups", trying to bring them into the political process. Progress is notable
on demobilization, and military expenditures have been reduced from 14 percent of total
expenditures in 1993 to 5 percent in 1998 (the size of the army was cut in half).

8. 
Economic policies and outcomes. The Government recently completed its first three-
year adjustment program, supported by an IMF ESAF and three Bank SACs. Fiscal performance
has sharply improved, moving from a current deficit of 5 percent of GDP in 1994 to a slight
current surplus in 1998. This was achieved through tight expenditure control and enhanced
revenue mobilization. Relations with foreign creditors have been normalized and external
arrears were fully cleared by end-1997. The program has also achieved a significant reallocation
of public expenditures towards developmental sectors: the share of public resources going to
education, health, social affairs, rural development and transport has reached 72 percent. The
program also registered strong progress on a variety of structural issues (see Annex E). The
public enterprise divestiture program has rapidly advanced, with most privatizations completed
or underway.

2

Table 1 - Chad: Selected Economic Indicators

Growth rates (%)
GDP 
Agriculture 

Industry 

Services 
Inflation (%) 

National accounts (% GDP)
Current account balance 

Gross investmnent 

Of which oil sector 

Actual 

Forecast

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

3.7 
2.7 
5.9 
1.9 
11.3 

4.1 
5.2 
9.5 
1.5 
5.6 

7.0 
9.5 
9.6 
2.7 
2.9 

1.3 
-4.3 
1.7 
3.5 
3.5 

5.5 
5.6 
5.3 
4.9 
2.9 

5.5
5.4
5.2
5.7
2.9

-12.2 

13.5 

... 

-15.0 
16.2 

1.0 

-11.7 
15.2 
2.2 

-15.9 
19.5 
5.2 

-19.0 
23.2 
8.9 

-31 .0*
36.0
19.7

Public fmance (% GDP)

Fiscalbalance 

-11.1 
13.2 

-10.2 
12.0 

- 6.9
7.3

-7.9 
8.0 

-8.0 
9.7 

- 7.9 
7.8 

Foreign finmancing 
Source: World Bank Live Database
* includes oil-related imports
9. 
Macroeconomic outcomes are encouraging (Table 1). Economic growth has accelerated
to an annual average of about 5 percent over 1996-98. The good growth rates have largely
resulted from improved performance in the rural sector, which has been the main beneficiary of
the devaluation of the CFA Franc. Year-to-year growth rates continue, however, to be strongly
affected by exogenous factors, such as rains and world prices-underscoring 
the importance of
natural resource management policies (especially concerning water and soil fertility). GDP
growth is expected to slow down to 1.3 percent in 1999, on account of unfavorable agricultural
performance, but should return to rates of 5 percent or more in the absence of further external
shocks. Inflation has been brought back to its historical low level of about 3 percent from over
50 percent after the 1994 devaluation of the CFA franc.

10. Despite this recent positive track record on the political and economic fronts, progress
remains fragile. Chad is still struggling with its political transition in an unstable regional
environment. The political scene remains fragmented, with over seventy political parties.
Episodes of localized conflict are recurrent between Government and a few armed opposition
groups who opt out of the democratic process and return to military action. In 1997, an armed
rebellion developed in the South. Poorly organized, it never presented a serious military threat to
the government, but its armed activities and the ensuing repression claimed about 200 lives and
led to civil right abuses before it was defeated in 1998. A political settlement has helped restore
peace, but this episode has left additional scars on the social fabric. More recently, an armed
rebellion led by a former Minister of Defense has surfaced in the Saharan region of Tibesti,
where insurgencies have been the rule rather than the exception since the beginning of the
century. While observers do not believe this guerilla poses a military or political threat to the
Government, it is likely to remain a thorn in its side, until a political settlement is found.

3

11. Chad has also been called upon to participate in several international peace-keeping
efforts. It contributes troops to two UN multinational peace keeping forces: MlNURCA in
Central African Republic and MINUAR in Rwanda. At the request of the government of the
Democratic Republic of Congo, it has also provided a limited contingent of troops which have
been operating close to the CAR border in northern DRC. These troops are now being
withdrawn. Operations, in CAR, Rwanda and in DRC are entirely funded by external sources.

III. DEVELOPMENT PROSPECTS: THE CHALLENGE OF OIL

12. Against this still fragile political and economic background, Chad's economic and social
prospects today, as the country prepares to enter the new millennium, hinge on the prospect of oil
exploitation. This carries enormous opportunities, and commensurate risks. 
It is no
exaggeration to argue that the Petroleum Development and Pipeline Project under preparation
has already irreversibly affected the prospects of the country, and its relations with the
international community and the World Bank.

Growth prospects without oil

13. 
There is a strong case for oil exploitation now, despite the risks and challenges discussed
below, because the likely development prospects in the absence of oil are bleak. Under the
present circumstances, some improvements in poverty alleviation were noted during the past
CAS period, though robust data is scant. Better security over the entire territory has contributed
to better economic performance, and incomes in the rural sector, where most of Chad's poor live,
are thought to have risen. Though quality and outcomes of education still present considerable
challenges, surging enrollment rates broadly distributed across the territory indicate improved
access to schooling, including in rural areas. Growth in donor-financed activities since the mid-
1990's have in all likelihood had an impact on investments to the benefit of the poor. Looking
forward, there is little doubt that Chad's rural growth potential is high. There are large areas of
underutilized arable land and livestock already represents a considerable source of income,
though caution should be exercised to ensure environmental sustainability.

14. Nevertheless, Chadians remain very poor and a complete picture requires underlining the
less encouraging elements. Soil fertility appears to be declining, threatening the sustainability of
farmers' incomes, and vulnerability to climactic conditions regularly lead to the emergence of
pockets of famine in regions with poor transport infrastructure. There is also evidence of a
"productivity gap" with countries with similar eco-physical features: agricultural yields on most
crops are much lower, sometimes up to 30 percent lower than equivalent crops in similar
countries (Mali, Burkina, etc.) and infrastructural bottlenecks present an even greater challenge
than in other poor Sahelian countries. Without oil, even in the best of circumstances, Chad
would be faced with unpalatable developmental prospects. Assuming further consolidation of
political stability and improvement in economic policies, Chad could probably sustain a trend
rate of growth of a little over 5 percent of GDP per year. But at that rate, it would take 3 5 years
to double its current low level of per-capita income of US$230. Raising incomes to a level that
would substantially reduce poverty would therefore span more than two generations. The oil
wealth in the ground offers an opportunity to dramatically accelerate the development process.

4

Box 1 - Sizing Up Oil Exploitation in Chad: Investment, Growth and Revenues

A project to develop and exploit oil reserves in the Doba region, in the south of Chad, is being considered
by a consortium of private oil companies led by Exxon. One of the largest private investment projects in sub-
Saharan Africa in recent years, it would require an investment of about US$3.2 billion, much of it up-front, for
(i) the exploitation of fields estimated at about 900 million barrels over a 25 year period (an average of about
100,000 barrels a day), and (ii) the construction of a 1,100 km pipe-line from Chad to the Atlantic coast in
Cameroon over a three-year period. Oil exports are expected to come on stream early 2004. The current CAS
period (FYOO-02) thus covers only the construction and development phase.

Growth impact. As in many developing countries, oil exploitation in Chad will be an economic enclave, with
limited direct employment generation and other linkages. As a result, we estimate that at the onset, while real
GDP (measuring production in Chad) would grow by about 40 percent, real GNP (measuring. Chadian income)
would increase by about 8 percent only. Given the anticipated profile of oil extraction, oil GDP growth will start
to decline after a few years. As argued in this document, medium- and long-term increases in GDP will emanate
from the enhanced formation of human and physical capital made possible by oil revenues. While these effects
are difficult to estimate, using available parameters suggests that oil resources could increase Chad's non-oil
GDP growth rate by some 2 percent over its baseline rate. This would imply doubling of per-capita income
every 17 years, rather than every 35 under the baseline scenario.

Revenues. As Chad will not, under the project, develop a domestic oil company. Its share in oil revenues would
accrue directly to the Government. The share would include royalties on oil exploitation, taxes on the oil field
companies, taxes on the income of the pipeline company in Chad (TOTCO), and, to a lesser extent, dividends
from the profits of TOTCO and of its sister organization in Cameroon (COTCO), in which the Chadian
Government will have a small equity stake. Depreciation charges for the massive initial investment would offset
taxable income of the oil field companies and TOTCO for the first few years of oil exploitation.

Over the most probable range of future oil prices, Chadian oil revenues accruing to Government would
represent an amount significant enough to make a difference and yet moderate enough to require

continued development assistance. At current Bank oil price forecasts, based on a real 1998 price of
US$15 per barrel for the Brent reference crude, nominal oil revenues would average about US$80 million a year,
and peak at US$110 million, over the first 7 full years of oil production (2004-2010), or about 22 percent of total
fiscal revenues, including oil, projected for the period. Thus, under this scenario, oil revenues would represent
about 50 percent of fiscal revenues today, or 50 percent of the current level of foreign aid. Under a low price
scenario (based on a real 1998 Brent price of US$11 dollars a barrel), oil revenues would peak at US$65 million
a year, and average about US$45 million a year. Under a high price scenario (real 1998 Brent price of US$20
per barrel), oil revenues wouldpeak at US$381 million, and average about US$270 million per year.

The Difference Oil Can Make

15. Oil development provides a major opportunity for Chad to break free from a poverty trap
of enormous needs and very limited resources, to diversify its economy and increase its fiscal
revenues (see Box 1)1. If well managed, additional revenues from oil can translate 
into
significant poverty alleviation, 
through greater availability of resources for priority sectors,
improved basic infrastructure and wider delivery of better public and social services. The key
here is appropriate use of oil revenues; the coming three years, leading up to the materialization
of oil revenues, will constitute a crucial period. The path leading from increased oil revenues to

A very detailed description of the Petroleum Development and Pipeline Project will be provided at the time of
Board presentation of the project and related operations.

5

accelerated poverty reduction runs as follows. Additional revenues can be allocated to lifiting
the bottlenecks that prevent growth and specifically affect the poor. First, the build-up of human
capital can be increased, thus providing the new generations of Chadians with better tools to take
up economic challenges. Second, in conjunction with measures to increase the strength of
institutions, of property rights and of commerce, greater resources can be assigned to alleviating
the bottlenecks that constrain both private sector activity and public sector delivery of services.
The end result can be a more sustained growth path, with public resources specifically targeted to
empowering the poor, and poor women in particular. Estimates suggest that incomes could grow
twice as fast, for about a generation, than under a non oil scenario, leading in all likelihood, to a
very significant improvement in welfare indicators. This opportunity is too important to pass up,
but the many risks associated with oil production must be identified and properly mitigated.

External Environment

16. 
The external environment is relatively favorable. Chad is a member of the regional
Central-African monetary union, which has a fixed-exchange rate arrangement with the Euro,
backed by the French Treasury. In 1998-99, decline in international commodity prices sparked
by the Asian crisis had a moderate impact on Chad's external position, unfavorably affecting its
cotton exports and the cotton company's financial results (and, by extension, government
revenues), though terms of trade suffered only a moderate decline. The current account deficit
(at about 16 percent of GDP in 1998) is best seen as the counterpart to a structural capital
account surplus, driven by highly concessional donor financing for public investment. Based on
current commodity price projections, Chad's external position is expected to remain sustainable
over the next several years, as important donor resources can be counted on to finance the
country's investment program, even prior to the arrival of oil resources.

17. Chad does not have a major external debt sustainability issue. Its present value of debt to
GDP or exports is moderate, reflecting high concessionality, but debt service still represents
about 20 percent of Government revenues. In the medium-term, oil exploitation would sharply
improve external prospects, although oil price variability (see Box 1) would add sharp challenges
to fiscal and macroeconomic management.

Risks: Poor Governance; Possibility of "Dutch Disease"

19. 
International experience has however shown a consistent propensity of governments to
squander and mismanage revenues from natural resources, with negative consequences on
stability and poverty. Experience also shows that lack of transparency and accountability are key
ingredients in the failure to promote development through the use of natural resource revenue.
Governance is thus a major issue that needs to be dealt with in Chad, to ensure that
accountability and transparency are indeed promoted in the very near term. In addition, powerful
economic forces are put in motion by the emergence of sudden wealth. If not appropriately
managed, they can lead to either the emergence of the Dutch Disease, and the attendant
reduction of the non-oil economy open to international competition, and/or to instability in
government revenues and expenditures, in the face of high variability of oil prices. These are
risks that can be managed, if careful policies are clearly understood and implemented.

6

IV. STRATEGIC IssuEs AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

20. How to transform oil revenues into concrete and substantial development achievements is
the key issue for Chad over the next several years. This section discusses the main hurdles that
can be expected, and is based on analytical work conducted by the Bank and other partners. The
Government of Chad has been a key participant in this analytical work, and has endorsed the
main tenets of the proposed strategy, most notably through a public document ("Chad: Strategic
Development Options"), presented to the donor community at the Round Table in October 1998.

21. 
A More Participatory Development Process. The first precondition for poverty-oriented
utilization of the oil revenues in the years to come is a determined political commitment on the
part of Chad's leadership to bolster and maintain a participatory process. 
Institutional
development is as much a process of enhancing inclusiveness, increased accountability of public
officials and giving voice to users of public services and potential taxpayers, as one of making
existing institutions more efficient. Both government and opposition recognize that the route
towards greater inclusiveness, participation and democracy has no alternatives worth
contemplating. Provisions to ensure that all strata of society, in particular those living in the
region of potential oil exploitation, will see material benefits from oil, are included in legislation
and are being discussed widely across civil society. Active discussion is on-going and will
continue over the next few years.

22. 
Continued commitment from the top and buy-in by civil society are critical elements for
success: it is up to Chad's government and civil society to rise to the task. The intemational
community, and the World Bank in particular, can help facilitate this national debate by taking
the greatest care in ensuring that adequate participation by civil society, local communities, and
NGOs is sought in all interventions, from the most strategic discussions to the projects that can
affect the quality of life at the village level.

23. 
In parallel with the deepening of the participatory process, Chad and the international
community face the important task of ensuring that the instruments needed to turn oil into
poverty reduction are put in place over the next three-four years: (i) concerted and sustained
actions are required to increase institutional capacity and enhance socio-economic management;
(ii) adequate strategies must be developed to allow a substantial build-up of human capital when
the oil resources come on stream; and (iii) constraints to non-oil activities must be removed.

A. 

Improving Governance and Socio-Economic Management

24. 
Governance and Corruption. Governance problems in Chad stem from insufficient
accountability and weak capacity, as well as from the youth of democratic institutions. As a
country which has only recently emerged from conflict, Chad has had relatively little time to
introduce and develop the institutions needed for the satisfactory management of public
resources. The absence of formal controls has often led to misuse of funds in public enterprises
and, as in many other countries, episodes of corruption are frequently reported and complaints
heard from private sector and users of public services. The geographical fragmentation of the
country and isolation of regions also pose severe problems, as local governments and traditional
chiefs are subject to little control, sometimes imposing arbitrary "taxes" for instance. Corruption,
however, is not developed in Chad on the scale and sophistication it has reached in many other

7

Box 2 - Oil Revenue Management Law
Essential Provisions

* Under the Law, all revenues would be included and accounted for in the Budget.
* A portion (10 percent) of non-tax oil revenues would be systematically saved for future generations.
. Of the remainder, 80 percent would go to expenditures in five priority sectors (education, health and social
services, rural development, infrastructure, and environment and water resources), above and beyond pre-oil
allocations, 15 percent to core civilian functions, such as justice, and the remaining 5 percent to the oil
producing region, in conformity with the regional devolution provision of the Chadian Constitution.
* Non-tax oil revenues would be deposited into special accounts, which will facilitate monitoring and
auditing,.
In addition to ordinary financial procedures, withdrawal requests would require prior approval by an
oversight committee, whose membership would include a Supreme Court judge, a Senator, a member of the
National Assembly, the Central Bank director, three administration officials, and two civil society
representatives, one from a local NGO, and one from trade unions.

.

countries, in Africa and elsewhere. If nothing else, the paucity of resources available for
redistribution is such that few outward signs of corruption are visible. The challenge is how to
avoid that increased resource flows encourage institutional weakening and lead to higher levels
of corruption.

25. Oil Revenue Management Policy. Addressing governance and corruption issues will
require a multi-pronged strategy, to ensure transparent management of revenues, in particular oil
revenues, and accountability of public institutions. The present phase of adjustment and
structural reform has resulted in the privatization of almost all public enterprises, thus removing,
eventually, the foundation for corruption and mismanagement in this sector. Nevertheless, much
more is needed, particularly with regard to the management of future oil revenues. The first but
critical elements of this strategy have been outlined in a Government Letter of Oil Revenue
Management Policy. Main features of this policy include: (i) transparent accounting of all
revenues and budget comprehensiveness; (ii) sound sectoral strategies, grounded in strong
participatory design and implementation; (iii) poverty monitoring and other instruments to assess
impacts; (iv) public administration reform, including the strengthening of budgetary processes
and instruments; (v) stronger public oversight mechanisms and institutions (Parliament, Auditor
General, Oversight Committee); and (vi) improved transparency through the dissemination of
public information about policies, revenues and their use.

26. 
This policy has been made operational through an Oil Revenue Management Law. This
law is virtually unique in the world and was adopted by the Chadian Parliament in January 1999,
four years before oil revenues are scheduled to come on stream. The law which was recently
published in the Chadian press and has been the object of ample discussions within civil society,
outlines the allocation of future oil resources and the establishment of control mechanisms with
civil society participation.

27. Legal and Judicial Reform. In the context of the challenges and risks posed by Oil

Revenue Management and of weak capacity and institutions, the improvement of Chad's legal

and judicial systems is one of the key elements of the sustainability of development efforts on
many fronts. Though, no thorough diagnosis of these systems is available, there are indications
that capacity and resources are limited. Experience in other countries has shown that improving

8

the quality of the legal system and the functioning of the judiciary have promoted better
governance and reduced opportunities for corruption. Bolstering capacity and transparency in
the legal and judicial systems is also necessary to enhance the business environment and
stimulate private sector development.

29. 
Capacity-Building. Progress in improving governance and in implementing the Oil
Revenue Management Law requires substantial efforts to develop, enhance and deepen the
capacity of public and private actors, which the Bank strategy has supported and will continue to
support through a range of instruments. The Government is fully aware of this challenge. Over
the last few years, it has initiated several actions to develop a coherent framework for its capacity
building efforts. Chad has been at the forefront of the Partnership for Capacity Building in
Africa. It has established a National Secretariat at the Ministry of Planning, which has carried
out a National Capacity Assessment and elaborated a Strategy and Action Plan. Donors, such as
UNDP, are involved in supporting the Government's capacity building efforts. The Government
has also formulated and begun implementing a strategy for civil service reform. The objectives
are to better focus government activities, improve the performance of the public administration,
reduce its cost, and enhance the competence and motivation of staff. The reform calls for a
gradual process based on a broad consensus.

30. Key progress indicators in strengthening public financial management include, among
others: (i) progress in formulating and monitoring integrated budgets; (ii) streamlining of
budgetary instruments; (iii) functioning treasury operations; (iv) establishment of internal
financial control; and (iv) oversight and control by the judiciary, and an independent Committee
mandated to oversee and control the utilization of oil revenue. As discussed below, an IDA
operation is foreseen to help the Government attain these objectives, and in particular the
introduction of a consolidated budget before oil production starts, and replace the project-based
public investment program with sector expenditure programs covering both capital and operation
costs. The proposed operation would also support civil service reform in the key financial
administrations, to enhance sustainability.

31. Macroeconomic Stability. Both institution building and orderly exploitation of oil
revenues require that the overall economic environment remain supportive. Maintaining
macroeconomic stability over the last few years has been crucial, allowing Chad to move from
crisis management to a stable and forward-looking policymaking. It has also promoted social
stability and institutional development. Since Chad is a member of the CFA regional monetary
union and benefits from a fixed exchange rate arrangement, the main instruments available to
government to ensure macroeconomic and financial stability are fiscal. Considerable progress
has been made over the past four years to put public finances on a stronger structural footing.

32. 
Progress must be consolidated, and the Government intends to pursue its fiscal efforts. A
balance has to be found, however, as the private sector is fragile and cannot support an excessive
tax burden. Efforts should continue to broaden the fiscal base. Bringing the informal sector,
which constitutes the largest part of private sector activities in Chad, into the formal economy is
a long process, which may be slowed down by ill-conceived tax initiatives. More is required to
better understand the nexus of fiscal, policy, and institutional issues, especially those related to
legal and judicial reform, which underpin private sector development in Chad.

9

33. 
Regarding the possibility of Dutch Disease and of excessive exposure of government
revenues to the variability of oil prices, it should be noted that the mechanisms implicit in the Oil
Revenue Management Law provide a good basis to minimize risks. Both the "Future
Generations Fund", and the strict mechanisms for utilization of the bulk of the oil resources in
the priority areas are aimed at avoiding spillage into excessive wage-bill growth (one of the main
avenues for transmission of the Dutch Disease) and at preventing unsustainable increases in
public investment (an occurrence that has been typical in many countries faced with sudden oil
price bonanzas). The modalities for the functioning of these mechanisms (including smoothing
price fluctuations) are to be worked out over the next three years, prior to the arrival of oil
revenues, and in accordance with the agreements regulating the Central African Monetary
Community, of which Chad is a member.

34. Decentralization of Service Delivery. Decentralization, a recent focus for Chad, is very
much at the forefront of the political and economic agenda. Faced with the inadequacy of the
very centralized state structure inherited at Independence, Chad is now beginning to ask
important questions about a more equitable and democratic distribution of power among citizens.
Plans are under development for the creation of three sub-national levels of government:
regional, departmental and municipal, each with elected bodies. But, as is the case in many other
countries, the full implications of proposed choices have not been fleshed out. The reform
process must take into account the issue of existing local government structures, "chefferies",
which play an important de facto administrative role. Equally important the issue of how
authority over expenditure of public funds and responsibility for revenue generation is to be
spread across these levels of government has yet to be addressed.

35. 
Experience suggests that the formal decentralization of the state will take time to develop
and will require a careful consideration of alternatives. The decentralization and deconcentration
of service delivery mechanisms are important, however, and can proceed even as the political
decentralization process takes shape. In fact, a defining mark of the success of projected sector
expenditure programs will be the extent to which underlying strategies give users and
communities the appropriate say over the spending and strategic decisions that affect their lives.

B. 

Enhancing the Development of Human Capital

36. 
To substantially increase in the provision of social services to the poor, appropriate
sectoral policies will be required to ensure that resources are put to the best use. This is the area
that will require the greatest attention over the next few years, and where work has begun in
earnest. Three important challenges must be tackled: addressing the issue of population growth,
improving health services, and providing better educational opportunities.

37. 
The demographic challenge. If Chad's population continues to grow at the current rate
of 2.9 percent, it will double in less than 24 years, putting increasing pressure on the growth and
availability of productive resources. The Government has recognized the importance of
addressing the issue of population and reproductive health and has adopted a National Population
Policy in 1994. The first Demographic and Health Survey ever conducted in Chad (1996-97)
points to serious problems: the use of family planning remains abysmally low and maternal
mortality excessively high-women have I chance in 18 to die from a maternity-related cause
during reproductive life. A broad approach is necessary to address these problems and the

10

Box 3 - EIIVIAIDS in Chad: A Key Developmental ChaUenge

As in most developing countries, AIDS/HIV is a serious public health problem in Chad and has the
potential of substantially and dramatically altering developmental prospects. If existing statistics are roughly
accurate, Chad is now in a somewhat better position than many of its neighbors. Overall HIV/AIDS prevalence
rates in Chad are estimated at a relatively low 2.72 percent by the Bank's Report on the global HIVIAIDS
epidemic of June 1998 (although prevalence rates are much higher among at-risk groups such as prostitutes and
the military).
This low rate of prevalence is no cause for complacency, and is likely to be eroded if public policies are
not suitably adjusted. Reported cases are often a poor indicator of existing cases-the number of people living
with HIV/AIDS in Chad is estimated by experts at 87 000 in 1997 out of a population of 7 million. Also, the
number of reported cases is increasing rapidly: an 18.6 percent increase from 1995 to 1996 and one of 100
percent from 1996 to 1997, though improvement in reporting techniques and awareness is believed to contribute
considerably to the higher figures.
In combating the epidemic, the Chadian government has made considerable efforts. A National Program
to Fight AIDS was created as early as 1988 and the governmuent has borrowed from the Bank (under the
ongoing Population and Aids project) and sought the assistance of other donors, in particular WHO and
UNAIDS, in combating the epidemic. Govermment has also been active in bringing the issue into the public
forum and to launch a multisectoral approach to HIV/AIDS, placing the issue squarely into the forum of general
public issues with a specific emphasis on preventive actions.
Social marketing of condoms has been launched and has been moderately successful, essentially in urban
settings. Radio and billboard campaigns have been implemented, training is being provided to health personnel,
better reporting structures have been integrated into the health system and efforts are being made to include
community leaders and religious authorities, to overcome some of the cultural reticence often encountered in the
context of AIDS prevention activities.
Nevertheless there are considerable challenges to be met. Thanks to the Demographic and Health Survey
completed for CHAD in 1998, data on preventive behavior in the face of STD's and in particular of AIDS is
robust. If awareness of HIV/AIDS issues at the time of polling (1996-7) is considerable for a country with such
high illiteracy rates and poor communication between regions, knowledge of what can be done to prevent the
transmission of aids remains very limited and the use of contraceptives even rarer particularly in the rural sector
and for women in both rural and urban settings.
The Bank intends to continue to raise AIDS as a developmental issue at the highest level. Resources and
policy-making attention are necessary to generate progress in this area. The Population and AIDS project
financed by the Bank will pursue its support with the aim of continued improvement in reporting and
epidemiological surveillance, of involving communities in the AIDS prevention process, of training adequate
medical and non-medical personnel to carry out HIV/AIDS information and prevention activities, and of actively
involving authorities and other actors from a variety of key sectors such as transport, education and rural
development in the campaign against the disease. An AIDS component is planned for one of the capacity-
building projects, aimed at increasing awareness and reducing risks related to the development of the pipeline,
and the attendant increase in traffic in and out of the country.
challenge will be to coordinate an array of actions including cost-effective and quality education
and health programs, but also intensified rural development actions.

38. Health. Chad's health status indicators are poor, even when compared with other sub-
Saharan countries with similar characteristics. Crucial factors exogenous to health policy and
service provision, such as lack of access to clean water and poor sanitation and nutrition,
negatively affect the health of a great majority of Chad's population. Despite Government's
recent efforts to increase budget allocations, significant donor contributions, and increased cost
recovery, health expenditures are among the lowest in Africa, (about US$ 5 per capita).

11

39. 
The largest obstacle to better access to and the provision of better quality services is the
dearth of qualified health personnel. Chad sorely lacks trained nurses and other paramedical
staff, which constitute the backbone of its health system, especially in rural areas. As a result,
the use and quality of services, as shown by a recent beneficiary assessment, is low. Scarce
financial and human resources are compounded by the Health Ministry's limited capacity.
Mechanisms to ensure an adequate flow of resources, control efficiency or assess results are
rudimentary. Private, for-profit or not, partnerships which could leverage the State's limited
capacity and perform under more adequate incentive systems, are only starting to develop.
Finally, preventive efforts which are being undertaken to combat the HIV/AIDS epidemic must
be enhanced rapidly (see Box 3).
40. 
The utilization of donor resources and, in the future, of oil revenue proceeds will take
place in the framework of a strategy developed with donor participation, and embodied in the
Government's National Health Policy. The latter envisages, among other things, the creation of
about 670 primary health centers and the training of health personnel in regional schools to
prevent the drain of qualified health-workers to the capital city. In this context efforts will be
made to increase the proportion of female health-workers, a crucial element of success in the
implementation of reproductive and maternity health policy.
41. Education. Despite recent progress, the Chadian education system is currently one of the
world's most under-resourced, under-managed and inegalitarian. The Government's past
strategy, developed with donor assistance, has led to a surge in enrollment rates, but has proven
inadequate to achieve expected quantitative and qualitative results. Also, important quality-of-
education issues such as the adequacy of the curriculum, school calendar and language of
instruction have yet to be fully addressed. These results are in large part caused by the
inadequate overall sector strategy and allocation of public resources in the sector. Secondary and
tertiary education continues to receive a disproportionate share of the budget. Wages of civil
service teachers (only about 39 percent of teachers are paid by the government, the rest are hired
by communities) are too high, and absorb the lion's share of sector resources.

42. The design of an appropriate education strategy is a critical task, which the Bank has been
supporting for over a year. The strategy should move away from a centralized and public-sector
dominated education system, and build on the strong involvement demonstrated by communities
in their schools. Increased and improved community involvement could greatly expand the
Chadian education system and improve its management and efficiency, in a way that is more
responsive to the needs of stakeholders and brings more equity across the country.

C 
Increasing Chad's Growth Potential
43. 
In addition to the long-term beneficial effects on productivity provided by greater creation
of human capital, the oil resources can provide a stimulus to non-oil growth, if used to remove
key bottlenecks to private sector development. These have three dimensions: (i) the Business
Environment; (ii) Rural Development; and (iii) Infrastructure Bottlenecks.
44. Business Environment. Reforms already underway to improve the environment for
business must continue. Government has stressed its commitment to deepen the reforms begun
under its first structural adjustment program. Completion of the privatization program and
implementation of regulatory reforms in the telecommunications, electricity and sugar sectors are
proceeding well. Efforts are underway to strengthen institutions crucial to the protection of

12

Box 4 - Rural Development in Chad

Of Chad's three main ecological zones, both the Saharan oasis economy of the far North and the
livestock economy of the Sahelian zone face large climatic and ecological constraints, which limit their potential
as engines of growth. In the Sahelian zone in particular environmental and ecological concerns - such as
balancing the expansion of herds with the sustainable use of grazing land - strongly curtail growth possibilities.
It is the third and southernmost Sudanian zone of Chad which offers the best agricultural potential, both in terms
of food and cash crops such as cotton and groundnut.
Efforts to launch a dynamic development process based on rural growth in the South, have remained
largely disappointing, however, particularly when compared with some of the agricultural production and yield
patterns observed in other countries with similar eco-geographical characteristics. In Chad's sudano-sahelian
zone, production is characterized by low yields and low labor productivity, due among other factors to limited
use of animal traction and related modem inputs. As a result, stabilization and intensification of agricultural
production linked to improved agricultural practices, systematic use of manure etc, has not taken place. Basic
rural infrastructure, whether in the form of feeder roads or access to water, is essentially non-existent and
producer organizations and other forms of collective organization are few and weak.
If rural development is to make a significant contribution to Chad's long-term growth, the country faces
a major challenge in developing the potential of the Sudanian zone. As has been the case in most other sudano-
sahelian regions in Francophone Africa, cotton development can be the catalyst of such growth. However, this
approach will only be successful if cotton development, which is a key source of monetary income, triggers a
broader range of rural and agricultural activities, including food crop development, improved rural organization,
and the establishment of an efficient rural credit system, allowing for the use of modem inputs, animal traction
and development of basic rural infrastructure. Success of this process in other regions in sub-Saharan Africa
over the last 15 years has led to improvements in rural well-being and demonstrated some of the types of rural
development which could be achieved in the Southern region of Chad.
Despite the fact that Chad's cotton industry developed earlier than most others in the region, it clearly
lags far behind that of other countries. Until recently, recurring civil war has wreaked havoc on production
logistics, hampered trade and disorganized production and markets. Due to insecurity and mismanagement, the
needed infrastructure, in particular roads and feeder roads, has remained insufficient or was not maintained. In
addition to this difficult environment, poor management and frequent turnover in the management of the state-
owned cotton company have translated into costly inefficiencies. Finally, from a historical perspective, prices to
farmers have remained much lower than in other countries over the last 20 year period.

property rights and the exercise of commerce, as are efforts to enhance Chad's business
environment by implementing newly adopted investment regulation and, in the context of
formalization of the economy, launching Social Security reform.

45. Rural Development. Widespread 
rural poverty 
in Chad 
illustrates 
the failure of
Government and donor efforts to generate a dynamic process leading to widely shared rural
growth. To reverse the situation, Chad needs to design a practical and participatory rural sector
strategy, to foster broad-based rural activities and to help reduce the considerable physical and
economic fragmentation of its rural world. Cotton Sector reform 
is one of the essential
remaining actions on the agenda. Restructuring of the Cotton Company, and the introduction of
competition 
in cotton ginning activities should yield results 
in the form of considerable
efficiency gains, allowing higher pass-through prices to fanners.

46. Infrastructure Bottlenecks. Major improvements are required in public infrastructure, in

roads, electricity, water and telecommunication. 
Chad lags 25 years behind comparable
countries in the Sahelian region. Such a deficit of basic infrastructure is a major obstacle to rural

growth, to regional and international trade, and to private sector development. Equally
important, the provision of, and access to, social services are severely hampered by
communications 
constraints 
and 
acute 
shortages of 
affordable 
electricity 
and

13

Box 5: The Petroleum and Electricity Crisis of 1998
Background: Prior to 1998, about two-thirds of Chad's supply of petroleum products were imported from
Nigeria and about one-third from Cameroon. In early 1998, supply from Nigeria stopped as Nigerian refineries
experienced operational problems, then shutdown. This caused prolonged acute shortages in Chad, the closing of
nearly all the filling stations, large retail price increases and the proliferation of unofficial distribution in the
streets of N'Djamena. These shortages, coupled with the poor reliability of the electricity generating units and
the weak financial status of the power and water utility, led to significant power shortages in the capital. The
petroleum and electricity crisis impacted heavily on the activities of the private sector as well as on the
Government's operations. It also created important public safety risks associated with disorganized distribution
of petroleum products and inability to supply electricity to key activities, such as hospitals, water pumping etc.
Lessons Learnt and Strategic Agenda. This crisis helped convince the govemment that key policy and
strategic decisions had to be taken. It illustrated the importance of a financially sound and well managed power
utility able to compete for access to petroleum products and it accelerated the privatization of STEE, which is
now on a fast track (selection of a private partner will take place by mid 1999). It also demonstrated that
alternative sources for the supply of petroleum products need to be secured. In this regard, as Chad is endowed
with crude oil suitable for domestic refining and also with natural gas, a domestic option, the Sedigi/SEERAT
project, is being pursued with donor and private financing. Increasing security of supply may also be obtained
through access to storage facilities in Nigeria and/or in Cameroon's Atlantic coast and at the railway terminal in
Ngaoundere. Finally, the crisis underscored considerable uncertainty in government on the best way to address
it, and while this led to considerable loss of time, it has also helped clarify strategic choices. Administrative
measures initially imposed such as requisitions, elimination of bonded warehouses and import licensing proved
counterproductive and have by now been repealed. New policies are being designed. New petroleum pricing
policies need to be adopted to ensure prompt and regular price adjustments reflecting changes in supply
conditions and in costs.

telecommunications. Finally, in a fragmented country such as Chad, communications constraints
are a major obstacle to nation building and political stability.

47. Transport. Future oil revenues offer a unique opportunity to set up an adequate policy and
institutional framework for the rational development of the road network and the management
and financing of its maintenance. 
In the road sector, the proposed strategy rests on the
development of a national priority road network a part of which should be passable throughout
the year. The approach needs to be based on a multi-sectoral methodology, 
that recognizes
broad economic and social returns to road network (as opposed to single road) development. For
road maintenance, the key principle is having road users pay for maintenance, by structuring fuel
taxation in adequate ways or by introducing road user tariffs, and establishing 
institutional
mechanism for road maintenance with user involvement.

48. Utilities. 
In electricity (where a major crisis has disrupted economic activity in recent
months, see Box 5), urban water supply and telecommunications, good progress has been made
recently in regulatory reforms and privatization, with technical support from the Bank. Private
investors may find 
it extremely difficult, however, 
to finance a steady development of
infrastructure. Because of a particularly narrow customer base, revenues from utilities will
remain low for a long time, and will not allow for a sizeable self financing of investment. There
will be the need therefore to develop a partnership between private utilities and the public sector
for the financing of a basic investment program in this sector.

14

V. CONSULTATIONS ON STRATEGIC PRIORITIES

49. Government Strategy. As previously noted, the developmental challenges outlined
above are on top of Chad's government priorities. Chad's Development Agenda and strategic
objectives have been outlined in its "Strategic Development Options" paper, presented at a
general donor Roundtable in Geneva, October 1998. The Government's paper stressed the need
to sustain recent achievements in political stability and financial stabilization as essential
prerequisites for social and economic progress. Consultations with the Bank on all aspects of
the strategy, as well as on sector matters and design, have been intense over a number of months.

50. 
Stakeholder participation. For the first time in Chad, a participatory approach has been
used in the preparation of the CAS. The move to a broadened dialogue in the context of the CAS
coincides with other steps to expand participation and consultation in Chadian society, most
particularly in the context of the Chad/Cameroon Pipeline Project and the related oil revenue
management program. A process of dialogue and consultation between government, civil
society and private sector representatives is increasingly moving from a limited marginal activity
to the center of the development and political arenas in Chad. This process is expected to deepen
as Chad moves to consolidate recent economic and political gains, and to prepare for the
petroleum era, whose success and sustainability depends on the participation of a broad segment
of society.

51 
The CAS preparation exercise has drawn on extensive consultation with stakeholders
across the country. Five workshops were held, one in the capital, and one in each of two
provinces in the South and the North. The sessions in the provinces were held in small towns,
and included groups from the urban and surrounding rural communities. At each workshop,
Bank and government representatives met with stakeholder groups together. These groups
included women's organizations, producer associations and farming organizations, human rights
organizations, trade unions, local government officials, non-governmental organizations, and
religious groups. The outcomes of these discussions have been incorporated into this CAS.

52. The discussions were marked by a frank and open exchange and yielded important
messages, namely: (i) skepticism regarding Government commitment to the oil revenue
management program; (ii) concerns that public funds, including Bank resources, were not seen to
reach or benefit the targeted communities or the poor; (iii) need to decentralize, moving
expenditure decisions closer to the community-level; and (iv) need to increase participation of
community groups in the oversight of public financial management and service delivery.
Consulted groups also repeatedly raised concerns regarding the Bank's effectiveness in
addressing their needs and to reach the poor, in particular by operating through the Government.

53. Many of the messages gleaned during the CAS consultation echoed, and in some ways
built upon, the consultation process conducted in the context of the Chad/Cameroon Pipeline
Project. The private sponsors and the government have conducted numerous workshops, village
meetings and meetings with NGOs and other civil society organizations in the project area, as
well as in N'Djamena. The Bank has also conducted periodic sessions with NGOs. - In addition,
the local NGOs recently organized a 3-day seminar in the project area. The three dominant
themes identified during these sessions were: (a) minimizing the negative impact of the project

15

on local communities and maximizing compensation to local populations; (b) using oil revenues
to benefit all Chadians; and (c) expanding consultation and participation.

54. Although the messages were sobering, they reflect an important movement in Chadian
society to an era of more open public debate and greater involvement of civil society and local
communities. While the Government, and the Bank, are moving to include more of Chadian
society in the development debate, local NGOs and comrmunity groups are also feeling more
empowered and better organized. The result is a more vibrant public debate, and the potential
for greater openness.

VI. THE BANK' S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

55. 
The discussion presented above sets out Chad's developmental challenge along three
main avenues, each fraught with difficulties. It is neither feasible nor advisable for the Bank's
Assistance Strategy to respond to all of them. Rather, the proposed strategy is tailored to
respond to those challenges where payoffs are likely to be highest, by concentrating our activities
in the areas of our own comparative advantage and taking into full account the lessons of the
past few years.

hat has worked well and what has not

56. 
The outcomes of the Country Portfolio Performance Reviews of February 1998 and 1999
point to an improvement in performance over the last three years, and give clear indications of
where the Bank program has been less effective. Sustainability of Bank projects and difficulty in
measuring their direct impact on the poor remain serious concerns. Tangible results have been
much easier to ascertain in the areas of economic management and in sectors where efforts have
been focused on improving policies and management. Overall this has meant that adjustment
and investment lending have been successful where the objectives were set in terms of policy
reform. Except in the Health Sector, it is not clear whether efforts have yielded tangible
improvements at the service delivery level.

57. Over the last CAS period, portfolio implementation has improved considerably. Despite
the unblemished portfolio performance record hailed in the last CAS, ratings given in FY96
quickly appeared unrealistic and misleading as, shortly after Board presentation, the Transport
Project, the Education Project and the Public Works and Capacity Building project were rated
unsatisfactory. Over the past two fiscal years, considerable progress has been made in the
Education and transport sectors- notably overall enrollment targets and female enrollment
targets for primary education were attained, and an agreement was reached on sustainable
financing arrangements for the road sector. Disbursements have been slow for all projects,
which had contracted works through the ATETIP agency financed by the Public Works and
Capacity Building Credit. They have now reached satisfactory levels. The education and
transport projects are now rated satisfactory. Portfolio quality today is satisfactory with a two
problem projects: the Public Works and Capacity Building and Agricultural Extension Projects.
The latter has recently been rated unsatisfactory, suffers from design flaws and will be
restructured. The Public Works project is being entirely restructured, the institutional setup of
the implementation agency entirely reformed and the remainder of the credit allocated to much
needed public works in N'Djamena where environmental conditions are worsening. Projects are

16

achieving visible results despite weak in-country capacity, thanks to strong commitment and
intensive supervision and capacity building efforts made by Government, Project Units, the
Resident Mission and Bank teams.

58. 
The Bank's strategy has had the most development impact in the past three years in the
following areas. The support to macroeconomic stabilization and market reforms through
sustained dialogue, capacity building (Cr. 2818), and three single-tranche adjustment operations
has helped establish conditions for sustained growth. IDA participation in sectoral and donor-
coordinated investment in health (Cr. 2626 and Cr. 2692) and in transport (Cr. 2520) has helped
prioritize public investment, initiate enhanced private participation, and achieve modest but
significant gains in public provision of health services and transport infrastructure. Ongoing
policy dialogue since 1997 has yielded substantial results 
in 
the electricity and
telecommunication sectors and major steps have been taken toward private provision of utility
services and adequate regulatory frameworks for these sectors, with the objective of leveraging
private investments.

59. 
On the other hand, project implementation in urban works (Cr. 2614), education
(Cr. 2501), and agricultural extension services (Cr. 2685) has been uneven, often because of a
combination of weak local capacities, design flaws and inadequate Bank supervision. It has also
proven difficult to contribute to an improved dialogue between Government and the private
sector, as the objectives of the macroeconomic program have exposed a potential conflict
between aggressive fiscal goals and an attractive business environment. Lack of continuity in
the Bank's presence in the field has restricted systematic donor coordination, especially on
prioritization. Project performance indicators in the social sectors are satisfactory, but health and
education status indicators are slow to change and considerable efforts remain necessary.
Partnership with other donors is one of the avenues which is being actively explored to address
these issues. Considerable efforts still need to be made in the rural sector. The Agricultural
Extension Project, which has very recently been downgraded to unsatisfactory will be fully
restructured, and the Household Energy Credit will become effective in the near future.

60. 
In sum, a review of the last CAS period (see Box 6) yields four main lessons for future
programs which are built into the proposed strategy:

* weak public administration requires continued and systematic focus on capacity building as
both a cross-cutting issue and a case-by-case constraint, to be addressed in the context of
each activity; capacity constraints put a premium on simplicity in project design and close
supervision which is essential to successful implementation;

* strategic issues both at a macro and sector level (rural development, education policy) need
to be well identified and demand adequate analysis of their institutional, social, political and
economic foundations;

* donor coordination has paid off in health, transport or adjustment, while lack of coordination
is one of the sources of poor performance in education and rural development; and

* continuity and long term efforts in Bank and donor support, both in terms of policy dialogue
and institution building, are crucial to achieve meaningful results.

17

Box 6 - Chad's performance under past CAS scenarios

Over the FY96-99 period, Chad has successfully carried out the program envisaged under theHigh Case scenario presented in the
1996 CAS, which presupposed satisfactory implementation of the ESAF program, a sharp restructuring of public expenditures, and
continued satisfactory project and portfolio implementation.
* Macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform. The mid-term review for the third year arrangement of the ESAF was
completed in March 1999 and the three single-tranche adjustment operations programmed were disbursed for a total of US$ 85
million over the last CAS period. Most public enterprises have been privatized and public expenditures have been restructured --
the share of expenditures allocated to development sectors rose to 72 percent in 1998, well above the 64 percent CAS target. The
Government's demobilization program has been successful and the size of the army has been more than halved during the period
(from 52 000 to 25 000 men). Starting from a current deficit of 5 percent of GDP in 1994, increased revenues and reduced
expenditures over the 96-99 period have, for the first time in decades, generated a current budget surplus of 0.1 percentage point
of GDP in 1998.
* Project implementation. Project implementation has been good overall, though somewhat slower than projected. The Pipeline
Project programmed in the FY96 High Case was not presented to the Board due to considerable delays in developing the
public/private partnership arrangements needed for such investment, which largely hinges on the constraints of private investors.
This operation is now scheduled to be presented to the Board as an IBRD enclave loan in the first quarter of FY00. A projected
Urban Infrastructure project was also dropped, due to considerable difficulties encountered in the context of the ongoing Public
Works and Capacity Building operation, its precursor.

Partnerships

61. The need for selectivity on our part is enhanced by the fact that several donors are active in

Chad with important assistance programs, especially the European Union (EU), the African
Development Bank (AFDB), France and Germany. Other donors, such as the Islamic
Development Bank operate on a more selective basis. Donors contribute about one half of all
public expenditures. The key for maximum developmental effectiveness, especially as the oil
era draws nearer, is to improve donor coordination and provide a framework for an effective use
of external resources. If coordination has been the rule in the past, although perhaps not entirely
successfully, it will become one of the most important yardsticks of success in the three years of
this CAS (see Annex D for a table of partnerships).

Proposed Assistance Strategy

62. 
The proposed strategy is driven by the assessment that policy and institutional reforms
over the current CAS period can dramatically leverage the poverty alleviation impact of future
oil revenues. The focus is on facilitating institutional development at the central level and
elaborating sound sector strategies.

63. 
Instruments. Under the proposed strategy, the Bank would provide a program composed
of: a) Investment lending, in sectors or activities where two conditions are met: (i) strategic
issues- especially institutional, delivery mechanisms and sustainability - are well identified, and
(ii) Government and donors expect the Bank to take a leadership role; b) Policy-based lending,
building on experience gained under the first adjustment program and on knowledge to be
formalized in a participatory Public Expenditure Review process supporting (i) continued
implementation of major market reforms and completion of the privatization agenda, and
(ii) policy and institutional reforms, with strong linkages between sectoral strategies and central
economic and financial management; and c) Non-lending services, coupled for impact when

necessary, with lending for capacity building where (i) key strategic issues need to be better

18

identified or addressed, and/or (ii) the Bank has a knowledge advantage, in particular on
international experience with oil windfalls and poverty monitoring, and environmental issues.

64. Selectivity of Intervention. According to these criteria, Bank assistance will be
concentrated on four of the five priority sectors in which oil resources will be utilized (health,
education, transport and rural development) where its presence (even as a non-leading partner,
such as in education and rural development) can help make a material difference. We will also
be active in telecommunications and energy where our projects will mark the culmination of a
policy dialogue that has lasted almost two years. The Bank will subsequently exit from these
two sectors and the private sector will provide additional investments as needed. The present
assistance strategy recognizes that, to consolidate future gains generated by better performance
of the Chadian economy, it would be advisable to undertake a full diagnosis of the Chadian legal
and judicial systems, with a view to their reform in the medium to long-term. We will therefore
work with other partners and donors interested in this area to ensure that this full diagnosis is
carried out and an appropriate program drawn up for the improvement of the legal and judicial
frameworks. We will continue to discuss legal and judicial reform issues in the context of our
policy dialogue with Government and Chad's development partners.

65. Poverty orientation of the strategy. Alleviating widespread poverty is at the core of the
proposed Country Assistance Strategy. In Chad this entails aiming for impact on a broad
spectrum of the population. The proposed program attempts to forcefully support the
improvement of basic living conditions for a large number of Chadians in those areas which have
the greatest impact on their daily lives, -- greater opportunities to increase their income, better
education and learning opportunities, improved health services, improved access to transport,
information and means of communication. The strategy aims to address bottlenecks to poverty
alleviation at various levels through a variety of activities. At -the governmental level the
program will support economic policy and structural reform, and the formulation and
implementation of sound poverty oriented sectoral policies. Improved access and equity in the
provision of social services will also be supported by activities aimed at increasing and
supporting the involvement of non-governmental actors in the provision of social services, be
they communities, non-governmental organizations or private enterprises. All projects under
preparation will be examined in light of their poverty impact and specific operations, such as the
social investment fund for the petroleum project area planned under the Petroleum Sector
Capacity Building Project (FYOO) and the Rural Investment/Community Development Project
(FY02) will provide opportunities for poor communities to directly access IDA funds.

66. Gender. As in many other countries, poverty strikes women in Chad with greater
incidence and depth than their male compatriots. Health status indicators and other social
indicators clearly show that their access to resources and services as well as economic and
educational opportunities is severely limited even by Chadian standards: female illiteracy rates
stand out at approximately 95 percent and 77 percent of women polled in the context of the
recent DHS have never had any schooling. Fertility rates are very high (6.8 children), fewer than
4 percent of women use any form of contraception, and 39 percent them have their first child
between the ages of 15 and 19. Experience has shown that improvements in women's education
and health status, as well as the promotion of women's full participation in social and economic
life have had considerable positive impacts on the overall development progress of societies.
The Bank's strategy therefore proposes to build upon the experience gained in the course of the

19

ongoing Health and Safe Motherhood and Basic Education Projects and examine gender issues
in the context of all proposed lending, in particular in the rural development and social sectors,
but also in the context of policy dialogue with the government and its development partners on
all fronts (legal and judicial reform, education, infrastructure, credit). Under operations targeted
at community development, such as the Social Investment Fund for the Petroleum producing
area (Petroleum Sector Capacity Building FY00) and the Rural Investment/Community
Development Project (FY02), measures will be implemented to give women adequate access to
IDA funds.

Objectives of the strategy

67. Objective 1: Capacity Building for Improved Governance. The Bank group will help
Chad develop its oil resources, and ensure their use for poverty reduction. In partnership with
the private sector, the Bank group will participate in the financing of the Chad-Cameroon
pipeline through IBRD enclave loans to the Governments of Chad and Cameroon2 .
In addition,
Bank support will focus on strengthening Chad's capacity to (i) manage the environmental and
social impacts of the oil development and pipeline project; (ii) manage its petroleum sector, and
(iii) adequately manage its oil resources for maximum poverty alleviation impact. It will also
support Cameroon in building capacity to implement the Environmental Mitigation Plan.

68. 
To achieve the above objectives, IDA will finance two capacity building operations and
will also use adjustment lending and ESW to help establish sound public expenditure
management systems. The first capacity building operation will help mitigate the social and
environmental impacts in the oil producing area and will help build capacity for the effective
management of the oil sector (legal and fiscal issues). The second operation will (i) address the
key systemic constraints in the management of oil revenues and public resources that are found
at the central level, (ii) continue to support improved budget and macroeconomic management,
and (iii) focus on the development of an independent oversight capacity. 
In addition, a
participatory public expenditure review will be conducted to give a large group of civil servants
and representatives of civil society the opportunity to reflect on budget allocation issues, even
before the advent of oil revenues. The conclusions of this review will be widely disseminated.
The programs supported by adjustment operations will be heavily focussed on the milestones
necessary to obtain budgetary and civil service capacity reform. Sector expenditure programs
will be prepared in close consultation with donors (see Box 7).

69. Objective 2: Establishing thefoundations for improved delivery of basic social services.
The Bank program will support the design of sector policies for efficient, equitable and

2 Although Chad is an IDA-only country, the project qualifies for an IBRD enclave loan as a discrete export earning
project that generates sufficient revenues off-shore to service IBRD's debt service obligations. Given, in part, that
the project involves a large scale commercial petroleum venture, sponsored and to be financed primarily by
multinational oil companies, an IBRD loan was chosen over an IDA credit as the mode of World Bank financing.
The proposed IBRD loan would benefit from the typical support arrangements for enclave loans, namely the
establishment of an off-shore account in which project revenues transit, and from which the Bank is paid directly,
the creation of a debt service reserve to further secure the IBRD loan, and a pre-completion guarantee from the
private sponsors covering commercial risks.

20

Box 7 - Sectoral Expenditure Programs

As part of a transition strategy to Chad's "oil era", the Government intends to develop medium-term
Sectoral Expenditure Programs (SEPs) in four major development sectors - education, health, transport and rural
development. These expenditure programs will be phased in over the next three years, and tested before oil
revenues start flowing. The SEPs will improve the quality of strategy implementation and expenditure
management, enhance donor coordination and facilitate an increase in Chad's absorption capacity. Predictable
multi-year spending programs are also an instrument to smooth spending as revenues change with oil prices.
SEPs will be a component of a Public Financial Management reform program, aiming at a fully consolidated
budget management. Because conditions for their successful implementation are not yet met in Chad, the Bank
strategy does not envisage introducing full-fledged Sector Investment Programs in lieu of traditional projects,
but combine Government-led SEPs, investment lending and Public Expenditure Reform Credits.

sustainable delivery systems, especially in education. In this sector, the focus will be on the
design and financing of delivery systems with public-private partnerships. It will emphasize
support to private or community initiative, and decentralized public administration. The role of
the central Govemment will be to provide financial support, ensure quality control and establish
a consensus on strategic issues. 
It will move progressively away from direct provision of
services, where private stakeholders (for-profit or not) are willing and able to move in and likely
to perform better. This focus requires better management (budget, human resources) of central
and decentralized public administration towards better planning and control at the central level,
and operations and management at the decentralized level.

70. 
In the Health Sector, the Bank's policy dialogue will focus on preparing the ground for
oil revenues by increasing the sector's absorptive capacity and ensuring adequate orientation of
expenditures. This effort will be undertaken in coordination with other donors and will focus on
the following instruments: strengthening the capacity of the central health administration,
improving budgetary oversight instruments and procedures to encompass donor and budgetary

contributions, and enhancing cost-recovery. 

Pursuing 

the work well underway under the

ongoing Health and Safe Motherhood, and Population and AIDS Projects, Bank lending and
non-lending activities in the sector will (i) address the severe shortage of qualified health
workers by reinforcing efforts by the Ministry of Health to significantly and rapidly increase the
number of trained staff, especially paramedical staff; (ii) aim to improve the impact of basic
health services on matemal and child mortality; (iii) support development of private/public
partnerships in the provision of health services, including a range of contractual arrangements
between the Ministry and potential private service providers; (iv) strengthen early waming
systems and preventive capacity to address and control epidemic outbreaks and endemic

diseases, such as malaria and (v) combat AIDS through monitoring, preventive action, training of
adequate personnel and coordination of AIDS initiatives with other sectors, 
in particular

Transport and Education.

71. A Health Sector Support Project is scheduled to be presented to the Board in FYOO with
the main objective of addressing the shortage of human resources, especially of trained nurses,
and to strengthen the professional quality of health and management personnel at the prefecture
and district level. To aggressively address this shortage, solutions are being envisaged which
include the provision of non-national staff through donor supported programs for the period
during which the rate of training of national staff will be insufficient to address existing needs.
The project will also focus on (i) improving the accessibility and quality of basic health services,
especially in the areas of child and reproductive health; (ii) improving the financing and

21

management of the health system including planning for oil resources; and (iii) strengthening the
institutional capacities of the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) in piloting reforms and in
coordinating external assistance.

72. 
In the Education Sector, the policy dialogue will be centered on the formulation of a
strategy which seeks to accelerate delivery of quality services in preparation for the availability
of oil revenues and to ensure the design of a system sustainable in the long-term. It will
encourage decentralization of the provision of services through the implementation of an
institutional and regulatory framework consistent with close collaboration between communities
and public authorities in the sector. A study of means to increase the absorptive capacity of the
sector will be conducted. The Bank's program will help (i) improve the quality and access to
education, especially for girls; (ii) enhance the quality and selective expansion of education
services beyond the sixth year of schooling; and (iii) build the Education Ministry's capacity to
plan and execute educational programs at the national and regional level.

73. 
Other donors, and in particular the African Development Bank, which has already been
approached by government to lead the upcoming Education Round Table, will be closely
associated with this sectoral policy dialogue. Support for the preparation of the Education
Round Table in late 1999 will constitute a first step. In this context, the Bank will assist the
Government in defining a financial framework for the sector and broadly outlining a long-term
expenditure program. It will also support an organizational audit of the Ministry of Education
and a number of studies. Following the Round Table, the Bank will support the Government in
putting together a detailed medium-term expenditure framework for the sector.

74. 
The first and foremost priority on the Bank's agenda will be to restructure the ongoing
education project (Credit 2501) to better support (i) the efforts of communities in the primary
education sector; (ii) an increase in investments aimed at addressing the critical elements which
impact on the quality of education, in particular the on-the-job training of teachers and the supply
of educational materials; and (iii) the building of capacity needed for the preparation and
implementation of a more ambitious sector development program. A new investment project is
slotted for FY02 and will aim at further increasing basic education services, reinforcing adult
education, and selectively increasing the supply of post-primary education programs.

75. Objective 3: Removing constraints to growth. The Bank will support continued reforms
to improve the environment for private sector growth as part of the long-term agenda to redefine
the role of the State and improve the capacity of the private sector to be the engine of growth and
development. Reform issues include completion of the privatization agenda, pursuit of reforms
to streamline general licensing regulation and the private investment policy framework, support
to reform of the Social Security system and to constructive dialogue between the public and
private sectors, while seeking to identifying further constraints to private sector development.

76. 
In Transport, the Bank will assist the Government to implement the 1999-2003 Transport
Sector Expenditure Program (PST3), the development of which was also supported by the Bank
under the ongoing Second Transport Sector Project (PST2). The main objective of-the PST3 is
to improve access of the rural population to markets and services (both social and
administrative), by ensuring reliable road connections throughout the year on a very basic
national road network. While other donors will concentrate on upgrading and paving of the most

22

vulnerable road sections, the Bank will mainly support activities designed to safeguard existing
road infrastructure thus avoiding its premature degradation. This will entail activities such as
(i) strengthening the existing paved roads and bridges, and (ii) helping to implement
performance-based road management and maintenance contracts with private firms. On a smaller
scale, the Bank may provide assistance in (iii) the paving of crucial road sections which are
interrupted for long periods in the rainy season and the construction of some bridges. Also, the
Bank will contribute to (iv) capacity-building and institutional strengthening in the transport
sector, which would include support to a small environmental unit within MTPTHU.

77. The Bank's ultimate objective in the Communications Sector is to improve quantity,
coverage, quality, and cost-efficiency of communications services in the country, as well as the
level of access to services, particularly in rural areas, which are chronically isolated. Substantial
poverty impact is to be expected from improved communications, in terms of reduced rural
isolation, access to critical information, promotion of regional and national market integration,
improved efficiency of logistics in social sectors, facilitation of governance and democratic
processes, and economic diversification and growth. Great potential exists in the restructuring
and development of the postal system to encompass a variety of services across the country.

78. 
In this context, the Bank's policy dialogue with Chad in the communications sector has
already yielded results: legal and regulatory reform are underway, liberalization of the sector has
been initiated and government has shown ownership and commitment. Through a small
investment operation to be presented to the Board in FY2000, the Bank will support the design
of communication and access strategies, restructuring actions, the conducting of transactions;
capacity building efforts; and some small-scale investments which are necessary for Chad to
materialize the benefits of sector reform.

79. 
In the Electricity and Energy sectors Bank will explore the range of instruments,
including IDA investment, IFC and MIGA, to support a developmental approach to private
involvement in these sectors; support to the building of a regulatory capacity. The possibility of
investment in partnership with donors and the private sector will be assessed.

80. Rural Development. The Bank has begun to build up its knowledge base in Chad's rural
sector in the key areas of policy reform and implementation issues, existing initiatives and
activities of other donors, community and NGO capacity and capacity building requirements,
local infrastructural needs and potential for sustainable mechanisms to be put in place. It would
therefore take some time to develop a comprehensive assistance strategy in the sector that takes
into account all the key constraints and what other donors are doing. The Bank is supporting a
participatory process of rural sector strategy and action plan development that would set the
stage for identifying some of the main priority investments in the sector.

81. The Bank's approach, based upon a fair assessment of the limits of its current experience
and knowledge and on an understanding of its comparative advantages, will consist of a limited
range of activities focused along four axes: (i) improving the road network through its sector
Transport investment project; (ii) engaging in in-depth policy dialogue to reform the cotton
sector, (iii) supporting the development of farmer organizations and community participation at
the local level, and (iv) reassessing and addressing agricultural extension and research issues
through the ongoing Agricultural Extension project, which will be restructured to better address

23

existing needs at grass root levels. Under (iii), measures will be taken to address the dearth of
basic rural infrastructure through a grass-roots implemented investment fund/community
development project with a bottom-up approach

82. Cotton sector reform. Progress on cotton sector reform has been slow. The government
was not convinced of the need to initiate an ambitious reform program, did not feel it had the
capacity to implement it while simultaneously addressing many other urgent issues, and was
worried by the exceptional political and economic challenge of implementing a reform program
which would impact the life of about three million people in a region which had recently been
shaken by an armed insurrection. There was also serious divergence of views among key donors
regarding the type of reform that was needed. Finally, our knowledge base was thin. Over the
last year, however, the foundations for future reform have been laid down.

83. First, an initial round of reform has been undertaken and includes refocusing the activities
of the state-owned company CotonTchad, by privatizing activities not directly related to the
cotton/ginning/marketing chain, such as cotton oil production and transportation. Second,
discussions among donors have helped to clarify the needed strategic approaches to Cotton
sector reform in Francophone countries. Third, an experienced consultant has made a
preliminary but detailed analysis of the sector in Chad with recommendations on what should be
the next steps in the reform program. These recommendations are now being evaluated and will
form the basis of extensive policy discussions with the government.

84. A thorough reform of the sector is badly needed for several important reasons: (i) as
regards cotton and related rural development, Chad lags behind other Sahelian countries (yields
are low, animal traction has not developed significantly, input supply is poorly organized etc);
(ii) political interference has had a negative impact on the management of the company and its
performance; (iii) stagnation of production, high costs, and environmental degradation threaten
the development of the sector in the short term and its viability in the long term. But the reform
program is technically complex and politically difficult to implement. Its success requires full
ownership from the government and extensive technical preparation. The risk of sector
disruption needs to be carefully managed, over a multi-year period.

85. The ultimate objective is to move from the current public monopoly to a fully liberalized
and competitive cotton sector; intermediate steps are needed. The capacity of producer
organizations must be developed to take over most functions related to credit, input distribution
and the logistics of primary marketing. These elements are not present today. During this CAS
period, the Bank proposes to proceed as follows: (i) help Chad develop a sound analytical base in
the sector; (ii) assist Government to complete the initial reform program of privatizing the
activities not directly related to the ginning/marketing chain; (iii) initiate, with other donors, a
program to promote and reinforce producer organizations; (iv) pursue dialogue with government
and other actors; and (iv) initiate a pilot privatization of a cluster of ginning factories.

86. Grassroots community development and rural infrastructure. The Bank's strategy to
support rural development will also aim to respond to the global deficit in rural infrastructure
(wells, feeder roads, small irrigation works and watershed management, small bridges and
market places). Experience shows that a participatory approach to rural infrastructure
development is often successful and ensures sustainability of rural investments. Such an

24

Box 8 - Sustainable Development - The Environmental Challenge.

In developing its potential in a sustainable manner, Chad faces a myriad of environmental challenges such as
desertification, soil erosion and decreased fertility, deforestation., the shrinking of the wetlands of Lake Chad,
poor urban waste management, and decreased biodiversity. As population continues to grow rapidly relative to
available resources and 80 percent of Chad's population derives its income from the primary sector,
environmental degradation affecting the productivity and sustainabilcy of agricultural and livestock activities is
likely to have a wide-spread impact on rural incomes and, consequently on poverty. Sustainable wood-fuel
production and better access to safe- water are some of the other salient environmental issues to be addressed.
Both natural and man-made phenomena such as decreased rainfall over the past 40 years, recurrent warfare, and
social and cultural patterns of behavior have contributed to bringing environmental issues to the fore of the
development agenda.
In 1998 Chad has adopted a framework law on Environment. Preparations are underway for a National
Environmental Action Plan. However, better knowledge of the state of the environment and the economic and
social impacts of the present environmental degradation trends, as well as a comprehensive framework to
manage natural resources, which can contribute to growth and have local, national and international benefits, are
urgently needed. Especially in the context of the exploitation of oil, considerable efforts need to be made to
promote sound natural resource management and ensure that public and private actors in Chad develop the
needed capacity to implement adequate environmental policies and promote environmentally responsible
behavior among Chad's citizens.
Under the Bank's current program, environmental issues are addressed at many levels: (i) under existing
projects, in particular the Agricultural Extension Project, which in its restructured form will examine soil fertility
and erosion questions; (ii) in the context of the projects under preparation through environmental assessments
and specific components aimed at developing the capacity of line ministries to manage environmental issues, as
in the future Transport Sector Project and the Pipeline Project; and (iii) through environmentally-targeted
operations such as the Household Energy Project, which aims to implement community management of wood
fuel resources as a means to address the deforestation of the outskirts of N'Djamena, and the Petroleum Sector
Capacity Building project, which will develop the Environmental management capacity of governmental and
non-governmental actors in the context of petroleum exploitation. The latter, scheduled for Board presentation in
FY00 will strengthen the capacity of all actors involved (governmental and non-governmental) to ensure that the
Environmental Mitigation Plan related to the Pipeline project is fully and adequately implemented. This will
entail strengthening capacity and allocating resources to the Ministry of Water and Environment, as well as
training local communities and organizations in Environmental Management techniques and involving them in
monitoring enviromnental conditions during and after project implementation.

approach is predicated on the identification by communities of their essential needs and on their
participation 
in the planning and implementation of investments and their management of
maintenance activities after project completion. With this in mind, the Bank plans to support a
community development/rural investment fund which would finance a menu of rural investment
micro projects, initially in the petroleum exploitation region and later elsewhere in the country.

87. Environment. The Bank's proposed strategy will address environmental 
issues in a
number of sectors (Box 8). In addition to the customary Environmental Assessments which will
be carried out for all projects under preparation according to Bank internal rules, considerable
efforts will be made to strengthen 
the govemment Environmental Management capacity to
address the environmental issues raised by oil exploitation in particular.

IFCActivities

88. 

Chad became a member of IFC in April 1998, primarily to qualify the pipeline for IFC

financing. It is part of the Extending IFC's Reach initiative, and is covered from the field office

25

in Douala. There is no portfolio outstanding at this time. An initial promotion mission was
made in July, 1998, which identified a number of potential small projects. Follow up missions
have developed some of these further, and IFC expects to have initial small manufacturing
projects materialize in the coming year, some financed under the PROPARCO Agency
agreement. Additional possibilities for IFC involvement in the financial sector may be
investigated in the future.

89. 
IFC's major involvement in Chad is support for the Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline. IFC is
collaborating with IDA and IBRD in arranging the debt financing for the project, expected to be
$100 million for IFC's account, and up to $300 million in participations by commercial banks
under IFC's B loan program.

VII. ASSISTANCE SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS

90. 
The challenge posed by the prospective development of the oil economy is an exceptional
one for Chad. It requires vigorous and sustained efforts in policy reform and capacity building.
It is an ambitious undertaking, on which the Base case is predicated. Because of the "lumpiness"
of the investment in the oil project, providing support commensurate with the requirement of a
comprehensive strategy leads to only two scenarios: a Base Case and a Low Case.

Assistance scenarios

91. Base Case. We now consider Chad to be in the Base case, on the basis of its perfonnance.
Maintenance of the present Base Case scenario is predicated on continued sustained
macroeconomic performance, completion of 
the reform agenda, successful portfolio
implementation, and satisfactory implementation of the first steps of the institutional
strengthening program for the preparation of the oil revenue management (see Table 2 for a
summary of the Base Case lending program).

92. Over the coming months, three key projects would be presented to the Bank's Board of
Executive Directors: (i) one investment operation in support of the construction of an oil pipeline
from Doba Chad to the port of Kribi in Cameroon financed through an IBRD enclave loan for
US$ 35 million; (ii) two IDA-financed Capacity Building projects totaling US$ 35 million
aimed at developing capacity to manage oil revenues and civil society's participation in such
management, and capacity to manage the petroleum sector and implement the environmental and
social mitigation measures related to the oil exploitation project.

93. 
In addition to these projects amounting to US$70 million, the Base Case foresees lending
for US$210 million over a three year period, together with a substantial program of non-lending
services. The former includes adjustment support (through one or more operations) for a total of
US$60 million aimed at public expenditure reform and completing the remaining reform agenda;
six investment operations, of which 4 in priority sectors for poverty alleviation (health,
education, transport and rural development, US$120 million) and 2 aimed at lifting infrastructure
bottlenecks and promoting private sector development (electricity and telecoms, US$30 million).
94. 
Non-lending activities will be key to the successful implementation of the program.
Coherent and consistent Policy dialogue on revenue management, the orientation, effectiveness

26

Base case - Proposed lending program FY 00-02

Table 2

FY 00 

Chad Cameroon Pipeline 

Project 

Capacity Building for 
Petroleum Sector 
Capacity Building for 
Revenue Management
Health Sector Support 

Credit

Telecommunications Project 

Total lending for FY 
oIw EBRD 

Total lending for CAS 
o/w IBRD 
o/w IDA 

Lending 

FY01 

(US$m) 
$ 35 Transport 

(IBRD)

Lending 

FY02 

(US$m) 
$ 50 Education 

$ 25 Electricity 

$ 10 SAC/PERC 

$ 20 Rural hifr./ 

Comnunuity
$ 60 Development

Lending

(US$m)
$ 20

$ 10

$ 40

$ 10

$ 120 
$ 35

$ 280
$ 35
$ 245

$130 

$30

and impact of expenditures in development sectors will be particularly crucial to the success of
the proposed strategy and will require enhanced coordination between sectoral teams inside the
Bank and with other donors. Planned ESW includes a participatory PER, with particular focus
on four priority sectors to which oil revenues are expected to accrue (health, transport, education
and rural development), analytical support to strategy work in the social sectors and in rural
development, especially cotton liberalization, and the implementation of poverty monitoring
mechanisms.

95. 
The Base Case presented above is justified by past performance and the continuing
improving policy environment. The lending program proposed is front-loaded (in terms of
number of operations) due to the clustering in FY00 of oil development and capacity building
operations, which go hand in hand. In addition to these, two sectoral investment operations per
year are proposed as well as one adjustment operation in the middle of the period. The demands
of this program on governmental capacity will be substantial but not overwhelming as those
sectors where strategy work is advanced and ministerial capacity has been developed under
existing projects are slotted for FY00 and early FY0 1.

96. 
Low case. Should the implementation of the reform program stall or should the steps
taken in preparation of the oil revenue management instruments be grossly inadequate, the
program would be scaled back considerably. Under such circumstances - a Low Case scenario -
no adjustment lending would be possible, loans related to oil development (if already approved)
would be suspended and remedies applied, as required by the circumstances, and the lending
program would be limited to investment in the health sector. The program would then consist of
a total of US$40 million during the period covered by this CAS (in addition to the US$70 million
contemplated for the next three-five months). Policy dialogue on governance would be stepped
up and the non-lending program would focus on actions needed to return to a satisfactory
implementation of economic reforms and public finance management, such as reinforced

27

economic policy dialogue in coordination with other donors and just-in-time advice and
analytical work in public financial management.

Triggers

96 The triggers for the proposed assistance scenarios are illustrated in Table 3 (below). The
Base Case would be in effect if (i) an appropriate macroeconomic framework is in place, (ii) the
reform program is proceeding as scheduled, (iii) implementation of existing and new projects
remains satisfactory, with particular emphasis on sector-wide operations (Health and Transport),
(iv) sector strategies are adequate for priority sectors, and (iv) satisfactory progress is made in
the implementation of Chad's Oil Revenue Management Program, in particular with regard to
the preparatory steps implementing the Oil Revenue Management Law. The Low Case would be
triggered by non-compliance with at least one of the triggers for the Base Case and by any
Government action or change in circumstances which would severely undermine implementation
of the Revenue Management Program, including material adverse changes to the Oil Revenue
Management Law.

VIII. RISKS

97. As emphasized throughout this document, the proposed strategy has high potential
payoffs, but also potentially high risks.

98. A number of related risks concem the pace and quality of the national debate on the oil
economy. The political leadership in the period leading up to the beginning of the oil era could
waver; the process of political reconciliation could be delayed, and therefore the internalization
of the strategy for exploitation of oil resources could come to a halt. We classify this risk as
significant, but unlikely: the financial incentives/temptations that could prompt departure from
the agreed utilization of oil revenues would not yet be present. Nevertheless, as discussed above,
slow-down in the implementation of the reforms necessary to enhance good governance would
lead to the low case scenario in our assistance strategy.

99. Other risks could be of external nature. The region remains very volatile and this could
distract the leadership or disrupt the internal reconciliation process. A further risk that should
not be underestimated relates to the commitment of the private investors in the Doba project. If,
for any reason, the project were to be delayed or cancelled, the underlying premise of this CAS,
i.e. to help the country prepare for the arrival of new resources, would no longer be appropriate.
While it is clear that many of the sectoral strategies proposed in this CAS would remain
appropriate under the changed circumstances, it is quite likely that a "non-oil" situation would
call for at least a thorough update of the CAS document.

100. Finally, the commodity slump currently underway, resulting in large part from the Asian
crisis of last year, could intensify and throw Chad's macroeconomy in disarray, both on the fiscal
and external fronts. If this scenario were to materialize, while the overall stance of structural
policies continued along broadly acceptable lines, the Bank would consider enhanced levels of
adjustment assistance to minimize disruptions to the continuation of the oil agenda. An interim
CAS update would be produced to discuss options.

28

Case 
Base Case 

Low Case 

Triggers 
* Appropriate Macro 

Table 3. CAS Triggers

Lending 
Oil/Capacity Building 

.

.

Framework 
* Chad-Cameroon Pipeline Project 
Progress in Reform Program 
.
Petroleum Sector Capacity 
satisfactory 
Building Project 
* Satisfactory Portfolio 
* Oil Revenue Management 
Implementation, including 
Capacity Building Project
successful implementation of Macro Stability
ongoing sector-wide 
* SAC/PERC
investment projects (Health Priority Sectors
and Transport) 
a Health Sector Support
. Adequate Sector Strategies in 
.
Third Transport Project
four priority sectors 
.
Education Project
Progress on implementation 
.
Pilot Rural Development
of the Oil Revenue 
Infrastructure
Management Program 
* Telecommunications Project
* Electricity Project
* Government action or change * Health Sector Support Credit 
in circumstances which 
severely undermines 
implementation of the 
Revenue Management 
Program (including material 
adverse changes to the Oil 
Revenue Management Law) 
. Non-compliance with any of 

Non Lending Services
.
Sectoral PERs

* Sector Strategies
.
Poverty Monitoring
* Cotton Sector
Liberalization

* Reinforcid economic
policy dialogue in
coordination with other
donors
Just-in-time advice and
analytical work on
public financial
management issues,
especially expenditure

.

the Base-Case Triggers

IX. CONCLUSION

101. This is a crucial period for Chad: The strategy proposed in this document aims to ensure
that, with the support of the international community and of the Bank in particular, the country
can aspire to dramatically accelerate its efforts to lower poverty and provide better lives for the
next generation of Chadians. It aims to support Chad in seizing the present challenge and turn oil
into benefits for a large portion of one of the world's poorest populations. This is a challenge to
which the Bank should be proud to rise.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By Shengman Zhang
Managing Director

Washington, D.C.
May28, 1999

29

Annex Al
Page 1 of2

Chad at a glance

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Low-
Income 

Chad 

Development diamond'

1997
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas methodo US$) 
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions) 
Average annual growth, 199147
Population (9%) 
Labor force (9%) 

6.8 
240 
1.6 

614 

2,048 
350
722

Life expectancy

500 

309 

2.5 

2.7 
2.6 

2.1
2.3 

.. 

GNP 
per 
capita 

Gross
primiary
enrollment

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1991-97) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (I% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (yeats) 
Infant mortality (per 1, 000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to safe water (I% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of populaton age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population) 
Male 
Female 

21 
50 
132 

32 
52 
90 

28
59
78
61 
71
47
91 
100
81

.. 

.. 

Access to safe water

24 
15 
32 
40 
23 

44 
43 
75 
82 
67 

-Chad 

-

Low-Income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1976 

1986 

1996 

1997

Economic ratios

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debVGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debfUGDP 
Present value of debtexports 

0.61 
19.1 
22.9 
4.5 
17.5 
-14,9 
0.1 
16.9 
3.6 

0.75 
9.1 
19.0 
-22.1 
-14.0 
-23.1 
0.2 
32.2 
5.2 

1.6 
13.5 
17.5 
-2.7 
1.3 
-12.2 
0.9 
58.0 
11.3 

1.6
16.2
17.6 
-1.5
1A.
-15.0 
0.9 
65.0 
13.4

Trade

Domestic 
omes 
Svn

Invesment

..
..

Indebtedness

1976-86 1987-97 

1996 

1997 199842

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

1.0 
-2.3 
-1.0 

.. 
.. 

3.7 
1.1 
-7.2 

4.1 
3.9 
11.2 

5.7 
3.1
9.8 

-

Chad 

Low-income group

.. 

1

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1976 

1986 

1996 

1997 

Growth rates of output and Investment(%)

(I% of GDP)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

43.9 
20.7 
17.5 
35.3 

38.7 
20.2 
18.1 
41.1 

37.1 
13.4 
11.4 
46.7 

37.4 
14.7 
12.2 
45.1 

0

40 -
20

o 

2

Private consumption 

71.8 102.3 

93.7 

94.3 

-20- 

924 

95 

as 

97

General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

23.7 
37.5 

19.8 
50.3 

9.0 
33.6 

7.2 
35.4 

GDl 

*-GDP

GIO

1976-86 1987-97 

1996 

1997 

Growth rates of exports and imports (%)

(average annual growth)
Agiculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

0.1 
0.6 
0.6 
1.6 

18.0 
17.6 
2.5 
21.5 

2.7 
5.9 

5.2 
9.5 

30
20

.. 

10

1.9 

1.5

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

4.3 
-5.4 
-11.3 
1.7 
0.9 

18.9 
8.2 
28.1 
16.4 
19.2 

1.0 
2.1 
22.0 
5.4 
3.7 

1.5 
-1.1
19.1 
6.4 
7.3 

o0 

93 

95 V 

9'7

-20

-Exports 

O 

Imports

I

Note: 1997 data are preliminary estimates.
'The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond viin
be incomplete.

Annex Ai
Page 2 of 2

Chad

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1976 

1986 

1996 

1997 

Inflation (%)

Domestic prices
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

40

.. 

-13.1 
-16.9 

11.3 
11.6 

5.6 
2.6 

30

8.4 

2020 

Govemmentfinance 
(% of GDP, includes cunent grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/defici 

10
o
-10 

.. 
.. 
.. 

6.8 
-2.8 
-20.6 

13.4 
4.2 
-5.1 

12.7 
4.4 
-5.2

94 

95 

96 

97

I 

GDP deflator O-CPI

TRADE

1976 

1986 

1996 

1997 

Exportandimportlevels(US$millions)

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob) 
Cotton 
Meat 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 

.. 

99 
42 
35 
5 
207 

221 
124 
42 
2 
289 
4 

211 
115
46 
1 
283
4 

416T

.. 
.. 

277

.. 
.. 

277

.. 

.. 

139 

5 

l 

97

Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 
Export prce index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

19 
42 
0 
0 

10 
100 
100 
100 
100 

12
106 
95
102 
94

.. 

0W 

A

.. 
.. 

i Exports 

R impots

.. 

.

BALANCE 

of PAYMENTS

1976 

1986 

1996 

1997 

Current account balance to GOP ratio (%)

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 
Net income 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Financing iteris (net) 
Changes in net reserves 
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, localUS$) 

27 
213 
-86 
0 

143 
378 
-235 
-9 

283 
546 
-263 
-32 
112 
-242 
201 
41 

267 
537 
-270
-28 
92 
-283 
294 

5

-

-10
s 5

-91 
104 
-14 

-174 
155 
19 

-20 -

-25

-11 

91 

92 

93 

94 

9S 

96 

97

23 

20 

178 

174

239.0 

346.3 

511.6 

571.2

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1976 

1986 

1996 

1997

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 
Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 
World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net tlow 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

Composttion of total debt, 1997 (USS miillions)

103 
0 
16 
5 
0 
0 

242 
0 
48 
8 
0 
2 

939 
0 
433 
34 
0 
4 

983

0 

5 G. 19

457 
39
0
5

E 161

B3; 457

.D: 

28

5 
2 

29 
0 

46 
-2 

25
0

..

c. 71

20 
5 
0 
5 
0 
5 

35 
10 
2 
8 
1 
8 

0 
17 
1 
16 
3 
13 

25 
49 
2 
47
3
43

A - IBRD 
E- Bilateral
- IDA D - Other mutilateral F - Private
G - Short-term |

C-IMF 

Development Economics 

9/1/98

Annex B I
Page 1 of I

Chad - Selected Indicators of
Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects under implementationa 
Average implementation period (years)b 
Percent of problem projectsa, c
by number 
by amount 
Percent of projects at riska, d
by number 
by amount 
Disbursement ratio (%)e 

Portfolio Management

CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999

12 
3.48 

25.00 
33.89 

50.00 
54.68 
22.88 

11 
3.91 

36.36 
43.32 

40.00 
50.76 
21.31 

11 
3.92 

27.27 
26.76 

33.33 
49.20 
21.70 

10
4.31

30.00
28.28

40.00
51.24
21.76

768.46 
64.04 

684.93 
62.27 

848.68 
77.15 

487.69
48.77

Memorandum item 

Since FY80 

Last five FYs

Projects evaluated by OED
by number 
by amount (US$ millions) 
Percent rated U or HU
by number 
by amount 

23 
374.50 

57.14 
41.10 

8
218.10

37.50
38.84

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY)
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning of the
year: investment projects only.

Annex B2
Page I of 2

Chad - Bank Group Program Summary, FY 2000-2002

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program, FY 2000-2002a

Implementationb
Project 

FY 
(H/M/L)

2000 CAP.BLDG MGT PET.ECO 
CHAD TELECOMM. 
HEALTH SECTOR PROJ. 
PET. TA/OIL SECTOR 
TD/CM PIPELINE 

Subtotal 

2001 ELECTRICITY 
THIRD TRANSPORT SECT 
SAC/PERC 

Subtotal 

2002 EDUCATION VI 
PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT 

Subtotal 

Total, FY 2000-2002 

Strategic rewardsb

US$(M) 

(H/M/L) 

risks

H 
H 
H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 

H 
H 

10.0 
10.0 
40.0 
25.0 
35.0 

120.0

20.0 
50.0 
60.0 
130.0

20.0 
10.0 

30.0

280.0

H
M
M
H
M

M
L
M

L
L

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M), or low (L).

Chad - IFC and MIGA Program, FY96-99

Annex B2
Page 2 of 2

Category 
IFC approvals (US$m)a 

Sector (%)

TOTAL 

Investment instrument (%)
Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity b 
Other 

1996 
0.00 

Past
1997 
0.00 

1998 
0.00 

1999
0.00

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

TOTAL 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 
MIGA commitments (US$m) 

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
0.00 

0.00
0.00

aExcludes AEF projects.
blncludes quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B3
Page 1 of I

Chad - Summary of Nonlending Services

Completion 
FY

Audiencea 

Objectiveb

Product 

Underway

Cotton Sector Work - Analytical assessment 
of the sector 

Rural Development Strategy - Preparatory 
Workshops 

FY99 

FY00 

Bank, Govemment, 
Donors 

Government, Rural 
Society, Bank, Donors 

Planned

Economic and Expenditure work

Annual Sectoral PERs -- with emphasis on 
Health, Education, Transport and Rural 
Development 

Sectoral Strategies

Education 

Rural Development Strategy 

FYOO-02 

Government, Donors, 
Public, Bank 

FY00 

Govemment, Private 
Sector, Communities,
Donors

FYOI 

Govemment, Rural 
Society, Bank, Donors 

Knowledge
generation,
problem-solving

Knowledge
generation,
public debate,
problem solving

Knowledge
generation,
public debate,
problem-solving

Problem-solving

Knowledge
generation,
problem solving

Cotton Sector Work (continued) 

FY00 

Poverty Monitoring

Analytical support for implementation of 
poverty monitoring system in-country 

FYOO-02 

Extensive Household Survey 

FYOO-01 

Govemment, Rural 
Society in cotton area, 
Bank, Donors 

Knowledge
generation,
problem-solving

Govemment, Bank, 
Donors, Public 
dissemination 

Government, Donors, 
Bank, Public 
dissemination

Knowledge
generation,
problem solving,
public debate

Knowledge
generation

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Chad Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY

(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100)

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 

Social securty and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

Access to safe water
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 

Rural 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 

Child malnutHtion (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under5(perthousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1992-97 

4.0 
2.0 
15.6 
6.0 

.. 
.. 

230 

.. 
.. 

0.2

.. 
.. 
.. 

26 

43 
23 

.. 
.. 

39 
38 
41 

166 
252 

554 
492 
858 

5.1 
2.7 
19.9 
7.1 

.. 
.. 
.. 

190 
77 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

31 

.. 
.. 

.. 

1 

35 

43 
41 
45 

118 
219 

556 
449 
700 

7.2 
2.8 
22.8 
6.5 

64.0
63.0
67.0

230 
119 

1.6 
2.4 

46
59
33

24 

48 

17 

30 
24 

39

49 
47 
50 

100 
182 

448 
383 
840

World Development Indicators 1999 CD-ROM, World Bank

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

612.4 
2.2 
32.3 
5.5 

Low-
income

2,035.6
1-7
28.4
4.0

510 
118 

350
122

2.5 
4.3

1.0

47 

74 
32 

58 
53 

51 
49 
52 

91 
147 

428 
375 

69

80
66

74
76

59
58
60

82
118

274
255

Annex B5
Page I of 3

Chad - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1995 
1996 

Estimate 
1998 

Projected
2000 

Indicator 

1994 

1997 

1999 

2001

National accounts
(as % GDP at current
market prices)

Gross domestic product 
Agriculturea 
Industrya 
Servicesa 

100.0 
37.2 
11.7 
49.5 

100.0 
35.1 
14.3 
48.4 

100.0 
37.1 
13.4 
46.7 

100.0 
37.4 
14.7 
45.1 

100.0 
37.5 
15.0 
43.2 

100.0 
35.0 
15.7 
43.2 

100.0 
34.8 
15.8 
43.5 

100.0
33.9
15.9
43.2

Total Consumption 
Grossdomesticfixed 
investment
Government investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in
stocks)

102.2 
11.8 

105.2 
11.6 

102.7 
11.9 

101.5 
14.4 

100.7 
15.2 

99.7 
19.5 

99.1 
23.2 

97.0
36.0

7.3 
9.3 

6.3 
4.0 

6.4 
7.1 

6.6 
9.7 

7.1 
8.1 

7.4 
12.1 

7.8 
15.4 

8.2
27.8

Exports (GNFS)b 

16.0 

21.5 

17.5 

17.6 

19.7 

18.2 

18.6 

19.0

Imports (GNFS) 

34.9 

36.9 

33.6 

35.4 

35.6 

37.4 

40.9 

51.9

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

-2.2 
5.3 

-5.2 
-0.1 

-2.7 
1.3 

-1.5 
1.4 

-0.7 
3.6 

0.3 
3.6 

0.9 
4.2 

3.0
5.0

Memorandum items
Grossdomesticproduct 
(US$ million at current
prices)
Gross national product per 
capita (US$, Atlas method)

1179 

1438 

1624 

1521 

1566 

1607 

1738 

1881

230 

210 

210 

240 

230

Real annual growth rates
(%, calculated from 1977
prices)
Gross domestic product at 
market prices
Gross Domestic Income 

9.9% 

0.9% 

3.7% 

4.1% 

7.0% 

1.3% 

5.5% 

5.5%

6.8% 

4.0% 

3.1% 

2.7% 

8.3% 

1.0% 

5.7% 

5.4%

Real annual per capita
growth rates (%, calculated
from 1977 prices)
Grossdomesticproductat 
market prices
Total consumption 
Private consumption 

7.1% 

-1.6% 

1.1% 

1.6% 

4.4% 

-1.2% 

3.0% 

2.9%

1.1% 
8.6% 

4.5% 
5.4% 

-1.5% 
-3.2% 

-1.2% 
-0.2% 

4.2% 
4.0% 

-2.7% 
-7.3% 

2.2% 
-0.6%
0.9% 
-1.8%
(Continued)

Annex B5
Page 2 of 3

Chad - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

Actual 
1995 
1996 

Estimate 
1998 

1999 

Projected
2000 

1997 

2001

1994 

Balance of Payments
(US$m)

Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports(GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Netcurrenttransfers 
(including official current
transfers)
Current account balance 
(after official capital grants)

Net private foreign direct 
investment
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private

Other capital (net, 

including 

errors and omissions)
Change in reservesd 

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of 
GDP at current market
prices)
Real annual growth rates
(1977 prices)
Merchandise exports 
(FOB)
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports 
(CIF)

Public finance
(as % of GDP at current
market prices)e
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 

190.0 
135.2 
411.4 
203.7 
-221.4 
113.3 

309.0 
247.1 
531.2 
281.7 
-222.2 
100.3 

283.0 
221.1 
545.7 
289.3 
-262.7 
112.4 

266.8 
211.1 
537.2 
283.6 
-270.4 
91.7 

308.5 
247.6 
557.7 
298.4 
-249.2 
151.1 

292.1 
224.4 
600.5 
329.2 
-308.4 
124.5 

323.1 
250.6 
710.5 
400.9 
-387.5 
132.7 

356.7
276.4
977.1
635.6
-620.4
130.7

-48.7 

-53.7 

-106.3 

-142.2 

-134.2 

-200.2 

-278.0 

-532.4

14.2 

10.1 

14.8 

15.8 

34.9 

83.3 

155.0 

370.0

.. 

38.9 

.. 

70.3 

.. 

45.8 

.. 

41.8 

..

94.0 

123.5 

99.5 

83.0

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

76.8 

73.8 

40.6 

-10.7 

2.9 

-17.1 

54.4 

18.5

-18.8% -15.4% -16.2% 

-17.8% -15.9% 

-19.2% 

-22.3% 

-33.0%

-16.2% 26.5% 

-7.2% 

11.2% 

13.2% 

-5.3% 

7.0% 

7.4%

-18.5% 29.0% 
-0.8% 22.6% 
-13.3% 
18.2% 

-9.4% 
-5.2% 
5.4% 

10.7% 
0.0% 
6.4% 

11.4% 
5.0% 
4.0% 

-5.5% 
6.1% 
12.1% 

5.7% 
8.9% 
17.7% 

5.7%
12.3%
41.0%

4.9 
10.0 

6.2 
9.0 

7.2 
9.3 

7.7 
8.3 

7.7 
7.7 

10.4 
9.0 

11.8 
12.6
11.0 
11.4
(Continued)

Annex B5
Page 3 of 3

Chad - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 
Current account surplus (+) 
or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP (at current market 
prices)
Growth of M2 (%) 
Privatesectorcreditgrowth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( 1977 =100)
Merchandiseexportprice 
index
Merchandise import price 
index
Merchandise terms of trade 
index
Real exchange rate 
(US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index 
(% growth rate)
GDP deflator 
(% growth rate)

1994 
-5.1 

Actual 
1995 
1996 
-2.8 
-2.1 

Estimate 
1998 
0.0 

1997 
-0.6 

Projected
2000 
0.7 

1999 
14 

2001
1.2

9.0 
14.9 

9.1 
10.9 

9.0 
13.2 

9.6 
12.0 

7.9 
8.0 

9.4 
9.7 

8.6 
7.8 

8.1
7.3

12.1 

15.0 

15.6 

13.2 

13.3 

13.6 

13.8 

13.9

66.3 
51.7 

36.0 
-41.3 

20.2 
55.1 

-9.3 
61.0 

-5.7 
42.0 

6.5 
59.0 

10.5 
84.0 

8.9
80.0

103.4 

149.4 

117.0 

106.3 

110.5 

105.7 

110.3 

113.2

164.8 

192.9 

174.7 

165.8 

149.0 

144.6 

149.7 

155.7

62.8 

77.5 

67.0 

64.1 

74.1 

73.1 

73.7 

72.8

57.4 

63.0 

65.3 

65.4 

65.4 

65.4 

65.4 

65.4

41.3% 

9.5% 

11.3% 

5.6% 

2.9% 

3.5% 

2.9% 

2.9%

43.8% 

8.7% 

11.6% 

2.6% 

3.6% 

3.1% 

2.9% 

3.0%

a. If GDP components are estimated at factor cost, a footnoote indicating this fact should be added.
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Should indicate the level of the government to which the data refer.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Page I of I

Chad - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
1995 

Estimate 
1998 

Projected
2000 
2001 

Indicator 

1994 

1996 

1997 

1999 

2002

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

797 

875 

939 

983 

1073 

1193 

1289 

1368 

1406

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

35 

77 

63 

61 

82 

118 

98 

79 

39

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)a

25 

32 

34 

39 

45 

46 

46 

51 

56

Debt and debt service indicators
(%/0)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

324.6 
68.5 
13.6 
83.8 

379.7 
74.2 
14.6 

372.7 
74.2 
13.4 

363.2 
72.7 
13.6 

339.4
68.8
13.6

67.6 

60.8 

57.8 

64.6 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

0.0 

80.3 

80.0 

79.6 

..

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (/o) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

0.0 
51.4 

0.0 
65.5 

0.0 
67.4 

0.0 
68.2 

0.0 
75.6 

1.1 
65.2 

3.4 
63.4 

5.4 
64.8 

6.2
69.8

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

0.0 
0 

0.2 
10 

0.5 
20 

0.7 
35 

0.8
35

0 

0 

0 

0 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

320 

324 

433 

457 

502 

577 

643 

703 

757

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
c. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Status of Bank Group Operations in Chad
Operations Portfolio

Project 

ID 

Fiscal 
Year 

Borrower 

Purpose

Original 

Amount 

in US$ Millions 

Between

Difference 
expected
and 
actual 
disbursements 

a/ 

Last 
Supervision 

PSR
Rating 

b/

Number 

of Closed 

Projects: 

25

Projects

Active 
TD-PE-528 
TD-PE-530 
TD-PE-517 
TD-PE-533 
TD-PE-509 
TD-PE-35601 
TD-PE-501 
TD-PE-35623 
TD-PE-532 
TD-PE-44974 

Total 

1991 
1993 
1993 
1994 
1994 
1995 
1995 
1996 
1998 
1999 

GOVERNMENT 
GOVERNMENT 
GOVERNMENT 
GOVERNMENT 
GOVERNMENT 
GOVERNMENT 
GOVERNMENT 
GOVERNMENT 
GOVERNMENT 
GOVERNMENT 

IBRD 

IDA 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig 

Frm Rev'd 

Dev Obj 

Imp 

Prog

II 

ENGINEERING 
TRANSPORT 
SECT 
BASIC 
EDUCATION 
PUBLIC WORKS AND CAP 
HEALTH & SAFE MOTHER 
POP. & AIDS 
CO 
AG SERVICES 
CAPACITY 
BUILDING 
HOUSEHOLD 
ENERGY 
SAC 
III 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

11.00 
49.70 
19.30 
17.40 
29.40 
20.40 
24.53 
9.50 
5.27 
30.00 

0.00 

216.50 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

0.00 

4.47 
3. 44 
10.62 
11.36 
11.05 
10.82 
11.35 
1.67 
5.42 
30.00 

100.20 

4.60 
-10.28 
10.62 
11.44 
-2.33 
1.73 
1.63 
2.12 
1.31 
0.00 

20.84 

S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 

4.72 
1.97 
0.00 
0.00 
-. 56 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00

6.13

S
S
U
U
S
S
U
S
S

Total 

Disbursed 
of which 
Total 
now 
held 
Amount 
sold 
Of which 
repaid 
Undisbursed 

Total 

(IBRD 
has 
been 
by 
IBRD 

and 
IDA): 
repaid: 
and 
IDA: 

: 
: 

Active 

Projects 

Closed 

Projects 

114.45 
0.00 
216.50 
0.00 
0.00 
100.20 

396.98 
22.23 
363.67 
6.00 
6.00 
.02 

Total

511.43
22.23
580.17
6.00
6.00
100.22

a. 
Intended disbursements 
to date minus actual disbursements 
to date as projected at appraisal.
b. Following 
the FY94 Annual Review of Portfolio performance 
(ARPP), a letter based system was introduced 
(HS = Highly Satisfactory, S = Satisfactory, U =Unsatisfactory, 
Unsatisfactory): 
see proposed 
Improvements 
in Project and Portfolio Performance Rating Methodology 
(SecM94-901), August 23, 1994.

HU = Highly

Note:
Disbursement 

data is updated at the end of the first week of the month.

-

X3

Key Development 
Objectives 

Strategy/Actions 

j_____ending_Donors

______________ _____________________ 

Chad 

IDA 

NLS 

Lending

CHAD - Country Assistance Strategy Matrix (2000-2002)
Progress Indicators 

Instruments 

Other

OB.JECTIVE 1: CAPACITY BIJILDING AND IMPROVED GOVERNANCE FOR EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT OF OILI. RESOURCES

Maintain 
Macroecononic 
Stability 
Improve capacity for 
public financial 
management, 
especially 
expenditure 
management

Develop a strategy 
for the poverty- 
oriented use of 
petroleumrevenues 

Broaden fiscal base 

ESAF on track 

Maintain expenditure control
Improve core central 
management processes 

Develop statistical base for 
monitoring poverty 

Consolidated budget by 2003 

Capacity to develop 
macroeconomic framework in 
place in Ministry of Finance 

Consensus established 
amnong donor 
community to support 
consolidated budget and 
expenditure programs

Expenditure Programs in place Wide dissemination of
for priority sectors by 2003 
PER conclusions

Parliament review of Executed
Budget
Completion of Household 
Survey and village indicator 
mapping 

Effective coordination 
with other donors. 

Develop long-tern vision and 
formulate Poverty Strategy 

Poverty Strategy widely 
discussed and disseminated 

Implement Oil Resource 
Management Law 

Strengthen capacity 
of civil society to 
monitor use of public 
revenues and improve Reinforce Parliament's capacity Training of the Finance and 
transparency 
to oversee budget 
Economic Committees on track 

Supporting decrees enacted 

Effective supervision of Policy Dialogue, Capacity Building 
Capacity Building for 
Donor 
for Oil Resource 
Oil Resource 
Coordination 
Management 
Management and IDF 
IDF Grant for 
(FY00) 
for capacity building in Capacity
Parliament. 
Building in
Parliament

Build up independent auditing 
Chambre des Comptes of 
capacity and capacity of 
Supreme Court and Oversight 
Petroleum Oversight Committee Committee in place and 
adequately staffed 

Establish a framework 
conducive to NGO development

Legal framework in place 

Mobilize additional
resources from donor
community for
enhanced civil society
involvement in public 
resource management

PFP, Policy 
Dialogue

PER, Policy 
Dialogue, Donor 
Coordination 

SAC IV FY01 

IMF ESAF

IMF ESAF

Capacity Building 
for Oil Resource
Management
(FY00)

Policy Dialogue, Capacity Building 
Support of 
for Oil Resource 
participatory 
Management 
discussion of 
(FY00) 
poverty strategy 

UNDP
Capacity
Building
Project; EU
policy
dialogue,
AFD policy
dialogue
French
support to
decentralizati
on

N

o x

Key Development 
Objectives 

CHAD - Country Assistance Strategy Matiix (2000-2002)

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

Instruments 

Other
Donors

Implement public information 
campaign 

Develop capacity for Build up capacity for 
Management of 
management of Petroleum 
Environmental and 
Sector in Ministry of Mines 
Social aspects of oil 
exploitation and 
export 

Develop capacity for 
management of environmental 
and social impacts of oil 
exploitation in central and local 
administrations, and civil 
society 

Chad 
Report on budget execution
widely disseminated

Capacity to monitor oil 
exploitation activities in place 

Capacity to monitor 
environmental and social 
impact of oil activities in place

Implementation of mitigation 
measures on track 

IDA 

NLS 

Lending

Policy Dialogue, 
NEAP, 

Capacity Building 
for Oil Sector 
Management 
(FY00) 

AFD, EU
support in the
oil producing
area

Maintain intensive 
dialogue with all 
concerned parties. 

Mobilize funding for
NEAP

Maintain intensive
dialogue with involved
communities, and local
and international NGOs

._________________ ________ _________ _________________ region 

Draw lessons from
implementation of
Conuiunity Investment
Fund for oil producing

____ 

___r

OBJECTIVE 2: ESTABLISH FOUNDATIONS FOR IMPROVED DELIVERY OF BASIC SOCIAL SERVICES
Define role of local 
Sector strategies for health and Participation in sectoral Policy dialogue 
Formulate 
appropriate strategies 
communities and private 
education formulated and 
Round Tables and other 
and donor 
for efficient and 
providers in service delivery, 
validated. 
donor coordination 
coordination 
equitable delivery 
particularly for education. 
mechanisms 
systems for health 
and education 

Sectoral PERs 

Focus on underserved areas and 
population groups 

Supervision reports are 
focused on impact 
indicators 

Supervision of 
ongoing projects

Formulate Sector Expenditure 
Programs in close consultation 
with stakeholders 

Build up appropriate 
monitoring systems to measure 
impact 

Sector Expenditure Programs 
part of the budget process. 

Impact indicators regularly 
published 

Mechanisms for
participation of
beneficiaries in project
supervision established 

Health Sector 
Project (FY00); 
Education Project 
(FY02) 

Health: All
donors
participate in
sector-wide
approach
(EU, WHO,
AFD).

Education:
AfDB and
AFD

( 
(Dox>
G~ co

hh

Key Development 
Objectives 

Strategy/Actions 

HEALTH:
Increase availability Address severe shortage of 
and access to health 
trained health workers 
services 

Support development of 
private/public partnerships in 
service delivery 

CHAD - Country Assistance Strategy Matrix (2000-2002)
Progress Indicators 

Instruments 

Chad 

IDA 

NLS 

Lending

Full use of existing and 
planned de-localized training 
facilities for paramedical 
personnel and use of staff from 
neighboring countries where 
possible 

hInovative training 
schemes developed, 

Policy dialogue Health Sector 
and donor 
Project (FY00) 
coordination 

Sectoral PERs 

Framework for public/private Best practices 
partnership established 
disseminated 

Supervision of
Health and Safe
Motherhood and
Population and
Core central authorities AIDS projects
sensitized and
supportive

Strengthen management 
capacity of Ministry of Public 
Health 

Increased delegation of 
responsibilities to regional and 
local offices 

Continued focus on mother and Sector-wide policy emnphasizes
child care sustained. 
mother and child care

Improve access for 
women, provision of 
services related to
mother and child care Increase number of female 
and reproductive 
health workers 
health, and impact on 
women's health

Increased number of female 
health workers trained and in 
place 

Donor support
mobilized to train more
women health workers

System in place to monitor 
evolution of women's health 
status and reproductive health 
practices 

Beneficiary assessment
carried out with focus
on women's and
reproductive health

Other
Donors

Health: All
donors
participate in
sector-wide
approach
(EU, WHO,
AFD).

OQ

ONw

FhX

Key Development 
Objectives 

EDUCATION:

Improve the quality 
and access to primary 
education, especially 
for girls 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

Instruments 

CIIAD - Country Assistance Strategy Matrix (2000-2002)

Chad 

IDA 

NLS 

Lending

Other
Donors

Increase relative allocation of 
primary education in sector 

Define role of local 
communities and private 
providers of education. 
Establish framework for close 
collaboration between local 
communities and public sector.

Improve training and 
motivation of teachers 

Share of primary education in 
sector expenditure is 
consistently increased (share of 
administration expenditure is
reduced)

Framework is established and 
widely disseminated. 

Restructure Basic 
Education Project 

Policy dialogue 
and donor 
coordination

Education Project 
(FY02) 

AfDB and
AFD

Sectoral PERs

Focus assistance on 
definition of financial
framework for the
sector and long-term
expenditure program

Supervision of teachers is 
improved with involvement 
from communities 

Audit of Ministry of 
Education completed 

Supervision of
Basic Education
Project

Expand education 
services beyond 6 
years of schooling 
selectively
OBJECTIVE 3: REMOVE CONSTRAINTS TO GROWTH

Strengthen management 
capacity of Ministry of 
Education 

Capacity of Ministry to plan 
Studies in preparation
sector development is enhanced of Round Table
completed

Improve 
Enviromment for 
Private Sector 
Growth 

Complete Privatization Program Privatization program 
completed: all commercial 
public enterprises, except
Coton Tchad are privatized 

Streamline policy framework 

General licensing regulation 
streamlned 

Improve dialogue with private Mechanism established for 
sector 
regular public/private exchange 
l___________________________ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __of 
view s 

Support to privatization 
program continued 

Any further constraints
to private sector 
development identified 

Policy dialogue 

SAC IV (FEY01) 

IMF, EU,
France

Supervision of
Capacity
Building for
Economic
Management 
Credit 

OQ
(D
o x
o x

cx

Key Development 
Objectives 

Strategy/Actions 

Implement 99-03 Transport 
Expenditure program 

TRANSPORT: 
Invest in a basic 
backbone road 
network passable year Upgrade and pave the most 
round 
vulnerable road sections 

Safeguard existing road
infrastructure

CHAD - Country Assistance Strategy Matrix (2000-2002)
Progress Indicators 

Instruments 

Chad 
Program is fully fmanced and 
implemented on time. 

IDA 
Program is fully 
financed. 

NLS 
Policy dialogue, 
Donor 
coordination 

Supervision of
PST2

Lending
Transport Sector 
Project (FY01) 

SAC IV 

Other
Donors

EU, KfW,
AfDB, OPEP
Fund, Islamic
Devpt. Bank

Provide adequate funding and 
institutional arrangements for 
road maintenance 

Adequate funding in Road
Fund is available to implement
annual maintenance plan

Implement improved regulatory Adoption of implementation 
framework 
decrees for telecom law, 
Creation of OTRT (telecomns
regulator) 

Complete privatization of 
electricity and telecom 
companies

STEE and SOTELTCHAD 
privatized

Formulate investment program 
in close collaboration with 
private partners

Investment programs agreed
with private partners

Capacity Building 
support to OTRT 

Policy dialogue, 
aid coordination 

Electricity Project 
(FY01)

AFD

Assessment of Energy 
supply to Chad 
completed 

Telecoms and
Postal Services
Project (FY00)

UTILITIES:
Improve coverage 
quality and cost 
efficiency of services. 

RURAL
DEVELOPMENT:

Formulate rural 
sector strategy and 
action development 
plan 

._________________ 

Establish a participatory process Multi-sectoral approach to rural Conmunity 
Cotton Sector 
development is adopted. 
Development/ Rural 
Liberalization 
for the formulation of rural 
Invest. Fund established ESW 
development strategy 

Mechanism for conmnunity 
participation in Rural 
Investment Fund is supported 
by all parties 
._____________________________________________________ 

_____________________ 

PER for Rural 
Development 

________________ 

Capacity Building 
for Petroleum 
Sector (Community 
Development Fund
FY00)

Rural Infrastructure 
Development
Y 02__ 

P roject (FY 02) 

AFD; AfDB,
EU, IFAD,
IDB

d

e

_D

o x

Key Development 

Objectives 

Strategy/Actions 

CHAD - Country Assistance Strategy Matrix (2000-2002)
Progress Indicators 

Instruments 

Other

Donors

Chad 

IDA 

NLS 

Lending

Liberalize cotton 
sector by increasing 
role of producers and 
private sector in its 
management. 

Develop sound analytical base Assessment of sector and next Consensus building 
Restructuring of
steps are agreed to by all 
among all stakeholders Agricultumal
stakeholders. 
is effective 
Extension Project

Support development of farmer
organizations 

Representation of farmer 
organizations in decision- 
making process is improved. 

Policy dialogue
and donor
coordination

Privatize non-core activities and Privatization program on track
initiate privatization of a cluster
of ginning factories.

Mitigate environmental impacts Capacity to monitor oil 
of the oil project. 
exploitation activities in place 

ENVIRONMENT:

Protect the 
Environment in the 
framework of oil 
exploitation 

Implementation of mitigation Maintain intensive
measures on track 
dialogue with involved 
communities, and local 
and international NGOs 

Capacity for environmental 
assessment established in line
ministries

Establish capacity for 
envirommental assessment in 
line ministries, particularly in 
the transport and rural
development sectors.

Strengthen Capacity 
Involve local communities in 
NEAP formulated in a
for Natural Resource Natural Resource Management. participatory manner.
Management

Formulate a NEAP 

__

Maintain intensive 
dialogue with all 
concerned parties. 

Policy Dialogue, Capacity Building AfDB (Lac
NEAP 
for Petroleum 
Tchad)
Sector (FY00)

Capacity to monitor 
environmental and social 
Mobilize funding for 
impact of oil activities in place NEAP 

Supervision of
Household 
Energy Project. 

Third Transport
Sector Project
(FY01)

Rural Ifrastructure
Development
Project (FY02)

o X

Chad - C"AS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B-

Page I c'f2

Network area 

Country 
perfor' ance 
a

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
* Poverty reduction 

Poor 

o Economic policy 

o Lviacro stability 

o Economic Mgmt. 

* Public sector 

Good 

Poor

Poor 

Major issueb 

Country 
prioritp 

Bank 

2

Recus.uot:cr
of courtry and
BiorifV
ank prioritde,-

Country-wide pervasivc 
and deep poverty
Limited financial and
humai. resources to
address it

Policy achievements not 
supported by increased
capacity in economic
management

High 

High

High 

High

Capacity/ 
Accountability/
Transparency

Hi gh 

High

i Gender 

Poor 

Not a strategic priority 

Low 

Moderate Concrete, actio_,
in Health and
policy dialogue
in Education
ongoing to bring
Gender issues ti.'
the fore

Human Development
Departmient
* Educatior, 

Poor 

Poor access, quality and 
equity Lacking coherent 
sector strategy 

High 

High, but 
inadequate 
policies 

* Health, nutiition & population 

Fair 

* Social protection 

Poor 

Coherent strategy, but 
poor access, low use,
impact uncertain

High 

High

System essentially not Moderate Moderate
functioning and
bankrupt

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
* Rural development 

Poor 

Rural poverty and 
isolation, lacking
coherent sector strategy

High 

High

Polircdia oague
ongoing to
address t!'s
issue

Chad - CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B9
Page 2 of 2

Country 

performance 
a 

Major issueb 

Country 

prioritYc 

BankpriorityC 

Reconciliation
ofcountry and

Bank
prioritiesd

Network area 

Environmenmtlly & Socially
Sustainable Development
Contd
* Environment

* Overall 

Poor 

* 

Issues linked to oil 

Fair 

* Social development 

Fair 

Finance, Private Sector &
Infrastructure
* Financial sector 

* Private sector 

Poor 

Fair 

* Energy & mining 

Good 

* 

Inftastructure 

Poor 

Desertification, soil Moderate 
erosion and
degradation

Moderate

Lack of capacity in 
Environmental
Management

Insufficient dialogue 
between civil society
and govemment

High 

High

High 

High

Poor access to credit Moderate 
esp. in rural areas

Moderate

High

Dialogue with formal Moderate 
private sector
insufficient.
Taxation issues.
Good progress on
privatization and
enabling environment

Govemment capacity 
for management of
petroleum sector
needs strengthening

Strong expansion of 
Infrastructure and
affordable system of
maintenance needed

High 

High

High 

High

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. 
Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary
completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing
dialogue.

(In US$ million) 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010

Chad - Revenue Scenarios

Low oil price scenario/i
Oil revenues 
Non-oil fiscal revenues 
Total fiscal revenues 
(excl. grants)
Grants/Loans 
Total revenues, grants, and loans 
Growth of total revenues, grants, and loans 
Share of oil in total revenues, grants, and loans 

Base oil price scenario/2
Oil revenues 
Non-oil fiscal revenues 
Totalfiscalrevenues 
(excd grants)
Grants/Loans 
Totalrevenues, grants, andloans 
Growth of total revenues, grants, and loans 
Share of oil intotal revenues, grants, and loans 

High oil price scenario/3
Oil revenues 
Non-oil fiscal revenues 
Total fiscal revenues 
(excl. grants)
Grants/Loans 
Totalrevenues, grants, andloans 
Growthoftotalrevenues,grants,andloans 
Share of oil in total revenues, grants, and loans 

1/ Assuming Brent price of US$11 per barrel in 1998
2/ Assuming Brent price of US$15 per barrel in 1998
3/ Assuming Brent price of US$20 per barrel in 1998

0 
164 
164 

160 
324 

.. 

0.0% 

0 
186 
186 

160 
346 
6.7% 
0.0% 

0 
164 
164 

0 
186 
186 

160 
324 

.. 

0.0% 

160 
346 
6.7% 
0.0% 

0 
164 
164 

160 
324 

.. 

0.0% 

0 
186 
186 

160 
346 
6.7% 
0.0% 

0 
206 
206 

160 
366 
5.8% 
0.0% 

0 
206 
206 

160 
366 
5.8% 
0.0% 

0 
206 
206 

160 
366 
5.8% 
0.0% 

0 
208 
208 

160 
368 
0.4% 
0.0% 

0 
208 
208 

160 
368 
0.4% 
0.0% 

0 
208 
208 

160 
368 
0.4% 
0.0% 

0 
212 
212 

45 
217 
262 

56 
241 
297 

65 
255 
320 

45 
274 
320 

160 
160 
160 
160 
372 
422 
457 
480 
1.1% 13.4% 
8.4% 
5.0% 
0.0% 10.6% 12.2% 13.5% 

160 
480 
-0.1% 
9.4% 

38 
294 
332 

160 
492 
2.6% 
7.7% 

36 
312 
348 

160 
508 
3.2% 
7.0% 

36
329
365

160
525
3.5%
6.9%

0 
216 
216 

88 
239 
327 

100 
265 
365 

110 
274 
384 

80 
291 
371 

67 
309 
376 

62 
327 
389 

60
342
402

160 
160 
160 
160 
160 
160 
160 
160
376 
487 
525 
544 
531 
536 
549 
562
2.2% 29.4% 
7.9% 
3.5% 
-2.4% 
1.0% 
2.3% 
2.5%
0.0% 18.0% 19.1% 20.2% 15.0% 12.5% 11.3% 10.7%

0 
224 
224 

142 
267 
409 

156 
289 
445 

381 
293 
675 

308 
308 
616 

258 
323 
581 

318 
345 
663 

301
366
667

160 
160 
160 
160 
160 
160 
160 
160
384 
569 
605 
835 
776 
741 
823 
827
4.3% 48.1% 
6.3% 38.1% 
-7.1% 
-4.5% 11.2% 
0.5%
0.0% 25.0% 25.7% 45.7% 39.7% 34.8% 38.7% 36.4%

CD

Strategy/Actions 

Key 
Development
Objectives 
SOCIO- 
ECONOMIC 
MANAGEMENT Maintain expenditure 
control

Broaden fiscal base 

Maintain 
Macroeconomic
Stability 

Improve capacity 
for public 
financial 
management, 
especially
expenditure
management

Develop a 
strategy for the 
poverty-oriented 
use of petroleum 
revenues 

Improve core central 
managementprocesses 

PER, Policy 
Dialogue, Donor 
Coordination 

Capacity Building 
for Oil Resource
Management 
(FY00)

TABLE OF DONOR ACTIVITIES
CHAD

IDA Instruments 

Activities of Other Donors

PFP, Policy 
Dialogue

SAC IV FY01 

I[MF: Policy Dialogue, ESAF

_

France: Policy Dialogue, Structural Adjustment Program

EU: Lome Convention, Structural Adjustment Program

AfDB: Structural Adjustment Program

IMF ESAF and Technical Assistance

France: Technical Assistance in Ministry of Finance

Develop statistical base for Policy Dialogue, Capacity Building UNDP National Capacity Building Project in collaboration with
monitoring poverty 
Support of 
for Oil Resource WB: includes poverty monitoring support and Household
participatory 
Management 
Surveys.
discussion of 
(FY00)
poverty strategy 

EU policy dialogue

Develop long-term vision 
and formulate Poverty
Strategy 

AFD policy dialogue

Strengthen 
Implement Oil Resource 
capacity of civil Management Law 
society to monitor 
use of public 
revenues and 
improve 
transparency 

Policy Dialogue, Capacity Building French support to decentralization. Further partnerships to be
Donor 
for Oil Resource 
developed with EU and other donors.
Coordination 
Management
Reinforce Parliament's 
IDF Grant for 
(FY00)
capacity to oversee budget Capacity
Building in
Parliament

Build up independent 
auditing capacity and
capacity of Petroleum
Oversight Committee

Establish a framework
conducive to NGO
development 

__

oo>

_ 

TABLE OF DONOR ACTIVITIES
CHAD

Strategy/Actions 

IDA Instruments 

Activities of Other Donors

Key 
Development
Objectives
Develop capacity Build up capacity for 
Policy Dialogue, Capacity Building Rural Development Programs in Petroleum Producing area:
for Management management of Petroleum NEAP 
for Oil Sector 
AFD, EU, Afl)B, IFAD.
of Enviromnental Sector in Ministry of Mines 
Management
and Social aspects 
(FY00)
of oil exploitation Develop capacity for
and export 
management of
environmental and social
impacts of oil exploitation
in central and local
administations, and civil
society
Define role of local 
communities and private 
providers in service 
delivery, particularly for 
education. 

Policy dialogue Health Sector 
Health
and donor 
Project (FY00); 
All donors participate in sector-wide approach
coordination 
Education Project WHO: Sector co-leadership with Bank. Policy Dialogue, expert
(FY02) 
assistance

SOCIAL 
SECTORS 
Formulate 
appropriate 
strategies for 
efficient and
equitable delivery Focus on underserved areas Supervision of 
systems for health and population groups 
ongoing projects 
and education

Sectoral PERs

Education
Donor coordination to be reinforced

Formulate Sector
Expenditure Programs in
close consultation with
stakeholders

Build up appropriate
monitoring systems to
measure impact

HEALTH

Increase 
availability and 
access to health 
services 

Address severe shortage of Policy dialogue Health Sector 
trained health workers 
and donor 
Project (FY00) 
coordination

Sectoral PERs 

Supervision of 
Health and Safe 

Health: All donors participate in sector-wide approach (EU,
WHO, AFD).

EU: Policy Dialogue and Technical Assistance in sanitary
districts.

AfDB: Policy Dialogue and Investment program.

__

OX

Key 
Development

Strategy/Actions 

IDA Instruments 

Activities of Other Donors

TABLE OF DONOR ACTIWITIES
CHAD

Objectives 

BEAL (cont'd) Support development of 
Motherhood and 
private/public partnerships Population and
in service delivery 
AIDS projects 

_____

AFD: Technical Assistance in sanitazy districts

KfW: Social marketing of contraceptives in context of WB
AIDS and Population Project

Strengthen management
capacity of Ministry of
Public Health

EDUCATION

Improve the 
Increase relative allocation Policy dialogue Education Project AfDB: Sector leadership. Full investment program in
quality and access of primary education m 
and donor 
(FY02) 
construction of classrooms
to prmary 
sector 
coordination
education, 
especially for girls 

EU: Classroom constrution and rehabilitation, policy and
insttutional supporL

Sectoral PERs 

Expand education Establish framework for 
Supervision of 
services beyond 6 close collaboration between Basic Education
years of schoolig 
local communities and 
Project 
selectively 
public sector.

OPEP: Support to Secondary Education

IDB: Classroom construction and training of engineecrs

FAC: Classroom construction and training of teachers.

Improve training and
motivation of teachers

Streng management
capacity of Ministry of
Education

0

Key Development 
Objectives 

PRIVATE 

SECTOR 

GROWTH 
Improve 
Environment for 
Private Sector 
Growth 

Strategy/Amlons 

1DA 

strum 

ts 

Complete Privatization 
Program 

Streanline policy 
framevork 

Improve dialogue with

ArC IV 

|MF 

Policy di; a 

Spls.qsnhnP, ea,
ad 
Buikling for
Eoonomic
Managemet

credt

.

I 

DPY}

0 her Der

OtherDons. 

private sector

TRANSPORT 
Invest in a basic 
backbone road 
network passable Upgrade and pave the most 
year round 
vulnerable road sections 

Implement 99-03 Transport Policy dialogue, Tra?-soxt Setor 
Expenditure program 
Donor 
Proj ec (FY01) 
coordination

SAC IV 

Supervision of 
PST 2

Safeguard existing road 
infrastructure

Provide adequate funding
for road maintenance

UTILITES

Improve coverage 
quality and cost 
efficiency of 
services, 

Implement improved 
regulatory framework 

Policy dialogue, Electricity Project 
aid coordination 
(FY01) 

Complete privatization of 
electricity and telecom 
companies 

Formulate investment
program m close
collaboration with private
partners 

Telecoms aid
Postal Services 
Project (FY00) 

.

1 

_

All donors partcipate in sectorwide framework for
future investment and maintenance.

EU, KfV Islamiic DivtBank Afl)B, OPEP Fund:
Road c3nstruction aad rehabilitation

AFPT: Airort Rehabilitation

France/AFD: Support and TA to Electricity Company
STEE; Small business development; Market
development

AfDB: Technicai support to Electricity Company
STEE; Technical support to Telecommunications
Company ONPT

aQ>

'z0

o 

Cotton Sector 
Formulate rural 
Establish a participatory 
Liberalization 
sector strategy and process for the formulation ESW 
action development of rural development 
strategy 
plan 

Capacity Building Heavy involvement of donors in localized integrated
for Petroleum 
rural development Coordination is gradually
Sector (Community emerging especially with France, EU, GTZ and IFAD
Development Fund
FY00) 

PER for Rural 
Development 

Cooperation Francaise/ AFD: Integrated rural
development projects, rural water over entire country,
Rural Infrastructure Livestock support project; Cotton sector support,
cotton feeder roads
Restructuring of Development 
Agricultural 
Project (FY02)
Extension Project 

AfMB: Integrated rural development projects -
Soudanian zone; rural water

Policy dialogue
and donor 
coordination 

Liberalize cotton Develop sound analytical 
sector by 
base 
increasing role of 
producers and 
private sector in its Support development of 
management. 
farmer organizations

Privatize non-core
activities and initiate 
privatization of a cluster of
ginning factories. 

TABLE OF DONOR ACTIVITIES
CHAD

Key Development 
Objectives

Strategy/Actions 

IDA Instruments 

Activities of Other Donors

RURAL
DEVELOPMENT

EU: Analytical work on Rural Development;
Infrastructure Development and irrigation in CHARI-
BARGUIMI, coumtry wide rural water program.

IFAD: Intregrated rural development OUADDAI
BILITlNE Project

IDB: Integrated rural development projects

GTZ: OUADDAI BILTTNE Project - Support to
Livestock development, MAYO KEBI Project--
Support to rural communities, credit, farmers
organizations.

Kuwaiti Fund: Rural Water.

o0e

Objectives

ENVIRONMENT

Protect the 
Environment in the 
framework of oil 
exploitation 

Strengthen 
Capacity for 
Naural Resource 
Management 

Establish capacity for 
Supervision of
environmental assessment Household 
in line ministries, 
Energy Project. 
particularly in the transport 
and rural development
sectors. 

Involve local communities 

in Natural Resource

Management.

Formulate a NEAP

Key Development 

Strategy/Actions 

TABLE OF DONOR ACTWITIES
CHAD

IDA Instruments 

Activities of Other Donors

Mitigate environmental 
Policy Dialogue, Capacity Building AfDB: Project to protect the zone of Lake CHAD.
impacts of the oil project. NEAP 
for Petroleum
Sector (FY00)

Third Transport
Sector Project
(FY01)

Rural Infrastructure
Development
Project (FY02)

-e

CDp

oa U

ANNEX E- Structural reforms, 1995-1998

Annex E
Page 1 of 1

Tax and trade
(i) continued implementation of tax, trade and tariff reform under sub-regional UDEAC
trade reform initiative
(ii) elimination of special tax advantages for large enterprises
Demobilization. Completion of demobilization, a multi-year program that halved the
size of the army from 52,000 in 1992 to 25,000 in 1998

Public expenditures
(i) census of civil service and elimination of 500 ghost workers
(ii) significant increase in allocation of public expenditures to recurrent budgets of
developmental ministries (education, health, transport, social affairs) and to investment
(counterpart funding)
Market reforms and privatization

(i) privatization of all banks completed
(ii) small and medium enterprise privatization on track (45 out of 50 enterprises
privatized or liquidated, and three large enterprises at an advanced stage of privatization
preparation.)
(iii) privatization of the sugar company, second largest PE, in progress
(iv) adoption of new regulatory frameworks in utility sector (power/telecom)
(v) privatization of urban electric and water utility reaching completion point
(vi) competition in telecom sector being put in place, through opening to cellular
operator, and privatization process engaged
(vii) new Labor Code adopted; Investment Charter in progress
(viii) regularization of State payments into Social Security system; audits of Social
Security agencies; reform working group in place
Sector policies
(i) road maintenance transferred to private companies
(ii) updating of National Health Policy; essential drug policy in place
(iii) Education: Substantial increase in enrollment rates.

15~ 

20 

L 

IBRD 25991
The boundaries, colors,
denominations and any
other information shown
on this map do not
imply, on the part of
The World Bank Group,
any judgment on the legal
status of any territory,
or aniy endorsement

ar acceptonce of such

~~~~baundaries.

CHAD 

,

Limits of Agro-Ecological Zones

Main Roads 

-- 

Secondary Roads 

Rivers 

Prefecture Boundaries

International Boundaries 

! 

|

KILOMETERS 0 

I 

r 

M LES 
o 

50 

I 

100 

I 

I 

50 

150 

200 

I _ I-7 

250 

I

I 

150 

150

20

r

BORKOU - ENNEDI - TIBESTI

A HAR9 

fI

' 

Z 

5 -i KANEM 

/ 

-_\ Nokou 

g-\_ 

\ ~~~Ma 

0 

> 

/ 11 }>" 

_ 

\ 

~~Moussoro 

BATHA 

BILTINE ,f 

iltiner

4__< 

/ 

t 

,.

Irba 

'

ssdkori 

\ 

,4 

I 

OUAEDAI 

.

'li 

i\o

-BAGURiM~~CHAI 

NIRIA 

ENA 

1 

Mong 

/Bitk 

I, 

i 

0 

Goz-Beida 

.1 j 

an 

dau 0 C, 

'Tikam4

6 Massenya 

> 

, 

10~Bkar

[r'~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

f+ 1,,,R 

\i 

,;r'i1 

CE T71

ON 

.

NLOO =' 

Baibaksa~ 

_' 

G1.\o 20

June 1994

