d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 22520-AFR

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

WEST AFRICA

JULY 11, 2001

Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit = Union des Cheques de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (UCAO)

ECOWAS

1 UCAO = US$1.28

(as of May 18, 2001, ECOWAS Fund)

Member Country 

Currency Unit 

_______________________ 

Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote 
d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali,
Niger, Senegal, Togo
Cape Verde 

Gambia 

Ghana 
Guinea 
Liberia 

Nigeria 

CFA Francs (XOF) 

Cape Verde Escudos (CVE) 

Gambian Dalasi (GMD) 

Ghanaian Cedis (GHC) 
Guinean Francs (GNF) 
Liberian Dollars (LRD) 

Niger an Naira (NGN) 

Sierra Leone 

Sierra Leonean Leones (SLL) 

Equivalent for US$1

.____________________ 
(as of M ay 21, 2001)

742.747

__

1

122.447

15.600 

7525.000
1920.000 
1.000

113.186

1837.559

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

FISCAL YEAR

January 1-December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
ACP 
AfDB 
BCEAO 

BOAD 
CAS 
CEAO 

CEMAC 

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African, Caribbean and Pacific
African Development Bank

Banque Centrale des Etats de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (Central Bank of West African

Banque Ouest Africaine de Developpement (West African Development Bank)

States)

Africa)

Country Assistance Strategy

Communaute Economique de l 'Afrique de l 'Ouest (Economic Community of West

Communaute Economique et Monetaire de l 'Afrique Centrale (Economic and

Monetary Community of Central Africa)

Vice President 
Callisto Madavo
Program Manager 
Marie Francoise Marie-Nelly
West Africa Team Leader Charles Humphreys

FOR OFFICLAL USE ONLY

CESAG 

CET 
CFA 
CILSS 
CIMAO 
CNPE 

DGF 
ECOMOG 
ECOWAS 
ESMAP 
EU 
FAIR 
FTZ 
GEF 
IDF 
IFC 
JSA 
MIGA 
NGO 
NTB 
OCP 
OECD 
OHADA 

OMVS 

OURES 
PARI 

PCS 
PPIAF 
PRSP 
RIAS 
UMOA 
UNDP 
VAT 
WAEN 
WDR 

Centre Africain d 'Etudes Supefrieures en Gestion (African Center of Advanced
Management Studies)
Common External Tariff
Communaute Financiere Africaine (African Financial Community)
Comite inter-Etats de Lutte contre la Secheresse dans le Sahel
Cimenterie d'Afrique de l'Ouest
Commission Nationale des Politiques Economiques (National Economic Policy
Commission)
Development Grant Facility
ECOWAS Monitoring Group
Economic Community of West African States
Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme
European Union
Fonds d 'Appui / 'lIntegration Regionale (Fund to Support Regional Integration)
Free Trade Zone
Global Environmental Fund
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Joint Staff Assessment
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Non-governmental Organization
Nontariff barrier
Onchocerciasis Control Program
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Organ isation pour l'Harmonisation du Droit des Affaires en Afrique (Organization to
Harmonize Business Law in, Africa)
Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du Fleuve Senegal (Organization for the
Development of the Senegal River)
Open, Unified, Regional Economic Space
Programme d 'Appui a lI ntegration Regionale (Program to Advance Regional
Integration)
Preklvement Communautaire de Solidarite (Community Solidarity Levy)
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Regional Integration Assistance Strategy
Union Monetaire Ouest Africaine (West African Monetary Union)
United Nations Development Program
Value Added Tax
West African Enterprise Network
World Development Report

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without

World Bank authorization.

MEMORANDUM OF T'HE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANC'E STRATEGY FOR WEST AFRICA

TABLE OF CONTENTS

,...... 

i
1.......

Executive Summary .....................
Introduction ....................
I. Regional Background: Obstacles and Forces .1
A. Obstacles to Overcome ...................................................................
2................... 
2
B. Forces for Integration ..............................................................
...... 4
4................ 
II. West African Regional Integration: Strategies, Institutions, Policies 
5
A. Vision and Strategy .................
5.....................................5
B. Institutions .................
6............................................ 
6
C. Policies ..............................................
8
D. Summary of Progress .................................................................... 
14
III. World Bank Assistance: Rationale, Principles, and Benefits. 
15
A. Rationale ........
.. 15
1...5............................................ 
B. Principles .............................
. 16
1............. 
C. Benefits: Integration for Growth and Poverty Alleviation ...................................... 18
IV. Strategic focus of Bank Assistance .
20
A. Convergence of Macroeconomic Policies ...................... 
.......... 21
B. Integration of Markets ....................................
...........
........... 
... 21
2..... 
1.... 
C. Supportive Institutional Capacity ........................ 
............ 
............. 
29
V. Work Program of the World Bank 
..
30
A. Financing Issues ....................
30.................... 
30
B. Past Support ........................... 
31
C. Proposed Program ..................................... 
......................... 
32
D. Monitoring Performance .... 
..... 
......................... 
38
VI. Collaboration with Other Development Partners .38
VII. Risks 
..
Concluding Remarks 

42
43

..

.

... 

..

Figures:
Figure 1: West Africa: Inflation in UEMOA and non-UEMOA Countries ...................... 11

Tables:
Table 1: Budget Allocations for Bank Work on Regional Integration in West Africa ..... 34
Table 2: Tentative West Africa Multicountry Financing Program, FY02-04 .................. 35
Table 3: West Africa Regional Analytical and Advisory Activities, FY02-04 ................ 37

Boxes:
Box 1: The Meaning of Market Integration ............................................................ 

22

Attachments

1. ECOWAS: Economic Community of West African States
2. UEMOA: West African Economic and Monetary Union
3. West African Intergovernmental Organizations
4. Open Regional Integration
5. Monetary Integration
6. North-South Arrangements
7. Toward a West African PRSP
8. Monitoring Progress in Regional Integration

Annex Tables

1. ECOWAS At-a-Glance
2. ECOWAS Key Economic Indicators
3. ECOWAS Social Indicators
4. Note on Aggregation Methods
5. Aggregate World Bank Group Operations in ECOWAS Countries
6. Composition of IDA and IBRD Portfolio for ECOWAS Countries
7. World Bank Multicountry Lending to West Africa
8. IDF and GEF Multicountry Grants to West Africa
9. Grouping of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries

Map

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A

REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR WEST AFRICA

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Introduction

1. This Regional Integration Assistance Strategy (RIAS) for West Africa is an
outgrowth of the World Bank's greater focus on regional integration in Africa. It has
been prepared in a participatory manner with several governments, the key West African
institutions, donors and representatives of civil society. The process culminated in a
workshop in Bamako, under the auspices of the Government of Mali, in March 2001. On
that occasion the governments and regional organizations confirmed their commitment to
the effective regional integration of fifteen member countries of West Africa and renewed
the request from the African Governors, at the 2000 Annual Meetings, for closer World
Bank involvement in the effort.

2. This assistance strategy responds to these requests on the basis of a solid economic
rationale, a judgment that the political commitment of the main regional partners,
including Nigeria, is sufficiently strong given recent progress, and a conviction that the
Bank, in partnership with other donors, can contribute to the considerable work that still
lies ahead.

Background

3. Regional integration in West Africa primarily concerns 15 countries - Benin, Burkina
Faso, Cape Verde, C6te d'Ivoire, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Liberia, Mali,
Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo. They are home to 240 million people,
with an average per capita income barely above $300 and half of the population living in
absolute poverty. The region is politically and economically highly fragmented,
comprising small, undiversified economies, notwithstanding Nigeria's large population
(half the region's total) and its great oil wealth (the region is a net oil exporter). While
recorded intra-regional trade is still small - about 10% - of total trade, there have always
been exchanges of goods, mainly food and small wares, as well as migratory movements
of people between countries, mainly from the landlocked to the coastal areas. These are
important sources of income for large segments of the population and manifestations of
real integration.

4. Having learned the lessons from the past, regional leaders have put open regional
integration policies at the center of the political and economic debate in the region. The
two main regional organizations, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA) are playing
pivotal roles in this debate. ECOWAS established in 1975, embraces 15 countries of the
region (Mauritania withdrew in 2000) and has become visibly more active on economic

ii

issues following the reopening of Nigeria to dialogue and democracy. The West African
Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA, Union Economique et Monetaire Ouest
Africaine), formed in 1994 on the foundation of the pre-existing West Africa Monetary
Union and the now defunct CEAO, is formed of seven francophone countries plus
Guinea-Bissau since 1997 which share a common currency, the CFA franc, and a
common central bank, the BCEAO.

5. Although it has not had a formal assistance strategy to support regional integration in
the past, the Bank, along with the IFC, has nonetheless been active in multicountry
endeavors in West Africa for the past 25 years, including financing of several
multicountry projects and institutional development activities, as well as substantial
dialogue on integration policies.

The West African Regional Integration Strategy

6. The region's own strategy, though not emanating from a single authority, is to move
progressively toward a form of "deep integration," i.e., a common market for goods,
services, capital and people, as provided for in the two treaties patterned, in effect, on the
vision of the EU model, which itself is evolving and must be adapted to the specifics of
West Africa. The ECOWAS, and especially the UEMOA, have been following a
reasonably well structured program to deepen cooperation and integration, though
concrete actions by countries often lag behind ambitious formal multicountry
commitments, and many objectives have indefinite horizons. Broadly speaking, the first
phase has focused on trade integration. Monetary integration actually proceeded this
phase in UEMOA but will follow it in ECOWAS, although an important interim step will
be to deepen financial sector integration. In parallel, the Region has been pursuing well-
defined and phased integration efforts in key sectors where cross-border externalities are
significant, notably air transport, energy, and - more recently - telecommunications.
Within UEMOA especially, these other integration efforts cover several tranversal issues,
including public finances, investment policies and competition, while in the ECOWAS,
attention has focused more on facilitating intra-regional travel and transport, as well as on
conflict resolution. Achieving deep integration will require stronger collaboration within,
and eventual consolidation of, the bi-polar institutional structure inherited from the past,
which has created tensions and duplication. This is being addressed, in part, through
increased contact between, exchange of information by, and some joint activities of the
two institutions. Until there is a single institution, the strategy emerges largely from the
actions under the purview of the two institutions. At the same time, there continue to be
a variety of other integration activities, involving subsets of countries and focusing more
on enhanced cooperation than deep integration, often under the umbrella of the
ECOWAS and the UEMOA. This work has also informed the formulation of the
proposed Bank strategy.

7. UEMOA has formally established a customs union effective as of 2000. This is to be
extended to all of ECOWAS, which officially completed the transition to a free trade
zone as of 2000 as well. Convergence of macroeconomic policies along a set of fiscal
criteria is subject to mutual surveillance in UEMOA and a similar approach is being
developed for the other countries. Within UEMOA, indirect tax harmonization is well
advanced and proposals are under discussion to establish a simple, non-discriminatory

ill

investment framework for private entrepreneurs. The institutions, either singly or jointly,
are preparing several integration programs for road and air transport (especially to
liberalize air traffic in West Africa), energy trade (electricity as well as natural gas), and
telecommunications, which variously focus on the convergence of national policies and
harmonizing related national investments, as well as establishing, where necessary,
regional institutions and infrastructure with the intent of facilitating deeper, cross-country
private sector participation.

8. With the notable exception of a private bank - ECOBANK - whose operations
straddle the currency divide, little progress has been made in integrating the financial
sectors between the CFA zone and other countries, whether the banking systems or the
tiny capital markets of Abidjan (serving all of IJEMOA), Accra and Lagos.

9. The region's integration efforts are sometimes marred by episodes of high tension,
and even conflict, between local populations and immigrant workers often associated
with periods of economic decline and political unrest, which is damaging for all
economies concerned, and to the cause of integration itself. National protection pressures
also sometimes restrict intraregional trade, even when countries have formally agreed to
liberalize it.

World Bank Regional Integration Assistance Strategy

10. In responding to the request from West Africa, the Bank has carefully weighed the
risks of such a complex undertaking in light of-a difficult geographical situation, a history
of failed attempts at integration, generally mediocre economic policy performance,
sluggish growth and, in places, unsettled political conditions, open conflict and
unresolved governance issues. In short, West Africa is, as is much of Africa, a "high risk,
high transactions cost" environment. And the Bank has considered as well the pros and
cons of regional integration as debated in the economics literature.

I1. The gains expected from regional integration are several, traditional and non-
traditional. First, the larger regional market can provide gains from larger scale
economies and increased competition that national markets cannot provide. However,
since the regional market will remain too small and too undifferentiated to offer a strong
stimulus for increased productivity and diversification, the region must reinforce its
policies of openness to the rest of the world. Second, regional integration can provide a
framework for dealing with positive (e.g conservation, river basin management) and
negative (e.g. communicable diseases, deforestation, conflicts) trans-border externalities.
Third, commitments to partners in and outside the region, in the context of the regional
organizations and international arrangements, can enhance the credibility of country
policies by 
locking in commitments to macroeconomic stability, convergence, trade
liberalization or sectoral reforms. Fourth, integration can help reduce poverty by
accelerating growth, facilitating movements of people from the poorer to the better
endowed parts of the region, and, possibly, by establishing mechanisms for financial
transfers in the opposite direction. Fifth, a common position will add weight to the
region in international negotiations on trade arid aid.

iv

12. Aimina toward an Open, Unified Regional Economic Space (OURES). The proposed
Bank assistance strategy reflects the region's own goals of accelerating growth and
alleviating poverty, while recognizing that assistance to individual countries - with a
heightened focus on cross-border constraints and opportunities facing a country - will
remain the primary vehicle for support. Bank strategy to assist regional integration
would focus on the creation of an open, unified, regional economic space, as a means of
creating an environment for a more efficient and competitive private sector.

13. Guiding principles. In addition to the overarching theme of openness, four important
principles underlie the formulation of the Bank strategy: subsidiarity, primacy of the
private sector, pragmatism and progressivity, and partnership, notably with other donors.
Subsidiarity implies that national actions, and Bank assistance to them, should dominate,
except where regional institutions and multicountry efforts would be more effective; a
focus on regional integration, however, should help reinforce the country assistance
strategies by ensuring greater intercountry consistency in both macroeconomic and
sectoral policies. The private sector should be considered the real beneficiary of regional
integration, and its participation in the design and implementation of initiatives will help
assure they succeed. This will only happen if there are much greater efforts, both by
regional institutions to involve private sector representatives actively in the design and
implementation of programs, and by the private sector to organize itself to contribute
effectively to the work on regional integration. Third, progress along the three
dimensions of regional integration - geographic coverage, substantive focus, and
institutional depth - will necessarily proceed pragmatically and gradually, as experience
brings the trust on which deep integration must be based. While much of the Bank's
work on regional integration will proceed broadly under the umbrella of the main
institutions (ECOWAS and UEMOA), many efforts also will involve, at least initially,
other institutional arrangements covering only a subset of ECOWAS countries, as well as
sometimes neighboring countries outside of ECOWAS. Finally, with respect to
partnership, the Bank has already a history of working closely with key donors, notably
the EU, the IMF, France, and USAID, which the Bank intends to continue. It may also
be useful to pursue the proposal emanating from the Bamako workshop for a larger
consultative forum that could regularly bring donors together, including their major West
African interlocutors, to discuss topics where enhanced collaboration is needed.

14. The Bank's focus on creating the regional market. The strategy thus privileges work
that would contribute most to the creation of regional, but open, markets as a way of
reducing risks and transactions costs for private sector activities. The strategy focuses
on:

* Convergence of macroeconomic policies to provide a more stable economic
framework for economic integration;
* Trade policy that removes all official and unofficial impediments to intraregional
merchandise trade, moves toward a lower, uniformn external tariff, minimizes
special exemptions and various informal barriers and generally favors better trade
facilitation;
* Efficient, region-wide infrastructure services (air and land transport, tele-
communications, energy);

v

* A more stable and attractive economic environment for all investors, centered
especially on greater financial market integration (e.g., a functioning cross-border
payments systems, unfettered capital mnovements, and a harmonized prudential
and regulatory framework to facilitate closer integration of banking systems and
equity markets) including the progressive harmonization of tax policy, and the
adoption of adequate region-wide competition policies and a simple, transparent,
non-discriminatory framework to promote private investment.

15. The Bank's role as convener. In other areas, especially human resource development,
poverty reduction efforts, and environmental and natural resource management, the
regional integration assistance strategy would cede pride of place to country assistance
strategies, because most of the work in these areas will continue to be national. However,
where there can be gains from greater regional cooperation, for example in controlling
the transmission of communicable diseases (Onchocerciasis, HIV-AIDS, etc.), in making
higher education better and more affordable, in tackling environmental issues than span
borders, and in labor migration, the strategy proposes that the Bank play the role of
convener and facilitator. While the thrust of this strategy is that the Bank will give
priority to activities aimed most directly at achieving deep integration, it will continue to
support a number of other, more limited, focused, and cooperative arrangements among
subsets of countries where a multicountry approach is likely to enhance similar national
efforts, as in controlling some communicable diseases, strengthening higher education,
and improving management of shared river basins.

16. The integration of production. While the assistance strategy does not explicitly focus
on agricultural and industrial production, these sectors are considered to be the implicit,
and main, beneficiaries of deeper regional integration, which would create a larger, more
competitive, multicountry economic space, with reduced risks and transactions costs,
capable of attracting new investors and of helping existing ones become more efficient.
Regional integration is seen as a means to strengthen industrial and agricultural
production.

17. The proposed work program. Consistent with the principle of subsidiarity country-
level assistance should remain the fundamental pillar of Bank assistance to the subregion,
and to regional integration itself, both because it helps strengthen overall country
performance (an indispensable precondition) and because it can be used to help countries
respect their regional commitments and deal with additional requirements imposed by
regional integration. To be effective in supporting regional integration, this country-level
support would itself have to be coordinated across West African countries, and made
coherent with the regional initiatives. The formulation of a regional integration
assistance strategy is one mechanism to provide the framework for such coordination,
and to ensure that country-level aid allocations increasingly effect priorities emanating
from the RIAS.

18. While the FY02-04 work program for the RIAS would build on the past, it would
increasingly be decided with reference to a central criterion - the extent to which the
activities being supported would contribute generally to the creation of a West African
open, unified, regional economic space and, more specifically, to deeper market

vi

integration. Consistent with the proposed strategy, this central theme would account for
over 90 percent of the proposed work program, covering trade, regional infrastructure
services, and a harmonized business environment - especially financial sector integration.
The remainder of the resources would be leveraged through the Bank's proposed role as
participant, convener and facilitator in other areas where enhanced cooperation, rather
than integration per se, is the aim and where other donors may be better placed to lead
(for example, agricultural policy, education and training, health services, natural resource
management, mining regulations and legal issues). The regional integration work
program would be augmented by other work on cross border issues, especially in health
and environmental issues, as well as by relevant work within country programs. Because
this is the first West Africa Assistance Strategy of the Bank, representing the beginning
of a much more focused program of support, the proposed work program will continue to
be refined and its specific contents will evolve, depending on emerging opportunities,
lessons learned, progress in West Africa, and shifts in priorities of other partners.

19. The strategy proposes several types of Bank support to regional integration in West
Africa, including increased analytical and advisory activities (AAA) (about 40 percent)
and direct financial support of both national and cross-border activities (about 60 percent)
to deepen regional integration. Drawing on past Bank work, as well as that of other
donors, several possible IDA credits and/or guarantees for both regional and multicountry
programs that would contribute directly to the integration of key regional markets are
being studied. These include, for example, projects to facilitate the liberalization and
strengthening of air transport, to support integration of regional financial systems, to help
establish subregional electricity and natural gas markets, to improve air traffic
infrastructure and safety within ECOWAS, and eventually to help set up a regional
telecommunications market and regulatory system. A reasonable expectation may be that
1-2 credits would be proposed each year, averaging perhaps $100 million each,
depending on the commitment and actions of countries in the region to move forward
together. Most of these are likely to be in the form of separate credits to individual
countries, within an agreed multicountry program, although some could be to regional
institutions capable of borrowing (as, for example, credits to the BCEAO and BOAD in
the past). In addition, the Bank would aim to increase the use of its grant facilities and
trust funds, primarily for targeted capacity building and technical assistance in regional
institutions and regulatory agencies and for increased analytical work within the region
on integration issues.

20. The AAA work would span a larger range of subjects, though concentrated on the
macro-economic and trade dialogue (including the range of informal impediments), and it
would provide the basis for the Bank to evaluate selected regional integration issues and
to participate actively and constructively in key regional integration and cooperation
initiatives, including a possible West Africa PRSP, that regional institutions would take
the lead in formul.ting. Topics may include telecommunications, agricultural policy
harmonization, road 
transport and 
transit facilitation, interstate road network
development policy, competition policy, higher education, control of infectious diseases,
and public procurement, to name the current priorities. The challenge will be to remain
selective within the broad range of issues and numerous requests of the Bank, to assure
that Bank analytical work retains a critical mass.

vii

21. The Bank would propose to monitor the implementation of the RIAS over the next
three years by focusing on progress at the regional and country level on four strategic
factors that underpin the establishment of an open, unified, regional economic space in
West Africa: creating an effective, and open, customs union; setting up regional markets
in infrastructure services for air transport, electricity, and telecommunications; improving
the regional business environment - especially regarding finance; and deepening
collaboration and convergence between the key regional institutions. Monitoring should
also cover actions to enhance the Bank's partnership with other donors.

Risks

22. The risks the Bank faces in moving ahead with the proposed assistance strategy to
regional integration derive from the risks inherent to the integration process in West
Africa itself - which may move more slowly and in a more limited way than planned.
The greatest risk is deterioration of domestic economic, social, or political conditions in
one or more key countries. In addition, implementation of most regional integration
arrangements themselves continues to be weak. Many countries simply fail to internalize
common decisions even if legally binding. There is also the opposite risk of the countries
as a group feeling strong enough to revert to some form of autarkic or at least highly
protectionist policies. There remains the institutional risk inherent in the co-existence of
two groups of countries and two main regional institutions, leading to overlapping or
inconsistent decisions that complicate or even retard the overall integration process -
despite recent efforts to deepen collaboration and convergence between the two.

23. If some of these risks materialize there would be opportunity costs to the proposed
use of Bank administrative and financial resources to support the strategy of the West
Africans, the size of which would depend on how slowly the region moves. It is likely
that there may be more substantial progress iin some areas than in others, although it
would be difficult to infallibly select the most successful areas in advance.

24. These risks and costs of the proposed assistance strategy must, however, be set
against the risks and costs of the Bank not continuing and reinforcing its support to the
process. Given the expectations from West Africa, adopting a small work program
would risk not only the credibility of the Bank in helping orient and improve the regional
integration process, but could also weaken the credibility of the integration effort overall.
It would deepen the risk that its country assistance strategies remain as islands, unaware
of more effective cross-border approaches, or - worse - that the Bank may support
national efforts that could undercut those in neighboring countries.

25. Given the encouraging recent track record in the sub-region, it would appear that the
sense of ownership, the statesmanship and the wisdom of regional leadership - both
public and private - will help ensure that the risks associated with this ambitious
enterprise will be contained. In the end, they appear small compared to the potential
gains. This is an opportunity for the Bank, and other donors, to be associated with a West
African initiative that has, more than any similar undertaking in the past, serious in-built
elements of success. Not the capacity to lift the region out of poverty, but certainly the
potential for being an important contributor toward that end.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR WEST AFRICA

INTRODUCTION

1. This Regional Integration Assistance Strategy - RIAS - is a formal manifestation of

the World Bank's added emphasis and new approach to regional integration in Africa', as
announced in the informal presentation to the Board of April 2, 2001. The proposed Bank
strategy focuses on assistance to regional integration in West Africa, and is not about the
Bank's assistance to West Africa. It is neither a sum nor a synthesis of Country
Assistance Strategies. As such, it looks less at problems that are common to all countries
than at problems whose solution lies in a regional approach, and aims to focus Bank
assistance on their solution.

2. This strategy has been prepared in a participatory manner. Participation by the clients
and especially the regional Institutions has been in the form of an increasingly close
working relationship with them, particularly over the last two years. Most recently,
(March 2001) a two day workshop hosted by the Government of Mali in Bamako, has
given the Bank an opportunity to present a draft of this strategy and to listen to numerous
comments and views from country representatives, high level officials from the regional
organizations as well as all major donors and, not least, representatives from the private
sector and civil society.

3. The paper is in seven parts. First, the salient features of the region's geography,
economy and its history of regional integration experiences are presented. In part two, the
region's strategy, institutions and integration policies, as understood by the Bank, are
described in stylized form, and a brief assessment of achievements offered. Part three
presents the rationale, principals and benefits on which the Bank's assistance strategy has
been formulated, while part four describes the main axes of the proposed strategy, while
the fifth part summarizes the operational program that follows from the strategy. Part six
deals with collaboration with other donors, and part seven assesses the risks.

1. REGIONAL BACKGROUND: OBSTACLES AND FORCES

4. The countries of West Africa present strong similarities and marked contrasts, some
favorable conditions and several serious obstacles that all make regional integration (and
development in general) both a difficult and potentially a highly rewarding undertaking.
Salient features of this regional environment are summnarized below.

' This effort was pioneered by the Southern Africa Strategy paper (presented to the Board in April 1998).

2

A. Obstacles to Overcome

5. Difficult Geography and High Fragmentation. West Africa is highly fragmented,
as a result of geographic, demographic, political and policy related reasons. The 236
million inhabitants are very unevenly distributed among countries, with Nigeria
containing half the total population and several countries having less than a million
people. There is no indigenous, widely used language for commerce, such as Swahili in
Eastern Africa, but rather three official European languages, still not understood by large
segments of the population. The region is roughly one-third desert, one third Sudano-
Sahelian with rather irregular rainfall and one third humid and rather more favorable for
agricultural development. Except in the urbanized areas along the Atlantic coast,
population density is low. Nearly half of the area is formed of landlocked countries.
Internal distances as well as distances to core markets (about 50% greater than in East
Asia) are enormous and transport infrastructure networks are only partially
interconnected between countries - since they had been originally conceived to serve the
colonial interests rather than the region's - and they are generally poorly maintained.2
Because of natural obstacles, political fragmentation, and inappropriate policies, national
markets are tiny and regional markets remain undeveloped. As a result, infrastructure
costs are among the highest in the world: electricity costs are on average 4.5 times higher
than in the OECD countries and 2 times higher than in Latin America. The rates for
international telephone calls are about 4 times higher than in OECD and 2.5 times higher
than in Latin America, also on average.

6. Small, fragile, slow-growing economies. The fifteen countries have a combined
GDP roughly the size of Ireland's, in other words an internal market limited in size,
diversification and sophistication. This translates into an average income per capita of
about $ 316, with (Bank Atlas method) with, in contrast to other sub-regions of Africa,
relatively small differences between countries. Extremes are $125 (Sierra Leone) and
$1330 (Cape Verde) but more than 70% of the population is under the $500 level,
although income distribution within countries exhibits much wider dispersion.

Furthermore, growth over the long term - 3 % p.a. 1989-99 - has only marginally

exceeded a demographic expansion of about 2.8 % annually. All countries have seen a
succession of good and bad years. While neither a marked upward trend or a discernable
cyclical pattern emerge, it is clear that all West African countries are very vulnerable to
shocks, whether extemal (terms of trade, droughts) or internal (conflicts).

7. Similar economic structure. All West African countries are largely natural resource
based and for that reason open economies as measured by trade shares, but still
protectionist relative to the size of their (small) industrial sectors. The composition of
exports is similar except for one net oil exporter, Nigeria. Intra-regional exchange of

2 Research worldwide, including sub-Saharan Africa has found that: the median landlocked country has
only 30% of the trade volume of the median coastal country; halving transport costs increases the volume
of trade five times; improving infrastructure from the 75" to the 50"' percentile increases trade by 50%; and
geography and infrastructure problems explain a large part of the relatively low level of African trade.
See Limao and Venables, "Infrastructure, Geographical Disadvantage, and Transport Costs", WP. No.
2257, December 1999.

3

goods and services is small, fluctuating around 10% of total trade, although its welfare
significance is greater than it appears because of unrecorded trade and because it provides
a main source of income for large segments of rural populations and small industries The
potential for expanded intra regional trade is limited simply because the economies are
not structurally complementary. While similar economic structures are not an obstacle
per se to trade creation and profitable integration arrangements (as demonstrated by the
European Union), provided there is substantial depth and diversification within sectors,
the relatively narrow range of activities - especially in industry - in West Africa do not
offer much scope for such intra-industry trade within the region.

8. Fragile social and political conditions. All countries in West Africa display very
poor social indicators, though with notable variations. The proportion of population in
absolute poverty is somewhat above 50% for the sub-region, but around 10% in the more
urbanized coastal, humid zone and about to 60% in the largely rural Sahelian zone. Five
of the ten lowest ranking countries on the UNDP Human Poverty Index are in West
Africa. Health and education indicators are as expected closely correlated with income
levels. The incidence of infectious disease is high, especially malaria which is endemic
over the region. Incidence of HIV is on average lower than in central or southern Africa,
though highly variable among countries, with Niger at one end being less than 2% and
Cote d'Ivoire exceeding 10%. On the other hand, the elimination of onchocerciasis (river
blindness) appears within reach as a result of a vigorous international campaign begun 25
years ago.

9. Fractious political rivalries have plagued Liberia and Sierra-Leone, and the spillover
into other countries, notably Guinea, has not been satisfactorily resolved; arms and
diamonds trade involving these and other countries and others in the region may be
continuing. While a degree of political stability has been restored in C6te d'Ivoire, since
the military coup of December 1999, after the municipal elections of March 2001, the
situation remains somewhat unsettled politically in a country which had been, by far, the
most economically advanced in the region. Poverty, poor social conditions, and political
tensions are not conducive to closer relations among countries.

10. Mixed policy performance. Countries aspiring to formn a durable regional
arrangement should all be reasonably good performers, lest the worst performers set the
pace of development. In this respect, the picture is a mixed one. The Bank's assessment
of the "Overall Policy Environment"3 rated only one of the two smallest West African
countries (Cape Verde) as "good", three as "average", six as "moderately unsatisfactory",
and five as "poor", including the largest one. Compared to all 47 Sub-Saharan countries,
the best performer was one among five, the three average performers were among ten
other countries, the six moderately unsatisfactory among fifteen, and the five poor
performers were in a group of seventeen. The distribution within the region thus
resembles that of the rest of Africa and, as in the rest of Africa, there clearly is room for
both overall improvement and greater convergence.

3 This assessment is based on four categories of policies: economic management, social policy and poverty
reduction as well as governance and institutional capacity including such important aspects for business as
the poor functioning of most judicial systems. (See also: "Linking IDA Support to Country Performance,
Recent Experience in Emerging Issues ", IDA, January 2001.)

4

B. Forces for Integration

11. While unfavorable factors are in themselves compelling reasons to promote regional
integration inasmuch as it can be a way to overcome at least some of these negative
conditions, several historical and recent internal and external forces for integration exist.

12. Integration by the people. The peoples of West Africa have traveled and traded
across the region for centuries and continue to do so. Coastal countries harbor large
groups of immigrant workers from the Sahelian countries: until recently, more than 25%
of the labor force, mainly in plantations, in Cote d'Ivoire, nearly 10% in Guinea, and a
large number were from other West African countries. There are also large numbers,
though necessarily a smaller proportion, in Nigeria. In fact, every coastal country
contains significant communities of people from the Sudan-Sahelian zone, especially in
the large urban areas of Abidjan, Accra, Dakar or Lagos. These historical movements of
people and goods are regional integration and are deeply ingrained in the regional
cultures. For that reason, it is hoped, and expected, that tensions between nationals and
non-nationals that have occurred in parts of the region, most recently in Cote d'Ivoire,
will not become permanent societal or political features.

13. Lessons from the past. Importantly, there are good indications that at least two
major mistakes that have doomed past attempts at regional integration are not being
repeated. First, import substitution, self-sufficiency and other autarkic strategies have
been officially rejected. Second, governments are acutely aware that the unequal, or
unequally perceived, distribution of the gains and losses of regional integration have been
a cause of failure in the past. They realize as well that no politically or economically easy
solution is at hand. Rather, the difficulties are not being ignored or dismissed and several
complementary approaches are being considered to avoid the consequences of possible
diverging growth trends between poor and better endowed areas.

14. Demands from civil society. In contrast to the past, there is a growing awareness
within the business communities and civil society in general that regional integration may
have the potential to move the region out of the mixture of fragmentation, conflict, and
stagnation that currently obscures the future. Traditional traders, women and men alike,
want to see freedom and security of movements across the region established on the
ground, not just in speeches and protocols. The modern business groups, of which the
West African Enterprise Network (WAEN) is a most dynamic element, take that same
position and actively lobby governments and regional organizations, and welcome
external support. Private financiers have already created a regional commercial bank
with effective operations that straddles the linguistic divide and are prepared to invest in
other multicountry activities.

15. Renewed political commitment. Regional integration is in the first place a political
enterprise, which requires genuine commitment by governments, mutual trust, and
leadership. The European Union, which is the model West Africa essentially seeks to
follow, is a clear demonstration of this. None of these is fully present in West Africa -
but neither were they at the beginnings of the EU, but they appear to be emerging in the
past few years. Two major regional institutions, Economic Community of West African

5

States (ECOWAS) and Union Economique et Monetaire Ouest Africaine (UEMOA)4
have been established, overcome several episodes of political uncertainty and become
stronger; all governments have expressed their commitment, and more importantly, most
have demonstrated it by actively contributing to the work of the regional organizations.
While no political figure has emerged as unquestionable leader of regional integration,
President Obasanjo of Nigeria (the largest country) now appears determined to share that
responsibility while other Heads of State, such as President Konare of Mali, have been
equally forthcoming.

16. Increased donors support. Several major donors, while believing that national
policies are key, share the view that regional integration can contribute to preventing
conflicts, enhancing growth, and reducing poverty. For that reason, the EU, the World
Bank, the IMF, and France have supported credible regional efforts. They have worked
jointly since 1994 to strengthen UEMOA, especially its institutional capacity for policy
design and implementation. The same support is now being extended to ECOWAS. Other
donors have contributed in a variety of ways. All confirmed their support for the future
at the recent Bamako workshop. In other words, the donor community stands behind
Africa in general, and West Africa in particular, on the critical theme of regional
integration.

17. In summary, it is difficult to meaningfully weigh the "pros" and "cons" of regional
integration in the West Africa region or to project chances of success versus failure.
Exarnination of the regional background tells us that this is undoubtedly a process that
faces "high risks and high transactions costs"'. At the same time, because the negatives
are large, the potential gains from overcoming them are also very large. And there are
sufficient strong positives to make it worthwh:ile for all actors to face the risks.

II. WEST AFRICAN REGIONAL INTEGRATION: STRATEGIES, INSTITUTIONS, POLICIES

18. The World Bank assistance strategy must be designed, in a participatory process, in
light of and in response to the development and integration strategy of the countries and
institutions of West Africa themselves. Unlike a Country Assistance Strategy, however, it
cannot, by definition, be based on the formal expression of a single political authority.
Rather it has to be found in the treaties and protocols that form the legal basis of the
integration effort as well as in the words and actions of the many participating regional
institutions and governments. This section describes the main aspects of this "revealed
strategy".

A. Vision and Strategy

19. While the long term goal is some form of African unity (for example, as enunciated in
the OAU Treaty Establishing the African Economic Community, signed in Abuja, 1991
and reinforced by the recent decision by African Heads of State, in July 2000, to create an
African Union), for which sub-regional integration arrangements would be intermediate

4 UEMOA is the French acronym for the West African Economic and Monetary Union and will be used
throughout the text.

6

steps, both the ECOWAS and the UEMOA treaties have similar and more immediate and
practical objectives regarding growth, stability and poverty reduction (or income
distribution); regarding the creation of "a common market for goods, services and
factors" as well as for the convergence of macroeconomic policies and coordination of
sector policies. One difference concerns "increased international competitiveness within
open markets", which features in the UEMOA treaty but not the earlier ECOWAS treaty.
However, throughout the region the objective of openness and integration into the world
economy has indeed become the official word. The ECOWAS, and especially the
UEMOA, have been following a reasonably well structured program to deepen
cooperation and integration, though concrete actions by countries often lag behind
ambitious formal multicountry commitments, and many objectives have indefinite
horizons. Broadly speaking, the first phase has focused on trade integration. Monetary
integration actually proceeded this phase in UEMOA but will follow it in ECOWAS,
although an important interim step will be to deepen financial sector integration. In
parallel, the Region has been pursuing well-defined and phased integration efforts in key
sectors where cross-border externalities are significant, notably air transport, energy, and
- more recently - telecommunication. Within UEMOA especially, integration efforts
also cover several tranversal issues, including public finances, investment policies and
competition, while in the ECOWAS, attention has focused more on facilitating intra-
regional trade and transport, as well as on conflict resolution.

B. Institutions

20. The governments of West Africa have chosen to aim at "deep" integration in its three
constitutive dimensions: all countries concerned, all policy areas, and a common
institutional framework - basically inspired by the European Union model, which
explains the pre-eminence of two regional institutions created for that purpose. At the
same time there exist a number of specialized cooperative arrangements that involve
some of the countries only and focus on some specific activities only. Some of these
specialized institutions historically precede the broader regional organizations. (See
Attachment 3.)

21. Main Regional Institutions. West Africa is defined here as the 15 countries' which
are members of the Economic Community of West African States - ECOWAS,
established in 1975 (see Attachment 1). The original inspiration is to be found in the
philosophy of Pan-africanism of early African independence leaders. Nigeria, together
with Ghana, was a central force in its creation. The ECOWAS has both an economic and
a political-diplomatic mandate, and has been more effective in the latter than in the
former. The UEMOA, Union Economique et Monetaire Ouest Africaine, contains eight
of the ECOWAS countries. UEMOA, created in 1994, has a strong institutional
pedigree, being an outgrowth of the West African Monetary Union (UMOA - Union
Monetaire Ouest Africaine) -
formally established in 1962 but predated by colonial
structures, and a successor to the CEAO (Communaute Economique de I'Afrique de
l'Ouest). It also has historical and economic links to Europe, principally by virtue of

5 Mauritania is part of West Africa, but ceased to be a member of ECOWAS in December 26, 2000 while
remaining a member of the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU). It is also a member of several regional
organizations, notably OMVS.

7

sharing a common currency belonging to the Franc zone, with convertibility guaranteed
by the French treasury. The UEMOA institutions are closely patterned along the lines of
the European Union (see Attachment 2). The main reasons for the differences between
the two institutions and indeed for their separate existence so far, are two. One is the
political, institutional, cultural, economic, and monetary links of the UEMOA countries
with France. The same linkages have not existed between the other ECOWAS countries
and their former colonial powers. The second is the checkered history of Nigeria, by far
the biggest partner in both population and economic power, which effectively deprived
ECOWAS of what should have been its "natural" leader in economic integration
(although Nigeria has underwritten most ECOWAS peacekeeping efforts). It is apparent
that Nigeria's size coupled with its relative political instability has inspired a sense of
hesitation on the part of other West African countries, including in their business
communities.6

22. However, recent major changes have improved the outlook for the region as a whole.
Turning points have been Nigeria's return to democracy following elections in 1999 and
President Obasanjo's far-sighted speech to the December 1999 ECOWAS Heads of State
meeting in Lom6, in which he offered a pragmatic, "two track" approach to West African
integration. This included as central objectives the creation of an effective, fast-track free
trade zone around Nigeria as a step toward the generalization of the UEMOA Customs
Union to all of ECOWAS by 2002 and a second monetary union of non-UEMOA
countries that would subsequently merge with the CFA zone to create a single monetary
union by 2003/4. On the heels of this opening, the relationship between the two
institutions has been steadily strengthened through numerous meetings at the technical
level between the Secretariat and the Commission, meetings of central bank governors,
and summits of Heads of State. President K;onare of Mali, elected President of both
ECOWAS and UEMOA in 2000 and re-elected in 2001, has provided needed credibility
and drive in bringing the two groups closer together.

23. Other events have had an impact on the policy stance and status of the regional
organizations. Among these, the devaluation of the CFA franc in January 1994 reflected
the limits of monetary arrangements with pegged exchange rates, however elaborate their
institutional set-up, in the face of adverse terms of trade shocks in a context of persistent
public sector fiscal laxity. Hence, the subsequent UEMOA endeavor has paid particular
attention to stricter adherence to sound macroeconomic management of CFA countries,
through commitment to largely fiscal targets under a system of mutual convergence and
surveillance. The franc zone lessons bear on the design of second monetary zone within
ECOWAS.

24. From a political and institutional point of view, the process of integration has made
great strides in the last few years and other parts of the continent look to West Africa as
being in many ways a valuable example of regional integration. Participating
governments, and no less so, civil society in the region, do expect that the effort toward
greater political and economic closeness among the countries will not only improve

6 The Conseil de I'Entente was set up by C6te d'lvoire in 1959 and also includes Benin, Burkina Faso,
Niger, and Togo, as a francophone counterweight to the growing power of Nigeria.

8

economic performance, but also strengthen democracy where it is nascent and help its
emergence where it is still absent.

25. Other regional arrangements. Deep regional "integration" is typically built on a
vast array of cooperative arrangements adopted over the years with a more limited focus,
with differing organizational structure, power and level of activity, and generally
covering only a subset of ECOWAS countries that have a special interest in the issue.
Some are purely inter-institutional agreements such as the mutual recognition of
standards and certificates (such as educational degrees), or various forms of cooperation
among national institutes such as the African Consortium for Economic Research, and
some may be purely private, such as the West Africa Enterprise Network. These limited
cooperative arrangements can sometimes culminate in full-fledged, sector-specific
regional institutions, as for example the West African Health Organization which merges
a previous anglophone and a francophone institution (and serves now as the health unit of
the ECOWAS Secretariat). Others have been created to manage a specific, time-bound
activity, such as the Onchocerciasis eradication program, or to manage certain activities
shared by neighboring countries, such as the Senegal River Valley Authority (OMVS -
Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du Fleuve Senegal) - comprising Mali, Mauritania
and Senegal to develop hydroelectric and irrigation potential. Another active institution is
the CILSS - Comite inter-Etats de Lutte contre la Secheresse - with a sister organization
housed at the OECD in Paris, the Club du Sahel, created in the wake of the severe
Sahelian drought in the early 1970s as a way of pooling resources to deal with a problem
affecting several countries. There are also periodic inter-state conferences at a ministerial
level to discuss issues and policies of common interest, for example, Conference of
Ministers of agriculture in West and Central Africa.

C. Policies

26. Regional policies for integration revolve largely around the objective of establishing a
regional common market, but including convergence or harmonization of various
national macroeconomic and sectoral policies as well. The two regional institutions often
have separate, parallel policy actions in the various areas, which are not always mutually
coherent.

27. Establishing a common market - Goods. Following years of discussion among
member countries and various donors, UEMOA formally established a customs union on
January 1, 2000. At that date, all official barriers among the eight member countries were
to be eliminated for goods originating in the Union (as defined as raw materials and
handicrafts, plus processed goods meeting rules of origin criteria) - although some
barriers based on norms and health concerns reportedly still exist. Simultaneously, a four
rate common external tariff (CET) became effective, with a statutory structure of 0 %
(medicines and books), 5% (largely capital goods and raw materials), 10% (intended to
cover intermediate goods but including capital goods), and 20% (in principle limited to
finished consumption goods but including many goods from other categories). Specific
UEMOA "accompanying measures" in the form of surtaxes and other indirect tariff
supplements can be applied individually by member countries to imports directly
competing with selected "sensitive" domestic activities (mainly manufactures) on a
declining basis over 4 years. To increase protection on these and other goods still further,

9

many have been purposely misclassified in the higher tariff rate categories. There still are
several national-level statutory or ad hoc duty exemptions on imports, though efforts are
being made to inventory and to limit these. On the whole, the degree of nominal
protection is on average lower than at the creation of UEMOA (around 12% vs. 26% in
1996). To facilitate the elimination of internal trade barriers, UEMOA has a functioning
compensation scheme for foregone customs receipts on intra-UEMOA trade, financed by
a 1 percent levy on imports from outside the zone.

28. At the same time, following a 10-year transitional period, the ECOWAS Free Trade
Area officially entered into effect in 2000. Its application remains patchy, in part because
the process of licensing products meeting the rules of origin criteria (similar to those of
the UEMOA) remain cumbersome and the original fiscal compensation mechanism was
poorly designed and underfinanced. The Nigerian "fast track" free trade area is meant to
correct deficiencies in the ECOWAS program but initial results after the first year are
unspectacular.

29. The other ECOWAS countries have a variety of tariff levels and structures vis-a-vis
the rest of the world, the rates of which (if not the classification of goods into these rates)
are being progressively aligned with the UEMOA external tariff. While Ghana now has a
tariff structure close to that of the UEMOA (though with a substantially different
classification and many more exemptions), Nigeria is lagging in reforming its trade
regime and still has higher average and more dispersed tariffs, as well as other
restrictions than other countries. In the entire zone, formal export taxes have virtually
disappeared (except for cocoa where it may be justified in terms of "optimal" taxation
and on forestry, where it might be justified environmentally). However, implicit taxation
of some exports through state monopolies persists, particularly in the case of cotton in the
UEMOA zone. West African Heads of State have decided to extend the UEMOA CET to
all 15 ECOWAS countries and simultaneously dismantle all internal barriers, while
adopting common rules of origin and relying on the same system of fiscal compensation
for tariff losses on internal trade. Work is proceeding to translate this agreement in
principle into action.

30. Establishing a common market -
Infrastructure Services. Integration of
infrastructure services -
transport, power, telecommunications -
is being considered
sector by sector, by one or both of the two regional institutions and, in the case of air
transport, within a broader African framework (following the 2000 Yamoussoukro
Decision, which calls for the progressive liberalization of air transport services
throughout the continent). A number of trans-border power projects, for electricity
transmission and natural gas transport, principally at the initiative of the ECOWAS
Secretariat, are at the design stage, as are two proposed harmonization programs for
telecommunications, together with a view to establishing a harmonized, if not common,
regulatory environment.

31. Establishing a common market - Finance. Current payments as well as capital
movements are free within the CFAF zone though not always easy in practice: the
BCEAO is currently in the process of modernizing its payments systems. Payments
across currency zones via formal channels are still extremely difficult and lengthy,
reflecting differences in banking systems ancl practices and extremely weak currency

10

clearing arrangements. The West African Clearing House established years ago by
ECOWAS is virtually defunct because governments failed to honor their obligations to
provide foreign exchange; these problems will need to be solved if the new West Africa
Monetary Institute, established in 2000 to support the second monetary zone, is to
succeed. One ad hoc solution was considered to be ECOWAS travelers checks,
introduced in 1999, but their usage appears to be very narrow. At the same time, the
creation of ECOBANK in the early 1 990s with branches across the currency divides, has
demonstrated the potential for greater financial integration by the private sector, even
within the current poor policy environment. ECOBANK is probably the most efficient
institution for money transfers across the sub-region. Finally, the region has 3 separate
stock exchanges, with no cross-listings and no formal correspondence among operating
systems, reflecting poor telecommunications and financial clearing systems as well as the
absence of regional policies to bring it about.

32. Establishing a common market - People. Migrations within the region have been a
feature for centuries, and the regional treaties enshrine the principles of the free
movement of persons and right of residence in any of the ECOWAS countries for citizens
from other member countries. There are no visa requirements for ECOWAS citizens to
travel within the zone. An ECOWAS passport formally exists but has not yet been issued
by member countries. Meanwhile, episodes of xenophobia and recrimination in parts of
the region have led to the return, under duress, of large number of immigrant workers at
various times in the past most often during periods of economic decline or political
unrest, most recently from C6te d'Ivoire, in 2000. This, besides being traumatic for all
those concerned, has damaged one of the pillars of a true regional integration and what
may be the most effective means of reducing inequalities among countries.

33. Monetary and exchange rate policy. Different monetary regimes are what separate
most visibly the economies of UEMOA and each of the other member countries of
ECOWAS. The UEMOA is an extension of pre-existing monetary imion, in which a
common central bank - the BCEAO-has always been responsible for monetary policy
within member countries. Its main objective is to prevent the rate of inflation in the
Union from deviating significantly from the rate prevailing in the Euro zone, to protect
the fixed peg with the Euro. The primary instrument has been strict limits on government
borrowing from the central bank, which are to be phased out entirely by the end of 2001,
although several countries continue to have sizeable overdrafts (and have used contingent
liabilities to the parastatal and banking sectors to circumvent the limits in the past). On
balance the policy is successful - inflation is historically in single digits and was around
5.0 % in 2000.

11

Figure 1: West Africa: Inflation in UEMOA and non-UEMOA Countries
(1983-99)

5 
s0 
75 
70 

60. 
55 
455 
45 

30 
i~25
20 

0 15

_~~~~ 

85 

40 

S 

85
80
75
70
8~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~5
60
5
50
s

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~40

2

2

: 20

a ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~5

s % \ v X -~~~~~~~~~~~j= 
io: ' l

-

Note: Horizontal lines indicate minimum, maximum, and median rates of inflation during period.
Dark area contains the proportion of points falling; in the second and third quartiles.

34. In contrast, each the six other member countries of ECOWAS have maintained their
own independent monetary system.7 Historically, one main issue has been the nominal
instability of the Ghanaian Cedi and even more so of the Nigerian Naira against the CFA
franc as a result of much higher inflation rates. In both Ghana and Nigeria, monetary
policy has essentially accommodated expansionist fiscal policies, with the result that
inflation has been higher and more variable than in the CFA countries, averaging some
20-30 percent a year.

35. Convergence of Macroeconomic policies. Both the UEMOA Commission and the
ECOWAS Secretariat have set defined macroeconomic management convergence criteria
relating principally to fiscal deficits, inflation, central bank financing of government,
public debt, foreign reserves, and a number of intermediate secondary targets such as the
ratio of wages and salaries in the budget and the ratio of public investment notionally
financed by national resources. Compared to E COWAS criteria, the quantitative targets
are rather more demanding under the UEMOA Stability Pact, the Commission's mutual
surveillance system functions better, and its mnember countries are closer to achieving
sound policy convergence. The imperative of macroeconomic stability (low inflation) is
indeed more stringent in the UEMOA because of the institutionally fixed nominal parity
of the CFA vis-a-vis the Euro. At the same time, the UEMOA Commission, the
ECOWAS Executive Secretariat, and the various central banks are working to increase
their cooperation and to align macroeconomic policy convergence criteria.

7 However, Cape Verde has pegged its currency to the Portuguese Escudo, and thereby to the Euro, and
Liberia continues to use the US dollar.

12

36. Business Environment. Both treaties purport to put the private sector at the center of
the integration process. The regional organizations have launched important initiatives to
improve a "business environment" which is still generally viewed as problematic. One is
tax harmonization. Indirect taxation harmonization, excluding petroleum products, is
nearly complete in the UEMOA with a VAT of 17-18 percent in all countries on most
products; excise tax rates are more variable, but limited to an agreed list of products, with
no discrimination between domestic and imported products (mainly tobacco, spirits).
Nigeria has a flat 5 percent VAT and Ghana has just introduced a VAT with a basic rate
of 12.5 percent. But there has been no work program on direct taxes (the corporate
income tax is typically high, in the range of 30-35 percent), or on working out tax sharing
arrangements when a business spans more than one country. Taxation of financial
instruments, even within UEMOA and its common capital market, remains variable
among countries. Finally, even where tax harmonization may have progressed, it is
undercut by the continued prevalence of exonerations under national investment codes
and by generally poor and sometimes corrupt tax administration.

37. Differences in the region stem principally from the two legal traditions inherited by
the Anglophone, francophone, and lusophone countries respectively. The UEMOA
countries have agreed to a set of identical business laws under the treaty obligations of
OHADA - (Organisation pour I'Harmonisation du Droit des Affaires en Afrique) - a
program for francophone Africa supported by donors, although the new codes have not
yet been fully translated into national legislations. Meanwhile, the ECOWAS Secretariat
is considering how the OHADA framework might be used to harmonize business law in
the other ECOWAS countries.

38. A common investment code has been drafted by the UEMOA Commission with a
view to establishing a secure environment, equally and automatically applicable to all
domestic and foreign private businesses throughout the region, with few (and declining)
special tax privileges, but there is still a lively debate among member states over the level
and form of fiscal incentives and eligible investors.8 The ECOWAS Secretariat has also
started work and consultations on common investment code. The prospects for adoption a
simple, regional code fully consistent with customs and tax laws remain uncertain.

39. Draft rules of competition inspired from those in the EU are currently under
consideration by the UEMOA authorities. Some basic issues remain to be sorted out,
however, including the extent to which the proposed common rules and institutions
would replace all national rules and structures, the applicability of the rules to non-
competitive actions by governments, and 
the consistency between the general
competition framework and sector-specific regulations. ECOWAS has scarcely begun to
address the issue of competition, outside of specific sectors, such as air transport and
telecommunications.9

8 The Bank and the Fund have argued to limit fiscal incentives to accelerated depreciation, which could be

administered by the fiscal authorities and would automatically phase out. There remains, however, a
preference for specific fiscal exemptions, on customs duties, VAT, and income.
To the contrary, there continues to be various proposals, including from within ECOWAS, for

arrangements to limit competition, for example in coastal shipping.

13

40. Commodity Producing Sectors: Agriculture and Industry. While the two main
regional organizations have been established on the premise that regional integration is
inherently and largely a multisectoral activity, requiring strategies that are by nature
transversal, reaching across sectors, consistent with the objective of creating a unified
economic space, or common market, they bolh retain a focus on productive sectors as
well. Their challenge is to define the public role in promoting regional integration in
such sectors. Because most agricultural and industrial production activities are private,
strategies to integrate production itself are the initiative and the responsibility of the
private sector, not governments or regional organizations.'0 Both UEMOA and
ECOWAS are formulating regional integration policies touching on the production of
agricultural and industrial goods (for example, the UEMOA Commission has drafted a
Common Industrial Policy and a Common Agricultural Policy). Typically, these focus
on cooperative arrangements and exchange of information among countries and regional
organizations, rather than attempting to "plan" or allocate public investments or
production targets on a regional basis. They seek rather to strengthen cooperation among
national agencies that affect productive activities (e.g., agricultural research, seeds
certification, industrial norms and testing).

41. Natural resources: Integrated Water management. After several years of little
activity following the Rio de Janeiro Conference on Environment and Development,
West African governments have revived cooperative activities among riparian countries
regarding conservation and management of river basins (the Niger and Senegal rivers
being by far the most important) and other water resources (notably lake Chad) in the
region. They formed the West African Conference on Integrated Water Resources
Management (16 countries) in Ouagadougou in March 1998, and a Ministerial Follow-up
Committee held its first meeting in March 2000 with support from Denmark. In
association with CILSS, ECOWAS, UEMOA and several existing river basin
organizations, they have fornulated a 4-year, $25 million West Africa Water Vision and
a Regional Action Plan, covering national integrated water management programs; water
resource reconstruction programs in countries damaged by wars; education and
awareness campaigns; an institutional structure for monitoring and coordinating; a
framework for re-vitalizing collaboration and convergence among riparian states and
river basin bodies ; and the establishment of various water development funds.

42. Poverty reduction and structural funds. Poverty reduction is implicit in the
primary objective of raising standards of living in the region, as stated in the treaties.
Conscious of the need to go beyond expressions of desire, the political authorities have
initiated discussions toward articulating a "regional poverty reduction strategy" building
on the national Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) that several member

10 The challenge can be illustrated by the cotton sector. West Africa produces some 15% of world cotton,
and a consolidated West Africa Cotton Basin would be of major interest to international investors. But as
production is currently fragmented among several countries each of which has specific national policies
regulating cotton production and marketing and generally reserved entirely to monopsonistic parastatals,
the private sector cannot effectively take a West African approach - which limits its attractiveness to major
investors.

14

countries have prepared or are in the process of preparing." This idea was broached
originally at a seminar sponsored by the BCEAO in July 2000 and was generally
supported at the Bamako workshop of March 2001. At the same time, a cautionary note
was voiced by several regional participants regarding the complexity and cost of such a
regional initiative in light of the experience gained by individual countries. In particular,
an essential ingredient of a PRSP is the active participation of civil society in its
formulation. It was noted that this highly desirable feature would have to be adapted to a
process involving fifteen countries. The Commission and the Secretariat will cooperate in
moving the West Africa PRSP process forward, and for which they are seeking support
from the donor community. A key issue, recognized by all, is the issue of migrant labor,
which is important not only for the business environment but for poverty reduction as
well, and regional authorities intend to discuss it during 2001. As explained in
Attachment 7, a West Africa PRSP would focus on how deeper regional integration can
accelerate growth and reduce poverty, including through cross-border safety net
mechanism.

43. Both institutions recognize that significant inequalities in income among member
countries constitute a barrier to deeper integration, and the problem especially manifests
itself in the gap between landlocked Sahelian countries and the relatively better endowed
humid coastal regions, although the poverty incidence is high in all countries and the
inequalities within countries are more than across countries. Thus, both institutions have
established "structural funds" to promote "balanced regional development." The
UEMOA fund has been carefully designed and is well-financed (over $30 million as of
early 2001, all from a share of the UEMOA community import levy (PCS - Prglevement
Communautaire de Solidarite), although no poverty reduction activities have yet been
financed. The ECOWAS Fund has already committed $114 million, though over half
have been for regional projects.

D. Summary of Progress

44. Much has been accomplished toward the regional integration of West Africa since
1975 and particularly since the early 1990s. Governments have reaffirmed their political
commitments, with the largest country in the region improving its economic management
and renewing its leadership. Regional organizations have strengthened both their
capacities and their role as the leaders in the movement; a customs union covering a third
of the trade within ECOWAS is officially in place and beginning to function; legal and
regulatory texts are at various stages of completion with a view to creating a more
favorable business environment; several segments of the private sector are taking a more
active stance in favor of integration and representatives of civil society now begin to have
a "voice" in the debate; and the rest of the world is taking notice.

I I This work would obviously build on ongoing work on national PRSPs; in West Africa, the status is as

follows: two full PRSPs (Burkina Faso and Mauritania), eight interim PRSPs (Benin, the Gambia, Ghana,

Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, and Senegal), and ongoing work expected to lead to an interim PRSP
in the coming months in Cote d'Ivoire, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone. For the remaining countries (Cape
Verde, Liberia, and Togo) work on even an interim PRSP has barely begun.

15

III. WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE: RATIONALE, PRINCIPLES, AND BENEFITS

45. The ultimate objective of the Bank's assistance strategy is to increase growth and to
reduce poverty in West Africa, identical to its objectives of its country assistance
strategies as well as national PRSPs and similar statements, and underlying objectives of
the various integration initiatives in the region. The RIAS is formulated on the premise
that the creation of a more unified, and open, regional economic space, by helping
enhance the competitiveness of the regional producers and reduce transactions costs, will
accelerate growth while providing wider access to the expanded employment
opportunities for workers throughout the region.

A. Rationale

46. Basically, the economic rationale for pursuing regional integration lies in the belief
that a more integrated West Africa can help overcome the main constraints to
development whether they are "states of nature" or the result of misdirected policies. As
noted at the outset, these include extreme geographic, political, and economic
fragmentation; extensive poverty; mediocre policy performance; persistent conflicts and
serious governance shortcomings.

47. Second, as already mentioned, after a long and checkered history the concept of
regional integration has been given a new life in recent years in all parts of Africa. In the
case of West Africa, it has acquired both greater economic sense and stronger political
credibility with the active participation of Nigeria and with the renewed cooperation
between the two main regional institutions. This still fragile renaissance deserves support.
The demand for World Bank's and other major donors' assistance, is unambiguous. It has
been clearly expressed, notably, at the 2000 Anmual Meetings in Prague and again on the
occasion of the recent visit to Africa by the President of the World Bank and the
Managing Director of the IMF. The proposed assistance strategy is in response to that
request as well as a confirmation of the Bank's continued commitment to the cause of
West African integration.

48. Thirdly, as noted earlier, past experience has shown the limits of an ad hoc, project by
project approach to regional integration. Also, several years of dialogue and cooperation
with the UEMOA Commission and the ECOWAS Executive Secretariat have led to the
conclusion that a more comprehensive, strategic approach would best serve the twin
objectives of helping these institutions lead the process of integration and focusing the
Bank's assistance in cooperation with other donors.

49. Fourthly, in several ways a strategic focus on the regional dimension should
strengthen the impact of the Bank's country work - and in no case should distract from it.
It will underscore the importance of countries' relations with each other; an aspect often
neglected in Bank economic and sector work. It will help ensure that the Bank's
operational stance is consistent across countries. It will naturally force CASs, as well as
PRSPs and JSAs, to face rather than by-pass difficult cross-border issues. As a corollary
it will give more weight to the need for countries to respect their regional commitments.
It has indeed been observed by the Commission, as well as the Secretariat, that regional

16

decisions, including those legally binding, are weakly "internalized" by the member
governments. Focusing on regional issues will of course facilitate identification, design
and implementation of regional projects and national projects, which are components of
regional networks, for example national portions of roads designated as "regional trunk
roads".

50. This RIAS is being formulated in full cognizance that in the intellectual debate on
regional arrangements, not all the arguments are in favor of such arrangements and when
they are, they do not necessarily support deep integration as the best alternative exclusive
of more flexible forms of cooperation. 12

51. From traditional customs union theory and its more recent developments, the dangers
of a regional arrangement are essentially two: trade diversion rather than trade creation;
second, geographical polarization of activities. Trade diversion and trade creation are not
likely to be powerful forces in the foreseeable future. First, because the region's main
exports are primary products whose markets are and will remain outside the region.
While regional integration is unlikely to affect the direction of primary exports, it is
possible that through alliances between exporters (e.g. of cocoa) with enough weight their
price might be affected in favor of the region (though efforts in that direction have not
been successful in the past). Second, the scope for trade creation in manufactures is ipso
facto constrained by the small size of industrial sectors; in particular the scope for intra-
industry trade (which has been increasing rapidly, for example, within the EU) is very
limited. Trade diversion of light manufactured goods such as household wares, could
expand from its current modest base if protected industries in countries such as Nigeria,
C6te d'Ivoire, or Senegal were to displace competing imports from East Asia. The
immediate negative welfare impact on consumers would have to be weighed against the
productivity increases made possible by economies of scale and other positive dynamic
effe-Cts that could eventually lead to trade creation on the basis of truly competitive
industries. The policy issue is of course the "optimal" level and structure of the external
tariff that could generate those dynamic benefits. Meanwhile, the thrust of the region's
integration strategy supported by the Bank is to gradually reduce and rationalize effective
protection, indeed to make "open regionalism" one of the guiding principles in the
process. (See Attachment 4.)

B. Principles

52. Four guiding principles underpin the formulation of the Bank's assistance strategy, as
well as the process of regional integration itself. These were confirmed, in a slightly
expanded form, at the Bamako workshop, which in addition emphasized the importance
for regional authorities to be more diligent in translating integration declarations into
action, necessary to give credibility to both to their own efforts and to donors' assistance
strategies.

53. Underpinning all these principles is the view that a regional integration assistance
strategy, just as regional integration itself, is justified by the extent it makes Bank country

12 See, for example, Trade Blocs, World Bank Policy Research Report, Oxford University Press, 2000.

17

assistance strategies more effective, and improves country performance. But while it is
subordinate to country-level decisions, it should also inform and help shape country-level
activities so they are increasingly coherent with regional policies and initiatives.

54. First, subsidiarity and coherence of national programs must be respected.
Regional integration, and World Bank strategy to assist it, should be viewed less as an
end in itself than as a means of reinforcing and enhancing country performance and the
effectiveness of Bank country assistance. In the first instance, this means that regional
organizations will limit themselves to those activities where there are clear scale
economies from a multi-country approach and where there are cross-border externalities,
requiring a joint approach - that is, they will focus on what the countries themselves
cannot do as effectively, recognizing that the demarcation between what should best be
done nationally or regionally will shift over time. Similarly the Bank should focus its
support to regional integration efforts on those cross-border activities that respect the
principle of subsidiarity.

55. At the same time, Bank, and other donor, country assistance strategies must
increasingly deal explicitly with the regional dimension and become more supportive of
and coherent with regional agreements, just as country policies gmust be progressively
aligned with regional initiatives. The formulation of a regional integration assistance
strategy should help set parameters for Bank assistance strategies in the countries
involved.

56. Second, regional integration should see the private sector and civil society as the
main engine of integration, as a participant in the design and implementation of policies,
and as the main stakeholder and beneficiary of integration. Therefore, regional
integration, and the Bank's strategy to assist it, should seek to enhance the scope for
cross-border private sector activity, implying, for example, priority to creating and
sustaining a unified, open economic space within West Africa with competitive regional
markets. Assuring that the private sector takes up more responsibility for advancing the
agenda on regional integration requires two concurrent efforts. The first is to work with
official institutions to create the opportunities for private sector representatives to be
more actively in regional integration activities, beyond consultation; this may require new
approaches that the Bank and IFC might help design. The second is for the private sector
itself to organize to be able to take up these responsibilities. The role of the private sector
goes beyond taking advantage of new business opportunities that regional integration
may throw up; it must lobby to help create these new opportunities and the Bank and IFC
may be able to strengthen such private sector groups.

57. Third, the large differences among countries as well as limited institutional and
political capacity suggest there will need to be pragmatism and progressivity in putting
regional integration schemes into place, and in terms of the Bank supporting them. While
political leaders speak in terms of quick and comprehensive integration, experience in
West Africa (and virtually everywhere else) shows the contrary - that regional integration
proceeds deliberating along three different dimnensions - geography, sectoral focus, and
institutional depth. In some areas, such as the creation of a free trade zone or air
transport liberalization, virtually all countries are involved and some authority is
gradually being transferred to supranational regional bodies. In others, such as electricity

18

trade, a gas pipeline, or joint river projects, only neighboring countries are directly
involved, with varying degrees of transfer of institutional authority. Some activities (like
river basin development) involve neighboring countries outside of ECOWAS. In still
other areas, such as exchanging information, all countries may be involved but only
through cooperative, not integration, arrangements. Not all countries can be
simultaneously and equally prepared or interested to move to deeper integration across
the board: political and institutional arrangements must be devised (as is done in the EU)
in a way that maintains strong solidarity among members, involves all of them in policy
formulation and achieves as wide as possible a consensus, yet not letting the pace of
progress be dictated by the slowest moving member. Continuous active diplomacy is key.
Pragmatism and gradualism provides the needed flexibility, and both donors and regional
representatives endorsed this principle at the Bamako workshop.

58. Fourth, partnerships with donors and between donors must be built with a view to
avoid duplication while obtaining the greatest possible benefit from each donor's
comparative advantage. Strong, transparent partnership with the donor community on
regional integration initiatives offers the best chance for the region to obtain additional
external financial resources over and above those allocated to individual countries, which
is a concern of West African authorities. There already exist a variety of consultative and
coordination mechanisms among donors (see Section V), usually linked to specific
activities, sometimes informal, often convened by regional institutions themselves. But
there is no over-arching donor consultative mechanism for West Africa as a whole.
Reflecting this concern, the Bamako workshop formulated the proposal to establish a
larger consultative forum that could regularly bring donors together, including their major
West African interlocuteurs, as a way of enhancing coordination and collaboration.

C. Benefits: Integration for Growth and Poverty Alleviation

59. The benefits expected from open regional integration include the traditional gains
from better resource allocation through economies of scale and increased competition as
well as positive regional external ecinomies. 
Integration will permit also to firm-up
policy commitments to macroeconomic stability and trade liberalization through some
lock-in mechanisms. However, that regional integration in itself accelerates growth
cannot be "demonstrated" on the basis of generally accepted theoretical models.
Experience, including the European Union, Nafta or Mercosur, offers no "proof' either.
Leaving aside the all important consideration that integration may have primarily
political objectives, it is reasonable to expect that, particularly in the case of West Africa,
regional integration will contribute to accelerated growth. As is implicit in the very
rationale for regional integration, transforming the region from a conglomerate of small
fragmented economies into a much larger unified open space will allow a better
allocation of capital and labor, make possible economies of scale including through
expansions and mergers, and generally permit to reap the benefits of openness which, as
distinct from integration proper, has been demonstrated to be highly beneficial for
growth. This in turn will be made possible by more stable macroeconomic conditions and
a more favorable business environment and consequently higher levels of domestic and
foreign private investment.

19

60. This no doubt is an idealized picture, but one to which regional integration can
contribute while national policies will remain the determining factor. The same
consideration applies to poverty reduction: the task is essentially in the hands of member
countries. As governments articulate their approach in national PRSPs, it is clear that
even with a reasonable prospect of gradually accelerating growth, poverty reduction is a
formidable undertaking in view of the current dismal situation in most countries.

61. Regional integration offers additional challenges and opportunities. One important
finding of both theory and observation is the danger of growing inequality within and
between countries resulting from polarization of economic activities in "South-South"
regional arrangements. The view in the region, which the Bank shares, is that such
polarization already occurs and is likely to continue with or without integration; but that
its extent and consequences will be better managed within the institutional framework
and the financial safeguards offered by deep integration than without it. Integration is
thus conceived as a rational means of ensuring that the gains and costs of regionalization
are not too unevenly distributed; that financial arrangements such as structural funds, if
well managed, can alleviate effects of maldistribution and that jointly agreed policies can
avoid beggar-thy-neighbor behavior that would otherwise most probably set in.

62. In this context, besides accelerating growth, there are three ways in which integration
can contribute to poverty reduction: permitting poor people to go where the jobs are;
creating jobs where poor people are; establishing compensatory mechanisms.

63. First, historically the most powerful channel has been immigration of workers from
the poor landlocked areas to the more prosperous coastal regions, particularly the cocoa
and coffee plantations of CMte d'Ivoire and Ghana and the large urban centers, Abidjan,
Accra, Lagos (to a lesser degree also outside West Africa, e.g. to Gabon, and to Western
Europe). It must therefore be underscored, particularly in light of recent events, that any
measures or actions that would in future significantly constrain trans-border movements
of people, their rights of residence and work (which feature in the treaties) would be
profoundly damaging to the cause of regional integration and poverty reduction.

64. Second, the difficulty of developing employment in the areas of emigration would be
attenuated by improving the infrastructure and communications facilities, services and
networks to serve activities that do not require much agglomeration, and are information
or technology-based.

65. Fiscal transfers within the region are a third way to combat poverty on a regional
scale.'3 The best example of these are "structural funds", as have been operating in the
EU, founded on a concept of regional solidarity and income re-distribution, targeted at
the least developed countries and localities with the aim of increasing the resources
available to them for investment. This seems to be the also the rationale for the UEMOA
and ECOWAS structural funds, with clear preference to small-scale, localized activities

" As mentioned earlier, inter-country fiscal transfers can have other rationales and objectives, including to
compensate for revenue losses suffered by a member country as a result of lowering tariffs, assuming other

countries gain or, in the same vein, to compensate for the effects of an asymmetrical shock which hurts
some countries and benefits others, e.g., a rise of petroleum prices. These would be a purely budgetary
operation with no other specific aim of growth or poverty reduction.

20

in the poorer regions of the zone with possibly low but positive economic returns.
Transfers of a purely social nature, however justified on poverty grounds, would pose a
serious problem of sustainability. They must therefore be part of broader programs to
foster economic development of the poor areas or social groups.

66. Whatever the uncertainties and difficulties inherent in all three regional contributions
to reducing poverty, they all deserve support including from the donor community: the
EU, the World Bank, the AfDB and NGOs with community development expertise, in
particular. One emerging channel for the Bank to contribute to poverty reduction, and
human resource development, is by helping to formulate a West African PRSP. This was
one of the proposals from the Bamako workshop, building on the outcome of an earlier
seminar hosted by the BCEAO. This regional exercise could clarify the regional, or
cross-country, dimensions of poverty and could examine and assess the feasibility of
regional policies, for example along the lines just outline above.

IV. STRATEGIC FOCUS OF BANK ASSISTANCE

67. The Bank's strategy has two main, complementary directions. First, support country
economic policies designed within a regional framework for accelerating growth, based
on reasonably stable political and macroeconomic conditions. Second, and this is the
central objective, support the creation of a West African Open, Unified, Regional
Economic Space - OURES, for short. (See Attachment 4.)

68. The Bamako workshop confirmed that West Africa regional integration should be
supported by the Bank at two levels. Consistent with the principle of subsidiarity
country-level assistance should remain the fundamental pillar of Bank assistance to the
subregion, and to regional integration itself, both because it helps strengthen overall
country performance (an indispensable precondition) and because it can be used to help
countries respect their regional commitments and deal with additional requirements
imposed by regional integration. In this respect, there was the expectation that the Bank
will continue to help compensate for transitional fiscal losses that may arise from
increased openness, that it would help countries finance the national portions of regional
public sector infrastructure networks, and that it would help assure that national
regulatory arrangements facilitate region-wide private sector investments. There was
also a call for the Bank to go beyond assuring its national assistance strategies were
coherent with regional initiatives and to use its lending conditionality to assure that
countries respect their commitments regarding regional integration. To be effective in
supporting regional integration, this country-level support would itself have to be
coordinated across West African countries, and made coherent with the regional
initiatives. The formulation of a regional integration assistance strategy is one
mechanism to provide the framework for such coordination, and to ensure that country-
level aid allocations increasingly effect priorities emanating from the RIAS.

69. But the workshop especially stressed that Bank assistance was especially needed at
the regional, or supranational, level. It was broadly accepted that the Bank assistance at
this level should be built on three key pillars: (1) convergence of macroeconomic
policies; (2) integration of markets (goods, capital, and services, especially infrastructure

21

services); and (3) strengthening human and institutional capacities. Each of these is
discussed below.

A. Convergence of Macroeconomic Policies

70. The Bank, in close collaboration with the IMF, will continue to work with both the
UEMOA Commission and the ECOWAS Secretariat to refine the methodologies,
approaches, and data to underpin existing or new mechanisms for their own multilateral
macroeconomic (fiscal and monetary) surveillance, as discussed above. The Bank's
objective will be to strengthen the linkage between the surveillance at this level and other
economic activities (by the private sector, by aid donors), to contribute to its accuracy
and analysis, and to help bolster respect of regional indicators by countries. For example,
Bank dialogue on the UEMOA indicators dealing with public indebtedness and with
investment financing has sought to introduce concessionality into their definition of debt
burden and to assure that the emphasis on domestic financing of investment does not
distort budgeting processes and discourage donor support. In addition, the Bank would
aim to contribute to the dialogue on fiscal harmonization, especially as it may affect the
private sector and national fiscal management (one issue relates to the harmonization of
petroleum taxes and the financing of Road Funds, for example).

71. Most of the Bank work in this domain will consist of analytical and advisory services,
in the form of periodic consultations and sharing of data and information. While central
to overall macroeconomic, and monetary in particular, integration, this will be the
smallest of the three pillars, and most of the work will in fact be carried out in the
conduct of country-level macroeconomic dialogue. This strategic orientation reflects
both the realities in West Africa (the UEMOA monetary zone is already well managed,
and the "second monetary zone" is far from a reality - as noted above) as well as the
primacy of the IMF in this domain. (See Attachment 5.)

B. Integration of Markets

72. Integration of markets is, and will continue to be, the central pillar of Bank assistance
to regional integration in West Africa, as it underpins the single, over-arching objective
of Bank strategy -
to create an open, unified, regional economic space for private
operators - a single West African market open to competitive entry and well integrated
into the global market. 
It has three different and strictly complementary facets: a
commercial policy for free goods markets; arrangements for efficient networks of
infrastructure services; and a favorable environrnent for business and finance.

22

Box 1: The Meaning of Market Integration

Concern is sometimes expressed tht the strategy sh:uld be more focused on 'nera
production systems' 
;ratherthan 
'>markets'.The fear that trade will be derimentl to exp
th B
drivesfrmaisconcetio mly put,he strategy of inteas 
it espoused by theregionl authorities,gives priorit to theestablsh 
t of a m 
derstads 
which 
thepate 
sector caopera 
dflourishin whichintegrtion of prodion wil 

t f

in

covrgne 
inrsrutr 

the* maret -for0i0 god,fr 
at 
sevcs 
an*:d teeistneonstittiona 

hare thema 

maiic ices E bili 
ad
i.e. 0capital0 an labor, ianld for services espeial
base neede to crete a maket anda'fvoale

1. Merchandise trade and commercial policy t4

73. While the region has made significant strides toward creating a Customs Union, there
iemain, not surprisingly in light of experience elsewhere, significant gaps, obstacles, and
issues. The full agenda to make the regional customs union effective - and welfare
e1hancing - comprises five highly complementary components.

74. The first of these is the need to rationalize and apply the UEMOA tariff. Main
problems concern the variable application of the agreed tariff measures even in UEMOA
countries, the persistence - at the national level - of various exonerations as well as
special transitional surcharges, and the poor categorization of products into tariff rate
categories.

75. The second is the merger of the UEMOA Customs Union into a larger ECOWAS
Customs Union, given that the non-UEMOA countries have yet to implement the Free
Trade Area that officially should have been fully in place in 2000. Given the difficulties
encountered to reach (tenuous) agreement on the common external tariff between the
eight UEMOA countries, its extension to six other countries, which in addition do not
have an extensive experience of cooperating on these matters and furthermore start from
vastly different positions, cannot be a simple matter. It involves several specific actions
besides rationalizing the UEMOA tariff as just indicated: aligning product classification;

14 Attempting an overall assessment of trade policies, comparing the positions before and after the common
tariff is applied in ECOWAS, would be premature at this time. It is hoped that this will be possible in FY02
to cover at meaningful number of member countries. Such an evaluation for a sample of African countries
including six members of ECOWAS is being completed as a research project at the Bank for the period
1996-98. This assessment focuses on the three main effects of trade restrictions (tariffs, NTBs, exchange
controls, exemptions, import and export monopolies): distortions in resource allocation, welfare impact on
consumers, fiscal revenue volatility.

23

phasing out all or most remaining NTBs as well as exemptions; eliminating all intra-
union barriers; and making rules of origin and customs valuation methods uniform.

76. The third issue is the need to agree on a calendar for continuing to reduce the average
level of tariffs and narrow their dispersion. While UEMOA rates are lower, in general,
than those in the rest of Africa, they are higher than the world average, new community-
wide levies have raised them recently, and, in any case, they remain high enough to
reduce the competitiveness of exporters and to feed demands for special exemptions. In
the longer run, it would be preferable to move toward a uniform rate that would vastly
simplify customs administration and eliminate virtually all issues over categorization.
This proposal, however, has been advanced by the World Bank and IMF for several
years, but has elicited little interest.

77. It would be highly desirable, fourth, to try and improve on the existing measures to
facilitate exports.' Such measures exist on paper in most member countries: VAT or
other indirect tax exemption or refund on imported inputs used in exportables; temporary
admission, free trade zones (FTZ), free trade status for individual firms etc. In most cases
these schemes do not work at all, or are very slow and cumbersome, or are abused. No
scheme is bad or good in itself, and some work well in some countries, while apparently
not in a single one in West Africa. Their effectiveness is a question of general
administrative efficiency and governance. Computerization does help, but it does not
solve the problems - which are an important item under the "high transactions costs"
issue. In reviewing these measures, the regional institutions and governments (i) could
benefit from comparing experiences within ECOWAS and in other countries, and (ii)
should ensure harmonization across countries to avoid the possibility of unfair
competition, for example if one or more countries legally or factually permit FTZs to sell
duty free goods on the domestic market.

78. Fifth, there should be increased focus on informal barriers as the major impediments
to trade, especially internally. Scattered but consistent evidence suggests that
bureaucratic hassle, corruption in customs, slow port operations, wastage and theft at
ports and airports, poor storage conditions, harassment by police and others' at
innumerable roadblocks, as well as inter-country payments difficulties, increase the costs
of intra-regional and international trade more than tariffs do. This is known as the
"second trade liberalization agenda".

79. The program formed by these five sets of actions is a tall order and is better
approached pragmatically. It is probable that not all countries will move in unison. The
credibility of the future ECOWAS customs union will nonetheless hinge on how
promptly and how vigorously the governments and the regional institutions will
collectively undertake its implementation.

" This does not refer 'incentives' in the sense too often understood in the region of tax exemptions (as they
feature for example in several 'investment codes') which amount to breaches of the common tax or
customs law. Besides the general rule that exports should not be taxed (with rare exceptions noted earlier),
incentives here is understood to mean all measures thal put exporters on an even keel with exporters in
other parts of the world.

24

80. The Bank will contribute to this agenda through a major piece of analytical work in
FY02 (and perhaps subsequently), together with other major partners - especially the EU,
that will focus on the issue of UEMOA-ECOWAS trade harmonization. At the same
time, the Bank will continue to support, and improve, the implementation of the customs
union through an existing IDF and periodic consultations. The Bank will also aim to
work on the "second trade liberalization agenda", including removal of "behind the
border impediments" - as part of the trade work, as part of proposed work on integrated
transport systems and more generally as part of a program to improve the business
environment.

2. Infrastructure services for a unified market

81. Regional integration can contribute to reducing the high cost of transport,
telecommunications and energy services by expanding their market and their scale of
operation and by establishing a more competitively oriented regional regulatory
framework. Indeed a network of efficient infrastructure services - not just physical
infrastructures - is the material foundation of an open, unified, regional market.

82. In road transport, two priorities are for countries to complete investment in and to
improve the maintenance of their national portion of the designated West Africa interstate
road network (as defined, for example, by the ECOWAS road master plan), preferably
according to regionally defined service standards, and to assure that transport services
function effectively and competitively across borders. The latter will require additional
attention to issues like liberalizing restrictive freight sharing arrangements, measures to
assure fair competition (common carrier provisions), improved interface between truckers
and other modes of transport, and elimination of all but essential official roadblocks
while instituting surveillance systems to monitor bribes and unofficial roadblocks. The
Bank will continue to support the regional program via country-based financing of
national road construction and maintenance programs and via analytical support through
the on-going Road Management Initiative and Trade and Transport components of the
Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Program. Future analytical work should focus more on the
functioning of regional road transport services and building capacity in regional bodies to
coordinate national investment programs and assure adequate maintenance for interstate
roads and harmonize transport policies and regulations and monitor their implementation.
In the much longer term, it may make sense to help establish more regional mechanisms
for interstate road financing - both investment and maintenance.

83. In air transport, integration means an "open regional sky". The recent signing by
twenty-three West and Central African countries of the Memorandum of understanding
for the implementation of Yamoussoukro II Decision is a bold step in that direction,
while some individual countries have accelerated liberalization of their national air space
and, in some cases, privatized national public airlines. This should put much needed
pressure on remaining national and regional air transport monopolies and cartels. At the
same time, the region must do more to strengthen and harmonize air safety oversight and
security in order to comply with internationally accepted standards. This will require
both additional national investment and capacity building at the level of national civil
aviation authorities and the development of regional mechanisms to address issues that

25

will be better dealt with at the regional level. Capacity for the economic regulation of the
sector needs also to be built within the region through the establishment of a regional
economic regulatory body. This body will play a key role in monitoring the development
of the market and anti-competitive behavior. Finally the legal and institutional
framework needs to be updated to ensure consistency with the Yamoussoukro Decision.
The Bank has been actively supporting the regional dialogue on air transport
liberalization for the past 2-3 years, and will continue to do so. This will require more
important resources than the ongoing IDF granted to ECOWAS and CEMAC. Support
for these activities for the next three years could come from the Development Grant
Facility.

84. In addition, the World Bank has been asked to provide funding and technical support
for the restructuring/privatization of Air Afrique. The Bank's support has been two-fold:
(a) facilitate a process to help the member states shareholders'6 assess the situation of the
company and the strategies that might reverse Air Afrique's sliding operational and
financial performance. This process culminated in a meeting in Washington in
November 2000 during which the member states decided to privatize the company after a
period of stabilization and restructuring, within 14 to 18 months; and (b) provide a grant
to finance technical assistance to initiate the stabilization process and prepare the
restructuring plan. However, further analysis carried out by the consultants and the
interim management financed under the grant concluded that the company's financial
situation was much worse than expected and that any viable plan would require some
form of liquidation of the company.

85. Following its own analysis, which confirms the above conclusion, the Bank has
indicated its commitment to support (i) the implementation of a realistic option that
would minimize service disruption resulting from the liquidation of the company, and (ii)
the creation of an enabling environment for the effective liberalization of air transport in
West Africa. Further support, especially financing, will depend on receiving a request
from the shareholders in response to the Bank's own assessment.

86. With respect to telecommunications, incl.uding interconnectivity among countries,
UEMOA and ECOWAS authorities must increasingly emphasize the emergence of a sub-
regional telecommunication market rather than common physical infrastructure projects
(as in ECOWAS Telecom-I and II). With the perspective to establish a fully unified
market, member states should agree on a harmonization program covering national
policies on technical standards, frequency management and control, establishment rules,
interconnection and competition policies - especially at the critical junction when
national telecommunications companies are being privatized and the telecommunications
market liberalized. In a second phase, if countries agree, it would be possible - and
desirable given the miniscule size of most national markets - to move to a common
regional licensing and regulatory agency. The Bank will continue to support, through
analytical work, the creation of a regional telecommunications market by helping
coordinate and harmonize national policies while working, especially with the EU, to
support the design of a West Africa regulatory structure.

16 Benin, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Cote d'lvoire, Mali, Mauritania, Niger,
Senegal, and Togo.

26

87. In energy, ECOWAS has taken the lead, with support from USAID, to prepare the
institutional framework for an interconnected electricity market among utility
companies, initially in Nigeria, Benin, Togo, Ghana, Cote d'Ivoire, Niger, Burkina Faso
and Mali.17 The program has three components. The first will focus on reinforcing the
physical integration of national power grids, (with priority to those links in Nigeria and in
Benin-Togo) as well as reforming national market policies and regulatory arrangements.
The second will pilot a cooperation model for the functioning of the integrated market,
including associated transmission and systems control facilities. And the third will be the
full scale functioning of the market, with enhanced long-term planning for expansion, and
the creation of regional regulatory capacity assuring open access by all operators. The
Bank has become increasingly actively involved in this effort through analytical work
(supported substantially through the ESMAP program), with special emphasis on
building capacity within countries, as well as establishing a core team at the regional
level, to deal with the technical, institutional, regulatory, and legal issues involved. With
respect to lending, in addition to participating in certain national investments identified
within CASs, the Bank has begun to prepare a multicountry credit to help finance the
costs incurred by specific countries in establishing the market (both required physical
investments and rehabilitation and institutional restructuring and regulation) and the costs
at the regional level of setting up the needed institutional and technical market
mechanisms. IFC may be invited to participate in private companies that may be created
as part of the regional market.

88. ECOWAS has also been promoting, again with support from USAID and in
conjunction with private investors, the installation of an offshore natural gas pipeline
from Nigeria to Ghana (and eventually to Cote d'Ivoire). The Bank has provided
financing for technical work through a PHRD grant. While the benefits of the pipeline
could be large, the economics have yet to be fully demonstrated, and depend in particular
on the natural gas and electricity policies in the three initial consumer countries (Benin,
Ghana, and Togo). As the main use will be for electricity generation, viability depends
intrinsically on the financial health of power generating and distribution companies. In
addition, governments need to create the regulatory environment for attracting private
investors in local distribution and for awarding gas distribution concessions. The Bank
Group may provide future analytical and advisory support to help countries design
appropriate policies and regulations to develop their gas markets, within a harmonized
regional framework. While the private sector will play the key role in financing the gas
pipeline, there are indications that it has an interest in securing an IDA partial risk
guarantee and/or MIGA risk insurance. However, for the development of the gas
distribution infrastructure networks within countries, a more active Bank participation
could be desirable to facilitate private sector involvement.

89. Regarding regional aspects of natural resources management, within the Bank,
GEF is supporting the preparation of four multi-country water conservation and
management projects in West Africa (out of 22 in Sub-Saharan Africa), including a
Senegal River Water and Environmental Management program intended to strengthen

17 These are the Zone A countries identified in the 2000 Memorandum of Understanding of ECOWAS
governments, where numerous interconnections already exist. The remaining ECOWAS countries are in
Zone B, where interconnections are more embryonic.

27

OMVS capacity to be jointly implemented bly UNDP and the World Bank. The Bank,
together with other donors, will also encourage the countries and regional organizations
already concerned (notably CILSS) to vigorously tackle the negative, intra-regional
externality arising from deforestation of the coastal humid zone. The excessive
exploitation of the forest is believed to contribute to drought and desertification in the
Soudano-Sahelian zone: in essence the short term gains of the coastal area is purchased,
in part, at the longer term expense of the poorer hinterland. Deeper regional integration
can help establish a framework for a more equitable solution to this issue, provided it is
put high on the agenda.

3. Unifying and improving the business environment

90. Consistent with the private sector as the "engine of integration", the business
environment must be improved in each country and, at the same time, regionally
integrated as a necessary complement to the unification of markets for goods and
infrastructure services. The main ingredients of the business framework include the
financial sector, the labor market, the incentive framework and the legal and judicial
institutions, as well as better governance and less corruption in the administration
generally. Pragmatism and gradualism, more than anywhere else, will be in order.

91. A regionally integrated financial sector would offer investors a wider choice of
profitable opportunities and financing options -
thus, increasing returns on equity,
reducing the cost of capital for entrepreneurs, and helping attract foreign investment and
avoid, reduce, or reverse capital flight. In addition, it would make it easier for financial
institutions to operate across countries, reducing exposure and mitigating the risks of
dealing with separate, small commodity dependent economies and would facilitate intra-
regional payments. While a monetary union makes it easier for a unified financial market
to develop, private banks with branches across the "monetary divide" in the region can go
some distance in facilitating cross border activities of private operators, as is
demonstrated the success of ECOBANK.

92. Fundamental to an integrated financial market is a functioning intra-regional
payments system among banks and clearing system among currencies, and governments
will need to harmonize policies, respect commitments regarding currency clearing
arrangements, bank supervision and prudential regulation. Eventually, the creation of a
regional financial supervisory bodies might be a cost-effective proposition given the
small size of national financial sectors but this will have to begin with substantial work
on harmonizing national supervisory arrangements.

93. The national stock exchanges of Lagos, the largest, Abidjan and Accra - are very
small and in several degrees deficient essentially because low volume and high cost of
transactions remain a handicap on liquidity and profitability. Both the BOAD and the
ECOWAS Fund have critical roles to play in stimulating and supporting the emergence
of sub-regional financial instruments, including syndicated long-term financing,
mortgage markets, multi-country leasing companies, and various guarantees schemes. A
recent review by IFC identifies a number of areas where action is needed to develop the
debt market of the UEMOA (and no doubt of relevance for ECOWAS as a whole).
Among the main issues is the pressing need to harmonize the taxation of financial

28

products, an agreement signed in 1966 by UEMOA countries but not yet implemented,
even though it is part of the already well advanced indirect tax harmonization agenda of
the Union.

94. The bulk of the Bank's work is likely to continue to be country-based, both in terms
of analytical work through the FSAPs and through financial sector projects. However,
within the franc zone, the Bank takes an increasingly subregional approach: dialogue
with the BCEAO banking supervision commission, a credit to BCEAO to strengthen its
payments systems, a study of the debt market in the zone by the IFC, past and proposed
projects to strengthen BOAD, and consultations with the UEMOA's "Conseil de
l'Epargne Publique et des Valeurs mobilieres", the equivalent of a securities and
exchange commission. This set of UEMOA activities will be broadened to ECOWAS and
probably focus first on strengthening payments systems among banks and stock
exchanges. In the longer run the Bank may help establish a regional financial supervisory
body and consolidating the stock exchanges. Progress in these areas will also depend on
improved clearing arrangements among central banks where the IMF will take the lead.

95. The agenda for taxation harmonization is indeed well advanced for indirect taxes
but hardly begun (beyond proposals for harmonizing taxes on financial income and to
harrnonize investment tax incentives). The Bank and Fund will pursue the question with
the Commission and have started the dialogue with the Secretariat.

96. The region (primarily UEMOA) is also tackling two other areas of the business
environment where regional action 
is warranted: 
investment incentives, and
competition. Harmonizing the framework for private investment incentives is dictated
by a common external tariff and by other fiscal harnonization, although to date countries
appear unwilling to abandon their special regimes, despite their commitment to a
common tariff, and have not agreed on a UEMOA common investment code or advanced
on a similar framework for ECOWAS. The Bank's dialogue, which includes the IFC and
FIAS, has aimed at convincing UEMOA to establish an investor "charter" that would
automatically apply to all investors and would eliminate fiscal incentives altogether
(except perhaps accelerated depreciation), and the Bank will continue this discussion
through periodic consultations and other analytical and advisory activities. UEMOA has
also sought to establish a common approach to competition policy, with a view to
preventing or correcting anti-competitive behavior within and between countries, and
including government actions for example in the area of public sector procurement. The
Bank has advised the Commission against the excessive centralization (to better respect
the spirit of subsidiarity) and overambitious scope of the draft the law, at this stage. The
dialogue continues on these matters.

97. The free movement of workers has been highlighted in the general context of growth
and poverty reduction and as such refers mainly to general laborers. More narrowly, the
business community is interested in being able to recruit skilled workers from a broader
regional market. Hence the importance of diplomas equivalency, mutual certification and,
of course, freedom of residence and of work across the region. Some progress has already
been accomplished in this regard and the Bank may be able to help advance the regional
dialogue.

29

98. Regarding the legal framework and work-ing of the judicial systems, the OHADA
initiative has been noted together with the continuing support from more specialized
donor institutions. While encouraging harmonization, however, it must be noted that
uniformity of laws and regulations is not necessary (or the EU would not have been
possible); transparency, equitable application of rules, and effective arbitration by the
regional institutions are. While the scope for direct Bank involvement is naturally
restricted, it does conduct occasional investigations of possible benefit for the region in
these areas (including in the forthcoming WDR).

99. Private sector representatives stressed the importance of the above issues during the
Bamako workshop and would like to be involved in future discussions that would
identify specific competitiveness issues and bottlenecks to private sector development
and. However, they see their major role as contributor to growth through their direct
participation in regional investments and projects. They would like to benefit from Bank
support to strengthen their regional organizations and their capacity to participate in
international negotiations. A key outcome of the Bamako workshop is that the private
sector has decided to take the lead in the organization of a specific private sector forum
on regional integration in order to better determine their participation in the integration
process, given the various components of this sector in West Africa. This forum will lead
to the definition of specific private-sector activities that the Bank could support.

C. Supportive Institutional Capacity

100. The proposed assistance strategy is clearly to support those policies, and programs
that directly contribute to the formation of a unified, open, regional market, and do so
within the institutional model of deep and comprehensive integration chosen by the
countries of the region. This priority means that the focus will be primarily on
macroeconomic convergence, trade, cross-borders infrastructure services and integrated
business environment including financial services. But, as noted earlier, it must not be
misinterpreted to imply that all other activities, or other forms of regional cooperation,
are considered unimportant.

101. A supportive institutional capacity is essential for successful integration policies.
The Bank will continue to address most education and training, and capacity building in
general, through its country assistance strategies, because this work is country specific
with limited scale economies and externalities. However, where a multicountry approach
can usefully economize teaching resources - as in regional professional and technical
schools (many of which were set up, especially for francophone countries, but which
have suffered neglect), the Bank could help by establishing or revitalizing such
institutions. An example is the Bank's proposed support of a special MBA program at
CESAG, a business management institute now under the BCEAO. Other possibilities
include support to cooperative programs among national universities to share programs,
as being encouraged by the ACBF, and programs to strengthen the capacity of local
private technical schools to operate across West Africa using, for example, distance
leaming tools..

30

102. More directly related to the requirements of integration is the need to strengthen the
main regional organizations as well as existing, or yet to-be-established, sector specific
ones, especially regulatory bodies. The EU has technically and financially supported the
UEMOA Commission from the start and will extend similar support to the ECOWAS
Secretariat. The Bank would expect the EU to continue to take the lead in strengthening
the overall internal capacity of the key West African institutions. Within the limited
availability of grant money, the Bank has approved two IDF operations: one to strengthen
the Commission's capacity to monitor trade policy and another to assist the Secretariat in
the design of the regional air transport policy. Increasing support for technical assistance,
analysis, institutional capacity building and policy dialogue with, and by, multi-country
institutions will continue to be important, usually within the context of specific
interventions in the priority areas for Bank work.

103. As to the form of regional integration, the Bank strategy will support the
commitment to pursue the path of deeper integration, as well as other more limited,
flexible institutional arrangements where appropriate. Indeed, simple coordination,
sharing, and cooperative arrangements may suffice for "integrating" many activities and
for dealing with cross-border externalities without needing the commitment, the
surrender of sovereignty and the more demanding institutional framework required for
deep integration. The same considerations apply as well to some of the regional public
goods for example, agricultural research, and most importantly to the fight against public
"bads": communicable diseases. Thus the Bank will continue to support longstanding
programs, notably the Onchocerciasis Control Program (OCP), and the "Malaria
Rollback program". It is committed to sharpen its activity on fighting AIDs in the North-
South and Coastal transport corridors which have become major vehicles of the HIV
infection: besides their human cost, they threaten the very notion of the unified market as
an instrument of regional development.

V. WORK PROGRAM OF THE WORLD BANK

104. The strategy proposes several types of Bank support to regional integration in West
Africa, including increased analytical and advisory activities and direct financial support
of both national and cross-border activities to deepen regional integration.

A. Financing Issues

105. The channeling of Bank financial support to regional integration raises a series of
interrelated operational design questions. A key issue is the appropriate mix between
country-level support of national activities that are part of a regional program, and
region-wide activities carried out by supranational institutions. This strategy proposes an
increase in both, although the first would remain as part of country assistance strategies
that would be increasingly aligned with the RIAS. Most IDA credits to support regional
integration would be borrowed by individual countries, but within a multicountry
program.

106. A related issue is providing financial support for regional programs directly to
regional organizations which may not be able to service even IDA credits. In the past,

31

where an organization was not deemed creditworthy, IDA (or Bank) lending was
channeled through a member country, which became legally responsible. Even IDF
grants have typically been channeled through a member country, although they are
increasingly accorded directly to some regional entities. An enhanced IDF grant program
more carefully targeted at regional organizations would be consistent with the proposal to
rely increasingly on them as interlocutors. However, the Bank can always contribute to
regional organizations indirectly through its support to member countries to help them
honor their respective financial obligations to regional organizations; this indirect
approach would help reinforce country ownership of regional efforts. Moreover, where
financing goes directly to private institutions, as for the IFC, the regional dimension
poses fewer constraints and may widen opportunities.

107. A third operational issue is that of geographic cross-conditionality on financial
support to member countries designed to help them finance the national costs of regional
integration efforts, which could range from fiscal shortfalls to new infrastructure
investments. There have been few instances of such cross conditionality, except those
involving specific bilateral projects - for example, railroad rehabilitation. In the future,
increased use of such cross-conditionality would seem to be consistent with and
supportive of much stronger efforts to mount effective multicountry policies and
programs, and its use was suggested by regional representatives at the Bamako
Workshop.

B. Past Support

108. Although the World Bank has never had an explicitly defined regional integration
assistance strategy for West Africa, it has, nonetheless, supported the process for the past
25 years. In total, the Bank has financed 13 multicountry projects, totaling about $300
million, mostly in finance and infrastructure sectors (see Annex 5) beginning with a
regional cement manufacturing plant in 1976, the Cote d'Ivoire-Burkina railroad in 1977
and a credit line to BOAD in 1980. More recently, there has been a tendency to finance
more, but smaller projects. In total, however, this represents a small fraction of the
Bank's total lending to West African countries over the same period - slightly more than
one percent, reflecting the difficulties of designing viable multicountry credits, the lack of
a strategic framework for support to regional integration, and the fact that the bulk of
financing to support regional integration efforts is required at the country level.
Performance has been mixed. The C6te d'Ivoire-Burkina Faso railroad had to be
rehabilitated with further IDA credits in the early 1990s. CIMAO, the regional parastatal
cement plant, failed as a viable enterprise; its liquidation spawned a highly successful
regional private company that IFC helped finance. CESAG, a regional management
school financed in 1985, functioned so poorly that it was eventually taken over by the
BCEAO. On the other hand, BOAD is considered a strong public sector financial
institution today, and the energy activities continue to function. I

18 Besides the specific "regional" projects discussed above, components of many country projects have
been designed as part of a multicountry effort, even if not intended to support regional integration per se.
For example, the Bank has financed components worth some $18 million in health projects in 9 ECOWAS

32

109. In addition to loans and credits, the Bank has also provided since the early 1990s,
seven capacity building or environmental grants through the IDF and the GEF, totaling
some $10 million. Several more are being processed and will likely be approved (see
Annex 6). Finally, the Bank has made substantial contributions to the Trust Fund for the
Onchocerciasis Control Program in West Africa, totaling $55 million since its inception
and averaging some $2.1 million per year during the past four years.

110. The IFC has directly and indirectly enhanced the role of the private sector in
regional integration, notably by supporting large scale manufacturing which serves
regional markets. Recent examples are cement plants in Senegal which will export to
Mali, and one in Ghana which is supplied by clinker from Togo (the former CIMAO). It
has contributed financially to ECOBANK and continues to partner with it. The IFC has
supported African Bank Holdings which is in the process of creating a network of
affiliate banks in francophone Africa and it has just approved an equity stake in Sunu
assurances, a regional insurer taking over from a West Africa affiliate of AXA. IFC
provided advisory services to the Abidjan regional stock exchange at an early stage and,
as mentioned earlier, it has recently completed a study of the debt market in UEMOA.

C. Proposed Program

11. Because this is the first West Africa Regional Integration Assistance Strategy of the
Bank, representing the beginning of a much more focused program of support, the
proposed work program will continue to be refined and its specific contents will evolve,
depending on emerging opportunities, lessons learned, progress in West Africa, and shifts
in priorities of other partners. What the RIAS proposes is more than simply a
continuation of past work, although the work program for FY02-04 would largely build
on the work program in FY01 and would continue to reflect the broad substantive focus
emanating from the Bank's programs in the past.

112. The RIAS would establish the central criterion for deciding Bank assistance - both
analytical and financial - as the extent to which such assistance will contribute to the
creation of a West African open, unified, regional economic space. As noted above, the
fulcrum is market integration, so the Bank's work program would focus on trade reform,
integrating the markets for infrastructure services generally, and unifying a propitious
environment for private sector investment - especially financial market integration. This
central theme would account for over 90 percent of the total, with infrastructure services
comprising about half, concentrated in air transport and energy and nearly a third in
financial sector market integration. The remaining share for market integration would
focus on trade issues (i.e., the market in goods), as well as the macroeconomic
convergence that must underpin deeper integration. The small share allocated to trade is
not a reflection of its importance, which is central, but the fact that several other partners,
notably the EU, are providing support and that the analytical work and dialogue are
typically less costly than preparing and supervising credits in the other areas. The trade
work would focus both on the adoption and implementation of an ECOWAS common
external tariff (harmonized with a revised UEMOA CET) and on other, less traditional

countries as part of the Roll Back Maiaria campaign in Africa (about a fourth of Africa-wide financing
under this initiative).

33

barriers to trade - especially within the Customs Union itself (issues like health
standards, road blocks, customs inspections, weak transit mechanisms, etc), as well as on
efforts to facilitate trade generally.

113. Outside of this central fulcrum, the work program would accommodate a variety of
other smaller tasks where the role of the Bank is solicited as a participant and a convener,
in close collaboration with other donors who make take the lead (for example, regional
approaches to agricultural policy, education and training, health services, natural resource
management, mining and legal reform).

114. Table 1 gives the projected allocation of work program resources, along the
standard sectoral breakdown. These figures do not represent the total World Bank effort;
additional cross-country work will be financed out of the World Bank Africa Region's
"Regional Programs" that typically cover pan-African issues (such as the Roll-Back
Malaria campaign), out of Bank-wide network resources (e.g., financial sector), out of the
special Africa Multicountry AIDS Program,'9 and out of the program to support the
Onchocerciasis Control Program.2 0
In addition, as proposed in this strategy, Bank
resources deployed at the country level are expected to increasingly include the cross-
border dimension in the design of work programs they support, for example helping
assure that countries are able to respect their regional commitments and that countries
design and finance programs that are integral components of regional programs.2 1 An
example of this would be trade work in Ghana and Nigeria to underpin efforts to move
toward an ECOWAS common external tariff, country-level work on the financial sector
to strengthen the basis for financial integration, and national road and power programs.

'9 For example, the Bank is helping prepare a pilot activity to help prevent the transmissioin of HIV/AIDS
along the Abidjan-Lagos corridor, in collaboration with LUSAID.
20 Additional resources through these programs can be substantial. For example, administrative budget for
the West Africa Onchocersiasis Control Program is equivalent to at least half of the budget for overall
regional integration in West Africa, while the pro-rata share of the budget for the Roll Back Malaria for
West Africa program averaged around $100,000 over the past three years.
21 Allocating even a small fraction of administrative resources at the country level to regional integration
efforts could have a substantial multiplier effect, as the West Africa regional work program represents less
than 2 percent of the total Bank budget for individual ECOWAS countries.

34

Table 1: Budget Allocations for Bank Work on Regional Integration in West Africa
(In percent)

FY01 
(Actual) 

FY02-04
(Proposed)

Macroeconomics and trade 

Infrastructure 
Transport 
Energy 
Telecommunications 

Business Environment 

Financial Sector 

Other 

Internal Strategic Work 
Total 

8 

40 
25 
10 
4 

26 

20 

5 

21 
100 

12

48
30
15
3

34

31

6

-

100

115. With respect to Bank "products," the current work program calls for a mix of AAA
and lending, split roughly 40 percent and 60 percent. This mix is weighted more toward
analytical work than the typical country work program (where the mix, for Africa overall,
is 70-75 percent lending and 25-30 percent AAA), reflecting the greater importance of
dialogue at this stage. Indeed, the need for IDA credits to support truly cross-country
activities is relatively limited, given that West Africa is only at the beginning stages of
deep integration except for the monetary and financial sector in UEMOA and for trade
policy in general.

116. Nonetheless, there is, for infrastructure markets in particular, an emerging series of
regional and multicountry activities where substantial IDA financing is being solicited.
These include a credit that could facilitate the restructuring and privatization of Air
Afrique, and possible credits for both regional and multicountry programs to help
establish a subregional electricity market, a subregional natural gas market, to improve
air traffic infrastructure and safety within ECOWAS, and eventually to help set up a
regional telecommunications market and regulatory system. (The multicountry credits
would involve an overall envelope, within which participating countries would borrow to
help finance their share of the cross-border activity, along the lines of the recently
approved Regional Trade Facility credits in eastern and southern Africa. Such credits
may also involve financing for regional, or supranational, activities beyond the scope of
individual countries.) These credits would build on relevant AAA work that the Bank
has been participating in for the past 2-3 years. Thus, the lending would be focused on 2
or 3 key sectors where integration is already at an advanced stage, and where countries
have, or will have, agreed to work within a multicountry framework.

35

117. In addition, Bank Group financing may help speed the integration of financial
markets, beyond the credit to strengthen the payments system in BCEAO approved in
FY01. Discussions are most advanced with the BOAD, which is requesting a fourth line
of concessional financing, but they have also been started with the ECOWAS Fund and
may eventually involve the newly formed West African Monetary Institute established to
help create the second monetary zone. 
Ideally, such financial support (through both
credits and guarantees) should focus on those activities aimed at improving regional-wide
regulatory arrangements as well as introducing region-wide financial instruments.
Whether and how the Bank can contribute to the financing (and management) of regional
"structural" funds (such as the FAIR - Fonds ,d'Appui a l'Integration Regionale, which
has started finctioning within UEMOA), and lhow such contributions could be linked to
financial sector integration - including for micro-finance -
is another question to be
addressed in the work. The shape of IDA financial assistance will ultimately depend on a
strategic assessment of the West Africa financiail sector, which is planned in FY02.

22

Table 2: Tentative West Africa Multicountry Financing Program, FY02-04

(US$ millions)

IDA Credits and 
Guarantees

IFC 

IDF/DGF 

GEF

x l

-

-

x

x 

-

2-3 

-

-

204

20

150-200 

possible 

100-200 

possible 

_2
possible 

100 
possible 

Infrastructure services markets
Air transport restructuring, 
liberalization and strengthening (TA,
restructuring, investments)
West Africa electricity power pool 
(TA, investments)
Telecommunications harmonization 
West Africa Gas Pipeline 
(guarantees, equity)
Regional business environment
Financial market integration 
(TA, credit lines, guarantees) 
Other
Targeted capacity building support to 
selected West African institutions
(eg., UEMOA, ECOWAS, CESAG)
Multicountry watershed management 
4 (TA)
Total 
450-600 
' Plus ongoing IDFs to ECOWAS (air transport) and UEMOA (trade).
2 Requested support from the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF).
3 Plus ongoing credit to BCEAO.
and Niger river basins, freshwater biodiversity.

being 
discussed

-

-

.. 

100- 

-

4Senegal 

22 For example, in order to encourage private participation in infrastructure in UEMOA member countries,
the Bank has been discussing the possibility of developing a guarantee scheme whereas BOAD guarantees
would be backstopped by an IDA guarantee, allowing commercial lenders to offer to private investors
attractive financing i.e., longer maturity and lower interest spreads, than they would otherwise obtain
without guarantee.

36

118. The IDA envelope for such credits (and guarantees) will depend on the size and
quality of projects and programs to be financed, and therefore the program proposed in
Table 2 above should be viewed as indicative. A reasonable expectation may be that 1-2
credits would be proposed each year, averaging perhaps $100 million each.

119. Consistent with the key role assigned to the private sector in the strategy for
regional integration, IFC's technical, advisory and financial activities are bound to
expand. Indeed, the process of creating unified markets calls for large-scale private
investments that could be supported by the IFC in infrastructure and financial services,
while unified markets in themselves will open new larger scale opportunities in
manufacturing, distribution, transport and other areas where private enterprise will be the
main actor.

120. While the bulk of financial flows would continue to occur via IDA credits (as well
as IDA guarantees and IFC operations), the Bank would continue to provide limited
institution-building grants (from the IDF, DGF, and GEF) to selected institutions where
smaller resource levels would suffice and where lending may not be feasible or
appropriate - including possible support for regional level professional training (e.g., the
MBA program at CESAG), improved regional public procurement practices (initially
with the UEMOA Commission), harmonization of air transport liberalization policies
(building on the existing support to ECOWAS and CEMAC, jointly), management of
shared water resources (e.g., the Senegal and Niger rivers, shallow aquifers, freshwater
biodiversity), and - possibly - strengthened design and maintenance of the designated
regional road network. While difficult to predict, one might expect - outside of GEF - 3-
5 grants totaling as much as $750,000 a year.

121. As the role of regional, or supranational, institutions increases -
i.e., as "deep
integration" progresses - especially as they begin to play a much more ambitious role in
the regulation of cross-border markets in infrastructure services or in the financing of the
national portion of regional infrastructure, their need for financial support will grow. For
example, the functioning of a regional telecommunications or an equities market
regulatory agency is unlikely to be able to be financed wholly by the market itself, at
least initially as market volume will be too small and the tax on transactions too great; a
public subsidy will be needed. Concessional IDA assistance to such agencies, either
channeled directly to them if they are judged capable of borrowing from IDA or
channeled to them indirectly through IDA credits to member states which are
contributing to the financing of their operating costs, would help them acquit their
responsibilities more effectively and assure the efficient functioning of regional markets.
At the same time, IDF capacity building grants could help such agencies get established.

122. The AAA work would span a larger range of subjects, though concentrated on the
macro-economic and trade dialogue, and it would provide the basis for the Bank to
evaluate selected regional integration issues and to participate actively and constructively
in key regional integration and cooperation initiatives, including telecommunications,
agricultural policy harmonization, road transport and transit facilitation, interstate road
network development policy, competition policy, higher education, control of infectious
diseases, mining regulations, and public procurement, to name the current priorities (see

37

Table 3). In some cases, the AAA will lay the basis for subsequent credits where deep
integration is feasible. 
In many other areas, where a cooperative approach is the best
mode of integration, the AAA will enable to Bank to be a full partner in the dialogue.

Table 3: West Africa Regional Analytical and Advisory Activities, FY02-04

Activity 
Macroeconomics and trade policy
Trade policy options within ECOWAS (external tariffs, 
internal barriers, facilitation)

Status

Report in FY02

Support to ongoing dialogue
To be determined

Support to ongoing dialogue
Support to ongoing dialogue
Support to ongoing dialogue; additional
work to be defined

Multilateral macro-economic surveillance 
West Africa Monetary Integration 
Infrastructure services markets
Air transport regulatory framework 
Telecommunications policy harmnonization 
Strengthening the designated West Africa 
road network 
Regional business environment
Strategic assessment of financial sector integration 
Report in FY02
Improving cross-border legal, investment and competition Support to ongoing dialogue with
climate for private sector in West Africa 
UEMOA, additional work to be defined
Other
Regional public procurement guidelines 
Agricultural policy harnonization and research 
cooperation 
Enhanced collaboration among higher education 
institutions
Support to a possible West Africa PRSP 

Support to ongoing dialogue
Support to ongoing dialogue, especially
cotton; research work to be defined
To be defined

To be defined

123. The work program includes a few major economic or sector reports; the two
earliest ones are likely to cover trade policy options within ECOWAS and a strategic
assessment of West Africa financial integration. Most of the "output" is likely to consist
of a series of aide-memoires and analytical notes that would aim to support the dialogue
around the issues - with the aim of improving the collaboration among countries and of
helping build the basis for deeper integration in the future. The challenge will be to
remain selective within the broad range of issues and numerous requests of the Bank, to
assure that Bank analytical work retains a critical mass. The eventual shape of this AAA
work will also be affected by a decision by regional institutions - notably ECOWAS - to
pursue the formulation of a West Africa PRSP, which was a proposal emanating from the
Bamako workshop and which 
is being discussed within 
the Commission and the

38

Secretariat. In any case, in any given year, the number of discreet AAA activities would
be limited to perhaps half dozen or so.

D. Monitoring Performance

124. Although solid country performance is essential for achieving deeper integration,
monitoring the RIAS will not focus on individual countries, except to note their progress
on achieving macroeconomic convergence. Instead, the Bank would propose to monitor
the implementation of the RIAS over the next three years by focusing on four strategic
factors that underpin the establishment of an open, unified, regional economic space in
West Africa. Such performance monitoring would cover both progress at the regional
level, as well as the respect of regional commitments by countries, especially the more
important ones. (See Attachment 8 for suggested specific monitoring indicators.)

125. Trade integration: the extension of a fully functioning customs union to all of
ECOWAS, as well as further progress on reducing import duties and the range of
informal barriers to unfettered internal trade.

126. Regional markets in key infrastructure services, focused on three areas: (a)
improvements 
in 
intercountry air 
transport 
links, which 
involves effective
implementation a liberalized and harmonized regulatory environment that will attract new
private multicountry operators; (b) continued progress in setting up a functioning West
Africa electricity power pool, including better physical interconnections and initial
operation of an effective electricity trading system; and (c) more extensive, more reliable,
and cheaper intercountry telecommunications linkages, involving a harmonized
regulatory framework within the region that will attract private, multicountry operators.

127. Regional business environment, focused on two areas: (a) more fluid cross-border
financial flows, especially between CFA and other ECOWAS countries; and (b) adoption
of sound investment promotion and competition policies that are, as a minimum,
harmonized across countries.

128. Institutional convergence: greater and more effective collaboration between the
ECOWAS Secretariat and the UEMOA Commission to maximize synergies and to
minimize duplication and competition.

VI. COLLABORATION WITH OTHER DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

129. Several development partners are quite active in supporting regional integration in
West Africa, although this aid is often eclipsed by their national aid programs. This
section provides a thumbnail sketch of their activities, as well as touches on how the
Bank has sought to work collaboratively with them.

130. The heart of Bank-donor collaboration on regional integration in West Africa
generally has been the relatively informal committee of external partners to support the
UEMOA, established in the early 1990s, and consisting of the EU, the IMF, France, and
the Bank, led by the UEMOA Commission. Regular meetings and continuing

39

consultations among the donors, and jointly with the Commission, has helped harmonize
positions as well as allocate responsibilities and minimize overlaps. At the same time,
there are other collaborative arrangements with donors active in sectors - typically with
the EU across most activities, but also involving some bilaterals active in specific areas
(such as USAID in creating a West Africa energy market). For example, the EU's
Technical Monitoring Committee for its PARIs - to which major partners are invited -
offers yet another forum for donor consultation, especially as it includes representatives
from the region. The Bamako workshop form,ulated the proposal to establish a larger
consultative forum that could regularly bring donors together, including their major West
African interlocuteurs, as a way of enhancing coordination and collaboration - an idea
strongly supported by the World Bank as well as other donors.

131. While several bilateral donors provide support to regional integration efforts in
West Africa, it is the multilateral institutions that are most active. Within Africa, the
Africa Development Bank and the World Bank have agreed through their 1999
Memorandum of Understanding that AfDB will take the lead on regional integration
issues, and it has recently adopted a strategy document for its own program. While
Africa-wide, its document has a diagnosis similar to this one for West Africa. While its
strategy document proposes to continue financing national components of West African
infrastructure networks, especially electricity, it also emphasizes making the regional
environment for the private sector more attractive (by creating regional information
networks, by strengthening the institutional framework for regional investments, and by
enlarging lines of credit to subregional development banks), continuing support to
research and capacity building generally, actions aimed at sustainable development and
natural resource management (support for the formulation of multicountry soil and
coastal conservation programs, as well as multicountry energy programs). During 1967-
2000, the AfDB commited some US$650 millions for multicountry activities, Africa-
wide, allocated to credit lines (37%), transport i(22%), energy (14%) and communications
(6%). Within West Africa specificially, the AfDB has financed some US$315 million for
activities aimed at improving cooperation among countries, including with the OMVS,
the Integration Development Authority for the Liptako-Gourma Region, roads linking
Mali and Guinea, and credit lines to the BOAD and the ECOWAS Fund. It is also
working with UEMOA Commission on procurement reform. 
The Economic
Commission for Africa, while not a donor per se, is preparing its own regional integration
strategy and has focused inter alia on monitoring all integration efforts in African and on
helping African countries participate in international trade negotiations (but not
necessarily from the perspective of formalized trade blocs within Africa).

132. The European Union provides by far the largest amount of financial resources. Its
explicit support for regional integration began in 1994. Since 1996 enhanced support
began with phase 1 of the Regional Integration Support Program (PARI-1, Programme
d'Appui a l'Integration Regionale, 14,4 millions Euro), and was extended in 1999-2000
with the approval of phase 2 (PARI-2, 65 millions Euro). The recent Cotonou Agreement
sharpens the EU's focus on regional integration by making it a key component of its
support to ACP countries. It establishes, at the level of regional institutions, a mechanism
to program both its assistance at the regional level and that share of country assistance,
which supports regional integration within national programs. (Under PARI-2, some 70

40

percent of the resources to support regional integration are to come from the regional
program, while the rest are from the national programs.) Overall, the direct allocation to
West Africa for regional integration amounts to Euro 228 millions (commitments) under
the current cooperation agreement (Lome IV bis), which covers 1996-2001. Other
substantial resources come from national assistance and other budget lines from the
European Commission. (See Attachment 6.)

133. The EU program provides substantial support for institutional and capacity
building, especially to the UEMOA Commission and increasingly to the ECOWAS
Secretariat (Euro 6 millions), as well as to OHADA (Euro 6,5 millions), and to country-
level institutions established as national counterparts to regional agencies (for example,
the national economic policy commissions (CNPE - Commission nationale des politiques
economiques). Substantively, this capacity building support covers a broad range of
transveral issues, including statistical harmonization and strengthening - essential for
better multilateral macroeconomic surveillance, customs and tax reform, public finance
harmonization, regional norms and standards, business law and its implementation, and
public debt management, as well as cross-cutting communication and information
programs (for example, with the private sector) and conflict prevention mechanism. The
type of support ranges from studies and training to technical advisors.

134. The EU also provides budget support to facilitate the implementation of the
UEMOA Customs Union (an allocation of Euro 38 million during PARI-2), as a regional
integration tranche of a country's wider macroeconomic program. In addition, the EU,
through other programs, contributes to regional integration by helping create a more
unified economic space, 
for example 
in 
transport, energy, water, R&D,
telecommunications, health, and agriculture. The European Investment Bank intervenes
inter alia via regional development banks, like the BOAD.

135. The IMF actively supports West African regional integration, primarily through its
dialogue regionally and nationally and via Fund technical assistance and training -
primarily to the francophone countries (in fact, the UEMOA institutions - the UEMOA
Commission, the BCEAO and the Banking Commission - are now formally included in
the Cycle of Article IV Consultations). Not surprisingly, its efforts are focused on
monetary issues and fiscal matters (tax harmonization, budgetary nomenclature and
frameworks, customs harmonization within UEMOA). It has also been involved with the
definition of a multilateral macroeconomic surveillance system within UEMOA, as one
additional lever for helping maintain macroeconomic stability. With the Bank, its
programs have helped finance the fiscal shortfalls in some countries caused by the
adoption of a (lower) common external tariff in UEMOA.

136. The most active of all bilaterals has been France, focused naturally on the franc
zone and its monetary institutions, including guaranteeing convertibility of the CFA
franc. Institution building (including the training of trainers) has been a hallmark of the
French approach, and it has actively promoted common business laws through OHADA,
helped establish regional institutions to harmonize insurance and social security policies,
strengthened statistics via Afristat, and, of course, supported to the UEMOA Commission
generally. It has considerably reinforced its support to the UEMOA Commission during
the past year, often in collaboration with the EU. In addition to continuing technical

41

support for the implementation of the common external tariff and other tax reform, it
working with the Commission on the regional reform of civil aviation, the formulation of
a common agricultural policy and a common transport sector policy, harmonization of
public finance rules and systems, and modeling to underpin the multilateral macro-
economic surveillance. Overall, French assistance - entirely grants -
to regional
integration in West Africa amounts to about $2 million a year, in addition to related
support a the country level (e.g., capability building in ministries of finance and justice),
support via the Operations Account for the CFAF, and contributions to Trust Funds that
support regional integration activities (especially in trade and transport). Finally, it has
increasingly focused on cross-country, as well as national, efforts to control infectious
diseases, especially HIV-AIDS and malaria.

137. Other active bilateral donors include USAID, Canada, and - to a lesser extent - the
UK. USAID prepared a major West Africa Regional Strategy through an extensive
consultative process in 1999, which covers 2001-08 and will provide an estimated $25
million per year. Its regional program is expected to deal with issues that are inherently

regional in nature as well as with activities -- mainly in the health sector -

in the 8

ECOWAS countries where USAID does not have existing bilateral programs. Some two
thirds of this program is targeted at population, health and nutrition, with a growing share
to HIV/AIDS (including cross-border efforts to prevent the spread along migration and
transport corridors). Nearly a quarter of the program will focus on food security and
natural resource management, mainly in Sahelian countries (where this work has been
ongoing for over a decade). Most of the rernainder of the program targets technical
support for economic growth and integration - including trade and monetary policies and
the private sector environment, but centered oni energy integration (the West Africa Gas
Pipeline and Power Pool projects). Finally, there is a small, relatively recent component
for conflict prevention. Institutionally, USAID works most closely with the ECOWAS
Secretariat and the CILSS and their associated agencies, as well as with several NGOs.

138. Canada has been at the forefront of donors taking a regional approach, having
prepared three assistance strategies for regional integration in West Africa in the late
1980s and early 1990s - a practice it stopped in 1997 in part following the request of the
individual countries involved because they felt they received less assistance as a result. It
is currently providing technical support to the BCEAO, to the West Africa stock
exchange, and to the OMVS. Canada intends to increase its support for regional
integration and cooperation and is at the moment considering different programming
options. Finally, the UK is a newcomer to regional integration in West Africa, but brings
a long experience of bilateral support in West African countries and support for regional
integration in East Africa. It is currently undertaking a scoping mission to ECOWAS and
UEMOA for their participation in an Africa-wide Trade and Poverty Programme, which
seeks to enhance organizations' capacity in poverty-focused trade policy formulation
negotiations and analysis. Other bilateral donors support specific multicountry programs
that also contribute to regional integration, including the work of Denmark and the
Netherlands in river basin management.

42

VII. RISKS

139. The risks the Bank faces in moving ahead with the proposed assistance strategy to
regional integration derive from the risks to the integration process in West Africa itself.
The greatest challenge for the entire process of integration at this point is probably not in
resolving regional issues proper but in improving domestic conditions in member
countries. Armed conflict, human rights abuses, persist. Ethnic tensions and open
xenophobia reappear sporadically. Governance is still a major issue. Law and order are
not respected in all countries, insecurity is prevalent in virtually all the large cities and
travel within countries and across borders is too often hazardous because of numerous
roadblocks, official or not. The judiciary is not as independent or neutral as it should.
High transactions costs are manifest in dealings with customs, tax officials and other
bureaucrats. Behavioral deficiencies are more frequent, and probably more difficult to
correct, than equipment deficiencies. The prevalence of such evils is of course not
specific to West Africa, or for that matter to Africa. If anything, in this respect West
Africa may be better off than many other parts of the continent. The problem is
nonetheless whether at the time when the forces of integration emerge with renewed
force, problems of governance do not risk putting the process in jeopardy.

140. A second set of risks is the non-application or non-respect of commitments made
by member countries, or simply a few major countries, in any of the critical areas of
integration: macroeconomic policies in the form of non-financeable fiscal deficits, lax
monetary policy, or erratic exchange rate movements; in trade policies, by non-
implementation of the common tariff or introduction of disguised protectionist devices; in
human resource policies by unduly restricting free movements of people, and so on.

141. A different danger, in almost the opposite direction, is for the countries in the
region to act together in a retreat from the commitment to accelerate integration in the
world economy and become gradually more protectionist. Though the risk of a "West
Africa fortress" syndrome poses no threat to the rest of the world, it would be damaging
for the region itself. It is a risk that the governments and the regional institutions must
avoid by resisting pressures from vested interests that are likely to grow as trade
liberalization proceeds. Unavoidably, tensions will arise around the distribution of the
gains and benefits of integration, in particular during the transition to full integration, and
later under the forces of divergence and polarization. If compensatory policies, financial
and structural, are not adequately managed, political disputes may ensue and, at worst,
lead to a breakdown of the whole arrangement - as in the past.

142. Fourth, there are a series of institutional risks. They range from weak capacity in
regional organizations to the problems stemming from overlapping responsibilities and
duplication inherent in the existence of two groups of countries and two major regional
institutions within ECOWAS. This is like a geo-political fault line generating recurrent
tremors and having the potential to create an earthquake. Despite recent and redoubled
efforts to strengthen the working relationship between the Secretariat and the
Commission, with considerable commitment and goodwill on both sides, there remains a
difficult legacy of past overlapping initiatives and consequent issues of turf, different
stages of integration within the two groups, and hence, different readiness for additional

43

steps, and unequal capacities and country commitment. Collaboration on an equal
footing is, therefore, complicated. The rich institutional legacy in West Africa is both a
strength and a risk to be managed carefully.

143. Those general risks and others more specific (for example the inability of countries
to agree on common positions in international trade negotiations) are all real. Meanwhile,
observance of the few guiding principles enounced at the outset would certainly reduce
the opportunities for conflict. Conflict is most likely to occur around the question of
subsidiarity (as it has in the EU), which points up the need for simple, transparent rules to
minimize misinterpretation by governments and regional organizations and the need to
demarcate areas of responsibility as clearly as possible with the full understanding and
commitment of all parties. Hence the need to have in place the instruments for arbitrating
conflicts and ensure commitment by all countries to their acceptance. This implies
credibility of the judiciary apparatus established by the regional authorities. Pragmatism
and gradualism, meaning a great deal of patience by all parties will be necessary -
witness the EU experience - to build a corpus of "case law" that will impose itself on all
participants. The key will be to prevent legitimate legal or technical conflicts from
degenerating into political feuds. Ultimately, the only effective shield against them will
lie in the political ownership of the entire process by the West African leaders, in their
wisdom and statesmanship. The support of all donors involved in this challenging
enterprise could also help. Given the expectations from West Africa, not adopting a
strong work program in support of integration would undermine the credibility of the
Bank and could weaken the integration effort overall.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

144. Given the encouraging recent track record in the sub-region, it would appear that
the sense of ownership, the statesmanship and the wisdom of regional leadership - both
public and private - will help ensure that the risks associated with this ambitious
enterprise will be contained. In the end, they appear small compared to the potential
gains. This is an opportunity for the Bank, and other donors, to be associated with a West
African initiative that has, more than any similar undertaking in the past, serious in-built
elements of success. Not the capacity to lift the region out of poverty, but certainly the
potential for being an important contributor toward that end.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Shengman Zhang

Attachments
Washington, D.C.
July 11, 2001

44

Attachment I

ECOWAS: Economic Community of West African States

Background

ECOWAS comprises the 15 countries of West Africa: Benin, 

SelecteE oic Ia 

Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea
Bissau, Cote d'lvoire, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, and Togo. Recently Mauritania left ECOWAS to
favor its membership in the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU). The 
ECOWAS treaty was adopted in May 1975, and revised in 1993 
to accelerate the pace of integration in West Africa. It envisaged: 
the creation of a common market among member countries with
a phased reduction of tariffs and non-tariff barriers on products of O: P: cPit: 
community origin until 
their complete elimination; 
the 
establishment of a common external tariff, fiscal and monetary 

.
Giowth (% 

lion (mit) 

US 

i; 

l 

i 

harmonization; the creation of a single monetary zone and close 
cooperation in all areas of economic activity. 

ia D%iGDP (%) 
t 
V.) 
) 

(V.) 

S) 

it r

2 
2:7 

76.6 

32 
3.7 

-3.9 
XC 
45 

3 

2363

2,5

81.9

322

3.6

0.4
-6 5.5

4 

I4

198.8 

2.9 

642 

32 
.2 

.. 

9 
3. 

3Awth 

Key Institutions

The institutions of the ECOWAS comprise: The Conference of Heads of State and Government; the Community
Parliament; the Court of Justice; the Economic and Social Council; the Council of Ministers; the Executive Secretariat;
the Fund for Co-operation, Compensation and Development; the West African Monetary Agency; the West African
Women Association; and the West African Health Community.

* The Executive Secretariat, the key administrative institution, is to

be financed by a half percent levy on all imports into ECOWAS. 

The Executive Secretary is assisted in his task by 4 deputy 
secretaries and 8 technical committees.
* The Secretariat is in charge of executing the decisions taken by 
the Conference of Heads of State and Government and applying
the regulations of the Council of Ministers. 

, 

s 

Z 
avi 

s.;i0i 

e 19934999)

y 

(V. 

0 

' o 

L 

L5

* The ECOWAS Fund, operational since 1982, aims to serve 
ECOWAS member countries with economic assistance, long term 

project financing, and guarantees to foreign investment. The Fund Life exe 

mortt 

nom 

(V.) 

(per i6 l;v births) 
at 
it (years)

i 

($500 million capital) was restructured in 1998-99 to improve 
operating efficiency and is to be further restructured into a
Holding Company with two subsidiaries: (I) a mostly private-
financed Regional Investment Bank to finance commercial 
projects; and (2) a mostly public Regional Fund to finance public
infrastructure projects.

.

0

3a

70

91

45

Attachment 2

UEMOA: West African Economic and Monetary Union

Background 

UEMOA S 

i

UEMOA is an economic and monetary union, formally created in
January 1994, but based on the pre-existing West Africa 
Monetary Union of the CFA franc zone, with eight members 
(Benin, Burkina-Faso, C6te d'lvoire, Mali, Niger, Senegal, Togo), PoWation 
and Guinea-Bissau which joined in May 1997). Member
countries share a common central bank - Banque Centrale des 
Population Growth (s) 
Etats de l'Afrique de I 'Ouest - BCEAO and a currency GDP (US$ bil.) 
guaranteed at fixed parity to the Euro through an overdraft ONP per capita (US$) 
arrangement with the French Treasury coupled with stringent GDP Growth (e) 
zone-wide fiscal and monetary rules. 
Fisa DefcWGVDP %/) 
lInfltion (CPIt, %) 

Averamge Average 
(1921-93) 
l0
55 6 
6il4) 
6.1 

2.9 
27.2 
470 
0.4 
-6.5 
0.5 

44 

2.8 
25.0 

389 
4.8 

-2.7 

9.0 

6.3 

titmates

70.0

2.5

28.0
395
3.5
-2.6

2.7

4.7

Key Institutions

Export Growth 

Source: A*ica Regiosoa Databawe. World Batk

* 

Patterned after the European Union, the Commission,
located in Ouagadougou, is the executive body. 
It has a
President, the highest Authority, 
and 8 commissioners 

UEMOA Social Indicatws

representing their 
respective countries, and with
sectoraU/functional responsibilities. The commission is 
me 
financed by a share of the one percent levy on all imports into Literacy 
34
UEMOA. It is spearheading efforts to establish a customs Gross primary enrollment (%) 63

(%) 

a9

investment incentives, public financial Fema1e p 
union, harnonize 
management procedures. and taxation, and monitor key 

macroeconomic convergence criteria - inciuding fiscal deficits, 

enrollment ('v") Si

fnt mortalitY (per 1000) 
Life expecta y at birth (years) 47

103

inflation, public sector wages, and govemment arrears. 
* UEMOA institutions also include a Court of Justice, a General Prevaence of HIV/ADS,
Accounting Office, regional Chamber of Commerce, and,

eventually, a Parliament. None of these is fully functioning. A 

3 5-9yS. 

(9%) 

Regional Banking Commission has been operating for several Access to safe water* (%) 
years, a Securities Exchange Commission has been established
and the regional Stock Exchange opened in 1998 (in Abidjan). 
The BOAD (Banque Ouest Africaine de Developpement) is 
considered as an independent, specialized institution under the
UEMOA treaty.

* 200B a

2000,,ata.

J &

4.4
68

46 

Attachment 3

West African Intergovernmental Organizations

Organization 

Year Established 

List of Members

1. INTEGRATION/GROUPINGS

Economic Community of West African 

Economic and Monetary Union of West Africa 
(UEMOA) 

Mano River Union (MRU) 

II. MULTI-PURPOSE IGO'S

i) General/multi-purpose

Council of understanding (ENTENTE) 

Inter-State Committee for the Fight Against 
Drought in the Sahel (CILSS) 

Authority for the Development of the Liptako- 
Gourma region (ALG)

Nigeria/Niger Joint Commission for co- 
operation (NNJCC)

Sene-gambia Permanent Secretariat 

ii) River and lake basins

Niger Basin Authority (NBA) 

Organization for the Development of the 
Gambia River (OMVG)

Organization for the Development of the 
Senegal River (OMVS) 

1975 

Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, C6te d'lvoire,
Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali,
Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Togo
1994 (but dates back to the 
Benin, Burkina Faso, C6te d'lvoire, Guinea-Bissau,
1972 CEAO and the UDAO Mali, Niger, Senegal, Togo
created in 1960)
1973 

Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone

1959 

1973 

1970 

1971 

1967 

1980 

1978 

Benin, Burkina Faso, C6te d'lvoire, Niger, Togo

Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chad, Gambia,
Mauritania, Niger, Senegal
Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger

Niger and Nigeria

Gambia and Senegal

Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, C6te d'lvoire,
Guinea, Mali, Niger, Nigeria

Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Senegal

1972 
(but dates back to OERS
created in 1968)

Mali, Mauritania, Senegal

Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) 

1964 

Cameroon, Chad, Niger, Nigeria

Organization 

Year Established 

List of Members

47 

Attachment 3

III. SINGLE-PURPOSE IGO'S

i) Agriculture and Natural Resources
West African Rice Development Association 

African Society for the Development of Millet 
and Sorghum-based Food (SADIAMIL)
Economic Community for Livestock and Meat 
(CEBV)
African Groundnut Council 
Cocoa Producers Alliance (CPA) 

Inter-State Committee for Water Studies 
(CIEH) 

Regional Agro-meteorological and 
Hydrological Centre (AGRHYMET) 

Sahel Institute (INSAH) 

Remote Sensing Centre of Ouagadougou 
(CRTO) 

Regional Centre for Training in Technical 
Aerial Survey (RECTAS) 

International Organization for the Fight 
against the African Migratory Locust 
(OICMA) 

Common Organization for the fight against 
Locust and Fowl Pests (OCLALAV) 

1970 

1972 

1970 

1964 

1962 

1960 

... 

1977 

1977 

1972 

1962 

1965 

Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, C6te d'lvoire, Gambia,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali,
Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Togo

Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Sudan

Benin, Burkina Faso, C6te d'lvoire, Niger, Tog

Gambia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sudan
Brazil, Cameroon, C6te d'lvoire, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sudan,
Togo

Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Congo,
C6te d'lvoire, Gabon, Mali, Mauritania, Niger,
Senegal, Togo

Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chad, Gambia, Mali,
Mauritania, Niger, Senegal
Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chad, Gambia, Mali,
Mauritania, Niger, Senegal
Algeria, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Congo,
Cote d'lvoire, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mali,
Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Gambia, Ghana, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal,
Togo, Zaire

Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Congo, Cote d'lvoire, Gambia,
Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Togo, Uganda, Zaire
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, COte
d'lvoire, Gambia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal

Organization 

Year Established 

List of Members

48 

Attachment 3

ii) Transport and Communications
Air Afrique 

Agency for Air Transport Security in Africa 
(ASECNA) 

African Civil Aviation Commission (AFCAC) 

1961 

1959 

1969 

Benin, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic,
Chad, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, France, Mauritania,
Niger, Senegal, Togo

Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Congo, C6te d'lvoire, Gabon,
Madagascar, Mali, Niger, Senegal, Togo

Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo, C6te d'lvoire,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Gabon,
Kenya, Lesotho, Libya, Liberia, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger,
Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tunisia, Uganda,
Zaire, Zambia

Benin and Niger Common Organization for 
Railways and Transport (OCBN)

iii) Industry
Electricity Community of Benin (CEB) 

West African Cement Company (CIMAO) 

African Regional Centre for Engineering 
Design and Manufacturing (ARCEDEM) 

iv) Social and Cultural Matters
Organization for co-operation and co- 
ordination in the Fight Against Endemic 
Disease (OCCGE)

West African Health Community (WAHC) 

African and Malagasy Council for Higher 
Education (CAMES) 

1959 

Benin and Niger

1970 

1975 

1979 

1960 

1972 

1968 

Benin and Togo

Cote d'lvoire, Ghana, Togo

Algeria, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Comoros,
Congo, Egypt, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia,
Mali, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Zaire, Zambia

Benin, Burkina Faso, C6te d'lvoire, Mali,
Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Togo

Gambia, Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone

Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo, Cote d'lvoire,
Gabon, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Niger,
Rwanda, Senegal, Togo, Zaire

49 

Attachment 3

Organization 

Year Established 

List of Members

IV. MONETARY AND FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS

African Centre for Monetary Studies (ACMS) 

1978 

West African Clearing House (WACH) 

West African Monetary Union (UMOA) 

Central Bank of West African States 
(BCEAO) 
West African Development Bank (BOAD) 

ECOWAS Fund 

FOSIDEC 

African Guarantee and Economic Co- 
operation Fund (FAGACE) 

ENTENTE FUND 

African Solidarity Fund (ASF) 

1975 

1973 

1962 

1972 

1978 

1977 

1966 

1976 

Algeria, BCEAO Members, Botswana, Burundi,
Cape Verde, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tunisia,
Uganda, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Central Banks of seven BCEAO countries,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia,
Mauritania, Nigeria, Sierra Leone

Benin, Burkina Faso, C6te d'lvoire, Mali, Niger,
Senegal, Togo

Benin, Burkina Faso, C6te d'lvoire, Mali,, Niger,
Senegal, Togo
Benin, Burkina Faso, C6te d'lvoire, Mali, Niger,
Senegal, Togo

See ECOWAS

See UEMOA

Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, C6te
d'lvoire, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Togo
See ENTENTE

Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, C6te d'lvoire France,
Gabon, Mali, Mauritius, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal,
Togo, Zaire

50

Open Regional Integration

Attachment 4

Opnes=tms 
ermmee 
is,rfr 
otetaergm 
trade as a0 rtio+ of GD whc i0 aAs deemndb 
o-oiyfctos, 
comdte 
n xot 
n the siz of th eoo my 

tictysekn' 

n o otesaitclmaueo
al 
h peminac 
of pr
eina 

nerton 

oe 

es

reina 
rdearngmns 
hc aent 
icimntryvs-vi 
h es 
fte 
ol.A=utm 
uino
cmomakt 
schs Tits.f00 
b Sft0000Aeing 
foArmdSU07 
for0 ECOW45;A000X.u.t 
theeoe 
00 0 
t0 0 0S, 
is ntS in that category. The.0000 
term is used83

hee onthles y 
efrecetoth 

fcttht 

heexeraltaif 

aredy(ofii 

lly)mpemete b

WAEU,adsontapltoth 
e; en=eEOA,i 
tefcalota 
t the poicy of tade liberalztio,eardn 

itntylwrta 
preiu naintrfsadt
taiffs and other resritiv 
eaue 
(swea

aviigecag 

ae 

iainet 

spandt 

otne 

einlitgaintu 

per 

sawyt

effectively_ inresingM opei_nness.

region is by an measure stll small0 andits prouctin un-diversified. Openingto0 wthe es o theworld

rean=meaie 
utemr 
dnmc 
ida an b 
ttatingfoe:ignivstetwilnt 
Noate* that t 
tecs 
.Win 
ftrl 
ehoo 

eeis 
rmtaetruhipr 
.matrilz 
fth 
icynewat;iyiis anXA 
'ifn 

eionreais 
inusi 

fnwtcnlge 
n
igl prtcion&is
Cargumten0,,,, 
for, pr 
i0t;;0,ajt 
tcti i

51

Monetary Integration

Attachment 5

Beyond simple policy convergence, the proposal for a West African monetary union
requires continued reflection.a The central banks authorities in the region, including the
BCEAO, therefore have undertaken to organize periodic consultations among themselves and
with external partners. The central issue, leaving aside the political dimension, is that in efect
the sub-region is far removed from meeting the criteria generally recognized for forning an
'optimal currency area': among others, intra-regional trade is small and, for structural reasons,
unlikely to expand greatly; countries are not subject to synchronic, but rather to contrary shocks,
particularly between net oil exporters (Nigeria) and net importers (all others). Related to this, the
proposal provides for a fiscal compensatory mechanism but its dimensions and modus operandi
are not yet known. While policy targets for macroeconomic convergence are agreed in principle
their achievement and sustainability in all member countries are still uncertain. Finally, within a
monetary union, in the absence of exchange rate flexibility, adjustment to a changing
environment has to rely on price and wage flexibility and/or increased factor movements,
especially labor, which may not be feasible.
- Furthernore, the target date of 2004 is over-ambitious in view of the countries' vey
different economic positions at the outset as well as the institutional complexities and costs of
establishing a common central bank, the inherently difficult debate for choosing among the
options for the exchange rate regime of the union and, not least, the modalities for a merging of
the existing CFAF West African zone and the '^second monetary union" (Nigeria, Ghana and
also Guinea, the Gambia, Liberia, Sierra-Leone). If, or as long as, no West African monetary
union emerges, the question will remain of what will be the best combination of: degree of
monetary independence, degree of exchange rate flexibility, and degree of freedom of capital
movements (the so-called Mundell's 'incompatibility triangle'). Energies in the meantime
should be primarily and effectively directed at improving domestic fiscal and monetary
management in each of the participating countries, to achieve the degree of macroeconormic
stability and convergence which in any case must precede monetary integration.

See Paul Masson and Catherine Pattilo, Monetary Union in West Africa - An Agency for Restraint of Fiscal
Policy?. IMF Working Paper WPIOI/34. March 2001

52

Attachment 6

North-South Arrangements

The economics literature points to North-South as tuore beneficial for the South than
South-South arrangements. The theory is couched in terms of arrangements of indivi4uat
countries but is relevant where the 'South' is itself a grouping of countries, s(cid:2)h as(cid:2)ECOWAS
and WAEMU. It is consistent with the new AC?-EU agreement that seeks to associate groups
ofACP countries, rather than individual countries, with the European Union.
The expected benefits of a North-South arrangement stem partly from increased ope(cid:2),ess
i.e "enlargement of export markets, accelerated capital inflows, techr(cid:2)logy transf (cid:2)rs, and
possibly enhanced mobility of other factors(cid:2)' as well as "n(cid:2)ore extensive shifts in specialization
and thereby greater gains from trade, .(cid:2)" 
(See: Worid .8am(cid:2)r, (cid:2)G1obaI Ec (cid:2)rnc (cid:2)mic frospec(cid:2)s
2OC (cid:2)J).
The association with the European Valon generates some of thos(cid:2) tariff and quotas
benef(cid:2)ts, in parti&ular as ACP exports have received preferential treatment in the E0(cid:2) (but not
pref(cid:2)rential treatment on health and other norms that, together with the ACP, still represei(cid:2)t
barriets to entry in the European market(cid:2).
Possibly more important(cid:2). however, the association with Northern partners such a(cid:2)the (cid:2)lJ,
ca(cid:2) yeld the 'iion-traditiona (cid:2) benefits' of integration, z(cid:2)nely increased policy cre4i(cid:2)ili(cid:2)y(cid:2) and
in(cid:2)reased pressure to respect policy eomniitments,(cid:2)especially when some f(cid:2)rn(cid:2) of 'k(cid:2)d4n(cid:2)
mechanism is in place. This is perhaps most evident in the area of mon(cid:2)tary and exchat(cid:2)e rate
(cid:2)policy through the fixed lir(cid:2)k between the CFA franc of the eight UEMOA countri(cid:2)s and the
French franc, now the Euro with Fre(cid:2)nch Treaswy g(cid:2)iaraM(cid:2)ee. The credibility rises(cid:2), notebly,
because the cost 61' exit from the arrangement also rises, which is seldom the case in South-
South arrangements
Other benefits from the EU-West Africa association arise in the form of coi(cid:2)siderable (cid:2)
technical and financial support for accelerating the process of regional integration: There is little
doubt that i(cid:2)nportant econontic reforms in West Africa, including trade liberalization; have thus
received a strong impulse from the EtJ; in corijimetion with other donors.
Finally, since the West Africa region has chosen to follow a model of deep integration
similar to the EU model, and despite obvious difkrences between the two groups of countries,
there are useful lessons that, West Alilca can derive from its closeness to its N(cid:2)thern partner.
The need for political leadership, for gradualism, and for cooperation toward economic stabi(cid:2)y
are no doubt among them.

53

Attachment 7

Toward a West Africa PRSP

As part of its process of preparing a Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for West
Africa, the World Bank convened a meeting of key West African institutions, country
representatives and private sector participants to a workshop in Bamako in mid-March
2001. One of the conclusions of this 2-day meeting was a tentative proposal that the
region should consider the possibility of preparing a West Africa PRSP.

This outcome confirmed earlier discussions with Ministers in the region when the PRSP
was launched - who commented on the lack of a cross-border dimension in the PRSP
process as envisaged by the Bank and the Fund. And it builds on conclusions of the
seminar on PRSPs hosted by the BCEAO, in mid-2000. In particular, the BCEAO
seminar stressed the importance of free movement of goods, services, capital, and people
within West Africa, and the creation of regional higher education and health facilities, as
well as other infrastructure, as measures to help fight poverty. More specifically, that
seminar proposed creating a "mechanism" to review national PRSPs as part of a
multilateral surveillance process, supported by a regional "observatory" (databank and
associated institutions) to monitor progress.

Work aimed at helping formulate a possible West Africa PRSP could help clarify the
regional, or cross-country, dimensions of poverty and could help demonstrate how
regional cooperation and integration could help alleviate poverty. While it would draw
on national PRSPs, it should focus on cross-border problems and solutions to the poverty
problem. It would not necessarily be linked to decisions on any funding for subregional
efforts, but it would be expected to help define priorities for such assistance by linking it
to poverty reduction efforts.

The proposal emanating from the Bamako workshop has been informally discussed with
both the ECOWAS Secretariat and the UEMOA Commission, the key West African
institutions. The next step could be a more formal endorsement by a meeting of a
Council of Ministers, along with an assignment of responsibilities, adoption of a
timetable, and delineation of a work program. It might be expected that this work would
be a joint effort by the Executive Secretariat of ECOWAS and the UEMOA Commission.

The content of a West Africa PRSP can only be defined through discussions within West
Africa. However, it could be expected to center on the poverty reduction implications of
regional integration arrangements. Conceptually, it might focus on how regional
integration can increase economic growth, how regional integration can increase
opportunities for the poor to be gainfully employed and eam higher incomes, and how
regional integration can enhance national programs designed to deliver essential public
services to the poor - both to improve their skills and to assure that minimum needs are
met. This work would obviously build on ongoing work on national PRSPs; in West
Africa, the status is as follows: two full PRSPs (Burkina Faso and Mauritania), eight
interim PRSPs (Benin, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, and
Senegal), and ongoing work expected to lead to an interim PRSP in the coming months in

54

Attachment 7

CMte d'Ivoire, Nigeria, and Sierre Leone. For the remaining countries (Cape Verde,
Liberia, and Togo) work on even an interim PRSP has barely begun.

Analytically, a West Africa PRSP process might, over time, contain the following four
main modules, the first of which would seem to be a prerequisite.

Description of existing poverty patterns within the subregion. Although all countries
have a large number of poor, the poverty lines vary by country. An initial task would be
to transform national poverty descriptions into a uniform regional description. The
observation that landlocked countries and sahelian regions are poorer than coastal regions
is an issue already on the minds of regional leaders, who have called on the ECOWAS
Secretariat to define specific actions to help landlocked (and island) economies.
Recognition of this geographic imbalance is implicit in the design of the UEMOA
structural fund, which aims to provide a form of redistribution of tariff revenue toward
poorer regions.

Modelinp of the growth effects of accelerated regional integration. This module would
look at how deeper integration may affect factor costs and competitiveness and the
location of investment and jobs. Some of this may rely on the studies and modeling
financed by the European Commission on the impact of the introduction of a common
external tariff in UEMOA, which are now being extended to cover the rest of ECOWAS.
This work would be complemented by other modeling work the Bank has supported in
some countries (Burkina Faso and Niger, for example).

Delineation of key cross-border mechanisms to translate growth into poverty reduction.
This module would focus mainly on changes in subregional labor markets and changes in
the distribution of the population, skills, and cross-border transfers - as well as possible
changes in government revenues - in response to the changing location of economic
activities. While much of this analysis would be speculative, it could rely in part on the
extensive demographic analysis underpinning the West Africa Long Term Perspective
Study prepared by the Club du Sahel in the early 1 990s. Analytically, it could be based
on the estimation of a gravity model of labor migration within West Africa.

Discussion of how new or enhanced regional integration policy measures could deepen
the positive impact of regional integration on poverty reduction. These measures could
range from a better harmonization of national macroeconomic and sectoral policies (as a
basis for promoting regional integration), to the creation of specific cross-border
activities, programs and investments, to the design of cross-border fiscal transfer, or
safety net, mechanisms. Where these policies exist or have been proposed, the discussion
would focus on how they might be modified to strengthen their impact on poverty
reduction.

55

Attachment 8

Monitoring Progress in Regional Integration

The task of monitoring progress in regional integration is the primary responsibility of
the UEMOA Commission and the ECOWAS Executive Secretariat. The Commission is
generally well equipped for the purpose, particularly regarding mutual surveillance of
macroeconomic policies and surveillance of trade policy (for which an IDF grant is in
place), and the Secretariat will receive technical/financial support from the EU and,
possibly, the Bank. Evaluating progress under this RIAS will thus depend crucially on the
ability of regional institutions - and the effectiveness of the Bank in strengthening these
institutions will itself become a measure of progress under this RIAS.

By its nature the process of regional integration embraces a wide set of activities. But
progress under this RIAS will focus on four aspects of the strategy that underpin the
establishment of an open, unified, regional economic space in West Africa: creating an
effective (and open) customs union, setting up regional markets in infrastructure services,
improving the regional business environment; and deepening collaboration between the
key regional institutions.

Under each of the five key areas a few indicators will be followed over the three year
period of this RIAS. Over that short period these indicators refer by necessity to actions
to be taken, rather than final outcomes: for example establishment of the customs union,
rather than the impact on trade flows; establishment of regional regulatory structures,
rather than reductions in utility or transport prices. Such outcomes will of course become
more observable over time, but measuring actions to be supported by the Bank will
permit an assessment of the adequacy of the assistance proposed and help determine the
adjustments needed to support regional integration more effectively over the longer term.

1. Creating a Customs Union

D Actions to implement the UEMOA common external tariff and accompanying
measures (as well as the calendar for removal of transitional measures as
specified in the law), including rules of origin, customs valuation methods,
and drastic reduction in import duty exemptions;
* Establishment of the ECOWAS customs union: while unlikely by 2002 as
proposed, a formal agreement on and initial steps to put into place the new
external tariff and related measures would be a minimum step forward;
* Effective removal of all official duties and taxes as well as non-tariff barriers
(such as spurious sanitary and technical standards) on intra-regional trade with
proper implementation of rules of origin of eligible products;
* Significant, verifiable reduction in official road blocks and similar
impediments to inter-country and transit trade; installation of back-to-back
customs posts at borders on main interstates routes.

56

Attachment 8

2. Infrastructure services

* Air transport: establishment of a regional regulatory structure and effective
liberalization of national air space, including through bilateral agreements (by
end 2002), and safety standards as defined by ICAO in place in all countries
(by end 2003);
* Electricity: enabling independent power producers to participate in cross-
border trade; using standard bilateral contracts along sound international
commercial practice; establishing a clearing system for cross-border financial
settlements for power trade; establishing a cooperation mechanism among
operators to assure stability of power networks involved; completion of links
required for full interconnection of power grids of operators;
* Telecommunications: Councils of ministers of ECOWAS and UEMOA to
adopt a harmonization program by end 2002; including an agreed deadline
(proposed as end 2005) for all member states to adapt their legislation and
regulations to comply with the harmonization program.

3. Business environment

* Financial integration. Easier and more rapid banking transfers and payments
settlements among countries, as evidenced for example by large transactions
being settled in real time (first in UEMOA , gradually in all of ECOWAS);
payments problems reduced and beneficiaries satisfied with system (as
evidenced by client surveys);
* Investment framework. Replace national "investment codes" by a more
general, regional framework such as an Investor Charter (eliminating, for
example, inter-country competition on tax "incentives" and assuring that
country exonerations do not undermine the common external tariff), and
developing an institutional structure that assures that regional and national
rules of competition are fully consistent;
* Tax harmonization: complete harmonization of VAT and other indirect taxes
to minimize distortions in intra-regional trade; harmonization of taxes on
financial instruments (especially within UEMOA); initiation of work to
harmonize direct taxes to avoid double taxation of investors.

4. Collaboration between the two regional institutions

* The depth and quality of the cooperation will be assessed primarily in the
context of their joint work on each the areas described above.

In addition, monitoring should cover Bank efforts to intensify its collaboration with
donor partners, for exarnple by helping activate and participate in yearly meetings of the
proposed "Donors Forum".

57

Annex 1

Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) at a glance

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

EconomIc Low i
Community of middle
Western African States 
Income 

Development dlamond

199m
Population, mid-year (irndlions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas nmethod, USS) 
GNP (Alias method, USSbihfons) 
Average annual growth, 1S93-99
Populatiort (6) 
Labor force (%) 
Most rwe*nt estimate (latest yer available, 199399J 
Poverty (% of popubtion below national poverty ine) 
Urban population (9of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live bathirs) 
Child malnutriton (% of children under 5) 
Access to sate water (% of populationy 
Iliteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-ege population) 
Male 
Female 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investmentlGDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Grossdomesticssvlngs/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 
Current account balance/GDP 

1979 

75.9 
20.9 
25.3 
18.9 

.. 

0.0 

230.6 5,083.8 
316.0 
1,240.0
71.7 6,310.8 

Life expectancy

T

2.7 
2.7 

.

39 
48 
91 

,, 

68l 
4S 
81 
92 
70 

1998 

1989 
1979 1SS9 199S 
58.4 
74.6 
15,4 
232 
27.7 
32.0 
15.5 
18.2 
9.7 
13.8 
-5.7 
-8.() 

1.5
1.8 

..
41
65
59
31
73 
25 
107 
110 
101 

1991 

t9S9 
77.8
21.1 
33.3
15.2
11.8
-9.0 

GNP 

capita 

-

e Gross

Access to safe water
-Econornic 
Community of
Westem African States
(ECOWAS)
Low & middle income group

Economic rmttos-

__ 

_ 

-__ 

_ _ 

__ _ 

Trade

Domestc 

58

Annex I

Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation

Domsic prikes;

(% change)
Consumer prices 
Implicit GOP deflator 
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes cunent grants)
Current revenue 
Curmnt budget balance 
Overall surplus/deffcit 

11.6 
9.7 

8.3 
4.5 

4.0 
2.8 

1.9
2.1 

10 t

.. 
.. 
.. 

15.2 
-2.3 

22.2 
8.8 

22.4 
7.5 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99

-

GDP deflator 

CPI

.. 

-8.1 

-6.0

TRADE
(UJS$ -meons) 
Total exports (fob) 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capitalgoods 
Export pnce index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1996=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

1979 

1989 
16,622 
1,155 
14,246 
1,725 
1,033 
1,517 
68 
61 

1998 
20,688 
1,663 
20,436 
3,152 
1,450 
2,114 
82 
91 
90 

1999 
22,547 
1,669 
22,500 
3,231 
1,754 
2,181
93 
91 
102

Export and Import levels (USS mill I
300oo0

.. 
.. 
.. 

25.000 t
20,000 +

1,817 
757 
217 
,, 

75. 

5 

"'I"

0,o mI h _

93 94 95 95 97 98 
aExporns 
Nimports

69

.. 
., 

111 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ m nS) 

1979 
1989 
25,269 18,235 
23,483 17,583 
1,786 
652 

1998 
23,946 
27,843 
-3,897 

1999 
25,952 
30,682 
-4,730 

| Current account balance to GDP 1%)
2

Exports of goods and services 
Importsofgoods and services 
Resource balance 

T

-2 

: 

97

Net income 
Ne current transfers 

-2,832 
273 

-4,700 
718 

-3,980 
2,509 

-4,686 
2,491 

4

i ii

Current account balance 
Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

18 
3,166 
-3,184 

-3,299 
5,043 
-1,744 

-5,796 
5,795 
77 

-6,872 
4,937 
1,977 

-
-10
-12

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

18,661 64,360 
967 
4,958 
592 
4,036 

73,372 
3,399 
11,627 

72,144
2,845 
11,982 

1
FConipoltion of 19919 
-bt 

(USS mIll.)

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

1,669 
125 

4,547 
722 

4,075 
689 
146 

3,673
637 
173 

A: 2,845

5 

37 

G: 1O,89D

( 

_i7:11,9~~~~~1,82

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Officialcreditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

681 
909 
2,225 
523 
0 

1,834 
2,015 
537 
1,989 
0 

2,230 
340 
-361 
1,778 
23 

2,128 
-171 
-510 
1,643 
28

c
C: 2.41 l

F:411,132 
I3 

0.7 

6 

8

:6,683

Wofid Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
repayments 
Netflows 

467 
270 
38 
232 
92 
139 

1,707 
1,097 
361 
735 
397 
338 

867 
1,096 
532 
564 
302 
262 

.. 

E:25,238

725
526
199 
284 
-84 

Principal 

IA -IBRD 
B-IDA 

E -Bilaterl
F - Private

Interest payments 

0- Other mutiater 

Ne transfers 

IC-IMF 

G - Short-tem

Note: This table was produced from tne Development Economics central database.

Inflation figures are median values. Balance of payments items excluding exports and imports are simple sums and may not reconcile.
Economic Community of West African States includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Cote crivoire, Gambia, The, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria,Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo.

59

Annex 2

Indicator 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000

ECOWAS - Key Economic Indicators

National Accounts as % of GDP
Grss Domestc Product
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 
Total Consumpton 
Gross Domesft Fxed Inveatment 
PublicInvestment 
Pnvate lnwstment 
Expor
s (GNFS) 
Impons (GNFS) 
Groff Domtic Savings 

t

Memorandum ItttMS
Gross Domestic Product
(USSmiiod at current prices) 
GNP per rapfta (US$, Atlas methodr 
RIutl acoa 
roerth r3tcs (Y= coiculuted from 1995 ptices)
Gess doextic productL r toket.pes 
R.] ct 
al p-erpst 9c 
t 
otes (%, caictriated f6oo 1995 pn-e0)
Gross doestki product o t 
tker pnc.s 
Total cooe.iftop 
Privot 
-coosutpuo, 

Wosee of Paftrents (USSm)
E.parM(GNFS) 
Mer-htdis FOB 
of ehich. od 
itpouts(GNFS)' 
M-ehcdio FOB 
RrtoecebwabWace 
Net creot 
-oasf-es 
C.-cntac oootba1mtce 

tvestent 
s- 

Not pntctcfo-g. 
doimer 
Ota.rc,ti.] ut(. 
a-ot m 
Dttb.o, Lore t-er IOs (CU US$)
P0,-n50 
Peo,ccs 
Chaegri--roecves' 

,8fettO,wdAtrOotms
Rcpsro- blero 
I%orGDP) 
Rea1 aetoot georrth rates (1995 pices)
Expors (GNFS) 
Itrpos (GNFS) 
R-erves in o-rho of neror of g-oIdsaes n 
Public finsee (as % of GDP as morket prires)
Cot 
ttresores 
-- 
C-tecpecd-rtes 
Ctoent uccout "suetus(.) ordcfict(-7 
Copstald e.opeodtcoae
Forcign fototCOtg

Prke hldico
Esponpricetodes 
Iteprtpr-tmd-x 
Term,softusde ird-(/chsmge) 
RoIleff tctxeoctahgersue 
-o-repsicciodo'r 
(%.chaogr) 

o. GNFS- dreetes *goods orald soefatot seI trs -
b Inclod-sur ofIMFProsoues.
c. Consolidtted cent..l govt1 o ej t

31 15 
32.13 
36.72 
8537 
1650 
6.58 
9 92 
35.43 
37 66 
14.63 

30.b8 
34 09 
3523 
7652 
1595 
646 
9 49 
38 90 
32 06 
2318 

31.16 
32.69 
36.15 
81.81 
18.00 
7.28 
10.71 
37.66 
37.65 
18.19 

33.39 
27.29 
3932 
81.84 
23.22 
15.19 
8.03 
32.09 
37.32 
18.18 

31.15 
33.53 
35.32 
84.78 
21.10 
11.92 
9.21 
33.35 
39.42 
15.22 

31.35
33.37
3528
76.55
22.95
14.84
8.31
47.69
44.9
24.45

67,071.00 
293.58 

77,528.00 
312.30 

76,91400 
334.02 

74,618.10 
324.43 

77.828.90 
316.23 

81,921.30
322.44

3.5 

.. 

23.760.30 
21,753.40 
11,449.00 
25,25610 
17,574.50 
(1,49580) 
1,299 50 
,(3,771.36) 

1,101.78 
(232.63) 

1,554.65 
2,400.87 
(1,23789) 

-2.23 

2.67 

19.8 
19.1 
07 

10000 
100D00 
1 3 
75.21 
845 

5.3 

2 40 
0.56 
8.06 

29,975.10 
26,564.20 
15,830.30 
24,701 40 
18,775.50 
5,273.70 
1,467.50 
968D9 

1,19324 
(2,762 58) 

1,183.52 
2,435.03 
(2,652.02) 

6.84 

14 65 
7.76 
3 61 

194 
17.7 
0.7 

10.04 
9076 
21.2 
79.58 
5.32 

3.8 

1.00 
3.45 
1 42 

28,965.30 
25,524.10 
14,850.00 
28,957.80 
20,628.00 
7.50 
2,848.60 
(260.30) 

2,077.79 
(1,512.05) 

847.32 
2,682.90 
(3,425.42) 

0,01 

2.55 
10.63 
5.37 

18.5 
20.9 
-2.5 

10369 
96.17 
-11 1 
79.90 
3.41 

3.3 

0.66 
-5.45 
-0.89 

23.946.90 
20,68810 
9,218.00 
27,84400 
20,435.90 
(3,897.10) 
2,508.90 
(5.795.66) 

1,600.40 
226.76 

1,111.29 
2,059.13 
76.77 

-5.2 

4.49 
1.49 
4.27 

22.2 
30.3 
-8.1 

8204 
91.12 
-16.5 
85.54 
3.99 

2.5 

0.00 
5.37 
2.06

25,952.80 
22,54790 
11,393.00 
30,682 30 
22,498.20 
(4,729.50) 
2,491.00
(6,871.71) 

2,077.89
(265.98)

659.96
2,095.12
1,977.53

4608 

-3.83 
10.39 
3.24 

22.4 
28.4 
-8.0 

92.45 
90.96 
12.9 
88.29 
1.89 

3.6

t .09
.8.46

39,069.80
30,790.80
19,471.00
36,770.40
24,432.60
2,299.40

(2,784.04)

2.81

4.41
11.24
4.04

32.1
31.8
0.3

133.29
98.0D
33.8
95.97
5.50

60

Annex 3

ECOWAS Social Indicators

Latest single year' 

Sane regionhlncome group

1970-75 

1980.85 

19t3-99 

116.3 
2.7 
23.0 
69 

155.5 
3.0 
29.0 
6.9 

.. 

., 

358 
51 

47 
58 
37 

.

.

.. 

.. 

.

..

43 
42 
45 

145 
237 

569 
470 

81 
93 
70 

35 
59 
29 

.. 

14 

47 
45 
48 

110 
206 

427 
507 
1,214 

230.6 
2.7 
39.0 
5.5 

22.0
37.0

311 
115 

81 
92 
70 

60 

36 

52 
50 
53 

91 
145 

414 
357 
966

Sub-
Saharan 
Afrtca 

Low-
income

642.8 
2.6 
33.8 
5.3 

2,417.1
1.9
31.4
3.7

490 
131 

420
138

78 
85 
71 

55 
82 
41 

57 
59 

47 
46 
48 

92 
161 

499 
453 

107
110
101

76
88
70

64
70

59
58
60

77
116

288
258

POPULATION

Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of populahon)

Urban pop. Below 2/3 of national mean per capita income 
Rural pop. Below 2/3 of national mean per capia income 

INCOME

GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS

Gross primwry school enrollment rate

(% rdage group)
Total 
Male 
Female 

Access to an improved water source'
(% of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immiunization rate

(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Ufe expectancy at birth

(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 

Mortality

Infant(per1,000livebirths) 
UnderS(per 1,000) 

Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1.000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

Latest year within the period, for which data are available.
Latest year for access to improved water source is 2000.

Source: Africa Regional Database, World Bank

61

Annex 4

Note on Aggregation Methods (for Annexes 1-3)*

1. Weighted/1995 Method

For group totals, missing data are imputed based on the relationship of the sum of
available data to the total in the year of the previous estimate. The imputation process
works forward and backward from 1995. Missing values in 1995 are imputed using one
of several proxy variables for which complete data are available in that year. The imputed
value is calculated so that it (or its proxy) bears the same relationship to the total of
available data. Imputed values and totals are usually not calculated if missing data
account for more than a third of the total in the benchmark year. The variables used as
proxies are GNI in U.S. dollars, total population, exports and imports of goods and
services in U.S. dollars, and value added in agriculture, industry, manufacturing, and
services in U.S. dollars.

2. Simple Total

Aggregates are sums of available data. Missing values are not imputed. Sums are not
computed if more than a third of the observations in the series or a proxy for the series
are missing in a given year.

3. Ratios

Aggregates of ratios are generally calculated as weighted averages of the ratios using the
value of the denominator or, in some cases, another indicator as a weight. The aggregate
ratios are based on available data. Missing values are assumed to have the same average
value as the available data. No aggregate is calculated if missing data account for more
than a third of the value of weights in the benchmark year. In a few cases the aggregate
ratio may be computed as the ratio of group totals after imputing values for missing data
according to the above rules for computing totals.

4. Growth Rates

Aggregate growth rates are generally calculated as a weighted average of growth rates. In
a few cases growth rates may be computed from time series of group totals. Growth rates
are not calculated if more than half the observations in a period are missing.

5. Median

Aggregates are medians of the values. No value is shown if more than half the
observations for countries with a population of more than 1 million are missing.
Depending on the judgment of World Bank analysts, the aggregates may be based on as
little as 50 percent of the available data. In other cases, where missing or excluded values
are judged to be small or irrelevant, aggregates are based only on the data shown in the
tables.

* Source: World Development Indicators (WDI) aggregation methodologies.

62

Annex 5

World Bank Group Operations in ECOWAS Countries* (US$ million)

IDA Commitments 
IDA Net disbursements 

IFC Approvals 

MIGA Guaranties** 

FY98 

FY99 

FY00

1154 
853 

158 

56 

817 
785 

215 

91 

626
594

119

182

* These values are computed from the Loan department database, and may not correspond to the same
values shown in the At A Glance Table generated from the central database.
** ECOWAS countries that are members of MIGA are: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Cote d' Ivoire,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo. Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, and
Niger are in the process of fulfilling membership requirements.

63

Annex 6

Composition of IDA and IBRD Portfolio for ECOWAS countries
Las of May 24, 2001)

,~ ~ ~~~~ 

.

.

Agriculture and Environment 
Policy, Public sector, and Trade 
Finance, and Private Sector 
Infrastructure 
Social Sector 

Total 

Notes:

Di-- - -sed And 
T*W
Cr.dits Com.Imeut Oa*tandtag Uftibur
L 
Aut~ ( 
,, __ (Sm) >_ 
ic (fSm)

110 
44 
67 
188 
245 

654 

1,957 
1,630 
1,202 
10,917 
6,311 

22,017 

365 
792 
227 

3,999 

1,422 

6,805 

771
397
385
1,815
1,657

5,025

Discrepancies between original and disbursed amounts are due to fluctuations in US$-SDR exchange
rates in the period of disbursement. Credits denominated in SDRs are shown in U.S. dollar equivalents.
Agriculture and Environment sector includes:
Agriculture, Environmental Institution, Agro-4ndus. &Market, Research, Irrigation and Drainage, and
Natural Resource Management
Policy, Public sector, and Trade includes:
Other Economic Pol., Public sector, Macro/Non-Trade, Trade, and Public Fin. Mgmt.
Finance, and Private sector includes:
Business Environment, Mining & Other Extra, Financial Sector, and Privatization.
Infrastructure sector includes:
Highways, Urban sector, Railways, Thermal, Transportation Adj. Power, Energy Adj., Telecommunication,
and Informatics.
Social sector includes:
Education, Social protection, & Assistance, Health, Vocat/Tech Edu, Training, Comm. Action Program,
Nutrition, and Water.

64

Annex 7

World Bank Multicountry Lending to West Africa
Sector/Unit 
Project Name 
Amount ($M) Year of Approval
Human Development

Senegal, Regional Management 
School, CESAG

5.5 

1985

Infrastructure

Finance

Other

Total 

Benin: Nangbeto Hydroelectric 
Power II
Togo: Nangbeto Hydroelectric 
Power II
Togo/Benin Energy Engineering 
Mauritania Regional Power/OMVS 
Regional Railway (C-I/Burkina) 
Burkina: Component of a transport 
sector project to rehabilitate
regional railway
C6te d'lvoire Rehabilitation of 
regional railway

BOAD: Regional Development 1 
BOAD Il: Regional Development 2 
BOAD III: Regional Development 3 
BCEAO payment systems 

Togo: CIMAO Regional Clinker 
Project

15.0 

15.0 

5.5 
11.1 
65.0 
8.5 

20.0 

3.0 
20.1 
55.0 
9.4 

60.0 

293.1

1984

1984

1992
1997
1977
1992

1995

1980
1983
1990
2000

1976

65

Annex 8

IDF and GEF Multicountry Grants to West Africa

Sector/Unit 
Macroeconomic & Trade

PSD & Finance

Infrastructure

Natural Resources

Total 

Project Name 

Amount ($M) Year of Approval

UEMOA: Monitoring Common 
Trade Policy (IDF)
Support to CESAG (IDFI 

UMOA Regional Stock Market 
(IDF)
Financial System Infrastructure 
(IDF)

Gas Pipeline Project (IDF) 
Liberalization of air transport in 
WCA (IDF)

West Africa Pilot Community 
Based Nat. Resource and
Wildlife Mgmt (GEF)
West African Freshwater 
Biodiversity Conservation and
Mgmt (GEF)
Assessment and Utilization of 
Shallow Aquifers in West
Africa (GEF)
Wildlife and Livestock 
Management (GEF)
Senegal River Basin Water and 
Environmental Mgmt program
(GEF)
Reversing Land & Water 
Degradation Trends in the
Niger River Basin (GEF)

0.3 

0.2 

0.6 

0.5 

0.2 
0.3 

7.0 

0.9 

0.6 

1.0 

10.0 

8.0 

29.5

2000

Proposed

1994

1997

1996
2000

1995

Proposed

2000

Proposed

Proposed

Proposed

66

Annex 9

Grouping of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries

Status as of June 2001

Angola* 
Benin 

Bolivia 

Burkina 
Faso 

Chad 
Congo Dem. 
Rep.* 
Congo, Rep.* 

Guinea 
Guinea- 
Bissau*
Guyana 

C6te d'Ivoire 

Honduras 

Burundi* 

Ethiopia** 

Kenya 

Madagascar Niger 
Malawi 
Rwanda* 

Tanzania
Togo

Mali 

Uganda

Mauritania 

Sierra 
Leone*
Sao Tome Vietnam
and
Principe
Mozambique Senegal 

Yemen,
Rep. Of
Zambia

Gambia, The 
Ghana 

Lao PDR " 
Liberia* 

Myanmar* 
Nicaragua 

Somalia* 
Sudan*

Cameroon 
Central 
African
Republic*

Of which:

Decision Points (23) 
Benin 
Mali 

Future Decision Point (13) 
Burundi 
Sierra 
Leone
Somalia 

Sustainable Cases (4)2_
Angola Vietnam

Kenya Yemen, Rep. of

Bolivia 

Mauritania 

Central 
African
Republic
Burkina Faso Mozambique Congo, Dem. Sudan
Rep of

Cameroon 

Nicaragua 

Congo, Rep. of Togo

C6te
d'Ivoire
Ethiopia**
Ghana3 '
Liberia
Myanmar

Chad 
Niger 
Gambia, The 
Rwanda 
Guinea 
Senegal 
Guinea-Bissau Sao Tome 
and Principe
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia

Guyana 
Honduras 
Madagascar 
Malawi

Highlighted countries are members of ECOWAS.
* Conflict affected.
** Cessation of hostilities signed on June 18, 2000. A peace agreement was signed on December 12, 2000.
1/ Presently, Lao PDR is not seeking HIPC assistance
2/ These countries are expected to achieve debt sustainability after receiving debt relief provided under the
traditional mechanisms.
3/ Ghanaian authorities have indicated their intention to request HIPC debt relief in their March 2000
budget statement.

MAP SECTION

IBRD 31521

29 

6 

6,.r8b 

! 

A 

__a. ~ j ~, 
Medcliterroneon 
Seo 

c 

C- i 

0 

500 

1,000 

1,500 KILOMETERS

, TUN5IA 

I I

MOROCCQ, 

o0 

500 

1,000MILES

 
ALGERIA 
--- j 

ARAB

cmo~~,I;l~ 

~ 

-. 

ALGERIA 

LIBYA

R 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~REP.OF

IS?WISH T 

.) 

EGYPT 

........

S 

SAHARAJ~ 
~~~~~K 

20, 

MAURITANIA 

20,

URINA\L 

-| 

GUIS*A 
4'\ 

/ 

< 

''-- 

!9,

NIGERIA44tE- 

91||t 

y 

> 

ETHIOPIA NSOMALIA,
_ j 

,J 

SIERRA

/ AFRICAN REPUBLIC/
CENTRAL 

EOUATORLAB E 

UGANDA) 

r

SAO TOMet<' 
& PRINCIPE 

KENA 

r,7 

KENYA

RWAND,)4~

SOUTH 
A TLA N TI C 

DEMOCRATIC 
REPUBLIC OF 

iItUND 

*I 

A
OCEAN

ATLANTIC 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

~ 

BRNIINDIAN

Cabtinda--_. 

A 

CONGO 

TANZANIA 

'z, 

OCEAN 

IAGOIA1\ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

O EA

-0'ANGOLA 

E 

SEYCHELLES 10

AINGOLA 

" 

' o 

COMOROS

,! 

! 

~~~ZAMBIA C 

ECONOMIC COMMUNITY OF 

!

WEST AFRICAN STATES 
and 

i 

ZIMBABWE 

20- 

N 

i 

MADAGASCAR 20'

UNION ECONOMIQUE 
ET MONETAIRE
OUEST AFRICAINE 

oSWANA 

MUS

! 

JrWA;LAND

30' 

(IEA9Tho

SOUTH AFRICA

ECOWAS MEMBERS

Thns at, was produced by the
Dgtign Unit of The World Bank
7h. bourdrre' colonSs.onr.onsi 
tions
INnd onyother informahon shown on
this mop do not imply, on Ah. part of
The World Bonk Group, ary judgmnnt
on the legalstoaus of any territory, or

UEMOA MEMBERS OP ECOWAS 

Mo~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~iVp 

UEMOA MEMBERS OF ECOWAS 

--- 
I NTE RNATIONAL BOU N DARI ES 

anya;c ndrent 

or acceptance of

",rh boundaries

30 

20 

to 

0o 

p 

20 

3,0 

40 

40 

40
JUNE 2001

