d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICL4L USE ONLY

Report No. 22111-AM

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATGEY

OF THE WORLD BANK

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA

APRIL 25, 2001

Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EOUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective March 31, 2001)
Currency Unit = Dram
Dram = US$0.0018
US$1.0 = 551.8 Dram

GOVERNMNT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December 31

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

BOD 
Biological Oxygen Dmand 
CAS 
County Assistane State 
CEM 
County Ecnomic Manondum 
CFAA Cotmy Firancial Accuntability Assessment 
COD 
Chenical Oxygen Demand 
CPPR Coimny Portfolio P ermane Review 
DFID 
Depatnent for Itraonal Developmet, UK. 
EBRD Eurpean Bank for Recosction & Devebpnent 
ESMAP Eney Sector M _ngmet Assistance Pogram 
EU 
European Union 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Ornizatio 
FDI 
Foign Direc Invesment 
FIAS 
Foreign veont Advisory Service 
FSU 
Fonmr Soviet Union 
FY 
Fiscal Year 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
G"bal Envimet Facilty 
GNP 
Gross National Product 
GOA 
Governent of Annenia 
GTZ 
Germa Techical Cooperati 
IBTCI 
Intatonal Busin and Technical Consultmts 
IDF 
Ituional Development Fund 
IFC 
Intemational Finance Coporation 
IGR 
Instiutional and Govemance Review 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
I-PRSP hterim Poverty Reduction Stategy Papr 
JBIC 
Japan Bank for lneationi Coopaion 
KfW 
Gennan Financial Coopertion 

LIL 
Leamning and Inovation Lon
MIGA Multlateral Ivesimeta Guaantee Author
MTEP Mediuur-Ten Epetdire Progm
NGO 
Non-Govenmnal Organization
NPV 
Net Present Value
OED 
Operations Evalaion Depariment
OSCE Organizadon for Security & Coqeation in Europe
PER 
Public EMediture Review
PRGF 
Povery Reucti and Gmwth Facilty
PRSC 
Poverty Reduction Sppot Credit
PRSP 
Poverty Reduction Staeg Pape
PSD 
Private Sector Developmaet
SAC 
Strucural Ajustmient Credit
SATAC Strucnual Adjutnent Technical Assistance Credit
SME 
Small and Medium Entmpises
SIDA 
Swedish Itnationa Develpment Ageny
STD 
Sexualy Transmited Diseae
TA 
Technical Assistance
TACIS Technical Assistance to die CIS (EU)
TB 
Tuberculosis
TDS 
Total Debt Sevice
UNDP United Nations Develpmt Progm
UNHCR United Naons High Cmmissioner for Refigees
UNICEF United Nations ntemational Childe's Fund
USAID United States Agency for ltrmational Devebpment
WB 
World Bank
WFP World Food Prgrn
WTO World Trade Organzatio

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Team Leader: 

Johannes Linn
Judy O'Connor
Peter Nicholas

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Armenia Country Assistance Strategy
Table of Contents

Executive Summary .............................. 

1. 
Context .1
II. 
Economic Trends .
111. Economic Reform Successes and Risks 
IV. Paradox of Armenian Economic Growth 
V. Continuing Widespread Poverty 
VI. The Government Reform Agenda 
VII. Growth and Financing Prospects ............................. 
VIII. CAS Consultations ............................. 
IX. World Bank Assistance Strategy .14
A. Creating Jobs through Private Sector Development 
.15

B. Improving Governance and Public Sector .17
C. Rebuilding Human Capital .19
X. World Bank Business Plan .21
XI. Managing the Risks .25

.2
.5

.6
.7

Chart 1: 
GDP and Export Growth .
Chart 2: 
Net Present Value of Debt .12
Table 1: 
Macroeconomic Trends and Baseline Projections 
Table 2: 
Downside Risk Scenario .12
Table 3: 
Proposed Lending Scenarios .21
Table 4 
Work Program Summary .24
Box 1: 
Poverty in Armenia 
Box 2: 
Gains from Re-Opening Borders 
Box 3: 
Govemance in Arenia 
Box 4: 
Consultative Group Meeting .13
Box 5: 
Base Case Triggers .22
Box 6: 
Outcome Indicators .23
Box 7: 
Melding Local and International Expertise .24
Attachment 1: IDA Portfolio ................................... 
Attachment 2: Partner Groups ................................... 
Attachment 3: Longer-Term Outcome Indicators ................................... 

.3

.5

.8

Pare

iii

10
12

27
28
29

.2

Annex 1: 

Annex 2: 
Annex 3: 
Annex 4: 
Annex 5: 
Annex 6: 
Annex 7: 
Annex 8: 
Annex 9: 
Annex 10: 
Map..50

Country at a Glance .30

Portfolio Indicators .32
Bank Group Program Summary .33
Summary of Non-Lending Services .34
Social Indicators .35
Key Economic Indicators .36
Key Exposure Indicators .38
Operations Portfolio .39
CAS Program Matrix .40
Development Priorities .49

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the

performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

-111-

Armenia Country Assistance Strategy
Executive Summary

i. 
Armenia's economy has suffered from several shocks in recent years: a severe
earthquake in 1988, the break-up of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
in 1988-94, the 1998 Russia crisis, and the assassination of the top leadership in October
1999. Despite these problems, the Government's commitment to a market-oriented economy,
and its considerable success in advancing structural reform, have helped generate growth
averaging over 5% a year since 1995.

ii. 
Although macroeconomic performance has been strong, Armenia has not benefited
from commensurate job creation or poverty reduction -- 55% of the population still live below
the poverty line. Part of the reason is lack of large-scale entry of private enterprises, and little
restructuring of existing enterprises. New investment has been limited by interference in
business activities by government officials, a serious shortage of appropriate skills, and
investors' perception of high political risks. Human capital has deteriorated, in part through
migration. This has had deleterious effects both on quality of life and on the economy as
Armenia's once abundant skill base has eroded.

iii. 
To address these constraints the Government has articulated in its Interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy the need for progress in three key areas:

* Improving the business environment by reducing administrative barriers to investment
and new entry, especially of foreign firms, building effective public-private
consultative mechanisms, and enforcing a level playing field for new and existing
companies.

* Strengthening public sector management and reducing corruption, so as to improve the
provision of public services and the conditions for private sector growth. This
requires streamlining public administration, including the civil service and key
regulatory agencies, and advancing judicial reform.
* Rebuilding human and physical capital, with an emphasis on ensuring additional
financing of school education, basic health, and infrastructure maintenance, and
improving the targeting of expenditures for social protection and education.

iv. 
The World Bank's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) supports reforms and
investments in these three key areas. Base Case lending is envisaged to be US$150 million in
FY02-04. Should the Government accelerate its reform program, a Poverty Reduction
Support Credit (PRSC) of US$40 million could be added in FY04, bringing total lending to
US$190 million. With good performance, IDA partial risk guarantees for privatizations and
for new export-oriented investments could also be considered.

v. 
In the Low Case, the focus would be on capacity building to improve the institutional
ability to implement future reforms, as well as on human development, rural development,
and environment initiatives which can contribute to long-term poverty alleviation even with
poor governance. Total IDA lending would then be about US$80 million.

vi. 
Triggers for continuing in the Base Case focus on satisfactory development and
implementation of: (i) the macroeconomic program, as evidenced for example by
implementation of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Program; (ii) the Poverty Reduction

-iv-

Strategy Paper (PRSP); (iii) the reform agenda, including social service delivery and the
business climate (with a tangible reduction in corruption and government interference in
private sector activity); and (iv) IDA-financed projects.

Risks

vii. 
The CAS faces several political and economic risks. The Caucasus have historically
been a region buffeted by competing political forces. In the event of renewed conflict, the
Bank would endeavor to focus on the most poverty-oriented investments, but a temporary
cessation of new lending, and perhaps even disbursements, might be unavoidable, and the
Board would be updated in this event. On the other hand, there are prospects for a peace
agreement on Nagorno-Karabakh. In this case, the Bank would update the Board on proposed
support for post-conflict reconstruction and development.

viii. The CAS could be undermined by unexpected loss of momentum in judicial and
public administration reform, reduced overall levels of external financial and technical
assistance, lower population estimates, or by a failure to improve the business environment.
Any of the these outcomes could move Armenia toward a scenario in which the debt burden
becomes unsustainable relative to exports and/or revenues. Key factors in the downside risk
scenario are: the level of overall economic growth and investment, especially export-oriented
investment, and the grant element of new development assistance. This reinforces the
importance of Bank support for reforms which foster broad-based economic growth and
private investment, and improve the tax base and tax collection. It also suggests a continuing
role for the Bank in assisting the Government manage and coordinate external assistance.

Issues for Board Discussion

ix. 

In its discussion, the Board may wish to consider whether:

* The Base Case triggers and outcome indicators are adequate;

* The Bank should step up the regional focus of its analytical and technical assistance
before a peace settlement on Nagorno-Karabakh is reached;

* The proposed combination of lending and non-lending services is appropriate to
Armenia's development needs.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATGEY OF THE WORLD BANK FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA

I. Context

1. 
Background to the CAS. This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) is being
presented to the Executive Directors alongside the Government's Interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy (I-PRSP), and the Joint Staff Assessment of that strategy prepared by
the staffs of the IMF and the World Bank. The CAS supports the Government's strategy as
defined in the I-PRSP. The Bank will update the CAS as necessary once the full PRSP,
which is expected during FY02, is completed.

2. 
Country Background. Armenia is located in the Caucasus Region, neighboring
Georgia, Azerbaijan, Iran, and Turkey. The official population estimate is 3.8 million peo-
ple, and GNP per capita was measured at US$490 in 1999. Because Armenia is small,
landlocked and mountainous, with few natural resources, it faces intrinsic economic disad-
vantages compared with many of its neighbors. To some extent this has been mitigated by
generous official development assistance of about 11% of GDP over the last five years.

II. Economic Trends

3. 
Sharp Economic Decline since Independence. Following the break-up of the
Soviet Union in the early 1990s Armenia's economy suffered one of the severest contrac-
tions among transition economies. The main causes were: the conflict in Nagorno-
Karabakh and the related blockade of major transportation routes; an inherited economic

structure which proved to be

uncompetitive; the hyper- 
inflation of 1992-93 and the 

continuing effects of thewt 
massive 1988 earthquake. In 

1993 the country was in 
very 
serious difficulties, 
with more than 300,000 
refuees 
nd 
ntemlly 
refugees 
and 
internally 

displaced people, electricity 

available, if at all, for only 

30% T

20% 

10% 

lo% 1995 

0%
-10%< 
20% 

--

-
Source: Government of Armenia

Chart 1: GDP and Export Growth

Rate

*

'*

_

1996 X1997 I.1998 

1999 

2000

* 

2-3 hours a day, and perhaps

two-thirds of the population surviving on humanitarian assistance. While the economy has
since recovered significantly, output in 2000 was still less than 70% of Armenia's pre-
transition peak. More importantly, recent economic growth has not brought many tangible
social gains. Poverty and unemployment remain extremely high (Box 1), and surveys
suggest that the public does not have enough confidence in the benefits of market-driven
economic reforms. Emigration, particularly among the younger and better educated,
continues at a fast pace for such a small economy.

4. 
Six Years of Economic Growth. Armenia's economy has grown for each of the
last seven years, at an average annual rate of 5.4%. Economic performance peaked in 1998
(see Chart 1 and Table 1), when GDP growth exceeded 7%, the budget deficit declined to

-2-

4.8% and inflation fell close to zero by year end. This improvement resulted from a
convergence of factors: the successful stabilization program that began in 1994/95; a
Government committed to structural reform, including in core sectors such as power
generation and agriculture; an expansion in private transfers from the Diaspora; and an
extraordinary program of international assistance, which helped finance a large current
account deficit.

5. 
Resilience in the Face of Economic Shocks. Armenia's economic growth showed
a remarkable degree of resilience in the face of two major shocks of the late 1990s. First,
following the Russia crisis, Armenia avoided both an exchange rate crisis and an
acceleration of inflation, and, after a brief slow-down, the economy continued to expand.
Then in October 1999 several leading Armenian politicians, including both the Prime
Minister and Speaker of Parliament, were assassinated. The political aftermath of the

assassinations led to a significant deterioration in fiscal and investment performance.

Nonetheless, economic growth resumed by mid-2000. For 2000 as a whole, GDP growth
reached 6% despite a severe drought.

Table 1: Macroeconomic Trends and Baseline Projections

Real GDP growth rate 
Consumer pr'ce index 
Exptsgro 
ratea 
Imnots groth rate 

As percent of GDP

State budgetrevenue 
State budget expendwiture 
Fiscal balane, accrual basis 
Cuent account balane 
C/A balne, ex. trasfers 

Foreign direct investent 
Extnl debt 

I 

(in percent)
Actual 
1996 e0 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 
5.9 
3.3 
7.2 
3.3 
6.0 
6.5 
18.7 14.0 
8.7 
0.7 
-0.8 
4.5 
4229 -10.3 
8.9 
6.5 15.0 18.5 
17.4t 7.2 
5.0 
-8. 1 
10.8 

3.9 

Proiected

2004
610 5.0
30 
3.0
9.9 
9.7
4.3: 
73

6.0 
3.0 
9.8 
3.2 

17.6 19.7 171 
19.3 16.3 IT172 17.6 18.0 185
26.3 25.7 21.9 26.5 23.4 21.2 20.2 21.0 21.0
-8.7 
-6.0 
-4,8 
-7.2 
-7.1 
-4.0 
-2.6 
-3.0 
-18.2 -18.7 -21.2 -16.6 -14.4 -14.1 -12.1 -10.s -10A4
-25.5 -27.8 -27. 1 
-21.7 -19.0 
-18.9 -46A. -14.5 -14.2
1.1 
6.4 
6.7 
6.1 
5.6 
450 o 47.3 46.8 45.2 44.5
32.6 39.0 41.4 46. 

3.2 11.6 66 

5.6

-25

In percent

' 

NPV/exeb 
lq 
V 
l 
e 
TDS/exports 
TDcal revenueC 
TOtal debt outstkinWdisbwsed 
($m)4

arevenec 

/a 
n/a 143.8 153.6 135.6 132.7 122.3 115.1 12i.9
ea, n/a 165.4 167.7 178.6 178.7 157.8 1449J 1430
9.3 
5.0 19.0 14.3 10.7 
12.2 12.2 
20.8 
t10.2 22,3 167 15.M7 23.5 17.6 17.3: 18,5
521 
639 797 855 
862 988 1068 1125 1198

i3A

i5.0 

a Goods and services.
b. Three year moving average centered on the preceding year is used for the denominator.
c. Central government revenue eNduding rants.
d. Includes government and government guaranteed medium and long-tenn debt
Source: Government of Armenia and World Bank and IMF estimates

III. Economic Reform Successes and Risks

6. 

Reform Commitment in the 1990s. Since independence in 1991, the Armenian

authorities have been committed 
to democracy and market-oriented principles.
Furthennore, Armenia has been more successful in implementing structural reforms than

most other former Soviet Union countries. Reform progress was most noticeable in the
following areas:

-3-

Box 1: Poverty In Armenia

Poverty is widespread in Armenia. Preliminary results from the 1998/99 Integrated Household
Survey suggest 55% of people live below the national poverty line (defined in terms of nutrition and
other basic needs). The survey and other sources reveal a number of features of poverty in Armenia:
* Poverty in Arnenia is particularly prevalent among the uneducated, unemployed, disabled, and
families with several children, as well as in rural areas among the landless. In urban areas 58% of
the population is below the poverty line, compared with 5 1% in rural areas. Poverty is especially
severe in towns in the earthquake zone, with 75% of people in urban Shirak district being poor.
* However, absolute poverty (defined in terms of minimum nutritional needs) appears to have
declined since the 1996 Household Survey, especially in urban areas. In 1998/99 extreme poverty
was only half a percentage point higher in urban than in rural areas.
* Introduction of the new targeted family poverty benefit (which transferred 1.5% of GDP to the
poorest 40%) was one factor that reduced extreme poverty.
* Survey results indicate relatively low consumption inequality: the consumption Gini is 0.37,
indicating a moderate level of inequality, while the expenditures of the richest decile are estimated
at eleven times that of the poorest. The poverty and inequality situation will be further explored
and updated in the forthcoming Poverty Study (FY02).
* Overall indications are that poverty might be becoming entrenched in Armenia, with early signs
that the poor may have started disinvesting in human capital. Poor families have difficulties
maintaining their children at school - in some cases choosing to place their children in residential
institutions. There are also some indications that poor children cannot attend school regularly
because they have to work to support their families.
* With very limited supply of free of charge health services, access of the poor to basic health care
has deteriorated, notwithstanding efforts to provide a basic health benefit package free of charge.

Source: 1996 and 1998/99 Integrated Household Surveys

* Market environment. Successive Governments have pushed ahead with a
comprehensive liberalization of trade, prices and currency regulations, improved
tax and customs administration, strengthened commercial bank supervision, wide-
ranging judicial and accounting reforms, a new Civil Code, and reform of tax,
company, banking, land and bankruptcy laws.
* Privatization. The authorities have divested about 85% of small and medium
enterprises, 75% of large companies, most agricultural land, and all but one
commercial bank (also offered for sale). The Government has issued tenders for
sale of the electricity distribution companies, and introduced private management
of the Yerevan Water Company. Telecommunications has been in private
ownership since 1998, but this has so far resulted in limited improvements in
access or reliability.
* Social Sector Reform. The Government has replaced most poorly-targeted
assistance benefits and privileges with better focused means-tested family benefits.
Aggregate poverty benefit payments have been sharply increased since 1999, and
administration improved. Comprehensive pension reform is now under preparation.
* Health and Education Restructuring. Armenia has initiated the first steps in
improving the efficiency of service delivery in both general education and public
health. The Government has begun rationalizing existing capacity, through both
consolidation and closures. Efforts are also underway to improve financial
management in schools and hospitals, and create stronger incentives and account-
ability mechanisms. While the first outcomes are encouraging, these reforms are

-4-

still at the pilot stage, and more decisive steps are needed in order for there to be
tangible results over the next 2-3 years.

7. 

Political Context and Risks to Reform The political environment for economic

reforms in Armenia remains fragile. While there is a strong consensus among the major
political factions on longer-term economic reform objectives, Armenia's political elites
remain less cohesive on a number of important issues, such as sale of the electric power
distribution companies. Indeed Armenia's external security and the Nagorno-Karabakh
conflict, not economic growth, remain their main preoccupation. There have been six
Prime Ministers since the 1997 CAS was presented to the Board, and the reform
momentum has seen significant fluctuations as a result. Uncertainty and loss of confidence
following the October 1999 assassinations affected the economy through two main
channels: a drastic reduction of investment activity, including delays with finalization of
several large investment projects; and a 10% fall in tax collections.

8. 
New Reform Momentum. The latest political crisis waned in May 2000 when
President Kacharyan appointed a new Government, led by Prime Minister Andranik
Margaryan, committed to full cooperation with different branches of power. The current
political environment is generally supportive of the acceleration of reform. Recent reforms
have included a WTO compliant customs code, a new Law on Inspections that severely
limits discretionary audits of private businesses, simplified taxation of small businesses,
and establishment of a High Level Business Council to advance improvements in the
investment climate. The Government has persisted with its intention to sell the power
distribution companies, despite strong resistance from entrenched interest groups.

9. 
Continued Investor Caution. Both domestic and foreign investors have been
alarmed at the existing and potential political uncertainties and risks, both from domestic
political instability and from the unresolved Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. This caution has
been undermining investment performance and eroding incentives for corporate restructur-
ing. As importantly, the Government needs to address the legitimate concerns of private
investors in a timely manner.

10. The Benefits of a Peace Settlement. The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict which
erupted in the period preceding the break-up of the Soviet Union ended in a cease-fire in
May 1994. As yet no peace settlement has been reached. This is a significant constraint to
economic growth (Box 2). Political uncertainties surrounding resolution of the conflict
have depressed investment levels, especially of FDI. The conflict has also enhanced the
role of the military and other national security agencies, thereby compromising the Gov-
ermnent's ability to confront key vested interests. Defense and national security together
absorb 20% of central Government expenditures, and this severely constrains the availabil-
ity of public resources for other needs such as education and health. A peace agreement
would thus have three major economic benefits. It would:
* Allow the opening of Armenia's borders with Azerbaijan and Turkey.
* 
Increase the confidence of investors, especially foreign investors.
* Enable the Government to free up resources for key development needs such as
health and education.
The Bank is working with the concerned South Caucasus countries to help devise ways to
reduce the cost of transport and trade disruptions, as well as help the Governments be
better prepared to secure the potential gains from peace. In the event of a peace agreement
the Bank would present an updated strategy to the Executive Directors.

-5-

Box 2: Gains from Re-Opened Borders

The unresolved conflict over Nagorno Karabakh has closed most of Armenia!s land borders,
cutting off rail links to the east and west. As a result Armenia is heavily dependent on trans-
shipment of goods though Georgia. This has significantly raised its trade costs, given the high
costs of all modes of transport (road, rail and port) in Georgia. A recent report suggests that re-
opening of Armenia's borders with Turkey and Azerbaijan could result in a reduction in transport
costs of 30-50o, a doubling of exports, and an increase of 30-38% in GDP.
When the borders do open, Armenia needs to be ready. Of particular importance will be:
* Improved road, rail, telecommunications and air infrastructure.
* Fostering internationally competitive exporters, for example in agricultural processing
* Greatly reduced corruption and theft at border crossings and on transport routes.
* Better integration of customs and tax rules, procedures and practices among the three
Caucasus countries.

Source: Trade, Transport and Telecommunications 
in the South Caucasus: Current Obstacles To Regional
Cooperation (World Bank 2001)

IV. Paradox of Armenian Economic Growth

11. Little Link between Growth and Poverty Reduction. Why has growth and
reform not lead to stronger poverty reduction outcomes - nor to more positive public
perceptions of reforms? The answer lies in the structure of recent growth, which has had a
narrow base and a limited impact on job generation and, hence, on poverty. Preliminary
results from the forthcoming (FY01) Growth Study suggest that manufacturing and
services growth has been heavily concentrated in Yerevan, and in only a few sub-sectors
(such as diamond polishing). Investment has also favored large enterprises (such as in
power) with a limited potential for new employment. At the same time most traditional
enterprises have continued to downsize, while creation of new private enterprises --
particularly labor-intensive small and medium-sized enterprises -- has remained weak and
unable to absorb excess labor. Overall, most growth has taken place outside the
manufacturing sector -- the very sector where Armenia may have the strongest comparative
advantage, particularly through its educated labor force. Agriculture and construction have
been the main contributors to GDP growth, but even in these sectors real labor incomes
have grown relatively slowly.

12. What Went Wrong? Armenia's transition to a market economy was more
difficult and more prolonged than originally anticipated. In contrast to some of the
transition economies in Central Europe, Armenia has yet to see large-scale entry of new
private enterprises or investment. This is the root cause of Armenia's failure to reduce
poverty. Until new investment and restructuring accelerate, the current growth patterns
will not be sustained despite the successes of the last seven years. The summary indicators
of industrial renewal - such as trends in merchandise exports and private investment -
suggest stagnation. Merchandise exports in 1999 were 10% lower than in 1995, and
amounted to just 13% of GDP. While Armenia has expanded its exports to the EU, North
America, and other new markets, the volumes have not yet compensated for the collapse of
traditional markets in the former Soviet Union countries. The prevailing business
environment has remained hostile to a stable inflow of new investment, including FDI.
For existing enterprises, the perceived riskiness of the business environment has unduly
favored short-term gains from asset sales over restructuring and investment. Even
establishment of new companies, backed by Diaspora investment, has been surprisingly

-6-

weak. Another strongly inhibiting factor is weak managerial skills, resulting from decades
of market isolation, and exacerbated by a decade of border closures.

13. Major Constraints to Faster Growth. Overall, three main factors appear to
reduce the employment impact of existing growth:
* Business environment. Excess interference in business activity by poorly paid
government officials has increased significantly the perceived costs of doing
business as well as made it difficult to attract new entry, including FDI. The fifteen
year monopoly granted in 1998 to Armentel, the telecommunication company
owned by the Hellenic Telecommunications Organization (OTE), has not resulted
in significantly improved service, further reducing the attractiveness of the business
environment.
* Capacity of the private sector. The isolation of the Armenian economy has left a
serious shortage of management skills in the private sector, limiting the economy's
export potential and integration in the world economy.
* Political risks and blockade. Without resolving the regional conflict and remov-
ing the blockade, investment will continue to be constrained by high transport costs
and perceptions of political risk.

V. Continuing Widespread Poverty

14. 
Poverty Profile and Policies to Alleviate Poverty. Poverty in Armenia is
widespread and persistent (Box 1). A number of factors are responsible: (a) high
unemployment (according to the 1998/99 Household Survey, more than 25% of the labor
force), because of very limited job creation; (b) low wages for those jobs that are available;
(c) low productivity, with agriculture -- mostly subsistence -- accounting for a high share
of employment (over 40%). Extreme poverty, however, appears to have declined since the
1996 Household Survey, in part because of improved targeting of social assistance
benefits. Even in the face of severe fiscal constraints the Government has succeeded in
maintaining the poverty-oriented family benefit. In addition to restructuring safety nets,
the Government has been working to improve pension administration and strengthen the
public pension system to make it sustainable. Except during the second half of 2000, the
Government has been paying pensions and family poverty benefit on time and avoiding
accumulation of arrears. Additionally, the Social Insurance Fund managed to clear most of
last year's pension arrears, and with EU Food Security Program assistance has managed to
make regular family poverty benefit payments.

15. Gender Dimension of Poverty. By most measures gender inequality is relatively
low in Armenia. Educational enrollment is higher for girls than for boys at all levels of
education, from primary through secondary and secondary-professional to higher
education. Female life expectancy is over 78 years for women, as against less than 71 for
men. However, there is emerging evidence that the quality of life and opportunities for
women have deteriorated: 64% of the registered unemployed are women; their labor force
participation rate is 55%, as against 77% for men; they bear the burdens of maintaining
families in times of economic hardship and of increased seasonal labor migration; they
have been badly affected by the decline of social services such as reproductive health and
child care. And women's role in public life at senior levels is relatively small, with female
representation in Parliament only 3%.

-7.-

16. 

Poverty and Environment. Rising prices and falling incomes have forced many

people -- especially the poor -- to overuse Armenia's natural resources, continuing a trend

which started in the heavy industry days of the Soviet Union. Since independence a
number of problems have become especially severe: water scarcity, depletion of forests
and fisheries, land degradation, urban pollution and inefficient use of resources such as
drinking water. Improved management of environment and natural resources base is
crucial for long-term development. The Government has begun, in the context of a
recently completed National Environment Action Plan, to address the most serious and
immediate environmental problems, including the degradation of water and other natural
resources and threats to biodiversity.

17. Capacity to Monitor Poverty. Armenia's capacity to monitor poverty remains
weak, mostly because there is no regular household income and expenditure survey, which
would be a vital data source on the economic and social conditions of the population (the
integrated household surveys of 1996 and 1998/99 were financed by donors). For these
reasons, the I-PRSP includes a commitment to establishing a regular program of household
income and expenditure surveys.

VI. The Government Reform Agenda
Facilitating Export-Driven Job Creation in the Private Sector

18. The Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy. The I-PRSP has three main pillars: (1)
sustainable and equitable economic growth, driven by a more dynamic private sector; (2)
public administration reform and an anti-corruption program; and (3) enhanced human
development.
* The I-PRSP commits the Government to improving the business environment
through reduced administrative barriers to investment and new entry, especially of
foreign firms, building effective public-private consultative mechanisms, and
enforcing a level playing field for new and existing companies.
* The Government's strategy also focuses on improved public sector management
and reduced corruption, with the aim of improving the provision of public services
and the conditions for private sector growth. Strengthened public sector manage-
ment will require streamlining the civil service and key regulatory and controlling
agencies, advancing judicial reform, and improving domestic revenue collection.
* The I-PRSP emphasizes rebuilding human and physical capital. This will require
additional financing of school education, basic health and 
infrastructure
maintenance (assuming improved revenue performance, and savings in financing of
lower priority items such as utility subsidies), and improving targeting of social
protection and education expenditures.

19. 
Improving the Business Environment. There is a broad agreement that the next
stage of reforms needs to focus on improvements in the business environment in order to
facilitate investment, new entry and job creation. The Government is committed to
addressing this problem, and specifically to:
* Lower the administrative barriers to investment and new entry mentioned above.
* 
Improve the transparency and technical quality of strategic privatization processes,
with the objective of attracting strategic investors into the largest state-owned
companies.

-8-

* Support financial deepening by advancing policies (such as enforcement of
collateral legislation) that would reduce lending risks and hence costs of borrowing;
continue the policy of consolidating the banking system, by requiring banks to
increase their capitalization.

* Improve the quality of infrastructure, especially in telecommunications, urban
water supply, and road, rail and air transportation; strengthen regulatory capacity to
support privately-owned operators in energy and infrastructure.

* Facilitate a revival of private agriculture through development of land markets,
improved irrigation and availability of rural credit, and promotion of agricultural
practices for sustainable use of energy, water, soil and pasture resources.
* Expand management training and business development services.

20. Anti-Corruption Efforts and Public Administration Reform. The I-PRSP puts
improved public administration and reduced corruption at the center of its strategy.
* 
Independent surveys suggest that corruption is a severe hindrance to sustained
growth and effective management of public services. Armenia appears to suffer
from a relatively low level of state capture (defined as firms influencing the "rules
of the game" in their favor by bribing government officials), but very high
administrative corruption, such as harassment by public officials.
- To reduce corruption's ill-effects Armenia needs to: (i) enhance the transparency,
accountability, and capacity of its public administration; (ii) develop and
implement clear criteria for personnel management decisions in the civil service;
(iii) develop adequate institutional capacity for financial management, including
effective agencies for internal and external audit, the treasury system, and for
public procurement; (iv) advance implementation of the ongoing judicial reforms
program; and (v) encourage a larger role for civil society in policy making and
implementation (see also Box 3). In any event, expanded trade and private sector
ownership should lessen the opportunities for corruption.

Box 3; Governance in ALrSmenia

ArMen;ia, like other FSU countries, found itself in 1991 witht the tk of uilding many new
governance structures and mechanisms. While achievements have been considerable, policy
capacity is unvent and accountability structures undereveloped. There are shortcomingsn b
the supply and the demand for good sector policy.
On the supply side, the capacity to generate good policy Options is limited by the endowment
of institutional stutures and skills Armenia was bequeathed at independence, unsuited to the
nees o a natiostate and a mareoriented economy, and by the predominance of defense and

security concerns.

n the demand side, accountability is constrained by close personal links between political
and business elites, and by the Executves pre-eminence over other branhes of state. The' role of
civil society,N 
and the imedia is still developing. Formal and infotral checks and balances
are pooly developed. This, together with pervasive 'control' activities of government entities,
weakens the Govemmenfs responsiveness to public and busiinesses concerns. 0 The civil service
needs to become ;-more professional and meritocratic, and lesst influenced by powerful interest

groups.

Surce iat 

an Governance Review (World Bank. 2000)

-9-

* Public administration reform will need to include a particular focus on improved
fiscal management given Annenia's low level of domestic revenues. A central
instrument is the Medium-Terrn Expenditure Program (MTEP), which will be
updated and mainstreamed, based on the initial draft prepared in late 1999. The full
MTEP will be built on: a) realistic macro-economic projections; b) strategic
prioritization of public spending; c) broad participation of respective agencies, and
d) performance evaluation, enhanced accountability and control over public
expenditures. Further development of the PRSP and the MTEP will need to be
coordinated to ensure consistency between the Government's poverty reduction and
expenditure management efforts. In connection with the MTEP, the Government is
beginning to strengthen the budget execution process, including improving budget
classification, expanding budget coverage of public expenditures, and streamlining
Treasury functions.

21. Enhanced Human Development. Much remains to be achieved in the social
sectors, particularly health and education. Much also remains to be done in the area of
social protection, so as to provide appropriate assistance, both in cash and kind to the most
vulnerable groups, including those living in absolute poverty, children and the elderly.
* Education. Enrollment rates in general education remain fairly high, indicating
still good access to public education. Nonetheless there are some indications that
enrollment rates may have started deteriorating, especially for the very poor. In
addition, the quality of education has substantially deteriorated. Public education
suffers: (a) severe government under-funding (2.1% of GDP, less than half the
lower middle-income country average), which has caused deterioration in facilities,
lack of modem teaching aids, and low (and often delayed) teacher pay; (b) low
notional pupil-teacher ratios, but in practice class sizes close to the international
average; (c) rigid curricula and teaching methodology; and (d) inefficient and
distorting central financial management control.
*Health Care. Health care indicators are mixed, but life expectancy for both
women and men appears to be increasing, despite a higher incidence of both
communicable and non-communicable disease. However, both infant and under
five mortality rates are high at 30 and 25 per 1000 respectively, and there has been
no improvement during the last few years. Immunization rates are fairly good, but
only 7% of immunization costs are currently covered by the Government,
indicating high vulnerability to fluctuations in donor financing. The prevalence of
tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS is increasing rapidly - while data on the incidence of
HIV/AIDS is very partial, the trend is nonetheless clear and alarming. The health
system suffers from: (a) severe government under-funding (less than 1.4% of GDP,
as against a lower middle-income country average of 3.3% of GNP); (b)
overcapacity of the infrastructure, leading to wasteful resources use, especially in
hospitals; (c) relatively under-developed primary health care; and (d) increasing
out-of-pocket costs and worsening quality of services.

* Health Insurance. The Ministry of Health is considering introduction of
mandatory health insurance, which the Bank would caution against, as analysis
suggests that it would not improve health sector financing, but would increase labor
costs and further distort labor markets. The Bank believes that a more effective
course of action would be to focus on providing equal access to essential, cost-
effective preventive and primary health care services, while improving health
facilities.

-10-

Social Protection. In the short term further efforts to reduce poverty need to focus
on measures to improve social programs' administration, on targeting of poverty
benefits, and on the elimination of remaining badly targeted implicit subsidies in
public service and utility provision. The resources released through these two
measures could be allocated to increase the level of poverty benefits and pensions,
as well as to the development of social care services at the local level. The
Government also needs to avoid broad new social programs, which may be
unaffordable, especially in the area of unemployment support. Another barrier to
efficient prioritization of social assistance programs is the lack of a reliable census
which would show where the greatest needs are. This is a particularly important
issue given the large-scale emigration. A new census, currently planned for
autumn of 2001, is a major short tern priority.

22. 
Priority Setting. While the I-PRSP focuses on the major challenges facing
Armenia, the Government will need, in the full PRSP, to focus more on how budget
priorities will be set. The I-PRSP does not discuss what the potential sources are for the
planned increases in spending on priority items such as primary health, general education,
old age pensions, and critical infrastructure maintenance. Only part of this increase could
derive from improved revenue collection, and some further cuts in low priority sectors will
be necessary, with savings reallocated to priority sectors. An additional reduction in
subsidies in energy and infrastructure is especially important. The authorities also need to
undertake a critical evaluation of the current high level of military expenditures. The
World Bank and the Government plan to work together in preparing the Public
Expenditure Review.

23. Labor Market Issues. The authorities need to implement decisive steps to change
labor legislation as an important part of the overall efforts to improve the business
environment. Reform of labor market institutions and policy would require: (i) replace-
ment of the poorly targeted unemployment insurance with more modest, but more
equitable, unemployment assistance, thereby enabling the Government to lower payroll
taxation; and (ii) rationalization of employment services, with a focus on job search and
counseling services to the unemployed with some limited, demand driven, re-training
programs.

24. Core Labor Standards. Armenia has a good record on core labor standards,
including: (i) elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labor; (ii) effective abolition
of formal use of child labor; (iii) equal opportunity and non-discrimination in employment;
and (iv) freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining. Laws regulating
trade unions and collective bargaining have substantially met the core labor standard goals,
and the Confederation of Trade Unions of Armenia has negotiated agreements on job
security, salaries, pensions, and social assistance. Binding contracts between workers
(with representation from grass-roots union organizations) and employers are common in
large enterprises, but have not yet taken firm root in smaller enterprises.

VII. Growth and Financing Prospects

25. Growth Prospects. The Bank shares the view of the I-PRSP that Armenia could
grow by about 6% a year as the reform program deepens and initiatives to expand regional
cooperation develop. In the short term, these high levels of GDP growth are expected to
result primarily from higher capacity utilization. Over the medium term, as the potential
for increased capacity utilization is gradually exhausted, investment in new capacity could

-11-

play an increasing role in generating growth. This will require increased private sector
confidence, both domestic and foreign, and a financial sector that plays a more effective
role in channeling saving into investment. Thus, the gross investment rate, estimated at
17% in 1998, is targeted to rise to about 18.3% by 2003. The I-PRSP also includes an
optimistic scenario of GDP growth accelerating steadily to 9.0% a year in 2003; this
scenario assumes progress towards a peace settlement in Nagorno-Karabakh, greater
foreign investment and tourism, and reduced emigration. If this scenario is realized, the
Bank would provide the Executive Directors with an updated strategy.

26. 
Export-Led Growth. Growth is expected to be led by export demand from both
traditional markets, and increasingly also from non-traditional markets, such as the Middle
East and Western Europe. So far, export trends have been quite volatile, reflecting both
the specific nature of some of Armenia's main export products (e.g. jewelry and processed
diamonds), weak capabilities of the local private sector, as well as the volatility of several
of Armenia's main export markets. Export growth of about 10% a year (in volume terms)
is projected throughout the 2001-05 period, assuming continued improvements in both the
business environment and relations with Armenia's neighbors. Infrastructure investments
designed to rehabilitate Armenia's transport and communications with neighboring
countries will significantly facilitate growth in external trade and the development of the
country's transit potential. Armnenia's highly-educated and entrepreneurial labor force will,
despite recent erosion in education standards, remain a source of potential comparative
advantage. Nonetheless, export-growth will be significantly constrained as long as
Armenia's main export route remains costly and unreliable (see paragraph 10 above).

27. Macroeconomic Policy and External Financing. Currently, trends in merchan-
dise export represent the weakest element of Armenia's macroeconomic performance, and
a major source of macroeconomic vulnerability. Armenia's trade deficit is large and
amounted to 29% of GDP in 1999. While Armenia continues to benefit from the
considerable inflow of remittances and private transfers (7-8% of GDP a year) and official
transfers (on average 6% of GDP a year in 1998-2000), it still has considerable residual
requirements for external financing. The current account deficit after official transfers is
projected to average 12% of GDP over the next three years. A residual financing gap of
about US$210 million is estimated for 2001-03. As indicated in paragraph 2, Armenia has
over the last five years received generous external assistance, and about US$240 million
(equivalent to about 11% of GDP) is projected for 2001 -- about US$75 per capita (based
on a population estimate of 3.1 million).

28. External Debt and Debt-Servicing Capacity. Armenia's public external debt
stood at US$862 million, or 45% of GDP, at the end of 2000. The debt's relatively large
grant element (36%) reflects the large share of highly concessional IDA credits, and the
small share of non-concessional commercial debt. Less than one fourth of total debt carries
variable interest rates. This composition of debt protects Armenia reasonably well against
higher international interest rates, or significant shifts in value of the major international
currencies. Although the current overall debt burden is modest in terms of the size of the
economy, it is high relative to expected export earnings. In terms of net present value,
external debt was estimated at end-1999 at 153% of export of goods and services and at
167% of fiscal revenues. The high debt-to-export ratio represents a constraint for
improvements in Armenia's creditworthiness.

29. Debt Trends. Debt ratios improved in 2000, after a 15% expansion in exports in
the course of the second part of the year. The medium-term scenario envisions further

gradual improvements in the debt profile over the next several years, based on a stronger
export performance and 
a

Chart 2: Net Present Value of Debt
(Downside Risk Projections)
~~~~~250% 

-^-----

^- 

-- 

-

.. 

continued moratorium on non- 

concessional borrowing. 

In 

addition, 
the authorities have
been negotiating a restructuring 
of 
Armenia's 
large 
non- 
concessional debts with several 

.. 

-12-

200%
150%

100% 41
50% 

creditors (Russia, Turkmenistan, 
and EU), which could result in 
further improvement of the debt 
profile. Overall Armenia's debt 
should remain manageable as
export performance continues to improve, but the Bank does not envisage that Armenia
will become creditworthy for IBRD lending during the CAS period.

2001 02 
03 04 
05 
06 07 
Source: IMF and World Bank projections

ren 

08 

09 

10

_

e

30. Downside Risk. The baseline macroeconomic scenario assumes that continued
prudent macroeconomic policies and a more market-friendly investment environment will
elicit a strong private sector response. However, a less favorable external environment
and/or a loss of reform momentum, leading to weaker-than-expected foreign and domestic
investment, poses serious downside risks (Table 2). Under a downside risk scenario,
export growth is assumed to be about a 1/3 lower and GDP growth 2 percentage points
lower than in the base case. Both the current account deficit and financing gaps are much
higher and lead to a more rapid build-up of external debt. The debt profile deteriorates
considerably and debt ratios
2: Downside Risk Scenario
exceed thresholds Of sustain- ::;:: 7o,::y;;r.\;:
ability in about 2007 (Chart 1). GP0dw? Ues (on % 
By 2010 the net present value of 
;a 
the debt reaches around 180% Nind GDP 
of exports and 220% of fiscal Exports of goods and,se 
res i18W 
revenues. This 
underlines 

lmports of goods and services 

exceedthresholds of 

sustain-.Table 

0 
6.5 

20 
4 

7.8 
2.5 

03 
.

1 71 

10.8 

7.70 0 

2.3 

9; 

7. 

D 

20

3.0

6.1

6.1
5.9

ability problems, especially the 

Armenia's debt service sustain- As %f GDP
r 
vulnerability to lower non-debt Curr;n aon 

t baIancet extransfers 

b 

financing flows, such as FDI 

Ct investtncnt 

..18.8 
-14.1 
6.7 

6 .7 

-16.8 

12.3 

1 

-148 
-10. 

05 4.8 

49.
-11.0

--

4.5

and grant support. The Bank Debt indicat ors

will be pressing the need for Total debt outst'ing&*ibursed(US$m) 987.6 
% o 
rs of god an w 

productive investment and grant 

continued substantial levels of 

f gtoodsetas 
serv 

4.3e 

iNP 

ices 

NPV!flscalrevenue 

assistance at a major investor 
s 
conference in May in New York TD&fia 
(see paragraph 42), and at a 
Consultative Group Meeting 

1094.3 1170.0 1277.8

48.9b 

48,8 

0.2

132.7 
16A 
178I.7 165.0 
15.0 
12.4 
23.5 

1. 
128 
12.8 
18.3 

127.9
164.1

147

20.1

0 
1 .9 
a includes government and government guaranteed medium and long-term debt.

Consultative Group Meeting b. Exports are three year moving average centered on the preceding year.

c. Central government revenue excluding grants.

planned for Paris in July (see Source: IMF and World Bank Staff Estimates

paragraph 57).

VIII. CAS Consultations

31. Consultations. Both the I-PRSP and the CAS have been discussed with a wide
range of stakeholders in Armenia. The Bank's own discussions included focus groups

-13-

comprising members of civil society throughout Armenia, including NGOs, the foreign
and domestic private sector, development partners, and trade unions. The Sociology
Department of Yerevan State University and an NGO, Armenian Democratic Forum,
helped organize meetings in seventeen urban and rural locations. Every group was
enthusiastic about the chance to express their views, with some groups even deciding to
keep meeting on a regular basis. NGOs, the private sector and other representatives of
civil society were also active participants at two recent meetings in Yerevan -- the
discussion of the Institutional and Governance Review, and the Consultative Group
Meeting (Box 4). There were a number of recurring themes at each of these discussions.

Box 4. The October 2000 Consultative Group Meeting In Yerevan

A Consultative Group Meeting was held in Yerevan in October, 2000. At the Meeting,
participants emphasized the need for: (a) continued macro stability, (b) improved environment for
private investment, domestic and foreign, and (c) measures to ensure that the vulnerable sections of
the population are adequately protected. The Meeting also discussed the importance of broad par-
ticipation in the formulation of the PRSP. Three themes were emphasized:
* Business Environment, specifically the need to: (i) deregulate and remove administrative
barriers to investment; (ii) strengthen investment promotion; (iii) improve banking supervision
and regulation; (iv) advance development of the capital markets; (v) privatize the remaining
large state-owned enterprises, including in energy.
* Government Revenues, particularly a broadened and increased level of revenue collection, as a
follow up to recent reforms in tax and custom administration, including tax evasion measures,
particularly aimed at the 'shadow" economy.
* Governance, including: (i) institutional reform; (ii) design and implementation of an effective
anti-corruption program; and (iii) consolidating the democratic process. More resolute action
was needed to improve the "rule of law" and anti-corruption activities, and to ensure well
targeted public services, especially health, education and social protection.

Source: Report o the Executive Directors on the Consultative Group Meeting (SecM2000-733. Dewemer20 2000)

32. 
Job Creation. Faster private employment generation was consistently seen as
critical to sustained poverty reduction. Participants pointed to a number of pressing issues:

* Small and medium businesses -- the most likely source of productive new jobs --

are hampered by increasingly out-of-date skills and training, unpredictable and
burdensome enforcement of regulations, and especially what was seen as
unwarranted harassment by tax officials. Many small business owners said that
small enterprises are hampered by lack of market knowledge and market access,
with even simple information such as on prevailing market prices hard to obtain.
* Distortions in the banking system were mentioned, with the private sector insisting
that there was strong demand for loans, which was tempered by a narrow definition
of allowable collateral, and notional interest rates being inflated by demands for
bribes. High interest rates, and lack of credit and associated collateral mechanisms,
were mentioned at grass-roots meetings.

33. 
Poor Governance and the Public Sector. Corruption and theft of public
resources were also mentioned repeatedly. In the face of these problems most participants
sought greater local control over Government funds and over decision-making. Many
focus groups wanted more directly-elected local officials who could be held accountable

-14-

for administration of public monies. But they also acknowledged that low pay among
public officials made eliminating corruption hard to achieve.

34. Deteriorating Human Capital. The decline in social services was a major con-
cern, affecting people's health, the education of their children and their ability to live with
dignity. Many participants perceived there to have been a steady decline both in the qual-
ity of education and health services, and in their availability. A deterioration in social
protection was also repeatedly mentioned. While participants saw inadequate funding of
social services as part of the cause of this malaise, a much larger problem was poor
administration and lack of implementation of reforms.

35. 
Follow-Up. In conjunction with Government and other stakeholders the Bank will
hold follow-up meetings, focusing in particular on the development priorities of the poor,
and developing a close interaction with the PRSP process.

IX. World Bank Assistance Strategy

36. The Last CAS. The objectives of the Bank's assistance strategy, as defined in the
last (FY98) CAS, were to:
-
"Foster the rapid development of the private sector by promoting further structural
reforms, strengthening the financial system and the legal and regulatory framework,
and alleviating key infrastructure bottlenecks in energy, transport and water".
* "Support social sustainability and the alleviation of poverty through the strength-
ening of the social safety net, and through improvements in the quality of, and
access to, basic health and education services".

37. 
Progress in Implementing the Last CAS. The Bank has successfully supported
progress towards most of these goals, especially investments and reforms to improve
energy, transport, irrigation and water supply services, strengthening of the judicial and
financial systems, rationalization and targeting of social benefits, and improvements in
educational quality and access. Poverty remains high, but most of the other progress
indicators in the last Country Program Matrix were met, especially in the areas of
macroeconomic reform, financial rehabilitation of the power sector, restructuring of social
protection, and introduction of new financial mechanisms in general education - indeed the
macroeconomic benchmarks were over-achieved. The area where the Bank has been least
successful is in promoting broad-based private sector development. In addition to
somewhat uneven implementation of structural reforms, dynamic private sector growth has
been more hampered by Armenia's isolation and political instability than the Bank had
anticipated. In addition, it was more difficult than expected to address the institutional,
bureaucratic, and legal obstacles to private sector investment (as recently detailed in a
Foreign Investment Advisory Service report). In the health sector the Bank was, in
retrospect, too optimistic that health financing reform would catalyze sectoral
rationalization and downsizing. In particular the Bank did not anticipate the difficulties the
Government had in reducing over-capacity, and in realistic budgeting in the face of
continuing revenue shortfalls. Recently, however, the momentum of health sector reform
has picked up considerably (see paragraph 6 above).

38. The CAS Strategy. The Bank's strategy supports the I-PRSP approach, and
deepens elements of the previous CAS, including a more explicit emphasis on private
sector development as a pre-requisite for poverty reduction, as well as on governance and

-15-

social sustainability. The I-PRSP focuses on improving policy fundamentals to create a
better environment for private sector growth, streamlined management of public goods,
and an increased stock of human capital. This would facilitate sustainable job creation, a
larger tax base, and better government services, particularly in the social sectors. This
should in turn improve incomes and quality of life, and reduce poverty. Notably, the I-

PRSP progresses significantly beyond the Government's -- and the Bank's -- previous

strategy, by emphasizing more the institutional barriers to private sector development. The
Bank particularly welcomes the I-PRSP's focus on consultation and monitoring, ensuring
that new policies are developed and assessed by a broad group of stakeholders, using well-
designed and measurable indicators. The Bank's support for the I-PRSP would focus on
three fundamental policy issues identified above: creating jobs through private sector
development; improving governance and public sector services; and rebuilding human
capital. While the span of the planned assistance is relatively broad, the Bank believes it is
manageable as: (i) it is in areas where the Bank already has substantial knowledge and
involvement; (ii) the scope and size of the individual operations is relatively modest, and in
most cases complements support from other donors; and (iii) these are areas where the
Bank already has substantial experience of working with the Government and civil society,
and where the Bank has a good understanding of the institutional capacity.

A. Creating Jobs through Private Sector Development

39. 
PRSP Focus. The I-PRSP emphasizes the vital need for job creation through
further improvement of the trade regime, further downsizing of the state enterprise sector,
more realistic pricing of government services, flexible labor markets, modernization of the
legal and bankruptcy framework, improved infrastructure maintenance, and carefully
managed promotion of private sector investment. The Bank intends to continue supporting
these reform efforts through a mix of lending and non-lending services.

40. 
Improving the Entrepreneurial Climate. The Bank's strategy will build on
lessons from previous adjustment credits, which supported, inter alia, privatization,
enterprise and banking restructuring, capital market development and property rights. The
Bank will also build on the existing support for enterprise development, which has helped
to strengthen commercial banks, the capital market, and enterprises' investment and market
development capacities, and has financed a credit line for enterprise fixed investment and
working capital. Effective implementation of the Fourth Structural Adjustment Credit
(being presented to the Board along with this CAS) should promote improvements in the
business climate and reduced corruption through: support for deregulation (liberalization
of licensing, registration, inspection, and reporting requirements); reforms of the legal and
regulatory framework, and of tax and customs administration; improvements to land
markets; and strengthening of institutions and mechanisms that support strategic
privatization and bankruptcy. The Government plans to establish a mechanism for regular
monitoring of the costs of doing business, and of major bottlenecks for investments.
Lessons from the Bank's draft Growth Study (FYO1) have already been factored into the
design of SAC IV. To continue to support Armenia's structural reform program the Bank
is processing SAC V for FY03 Board presentation (or late FY02 if performance warrants).
The Credit would support further core reforms in the business environment and social
sectors. In addition, a Labor Market Study (FY03) would advise the Government on
removing impediments to labor market flexibility. 
IFC has made only one equity
investment to date (Hotel Armenia), and no loans, reflecting in large part a scarcity of
suitable investment opportunities. Throughout the CAS period, IFC will continue to seek

-16-

investments possibilities, and to offer the advice of the Foreign Investment Advisory
Services to further improve the business environment.

41. 
Promotion of the Private Sector. The forthcoming Growth Study (FY01) is
expected to develop a better understanding of the constraints to private investment in
promoting balanced and equitable growth, including the expected role of the rural
economy. In addition to ongoing support for infrastructure maintenance and enterprise
development, the proposed Private Sector Development LIL (FY02) builds on existing
analytical and project work, and would, together with SAC IV, support improvements in
the policy and business environment. The project should also help strengthen local
managerial capabilities through expanding business services to private SMEs and second-
ment abroad of some of the best private sector managers. This LIL could be followed by a
fuirther Private Sector Development Credit (FY04), to help improve business linkages.
The Bank is working with private business, as well as other donors and the Government,
on a strategy and action plan for the infornation technology and software industry. The
strong expansion of this industry over the last two years shows the potential for much
broader growth in various high-skill sectors. The Bank also intends to co-sponsor a
combined South Caucasus Trade Facilitation Workshop for Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia later in 2001.

42. Direct Support for Foreign Investment. For foreign private investors, Armenia
remains a high-risk country. Economic and political uncertainties are great, and the legal
aspects of doing business remain largely untested. IFC opened an office in Armenia in
February 1999, and is seeking private investment opportunities in this difficult market.
Three initiatives are under way. Along with a group of American-Armenian investors, IFC
is investing in the modernization of a hotel in downtown Yerevan. IFC is also developing
a Risk Capital Fund, which will use innovative financial instruments (quasi-equity/equity)
to target small and medium-size enterprises. Non-bank financial intermediaries may offer
the best means by which to finance SMEs because Armenia's banks are weak and
undercapitalized, making financing through credit lines difficult. Also with the aim of
strengthening the SME sector, IFC is in the process of identifying a foreign technical
partner to establish Armnenia's first leasing company. Complementing its financing
activities, IFC has, under the newly established Private Enterprise Partnership, initiated a
Technical Assistance program designed to improve corporate governance practices and the
legal and regulatory environment for business development by working directly with
government officials and company managers, directors, and shareholders. In addition, a
new Technical Assistance Facility may be established in conjunction with the Risk Capital
Fund to support the Fund's investrnent initiatives. IFC is also working to encourage
foreign investment in Armenia by sponsoring a major international investors' conference,
with support from the World Bank, the U.S. Trade and Development Agency and the
Armenian Government. The conference is planned for New York in May, 2001 and will
bring together entrepreneurs developing a range of private sector projects, and leading
investors from around the world with an expressed interest in Armenia.

43. Guarantee and Advisory Support for Foreign Investment. The World Bank
Group is also catalyzing foreign investment through MIGA and FIAS. MIGA recently
provided a guarantee for an investment in the International Commercial Black Sea Bank in
Armenia. FIAS has prepared a detailed and analysis of the barriers to investment in
Armenia. The recommendations of this report were highlighted and strongly endorsed at
the recent Consultative Group in Yerevan. A joint FIAS/MIGA initiative has been
providing short-term assistance to the Armenian Development Agency (ADA) in

-17-

preparation for the New York Investors Conference, and MIGA has been assessing the
possibilities for mounting a long-term technical assistance program to build ADA's
capacity to promote Armenia as a location for foreign investment. MIGA is currently
working with Bank Group to encourage the Armenian Government to give greater priority
to the work of ADA, and with donor agencies to develop a partnership-based funding
approach to ADA's work program.

B. Improving Governance and Public Sector Services

44. 
PRSP Focus. The I-PRSP emphasizes the need for restructuring public admini-
stration, further anti-corruption initiatives, more cost-effective administration of urban and
rural public services where outright private ownership is not foreseen, and sustainable
management of natural resources. The Bank proposes to continue to provide support in all
these key areas.

45. Governance. The Bank plans to deepen its broad focus on governance and corrup-
tion issues. One central element will be a Public Expenditure Review (FY02), that will
cover not only institutional reforms, but also the development priorities for available
expenditures, given the weak revenue base and high level of defense expenditures. The
Bank's work on institutional and govemance issues, widely discussed at a workshop in
Yerevan in October 2000, is to be followed up with a Public Sector Reform Credit
(FY03), which will also build on the ongoing Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (FY02), and could include further technical assistance for structural reform.
The Public Sector Reform Credit would support strengthening of public administration and
executive decision-making, rightsizing and modernizing the civil service and making it
more accountable, improving public expenditure management and procurement
procedures, reforning intergovernmental finance, and strengthening the internal and
external audit functions. Periodic surveys of households and firms will be carried out to
benchmark and assess the progress of public sector reforms, especially in respect of
delivery of public services. Recently-approved Institutional Development Fund grants
aim to improve policy capacity and the quality of national accounts statistics, and
strengthen the capacity to plan, prioritize and implement the PRSP. Grant support is also
envisaged from the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) to support
the Government's request to create a single public services regulatory body in Armenia to
regulate monopoly aspects of energy (electricity, natural gas and network-based heating),
telecommunications, and water and sanitation services, and to improve access to
communications. The regulatory body is to be created by enlarging the role of the Energy
Regulatory Commission to also cover other sectors which have significant natural
monopoly elements. Through the recently approved Judicial Reform Project (FY01) the
Bank is supporting a redesigned court administration and case management system,
improved court infrastructure, strengthened judicial training and enforcement of court
decisions, a comprehensive legal information database, and improved judicial public
relations capacity.

46. Utilities. The Bank proposes to continue to support the I-PRSP's emphasis on
reforming the public sector's regulatory capacity of key services, such as energy, water,
sanitation, and telecommunications -
including management contracts with private
operators.
Water and Sanitation. The Bank's focus is improving water service at lower cost
(but with increased cost recovery) to households -- especially the poorest
households. This is expected to bring significant health benefits, and reduce

-18-

responsibility of government for service provision, and strengthening its regulatory
capacity. The Bank's existing municipal development credit is helping improve the
reliability, quality and cost-effectiveness of water service by shifting management
of Yerevan's water company to an international private operator, and the Bank will
help introduce similar management contracts in other cities across Armenia under
the planned Municipal Water and Sanitation Sector Credit (FY02).
* Power. Electricity is the dominant source of energy for the economy. Through
adjustment and investment operations, the Bank has been supporting the technical
and financial rehabilitation of the power sector, its restructuring into a transparent,
independently regulated, market-based system, and the sale of shares in the
electricity distribution companies to strategic investors. Power privatization would
eliminate a quasi-fiscal burden of about 2% of GDP, improve the efficiency and
reliability of power supply, and secure private financing for the substantial
investments needed over the next ten years. An IDA partial risk guarantee is under
consideration to support privatization of the power distribution companies, and
further risk guarantees might be considered. The Bank has provided investment
support for electricity transmission and distribution through a credit which
constitutes the first installment of up to $53 million available over the next five
years under the Power Sector Restructuring and Development Program. SAC V
(FY03) could include a component for Energy Sector Adjustment, notably financial
rehabilitation and debt restructuring to facilitate the post-privatized electricity
market, and IFC could potentially co-finance further energy investments. The EU
and USAID are assisting Armenia develop an investment strategy to facilitate the
safe and early closure of the nuclear power plant at Medzamor, and the Bank would
support this through complementary lending (for example support for phasing out
electric heating through the proposed Heating Credit).
* Heating. The I-PRSP emphasizes the importance of improving the availability,
and reducing the cost and the environmental impact of heating. Household heating
is expensive (often second only to food in the household budgets of the poor).
Existing state-supported district heat suffers from non-payment of the order of $10-
12 million a year, but this "subsidy" benefits only about 10% of the population, not
always the poorest. Other urban consumers either use relatively costly electricity,
or use wood (causing an alarming pace of deforestation) in poorly ventilated apart-
ments (causing indoor pollution resulting in respiratory ailments). Gas supply to
apartment buildings is being slowly restored, and is likely to be the main energy
source for home heating. Given the economies of scale and communal nature of
heating services in high population density urban areas, the Urban Heating
Strategy (FY02) is intended to propose mechanisms to create associations to take
"ownership" of building-level heating services, thus contributing to community
driven development. Support for implementation of the Strategy is possible
through an Urban Heat Credit (FY04). Given that Armenia has substantial
geothermal reserves, the Urban Heat Strategy will also examine this resource's
potential, as a cost-effective alternative to traditional fossil fuels.

47. Rural Services. The 2000 drought has had a devastating impact in some parts of
Armenia, with rainfed wheat and potato production down by 60-70% in the affected areas,
and the Bank is supplementing and restructuring the ongoing Dam Safety Credit (FY99) to
provide field preparation and tubewell rehabilitation for the spring planting. More broadly,
the Bank is supporting the Government's rural reform program, which promotes further
cost recovery in irrigation, strengthens land property rights and land markets by

-19-

accelerating titling of individual plots, enforcing collateral legislation, and promoting small
credit associations. The Bank has helped to strengthen the operation of the irrigation
system and to reduce leakage, and further support is envisaged in the proposed Irrigation

Development Credit (FY03). The Bank would -- in close collaboration with the EU --

include support for decompression of tariffs and the development of water users
associations. This would help meet the new cost-recovery targets to be defined in the
forthcoming Medium-Term Expenditure Program. The Bank has also been helping raise
small farmers' productivity through finance for better support services, easier title
registration, and better access to credit (credit access is also being improved for medium-
scale agro-businesses).

48. 
Environment and Natural Resource Management. The Bank's planned Natural Re-
source Management and Poverty Alleviation CreditlGEF Grant (FY02) would help reduce
rural poverty and natural resource degradation by supporting: participatory watershed
management and community development, environmentally sustainable farming activities,
and improved forest and protected area management. Through direct community involve-
ment the project will integrate biodiversity conservation into sustainable natural resources
management. The Urban Heat Credit (FY04) would also help reduce consumption of
polluting and scarce fuels, specifically if zero-polluting geothermal resources could sub-
stitute for fossil fuels. The Bank is also completing work on an Integrated Water
Resources Management Plan (FYO1) based on sustainable and rational utilization,
protection, conservation and management of water resources. It will be important to
monitor the cross-sectoral impact of reforms, including the inter-relationship between
energy sector reforms and trends in fuel-wood consumption (and thus deforestation and
indoor pollution). Also important will be continued support for improved environmental
policy, institutional strengthening, building public-private partnership for environmental
protection and compliance with international commitments. The Bank will consider future
assistance to help the Government introduce new incentive structures and regulatory and
financial instruments for environmental management, and may also support efforts to
mainstream the environment and incorporate global environmental concerns in transport,
agriculture, and energy sectors by promoting development of non-traditional energy
sources.

C. Rebuilding Human Capital

49. 
PRSP Focus. The I-PRSP stresses that it is critical to expand budget allocations to
the social sectors, and to push forward with a comprehensive rationalization of existing
facilities, better training and re-training, more focus on results and on using output
indicators, and greater focus on preventative health, housing conditions, indoor pollution
and water and sanitation. The Bank's support will focus on:
* Education. The Bank has been supporting more prioritized, efficient and stable
financing for general primary and secondary education, including increased
budgetary allocations for general education, sustainable textbook supply, and a
greater community involvement in schools. Teaching quality is being addressed
through improvements in the curriculum, teacher assessment and examination, and
better access to modern technologies, including information technologies and more
relevant textbooks. School budgets are to be made more transparent and more
poverty-focused, with budgets and other relevant documents being made public.
The Government is tackling lack of access of the poor to schooling through free
textbook loans and other targeted initiatives. The Government still faces major

-20-

challenges in combining underutilized schools, and addressing the poor quality of
education, and the proposed Second Education Credit (FY04) would likely focus
on these continuing challenges.
* Health. The Bank has been supporting better access to health services, particularly
for poorer groups and regions, reallocation of the health budget towards primary
health care, concentration of funding on core services, improved financing of the
health system, and health service rationalization, including closing excess capacity.
The Bank will continue to support the Government in developing appropriate
strategies and mechanisms for achieving the above-mentioned goals, as well as
follow-on project funding. The Bank is also helping the Government develop a
comprehensive HIV/AIDS strategy, that could be supported under the possible
Health/Social Protection Credit (FY04), which would also deepen the health and
social protection reforms being implemented in the first health sector credit.
* Social Protection and Labor Markets. Social protection continues to be a key
concern. Social insurance is crucial to protect the elderly against extreme poverty.
A Social Protection Study (FY02) would contribute to the design and implementa-
tion of fiscally sustainable public pensions reform. In the area of social safety nets
the Bank expects to continue to support better targeting and administration of the
family poverty benefit, since it is one of the key poverty coping/alleviation instru-
ments. The main objective in the medium term is to rationalize social insurance.
The Bank will also help develop Armenia's legal framework, institutions and
policies for social protection, and especially community-based social assistance and
care services for the most vulnerable. In the area of employment the Bank's
support for flexible and broader labor markets is expected through policy reforms
in labor legislation and institutions, and modest, affordable public protection for
unemployment. Support in some of these areas is possible through the
Health/Social Protection Credit (FY04), as well as future adjustment program
supported by SAC V (FY03).
G Gender Issues. Women's earnings are a crucial component of household income,
and the implications for economic and social development will be addressed in the
Social Protection and Labor Market Studies (FY02 and FY03), and in the design
of the Household Survey. The Bank's second Social Investment Fund Credit
(FY00) has a particular focus on gender issues, including support for: evaluation of
the project's impact on women, as well as mitigatory steps where needed;
strengthening the active participation of women in development activities; and
collection of gender disaggregated data for evaluation and future project purposes.
* Community-Driven Development. Armenia pioneered social investment funds in
ECA, though the internal and external shocks have made it more difficult to reap
large-scale benefits from this work to date. The Bank will continue to support
appropriate scaling-up of community-driven development by expanding commu-
nity access to information on Bank-assisted projects -- for example the planned
Natural Resource Management and Poverty Reduction Credit/Grant (FY02) --
and promoting communities' systematic involvement in design, implementation and
monitoring of watershed management. The Urban Heating Credit (FY04) could,
as mentioned above, focus on community ownership of heating services. The
Bank's community-driven development approach -- which the Bank is working
with Armenian stakeholders to develop -- will have important implications for the
ongoing second Social Investment Fund Credit, education and health sector
reforms, natural resource management, and planned anti-corruption programs.

-21-

X. The World Bank's Business Strategy

50. World Bank Portfolio. Following the closure of three credits in the first three
quarters of FY01, the World Bank's portfolio now consists of thirteen credits totaling $261
million. Recent portfolio performance has been good (see Attachment 1 and Annex 8),
although there have been some systemic problems, especially procurement delays,
counterpart funding arrears, and delays in parliamentary approval of grants.
* Counterpart funds are sometimes insufficient - four projects are currently rated
unsatisfactory for counterpart funding.

* Parliamentary ratification for PHRD/IDF/GEF Grants has often been slow, and at
one point in FY00 thirteen Grants totaling almost $5 million were pending.
* Procurement is often delayed by problems with tender evaluation, and by delays in
award of contracts and handling of procurement complaints.
Following an intensive portfolio review in early 2000 the Government has been addressing
these issues. Counterpart backlogs are being cleared, a comprehensive Law on
International Treaties has streamlined grant ratification, and procurement delays are now
significantly less than they were in FY00. To improve responsiveness and day-to-day
oversight of the portfolio, the Bank has devolved authority for portfolio management to
Yerevan, and is working to streamline and improve project audits. In addition, the Bank
intends to place in Tbilisi an International Financial Management Specialist covering the
three Caucasus countries.

51. 
IDA Base Case Assistance Program. Annenia is currently in the Base Case,
which assumes continued good policy reform performance. Lending is envisaged to be
US$150 million (see Table 3), which is consistent with the IDA Lending Allocation. The
Base Case includes three projects a year (four in FY04) -- including SAC V in FY03.
There are few other donors providing development assistance, so the lending program
covers a relatively wide spectrum (other donors are mostly involved in technical assistance

Table 3: Proposed Lending Scenarios

(US$ million)

FY01 
Project 

Judicial 

Reform* 
SAC IV 

Base Case
FY02 
FY03 
Sm 
Project 
Sm 
prSject 
11.4 Nat Resource 10.0 SACV 
(1l),GF) 

-

FY04 
FY02-04
Sm Project 
Sm No. Sm
40.0 Private Sector 10.0
Develop't 3_

50.0 Municipal 

20.0 lihigation 

20.0 Health/Social I5.0

Watert 
I 
Protection*
Priv. Sec. Dev2' 5.0 Public Sec. Ref. 10,0 Educaion 2' 10.0

Urban Heat 10.0

45.0 1 150.0

Total Base 

61.4 

35.0 

70.0 

Low Case

FY01 

FY02 

FY03 

FY04 

FYO2-04

Project 
Judicial 

Reform* 

Sm 
Project 
$Sm Project Sm Project 
Sm No. Sm
11.4 Nat Resource 110.0 Municipal 
15.0 Health/Social 15.0

(IA/GEF) 

ll Watert

Protection"

=_____ Public Sec. Ref. 10.0 Irrigaiion 

20.0 Education 

wTotal Low-1. 

I0 

T Follow-up operation

*Approved

.0 3. 

0 

.0
25.0 

6 

8a.0

-22-

and humanitarian relief), covering structural reform, the social sectors, sustainable rural
development, governance, private sector development and urban utilities. Nonetheless, as
indicated in Table 3, most of the proposed credits follow up on earlier successful
operations, so the risks of a relatively diverse portfolio are substantially reduced. Given
the work program and intentions of other donors (see Attachment 2), we envisage no direct
support for culture, tourism, housing, mining, telecommunications or aviation infra-
structure, although the two latter areas are possibilities for IFC investment.

52. 
IDA Base Case Triggers. For Armenia to remain in the Base Case progress would
be needed on all the triggers shown in Box 5. The triggers focus on satisfactory develop-
ment and implementation of: (i) the macroeconomic program, as evidenced for example by
implementation of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Program; (ii) the Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper (PRSP); (iii) the reform program, including measures to improve social
service delivery and the business climate (with a tangible reduction in corruption and
government interference in private sector activity); and (iv) the IDA-financed projects.

53. High-Base Case Triggers and Assistance. Should the Government accelerate its
reform program, particularly in the areas of energy reform and privatization, the Bank
could consider bringing SAC V forward to FY02, and extending its scope to include
further strengthening of reforms in the energy sector. Under these circumstances, a PRSC
of US$40 million could be added in FY04, bringing total lending up to US$190 million.
With good performance, IDA partial risk guarantees for privatizations and for new export-
oriented investments could be considered, in addition to the US$150-190 million envelope.

Box 5: Base Case Triggers

Base Case assistance would be conditined on progress in all of the following areas:
Overall Development/Poverty Reduction
* Development and implementation ofthe PRSP
. A satisfactory macro-economic environment, as evidenced for example by the implementation of the
Poverty Reduction and Growth Programn
* No new arrears in counterpart funding, pensions, poverty benefit, and other social sector expenditures
* Fewer 
lhan 15% of IDA projects rated unsatisfactory on implementation
PrivateSector
* Satisfactory progress with the Action Plan for improving business environment/removing
administrative barriers for investments
* Progress in implementing the legal framework for private sector development, including amendments
toJot stock and limited liability companies laws as well as to bankruptcy legislation
Governance
. Progress in tax/customs administration, court infrastructure, training, and working of judicial
system/procuracy show improvement, as measured by business and client surveys
* Enactment of Civil Service Law; implementation of income/asset declaration for senior public
servants
Social Sectors
* Satisfatory implementation of school rationalization, initially in three pilot zones in 2001.
* Satif 
ry implementation of hospital rationalization, initially in two districts in 2001.
* Progress in completing the first phase of pension reform and improved targeting of social assistance.
Energy

* Adoption of a Comprehensive Heating Strategy and Action Plan, covering legal, regulatory, market

structure and financing issues, including progress in phasing out Government involvement in the
provision of district heat, and in imposition of a hard budget constraint on heat providers.

-23-

54. 

Low Case Triggers and Assistance. If there is little progress on any of the Base

Case triggers, Armenia would move to the Low Case. In the Low Case, the focus is
expected to be largely on projects in human development, rural development, and
environment that can contribute to long-term poverty alleviation even with poor
governance, or for capacity building. No lending is envisaged for private sector develop-
ment, or energy. Also in the Low Case there would be no adjustment lending. Total IDA
lending would then be about US$80 million.

55. Outcome Indicators. Well-designed and monitored outcome indicators will be
crucial to judging the success of the poverty reduction strategy. Box 6 gives the medium-
term outcome indicators to be monitored over the CAS period. Longer-term indicators are
being developed in the context of the PRSP (see Attachment 3 and Annex 9, drawing on
the I-PRSP. The Bank will work with the Government and civil society to further develop
these indicators, and to create monitoring procedures at the community, district and
national levels. Where feasible, the Bank will try and ensure that the indicators and
monitoring mechanisms capture the social impacts of anti-poverty measures, and that the

Box 6: Outcome Indicators for CAS Period (FY02-04)

Overall Development/Poverty Reduction

* Poor as percent of total population reduced from 55% to 50%
 Regular payment of social insurance and social assistance transfers
* At least 15% real increase in average pensions

Private sector

* Reduced average time for business registration
* Reduced time for customs clearance by importers
* Reduction and streamlining of licensing requirements

Governance

* Greater reliance on thejudicial system to resolve bankruptcy cases
* Public perception of progress in improving governance, and reducing corruption
Social Sectors
^ Girls' school enrollment maintained at at least the sane level as boys
* Real average salary teacher salary up by 40%
^ Enrollment rates in elementary education at least 95%
* Maternal mortality reduced from 47 to 22 per 100,000 live births.
* Increase or at least maintain percentage of fully immunized one year olds at 95% or more (TB
currently 93%, DPT 88%, measles 84%, polio 96%.
* Reduce under-5 mortality from 25 per 1,000 to 20 per 1,000

Energy

* Quasi-fiscal cost of energy sector reduced to a quarter its current level
* Resumption of natural gas supply to additional 40,000 households

Agriculture

* Completion of titling of rural land -- all farmers have titles
* 20% increase in Water User Associations receiving at least 5,00Om3 of irrigation water per
hectare
* 25% inprovement in cost recovery in irrigation water supply
Infrastructure Services
* Decrease in proportion of drinking water with above allowable contaninant levels from 14%
to 8% (urban), and from 22% to 15% (rural)
* For households with piped water service, increase in number having at least 12 hours supply
from 10% to 200/o (urban) and from 40% to 55% (nral).

-24-

indicators are regularly published and disseminated throughout Armenia. The Bank will
also work with communities, local governments and civil society organizations to develop
a "social audit" of Government programs and policies.
56. Work Program. The Bank's work program -- including supervision and non-
lending services -- is summarized in Table 4. The due diligence economic and sector work
will be addressed through the PER/CFAA (FY02), a Poverty Study (FY02), a
CEM/Growth Study (FYO1), an Institutional and Governance Reform Study (FYO1), and a
Procurement Assessment (FY02). An informal Client Survey was undertaken in FYOO, in
preparation for the CAS, and a Client Survey will also be undertaken in FY02 and later
years as necessary.

PSD 

:_____:__ 

Table 4: Work Program Summary

Enterprise Development (PSDI) PD M2 
(FY8) 
PSD 2;PSD 3 
PSD 3 (FY04) 

Supervin Product T Lo 
g Produ&ct 
I SAC 4 (FY01) 
SAC 4; SAC 5; SATAC 
Public Sector pant Safety 
(FY02) [with GEF] 
Irrigationt I 
Public Sector Ref, (Y03) PER (FY Ati-Corruption IDF (FY01)
Nat. Resoure & PovertyRed'n Municipal Water (FY02) Urban Heat Strategy (FY02)
:Tit'e Registration 
Urban Heat (PY04) 
Water Resources Plan (FYO)

Trade Facilitation WoFhop FY0O)
CFAA (FY02); Client Survey (FY02)
R (0Y0)YIR Workshop (FY01)

Hi_ hway, tansport 
Governance and Agric. Reform Support 

_SACS 

(0FY) 
Nat. Rcs. & Pov. Rid'n 

Financial Sector TA (FY02)
CEMIrowth Study (FYOI)

Labor Market (FY03)

AAA Product

Judlicial Reforn 

Public Sector Refom 

Electricity Traqs'/Urban Heat 
Municipal i and It 

Cultural Heritage IDF (FYO0)
S trengthn Policy Cap. IDF (FYOI)
Procurcment Assement (FY02)

Stren 
ten Staistics IDF ()
:ub.,Priv. Infra're Advisory Fac'y (FY02)
umgan Capital Education I and I, Health I and1 Education 2 (FY04) 
Prty Study (FY02)
ove 
H4elth/Scial Protection 
Healh/Social Protection Restruturing Education (FYOI)
SlP 
(FY04) 
]Children's Initiative IDF (FY98)
Chid Welfare Note (FY02)

Irrigation 2 (FY03) 

___________ 

__Judiciail Re 

(FY01) So Prtion St* (FY02)

tBoi 7.:MeldingLocal andlIntFrnational Expertise

57. Coordination with Development Partners. While IDA is the largest donor to
Armenia, there are a number of other agencies active in Armenia, mostly but not exclu-
sively focused on Technical Assistance. The USAID, DFID, KfW, major UN agencies
(including WFP), EU/TACIS, IFC,
IMF, EU/TACIS and the Lincy 
Foundation have representatives :tt ;;:C : ;0;t
in Yerevan. Gese any, 
resident 
To improve the development impact as well as the
resident ind YEBRealso Germa, 
cost-effectiveness of tie Bank's work, it was recognized that a
Japan,t. and EBan alsoffic s pvide 
nmore substaitive role for fnational staff in the country office
support. The Bank office has nine would help.0 Aoringly management of a number of
operational staff, who have an 
activities is beingdevolvedtotheBank's office in Armenia. In
increasing range of responsibilities Otober 2000 the Bank's Country Manager in Armenia
(Box 7), including managing key 
assumed responsibilyoprtflio management. Since then,
partnerships, and donor coordina- 
portfolio quitybhs started to show some improvements. In
tion. There are fourteen sector- FY02 national will manage a variety of tasks, initially in
based Partner Groups, and an um- 
sonme cases as comanagers with international staff. National
brella Donor Coordination Group 
staff will also take the lead inwa number of supervision tasks
chaired on a rotational basis by the 
and some analytical and advisory work, including the
Bank, UNDP, and USAID. In 
eparation stage of the Public E xpenditure Review and the
October, 2000, the Government 
fAnt-Corruption Stragy. The intention is to locate work
and the Bank co-chaired a Consul- 
;where it can best benefit from synergies between the Bank's
tative Group Meeting in Yerevan I global exPertise and local knowledge and4experience.

-25-

which included an open and very substantive dialogue with the private sector and NGOs
on a range of institutional and economic issues (Box 4). The donors have been closely
involved in the development of this CAS. The Bank expects to co-chair a Consultative
Group Meeting in Paris in July, 2001.

58. Civil Society. Most of the Bank's consultation will continue to be directed towards
supporting the Government's participatory process for the PRSP. The main goal will be to
help "internalize" PRSP participation process within the Armenian Government and civil
society, and in that sense the role of the Bank will become more advisory. Leading roles
are being played by USAID, EU/TACIS, the Lincy Foundation and other international
NGOs in supporting the evolution of local NGOs, strengthen Parliamentary processes, the
press and other democratic institutions.

XI. Managing the Risks

59. Geo-Political Instability. The CAS faces several political and economic risks.
The Caucasus have historically been a region buffeted by competing political forces. In
the event of renewed conflict, the Bank would endeavor to focus on the most poverty-
oriented investments, but a temporary cessation of new lending, and perhaps even
disbursements, might be unavoidable, and the Board would be updated in this event. On
the other hand, there are prospects for a peace agreement on Nagorno-Karabakh. In this
case, we would update the Board on proposed Bank support for post-conflict
reconstruction and development.

60. Other Risks. The CAS faces a number of other risks.

- Governance. The Bank's strategy relies on judicial and public administration
reform (and deregulation) as the best way to help reduce corruption and improve
the quality of government services. There is a possibility that the reformn
momentum in these areas will be affected by political changes, and in this event we
would need to reassess our strategy, possibly placing more emphasis on non-
lending services.

* Population. A new census is planned, which may reveal a much lower population,
with a resulting risk of reduced assistance from donors. The Government needs to
plan ahead for this eventuality, and the Bank will work with the authorities to
ensure that the MTEF and PRSP include a downside risk scenario of reduced donor
assistance.

. Business Environment. The Poverty Reduction Strategy relies on 
the
Government's commitment to move rapidly to support a level playing field for the
private sector, thus encouraging employment-creating investments. There is a risk
that this commitment may be derailed by interest groups that benefit from the
existing business environment of limited competition and high effective barriers to
new entry. If this were to happen, the Bank would need to postpone its planned
support for private sector investment, and reconsider its adjustment lending.

* Debt Sustainability. Any of the these risks mentioned above could move Armenia
toward the downside macroeconomic scenario outlined in paragraph 30 above, in
which the debt burden becomes unsustainable relative to exports and/or revenues.
Key factors in determining whether the downside risk scenario is realized are

-26-

overall economic growth, the level of exports-oriented investment, and the grant
element of new development assistance. This reinforces the importance for the
Bank of supporting reforms which foster private investments, particularly export-
oriented investments, and which improve the tax base and tax collection. It also
underlines the importance of the Bank continuing to help the Government manage
and coordinate external assistance.

61. Minimizing the Risks. The Bank will try to minimize these risks to the CAS by
working closely with Government, civil society, the domestic and foreign private sector,
and donors to ensure that reform not only gains momentum, but is owned and supported by
all the key constituencies necessary for Armenia to succeed in its poverty reduction
strategy.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

by Sven Sandstr6m

Washington, D.C.
April 25, 2001

-27-

IDA PORTFOLIO

ATTACHMENT 1

The Bank has financed 23 projects for a total of US$693 million (all except the first
were Credits). Ten have closed. The Bank's current portfolio consists of a Structural
Adjustment TA Credit and twelve investment credits in support of infrastructure, the social
sectors and community development, rural development and agriculture, private sector
development and law and justice. As of March, 2001, none were rated unsatisfactory for
either Development Objectives or Implementation Progress, but four were rated
unsatisfactory for Counterpart Funding.

Sector 

Economic Policy 
Private Sector Development 
Public Sector Management 

Environment 

Rural Development &Agriculture 
Electric Power & Energy 
Water Supply& Sanitation 
Transportation 
Health 
Social Protection 
Education 
Total 

Number Net Commit Share Av. Age
Projects 
(Sm) 
(%) 
(Yts)
1 
5.0 
1.9 
3.4
1 
16.8 
6.4 
4,2
1 
11.4 
4.4 
0.5

1 

3 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
13 

8.0 

3.1 

84.1 
32.2 
21.0 
8.0 
30.0 
11.5 
40.0 
15.3 
10.0 
3.8 
20.0 
7.7 
15.0 
5.7 
261.3 100.0 

2.4

3.7
2.0
2.8
0.8
3.6
0.8
3.3
2.7

-28-

Partner Groups

ATTACHMENT 2

Ministry of Health 

Ministry of Agriculture 

Governance/Corruption 

Health 

Roads 

Education 

Poverty Reduction 

PRSP Steering Commission 

Agriculture/ 
Food Security 
Decentralization 
Energy 

Mini Consultative Group Ministry of Finance and Economy WB/IMF/UNDP/USAID/
EU
WB/IMF/UNDP/USAID/
UNHCRJNGOs/EU
Public Sector Reform Commission WB/IMF/EU/DFID/
USAID/GTZ/OSCE
WB/USAID/UNDP/WHO
UNICEF
Ministry of Transport and 
WB/Lincy Foundation/EU
Communications 
Japan
Ministry of Education and Science WB/UNDP/UNICEF/EU
UNHCR/USAID/
EU/WB/FAO/WFP/IFAD/
USAID
USAID/EU
WB/EBRD/JBIC/EU
USAID/KfW
WB/USAID/KfW/GTZ/
UKlEBRD/EU/Eurasia
Foundation
Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of WB/UNHCR/WFP
Territorial Administration
Committee on Water Resource 
Management, Yerevan Municipality
Natural Resources/Envir't Ministry of Nature Protection 
Refugees/Housing 
Department for Refugees/Urban 
Construction Ministry
Central Bank /Ministry of Finance & WB/IMF/USAID
Economy/Securities Commission

Ministry of Territorial Admin'n 
Ministry of Energy 

Ministry of Industry and Trade, 
Armenian Development Agency 

WB

WB/UNDP/EU
UNHCR/WFP

Private Sector 

Rural Development 

Water 

Financial Sector 

-29-

Longer-Term Outcome Indicators

(See also Text Box 6 and Annex 9)
(Numerical targets to be developed in context of full PRSP)

ATTACHMENT 3

Poverty Reduction
. Absolute numbers of poor and very poor
Private Sector
.
Private sector credit as proportion of GDP
* FDI as a proportion of GDP
Governance
* Proportion of households reporting paying any kind of bribes during the last year
.
Proportion of time firms' management spends dealing with bureaucracy
. Reduction in the number of activities subject to licensing and similar controls
 
Proportion of users satisfied with access/quality of general public services (e.g. courts)
.
Proportion of users making informal payments for education and health services
Social Sectors
.
Student learning achievement outcomes
.
Public spending on general education as a share of GDP and total public budget
.
School enrollment and attendance ratios
. Number of children in institutions
.
Infant mortality
* Under-five mortality rate
. Child stunting and wasting rates
. Maternal mortality rates
.
Incidence of respiratory infection, infectious/communicable diseases, including TB and STD.
Immunization rates
Energy Services
^ Proportion of population with access to pipeline gas
. Decline in wood, coal and other solid fuels for urban household heating
Agriculture and Natural Resource Management
* Average size of farms
.
Proportion of Water User Associations receiving at least 5,000 m3 of irrigation water per hectare
* Ratio of harvest forest to net natural growth
. Nationally protected areas as proporfion of total land
. Water quality (BO13, COD, heavy metals)
Infrastructure Services
^ Proportion of population with access to safe water (urban/rural)
.
Proportion of population with access to adequate sanitation (urban/rural)
. Road accident deatis and serious injuries
. Average road user cost, including travel time

* 

-30-

Armenia at a glance 

Annex 1
Page 1 of 2

9'7Q00

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

1999

Populabon, mid-year (millions) 
GNP Der caita (Atlas meMtod, VS$J 
GNP (Atlas methodx USS billions) 
Average annual growth. 1993-99
Population (%) 
Labor force (% 
Most racmnt etimate (atst year available, 1993-99) 
Poverty (% of population below national povlyV line) 
Urbanpopulabon(%oftotalpopufation) 
Life expectancy at birth (vears) 
lnfantmortality(Per1, 00/ivebirths) 
Child malnutrdion (9 of children under 5) 
Access to imDroved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy ( ofpopuation age 15+) 
Grossrpnmaryenrollment (6ofschool-agepopulation) 
Male 
Female 
KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 

-. 

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross investment/GDP 
Exports of oods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross nabonal savings/GOP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest pavmentGDP 
Total debt/GP 
Total debt serce/exports 
Present value of debtWGWP 
Present value of debexPorts 

(average annual growth)
GW 
GNP Per caoita 
Exports of goods and services 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDOF
Agriculture 
IndustrY 
Manufacturing 
Services 

Prvate consumption 
General oovemmentconsumrption 
Imports o goods and services 

(average annual growth)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturnn 
Services 
Private consumption 
General government consumotion 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

Europe &
Central 
Asia 

Low-
incomtt 

Arnenia 

38 
490 
1.9 

n a 
-15 

55
67 
73 
15 
3 
85 
1 
90 
88 
93 

1989 

475 
2150 
1.022 

2,417 
410
988

0.1 
0.6 

1.9
2.3 

67 
69 
22 
8 

3 
100 
101 
99 

1998 
1.9 
16.9 
19.0 
-14.7 
-5.9
-21 2 
10 
41.4 
19.0 
26.7 
143.8 

31
60
77
43 
64
39
96 
102 
86

1999
1.8
17.3 
20.7
-9.3

-16.6 
1.0 
46.3
14.3
29.7
153.6

Development diamond'

Life expectancy

GNP 
per 
capta 

Gross
primary
enroPiment

Access to safe water

-

Armenia
Low-income group

Economic ratios'

Trade

Domestic 
SavinInvestment

/e 

n

1979489 1986-99 

1998 

1999 1999043

-3.2 
-3.0 
-18.2 

7 2 
6.3 
8.9 

3.3 
3.0 
6.5 

61 

13.3

Indebtedness

-A 

rmiernia
Low-income group

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of investment and GDP%)

34.0 
308 
219 
35-3 
103.6 
11.1 
52.8 

28.7
326
230 
387 
98.5 
107 
49.7

10

-20

9s 

97 

Be 

99

-

GDI 

0c3DP

1979-49 1199-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and imports(%)

-

.

12.6 
1.0 
-2.7 
5.6 
4.3 
-2 4 
50 
4.4 

6.5 

1

3

3

so

1.3 
59 
52
30
04 
-0.7
11 
01 
2.7

Exports -

mports

Note 1999 data are preliminary estimates
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group averane If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

-31-

Annex 1
Page 2 of 2

Armenia

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Infatlaton(%)

Domestic prices
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes cunrent grants) 
Current revenue 

s,000

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

8.7 
10.8 

0.7 
0.1 

4000
3

2,00
1 ooo

0

.. 

.. 

17.1 

19.3 

94 

95 

9e 
GDP deflator 

97 

98
0 CPI

Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

.
.. 

.
.. 

1.2 
-4.3 

0.1 
-5.2

TRADE

exports (fob) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

Total merchandizeexpors (fob) 
Copper mineral, concentrate 
Molybdenum mineral, concentrate 
Manufactures 
Total merchandize imports (cif) 
Food 

229 
9
8
102
808 
201 

247

.. 

.. 

.
.. 

.. 
.. 

721
129

Fuel and energy 

.

.

203

Capital goods 

113 

80 

o

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99

Export price index (1995=100) 

..

Import price index (1995=100) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

| 

Exports 

UImports

Terms of trade (1995=100) 

.

.

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Current account balance to GOP (%)

(USS millions)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and servicres 
Resource balance 

.. 
.
.. 

.. 
.
.

360 

383 
919
-536 

0

1,000 
-40 

* 

-

Net income 
Net current transfers 

.

.

60 

55 
174 

-10 

'Ii',

.. 

.. 

177 

15

Current account balance 

-403 

-307 

20

Financing 
items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

.
.. 

.
.. 

406 
-4 

311
-4 

-25

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS mWillions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locaLUSS) 

.
.

.. 

298 
505 

305
535

.

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ nmilions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition d 1998 debt (USS mill.)

787 
10 
293 

855
94 
352

10

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

68 
1 
2 

55 
1 
2

133

293

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 

-

113 
148 
0 

94 
84
0

129

.

Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

.. 
.

.. 
.

221 
-16 

122
2 

190

World Bank program

Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 

.. 

.

125 
43 
0 

48 
66 
0 

A - IBRD 
B - IDA 
C-IMF 

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G -Short-term

D - Other multilateral 

Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

43 
2 
40 

66
3
63

-32-

Annex 2

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance 

and Management

As of 03/09/2001

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
NumberofProjects Under Implementation 
Average Implementation Period (years)b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Numbera"' 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a. 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number ad 

Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount 

ad 

Disbursement Ratio (%)e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 

Supervision Resources 

(totalUS$)f 

Average Supervision (USS/project) 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

11 

1.8 
9.1 
7.7 
9.1 

7.7 

20.2 

Yes 

1,112 

101 

14 
2 
0 
0 
0 

0 

27.7 

No 

1,192 

85 

15 
2.5 
6.7 
1.4 
6.7 

1.4 

25.1 

Yes 

1,500 

100 

13
2.7
0
0
0

0

12.1

Yes

1,218

94

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U orHU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U orHU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
6 
5
223 
163
0 
0
0 
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance ofthe Bank's portfolio at the
beginning ofthe year: Investment projects only.
f. Adjusted for FY01 dollars
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,

-33-

Annex 3 - Bank Group Program Summary

As Of 03/09/2001

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program

Fiscal 
year 
2002 

2003 

2004 

Proj ID 

USs(M) 

Natural Resource Management 
Municipal Water & Wastewater 
Private Sector Development 2 
Total 

Public Sector Reform 
Irrigation Development 
SAC V 
Total 

Health/Social Protection 
Urban Heat 
Private Sector Development 3 
Education 2 
Total 

10.0 
20.0 
5.0 

35.0

10.0 
20.0 
40.0 
70.0

15.0 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
45.0

Strategic Rewards 
(H/IAL) 
M 
M 
H 

Implementation
Risks (HIMIL)
L
M
H

H 
M 
H 

M 
M 
H 
H 

M
M
H

H
M
M
M

IFC and MIGA Program

IFC Approvals (US$m)

Hotel Armenia (FY01) 

MIGA Guarantees (US$m)

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0 
3.6 
0 
0

Inter'l Comrm'l Black Sea Bank 

0 

0 

2.7 

0

1998 1999 

2000 

2001

-34-

Annex 4 - Summary of Nonlending Services

As Of WO912001

fPrduct 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) Audiencea Objectiveb

Recent completions
Institutional Governance Review 
Workshop
Social Dimensions of Utility Price 
Changes
Institutional Governance Review 
Banking Sector Vulnerability 
Poverty and Targeting Strategy 
Civil Service Assessment 
Judicial Assessment 
Financial Sector Review 
Private Farms Study 

Underway
Restructuring Education Expenditures 
Growh Study 
Water Resource Plan 
Reg Eco Int/Trade Facilitation Worksho 
Urban Heat Strategy 
Children's Initiative IDF 
Cultural Heritage IDF 
Strengthening Statistical System IDF 

FY01 

FY00 

FY00 
FY00 
FY99 
FY99 
FY99 
FY99 
FY99 

FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY02 
FY01 
FY02 
FY02 

$31 

$40 

$172 
$39 
$191 
$67 
$60 
$41 
$15 

$100 
$220 
$150 
$40 
$100 
$40 
$65 
$60 

G, D, B, P 

KG

G, B 

G, D, B, P 
G, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, B, P 

G, B 
G, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, B 
G, B 
G, B 

KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG
KG
KG
KG

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

Macro Monitoring 

ongoing 

$200 

G, B 

KG, PS

Planned
Poverty Study 
Country Financial Account' & Auditing 
Procurement Assessment 
Public Expenditure Review 
Child Welfare Note 
Financial Sector TA 
Labor Market 
Social Protection Study 
Anti-Corruption Strategy IDF 
Strengthening Policy Capcity IDF 

FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY03 
FY02 
FY03 
FY03 

$80 
$50 
$50 
$175 
$60 
$50 
$130 
$130 
$60 
$60 

G, D, B, P 
G, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B, P 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 

KG, PS
PS
PS
KG
KG
PS
KG
KG
PS
PS

a. Govemment (G), donor (D), Bank (B), public dssemination (P).
b. Knowledge Generation (KG), public debate (PD), problernsolving (PS).

-35-

Armenia Social Indicators

Ar=x 5

POPULATION
Total population, rid-year (niHlions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per wornran) 

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

1970-76 

1980-85 

1993-98 

Europe & 
Central Asia 

Low-
income

2.8 
2.3 
63.0 
2.8 

3.3 
1.5 
66.6 
2.5 

3.8 
0.3 
69.4 
1.3 

474.7 
0.1 
66.2 
1.6 

3,536.4
1.4
30.5
3.1

POVERTY

(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 
INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consunrer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOME/CONSLMrPTION 
USTFIBUTION
Gni index

Lowest quintile (% of incorre or consunption) 

Fighest quintile (% of incorre or consunption) 

SOCIAL INOCATOFS
Public expenditure

Flealth (% of GDP)1... 
Education (% ofG 
Social security and welfare (% of GD)F 

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 
bb- 

Feniae 

Access to safe water

(% of population)

Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

I\iasles 

DPr 

Chid nelnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Nble 
Ferrale 
Mortality
hIfant (per thousand live births) 

iknder 5 (per thousand live births) 

..
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

72 
69 
75 

.. 

.. 

..
..

.. 
.. 

..

..

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

73 
71 
76 

25 

.

460 
147 

2,200 
155 

520
136

3.1 
2.0 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

92 

87 
3

74 
71 
78 

15 

18 

4.0 
5.1 
8.8

100 
100 
99 

91 

89 

69 
65 
74 

22 

26 

1.3
3.2

86
89
82

80

82

63
62
64

68

92

-36-

Annex 6: Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product3 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100 
37 
33 
31 

100 
32 
33 
35 

100 
34 
31 
35 

100 
29 
33 
39 

100 
29 
35 
35 

100 
28 
36 
36 

100 
27 
38 
35 

100 
26
39 
35 

100

..
..

Total Consumption 
Gross investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

112.7 
17.9 

118.9 
16.9 

114.7 
16.9 

109.3 
17.3 

110.6 
16.8 

108.0 
17.2 
3.8 
13.4 

103.7 
17.8 
4.0 
13.8 

100.2 
18.3 
4.0 
14.3

...
..
..

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.

4.1 

12.7 

ENports (GNFS)b 
Irports (GNFS) 

23.2 
56.0 

20.3 
58.3 

19.0 
52.8 

20.7 
49.8 

23.0 
49.9 

25.0 
50.6 

25.1 
47.9 

25.3 
45.8 

25.7
45.4

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings 

-13 
-4 

-19 
-9 

-14.7 
-5.9 

-9.3 

-13 
1 

-10 
4 

-6 
6 

-2 
8 

..
..

.

iMemorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

1597 

1639 

1899 

1847 

1915 

2089 

2280 

2489 

2693

620 

520 

480 

490 

529 

543 

569 

613 

686

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1994 prices)
Gross domestic product at niarket prices 
5.9 
Gross National Income 
5.9 

3.3 
3.4 

7.2 
7.0 

3.3 
2.9 

6.0 
6.0 

6.5 
5.7 

6.0 
5.1 

6.0 
5.3 

5.0
4.4

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1994 prices)
Gross domestic product at narket prices 
5.5 
3.0 
Total consumption 
2.2 
7.9 
Private consumption 
2.7 
8.9 

6.9 
3.5 
4.0 

2.9 
-0.1 
0.0 

5.7 
6.9 
6.9 

6.2 
3.7 
4.0 

5.7 
1.5 
1.9 

5.7 
2.1
2.3

4.7

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)

Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise CIF 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

368 
290 
888 
760 
-520 
185 
-291 

330 
234 
952 
793 
-622 
217 
-307 

360 
229 
1000 
806 
-640 
177 
-403 

383 
247 
919 
721 
-536 
174 
-307 

441 
307 
955 
774 
-514 
187 
-276 

522 
356 
1058 
848 
-536 
189 
-294 

573 
392 
1092 
870 
-519 
197 
-275 

630 
432 
1139 
908 
-509 
206 
-261 

691
475
1222
944
-531
216
-281

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 

18 
173 
113 

52 
184 
101 

221 
34 
34 

122 
85 
85 

122 
69 
69 

140 
112 
112 

140 
75 
75 

140 
60 
60 

150
94
94

-37-

Armenia - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)
Revenues 
Expenditures 
Fiscal balance, accrual basis, deficit (-) 
Fiscal balance, cash basis, deficit (-) 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth 
Total credit growth (%) 

Price indices( YR94 =100)
Merchandise 
export price index 
Merchandise 
import price index 
Merchandise 
terms oftrade 
index 
Real exchange rate (USS/LCU)f 

17.6 
20.2 
-2.6 
-3.8 
3.3 

18.0 
21.0 
-3.0 
-3.0 
2.4 

18.5
21.0
-2.5
-2.5
2.0

17.6 
26.3 
-8.7 
-9.3 
6.5 

8.3 
35.6 
-2.9 
37 

.. 
.. 
.. 

19.7 
25.7 
-6.0 
-5.9 
6.3 

8.7 
28.7 
25.5 
-12 

.. 
.. 
.. 

17.1 
21.9 
-4.8 
-4.3 
2.6 

10.0 
36.0 
60.7 
51 

.. 
.. 
.. 

19.3 
26.5 
-7.2 
-5.2 
4.7 

11.0 
13.6 
5.8 
-0.8 

.. 
.. 
.. 

16.3 
23.4 
-7.1 
-4.2 
1.5 

14.6 
38.7 
24.2 
9.0 

.. 
.. 
.. 

17.2 
21.2 
-4.0 
-4.6 
4.3 

14.7
12.0
8.6
9.5

..
..
..

180.0 

169.2 

176.0 

163.6 

157.2 

157.2 

157.2 

157.2 

157.2

Real interest rates 9 
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator(% change) 

22.2 
18.7 
19.6 

35.1 
14.0 
17.7 

33.4 
8.7 
11.2 

52.9 
0.7 
0.1 

23.6
-0.8 
-1.4 

4.5 
4.5 

3.0 
3.0 

3.0 
3.0 

3.0
3.0

a. GDPatfactorcost
b. "GNFS" denotes 
"goods and nonfactor 
services."
c. Includes net unrequited 
transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. State budget
f. "LCU" denotes 
"local currency units." An increase 
in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.
g. For 1996-1999: 91-day T-bill yield. For2000 average yield of T-bills with 182-day maturity.

-38-

Annex 7 - Key Exposure Indicators

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (IS$ma

521 

639 

787 

855 

862 

988 

1068 

1125 

1198

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

163 

144 

148 

84 

7 

126 

80 

57 

73

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)' 

43 

24 

68 

55 

47.1 

78.4 

69.7 

76.6 

92.3

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
IDXYSb 

'FDO/CDP 

NPV/XGSd 

NPV/Fiscal revenue' 
TDS/XGS 
IlDS/Fiscal revenue 
ConcessionalITDO 
Preferred creditor DS/public DC(%) C 

IBRD/IDA e.xosure indicators
IBRD TDO (US$n) 
IDA TDO(IJS$m) 
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
Share of IDA portfolio (%.) 
IBRD DS/public DS (%) 
IDA DS/public DS (%) 

IFC (l JS$m)

Loans 

Equity and quasi-equity 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

141.5 
32.6 

193.4 
39.0 

9.3 
20.8 
38.8 
38.0 

10.3 
174 
2.0 
33 
0.9 
1.8 

5.0 
10.2 
40.5 
77.8 

11.2 
240 
1.8 
38 
2.6 
5.1 

185.5 
41.4 
143.8 
165.4 
19.0 
22.3 
44.2 
73.9 

10.6 
293 
1.3 
37 
1.1 
2.4 

184.5 
46.3 
153.6 
167.7 
14.3 
16.7 
67.3 
64.2 

10.2 
352 
1.2 
41 
1.7 
3.9 

164.3 
45.0 
135.6 
178.6 
10.7 
15.7 
73.7 
65.1 

9.7 
417 
1.1 
48 
1.8 
5.8 

161.7 
47.3 
132.7 
178.7 
15.0 
23.5 

81.6 
39.7 

9.2 
482 
0.9 
49 
1.5 
3.7 

159.4 
46.8 
122.3 
157.8 
12.2 
17.6 

85.4 
58.4 

8.6 
558 
0.8 
52 
1.7 
5.3 

152.9 
45.2 
115.1 
149.7 
12.2 
17.3 

87.6 
58.7 

8.1 
613 
0.7 
54 
1.6 
6.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

3.6 

0.0 

3.6 

0.0 

3.6 

148.9
44.5
112.9
143.0
13.4
18.5

88.9
51.5

7.5
657
0.6
55
1.3
5.7

0.0

3.6

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

2.7 

2.7 

2.7 

2.7 

2.7

-39-

Annex 8
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

As of 03/09/2001

Closed Projects 

IBRD/IDA
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

Active Proiects 

10

93.30
0.00
341.90
0.90
435.21
0.94

158.03
0.12
158.15

13

Last PSR
Supervision Rating 

Amount in US$M

Project Name 

Obiectives 

poaton 

Fiscal 

IDA Undisb

AGR REF SUPPORT 
EDUCATION 
ELEC TRANSM & DISTR 

ENT DEVT 

HEALTH 
IRRIG DAM SAFETY 
IRRIG REHAB 
JUDICIAL REFORM 
MUN DEVT 
SATAC 2 
SIF II 
TITLE REG 
TRANSPORT 
Total 

S 
S 
S 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

1998 
1998 
1999 

1997 

1998 
1999 
1995 
2001 
1998 
1998 
2000 
1999 
2000 

14.5 
15.0 
21.0 

16.8 

10.0 
26.6 
43.0 
11.4 
30.0 
5.0 
20.0 
8.0 
40.0 
261.3 

3.5
4.6
18.1

1.2

6.0
23.8
2.3
11.1
21.6
2.2
18.8
5.6
39.2
158.0

-40-

Annex 9
CAS Program Matrix

(Based on I-PRSP; to be refined for full PRSP)

Measure 

Objective 

______________ 

I. Economic growth
1. Creation of a high-level Business 
1. Creation of a high-level 
Businessby 
Council on investment promotion 
Introduction of public-private dialogue 
and business support, and approval 
for investigation and elimination of 
of a program for investment climate barriers for business development 
improvement 

2. Organization of the intemational 
s Orgnizaion of the internationa Presentation of investment projects to 
bsNess onfreneokrmnai 
international financial community 
New York 

Bank Assistance 

Partner 

~~Programs T

Monitorable Result

Analytical work 
FIAS/MIGA, 
and support 
through SAC 
process and under 
SATAC2; PSD 
projects 

UNDP 

Improvement of the investment
climate, as measured by e.g. business
surve, 
as customs
sudrvenistration court infrastructure,
training, and working of judicial
system,procuracy
system/procuracy

from Attraction of foreign investmnents, as
Support from IFC US Trade and measured by e.g. increasing ratio of
and World Bank 
Development Foreign Direct Investment to GDP

~~~~~~~Support 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Agency

3. Adoption of all legal statutes 
Contribution to establishing stable 
3.sAdophn for accession stattes Weconomic 
necessary for accession into WTO 
climate for investments
environment and favorable 

SAC IV 

EU/TACIS/
OSCE 

WTO membership

4. Adoption of a new privatization 
programn for 2001-2003 
Ensuring effective economic growth 
program for 2001-2003 

SAC preparation 
SAC preparation 

(IBTCI) 
(IBTCI) 

Sale or liquidation of state
enterprises Increase in economic

~~~~~~~efficiency

Support through 
Effective use of privatization proceeds SAC preparation 

5. Approval of a medium-term 
strategy for the effective use of the 
privatization proceeds 
6. Adoption of a legal statute on the Ensuring appropriate conditions for 
transfer of land to privatized 
operation of privatized enterprises 
enterprises 
o

IMF/USAID Establishment of priorities for the
and DFID 
use of privatization proceeds
TA

Judicial Reform 
Project 

USAID 

Increase in the efficiency of
privatized enterprises

-41-

Measure 

Objective 

Bank Assistance 

Partner 
Programs 

Monitorable Result
MntrbeRsl

7. Adoption of laws on "Joint-stock 
companies", "Limited liability 
companies", "Registration of legal 
entities". 

Consolidation of the legal economic 
framework 

IFC/Judicial
Reform Project 
and from
SATAC2

USAID 

Business climate improvement

8. Adoption of changes in Civil 
Code and/or Civil Procedures Code 

Increased efficiency in companies' 
operations, financial rehabilitation 

Judicial Reform 
Project 

USAID/ 
German TA 

Full operation of bankruptcy
procedures

9. Implementation of Irrigation 
Development Schemes 

Increased efficiency and financial 
rehabilitation of the irrigation sector 

Irrigation Projects 

IFAD 

Institutional restructuring of the
sector, strengthen Water User
Associations, conversion from
pumping to gravity irrigation to
increase efficiency.

of new lending
mechanisms including micro-credits
crceit

for on-farm investments,

Availability 
to farmersEstablishment 
of micr-credits 
10. Expand access of both on-farmn Availability of micro-credits to farmers, 
f bth n-frm 
promotion of agricultural production, 
Irrigation Projects-mcaisinldg 
iriainPoet;USAID- 
IO.Expnd 
cces 

promoty 

of agricultural machione 

Financial Sector 

UnD- 

affordability of agricultural machinery 
TA 
and fertilizers 

funded NGOs agroprocessing industry, and self-
employment activities

and off-farm credits to rural 

population 

11. Initiating public discussions on 
the tax and customs reforms 
program 

Formation of more effective tax and 
Fusorma ytio efmor fetv 
an 

SAC IVIPRSP 

USAID! 

AgAID 
reed program on tax and customs
rforms. Reduced time for customs
clearance.

II. State Governance and combating corruption

12. Adoption of draft law on "Civil 
Service" 

State governance system improvement 

Support from
IDFs and 
analytical work for 
IGR

DFID 

13. Adoption of draft 
law on 
13. Adoption of draft law on 
Financial disclosure for high-level 
State governance system improvement 
public officials 

~~~~~~~Analytical 

work 
for IGR. Public 
fSector Reform 
Credit. 

DFID/ 
IMF 

__ __ _ __ __ _ __ __ _ __ __ _ __ __ _ __ __ _ __ __ 
_ __ __ _ __ __ ___ 

Reduced bureaucracy, as measured
by business and other surveys

Establishment of a system of
financial disclosure for high level
public officials. Reduced public
perception of corruption as measured

by surveys

-42-

Measure 

Objective 

Banik Assistance 

Partner 
Programs 

Monitorable Result
MntrbeRsl

14. Adoption of draft law on 
"Changes to Laws on Territorial 
administration and Local 
governments" 

Clarification of state, territorial and 
localon 
odie, 
mandates and 
local governance bodies mandates and 
interrelationship 

Strengthening
Policy Capacity 
DFID/ 
IDF; Public Sector USAID 
Reform Project

Better balance between roles of
central and local Governments

15. Design of an anti-corruption 
program 

Combating corruption 

OSCE/Lead
Donor Group
SAC IV; IGR; 
(UK, UNDP
Anti-Corruption 
German 
IDF; Public Sector Embassy, 
Reform Project 
USAID,
UNDP,

Reduced corruption as measured by
business and other surveys

16. Adoption of legal statutes 

necessary for implementing 
on "Procurement" 

on"rcureent 

the law 

Regulation of the state procurement, 

ensuring transparency of procurements 

Strengthening 

Policy Capacity 
D

IDFefilny 

EBRD)

USAID 

Ill. Labor market and social protection

Reduced corruption and increased

efficiency 

in procurement.

rcueet

Increased efficiency of assistance 
reas 
programs 

SAC IV; SATAC
II, Poverty Study;
Social Protection 
Social 
Study; 
Protection Project

USAID 

EU 

Improved targeting of assistance to
vulnerable groups and verification of
number of recipients

17. Re-registration of vulnerable
families, assessment of the support 
program for vulnerable families, 
adoption of a new methodology for 
poverty level based on information 
received from re-registration and 
survey of households, creation of 
database on vulnerable groups and
assistance rendered to them

18. Adoption of laws on "State 
pensions" and "Social security 
identification code system" 

Completion of the first stage of pension SAC IV; SATAC 
reforms 
II; Social 
Protection Study; USAID
Health/Social 
Protection Project 

Introduction of identification code 
system 

19. Development of draft Labor 
Code and other related labor 
legislation, as well as the Law on 
Social Assistance Provision 

Reduction of poverty through 
improvements in the legal framework 
and increased labor markets flexibility 
and employment opportunities

Labor Market 
Study 

Unified regulation of state pensions
Legislative regulation of introduction

of identification code system
Better targeting

Adoption of the mentioned drafts.
Increased labor markets flexibility
and employment opportunities

-43-

Measure 

Objective 

Bank Assistance 

Partner 
Programs 

Monitorable Result
MntrbeRsl

20. Establishment of proportionality E 
a 
f 
amongst sizes of all types of 
pensuring adequacy for varous types of 
pensions 

Social Protection 
Study; 
Protection Project 

USAID 

Abolition of unjustified differences
amongst various types of pensions.
Reduced sever poverty

21. Establishment of differentiatedSoilPtein
21. Establishment of 
differentiated 
family allowances based on the 
Efficient use of state funds 

level of vulnerability of a family 

Social Protection
Study; 
Health/Social 

Protection Project

Poverty reduction, especially sever
poverty

22. Increased targeting in social 
assistance programs towards the 
children (below 16 years) 

23. Formation of proportionality 
amongst wages, pensions, 
allowances and stipends

24. Restructuring of State Fund for
Social Insurance and increasing 
efficiency of funds accumulation

Efficient use of state funds 

Reduction of social tension 

Child Welfare 
Study; Health/Social UNICEF 
Protection Project 

Improved social conditions for the
children, especially those from very
poor families

Elimination of existing obvious
difference

Reduction of social tension 

SAC IV 

USAID 

Timely payment of pensions

25. Improved assessment of family 
vulnerability level 
vulnerability level 

Increased targeting of social policy 

26. Ensuring economic and social 
protection of the families, and 
development of state programs for 
this purpose 

IV. Health

Reduction of social tension 

Child Welfare

Study; Social
Protection Study; 
Health/Social

Protection Project

Social Protection
Study; Health/ 
Social Protection 
Project

Assistance to the poorest

Increased level of economic and
social security of the families

27. Introduction of viable health 
insurance system 

Improved efficiency of financing the 
health care system 

Netherl's/ 
USAID 

Attraction of additional funds, more
efficient use of budgetary funds

28. Approval of a program for 
further reforms in health financing 
sphere 

Improved efficiency of financing the 
health care system and targeting in the 
system 

Health Projects; 
Sa t 

-

Decreasing need for budgetary
financing, development of voluntary
medical insurance.

44-

Measure 

Objective 

Bank Assistance 

Partner 

Programs

Monitorable Result

29. Introduction of family health 
care system 

Improve early detection and prevention Health Projects 
of diseases

.
.
30. Establishment or reconstruction 
of rralamblatrie 
of rural ambulatories 

~~~~~Progressive 

development of 
ambulatory-polclinilc system in 
districts

Health Projects 

UNDP 

31. Establishment of free of charge 
Increase in the affordability of medical 
health care system based on several care for most vulnerable groups of 
hospitals 
population 

Study 

32. Inclusion of persons in the 
targeted health care programs based 
on the vulnerability level of their 
families 
V. Education

Increasing in the targeting of the social Health Projects 
policy

USAID 

Make the first chain of health care
more affordable for the public.

Better health indicators
Reconstructed and re-equipped rural
abltre,hge 
ult 
n
ambulatories, higher quality and
affordable first-aid.
Better health indicators
The highest possible centralization of
free of charge medical care
guaranteed by the state
Better health indicators, especially
among the very poor
Assistance to the poorest
Better health indicators, especially

among the very poor

33. Design of state program for the 
development of education 

and development through targeted 
.
budgetary financing 

EnsuringeducationsphereeRestructuring 
Parliament approval of the state
Education Study; UNDP 
program for the development of
Education 
education
Projects; SAC IV 
Better use of scarce education funds

34. Modernization of teaching 
methods and essence of pre-school 
education 

Rendering assistance to families in 
teaching and educating children at pre- Education Projects UNICEF 
school age 

35. Increase in wages of public 
school teachers as stipulated in the 
law on Education 

Restructuring 
Increase in the efficiency of education Education Study; 
Education Projects 

Organization of short-term courses
for preparing for the school for
children of the age of 6 years and not
included in the pre-school
educational institutions

Improvement in the social conditions
of teaching personnel
Better quality teaching

Measure 

Objective 

Bank Assistance 

Partner 

Programs

Monitorable Result

-45-

36. Increase in wages of scientific
workers in scientific institutions as 
stipulated in the law on Scientific 
and Scientific-Technical Activities

37. Ensuring free of charge supply 
of textbooks to elementary level 

pupils 

.

.

.

Improvement in the social conditions of Financing 
children (especially those from 
Managemen 

vulnerable families) 

Project 

38. Introduction of financing 
scheme based on the number of 
pupils 

Increased efficiency in the operations of 
secondary education schools and 
opportunities for autonomy at the 
ools, 
estautonomal 
schools, ablishmentvofvoptimal 
teaching and administrative vacancies 
ratio 

Restructuring 
Education Study; 
Education Projects 

39. Design and implementation of a 
program for rural schools 
development 

Improved premises for rural schools, 
provision of personnel, inclusion of 
young specialists 

Restructuring 
Education Study;- 
Education Projects 

Improvement in the social conditions
of scientific personnel

Provision of free of charge textbooks
to all first grade pupils and socially

vulnerable elementary 

level pupils

Improved mechanisms for
management and financing of public
education, decentralization of the
management in the system and
introduction of financing scheme
based on the number of pupils,
providing for differentiated approach
to understaffed schools of frontier,

remote and isolated areas

Targeted preparation of wide profile
teaching personnel for understaffed
rural schools
Improved education outcome
indicators

Introduction of an additional

pedagogical experience

Ensuring social protection of
educational system employees 

40. Design and implementation of a 
methodology for additional 
compensation for long-term 
pedagogical experience

41. Inclusion in the free of charge 
educational schemes at the state 
educational institutions based on the 
level of family vulnerability 

.
.
.
Increased targetig of social policy 

Poverty Study; 
Child Welfare
Study; Education 
Projects 

Assistance to the poorest

Improved educational outcomes,
especially for the poorest

Measure 

Objective 

Bank Assistance 

Partner 
Programs

Monitorable Result

-46-

42. Design of the special education 
system rationalization program 

Imprvemet 
inthe rganzatin of 
Children's 
whor ne o 
Initiative IDF; 
Improvnt 
in 
education for children who need special Child Welfare 
teaching conditions 
Study 

UNICEF 
SIDA 

43 
.
.secondary 
43. Rationalization of 
and higher educational institutions 
network in accordance with the 
newr. nacrdnewt 
h 
requirements of labor market and 
social order 

. .

Study of the need for specialists from 
and higher educational 
institutions and based on this study 
fortnation and stateorder, introctin 
o L 
abor Market 
formation of state order, introduction of Study; Education 
contractual relationships, development Prjet
and implementation of a new scheme 
Projects 
for setting stipend levels, establishment 
of a unified discount system for tuition. 

~~~~~~~~~~~Optimization 

Implementation of structural reforms
in common and boarding schools
reforming part of institutions into
two-day schools, organization of
support services for children who
need special teaching conditions
of secondary and
higher educational institutions,
mig 
egal sta 
t 
utional
makg 
lega status of educatonal
consistent with existing
i 
nstitutions 
legislation and market relationships,
optimization of free of charge and
paid education schemes,
development of programs for staff

training

44. Design of a state program on 
higher education development 

VI. 

Utilities

45. Design and approval of a 
financial 
approvalmofoa 
finerancial rehabiliystai 
water and sewage system 

Bringing higher education in line with 
existing scientific, economic and social 
needs, as well as intemational 
educational practices, further 
development of multi-level educational 
system. 

Design and approval of draft law on
Higher Education and other legal and
procedural documents
Graduates' skills more suited to the
job market. Higher rate of
employment of graduates.

Final financial rehabilitation of the 
water and sewage system 

Municipal
Development/ 
Municipal Water
Project

Kf W 

Financial rehabilitation of the system

46. Implementaton of Municipal 
Water and Sanitation Program 
supported by the World Bank credit 

Rehabilitation of water and sewage 
systemnMunicipalWte 

Development] 

Proje unctpa Wtrareas

Improvement of municipal water and
sanitation services in the most needy

-47-

Measure 

Objective 

Bank Assistance 

Partner 
Programs 

Monitorable Result
MntrbeRsl

47. Design and approval of a 
financial rehabilitation 
aclean 
the heating system for 2002-2004 

Facilitating access to affordable and
heating services by the urban 
population in a fiscally sustainableGrn
manner

VII. Environmental protection

Heating Strategy 

ESMAP 

Financial rehabilitation of the system

48. a) Reduce losses and improve 
forest cover 
b) Maintain forest resources as a 
source of tradable carbon 

National Forest Program Developed and Natural Resource
implemented (2002 and onwards); 
Management and 
Reforestation of destroyed and 
Poverty Alleviation 
degraded forests; 
Project

Improve management and
conservation of forest resources

49. a) Improve management of land
and forest resources and pastures to
increase productivity of crop and 
livestock systems and non-timber 
forest products to improve house- 
hold nutrition and cash surpluses; 

b) Provide rural poor with choices 
that enable them to use grazing, 
arable land, forest and waters 
resources in more sustainable 
manner; 
c) Promote environmentally friendly 
and ultimately sustainable 
agriculture practices aiming at 
increased productivity and conser-
vation of landscapes

50. Pursue conservation of 
biodiversity and critical habitats 
through integrated ecosystem 
management with direct 
involvement of local communities 

Programs for management of natural
resources through better planning and
involvement of all levels stakeholders
implemented in selected watersheds;

Complex of measures oriented towards Natural ResourceSustainal 
reducing pressure on forests, water, 
Management and 
land resources implemented; 
Poverly Alleviation GEF 
Project

Soil erosion from arable land reduced; 
Improved inter-sector dialogue and
policy co-ordination to avoid further
deterioration of natural resources.

develo 
an
mountainous and forested areas
through improved management of

natural resource base.

Protected area management improved;
Public involvement and awareness 
increased; 

Biodiversity in forests, pastures and 

meadows maintained and improved.

Natural Resource 
Management and 
Poverty Alleviation 
Project

Improve protected areas management
and conserve globally important
biodiversity

48-

Measure 

Objective 

Bank Assistance 

Partner 

Programs

Monitorable Result

51. Increase public involvement in 
decision making, co-operate with 
society groups and mass media 
about environment issues 

Environment assessment regulations 
Support to PRSP
improved; 
Process; Natural
A system for transparent dissemination Resource Manage- UNDP 
of environmental information to policy ment and Poverty
makers and general public developed 
Alleviation Project
and implemented.

Elaborate policies for integrated water
sector management and implement a
National Strategy for Integrated Water Water Resources
Resources Management; 
Plan

Raise public awareness and release

52. a) Manage water resources in 
such a way to provide equitable 
access to all users. 

Institutional and administrative
framework for water resources 
Mun
management rationalized and optimized mnciPal Develo 

b) Secure water to meet basic 
human needs (drinking, sanitation, Water resources planning and allocation 
cooking, washing). 
of water resources carried out in an 
Natural Resource
integrated way through wide 
Management and
participation of stakeholders (users, 
Poverty Alleviation
planners and policy makers) at all levels Project
and stages of planning and
implementation.

VIII. Monitoring of indicators

USAID 

Improve management of water

Dutch 
Government

resources.

53. Design of monitoring and 
analysis system 

Ensuring efficient design and
implementation of PRSP, development 
of proposals in collaboration with 
territorial and local goverance bodies 

and the civil society

f 
Bank support or 
PRSP preparation UNDP 

DFID 

Monitoring of social and poverty
indicators, analysis of social policy
and socio-economic situation.

54. Survey of households 

Information necessary for the 
development of poverty reduction 

Bank support for 
PRSP preparation UNDP 

Data describing poverty and standard
of living

strategy

-49-

Development Priorities

Annex 10

Country 

.performance 

Major issue 

Country 
priority 

Bank 
priority 

Reconciliation of country and
Bank priorities

Poverty Reduc'n & Economic Manag't
Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 
Public sector 

Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 

Health, nutrition & population 

Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development 
Environment 

Social development 

Fair 

Good 
Fair 

Good 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 
Poor 

Fair 

High 

High

Reduction in overall 
poverty
Business climate 
Administrative 
Corruption 
High burden on women, Moderate Moderate
low labor force participa'n

High 
High
Moderate High 

Ongoing dialogue, including
IGR discussions

Quality, increased funding, Moderate High 
efficiency of resource use 
Quality, cost-efficiency Moderate High 

Improve targeting, 
effectiveness & admin'n

High 

High

Ongoing dialogue in context of
education credit
Ongoing dialogue in context of
health credit

Irrigation improvements High 
Deplet'n/ deg'n nat. 
High 
resources
Civil society 
participation 

Fair 

High
High

Moderate Dialogue in context of I-PRSP/
PRSP

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 

Moderate 

Private sector 

Energy & mining 
Infrastructure 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Consolidation, better 
regulation
Liberalization, less 
administrative corruption
Fiscal 
Water supply 

Moderate Moderate

High 

High

High 
High 

Moderate Availability of private finance
High

IBRn 29952

GEORGIA 

ToGShuEue4 

A 

46 

I 

29

T3

Alo t ver 

SI yember)on 

IOAZAKHASTAN

Al. 

i~ ~ ~ ~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~~~~...;z~~u

RUSSIANSTA

-40 

; 

4 

liA 

aAf 

\ 

/ 

< 

;^>fJ 

PRIMARYROADS 

40 

-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~AA.

4 

/ .

t JermuA 

2, 

> ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~ 

z 

OLOV 

IN E NAINA B UDEATIES

A 0 R I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~C 

64 

FIA

TURKEY 

RESERVOIRS 

' 

A 

F N TA, 

T. R.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

EINMR)CPR

Akhu~~ 

~~~ 

DilitEthtt,C 

tkhkl 

;e 

t8-h 

kh 

7- 

5YRI~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

AT 

0NA CAPMI TAUL 

R AI RAB 
REGINP60 BOUNDARIES

I

o 

Amik/T 

SoIrSI 

r 

) 

> 

-

<+ 

Angkhko 

' 

,,I 

Vo 

<rhoRjj,.Go 

A

-. h 

AZERBAIJAN 

kd- 

A ERB

N .'8 

(NACHITCj EV<Nf 

: ;yt7i 

9 X 

1.Vz 

79is 

LaA 

OTN 

As pTARAKv 

, REPUBLIC 

R 

OF ARMENil

OF IRAN~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1 

RSROR

ropJ,,p/ 

1>* 

0:n 

t0IA 

4' 

) 

t 

-- 

X 

-o 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60SKiIoolo,,eer 

39

Sio po, ol Tho odd 7Sok 

.

SLT 

TWiVIAt

R

6

ooooD,iooayh 

-hv 

ToOo,JobooI. 

V.4er

hoodoooo 

-' 

*os h 

.

'Kn 

e 

o

44. 

RA 

PRIMARY ROADS 

4 1991

