d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 44845- IND 

INVESTING IN INDONESIA’S INSTITUTIONS 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

AND THE 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY09-12 

FOR  

REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA 

July 22, 2008 

Indonesia Country Team, World Bank 
East Asia and Pacific Region 

The International Finance Corporation 
East Asia and Pacific Department 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) Report No. 27108-IND was discussed by the Board on 
November 25, 2003, and the last CAS Progress Report No. 36856-IND was dated September 5, 2006 

Vice President 
Country Director/Country 
Manager 
Task Team Leaders 

World Bank 
James W. Adams 
Joachim von Amsberg 

IFC 
Farida Khambata 
Adam Sack 

 Preeti Ahuja,  Wolfgang Fengler Hans Shrader,  Magdi Amin 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 

Currency unit: Rupiah (Rp) as of July 21, 2008 
US$1 = Rp. 9, 148  

FISCAL YEAR 

Until March 31, 2000: April 1 to March 31 
Until December 31, 2000: April 1 to December 31 
From January 1, 2001: January 1 to December 31 

This Country Partnership Strategy was prepared under the guidance of Joachim von Amsberg (Country 
Director) by a team led by Preeti Ahuja and Wolfgang Fengler. Joel Hellman was co-TTL of the CPS until 
March 2008.  The core team included Vincent S. Da Cruz, Peter Milne, Satiriantinah Bur Rasuanto and the 
following coordinators:  Hans Shrader and Magdi Amin (IFC), Peter Ellis (SD), Menno Pradhan (HD) and 
Imad Saleh (OSU).  In addition, the following colleagues have made important contributions to this 
strategy: Kundhavi Kadiresan, Christian Rey, Yogana Prasta, Rajat Narula, Suresh K. Khosla, Pantja 
Widdarini, Bakti Sudaryono from OSU; Sonia Hamman, Hongjoo Hahm, Sally Burningham, George 
Soraya, Scott Guggenheim, Joe Leitmann, Louise F. Scura, Ilham Abla, Erman Rahman, Susan Wong, Tim 
Brown, Mario Boccuci from SD; Vincente Paqueo, Mae Chu Chang, Clauda Rokx from HD; William 
Wallace, Shubham Chaudhuri, P.S. Srinivas, Vivi Alatas, Staffan Synnerstrom, Peter Rosner, Enrique 
Aldaz-Caroll, Soekarno Wirokartono, and Tim Bulman from PREM unit; Aliya Husain and Zafar Ahmed 
from PREMPR; Marlyn Caluag from CASU and Paramita Dewi, Wilza Samakoen and Erisa Dian for the 
logistical support. 

The IFC team integral to the development of this CPS was led by Adam Sack (Country Manager). 

Particular thanks go to advice on governance, anti-corruption and institutional reform provided by Daniel 
Kaufmann, Sanjay Pradhan, and Kai Kaiser.  

Finally, special thanks are extended to World Bank Group development partners for their contributions.  

ii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AAA 
ADB 
Bappenas 
BAWASDA 
BNPB 
BOS 
BPK 
BPKP 
BPS 
CAE 
CAS 
CCT 
CDD 
CIF 
CIR 
CPS 
CRMR 
CSO 
DGH 
DHS 
DWR 
DPL 
DSF 
EITI 
GAAPs 
GDP 
GFMRAP 
IBRD 
IDA 
IFC 
ILGR 
JRF 
KKPPI 
KPK 
MDF 
MDGs 
MIC 
MoF 
MoNE 
MoT 
NGO 
NPPO/LKKP 
PDAMs 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
Asian Development Bank 
State Ministry of Development Planning 
Badan Pengawasan Daerah (Local Government Audit Agency) 
National Disaster Management Agency 
School Operational Assistance 
State Audit Agency 
State Development Audit Agency 
Central Bureau of Statistics 
Country Assistance Evaluation 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Conditional Cash Transfer 
Community-Driven Development 
Climate Investment Funds 
Country Impact Review 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Country Results Monitoring Review 
Civil Society Organization 
Directorate General of Highways 
Directorate General of Human Settlement 
Directorate General of Water Resources 
Development Policy Loan 
Decentralization Support Facility 
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative 
Governance and Anti-Corruption Action Plans 
Gross Domestic Product 
Government Financial Management and Revenue Administration Project 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
International Development Association 
International Finance Corporation 
Initiatives for Local Government Reform 
Java Reconstruction Fund 
National Committee on Policy for Accelerating Infrastructure Provision 
Corruption Eradication Commission 
Multi-Donor (Trust) Fund 
Millennium Development Goals 
Middle Income Country 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of National Education 
Ministry of Trade 
Non-Government Organization 
National Public Procurement Office/Lembaga Kebijakan Pengadaan Pemerintah 
Urban Water Utility Companies 

iii 

 
 
 
 
PEACH 
PLN 
PNPM 
PNPM-Rural 
PNPM-Urban 
PPP 
REDD 
RPJM 
SISWA 
SOFEI 
SMEs 
SPADA 
STATCAP 
TA 
USDRP 
WBG 

Public Expenditure and Capacity Harmonization 
State-owned Electrical Utility 
National Community Empowerment Program 
National Program for Community Empowerment in Rural Areas Project 
National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas Project 
Public-Private Partnerships 
Reduce Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation 
Medium-Term Development Strategy 
System Improvement through Sector Wide Approaches 
Decentralization Support Facility for Eastern Indonesia 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Support for Poor and Disadvantaged Areas 
Statistical Capacity Building Project 
Technical Assistance 
Urban Sector Development and Reform Project 
World Bank Group 

iv 

 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................ 1 

CHAPTER I: INDONESIA’S INSTITUTIONS MATTER FOR DEVELOPMENT OUTCOMES ............... 3 

Indonesia has succeeded in consolidating its post-crisis achievements .................................. 4 
Indonesia is now better placed to meet its development challenges ....................................... 5 
Indonesia’s medium term outlook is favorable but there are downside risks .......................... 8 
Development outcomes depend on the quality of Indonesia’s institutions ............................. 9 

CHAPTER II: THE STRATEGIC APPROACH – INVESTING IN INDONESIA’S INSTITUTIONS ....... 12 

Lessons .................................................................................................................................. 12 
Approach ............................................................................................................................... 13 
Selectivity .............................................................................................................................. 14 
Principles and Practices ......................................................................................................... 15 
Instruments ............................................................................................................................ 16 
CHAPTER III: THE WBG PROGRAM – CURRENT CORE ENGAGEMENTS ................................. 17 
Cross-cutting Engagement 1: Central Government Institutions and Systems ....................... 20 
Cross-cutting Engagement 2: Sub-national Government Institutions and Systems .............. 21 
Core engagement 1 – Private Sector Development ............................................................... 23 
Core engagement 2 – Infrastructure ...................................................................................... 24 
Core engagement 3 – Community Development and Social Protection ............................... 26 
Core engagement 4 – Education ............................................................................................ 28 
Core engagement 5 – Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Mitigation ....................... 29 
Other Engagement areas ........................................................................................................ 31 
CHAPTER IV: PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION ............................................................................ 32 
The need for a flexible financing envelope ........................................................................... 33 
Cooperation with other stakeholders/partnerships ................................................................ 34 
Trust funds ............................................................................................................................. 34 
Knowledge engagements ....................................................................................................... 35 
Implementation and management principles ......................................................................... 37 
Addressing the risk of fraud and corruption in WBG-supported programs .......................... 37 
Results management framework ........................................................................................... 38 
Managing for risks................................................................................................................. 38 

v 

 
 
 
 
 
FIGURES  

Figure 1: Indonesia: per capita income, government debt, poverty; unemployment ...................... 3 
Figure 2:  The CPS approach: Investing in Indonesia's Institutions .............................................. 13 
Figure 3: Investing in Indonesia's institutions: current core engagements .................................... 17 
Figure 4: World Bank resource transfer to Indonesia.................................................................... 32 
Figure 5: Determining the financing envelope 2009-12 ................................................................ 33 

TABLES 

Table 1   : Indonesia 2004-2011 – Key macroeconomic indicators and projections ....................... 8 
Table 2   : Indonesia's debt position and projections ....................................................................... 9 
Table 3   : Enhancing institutional effectiveness through strengthened accountability and   
capacity in the WBG core engagements ...................................................................... 19 
Table 4   : National government institutions - Illustrative outcomes supported by WBG ............ 21 
Table 5   : Sub-national governments ─ Illustrative outcomes supported by WBG ..................... 23 
Table 6   : Private sector development ─ Illustrative outcomes supported by WBG .................... 24 
Table 7   : Infrastructure ─ Illustrative outcomes supported by WBG .......................................... 26 
Table 8   : Community Development and Social Protection ─ Illustrative outcomes supported    
by WBG ....................................................................................................................... 28 
Table 9   : Education ─ Illustrative outcomes supported by WBG ............................................... 29 
Table 10 : Environmental Sustainability and Disaster mitigation ─ Illustrative outcomes 
supported by WBG ...................................................................................................... 31 
Table 11 : Core engagements: Alignment of instruments ............................................................. 36 

BOXES 

Box 1: Key facts on the impact of rising oil and food prices .......................................................... 4 
Box 2: Use of the term “institutions” ............................................................................................ 13 

APPENDICES AND ANNEXES 

Appendices 
Appendix 1:   Cross-cutting and Core Engagements  
Appendix 2:   Results Framework  
Appendix 3:   Progress towards the MDGs  
Appendix 4:   Poverty and Inequality in Indonesia: Summary of Recent Poverty Assessments  
Appendix 5:  
2008 Doing Business Rankings 
Appendix 6:   Toward Enhanced Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Risk Management  
Appendix 7:   Environmental Indicators (Little Green Data Book 2008)  
Appendix 8:   Country Assistance Strategy FY04-08 Completion Report  
Attachment A (Results Framework Completion Matrix)  
Attachment B (Planned Lending Program & Actual Deliveries FY04-FY08)  
Attachment C (Projects Closed During CAS FY04-08 Period) 
Attachment D (Key Non-lending Program & Actual Deliveries FY04-FY08) 
Appendix 9:   Civil Society Consultations 
Appendix 10:   Addressing the Issue of Fraud and Corruption in WBG Supported Programs 
Appendix 11:   Management of Trust Fund Operations 
Attachment A (Trust Funds Portfolio)  
Attachment B (Key Active Trust Funds)  

vi 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Standard Annexes 
Annex A2:   
Country At-A-Glance  
Annex B2:   
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 
Annex B3:   
Indicative IRBD Lending Program, FY09-12 
Annex B3:  
IFC Investment Operations Program 
Annex B4:   
Summary of Non-lending Services (Planned Key Activities (FY09-12)) 
Annex B5:   
Social Indicators 
Annex B6:  
Key Economic Indicators 
Annex B7:   Key Exposure Indicators 
Annex B8:   Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 
Annex B8:  
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio  

Map of Indonesia    IBRD No. 33420RI 

vii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1. 
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2009-12 marks Indonesia’s re-emergence 
as a confident middle-income country (MIC) that has graduated from IDA, and is enjoying a 
rising regional and global standing. With a Government that is demanding dependable and timely 
support for its own development priorities and its poverty-reduction agenda, this CPS positions 
the World Bank Group (WBG) to respond better to these challenges, thereby ensuring the WBG’s 
continued relevance in the new Indonesia.  

2. 
Ten years ago, Indonesia was in the middle of an extremely severe economic crisis. 
Today, Indonesia is a different country. It has embarked upon a far-reaching institutional 
transformation and has become one of the region’s most vibrant democracies. Its sub-national 
governments are now major players in service delivery. The fight against corruption has moved to 
the center of the Government’s program and relevant institutions have been strengthened.  

3. 
In social and economic terms, Indonesia has also seen much progress. Its real GDP has 
been growing at 5 to 6 percent annually since 2002. Prudent fiscal management and a strategy of 
fiscal consolidation have continued the significant reduction in government debt levels. Inflation 
has largely been kept under control and Indonesia has a strong balance of payments, with record 
exports. Public investment has steadily increased over the past five years. Poverty has declined 
and public services are receiving additional resources, including through community-driven 
development programs.  

4. 
While Indonesia is doing well it could be doing far better across the areas of poverty 
reduction, service delivery and governance. In 2007, nearly half of Indonesia’s population was 
still either poor or had per-capita consumption levels of less than one-third above the national 
poverty line. Employment growth has been slower than population growth. Public services 
remain inadequate for a middle-income economy. Many regions, especially in eastern Indonesia, 
are lagging behind and Indonesia is doing particularly poorly in a number of health and 
infrastructure related indicators. As a result, Indonesia may yet fail to reach several of its MDG 
targets.  
5. 
In meeting these challenges Indonesia’s main constraint today is not a lack of financial 
resources but the need for effective and accountable institutions that can translate available 
resources into better development outcomes. For this reason, “Investing in Indonesia’s 
Institutions” is the theme of the CPS. This focus also recognizes that WBG financing now 
represents such a small share of Indonesia’s national budget that it can only make a demonstrable 
impact if it leverages a much larger share of Indonesia’s own public spending or private 
investment.  

6. 
Building on the governance focus of the WBG Country Assistance Strategy for 2004 to 
2008, this CPS emphasizes engagements with government counterparts and other stakeholders 
who are committed to addressing critical governance and institutional challenges. With this 
approach, the WBG wants to support success stories of replicable institutional reform. As such, 
the emphasis of the financing and knowledge program will continue to shift towards directly 
supporting successful or promising priority programs of the Government. This approach aims to 
improve existing government programs, strengthen the institutions involved, both state and non-
state, and encourage others to replicate them.  

1 

 
 
 
7. 
The application of this “institutional lens” will itself provide a focus for the WBG 
program: investment, together with advisory and analytical services, will be concentrated on the 
institutions, sectors, systems and programs where this approach is most likely to succeed. In 
addition to its cross-cutting engagements to strengthen central and sub-national government 
institutions and systems, this CPS identifies five thematic areas that are expected to form the core 
of the WBG’s engagement:  (i) Private Sector Development; (ii) Infrastructure; (iii) Community 
Development and Social Protection; (iv) Education; and (v) Environmental Sustainability and 
Disaster Mitigation.  

8. 
However, this list of core engagements is dynamic and some of these areas may change, 
especially as Indonesia will be holding general elections in 2009 and the Government’s medium-
term development plan (RPJM) for 2010-2014 will be launched in 2010. The WBG’s capacity to 
implement this strategy will therefore depend on a degree of flexibility in its program and also on 
its capacity to build and maintain relationships in other areas where new opportunities may 
emerge.  

9. 
Implementing this strategy will also require some flexibility in the WBG’s financing 
instruments and envelope. The two factors that will determine the level of engagement, demand 
and performance, are prone to change across sectors, particularly in view of the upcoming 
elections, and cannot be predicted with accuracy for the entire CPS period. However, the 
Government’s results in implementing the reform agenda, including through development loans, 
Indonesia’s strong macroeconomic progress and Indonesia’s financing needs, together make a 
strong case for reversing the decline in recent years in the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (IBRD) exposure. 

10. 
A notional annual IBRD investment of about US$2 billion is expected. Actual annual 
lending volumes could vary significantly up or downwards, but will be commensurate with 
continued robust macroeconomic performance, financial stability and momentum on key reforms. 
IFC expects to invest about US$300 million annually in the priority sectors of finance, 
infrastructure and commodity-based supply chains. The investment program is expected to grow 
in the event of an acceleration of reform in private infrastructure provision.  

11. 
Trust funds and grant financing through trust funds will continue to be an integral part of 
the WBG program. The majority of trust funds will be aligned with the WBG’s core engagement 
areas. Trust funds also allow for knowledge engagements outside these areas and support the 
harmonization and alignment of funding from various development partners behind core 
government programs. 

 12. While the share of the WBG’s financial contribution to Indonesia’s development is 
expected to decline as the economy expands, knowledge partnerships will become ever more 
important. The WBG will build on its existing program of analytical and advisory services, and 
align this program with its core engagements. In doing so the WBG will also ensure that 
analytical and technical support strengthens national institutions and country systems and, 
increasingly, will have this type of work led by, and based within, Indonesian institutions.  

13. 
This CPS is designed to use the WBG’s limited resources to better meet Indonesia’s 
needs and aspirations as a middle-income country. By leveraging Indonesia’s own institutions, 
the CPS aims to help the country to move to the next phase of its ongoing and incomplete 
transformation — a phase that once complete will allow Indonesia to take its place among 
Southeast Asia’s most successful economies. 

2 

 
 
 
CHAPTER I: INDONESIA’S INSTITUTIONS MATTER FOR DEVELOPMENT OUTCOMES 

14. 
Indonesia has emerged a very different country today compared with the country that 
endured deep economic and political crises a decade ago. It has embarked upon a far-reaching 
institutional transformation and has become one of the region’s most vibrant democracies. The 
first phase of this transformation, from 1998 to 2003, was a period of radical political and 
economic change, typified by democratization and the largest ever decentralization of 
government. The second phase, from 2004 to 2008, was a period of consolidating democratic 
institutions and returning to political and macroeconomic stability, most notable in Indonesia’s 
first direct presidential elections in 2004 and in its debt levels falling to below 35 percent of GDP. 
As a result, Indonesia resumed higher levels of growth and has now re-emerged as a confident 
middle-income country (MIC). 

15. 
Despite these achievements, Indonesia’s transition is far from complete. Poverty levels 
fell quickly in the years after the crisis, but have been almost stagnant since 2002 (Figure 1). In 
order to achieve the standards of service delivery and private sector investment required to reach 
its full potential, Indonesia needs to improve its institutional effectiveness, particularly in the 
areas of accountability, corruption control and capacity. Better development outcomes now 
largely depend on addressing fragmentation, capacity weaknesses, capture and corruption in 
Indonesia’s institutions.  

Figure 1: Indonesia: per capita income, government debt, poverty; unemployment 

GNI per capita

Centra l Government Debt to GDP Ratio

)

P
P
P

(

D

S

U

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

P overty Rate

)

%

(

e

t

a

r

t

n
e

m

y
o
p

l

m

e
n

U

35.0
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
-

25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Unemployment Rates 

 Youth
27.9 

28.1

29.6

33.4

30.6

25.1

24.1

 All
9.1 

8.1

9.7

9.9

11.2

10.3

9.1

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: World Bank staff calculations, BPS (SAKERNAS labor force surveys).  
Note:  Central Government Debt to GDP Ratio was recalculated in 2000. Poverty data were only available 
on an annual basis from 2002 onwards. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia has succeeded in consolidating its post-crisis achievements 
16. 
After a turbulent first five years following the crisis, Indonesia began to consolidate its 
democratic institutions with the parliamentary election in April 2004 and the first ever direct 
presidential election in mid-2004. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono (SBY) won 61 percent of the vote 
in a second-round run-off on a platform based on promises to fight corruption, jumpstart the 
economy, and ensure social cohesion and stability. Given that President SBY’s own Democrat 
Party is in a minority in Parliament, the Government has chosen to govern on the basis of a broad 
consensus that has promoted stability. 

17. 
Sub-national governments have become major players in service delivery and their role in 
public investment and economic development is increasing. Indonesia’s almost 500 provincial, 
district and city governments now undertake nearly 40 percent of public spending. 
Decentralization contributed to the calming of separatist sentiments and regional conflicts and the 
Government received international praise for signing a peace agreement in mid-2005 with 
separatist rebels in Aceh, ending a three-decade conflict. There has also been a marked reduction 
in tensions in Central Sulawesi, Maluku, and Papua. A number of sub-national governments have 
undertaken major reforms of their public sector systems, introducing among others performance-
based budgeting and one-stop public services.  

18. 
The macro-economy continues to be strong; however there are areas of concern. In the 
context of a slowing global economy, Indonesia’s economic growth accelerated to a 10-year high 
of 6.3 percent in 2007; thereafter revised downward to 6.0 percent for 2008. Domestic demand, 
particularly private investment, has been the main driver of recent growth rates. Real GDP has 
been growing at 5 to 6 percent annually since 2002 and, in 2005 per-capita real GDP for the first 
time exceeded the level reached in 1997, immediately prior to the crisis. The Government’s 
prudent fiscal management and a strategy of fiscal consolidation have continued the significant 
reduction in government debt levels, which are estimated to fall to 32 percent by end-2008. To 
date, inflation has achieved year-to-year increases of 11 percent in June due in part to the increase 
of fuel prices averaging over 125 percent in 2005, and over 28 percent in May 2008 (Box 1).  

Box 1: Key facts on the impact of rising oil and food prices 

• 

International oil prices doubled since mid-2007 and food prices increased 20 percent over 
the first half of 2008, a scale of increase not seen since the 1970s.  
• Since 2004, Indonesia has become a net importer of oil but remains a net exporter of 
energy. Indonesia has announced plans to leave OPEC in 2009. 
• Despite record high oil prices, oil and gas revenues have hardly increased but regular 
revenues have been performing strongly.  
• Despite a 28.7 percent increase of fuel prices in May 2008, energy subsidies are likely to 
exceed US$15 billion in 2008 if oil prices stay substantially above US$100 per barrel.  
Rising fuel prices have in part, impacted adversely the domestic electricity supply.  
• The poor have been hurt by rising food commodity prices because they spend more than 
half of their consumption resources on food.  
• High commodity prices also present opportunities for Indonesia, particularly for net 
producers of agricultural goods and minerals.  

19. 
Indonesia has a strong balance of payments, with record exports, and achieved a current 
account surplus of US$12.7 billion in 2007. This has contributed to a sizeable accumulation of 

4 

 
 
 
official international reserves, which approached US$60 billion in mid-2008, providing Indonesia 
with a cushion against external shocks. With fiscal consolidation, public investment has steadily 
increased over the past five years. Private investment has only more recently recovered and 
although it still remains below pre-crisis levels, it is rising fast. Following the crisis, investment 
rates fell from 30 percent before the crisis to a low of 19 percent of GDP in 2002. In 2007, 
Indonesia’s investment rate was 25 percent of GDP. 

20. 
Faced with one of the world’s most devastating natural disasters in recent history — the 
December 2004 earthquake in Aceh and the resulting tsunami — the Government staged an 
appropriate response and the reconstruction effort is now making steady progress. The lessons 
from that disaster have been applied successfully in a number of other major disasters Indonesia 
has had to face, most notably the earthquakes in Nias and Yogyakarta in 2005 and 2006, 
respectively.  

Indonesia is now better placed to meet its development challenges  
21. 
Indonesia has re-emerged with increasing regional and global standing. It now has the 
possibility to join the ranks of the world’s strongest economic performers and, if Indonesia can 
sustain growth rates close to those of India, China or Vietnam, the world’s fourth most populous 
nation can make poverty history within a decade. High and inclusive growth would help replicate 
the economic and social dynamism of other Asian countries that attract national and international 
investments and nurture innovation. Building on its existing economic and political fundamentals, 
Indonesia today has the opportunity to create this virtuous cycle of sustainable and inclusive 
growth. 

22. 
Success, however, is not guaranteed. The next phase of its transformation is likely to be 
even more challenging than the last one, because Indonesia will have to enter into a period of 
second generation reforms. It will need to provide services such as more sophisticated 
infrastructure, and secondary and tertiary education, as well as a sustainable health insurance 
system. If Indonesia fails to address these second generation reforms there is a risk that it will fall 
into the middle-income trap — squeezed between the innovations of high-income countries and 
the low labor cost of low-income countries. The consequences of this could include stagnant 
poverty levels, the depletion of natural resources, relative isolation and rising threats to social 
cohesion. 

23. Which of these paths Indonesia follows will largely depend on how successful it is in 
improving its governance — broadly defined as the ability of its public institutions to effectively 
work for the common good.1 Indonesia’s transition has come a long way in terms of the public’s 
voice and the state’s stability. Future success now depends on making progress in improving the 
quality of Indonesia’s institutions, particularly in the public sector. This includes improving 
regulatory quality, the rule of law, and the control of corruption through more accountability, as 
well as enhancing institutional capacity. For sustainable, inclusive growth, Indonesia will have to 
ensure effective implementation of key reforms to the investment climate to both permit the 
private sector to drive growth and to increase the capacity of public institutions to deliver public 
goods and share the benefits of growth. These are undoubtedly challenges of enormous 
proportions. 

1 For a full definition of governance and anti-corruption, see the GAC-Strategy: Strengthening World Bank 
Group Engagement on Governance and Anti-Corruption, March 2007, World Bank. 
http://www.worldbank.org/html/extdr/comments/governancefeedback/gacpaper-03212007.pdf 

5 

 
 
 
                                                 
Poverty and unemployment 
24. 
The poverty rate has fallen by about one percentage point per year since 2003 and 
reached 17.8 percent in 2006 falling further to 16.6 percent in 2007 (see Appendix 4). The 
percentage of people living on less than US$1-a-day was already below the MDG target by 2006. 
Yet in 2007, nearly half of Indonesia’s population was still either poor or had per-capita 
consumption levels of less than a third above the national poverty line. These “near-poor” 
households are vulnerable to expenditure shocks, which can drive them into poverty. Between 
2003 and 2004, 40.5 percent of initially poor households escaped poverty, but over one-third of 
the households that had not been poor fell into poverty.  Indonesia’s progress towards the 
millennium development goal to promote gender equality and empower women (MDG 3) is 
shown in Appendix 3.  Indonesia has done extremely well in narrowing the gap between male and 
female enrollment rates in primary and secondary schools. However, much remains to be done. 
Women’s health issues including maternal mortality rates, continue to pose a challenge. New 
issues are resulting from decentralization and rapidly increasing migration of female workers. 
Women also continue to lag behind men in the labor market and in terms of the percentage of 
earned income.  Addressing these challenges will be all the more important as surging food and 
other commodity prices — coming at a time of record high international oil prices (Box 1) and 
coinciding with an unfavorable international economic environment — are likely to affect poor 
and near-poor households disproportionately.  

25. 
The open unemployment rate rose from 9.1 percent in 2002 to 10.3 percent in 2006, and 
fell back to 9.1 percent in 2007. Non-participation rates have also risen, and youth unemployment 
remains high, while median wages have remained the same since the crisis. In agriculture, 
productivity levels remain low and growth is stagnating. Only about 30 percent of Indonesia’s 
growing labor force appears to have made the transition to what might be considered high-value-
added activities.  

26. 
As part of its poverty reduction program, the Government is scaling up its community-
level infrastructure support by consolidating over 50 CDD programs into a National Community 
Empowerment Program (PNPM-Mandiri) and increasing its investment. This program will be 
instituted in every village and urban community of the country by 2009-10 in a major effort to 
enhance inclusiveness in Indonesia’s growth. The Kecamatan Development Program and the 
Urban Poverty Program on which PNPM is based have successfully established community-
based, community-driven approaches to poverty alleviation and realized their intended results in 
terms of physical outputs, institutional development, improved governance and increased 
incomes. They will now need to be integrated more effectively with sectoral service delivery 
programs.  

27. 
Following the adjustments of fuel prices in 2005 and 2008, the Government is also 
considering further cuts in regressive subsidies and reallocating the additional funds to targeted 
cash transfer programs designed to compensate the poor.  

Social services 
28. 
The Government has been investing additional resources in public service provision to 
address capacity weaknesses and the resulting poor development outcomes. Infant and child 
mortality rates have been falling steadily, and there has been good progress on primary and 
secondary enrollment rates. There is also some recent evidence of improvements in the learning 

6 

 
 
 
 
achievements of children as recorded in the 2003 and 2006 Program for International Students 
Assessment (PISA) mathematics assessments.  

29. Much effort is still required to ensure that Indonesia meets all MDG targets (see 
Appendix 3). Since 2002, child malnutrition rates have stagnated and in some provinces 
increased. Maternal mortality rates, already the highest in the region, have not improved. 
Sewerage coverage (estimated at 1.3 percent) is among the lowest is Asia. The Government is in 
the middle of the decentralization of public services. Many of the gaps in the provision of basic 
services are due to the difficulties in rebalancing the roles of provincial and district level 
governments in service provision, and shifting the public sector’s role from a provider to a 
regulator and monitor of private health services.   

30. 
Indonesia is also one of the countries most affected by avian influenza and a potential 
source country of a possible human flu pandemic, as well as of a highly infectious trans-boundary 
animal disease. As such, Indonesia is a prime candidate for better surveillance for human 
influenza-like illnesses.  

Investment climate and infrastructure 
31. 
Investment rates are improving, but are still below pre-crisis levels and in certain key 
sectors such as mining, as well as in policy areas, such as labor reforms, much progress is still 
needed. Indonesia ranks low in several global comparative indicators of the investment climate, 
including Doing Business (see Appendix 5). The Government has taken steps to address different 
aspects of the investment climate through policy reform packages covering key areas of concern 
of private investors, such as taxes, customs, investment frameworks, and the financial sector, and 
has promulgated Law No. 25 of 2007 for improving the investment climate; but several 
challenges remain. Institutional capture is a major obstacle in this area, with many reforms still to 
be implemented effectively and evenly on the ground.  

32. 
Improving the quality of Indonesia’s infrastructure is another essential aspect of 
strengthening Indonesia’s competitiveness. Road congestion is expected to pose significant 
challenges and electricity system capacity has been unable to meet growing demand. Retail tariff 
levels remain below cost in almost all infrastructure sectors, discouraging investment in critical 
sectors such as power and water. There continue to be considerable operational and financial 
problems to overcome and land acquisition procedures for infrastructure projects remain 
cumbersome and often inequitable.  

33. 
The challenges confronting the transport sector range from weaknesses in capacity, 
unavailability of long-term financing, to regulatory issues.  As in many other parts of the world, 
the Indonesian transport sector is impacted by considerable governance challenges. The 
Government recognizes the importance of essential infrastructure to promote private sector 
activity, both through public sector investments and public-private partnerships (PPP), and set up 
a National Committee on Policy for Accelerating Infrastructure Provision (KKPPI) in 2005. 
While KKPPI has been successful in preventing non-compliant projects from materializing, it has 
yet to make a significant breakthrough in developing transparent and competitive PPP projects. 

Environmental challenges 
34. 
Indonesia has begun to play an important international role in environmental 
sustainability issues. Two thirds of Indonesians live in rural areas and are directly or indirectly 
dependent on communal land, and coastal and environmental resources that are being depleted 

7 

 
 
 
rapidly.  The other third is affected by environmental conditions in urban areas, such as water and 
air pollution, flooding, congestion and noise. Indonesia is prone to a range of natural and man-
made risks, as well as the impacts of climate change.  

35. 
Deforestation rates in Indonesia are among the highest in the world, with substantial 
emissions of greenhouse gases, as a result. In part, this is the result of the influence of vested 
interests contributing to illegal logging. Mitigation efforts and corruption control are crucial, and 
the Government is working to set up the institutional framework, coordinating mechanisms and 
financial as well as programming capacity for addressing climate change. In the coming years, 
substantial new funds and instruments will become available to address global public goods. 
Indonesia is in a unique position both to influence how these funds are used and to tap into these 
funds to strengthen its own mitigation and adaptation efforts.  

Indonesia’s medium term outlook is favorable but there are downside risks 
36. 
Indonesia is expected to weather the current global slowdown reasonably well. Growth is 
projected to slow to 6.0 percent in 2008 before gradually returning to trend growth rates 
approaching 7.0 percent. These projections anticipate some slowing in export growth from recent 
rates, but foresee domestic demand and especially investment and consumption remaining robust 
as the economy’s momentum from 2007 carries into 2008.   

Table 1: Indonesia 2004-2011 – Key macroeconomic indicators and projections 

Real GDP growth (%) 
Exports (GNFS) (billion USD) 
Imports (GNFS) (billion USD) 
Current account balance (billion USD) 
Budget deficit (% of GDP) 
Consumer price index (% change) 
Growth of M2 (%) 

2004 
5.0 
84.2 
71.3 
3.3 
-1.0 
6.2 
8.1 

Actual 
2005 
2006 
5.7 
5.5 
99.8 
115.0 
91.3 
95.5 
0.3 
9.9 
-0.5 
-0.9 
10.5 
13.1 
16.4 
14.9 

2007 
6.3 
130.4 
108.5 
11.0 
-1.3 
6.5 
18.9 

2008 
6.0 
152.6 
117.9 
8.5 
-1.8 
12.5 
11.4 

Projected 
2009 
2010 
6.4 
6.7 
164.1 
180.0 
123.2 
132.6 
4.9 
1.6 
-1.6 
-1.3 
8.0 
6.0 
14.4 
13.1 

2011 
6.7 
200.2 
143.0 
-1.3 
-1.0 
6.5 
12.6 

37. 
Indonesia is less exposed to external shocks than other economies in the region. Its trade 
share (the ratio of imports plus exports to GDP) is relatively small even accounting for its size, at 
about 50 percent of GDP. Firms largely finance their investment through retained earnings. The 
banking sector is in sound shape and is relatively unexposed to developments in troubled 
financial markets elsewhere. The structure and destination of Indonesia’s exports also protect its 
external sector from the current downturn. Indonesia’s exports are increasingly directed towards 
emerging economies, particularly those in Asia. Almost two-thirds of Indonesia’s exports are 
primary products and the prices of these, while projected to decrease from recent highs, are likely 
to remain high into the next decade, according to World Bank forecasts.  

38. 
However, turmoil in the global economy and the possibility of a prolonged and more 
severe global slowdown makes any projection highly uncertain. External developments will 
determine the degree to which Indonesia’s growth moderates in 2008 and the speed of recovery in 
2009 and beyond. Commodity prices stabilizing near current levels are likely to induce ongoing 
production growth, while minimizing both the domestic and international disruption flowing from 
the changes in relative prices. However, further increases in the price of oil are likely to threaten 
external demand growth, as well as weaken the Government’s finances. Meanwhile, further 
turbulence in international financial markets would likely limit demand for Indonesia’s exports 

8 

 
 
 
 
and limit investment growth through more expensive credit, weakened confidence among 
domestic investors, and more costly financing for the Government. 

39. 
High commodity prices have so far had a positive impact on Indonesia’s terms of trade, 
on its current account and on its growth. As a resource rich country Indonesia stands to benefit in 
many ways from the current commodity boom. But high commodity prices have also had adverse 
impacts on inflation, the fiscal balance and income distribution. And further increases in 
commodity and oil prices pose risks if the fiscal and distributional effects are not managed 
properly. Indonesia’s budget deficit so far has remained at sustainable levels, despite the 
pressures from ballooning energy subsidies, in part because of the government’s decision to 
reduce fuel subsidies in late May and in part because government revenues have grown 
significantly since late 2007. But the budgetary costs of energy subsidies and measures to protect 
consumers from increases in food prices threaten Indonesia’s hard-earned fiscal discipline. 

40. 
Though Indonesia’s gross financing needs are still high because of the maturity structure 
of its existing debt, Indonesia has been able, through prudent fiscal policy, to bring its public debt 
to GDP ratio to levels well below what had been forecast five years ago at the time the last CAS 
was prepared. Projections indicate that this trend is likely to continue. 

Table 2: Indonesia's debt position and projections 

Total debt outstanding disbursed 
(US$m)a 
Net disbursements (US$m)a 
Total debt service (US$m)a  
Total outstanding government debt to 
GDP (%) 

2004 

2005 

2006 

137,026

130,651

128,736

2008 

2007 
2009 
2010 
Estimate
Projected 
136,640 137,458 146,611 151,687 158,277

2011 

-5,630
31,519
59.7

-2,440
34,361
47.1

-13,417
30,669
38.5

-10,118
26,981
34.5

-9,667
28,783
31.3

-6,366 
25,209 
29.6 

-7,453
23,661
27.7

-5,886
22,952
26.3

Notes: a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital. 

Development outcomes depend on the quality of Indonesia’s institutions 
41. 
Today, the main constraint for Indonesia’s development outcomes is not a lack of 
financial resources but the need for its institutions to translate the available resources into better 
development outcomes. Indonesia’s institutional reforms have made advances in several 
important aspects of governance. In the past ten years, the voice of the Indonesian public has been 
considerably strengthened, through civil society and free media organizations, as well as through 
democratic elections. Delivering better development outcomes now depends largely on improving 
government effectiveness through strengthening accountability and capacity at all levels, as well 
as ensuring that much of future growth is driven by private sector development.  

Institutional Capacity 
42. 
Indonesia faces a challenge in that a large number of government agencies are 
fragmented and have overlapping authorities, hampering efficient decision-making. The 
implementation of the institutional framework governing the division of roles, responsibilities and 
resources between the national and local governments remains incomplete. These challenges are 
particularly severe in the infrastructure sector. In the new Indonesia, power has been dispersed to 
many actors, without establishing clarity on their respective roles and responsibilities. As a result, 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it often takes longer to reach decisions on important investments and to implement them 
subsequently.  

43. 
The capabilities of Indonesia’s civil servants also need upgrading in various areas to 
enable them to perform their functions effectively. This is particularly true for local governments 
as decentralization has dramatically increased their responsibilities without commensurate 
improvements in capacity. Local-level social service delivery particularly suffers as a result. 
These are the result of weaknesses in recruitment and training systems, inefficient allocation of 
civil servants, a compensation system that is not entirely transparent or merit-based, and the 
absence of credible sanctions for low performance and corruption. Incentive structures are not 
conducive to initiative or cooperation. In addition, the “command and control” type of 
management practiced during the Soeharto years has broken down in many areas, but modern 
management principles have still to be applied. 

44. 
In response to these challenges, the Government is piloting public sector reforms of 
specific systems in selected ministries, agencies and localities. The reforms involve strengthening 
human-resource capacity, revising standard operating procedures, clarifying job descriptions and 
job grading, enhancing performance incentives through greater pay and promotion linkages, and 
improving human-resource management functions. The reforms also seek to strengthen policy 
research and analysis within government ministries and agencies. The State Minister for 
Empowerment of State Apparatus (Kementrian Negara Pendayagunaan Aparatur Negara/PAN) 
intends to extend these reforms to other public sector institutions. This is a strategy that uses a 
phased approach to prevent disrupting standard practices and routines in the initial stages, before 
demonstrating noticeable improvements in public sector performance via the pilot reform 
programs.  

Institutional Accountability  
45. 
In its fight against graft and corruption, the Government has strengthened a number of 
anti-corruption institutions. High-level corruption investigations and, indeed, prosecutions have 
become increasingly common. The Government is beginning also to implement important 
reforms in key systems for public financial management, public procurement, business regulation, 
auditing, and monitoring and evaluation. Although these measures rarely make headlines, they 
often have an important and lasting impact on the opportunities and incentives for corruption. 
Indonesia has made major advances over the past five years in establishing a sound legal and 
administrative framework for the modernization of public financial management in line with good 
international practice.  

46. 
Despite these positive steps, these long-standing issues require more time if they are to be 
thoroughly addressed and effectively tackled. Indonesia’s government agencies require even 
stronger fiduciary control systems, rules and methods for ensuring transparency of information, 
and effective investigative and disciplinary capabilities. There is also a lack of adequate 
frameworks for measuring and monitoring results, and social accountability mechanisms that 
solicit, assess and ensure implementation of client feedback on performance. 

47. While some of the lagging areas are the result of inefficient government structures or lack 
of capacity, in some instances deliberate institutional capture stifles reform and fosters corruption. 
In Indonesia’s as yet incomplete transition, some government and non-government agencies are 
still beholden to powerful interest groups. As a result, they can interfere with the efforts that the 

10 

 
 
 
Government and the country as a whole are working towards, in order to achieve better 
development outcomes.  

48. 
The next phase in Indonesia’s transition will depend on tackling all of these 
organizational and institutional issues. There now exists an opportunity to support this next phase 
of institutional transition as many government agencies have taken ownership of these reforms. 
Institutional change and reform will now require working with and through institutions where 
opportunities for supporting such change exist, identifying committed reformers, where and when 
they arise, and providing them with dedicated support. 

11 

 
 
 
CHAPTER II: THE STRATEGIC APPROACH – INVESTING IN INDONESIA’S INSTITUTIONS 

Lessons 
49. 
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) is anchored in the World Bank’s East Asia and 
Pacific Regional Strategy2 and in the WBG’s strategy for Middle Income Countries.  Indonesia 
presents the WBG, an opportunity to partner with a country, of enhanced regional and global 
standing; an opportunity for the WBG to contribute to government efforts at accelerating and 
sharing gains in growth and socio-economic prosperity. This CPS is based on consultations with 
government and non-government institutions (see Appendix 9 on civil society consultations) as 
well as lessons and recommendations from assessments including the World Bank Country 
Assistance Evaluation (CAE), the IFC Country Impact Review (CIR), the work underlying the 
Country Results Monitoring Review (CRMR), and the CAS Completion Report (CAS-CR).  

50. 
The assessments consider that the WBG’s policy, investments and analytical support 
have contributed to the Government’s successes and achievements, notably macroeconomic 
stability, institutional reforms and provision of some core services, including through the 
Development Policy Loan (DPL) series, the community-driven development (CDD) programs, 
and education sector interventions. The WBG was also effective in using its role as a key 
convener of development partners in response to disasters and played a significant role in 
providing quality timely analysis and advice, and in building effective partnerships.  

51. 
However, overall the WBG’s investment financing support has been limited, relative to 
Indonesia’s needs for more and higher quality investments. A combination of the perceived high 
transaction costs of following WBG procedures, lagging counterpart commitment in some areas, 
and inadequate government capacity in some sectors, has led to slow project preparation and 
implementation, and delayed the realization of outcomes. A number of rural and social service 
delivery projects (e.g., in agriculture and health) have also struggled to meet their objectives. 
Infrastructure was cited among the areas where far more progress is needed. The reviews 
unanimously stressed the need for greater improvements to the investment climate. The linkages 
between analytical and advisory activities (AAA) and other WBG operations need strengthening 
as well. 

52. 
The WBG’s own managerial, operational and administrative systems in Indonesia have 
been strained by the significant expansion of the WBG’s program, especially the growth of the 
activities supported by trust funds. Thus, although the overall implementation of the CAS was 
deemed to be broadly on track, there were delays or limited progress in achieving several of the 
CAS outcomes. In this regard, the assessments note that the WBG should have focused on a 
smaller set of objectives.  

2 Securing the Future: Supporting Shared and Sustainable Growth in the East Asian and Pacific Countries 
and Beyond; April 24, 2008.  

12 

 
 
 
                                                 
Approach 

53. 
This CPS marks Indonesia’s re-
appearance as an advancing (IBRD-only) 
mid-level country. 
It 
recognizes 
that 
fostering inclusive, sustainable growth in a 
competitive middle-income 
Indonesia 
requires strong and effective institutions 
and therefore seeks a different model of 
engagement 
based 
on 
a 
genuine 
partnership. The Government demands 
dependable and timely support for its own 
development priorities and its poverty-
reduction agenda. Reviews of the WBG 
program 
call 
for more 
focus 
and 
consolidation. Today, the WBG’s financing 
represents 
a 
very 
small 
share 
of 
investments in Indonesia and leveraging its 
impact depends on whether it can be 
applied to improve development outcomes 
of far larger government programs and 
private sector investments.   

Box 2: Use of the term “institutions” 

This CPS uses the term “institutions” to denote 
arrangements and organizations, not only of the 
State (government, the legislature and the judiciary 
at all levels i.e. national, provincial and district), but 
also private sector actors, financial institutions, civil 
society and community-based organizations (CSOs 
and CBOs), academia (including, in particular 
Indonesian universities), think-tanks, professional 
organizations and the media. The main focus of the 
CPS is on improving accountability and building 
capacity of select state and non-state organizations 
to meet Indonesia’s development objectives. 
The 
strategy 
recognizes 
the 
importance of 
strengthening both the capacity and accountability 
of key executive institutions (e.g., ministries and 
agencies), as well engagement with non-executive 
institutions of government (e.g., audit, parliament).  
At the same time, the CPS recognizes that non-
government counterparts can play an important role 
in enhancing accountability.   

54. 
For all these reasons, the focus of this Country Partnership Strategy for 2009 to 2012 is 
on investing in Indonesia’s institutions (see Box 2 for a definition of the term “institutions”). The 
WBG will support Indonesia in the implementation of its own programs and solutions for 
addressing its development challenges. In the process, it intends to leverage relationships and 
investments to bring about broad-based policy, institutional and systemic reforms. All WBG 
engagements will thus be viewed through an “institutional lens” and selected on the basis of their 
contributions to strengthening Indonesia’s institutions and systems, particularly those of the 
public sector (Figure 2).  
Figure 2: The CPS approach: Investing in Indonesia's Institutions 

Development 
Development 
Outcomes
Outcomes

Government Programs
Government Programs

Institutional Lens
Institutional Lens

Core Engagements
Core Engagements

WBG Support
WBG Support

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55. 
This CPS is a natural progression from the last Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy 
(CAS) for 2004 to 2008. Many elements of the CPS approach have been applied in the past and 
formed the basis for some of the WBG’s most successful programs and partnerships in Indonesia. 
This CPS maintains the strong emphasis on governance, as did the previous CAS, as good 
governance continues to remain the single most important issue for development in Indonesia. 
However, while the last CAS served as an agenda-setting document at a time when the 
Government’s focus on governance issues was still emerging, the CPS seeks to strongly align 
behind and help implement the Government’s own reform priorities.  

56. 
Today, the Government has made good governance one of its own priorities. The demand 
put on the CPS is now to allow for practical ways of implementing the governance agenda in 
alignment with the Government’s strategy.  It seeks to do so by putting “investing in Indonesia’s 
institutions” at the center of the WBG’s work, using this governance focus to determine those 
areas and sectors in which the WBG will engage. 

57. 
Underlying this strategy is an understanding that successful institutional change in a 
large, diverse, dynamic and democratic middle-income country such as Indonesia tends to be 
government-initiated and -led, and may initially have to be limited in scope and to specific areas 
(sectors or regions). The application of proven institutional and systemic reforms can be gradually 
broadened to other areas to ensure greater ownership and sustainability. Thus the CPS seeks to 
foster success stories based on Indonesian institutions leadership, and thereby contribute to 
strengthening further their effectiveness, credibility and performance. The WBG will encourage 
the replication of these successes to maximize the impact of the partnership.  

58.  
The implementation of this approach requires the WBG to deepen its understanding of 
Indonesian institutions and their challenges, such that the WBG is able to identify where it may 
be in a position to contribute to the emergence or replication of such success stories and for it to 
provide customized products. This in turn requires a shift from an emphasis on transactions 
towards a genuine partnership based on long-term institutional relationships and trust. Taking full 
advantage of the existing opportunities also requires consolidating the current wide range of 
WBG-financed projects and advisory activities.  A crucial component of this CPS approach will 
be to invest in Indonesia’s knowledge institutions. The WBG will support Indonesian universities 
and think-tanks to develop and expand Indonesia’s analytical foundations for development (see 
Chapter 4).  

Selectivity 
59. 
Consistent with the regional and country partnership strategy, the WBG will engage and 
apply its resources to areas and sectors that are significant for Indonesia’s stakeholders, where 
there remain vital needs, in which reform opportunities arise, where there is an unambiguous 
demand from Indonesia’s key stakeholders, and where the WBG will have the capacity to deliver: 
1. Significance: The area of engagement reflects a government priority; 
2. Need: Development challenges are vital;  
3. Opportunity: Partner institutions (government and/or non-government) are committed to 
institutional change; 
4. Demand: Indonesia’s key stakeholders considers the WBG as a partner of choice; and 
5. Capacity: The WBG has a comparative advantage and an understanding with other partners 
on respective roles, areas of support, and the possibility of leveraging resources through 
cooperation.  

14 

 
 
 
 
60. 
The consequence of applying all of these criteria is that there will be areas and sectors 
that may have important needs but where the WBG will not become or no longer remain very 
active. In some of these areas the WBG may continue to maintain an engagement, albeit at a 
lower level, in order to be in a position to foster successes at a later point in time, should the 
opportunity arise.  

Principles and Practices 
61. 
The partnership between the Government and the WBG is based on: (i) focusing the 
overall WBG support directly to the Government’s own development strategies, policy objectives 
and priority programs, as reflected in the medium-term development plan (RPJM, or Rencana 
Pembangunan Jangka Menegah), annual plans and annual state budgets; (ii) using Indonesia’s 
own systems and procedures to the maximum extent possible, establishing additional safeguards 
and measures in ways that strengthen country systems and procedures where this is not feasible; 
yet (iii) continuing to put a strong emphasis on fiduciary controls, accountability and technical 
excellence for ensuring high quality support and good governance; (iv) making effective use of 
existing capacities and harmonizing support for capacity development accordingly; and (v) 
supporting government efforts to strengthen the consolidation and alignment of development 
resources for enhanced development outcomes.  

62. 
The WBG’s engagements will be designed to promote the effectiveness of institutions for 
achieving stronger development outcomes. The specific combination of actions, systems and 
mechanisms the WBG supports in each engagement area will depend on specific requirements 
and conditions. The programs over the CPS period, will build on the WBG’s experience in 
strengthening accountability and enhancing capacity, both of which will be deepened in the core 
areas of WBG engagement (see Chapter 3).  

Institutional Accountability  
63. 
The WBG will strengthen, where possible, the incentives and processes to promote 
accountability for increased government effectiveness. In general, the CPS engagements will help 
build or strengthen some or all of the following: 

• Social accountability mechanisms to leverage voice and participation; 
• External transparency and greater access to public information, as well as where feasible, 
complaints handling and/or dispute resolution mechanisms for greater accountability; 
• Monitoring and evaluation systems that measure institutional performance to enable 
accountability for results; 
• Mechanisms for rewarding good performance within the allowable framework of Indonesia’s 
civil service guidelines; 
• Procurement, financial management and control systems to improve cost-effectiveness and to 
ensure that funds are used for the intended purposes; and 
Internal audit and investigative mechanisms to hold civil service appointees directly 
accountable for any misuse of funds.  

• 

Institutional Capacity 
64. 
In order to enhance institutional capacity, engagements will build or strengthen some or 
all of the following:  

• The legal and regulatory framework;  

15 

 
 
 
 
 
• Operational, technical and administrative policies, procedures and standards; 
• Organizational structures, including clarity in definitions of roles and responsibilities; 
• Management, information and evaluation systems, as well as implementation, technical and 
evaluation capacity; 
• Planning and budgeting capacity;  
• Research and analytical capacity, including to support policy formulation; and 
• Knowledge and information sharing, including on international best practice; 
• Market supporting institutions such as credit bureaus and quality standards. 

Instruments 
65. 
The partnership will be implemented by the WBG in: (i) using its financial instruments to 
co-finance slices of government budgeted priority programs, financing private sector investments, 
and using new instruments where appropriate;  (ii) providing flexible, on-demand services, quick-
response policy notes, in-depth analytical and knowledge work, and on-the-ground advisory and 
technical assistance in priority areas, with a particular emphasis on multi-disciplinary and multi-
partner teams; and (iii) continuing to seek and take advantage of opportunities to work together 
with other development partners to better align policy, analytic and financial support with 
government-led strategies and priorities. 

16 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III: THE WBG PROGRAM – CURRENT CORE ENGAGEMENTS 

66. 
Based on the Government’s development plans and CPS consultations, the WBG has 
identified five thematic areas of engagement that are expected to form the core of the partnership 
strategy, together with two sets of cross-cutting engagements to strengthen central and local 
government institutions and systems (Figure 3). These engagements are currently supporting the 
Government’s priority programs with the primary aim of strengthening the effectiveness of 
Indonesia’s institutions. Each of these areas represents a combination of financing and analytical 
and advisory activities that the WBG will provide in support of the Government’s programs.  

67. 
The WBG’s engagements in these areas are at different stages of maturity, which is 
reflected both in the depth of the dialogue, the types of activities supported and the specificity of 
the results expected. The WBG has, for example, long-standing engagements in support of central 
government institutions and systems, private sector development, education, and community-
based poverty reduction efforts, but its engagements in support of local government institutions 
and systems, infrastructure or environmental sustainability and disaster mitigation efforts, are still 
developing. The WBG recognizes that moreover there are areas where Indonesia’s needs are 
great, but where counterparts are not sufficiently committed to institutional reform, or where 
there is limited demand for the WBG to become engaged. In line with the selectivity in approach 
pursued via this CPS, the WBG will limit its engagement in such areas.   

68.  
Even with an increased financing program, the quality of the WBG’s knowledge 
engagement will define the medium-term relevance and development impact in Indonesia. During 
this CPS period, the analytical and advisory activities program will be aligned with the financing 
program in these seven core engagements. In addition, the AAA program also allows for 
continuation of knowledge-centered engagements in non-core areas (e.g., health, where a 
substantial knowledge program has been developed).  

Figure 3: Investing in Indonesia's institutions: current core engagements 

Central Government 
Institutions and Systems 

Local Government 
Institutions and Systems 

Development 
Development 
Outcomes
Outcomes

Government Programs
Government Programs

Institutional Lens
Institutional Lens

Core Engagements
Core Engagements

WBG Support
WBG Support

r

t

o
n

t

c
e
e

m

S

a
e
v
v
e

r

i

P

D

p
o

l

e

t

n
d
o
n

i

m

t

l

a
a
a
y

g

n

t
t
t

i
i
l
i
i

e

b

M

i

r

n
n
o

a
e
a
s
a
v
s
s

r

t

t

i

n
u

i

E
S

D

d
n
n
o

i

t
t

a
c
e
y
e

n

t

t

i

m

n
p
u
o

o

r

P

m
m

o

l
l

a
e
v
c
e

o

i

C
D

S

e

r

u

t

c

u

r

t

s
a

r

f

n

I

n
o

i

t

a
c

u
d

E

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69. 
Indonesia’s fundamental development priorities are not expected to change in the short 
term. However, the Government’s medium-term development plan (RPJM) for 2010-14 is yet to 
be drafted and the results of the 2009 elections may present new or different priorities and 
opportunities for engagement. The WBG’s capacity to respond to emerging demands and 
changing requirements will therefore depend on a degree of flexibility in its program, both within 
its core engagements and in other select areas currently outside these core programs.  

70.   What does “Investing in Indonesia’s Institutions” mean in practice for the program of the 
WBG? Indonesia is facing two fundamental institutional challenges; weaknesses in accountability 
and capacity, both of which have specific characteristics and offer different entry points for 
reform (see Chapter 2). The CPS aims to help address these two challenges through the WBG 
core engagements. The specific types of interventions depend on the nature of the sector, the 
existing entry-points and the maturity of the individual engagement. The following table 
illustrates how the WBG will promote effectiveness through strengthening accountability 
mechanisms and enhancing capacity in its core engagement areas (Table 3), the subsequent 
sections describe the nature of the engagement and the expected contribution of the WBG to 
Indonesia’s development outcomes.3  

3 See Annexes B3, B4 and Appendix 10 for details of the lending and non-lending program to be supported 
within each of the engagement areas. 

18 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
19 

Table 3: Enhancing institutional effectiveness through strengthened accountability and capacity in the WBG core engagements 

Note: Dark cells represent ongoing (CAS) and future (CPS) engagements, while cells with horizontal stripes representing the areas of expected/future (CPS) engagements. 

Cross-cutting 
Engagements 

Sectoral Engagements 

C

s
s
e

n

r
t
t
i
t
t

a

i
l
t

G

v
o
n
o

e
a

r

n
d
n

m

e

n

t

I

y
n

u

s

S

e

m

s

S

n
n
n
o
o
n
n
u
v
b
o
u
y
n

-

a

i
t

a
s
e

l
t

G

e

i
t
r
t
i
t
t

m

I

s
s

a

d
n

S

e

m

s

P

i
r

v
v

a
e

t
l

e

S

c
e
e

t

o
n

r
t

D

e

p
o

m

I

n

r
f

s
a

r
t

u

c

t

u

r

e

C
D

v
o
o

m
m

o
n
p
u
o

t
i

n
y

e
a
c
e

l
l

m

c
e
e

i
t
t

a

d
n
n
o

S

i

P

r

t

E

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

E
S

v
n
u

i
t
r
i
t

b
n
n
o

m

e

g
y
n

t
i
t
t
i
i
l
i

a
a
a

l

a
s
a
s
s

a
e

n
d
o
n

D

i

r

M

i
t

Strengthening institutional accountability, via:  
Building social accountability mechanisms into the design of projects to leverage 
voice and participation  
Promoting external transparency and access to information for greater 
accountability. 
Enhancing monitoring and evaluation systems.  
Establishing mechanisms for rewarding good performance within the allowable 
framework of Indonesia’s civil service guidelines. 
Strengthening procurement, financial management and control systems to improve 
economy,, efficiency, and effectiveness in use of public funds. 
Strengthening internal audit and investigative mechanisms. 
Strengthening institutional capacity, via:  
Strengthening the legal and regulatory framework. 
Strengthening operational, technical and administrative policies, procedures and 
standards.  
Strengthening organizational structures, including clarity in definitions of roles and 
responsibilities.  
Strengthening management, information and evaluation systems and enhancing 
implementation, technical and evaluation capacity.  
Evaluating and enhancing planning and budgeting capacity.  
Building research and analytical capacity, including to support policy formulation.  
Sharing knowledge and information on international best practices. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cross-cutting Engagement 1: Central Government Institutions and Systems 
71. 
Driven by key reformers in Government, Indonesia is making solid progress in improving 
the effectiveness and accountability of central government institutions and systems. In this vital 
cross-cutting engagement, the WBG will play a full and active role in supporting the 
Government’s quest to maintain the reform momentum. Where appropriate examples shine 
through, the WBG will encourage the replication of these successful engagements in other 
government agencies that show strong commitment towards improving institutional effectiveness.  

72. 
 The WBG will build on its already strong relationships and dialogue with the Ministry of 
Finance (MoF), the State Ministry of Development Planning (Bappenas) and the Central Bureau 
of Statistics (BPS). Cognizant of the real progress made over the past few years and keen to 
sustain the impetus, the WBG will also enhance its partnerships with Indonesian institutions that 
are responsible for ensuring oversight, accountability, and the rule of law, and are leading the 
fight against corruption, including the Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK), Attorney 
General’s Office, the state audit agencies (BPK and BPKP) and local government audit agencies 
(BAWASDA or Badan Pengawasan Daerah), relevant Inspector General units of partner 
agencies, and the recently-established National Public Procurement Office/ Government 
Institution for Procurement Policy (NPPO/LKPP - Lembaga Kebijakan Pengadaan Pemerintah, 
responsible for focused and coordinated planning and development of strategies and policies for 
public procurement). These partnerships aimed at bolstering institutional effectiveness will take 
the form of analytical and advisory services, policy dialogue, reform projects and loans.    

73. 
Accountability will be enhanced through continued strengthening of public financial 
management and data systems. This will include strengthening audit and investigative 
mechanisms, enhancing monitoring and evaluation systems that measure performance within 
institutions, and strengthening managerial, operational and technical policies, as well as 
procedures and standards in data collection and analysis. Capacity will also be strengthened by 
supporting improvements to the regulatory framework, developing national capacity-building 
programs and establishing professional procurement units in implementing agencies with a focus 
on areas of WBG engagement.    

74. 
The Development Policy Loan (DPL) series will continue to be at the centre of WBG 
support to central government institutional and systems reform. Supported by parallel financing 
from the Government of Japan and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), DPLs have helped the 
Government’s efforts to reduce inefficient public expenditures, strengthen tax administration and 
debt management, enhance the competitiveness of the financial sector and implement governance 
and fiduciary reforms. Underpinned by a large AAA program co-financed by development 
partners, DPLs have also supported key reforms to improve the business climate and service 
delivery. 

75. 
The next generation of DPLs will build on strong relationships with the reform-minded 
economic ministries and support Indonesia’s central government in strengthening effectiveness of 
its systems. Key elements include building capacity in planning and budgeting, revenue and 
expenditure management, while specific measures relate to public procurement, auditing, 
monitoring and evaluation, and research and analysis for better policy formulation — all drawn 
from the Government’s own policy packages. Meanwhile, accountability and the control of 
corruption will be strengthened through enhanced monitoring and evaluation systems, financial 

20

 
 
 
 
control systems, and audit and investigative mechanisms to hold bureaucrats accountable for the 
funds under their control.    

76. 
The WBG’s engagement will also operate 
through 
the Government Financial 
Management and Revenue Administration Project (GFMRAP) and the future Statistical Capacity 
Building Project (STATCAP), which are financing investments in technological modernization, 
capacity-building and change management. The State Treasury and Budget System (SPAN) 
project will improve accountability through a new automated treasury system. Over the CPS 
period, institutional effectiveness through expanding the accountability and capacity of the tax 
administration system will be enhanced via the Project for Indonesian Tax Administration 
Reform (PINTAR) project. These projects directly reinforce changes to the underlying 
institutional, incentive and organizational frameworks for core functions of the MoF, BPS and 
other related institutions, including fiscal-policy formulation, budgeting, treasury, internal audit, 
procurement, revenue dispute resolution and legislative oversight. Civil service reform will 
support the updating of the MoF organizational roadmap, the implementation of future phases of 
the human resources management reform strategy at the MoF, and the rolling-out of MoF reforms 
to other ministries.   

77. 
The MoF and the WBG will also embark upon a substantial program of analytical and 
advisory services to support the economics ministries in overall public financial management 
reform efforts, including budget formulation, resource allocation and budget implementation. A 
good part of these efforts are supported by trust funds. One example of this is the Initiative for 
Public Expenditure Analysis (IPEA), which seeks to enhance transparency and accountability in 
public financial management and build the Government’s research and analytical capacity in 
support of improved policy and budget formulation.  Another aims to enhance transparency in the 
oil, gas, and mining sector, where the WBG is supporting the adoption of the Extractive 
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). 

Table 4: Central government institutions - Illustrative outcomes supported by WBG 
Indonesia’s longer-term 
Development outcomes at end-FY12 
objectives 
Strengthen central 
government institutions and 
systems to enhance public 
financial management and 
governance to increase the 
development impact of 
priority budget 
expenditures.   

• Improved results orientation in the budget process. 
• Timely and reliable financial reporting through effective 
operationalization of the TSA.  
• Improved 
tax administration via 
increased number of: 
accurate registration records; audits of taxpayer declarations. 
Reduced tax arrears.  
• Improved quality and timeliness of key statistics produced by 
BPS, e.g., national accounts, poverty data   
• Improved public procurement 
regulatory 
framework; 
procurement capacity at national and provincial levels; and 
quality of procurement audits and effectiveness of sanctions. 

Cross-cutting Engagement 2: Sub-national Government Institutions and Systems 
78. 
The empowerment of local governments has been one of Indonesia’s most remarkable 
achievements in the past ten years. As a result, Indonesia’s almost 500 sub-national governments 

21 

 
 
 
now manage close to 40 percent of all public spending and have become crucial players in 
ensuring that Indonesia meets its future development goals. Since local elections, provinces and 
districts/cities are now headed by officials directly accountable to their electorate. Many of them 
have implemented radical and innovative reforms with the aim of enhancing institutional capacity 
and accountability, and, in some cases, of encouraging private sector development at the local 
level. Development partners now have a multitude of local reformers they can engage with, and 
promising initiatives are flourishing.   

79. 
The challenges are however, considerable. The needs, opportunities, demand, as well as 
the WBG’s capacity to respond all vary greatly across the archipelago. Experience with support 
programs for sub-national governments has revealed obstacles to implementation at the central 
level: no single central government agency is in a position to oversee project implementation 
from start to finish. Limited capacity in central government agencies in dealing with the MoF in 
budget preparation, managing internal budget approvals and execution, and supporting field-level 
implementation are also significant issues. Capacity weaknesses at local levels often exacerbate 
the problems. Another lesson is that for successful strengthening of institutional accountability at 
all levels, the involvement of local parliaments, CSOs and media is crucial.   

80. 
Over the CPS period, the WBG will engage with a limited number of sub-national 
governments that demonstrate a clear commitment to tackling accountability and capacity 
challenges. The aim will be to improve the overall development impact through promoting well-
targeted and sustainable public spending by making development planning more responsive to 
constituents and by enhancing public financial management capacity. Support will be based on 
technical assistance and the co-financing of sub-national expenditure programs.  The Bank Group 
is also seeking ways to finance subnational entities (such as provinces, cities or local water 
utilities- PDAMs) through the joint Bank-IFC subnational initiative (financing could potentially 
be provided through local banks or through support to local bond issuances). IFC is working with 
local governments focusing on reducing investment climate obstacles, including in the local 
regulatory framework, and on fostering capacity to forge effective public-private partnerships. 
Several of the programs include components to support local CSOs in order to improve access to 
information and to enhance social accountability. The WBG will continue to draw attention to 
inspiring and innovative success stories in sub-national government reforms and to encourage 
their replication.    

81. 
The WBG approach is illustrated by two complementary programs: in selected, reform-
minded provinces and districts a program that is disbursed against local governments’ outputs 
will provide the opportunity to strengthen financial controls and monitoring and evaluation 
systems; and, in the same provinces, trust funds, financed by AusAID, the Netherlands and other 
partners, provide for analytical and advisory services through the Public Expenditure Analysis 
and Capacity Harmonization (PEACH) program. The program seeks to support the assessment 
and improvement of the effectiveness of local planning and budgeting processes. Sub-national 
public expenditure analyses has become a powerful tool to enhance transparency in the provinces 
where PEACH has been implemented. PEACH programs are demand-driven, tailored to the 
needs of local governments and implemented by them, together with local Indonesian research 
institutions, enhancing collaboration and analytical and implementation capacity of both local 
governments and local universities. The WBG and other development partners will continue to 
engage with many of these local stakeholders through the Decentralization Support Facility for 
Eastern Indonesia (SOFEI), which has established a strong network of reformers across the 

22 

 
 
 
region.  The experiences with the ongoing programs will help inform and improve the design and 
scope of future WBG support.  

82. 
The WBG will reinforce and consolidate ongoing partnerships that seek to enhance local 
government capacity through existing financing programs, such as Initiatives for Local 
Government Reform (ILGR), the Urban Sector Development and Reform Project (USDRP), and 
Support for Poor and Disadvantaged Areas (SPADA). In addition, the Decentralization Support 
Facility (DSF) brings together a number of development partners, including AusAID, DFID, and 
the Netherlands, with a broad mandate to engage Indonesian institutions essential to the local 
accountability framework, such as legislatures, media and NGO networks. The DSF will continue 
to be the main mechanism for deepening WBG relationships with the key central institutions that 
set and regulate the environment in which local governments operate. Relevant WBI expertise 
will also be leveraged to complement the WBG’s efforts to strengthen the accountability and 
capacity of sub-national institutions.  

Table 5: Sub-national governments ─ Illustrative outcomes supported by WBG 
Indonesia’s longer-term 
Development outcomes at end-FY12 
objectives 
Strengthen decentralized local 
governments and institutions to 
increase the impact of public 
spending. 

• Improved LG systems and processes for better planning, 
resource allocation and budget implementation  
• Improved standards of service delivery in both urban and 
rural areas.  

Core engagement 1 – Private Sector Development  
83. 
Private sector-led growth will be vital to Indonesia’s competitiveness regionally and 
globally, and will also be key to the Government’s success in addressing some of the gaps in 
service delivery. In some areas the public sector can be prone to institutional capture, whereby 
private business interests seek to protect their advantages and place obstacles in the way of 
potential competitors. The results can undermine efficiency and innovation, and waste investment 
opportunities. The Government recognizes this and has been taking appropriate measures to build 
the required business environment for a strong and dynamic private sector, including launching a 
series of comprehensive policy reform packages over the past few years. Private investment rates 
are now beginning to recover in Indonesia, and there are exciting opportunities to consolidate this 
progress and help support the private sector in becoming the driver of broad-based growth in 
Indonesia. In particular, the WBG is well-placed to help ensure that the public sector is no longer 
a bottleneck but instead provides an environment that nurtures private sector development.      

84. 
Building on synergies between IFC and World Bank teams, the WBG has established 
strong relationships with key Indonesian partners that shape the investment climate. These 
include the Ministry of Trade (MoT), the Coordinating Ministry for the Economy, and financial 
sector regulators (such as Bapepam-LK). This is a crucial area of progress, as institutional capture 
in the public sector will seriously hamper the private sector development that Indonesia so badly 
needs. In addition to budget support from the DPL series, these partnerships are also based on 
analytical, advisory and monitoring work, as well as institutional capacity-building.   

85. 
Support is being provided to the MoT to deliver effective services in formulating and 
implementing domestic and international trade and investment policies, implementing these 

23 

 
 
 
policies, negotiating trade agreements, and managing the human resources and operations of the 
Ministry. Mobilizing trust funds, the WBG has established a team of advisers to provide direct 
support on the ground to MoT. Although there are significant obstacles, these initiatives are 
showing promise. Additionally, IFC will help to facilitate business formalization and market 
access for new private sector entrants by working to reduce obstacles both at the national and sub-
national levels, improving market linkages covering urban and rural producers, and helping small 
and medium enterprises (SMEs) better understand market requirements and the benefits of 
adopting new standards and practices. The WBG is furthermore supporting the establishment of 
an innovative infrastructure financing institution that will help to accelerate private investment in 
infrastructure. The WBG will also continue to strengthen the capacity of regulatory and 
supervisory institutions, such as Bank Indonesia, by providing analytical and technical support to 
reform efforts, and supporting the monitoring and evaluation of the impacts of reforms.  

86. 
The WBG will continue to work closely in the financial sector – with the World Bank 
assisting in policy formulation and implementation and IFC focusing on investments in the sector, 
for strengthened access to financial services aimed at greater competitiveness and inclusive 
growth. WBG’s capacity building efforts in the sector will continue; this support has been largely 
financed using trust funds (including the ASEM (Asia Europe Meeting) trust funds). The 
Government recognizes the systemic importance of the banking sector and has recently begun 
receiving World Bank support (along with AusAID) on crisis management protocols. Policy 
discussions on the impact of the sector of recent global credit market turmoil as well as of 
domestic monetary and fiscal policies continue. The authorities have been considering detailed 
analytic work in the sector – including the possibility of a Financial Sector Assessment Program 
(FSAP). Policies and programs to increase access to financial services for a larger segment of the 
population, SMEs, and innovative public-private partnerships in this area, will also be supported.  

Table 6: Private sector development ─ Illustrative outcomes supported by WBG 
Indonesia’s longer-term 
Development outcomes at end-FY12 
objectives 
Enhance the environment for 
private sector development to 
foster accelerated growth and 
poverty reduction.   

• Strengthened private and financial sector through: better 
regulatory frameworks; improved investment climate; 
stronger financial institutions; improved market access; 
business linkages and partnerships. 
• Improved capacity of select sub-national governments 
to support business operations. 
• Improved regulatory environment and 
interagency 
coordination in the development of investment policies 
• Strengthened institutional structure and capacity of the 
Ministry of Trade for more effective trade policies.   

Core engagement 2 – Infrastructure  
87. 
The development of large-scale infrastructure is crucial to Indonesia’s progress on almost 
every front over the CPS period. Despite significant challenges, a window of opportunity now 
exists to capitalize on the need for a breakthrough ─ the importance of which is widely 
recognized by government and private sector counterparts. Focusing on three main sub-sectors, 
the WBG will support institutions, both public and private, in finding more effective solutions to 

24 

 
 
 
 
bridge the financing gap in infrastructure in a sustainable way, and help strengthen the 
accountability and capacity of institutions to deliver better infrastructure outcomes.      

88. 
The WBG will provide financial and advisory support for the Government’s own 
infrastructure financing plan as set out in the current RPJM and work with those institutions 
committed to reform and good governance. This support includes a substantial program of 
investment lending bolstered by a recently launched infrastructure policy loan (I-DPL) series, as 
well as model PPP investments by IFC. The support is expected to cover the roads, energy and 
water sectors (irrigation, as well as water and sanitation services) through I-DPLs and co-
financing arrangements to promote infrastructure investments.  

89. 
The four agencies with which particularly strong partnerships are currently envisaged are 
the Directorate General of Highways (DGH), the Directorate General of Water Resources (DWR) 
and the Directorate General of Human Settlement (DHS) — all at the Ministry of Public Works 
— as well as the state-owned electricity utility (Perusahaan Listrik Negara, or PLN), which, 
together with some major energy companies, has signaled its willingness to rebuild a new 
partnership with the WBG. Infrastructure development in Indonesia, even within individual 
sectors, will require strengthened coordination across government agencies, including line 
ministries, SOEs, and the MoF, Bappenas and the Coordinating Ministry for the Economy. The 
WBG will support the strengthening of this inter-agency dialogue.   

90. 
The WBG’s investments in Indonesia’s infrastructure institutions aim to promote 
effectiveness through greater accountability and capacity.  The WBG’s strategy is designed to 
support key components of Indonesia’s cross-sector infrastructure reform agenda, including 
reforms aimed at increasing the transparency and efficiency of the Government’s spending and 
strengthening 
inter-governmental fiscal relations; reforms for promoting public private 
partnerships within a transparent, credible framework; sector agency capacity-building; and 
reforms that foster accountability. The WBG will support this reform platform via a series of 
policy loans jointly with ADB and the Government of Japan. 

91. 
In the energy sector, the WBG’s strategy will focus on strengthening the technical, 
managerial and operational capacity of state institutions. The aim will be to improve efficiency, in 
support of a more effective targeting of electricity subsidies in the short term and the 
development of a sustainable pricing policy over the medium term. In addition, the WBG will 
support improvements to the institutional framework with the aim of increasing private 
investments in Indonesia. The envisaged Bank investment financing program will seek to reduce 
the local and global environmental impacts of the sector and focus on clean and renewable energy 
such as geothermal power investments, pumped storage, improved coal technologies, and power 
transmission and distribution projects, including gas distribution.  

92. 
In the roads sector, the Bank’s engagement with the Government has included support for 
the design of a road asset management framework, transport network development plans and 
enhancement of planning capacity at provincial and kabupaten (district) levels. IFC plans to 
support the private financing of toll roads by offering long term capital and sharing best practice 
from other countries, in order to assist the Government develop and roll out international standard 
concession agreements, and follow up with financing for a select number of model transactions. 
The WBG will continue to strengthen the institutional framework at the national and regional 
levels, including fiduciary, operational, technical, and management systems and capacities of 

25 

 
 
 
counterparts in support of Government’s efforts to improve road quality and capacity. Such 
measures to improve effectiveness, increase accountability and fight corruption in the sector are 
essential for the continued and timely implementation of infrastructure projects, several of which 
have been plagued by weak execution, and procurement, corruption and collusion issues in the 
past. This support will be given in partnership with ADB, AusAID and the Government of Japan, 
the three key development partners in the sector. Support for increased private sector participation 
and effective decentralization of implementation and management of the transport sector will also 
continue. 

93. 
In the water sector, the WBG will support strengthening of the legal and regulatory 
framework and enhancing technical, operational and management capacities, including for select 
water utilities (PDAMs). There will be a focus on adapting irrigation, dam and reservoir design 
operations to meet new climate change conditions and productivity requirements. In sanitation 
and community based water services, the Bank supported PAMSIMAS project focuses on 
building capacity to plan system integration for centralized, community and household sanitation, 
and make 
long-term financing available 
to municipalities for sanitation 
infrastructure 
development. Such financing could be offered where local institutions are keen to implement 
cost-recovery plans for sustainable operations and maintenance. 

Table 7: Infrastructure ─ Illustrative outcomes supported by WBG 
Indonesia’s longer-term 
Development outcomes at end-FY12 
objectives 
Increase the level and efficiency of 
public and private investments in 
infrastructure to meet needs and 
strengthen competitiveness. 

• Increased and better quality national and sub-national 
government spending on 
infrastructure 
through 
improvements 
in 
subsidy 
policy, 
incentives 
framework, and expenditure planning and budgeting. 
• Increased private investment in infrastructure through 
the establishment of a fiscally sound, credible and 
transparent PPP framework. 

Core engagement 3 – Community Development and Social Protection  
94. 
The World Bank through its decade-long support has contributed to the Government’s 
successful community-driven development and poverty reduction programs. This support 
transcended the difficult years after the crisis and the outcomes obtained have led to these 
programs being rolled out on a national scale by the Government. Working with the Government 
to ensure continued progress towards poverty reduction goals, and achieving equity and 
inclusiveness across regions, remains a top priority for the WBG.   

95. With this aim, the WBG will continue to support Government in the design and effective 
expansion of programs that promote more inclusive growth and social protection, and that also 
enhance the accountability of elected officials and service providers. This will include CDD and 
conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs. Support consists of a combination of co-financing and 
analytical and advisory work, much of which will be funded through trust funds. The CPS 
support for improved institutional effectiveness will be mainly focused on the Coordinating 
Ministry for People’s Welfare.   

26 

 
 
 
 
96. 
The CPS approach inherent in the partnership between the Government and the WBG is 
built around the National Community Empowerment Program (PNPM-Mandiri), which is based 
on the well-performing Kecamatan Development Project (KDP) and the Urban Poverty Project 
(UPP) models — programs in which the WBG has had a long-standing engagement. Over the 
past ten years, these programs have developed many features to enhance institutional 
effectiveness through accountability mechanisms and capacity-enhancing strategies that are now 
being adopted by other projects, not only across Indonesia but also abroad.  

97. 
Accountability mechanisms include simple and practical procedures for financial control, 
information disclosure, feedback, complaints, follow-up and resolution. Performance-based 
rewards are applied at the community level to tap into existing social accountability mechanisms, 
and this is reinforced by independent monitoring through CSOs and the media. The entire 
program is designed to generate demand for good governance at the grassroots’ level.    

98. 
In terms of enhancing capacity, the program makes large up-front investments in the 
training of community facilitators, strengthening their skills in areas such as monitoring and 
evaluation, planning and budgeting, as well as project implementation. They are taught to use 
participatory methods and to ensure that the communities understand basic accounting, planning 
and management principles. The program makes extensive use of local expertise for technical 
inputs and assessments, thereby strengthening capacity and expanding experience at the 
community level.    

99. 
The WBG will co-finance a slice of PNPM-Mandiri, supporting the program’s expansion 
to an estimated US$2 billion annual government investment. With PNPM-Rural and PNPM-
Urban ongoing, repeater projects are expected to extend the PNPM program to all 70,000 
communities across Indonesia by 2009/2010 — early on in the CPS period.  The WBG is also 
providing support to the Government in its efforts to bring supply-side initiatives from health, 
education, rural development and other sectors under the PNPM umbrella to maximize 
complementarities for poverty reduction. In addition, through a WBG trust fund, other 
development partners support a wide range of analytical and advisory services to promote broader 
institutional reforms.  These aim to strengthen accountability and enhance capacity of the 
community-level planning process in key institutions and systems, such as dispute resolution and 
relating to property rights.  

100. 
Support to addressing gender issues is mainstreamed across various key financing and 
analytic/policy advice programs.  These include support via the PNPM, a study on remittances 
offering recommendations for making formal transfers work for women and undocumented 
migrants, a labor market assessment that will among others, include an examination of the impact 
of labor market policy on job opportunities for women, the use of trust funds to support programs 
to empower female household heads to develop group-based revolving funds and improve 
livelihoods, and the support of women’s cooperatives to enhance their access to markets.   

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Development outcomes at end-FY12 

Table 8: Community development and social protection ─ Illustrative outcomes supported 
by WBG 
Indonesia’s longer-term 
objectives 
Reduce poverty 
levels 
and 
improve equity by 
improving 
livelihoods and service delivery, 
and decrease remaining pockets 
of high-level poverty.   

• Improved socio-economic and local-level governance 
conditions of the urban and rural poor through wider 
implementation of poverty reduction and community 
empowerment programs.   
• Public 
expenditures made more pro-poor by 
reallocating savings from subsidies towards strategic 
targeted interventions and successful implementation of 
Conditional Cash Transfers 

Core engagement 4 – Education  
101. Over the CPS period, the World Bank’s support for the education sector will continue to 
be based on its close partnership with the Ministry of National Education (MoNE) and the 
Ministry of Religious Affairs. This core WBG engagement aims at supporting the Government’s 
transformation of the education sector — a transformation that is fundamental if Indonesia is to 
compete effectively with its regional peers. This engagement will cover the entire spectrum in 
education — from early childhood education and development to higher education and teacher 
upgrading — through advisory services, as well as trust-funded activities and investment projects.   

102. 
The World Bank’s engagement in education is strongly focused on improving the 
effectiveness of state and non-state institutions by strengthening accountability, together with 
measures aimed at enhancing capacity of state institutions, school heads, staff, and parents. The 
WBG’s strategy is designed to support key components of the Government’s education reform 
agenda, including building social accountability mechanisms, promoting external transparency 
and access to information, and enhancing monitoring and evaluation systems. Important areas 
will also include enhancing planning and budgeting capacity, and building the MoNE’s own 
analytical capacity to support better policy formulation.     

103. 
For example, the World Bank intends to support the Government through a System 
Improvement through Sector Wide Approaches (SISWA) program. In the first stage of the 
SISWA — with significant financial support from the Netherlands Government and the European 
Commission — the World Bank will co-finance the Government’s School Operational Assistance 
(BOS) program. This program builds on MoNE’s initiatives to better manage its education 
funding. through improved information, better monitoring and evaluation, and more streamlined, 
standardized practices. The BOS program funds important expenditures in the education sector in 
ways 
that empower school managers and enhances ownership 
through schools-based 
management. At the central level, the new BOS KITA program will help to build government 
accountability and capacity in order to better monitor, manage and align basic education funding. 
At the local level, the program will improve governance and accountability, and support districts 
and schools in their management, operational and technical functions, in line with Indonesia’s 
decentralization strategy. The program will contribute to raising the awareness of parents and the 
local community, introducing measures to improve transparency, information flows and decision-
making, and also support operational improvements to streamline procedures.  The sectoral 

28 

 
 
 
support will additionally seek to strengthen human resource capabilities via improvements to 
medical/health education in the country.    

Table 9: Education ─ Illustrative outcomes supported by WBG 
Development outcomes at end-FY12 

Indonesia’s longer-term 
objectives 

Improve: 
access 
to basic 
education to achieve MDGs;  
education quality to enhance 
competitiveness 
and 
inclusiveness  

• Increased number of basic education teachers who meet 
mandated academic qualifications.   
• Improved efficiency and equity in the use of resources to 
increase access to basic education. 
• Improved training programs and higher education system 
through institutional accreditation; regular tracer studies to 
gauge effectiveness of training. 
• Improved 
information 
and 
better 
implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of education funding.   

Core engagement 5 – Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Mitigation 
104. 
Indonesia has emerged as a leader on climate-change issues. At the same time, the 
country is faced with some serious challenges on environmental sustainability and natural 
resource management fronts. This also presents opportunities to Indonesia to benefit from new 
international investment instruments designed to scale-up funding to help countries in their efforts 
to address climate change, and to undertake appropriate mitigation and adaptation programs.  In 
both areas the WBG has expertise to place at the Government’s disposal. Meanwhile, the WBG 
will continue with its major role in disaster reconstruction, while helping to reduce Indonesia’s 
vulnerability to natural disasters. 

105. 
The WBG will continue to focus on strengthening policy formulation and strategic 
planning capacity for more effective environmental and natural resources management and 
disaster risk reduction. Enhancing accountability and fighting corruption are also particularly 
important in this sector. The WBG’s engagement around environmental sustainability and 
disaster mitigation involves several state and non-state interlocutors. In government, the partners 
include a range of ministries and agencies dealing with cross-cutting climate change issues, 
including the recently launched National Climate Change Council (Dewan Nasional Perubahan 
Iklim), as well as Bappenas and the National Disaster Management Agency (Badan Nasional 
Penanggulangan Bencana, or BNPB) on disaster mitigation and recovery. The WBG will draw 
from an active network of CSOs to continue fostering social accountability and participatory 
mechanisms.  

106. 
IFC will play a catalytic role in private sector engagement in climate change mitigation 
and adaptation efforts through its analytical and advisory work. It will seek investments in 
geothermal and energy efficiency projects, including mobilizing financing support for such 
projects; help improve environmental standards in critical sectors such as palm oil; and promote 
sustainable forestry practices of private firms with the aim of enabling Indonesia to participate in 
global carbon markets. 

29 

 
 
 
107. 
The WBG will continue deepening the relationships established with Bappenas and the 
local governments of Aceh, Nias and Yogyakarta in supporting selected elements of the 
Government’s actions to strengthen natural disaster resiliency. The rebuilding of Aceh and Nias 
will continue for the CPS period through the MDF, as will the JRF activities for Yogyakarta and 
Central Java. A second-phase MDF will support the Aceh region to transition from post-tsunami 
reconstruction towards sustainable economic development, an important part of which will be 
through strengthening local capacity.  Over the CPS period, the WBG will – in consultation with 
Government and other partners – also provide requisite support to Indonesia to respond to other 
natural challenges.  

108. 
The WBG will support building national and local government capacity for assessing 
disaster damage, losses and needs; assessing capacity to absorb catastrophic events; supporting 
development of a social protection system to manage sources of vulnerability; and designing 
instruments for financial risk transfer and flexible risk financing. The mainstreaming of risk-
reduction in the development process will include strengthening Bappenas capacity in preparing 
the national action plan, strengthening the capability of BNPB and designing a framework for 
disaster-risk insurance with the MoF. 

109. A key upcoming disaster risk reduction initiative is the Jakarta municipality’s (DKI 
Jakarta) three-year river-dredging program, the Jakarta Emergency Dredging Initiative (JEDI). 
The WBG will assist DKI Jakarta to locate grant financing for capacity-building within the 
municipal administration for the effective operation and management of the flood-management 
system.   

110. 
To encourage environmental sustainability, the WBG will support measures promoting 
effective and transparent use of resources. Global best practice and lessons will be applied in 
assessing alternative development and policy paths for ‘green growth’. The WBG’s policy 
dialogue will seek to mainstream the discussion of climate change (with attention to both 
mitigation and adaptation challenges) across a range of actors, through the preparation and 
dissemination of 
information 
to raise awareness about carbon emissions, Indonesia’s 
environmental vulnerability and import of relevant policies.  

111. 
The WBG will support coordination and facilitate partnerships with the private sector and 
civil society for the implementation of the National Action Plan for Climate Change. One 
example is the Indonesia Forest Carbon Alliance. The Government is working in collaboration 
with a multi-disciplinary alliance of NGOs and research organizations — supported by the 
international partners including the WBG — to develop and pilot a framework and program to 
Reduce Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD). The WBG will also assist 
Indonesia in making use of the substantial funds and instruments that are becoming available to 
address global public goods, such as Climate Investment and the Adaptation Funds, as well as 
global carbon markets. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 10: Environmental sustainability and disaster mitigation ─ Illustrative outcomes 
supported by WBG 
Indonesia’s longer-term objectives 
Strengthen 
Indonesia’s capacity 
to 
adapt to climate change and address 
environmental 
challenges 
including 
development of 
integrated disaster 
management 
(improve disaster 
risk 
preparedness, mitigation measures, and 
post-disaster 
recovery 
and 
reconstruction responsiveness).   

Development outcomes at end-FY12 
• Implementation of policies and pilots to reduce 
emissions from deforestation and environmental 
degradation. 
• Strengthened 
disaster 
risk 
reduction 
development planning and administration. 

in 

Other engagement areas 
112. 
There are other important areas that may present promising opportunities over the CPS 
period and beyond. The WBG will continue to invest some resources in these areas in order to 
maintain and build on existing relationships and foster knowledge partnerships, including through 
the use of trust funds. While these may not be core engagements at the present time, there could 
be a change in status if government counterparts and other stakeholders demonstrate a clear 
commitment to addressing critical governance and institutional challenges.  

113. One example of this type of engagement is the World Bank’s support for a 
comprehensive review of the health sector and an in-depth assessment of its performance. The 
first result of this engagement has been the production of a Health Public Expenditure Review 
which was launched jointly with central ministries and local stakeholders in May 2008. The 
health PER and future health sector analyses will provide analytical inputs for the elaboration of 
the health reform agenda and sectoral development priorities. While no new lending for the health 
sector is currently considered, the Bank remains engaged in the health reform agenda.  

114. 
Similarly, the WBG remains engaged in agriculture. For example, the Bank is supporting 
the Farmer Empowerment through Agricultural Technology and Information Project, part of a 
Government effort to revitalize the agricultural sector. Empowerment of farmers through 
improved information networks, community agribusiness development, enhanced linkages 
between research and extension is expected to result in increased diversification, higher farmer 
incomes and agricultural competitiveness. Another example is the Land Management and Policy 
Development Project, which aims to contribute to the government’s objectives of poverty 
reduction, economic growth and sustainable land resource utilization. In particular, the project 
seeks to help improve land tenure security through registration, issuing of titles, and enhancing 
local government capacity to undertake land management functions with greater efficiency and 
transparency. 

31 

 
 
 
CHAPTER IV: PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION 

115. 
Indonesia’s public debt has declined from more than 80 percent of GDP in 2000 to a 
projected 32 percent in 2008. Its IBRD (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development) 
debt has been declining as well since 2001, as agreed between the Government and the Bank. 
IBRD debt service/exports ratio is projected to decline from 2.9 percent in 2003 to 1 percent in 
2008, while Indonesia’s share of total IBRD exposure also declined from 8.8 percent in FY03 to 
an estimated 6.7 percent in FY08 (IBRD’s exposure to Indonesia has declined from US$11.8 
billion in FY2000 to US$6.4 billion by the end of FY08). In view of the substantial borrowing at 
the time of the financial crisis, and Indonesia’s high debt levels, it was appropriate that the Bank’s 
exposure should fall, as IDA commitments increased. Hence, with high levels of repayments and 
reduced borrowing by Indonesia, net transfers have been negative since 2000 (Figure 4). As 
Indonesia’s reforms progressed, exhibiting strong Country Policy and Institutional Assessment 
(CPIA) scores, improved independent sovereign credit risk ratings, and rising financing 
requirements, commitments increased significantly over the last CAS period. In FY08 about 
US$1.3 billion was provided as loans and credits (of which some US$1 billion was on IBRD 
terms).  

Figure 4: World Bank resource transfer to Indonesia 

116. Despite Indonesia’s success in debt reduction, the country’s gross financing needs are 
estimated to exceed US$21 billion in 2008 and stay around that level in subsequent years. The 
Government views WBG loans, particularly DPLs, as a way to simultaneously reinforce the 
reform agenda and meet in part Indonesia’s gross financing needs. This, combined with 
Indonesia’s macroeconomic progress, re-emergence as a mature MIC and strong relationship with 
the WBG, establish the basis for increasing IBRD resource flows — by extending the successful 
DPL series and the CDD program. The CPS also aims to provide the strategic framework for 
revitalizing the WBG’s investment financing portfolio, including through co-financing and 
strengthening of government expenditure programs.  With Indonesia’s access to IDA ceasing in 
June 2008, and provided the full potential of the proposed financing program is realized, there 
could be a significant increase in IBRD lending volume over this CPS period (compared to the 
previous CAS) reversing IBRD's declining exposure to Indonesia.  

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The need for a flexible financing envelope  
117. During this CPS period, the Government's annual budget is projected to exceed US$100 
billion. Financing from development partners will continue to decline in relative significance. The 
IBRD pricing reform positions the WBG better to respond to Indonesia’s demand for flexible 
support. In order to maximize the WBG’s operational efficiency, the lending program will make 
use of a variety of instruments, as appropriate:  
• DPLs: policy-base lending focused on structural reforms and cross-cutting issues, as well as 
high-level sectoral reforms (e.g., Infrastructure DPL); 
• Co-financing of successful government programs through sector-wide approaches; 
• Repeater projects and additional financing to scale up and broaden the impact of well 
performing projects; and 
• More innovative and competitive instruments and products, including new financial risk-
management and debt-management instruments. 

118. 
This strategy calls for an approach of flexible financing support that allows the WBG to 
take maximum advantage of opportunities to engage, while also minimizing risk. On the basis of 
current demand and performance, a notional annual IBRD investment of about US$2 billion is 
expected. Actual annual lending volumes could vary significantly up or downwards, but will be 
commensurate with continued robust macroeconomic performance, financial stability and 
momentum on key reforms, and be determined by careful management of IBRD exposure (see 
Figure 5). Actual annual lending volumes will depend on the Government’s appetite for Bank 
borrowing vis-à-vis other sources of finance, and country performance.  The lower bound and 
reduced lending volumes would result in the event of a significant weakening of the 
macroeconomic stance; substantial back-tracking on the reform program; or poor implementation 
of WBG-supported projects.  Under such a scenario, WBG support could be limited to financing 
only poverty programs, basic social services, and critical infrastructure needs. The upper bound of 
the lending envelope, subject to IBRD exposure considerations, will also take into account the 
level of progress in the key reforms, including those supported by the DPL series. 
Figure 5: Determining the financing envelope 2009-12 

Upper bound 
WBG exposure  

Policy-Based Loans, 

driven by criteria for successful 
engagement and performance on 
policy reforms 

Lending program 
under sound 
economic policies 

Investment Loans, 

driven by criteria for successful 
engagement  

Lower bound 
(US$500 million per annum): 

33 

 
 
 
 
119. 
IFC has a committed investment portfolio of US$695 million in Indonesia, of which 57 
percent is invested in financial markets project, 24 percent in agribusiness and 17 percent in 
manufacturing. In FY07, IFC committed US$278 million to seven projects. IFC expects to invest 
about US$300 million annually in the priority sectors of finance, infrastructure and commodity-
based supply chains. The investment program is expected to grow in the event of an acceleration 
of reform in private infrastructure provision, further progress in financial sector reform including 
the non-bank financial sector and further improvement in the investment climate. Close 
partnership with the WBG will be essential to creating the policy and institutional environment 
for increased IFC investment.  

Cooperation with other stakeholders/partnerships 
120. A number of key development partners will continue to leverage the Bank’s technical, 
managerial and fiduciary capabilities on the ground to advance on shared objectives. This is 
reflected by a robust set of strategic partnerships, most notably through bi/multi-lateral trust funds 
and co-financing arrangements. Major WBG partners continue to include the Asian Development 
Bank (ADB), the Australian Government, the European Commission (EC), as well as the 
Japanese, Royal Netherlands and UK Governments. These partnerships can be expected to remain 
strong over the CPS period.    

Trust funds 
121. 
Trust funds (TFs) and grant financing continue to be an integral part of the WBG 
program.  With Indonesia transitioning to IBRD status in FY09, from a ‘blend’ status (with 
access to both IDA and IBRD resources) under the previous CAS, TFs will play an ever 
important role, but will be used more strategically and in accordance with the World Bank’s 
comparative advantage. The majority of TFs will complement other WBG support in the current 
core engagement areas of this CPS by providing valuable AAA and technical assistance (TA) 
(Table 11). They support the harmonization and alignment of funding from various development 
partners behind core government programs. The most significant 
trust funds finance 
reconstruction work in Aceh, Nias, Yogyakarta and Central Java. The remaining TFs and grants 
will finance AAA and TA, as well as some small-scale or pilot activities, outside the current core 
engagement areas. In line with its commitment to using Indonesia’s own systems and procedures 
to the extent possible, the WBG is committed to gradually moving towards more recipient-
executed trust funds. 

122. 
The WBG’s TF portfolio (currently over US$1 billion) has been expanding significantly, 
and the range and variety of TF arrangements have increased the complexity of managing the TF 
program. As a result, existing systems and processes for the use of TFs are struggling to keep 
pace with this expansion. Recent policy changes for TFs approved by the World Bank Board have 
created an enabling environment for strengthening the operational effectiveness, management and 
oversight of the Indonesian TF program.  In order to ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of 
the TF program, a new management framework is therefore being pursued as part of this CPS. Its 
main elements are: 
• Applying CPS selectivity criteria (see Chapter 2) to TFs to ensure improved strategic fit;  
• Reducing transaction costs, strengthening portfolio management and mitigating risks through: 
greater standardization and application of clear modalities; clarification of accountabilities; 
and development of new harmonized tools for TF negotiations, execution and oversight. 

34 

 
 
 
Common standards and tools for setting and allocating management fees, financing 
categories, and development-partner reporting will be pursued.  The WBG is also taking steps 
to enhance the TF portfolio management and oversight capacity within the Indonesia country 
team. 

Knowledge engagements 
123. 
The knowledge partnership agenda has long been central in the WBG’s support to 
Indonesia and, in line with experience in other MICs, the importance of this partnership is certain 
to grow over the CPS period. Indeed, knowledge partnership will be key to the successful 
implementation of the CPS and, in some areas, the most important vehicle for WBG engagement.  

124. 
The CPS will build on the WBG’s existing AAA and TA program, which currently 
includes: (i) analysis that supports government’s development agenda (e.g. poverty assessments 
and PERs); (ii) policy notes, think pieces for knowledge generation and background papers; and 
(iv) hands-on TA. These activities will be used to underpin the core WBG engagements, while 
also allowing for continued and active involvement in areas outside the core engagements. During 
the CPS-period, the WBG will continue to deliver on the full spectrum of knowledge products 
with the trend shifting towards tailor-made, just in-time products. There will also be a stronger 
emphasis on dissemination of products in Indonesian language. 

125. 
The WBG will pay special attention to systematic planning and prioritization of AAA 
including TA. Greater effort will be made to integrate the WBG’s AAA and TA with investment 
services, and maximize harmonization and coordination with the aim of reducing transaction 
costs. Shifting the emphasis from transactions to relationships also means that demand for AAA 
in core engagement areas may be informal and at short notice, for example, taking the form of 
requests for expert advice and discussions, presentations of international experience, specific 
policy notes, or reports to support policy and institutional reform decisions.  The WBG will use 
trust funds as appropriate, to respond to such demands in a timely way while also ensuring 
continued focus on quality.    

126. 
IFC’s Advisory Services will work closely with the World Bank on national and sub-
national policy and regulatory reform. These efforts will include policy advice, assessments and 
technical assistance.  In all its efforts, IFC will look to incorporate the voice of the private sector 
into the policy discussion. This may be through public-private dialogue or through feedback to 
the appropriate government institutions on its policy-making efforts.  The IFC’s Advisory Service 
Program is an increasingly important part of IFC’s engagement in Indonesia and manages 
bilateral trust funds of over US$40 million to provide policy advice, consultation, and technical 
assistance in support of sustainable and broad-based economic growth. 

127. 
In delivering the knowledge program, the WBG will also invest in Indonesia’s 
knowledge Institutions.  Future AAA and TA should be as much as possible led by, and based 
within, Indonesia’s government or non-government institutions, academia and think-tanks. Over 
the CPS period the WBG will encourage national learning institutions, particularly universities 
and think-tanks, to play an increasingly important role in the delivery of knowledge, while 
shifting its own role from one of active research and implementation towards advice and quality 
control.  

35 

 
 
 
Table 11: Core engagements: Alignment of instruments4 

National 
government 
institutions and 
systems 

i

g

n
d
n

 DPL series;  
PINTAR; 
STATCAP; 
PFM/Civil 
Service 

L

e

Sub-national 
government 
institutions and 
systems 

DPL series; LG 
DAU/DAK 
support;  
IFC sub-national 
financing 

s

t

a

n

 Public Financial 
Management 
Multi-Donor 
Trust Fund 

G

r

d
n

a

5

F

T

6

A
A
A

 PEFA; CPAR; 
PER; DPR; 
Commodity 
Prices 

DSF, IFC 
Advisory Services 

IFC Advisory 
Services; 
MDTF for trade 
and investment  

IFC Advisory 
Services 

PNPM TF 

Basic Education 
Trust Fund 

Justice for the 
Poor, PEACH 
(LG PER 
program); Inter-
governmental 
analysis; Capacity 
Enhancement for 
Eastern Indonesia  

IFC Advisory 
services; 
Investment 
climate survey;  
Trade 
Facilitation;  
Financial Sector 

Infrastructure 
Development 
Review; Water 
Supply and 
Sanitation 

Poverty 
Assessment; 
KDP Research 
program; CCT; 
Pro-poor jobs 
strategy; CDD 
User Fee 
assessment 

Education Sector 
PER, Teacher 
Management and 
Education Sector 
Assessment; 
Support to 
Education 
RENSTRA 

Private sector 
development 

Infrastructure 

Community 
Development and 
Social Protection 

Education 

Environmental 
Sustainability  and 
Disaster mitigation 

IFC 
investments;   

Infrastructure 
Finance Facility; 

I-DPL series; 
Roads improvement 
& maintenance; 
Water utilities 
reform, Energy 
reform and delivery;  

IFC investments  

PNPM co-
financing 

BOS-KITA Co-
financing/SISWA 

Climate Change 
DPL (or CC 
component in DPL); 
Jakarta Emergency 
Dredging Initiative; 
IFC investments    

Climate Change TF, 
IFC Advisory 
Services, Extension 
of Aceh & Nias 
MDF; 2nd window 
of MDF for Peace 
Building Activities 

Low Carbon growth 
strategy; REDD 
Study,  Aceh and 
Nias PER; 
Aceh Peace 
Program; 
Aceh Poverty 
Assessment & 
Economic updates 

4 See Appendix 10 and Annexes B3, B4 for details of the lending and non-lending program to be supported within each of the engagement areas. 
5 In addition to the new/forthcoming TFs listed here, a fuller list of major ongoing TFs is available in Appendix 10. 
6 In addition to AAA products specified here, a range of just-in-time, on demand policy advice, capacity building and other TA will be provided over the course 
of the CPS.  

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Implementation and management principles 
128. Reflecting Indonesia’s re-emergence, this CPS entails some significant changes in the 
way the WBG team in Indonesia is structured and operates. Achievements in building and 
developing effective relationships with institutional partners will be recognized. The WBG’s 
existing portfolio will be revisited to ensure that all operations support the CPS approach of 
investing in Indonesia’s institutions.  

129. As of end-June, 2008, the World Bank’s active financing portfolio comprised 27 projects 
with total net commitments of over US$2.9 billion.  Nearly 30 percent of the total number of 
projects were rated ‘at risk’ while some 17.5 percent of the total commitments were deemed to be 
‘at risk’. The percentage of ‘at risk’ projects (by number and commitments) has increased from 
15.4 percent and 10.9 percent, respectively as of end-FY07.  Several other projects are rated 
marginally satisfactory.  Risk factors include weaknesses in project management, corruption and 
misuse of funds, delays in counterpart funds release by the Government, slow disbursements, 
procurement problems, and monitoring and evaluation issues. Improving project performance will 
be a priority.  Efforts to improve portfolio quality, in addition to remedial measures underway 
will include restructuring of the marginally satisfactory and problem projects to bring their 
implementation back on track, with a focus on containing commitments at risk.  The issues will 
also be addressed actively through follow-up on specific areas of weakness, e.g., counterpart 
funds release, application of remedies for misuse of funds, and procurement, financial and project 
management improvements.  Additional efforts will be made to intensify joint project/program 
supervision with government and other partners, and to build in and implement strengthened 
participatory and/or independent monitoring and evaluation measures, as appropriate.  

130. 
Indonesian clients have expressed concerns around the non-financial “transaction costs” 
inherent in WBG-financed assistance, in line with those increasingly voiced by a number of other 
MIC clients.  Several initiatives to improve the efficiency and processing times of internal WBG 
administrative processes are underway. Targets and service standards will be set for key 
processes. There will also be regular pipeline discussions and systematic, regular portfolio 
reviews with Bappenas and the relevant line agencies. These portfolio reviews will phase in an 
assessment of key trust funds and the grants portfolio. Follow-up by responsible parties on 
outstanding issues will be central to enhanced portfolio management.  A greater focus on the 
results and impacts of the WBG-supported programs will also be implemented, building on the 
first joint results management review undertaken in 2007.  

Addressing the risk of fraud and corruption7 in WBG-supported programs 
131. 
The Government has been making progress recently in the fight against corruption as 
indicated by improvement in 2007 across key governance dimensions8, including the control of 
corruption and the rule of law. However, considerable challenges remain, as epitomized by the 
slow progress in implementing the legal and judicial reform agenda. Thus, the WBG-supported 
programs in Indonesia continue to require strong anti-corruption measures and fiduciary 

7 “Fraud and/or corruption" refers collectively to fraud, corruption, collusion, coercion and obstruction as 
defined in the Bank's Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD 
Loans and IDA Credits and Grants. See also Strengthening World Bank Group Engagement on Governance 
and Anti-Corruption, March 2007, World Bank. 
8 Source: Kaufmann D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi 2008: Governance Matters VII.  

37 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
frameworks. The CPS builds on the CAS, which set out innovative governance and anti-
corruption measures, and it seeks to further strengthen these mechanisms and their effectiveness.  

132. A recent internal review of the Governance and Anti-Corruption Action Plans (GAAP) 
mechanism included in WB-supported projects, has revealed important lessons; notably, more 
needs to be done to strengthen government ownership and the implementation of these plans. As 
a result, going forward, the WBG will work to ensure that the plans are relevant to government 
partners’ own anti-corruption efforts as well. Bolstering national ownership and institutional 
capacity-building for enhanced accountability and improved performance — already one of the 
elements of the anti-corruption commitment of the last CAS — will be at the center of the 
implementation of this CPS. The WBG will focus on applying the good governance and anti-
corruption principles and practices together with the Indonesian partner institutions for a broader, 
more sustainable impact.    

133. 
In addition to incorporating robust mechanisms and tools to safeguard fiduciary 
responsibilities, and while still relying on its own investigative and sanctions processes, the WBG 
will support and thereby strengthen those of the Government. For this purpose, the WBG will 
provide technical assistance to government agencies investigating corruption allegations, such as 
the KPK, BPKP and BPK or the relevant Inspector General units of partner agencies.  

134. Making greater use of the Government’s own anti-corruption mechanisms will contribute 
to the synergies between IFC’s and the World Bank’s anti-corruption measures, especially in the 
important area of supporting regulatory reform that reduces rents and the capture of public assets. 
The WBG will also leverage demand-side anti-corruption measures and lessons arising from 
CDD projects, to inform the design and implementation of other programs that it supports. 
Building on the opportunity offered by the Government’s own focus on good governance, the 
WBG approach therefore is moving from a largely transaction-oriented approach to an 
institutional one. 

Results management framework 
135. 
The CPS seeks to leverage WBG activities in support of the Government’s development 
and reform programs. While this approach renders the measurement of the direct impact of WBG 
activities even more difficult, it reinforces the objective of supporting Indonesia’s efforts at policy 
and institutional transformation. The appended results framework is furthermore designed to 
reflect the flexibility inherent in the CPS’ approach: the variations across different engagements 
in the framework are indicative of the different stages of maturity, with some partnerships and 
programs being well advanced (e.g., Ministry of Finance and public financial management) with 
more clearly definable and measurable targets, while others (e.g., Ministry of Environment and 
the climate change agenda) are at relatively early stages.  The results framework will be 
monitored and updated periodically. The dialogue with Bappenas around program results will be 
continued, strengthened and may be broadened to include other key partners. These assessments 
will serve as guidelines for any necessary course corrections and feed into the CPS Progress 
Report scheduled for Board presentation in FY11.   

Managing for risks  
136. 
Investing in Indonesia’s institutions requires a close engagement with the partner 
institutions and the flexibility to modify the program in line with the opening — or closing — of 

38 

 
 
 
opportunities for working with and through these institutions. The implementation of this 
approach will itself mitigate risks because the decision to engage will depend on timely and 
informed assessments of the likelihood for success. However, the approach subjects the WBG 
program to the factors that determine the opportunities for engagement. In unfavorable 
conditions, the WBG portfolio may not be exposed to risk, but it may be very limited. The key 
broader risks are highlighted below:   

137. 
Political risks: The electoral process is now well institutionalized across the different 
levels of government. The 2009 elections are likely to be competitive and there is a risk that the 
elections will give incentives to the partners in the government to strengthen their political appeal 
by distinguishing themselves, hampering the capacity to jointly pursue difficult reform programs. 
However, the elections will also put pressure on the administration to deliver demonstrable 
results, especially in its priority areas of infrastructure development, governance reform, 
community development, social protection and the investment climate. At the same time, 
elections can open up the political space for reform as new leaders with a new mandate seek 
solutions to advance their agenda.  

138. 
Socio-Economic risks: Indonesia’s resilience to external shocks has increased, 
macroeconomic fundamentals are strong and its Government is in a better position to address 
economic risks than in the past. However, several socio-economic risks remain. Indonesia’s 
growth over the past three years has been driven by its export performance.  A global growth and 
trade slow-down would translate into lower Indonesian growth as direct exports to affected 
markets fall, indirect exports (commodities) to the region fall and international markets remain 
volatile. Depending on the magnitude and duration of the slowdown, this could also slow job 
creation in Indonesia, with a particular impact on the poor. Another potential risk in this situation 
could come from a sudden reversal of financial assets held in the Indonesian stock and bond 
markets.  Such an event would feed into the exchange rate fluctuations and inflation, raising 
domestic tensions. Finally, Indonesia has suffered from major natural disasters of various kinds in 
the recent past, with significant social costs. Although better prepared than in 2004, the country 
remains vulnerable to these disasters.    

139. Risk of anti-debt sentiment: Concerns over the use of foreign financing to support the 
Government budget continue to generate opposition to foreign loans, in particular from, but not 
limited to, civil society groups. Anti-debt sentiment also exists in the legislature, where several 
key political parties, despite having explicitly agreed to program lending, hold positions designed 
to limit foreign debt exposure. Such sentiment raises potential risks for budget support operations 
as the legislature seeks to play a stronger role in overseeing foreign borrowing.  

140. Reform implementation risks: Even where there is clear political will to tackle 
institutional reforms, the reformers themselves can sometimes be overwhelmed by the extent and 
complexity of the task in the face of vested interests, and entrenched organizational cultures and 
behaviors. Capacity to develop and implement complex institutional reforms also remains a 
problem at all levels. It is precisely because of these implementation risks that the CPS is 
designed around institution-building to provide the technical assistance and co-financing support 
for the design and implementation of the government’s own reforms. 

141. Governance and corruption risks: Fiduciary risks remain significant. Investing in 
larger government-led programs, may increase the risks of the WBG being associated with a 

39 

 
 
 
program which may be tainted by corruption. For this reason, the WBG proposes to apply this 
approach only to areas where the authorities are committed to reform and anti-corruption 
measures and only where the WBG can build on a long-standing engagement; the WBG will also 
support measures to strengthen accountability and build fiduciary capacity in counterparts.  For 
the WBG’s own portfolio, the governance and anti-corruption safeguards already in place will 
continue to be improved, and will also provide stronger coverage of the TF portfolio of activities. 

142. WBG performance risks: Indonesia has access to an increasing number of sources for 
meeting its financing and technical assistance needs. As a result, the Government is seeking 
higher performance standards, and the WBG is striving to deliver on these fronts. In so doing, the 
WBG is aiming at quicker response times in the preparation and implementation of projects, more 
flexibility in the lending program, simplification of WBG procedures, greater alignment with the 
country’s own systems, and stronger tailoring of the analytical and advisory products to the needs 
and timeframes of the Government.  

143. 
The design of this CPS and its implementation will attempt to mitigate the impact of 
these risks for the WBG. Not only will the flexibility that the approach requires allow the WBG 
to reduce the risks in its engagements, but it will also ensure that the new partnership between the 
World Bank Group and Indonesia lives up to its potential.  

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices and Annexes 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 

Note 1: Cross-cutting Engagement 1: Central Government  
Institutions and Systems 

The World Bank has had an increasingly strong engagement since 2004 in supporting central 
government institutions, particularly the Ministry of Finance and Bappenas, in public sector 
reform through policy-based and investment lending, as well as a substantial TF and AAA 
program.  

Lending. There are two programs that have defined the World Bank’s lending engagement in this 
area since 2004, and that are expected to provide the backbone of this engagement during the 
CPS period as well. First, the World Bank has provided four consecutive DPLs since December 
2004 (DPL1-4). The DPL program has increased from US$300 million (DPL1) to US$600 
million (DPL4), and is expected to reach US$700 in FY09 (DPL5). DPLs have been the World 
Bank’s main vehicle to support core institutional reforms in the area of public financial 
management and resulted, among others, in the establishment of a Treasury Single Account, an 
improved accounting system and the setting-up of an independent National Procurement Office.9  

Second, the World Bank has supported the implementation of public sector reforms, particularly 
in the Ministry of Finance through the Government Financial Management and Revenue 
Administration Project (GFMRAP). GFMRAP1 (US$65 million10) was approved in conjunction 
with DPL1, and has been complementing DPL support for reforms in public financial 
management. More specifically, GFMRAPs are financing investments 
in 
technological 
modernization, capacity-building and change management.  These projects directly reinforce 
changes to the underlying institutional, incentive and organizational frameworks for core business 
functions of the MoF and other related institutions, including fiscal policy formulation, 
budgeting, treasury, internal audit, procurement, revenue dispute resolution, and legislative 
oversight. The future Statistical Capacity Building Project (STATCAP) will replicate a similar 
institutional reform investment in the Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS), thereby strengthening 
the supply of economic and social data available to policy-makers and the public. Over the CPS 
period, reform of the tax administration system will be supported by the Project for Indonesian 
Tax Administration Reform (PINTAR).  

Trust fund program. Through trust funds, the WBG is providing complementary technical 
assistance and analytical services, particularly to the core economic ministries. These Trust Funds 
include a €14.3 million Public Financial Management Multi-Donor Trust Fund financed by the 
European Commission and the Dutch Government, and a €20 million Dutch Institutional 
Development and Capacity Building Trust Fund, which supported the implementation of the CAS 
2003-08. In particular, the Dutch Trust Fund has been providing support to the Initiative for 
Public Expenditure Analysis (IPEA), which supported the Government in the allocation and 
implementation of national and sub-national budgets, and a local justice sector reform program 
(“Justice for the Poor”).  

AAA and policy dialogue. Through trust funds and its own resources, the WBG has produced a 
large number of agenda-setting flagship reports as well as on-demand policy notes and advice, all 

9 The DPL program has also supported reforms in the Investment Climate and Service Delivery (see 
engagements on private sector development and poverty). 
10 Comprising US$55 million from IBRD, US$5 million from IDA, and US$5 million from PHRD (Poverty 
and Human Resources Development - Japanese Global Trust Fund).  

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Appendix 1 

of which form part of a broader knowledge engagement in the reform of core public sector 
institutions.  The flagship reports include Spending for Development – Making the Most of 
Indonesia’s New Opportunities (PER 2007) and bi-annual economic updates. Other reports 
include the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment (PEFA 2008), an 
Education Expenditure Review (2007), and a Health Expenditure Review (2008). A Development 
Policy Review (DPR) has been produced in conjunction with this CPS.  All of these outputs are 
part of an engagement to support economic and sectoral ministries in public sector reform, as well 
as budget formulation, allocation and implementation. The future knowledge engagement will 
deepen WBG support to budget reform and Indonesia’s anti-corruption institutions. The WBG 
will also support Bappenas in preparation of a background study for the Government’s next 
Medium-Term Development Plan 2010-14 framework. 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 

Note 2: Cross-cutting Engagement 2: Sub-national Government 
Institutions and Systems 

The WBG seeks to expand its support for the core issue of institutional reform and governance at 
the local-government level.  Under a decentralization framework, priority will be given to making 
development planning more responsive to constituents, improving public financial management, 
and strengthening the accountability of local governments.  Support will be based on technical 
assistance and the co-financing of sub-national expenditure programs, along with possible direct 
engagements with the larger municipalities.  

Lending.  The WBG approach includes a loan to finance a share of local governments’ 
expenditures, to be disbursed against local governments’ outputs.  Preliminary discussions, 
including the identification of local governments that will be engaged in the project, are 
underway.  The WBG will also strengthen ongoing partnerships through continuing engagement 
in existing lending programs, such as Initiatives for Local Government Reform (ILGR), the 
Urban Sector Development and Reform Project (USDRP), and Support for Poor and 
Disadvantaged Areas (SPADA).  In addition, the WBG will start working more closely with the 
largest municipalities in order to support their specific growth and development challenges.  

Trust fund program. Through the AusAID-East Asia and Pacific Infrastructure for Growth 
Trust Fund, the WBG will provide technical and analytical support to key ministries to review 
sub-national government financing, in addition to supporting the role of sub-national 
governments in addressing growing urbanization and housing provision.  Analysis of the 
constraints on developing a market for municipal borrowing will explore a range of issues, such 
as revenue sources, laws and regulations, incentives, borrowing capacity, and creditworthiness.  
In relation to this, an assessment of Indonesia’s regional urban development will focus on the 
contribution of major urban centers to regional and national economic growth, as well as the 
delivery of services to the population.   

AAA and policy dialogue.  Development partners will fund analytical and advisory services to 
selected local governments through the Public Expenditure Analysis and Capacity Harmonization 
(PEACH) program in order to assess and improve the performance of their planning and 
budgeting processes.  In addition, the Decentralization Support Facility (DSF) brings together a 
number of development partners with a broad mandate to engage Indonesian institutions essential 
to the local accountability framework, such as legislatures, media and NGO networks. The WBG 
and other development partners will continue to engage with local governments through the 
Decentralization Support Facility for Eastern Indonesia (SOFEI), which has established a strong 
network of reformers across the region. WBG resources will also complement the above trust 
fund activities in support of a series of policy notes.  Policy discussion will be fostered through 
the dissemination of the notes and in the form of multi-stakeholder workshops for discussion of 
findings, recommendations, and follow-on activities. 

44 

 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 

Note 3: Core Engagement 1: Private Sector Development 

Lending: The World Bank’s work in the investment climate, trade and financial sector areas is a 
core element of the Bank’s flagship DPL lending program. In support of the proposed CPS, 
additional lending opportunities could be identified in these areas, as agreed with Government. In 
the financial/infrastructure sector, the Bank is preparing a US$100 million loan to support the 
establishment of an infrastructure financing institution that can help accelerate private investment 
in infrastructure. This is an innovative engagement involving the Bank and IFC (which will take 
an equity stake in the institution) as well as a number of other development partners in addition to 
private investors.  Additional demand-driven investment lending support may be provided in 
areas where institutional restructuring and strengthening needs are identified through ongoing 
AAA/TA activities.  

Trust funds program: Through trust funds, the WBG is providing complementary technical 
assistance, policy advice and capacity building in the areas of investment climate, trade and 
finance to core economic ministries, sub-national government and organizations, and institutions 
engaged in economic growth and development programs. Appropriate support to sub-national 
governments for fostering an environment conducive to the development of SMEs will be 
provided. IFC trust funds include an estimated US$40 million over five years raised from a suite 
of bi-lateral governments as well as IFC, for IFC Advisory Services to engage in broad ranging 
economic development initiatives. The Bank is contributing through the Dutch Trust Fund to 
Improve the Investment Climate and the Dutch Program to Improve Trade Policy in Indonesia, 
amounting to US$3.9 million and US$2.5 million, respectively. The Bank is also setting up a 
Multi-Donor Trust Fund, initially valued at US$7 million. This facility aims to strengthen GoI 
institutions (such as the Ministry of Trade and the National Team for Export and Investment 
Promotion, or PEPI) in managing effectively and efficiently the challenges of improving trade 
competitiveness, the investment climate, and the financial sector by supporting organizational 
reform, improving HR training management, setting up specialist teams and providing TA and 
policy advice to support reform and restructuring efforts. 

AAA, TA and policy dialogue: This program is supported through the Bank's own resources 
leveraged substantially by TF resources. Flagship products that set multi-year reform agendas 
with analysis that underlies several government reform packages (e.g., the non-bank financial 
institutions report and the forthcoming report on improving access to financial services) and 
flagship reports on special issues (e.g., the ESW report on the impact of high commodity prices 
on Indonesia’s development strategy) are one form of engagement. Another is rapid-response on-
demand policy notes that support emerging issues in the investment climate, trade and financial 
sectors. Lastly, ongoing policy dialogue and inputs to ongoing reform efforts being undertaken by 
the Government are high-impact activities that will continue to be supported.  Key counterparts to 
this work are the Coordinating Ministry for the Economy, the Ministry of Trade, Bapepam-LK, 
Bank Indonesia, and other relevant agencies. Close interaction with, and inputs to, the financial 
industry, private sector and self-regulatory bodies are also important areas of engagement that 
will continue. 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 

Note 4: Core Engagement 2: Infrastructure 

The WBG will provide financial and advisory support for the Government’s infrastructure 
financing plan as set out in the RPJM.  Key sectors covered through a series of Infrastructure 
DPLs (I-DPLs) and co-financing pooled-funding arrangements include energy, roads, and urban 
infrastructure, such as housing, water supply and sanitation.  
Lending.  WBG support includes a substantial program of investment lending to the following 
key projects:  
• 
Investment lending support for the energy sector will focus primarily on clean and 
renewable energy technologies including geothermal power investments, pumped 
storage, advanced coal technologies, power transmission and distribution projects, gas 
distribution projects, and rural electrification.  Strategic investments will seek to facilitate 
PLN’s institutional re-organization and policy reforms that will enhance efficiency and 
reduce PLN’s cost of supply.   
• Urban infrastructure development will focus on several key issues, such as water and 
sanitation improvements, and low-income housing.  Water management projects will 
increasingly target priority issues, such as flood mitigation and dam operations 
improvement.  In sanitation, the WBG’s ongoing PAMSIMAS project, for rural and peri-
urban populations, focuses on building capacity to plan system integration for 
centralized, community and household sanitation, and make long-term financing 
available for sanitation infrastructure development.   
• The Directorate General of Highways’ (DGH) well-defined maintenance program for the 
national road network, as well as clear objectives for the condition of the network, made 
it a good candidate for partnership in the implementation of development programs in 
regional and national road operations.  Road improvement projects will focus efforts on 
strengthening fiduciary, operational and management capacities of local counterparts, and 
improve the pace of implementation in ongoing projects. 

Trust fund program.  Through the AusAID-East Asia and Pacific Infrastructure for Growth 
Trust Fund, the WBG will be providing technical and analytical support to key ministries to 
review the role of the Government in housing provision.  The WBG will offer support to both 
central and sub-national governments in the development of a policy and strategy for the 
provision of housing opportunities to low-income residents in urban areas.  Particular focus will 
be on the condition of housing and land markets (supply and constraints), access to housing 
finance, and an analysis of the current slum environment (including population density and 
geographical distribution).  

AAA and policy dialogue.  The WBG primarily works with four agencies on infrastructure 
policy development: the Directorate General of Highways (DGH), the Directorate General of 
Water Resources (DWR) and the Directorate General of Human Settlement (DHS) — all at the 
Ministry of Public Works — as well as the state-owned electricity utility (Perusahaan Listrik 
Negara, or PLN).  WBG will continue to engage the DWR and the DHS to enhance policies in 
support of increased access to affordable piped water and urban sanitation.  In addition, as 
transportation is one of the most rapidly rising sources of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions, the 
WBG will work to appraise the current situation and key policy actions that need to be taken to 
improve air quality and reduce emissions. Actions achievable through legislation and financial 
incentives will be identified in a brief policy note, as well as other dissemination materials 
appropriate for the media, public pressure groups, car manufacturers, and NGOs. 

46 

 
 
Appendix 1 

Note 5: Core Engagement 3: Community Development  
and Social Protection  

The WBG will continue to support the Government in its efforts to reduce poverty and to ensure 
equity and inclusiveness across regions. Despite impressive macro-economic growth rates over 
the past several years, poverty remains high in Indonesia with 36 million people or 16.7 percent 
below the national poverty line (US$1.55/day) and almost half the population (49 percent) below 
US$2/day (2007).  Indonesia continues to under-perform compared with its neighboring countries 
in terms of access to quality healthcare, water and sanitation, education and other basic services. 

WBG support consists of assistance on the macro-economic growth side as mentioned in other 
parts of this CPS, as well as the service delivery and direct poverty programming dimensions. 
The latter will be achieved through a combination of co-financing loans, AAA, and technical 
assistance and policy guidance on poverty reduction strategies and programming.  Major 
government counterparts include the Government’s National Poverty Commission, led by the 
Coordinating Ministry for People’s Welfare, as well as Bappenas and the Ministries of Finance, 
Home Affairs, Public Works, Social Welfare, Education and Health.  

Lending. The National Community Empowerment Program 
(PNPM-Mandiri) 
is 
the 
Government’s flagship national poverty reduction program. It was built upon the previous 10 
years of successful experience with the World Bank’s Kecamatan Development Program (KDP) 
and Urban Poverty Program (UPP). For 2008-09, the program includes two WBG SILS totaling 
US$409 million as well as national and local government counterpart funding and other 
community development programs equaling about US$1.8 billion.  Other smaller poverty 
reduction programs are being folded into the PNPM-Mandiri in order to make poverty 
programming at the community level more streamlined and coordinated. PNPM-Mandiri 
currently covers almost 70 percent of the sub-districts in the country; by 2009, the Government 
expects the program to cover all sub-districts and cities.  This program is planned to continue 
until 2015, and the WBG and other donors will be supporting these efforts through repeater loans. 

The other major poverty program that the Bank is supporting is the Conditional Cash Transfer 
(CCT) program. The Bank provides technical support and guidance for the traditional household 
version of the CCT (Program Keluarga Harapan), as well as financial support through the PNPM-
Mandiri program and a community version of the CCT.  Both programs began in 2007 and are 
expected to continue in future years. 

Trust fund program.  The AAA work and technical assistance are funded primarily out of two 
major trust funds. The PNPM Support Facility was established in early 2008 with about US$40 
million in initial commitments from the Dutch, DANIDA, and AusAid.  The facility will fund a 
variety of evaluations, special studies, and technical assistance related to PNPM implementation. 
In addition, a Dutch Trust Fund supports the AAA and technical work of PREM’s poverty team 
as described below. A Dutch Trust Fund provides just under €1.8 million to support a range of 
activities, such as poverty program assessments, data and policy advice, institutional capacity-
building activities, implementation support for key poverty programs (social protection), and 
results and knowledge sharing activities.  

AAA and policy dialogue. The poverty AAA work has been funded primarily out of trust funds, 
with Bank Budget (BB) supporting core World Bank staff costs. In the case of PNPM, this allows 
the limited resources of trust funds to leverage high returns in terms of policy guidance, strategic 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 

technical assistance, and analytical knowledge. AAA and policy dialogue for this CPS period will 
consist of: 

(cid:131) Ten different evaluations and studies for PNPM-Mandiri to evaluate its poverty impact, cost 
effectiveness, inclusiveness, and various aspects of its operations. 
(cid:131) Technical guidance and policy advice regarding poverty reduction strategies and reforms, as 
well as oversight of the two World Bank loans, PNPM-Rural and PNPM-Urban. 
(cid:131) Technical assistance and evaluations of the pilot CCT programs and social protection in 
general. 
(cid:131) Assessments of other major poverty reduction programs. 
(cid:131) Several randomized experiments related to poverty targeting and governance. 
(cid:131) Monitoring and evaluation capacity building with Bappenas and other ministries. 
(cid:131) Analytical work and technical guidance related to national employment policies. 
(cid:131) Improved poverty measurement and statistical capacity building. 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 

Note 6: Core Engagement 4: Education 

The World Bank has developed increasingly close ties with both the Ministry of National 
Education (MoNE) and the Ministry of Religious Affairs (MoRA), with strong engagement in 
strategic areas of the education sector through a mix of lending, technical assistance and policy 
dialogue.  

Lending. The lending portfolio has grown considerably, with three projects starting since 2006 
and another three projects in the pipeline.  Among current projects, the Improving Management 
of Higher Education for Relevance and Efficiency (IMHERE) project (US$117 million) was 
launched in 2006 and aims to build capacity for the reform and oversight of the higher education 
system and to improve academic quality and institutional performance.  The Early Childhood 
Education and Development (ECED) (US$127 million — including US$23 million in Dutch 
grant financing) began in 2007 and aims to establish about 6,000 community-based ECED sites 
for children up to six years of age in targeted poor districts and villages. This project will help to 
level the playing field for poor children who drop out and repeat school due to unequal access to 
early learning opportunities.  The Better Education through Reformed Management and Universal 
Teacher Upgrading (BERMUTU) (US$195 million, with US$52 million Dutch grant financing) 
began in 2008 and is targeted to areas that will assist the Government to implement the December 
2005 Teacher Law, which links significant increases in teacher incentives to certified teacher 
competencies.  The project supports structures that are critical in the certification and upgrading 
process.   Areas include the accreditation of universities, capacity building of teacher cluster 
groups (which will be instrumental in teacher upgrading) and reform of teacher progression and 
promotion systems.   

Among projects in the pipeline, BOS-KITA, a proposed US$600 million three-year project 
beginning in October 2008 aims to support a major government program that provides 
operational funding to primary and junior secondary schools across the nation.  The project will 
strengthen the already existing BOS program through establishing an independent monitoring 
unit and an information campaign. The System Improvements through Sector-Wide Approaches 
(SISWA) program is aimed at gradually moving donor assistance towards a basic education 
sector support program and is intended to be the means by which the Government will eventually 
(by 2010) align, coordinate and focus all donor assistance to basic education.  This proposed 
program of about US$1 billion (US$200 million World Bank lending) is being led by the 
Government with the primary partners including the Government of the Netherlands, the 
European Commission and AusAID.  The Better Employment Knowledge and Entrepreneurship 
to Revitalize Job Access (BEKERJA) (currently proposed amount of US$100 million) is a youth 
employment program aimed at improving the functioning of the labor market for youth by 
addressing key bottlenecks on both the demand and supply side of the skills market. The program 
is under discussion with government counterparts and would include activities in support of 
vouchers for unemployed youth to receive vocational training, and micro and SME finance. 

Trust fund program. Two large trust funds are in operation to support strategic policy areas of 
education.  The US$11.1 million Dutch Basic Education Support Program has been targeted to 
the shaping of national policy and in the provision of necessary just-in-time technical support in 
critical areas, including: (i) Teacher Management and Quality of Education, (ii) Piloting of 
Teacher Certification and Teacher Employment and Deployment policies, (iii) Improving the 
Accountability, Incentive and Support Structures of Basic Education, (iv) Education Monitoring 
and Evaluation, and (v) ICT in Education.  The €39 million Basic Education Capacity Trust Fund 
(BEC-TF) was jointly established by the European Commission and the Government of the 

49 

 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 

Netherlands with the purpose of supporting the Government in improving the delivery of 
decentralized basic education.  It is also intended to lay the ground and conditions to be met for a 
major sector-wide investment program. These goals will be achieved through targeted analytical 
work, thematic dialogue in education between the Government and donors, and capacity 
development and strengthening of systems for planning, budgeting, financial management, M&E, 
and human resource management. 

AAA and policy dialogue. In tandem with lending development and preparation, a broad array of 
AAA work has been conducted to support the Government in key areas, including the 
Government’s current medium-term strategy (RENSTRA), the regulations under the Teacher 
Law, analytical work on mechanisms for teacher certification, teacher employment and 
redeployment, inclusive education, reaching the vulnerable and disabled, education management 
information system, quality framework for early childhood education and adult literacy.  Future 
formal Economic and Sector Work (ESW) is planned for four areas, including (i) Education 
Sector Assessment, which will provide the technical assistance to assist the Government in 
preparing a technically sound “education sector assessment” report, which will form an analytical 
base for the formulation of a strategically pertinent and focused medium-term strategic plan 
(RENSTRA) for 2009-14, (ii) Teacher Quality, focused on helping the Government in 
formulating new policies or refining existing policies to improve quality of teachers aimed at 
improving student learning, (iii) Teacher Employment and Deployment, which will fill in 
knowledge gaps and provide policy recommendations that will inform Indonesia’s teacher 
employment and deployment strategy, and (iv) Early Childhood Development Evaluation, which 
is a joint research between the Early Childhood Development Unit (ECDU) in the MoNE and the 
World Bank, with the purpose of conducting a high quality evaluation of the ECED program and 
providing the evidence required to raise awareness and advocate for early child development and 
the importance of school readiness.  

50 

 
 
Appendix 1 

Note 7: Core Engagement 5: Environmental Sustainability and  
Disaster Mitigation 

Following the Bank’s major role in the reconstruction of Aceh, Nias and Yogyakarta, the CAS 
was amended in September 2006 to include a disaster risk management pillar. This called for the 
Bank to support new legislation and institutional arrangements for disaster risk reduction (DRR), 
and integrating DRR in its sectoral work. Joint TA was to be provided in key areas, including 
developing national and local government capacity for assessing disaster damage, losses and 
needs; assessing capacity to absorb catastrophic events, amongst others. Meanwhile, in 2007 the 
Bank became a major source of support for climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. 
This engagement involves support for the Ministry of Environment in preparation for the Bali 
COP 13, assistance to the Ministry of Forestry to develop its program on REDD, partnership with 
the MoF to develop a low carbon growth strategy, and work with Bappenas to formulate a 
national climate change and disaster management adaptation program. 

Lending. Engagement with climate change is relatively new, but a climate change pillar is being 
developed for the fifth Development Policy Loan (DPL 5) to incorporate priority actions related 
to institutional consolidation, mitigation and adaptation. This pillar will enable the DPL5 to be 
increased by US$100 million. Once institutional leadership on the climate change issue has been 
consolidated and the Bank has a clear counterpart, it may be possible to consider a stand-alone 
climate change DPL series. The Bank is financing a growing portfolio of Clean Development 
Mechanism (CDM) projects and mainstreaming adaptation to climate in the overall Bank lending 
portfolio. Finally, the emerging Forest Investment Fund presents an opportunity to provide 
Indonesia with concessional lending to support, inter alia, the initial development of REDD 
projects. 

For both national-scale disasters (Aceh/Nias and Yogyakarta), the World Bank responded by 
reprogramming its lending portfolio to make funds available for community-based reconstruction 
programs. The Bank also has a significant grant-financed portfolio of projects in both areas. The 
possibility exists to develop a catastrophic drawn-down option (CAT DDO) if there is 
government interest in this new “line-of-credit” financing mechanism. Enhanced efforts will be 
made to integrate DRR and climate change adaptation into the project cycle.  

Trust fund program. Trust funds support the Bank’s climate change program including in the 
following areas: 
• REDD: about US$1million in reimbursable agreements from the Government of 
Australia and DFID plus funds from the Bank’s PROFOR to assist the Indonesia Forest 
Climate Alliance with development of the national REDD program. 
• Pathways to Sustainability: US$200,000 from PROFOR which is leveraging over US$2 
million from AusAID and CSIRO to develop macro- and micro-modeling tools for 
Bappenas to understand better the environmental (including greenhouse gas emissions) 
consequences of different developmental paths. 
• Low Carbon Growth: US$360,000 through an Externally Funded Output from AusAID to 
support a low carbon growth study in partnership with the Ministry of Finance. 
Additional resource commitments are expected from DFID for this work. 
• An additional grant of US$1-2 million from WASAP is being proposed for a pilot study 
on water-resources management in relation to the major source of Indonesia’s carbon 
emissions, namely degraded peatlands. 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 

Discussions have been held with development partners and the GoI to create a MDTF for climate 
change, which would support the GoI’s climate change action plan by financing TA, capacity 
building and pilot activities. Once an appropriate government counterpart has been found, the 
fund will be activated. 

Trust funds have been used to respond to major disasters and initiate a program for 
mainstreaming DRR. The Bank created and manages a US$697 million MDTF for Aceh and Nias 
for post-disaster reconstruction through a portfolio of 20 projects, over half of which are Bank 
supervised. Similarly, over US$84 million was committed to the Java Reconstruction Fund 
following the Yogyakarta/Central Java earthquake. Its major community-built housing project is 
Bank supervised.  For DRR, a US$1.25 million grant has been obtained from the Global Facility 
for Disaster Reduction and Recovery to mainstream DRR in Bappenas, the new Disaster 
Management Agency (BNPB), the insurance industry, and the Bank itself. 

AAA and policy dialogue. The Bank’s climate change AAA has focused on TA to prepare the 
national REDD program and support for the first phase of the low carbon growth study. The Bank 
will focus efforts on the main inputs for the GoI to develop its low carbon growth strategy and the 
policy dialogue has sought to mainstream the discussion of climate change. This has involved: 
preparing and disseminating information to raise awareness about carbon emissions, vulnerability 
and relevant policies; working with the Ministries of Finance and Trade on relevant instruments 
and options for mitigation and adaptation; engaging with Bappenas on issues of development 
partnership and adaptation; and coordinating with the donor community on financial support for 
Indonesia’s climate change program. At the local level, the WBG will assist DKI Jakarta’s three-
year river-dredging initiative, the Jakarta Emergency Dredging Initiative (JEDI), to locate grant 
financing for capacity-building within the municipal administration. 

PREM has taken the lead on AAA, especially in the area of disaster financing, monitoring of the 
reconstruction process and economic impact analysis. Outputs in FY08 include the Aceh Poverty 
Assessment, the Nias Public Expenditure Review, a stock-taking report One Year after the 
Yogyakarta Earthquake, bi-annual Aceh Economic Updates and the establishment of a 
reconstruction finance tracking methodology. In FY09, the following products are anticipated: An 
analysis of reconstruction results in Aceh and Nias in conjunction with the official end of the 
reconstruction period, a deepening of economic research and support to other country teams in 
responding to disasters and setting up M&E.  

52 

 
 
 
 
Appendix 2 

INDONESIA: Results framework approach 

The key development outcomes at the end of the CPS period are included in the following Results 
Framework. The variations across these in the framework are indicative of the different stages of 
maturity, with some partnerships and programs being well advanced (e.g., Ministry of Finance 
and public financial management), while others (e.g., Ministry of Environment and the climate 
change agenda) are at relatively early stages. The following seeks to classify the seven current 
core engagements by level of relative maturity:  

Mature engagements:   
Cross-cutting Engagement Area 1: Central Government Institutions and Systems 
Core Engagement Area 1: Private Sector Development  
Core Engagement Area 3: Community Development and Social Protection  
Core Engagement Area 4: Education  

Developing engagements:  
Cross-cutting Engagement Area 2: Sub-national Government Institutions and Systems  
Core Engagement Area 2: Infrastructure  
Core Engagement Area 5: Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Mitigation  

Where core engagements are already moving into a mature phase, the WBG is in a position to be 
more specific in terms of the outcomes over the CPS period that can be realistically achieved. 
Hence, the detail relating to the outcomes and intermediate indicative milestones are more 
developed in the mature engagements than in those engagements that are still in an early phase. In 
these developing engagements, outcomes are somewhat less definable and therefore, more likely 
to be based on a range of possible targets or intermediate outcomes.   

Finally, it is important to note that the flexibility inherent in the CPS will also apply to the results 
framework, with adjustments to the core partnerships and programs also being mirrored in the 
results framework, as appropriate.   

53  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Further improvements to effectiveness 
and quality of public expenditures, 
and strengthened national institutions, 
fiduciary and operational frameworks 
required for enhanced accountability 
and increased Government 
effectiveness 

“The ideal Indonesia is an 
Indonesia that is safer and 
more peaceful, just and 
democratic and more 
prosperous.” 
State Address of the 
President of the Republic 
of Indonesia on the Eve of 
the Sixtieth Anniversary 
of Indonesia’s 
Independence.” 

Strengthen central 
government institutions 
and systems to enhance 
public financial 
management and 
governance to increase the 
development impact of 
priority budget 
expenditures for a 
competitive, inclusive, and 
sustainable Indonesia 

Appendix 2 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

INDONESIA: CPS Results Matrix 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Overarching Development Outcomes 

1. WBG support and financing are aligned to 
national priorities. 
2. Strengthened use of Indonesia’s own systems, 
procedures and institutions to the extent possible. 
3. Enhanced harmonization of development 
partners’ support. 
4. Contributions toward strengthened public 
fiduciary controls, accountability, managerial, 
technical and evaluation capacity. 

Cross-cutting Engagement Area 1: Central Government Institutions and Systems 
The budget system is input-based, 
1. Improved results orientation in the budget process.  
• Revised program structure for 
excessively detailed and inflexible 
Baseline: Budget allocations based on 
RPJM 2010-15 specifies 
and strictly annual, hampering 
organization, detailed types of expenditure, 
measurable results and targets 
implementation of multi-year projects 
functions, programs and activities; budget documents 
aligned to organizational 
include macroeconomic projections of aggregate 
structure (2010) 
expenditures and revenues, but the budget 
• Standing order for virements 
preparation process remains strictly annual with no 
reference to forward estimates for outer years.  
allow spending ministries to 
                Targets: Results-oriented programs with 
reallocate between spending 
measurable results becoming the main units for 
units, activities, some economic 
budget allocation and control, with other 
categories and location within a 
classifications (by organization and/or type of 
given program without prior 
expenditure) being applied selectively at an 
MoF approval (2012) 
aggregate level. 
• Progress towards a point where 
Data source: Pertinent government 
regulations, including annual budget law; staff 
budget documents present 
assessments. 
current budget year estimates 
and forward estimates for two 
outer years (continuous) 

Ongoing Financing: 
GFMRAP; Institutional 
Development TF 
(Netherlands); GFMRAP 
TF (PHRD); Governance 
TFs (Netherlands); PFM 
TFs (PHRD) 

Planned Financing: DPLs; 
PINTAR/ GFMRAP II; 
STATCAP; PFM – MDTF 

54  

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

AAA/Others: PER, DPR;; 
analysis of demand for legal 
reforms; commodity price 
analysis; CEM/sector 
analysis; support to RPJM; 
policy notes; poverty 
assessment 

Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Strengthen central 
government institutions 
and systems to enhance 
public financial 
management and 
governance to increase the 
development impact of 
priority budget 
expenditures for a 
competitive, inclusive, and 
sustainable Indonesia 

Issues and Obstacles 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 
Cross-cutting Engagement Area 1: Central Government Institutions and Systems 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Government cash balances are 
fragmented and there is limited 
information available for efficient 
management of cash; treasury 
operations are currently managed 
through fragmented data collection 
and consolidation systems which have 
limited capacity to produce reliable 
and timely information on budget 
execution 

2. Effective operationalization of TSA, together with 
strengthened and timely cash plans from the line 
ministries. 
                Baseline: TSA extended to all expenditure 
accounts but not yet to the revenue side. Very 
rudimentary cash planning that is not based on 
expected disbursements.  
                Targets: Comprehensive TSA coverage of 
all major government cash balances, including the 
revenue side. Maximum 10% deviation in line 
ministries’ quarterly cash plans compared with actual 
cash flows.  
                 Data sources: MoF accounts quarterly 
cash plans, government regulations; system manuals, 
integrated database and staff assessments.  

Controls in budget execution 
processes are generally inadequate 
and could jeopardize gains from 
improvements made in other areas of 
PFM 

Improvements in tax administration 
are hampered by inefficient 
registration, returns processing, 
document management, and 
limitations in the basic IT 
infrastructure 

3. Effective and reliable implementation of State 
Treasury and Budget System (SPAN) reform, as 
evidenced by timely and accurate financial reporting.  
Baseline: PEFA indicators: PI 18 on 
effectiveness of payroll control is at D+; PI 20 on 
effectiveness of internal controls over non-salary 
expenditure is at D+; PI 25 on quality and timeliness 
of annual financial statements is at C+.  
                Targets: PEFA indicators: PI 18 to rise to 
C; PI 20 to rise to A; and PI 25 to rise to A.  
Data source: Repeat PEFA assessment 

(2012).  
4. More efficient tax administration through: 
increased number of accurate taxpayer registration 
records in the registration database using third-party 
data and call centers; increased number of 
comprehensive and risk-based audits of taxpayer 
declarations; reduced tax arrears through better and 
more accurate taxpayer accounts and collection 
procedures. 

• Inclusion of major revenue 
accounts into the TSA regime 
(2008) 
• Contract signed for procurement 
of new Treasury and Budget 
system (2008) 
• Progressive inclusion of 
remaining cash balances of 
central government institutions 
into the TSA regime 
(continuous) 
• Treasury enforces quarterly cash 
planning in the line ministries 
(2009) 
• Progressive implementation of 
the Integrated Financial 
Management System in the 
Treasury starting with 5 pilot 
ministries (2010) 
• COSO control framework 
piloted in 3 select line ministries 
providing better understanding 
of the challenges on internal 
control in line ministries (2009) 
• On payroll controls, an initial 
design of an information system 
which links BKN and MDAs is 
produced (2010) 

• Double entry for registration 
process introduced (2009) 
• Centralized registration system 
introduced (2009) 
• Registration master file cleaned 
up of erroneous records and 
duplications  (2009) 
• Development of taxpayer risk 
assessment models (2009) 

55  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

• Determination of reliable arrears 
information (2009) 
• Contract for procurement of core 
tax administration system signed 
(2009) 
• Progressive development and 
implementation of core tax 
administration systems 
(continuous) 
• Progressive implementation of 
risk-based audit management 
(continuous) 
• Progressive development and 
implementation of systematic 
collection program (continuous) 
• LPKP fully staffed and 
functional (2008) 
• Revision of Keppres 80/2003 
and issuance of national standard 
bidding documents (2008) 
• Development of a capacity 
building strategy (2008) 
• Support to capacity building 
program providers at the national 
and provincial  level (2009) 
• Procurement units established at 
selected implementing agencies 
(2009) 
• Strengthening  the procurement 
audit functions in IGs and BPKP 
(2009) 
• Revision of the sanctions system 
(2009) 
• Procurement law enacted (2010) 
• Professional procurement stream 
is established in implementing 
agencies (2010) 

Improvements in tax administration 
are hampered by inefficient 
registration, returns processing, 
document management, and 
limitations in the basic IT 
infrastructure 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 
Cross-cutting Engagement Area 1: Central Government Institutions and Systems 
Baseline: (i) 40% accuracy (2007; based 
on total of 11 million taxpayer records); (ii) regular 
audits are limited to VAT refunds; (iii) processes to 
collect arrears not classified into collectable and non-
collectable items; collection enforcement is 
ineffective. 
             Targets: (i) 100% accuracy; (ii) DGT 
conducts comprehensive audits expanding the 
number of returns exposed to compliance programs; 
(iii) effective procedures in place to collect arrears 
resulting in reported arrears not exceeding 5% of 
declared tax liabilities.  
Data sources: AusAID study; staff 
assessment; government regulations.  

The public procurement system still 
has significant deficiencies in terms of 
improving the regulatory framework 
and implementation tools as well as 
capacity of procurement practitioners; 
collusion and corrupt practices in the 
bidding process continue to exist, 
causing leakages and losses in the 
system 

5. Improved regulatory framework; higher capacity 
levels at national and provincial levels, and 
establishment of professional procurement units in 
implementing agencies; improved quality of 
procurement audit and effectiveness of sanctions. 
Baseline: (i) No procurement law is 
currently in place and there is no set of national 
standard bidding documents; (ii) there is no clear 
capacity-building program and percentage of 
government staff passing the certification test is still 
below 15% (mid-2008); (iii) sanctions on colluding 
firms are relatively limited and do not apply outside 
the implementing agency where collusion occurs. 
Targets: (i) Procurement law and 
associated tools are issued; (ii) capacity-building 
program in place; (iii) sanctions provide a deterrent 
for colluding firms. 
Data sources: Staff assessment; 
government regulations; update of OECD/DAC BIL. 

56  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 
Cross-cutting Engagement Area 1: Central Government Institutions and Systems 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

Increasing demand for improved 
quality, timeliness and responsiveness 
of data availability are hampered by 
poor ICT infrastructure and data 
management, and inefficient business 
processes 

6.  Improved quality and timeliness of key statistics 
produced by BPS, e.g., national accounts data, 
poverty data, etc.  
                Baseline: (i) Inconsistencies between BPS 
statistics from various different sources; (ii) low 
levels of user engagement and confidence, and (iii) 
prolonged data production timelines.  
                Targets: (i) National accounts move from 
1968 System of National Accounts (SNA) to 1993 
SNA; decreased discrepancies between statistics 
from different sources; (ii) increased level of user 
satisfaction and confidence, and (iii) reduced time 
lags between collection and data dissemination. 
                Data sources: Dialogue with BPS; reports; 
staff workshops, user surveys.   

• All sub-districts statistics 
officers equipped with GPS 
technology (2009) 
• Sixty-six city offices connected 
by wide area network (2009) 
• Business process re-engineering 
conducted for 5 product lines 
(2010) 
• Methodology reviews conducted 
for 5 product lines (2010) 
• Data warehouse prototype 
designed and developed (2011) 
• Corporate Training Strategy 
developed and implemented for 
new information management 
systems (2011) 
• Quality assurance mechanisms 
established and implemented 
(2011) 
Cross-cutting Engagement Area 2: Sub-national Government Institutions and Systems 

Strengthen decentralized 
local governments and 
institutions to increase the 
impact of public spending 

Weak capacity of local governments 
(LG) to manage assets and improve 
service delivery 

Improved LG systems and processes for planning, 
budgeting and delivering services and investments. 
Baseline: Most LGs have poor investment 
planning, budget management, and weak 
implementation capacities. Very few LGs conduct 
adequate investment and expenditure planning.  
Target: (i) LGs following Bank-supported 
programs prepare detailed medium-term investment 
plans (RPJM); (ii) LGs following Bank-supported 
programs execute annual investments as identified in 
their medium-term plans; and (iii) LGs following 
Bank-supported programs conduct detailed 
expenditure reviews and prepare capacity 
enhancement programs.  
                Data sources: Medium-term investment 
plans submitted to the MoF by LGs. Expenditure 
management assessments.  

• Ongoing work with national 
government and various select 
rural and urban LGs on creating 
a framework for improving their 
planning and resource 
management (continuous) 
• Improving asset and financial 
resource management within 
select LGs (continuous) 
• Engagement through NLTA with 
large urban municipalities 
(continuous) 
• Series of regional-based 
knowledge-sharing events and 
policy dialogues to increase 
awareness and share lessons 
learnt in areas with limited 
information access, i.e., eastern 
Indonesia (continuous) 

Ongoing Financing: 
SPADA; ILGRP; USDRP; 
DSF – MDTF; ILGRP – 
MDTF; DSF 

Planned Financing: DPLs; 
LG DAU/ DAK Support; 
PNPMs 

AAA/Others: 
Strengthening inter-
governmental framework; 
IEC/ DSF II; Papua PER; 
PEACH 

57  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Enhance the environment 
for private sector 
development to foster 
accelerated growth and 
poverty reduction and 
strengthen 
competitiveness and 
inclusiveness 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 

Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

Core Engagement Area 1: Private Sector Development  

1. Strengthened private and financial sector through: 
better regulatory frameworks; improved investment 
climate; stronger bank and non-bank financial 
institutions. 
Baseline: Key financial ratios of banks are 
sound; LDR 60%; 35% of households have access to 
bank accounts; saving, investment and risk 
management products relevant to poor and 
vulnerable population are limited. 
Targets: Key financial ratios of banks 
remain sound and LDR reaches minimum 80%; 
NBFI assets as proportion of loans to SME doubled; 
minimum of 45% of households have a bank 
account; infrastructure finance institution established 
and well functioning.  
Data sources: Bank Indonesia; Bapepam & 
LK; access to finance surveys; BPS. 
2. Improved capacity of sub-national governments to 
support business operations through introduction of 
less cumbersome procedures for business start-ups 
and licensing. 
Baseline: Sub-national Doing Business 
(DB) study of 15 cities and other baseline studies. 
Targets: Reduction in time and cost of 
start-ups and licensing of 50% in client cities. 
Data sources: Internal M&E reviews; 
WBG Doing Business report. 

3. Improved regulatory environment and interagency 
coordination in the development of investment 
policies. 

Baseline: 109 days to start a company; 4 
months to receive VAT refund; 7 days average 
container dwell time; uncoordinated investment 
policy. 

Targets: 50 days to start a company; 2 
months to receive VAT refund; 5 days average 
container dwell time; coordinated investment policy 
through PEPI; improved DB rankings. 

Ongoing Financing: IFC 
investments in priority 
sectors; IFC Advisory 
Services Initiative; 
Investment Climate TF 
(Netherlands) 

Planned Financing: IFC 
investments in priority 
sectors; Private 
Infrastructure Finance;  
bilateral TFs to IFC 
Advisory Services; trade 
and investment climate 
MDTF 

AAA/Others: Investment 
climate, trade facilitation, 
financial sector; studies on 
insurance and NBFI; 
surveys of access to finance; 
policy dialogue on banking 
sector; capacity building, 
and IFC engagement with 
microfinance; IFC Advisory 
Services Initiatives on 
regulatory reform and 
investment promotion; 
capacity-building initiatives 
to MoT, PEPI and other  
GoI institutions 

• Banking lending consistently 
increases higher than annual 
inflation rate and LDR reaches 
70% (2008) and increases 5% 
annually thereafter 
• Steady increase of mutual fund 
assets and amount of capital 
raised through equity and bonds 
market IPO (continuous) 
• Mainstreaming the results of 
national access to finance survey 
in government policy (2009) 
• Higher penetration of pension 
and insurance (continuous) 

• Improved monitoring and 
evaluation capacity of 
effectiveness of licensing offices 
by districts or provincial 
government (continuous) 
• Passage of national laws that 
affect and improve national and 
sub-national governments’ 
business licensing processing 
(continuous) 

• Regular monitoring and public 
announcement of company start-
up time (Ministry of Justice); 
VAT refund time (DG Tax); and 
container dwell time 
(Pelindo/JICT) (continuous) 
• Progress towards a fully staffed 
and functional professional 
secretariat for PEPI (continuous) 

Financial intermediation is low; non 
bank financial institutions and capital 
markets are small; type and access to 
finance limited; limited long-term 
domestic financial resources and lack 
of local infrastructure financing 
expertise 

Sub-national government processes 
are slow, cumbersome and lacking in 
transparency 

Policy decisions are taken without 
sufficient analysis of alternatives and 
of their costs and benefits; lack of 
specialists to provide information at 
the level required; weak coordination 
between research units and policy 
units; complex regulatory 
environment inhibits private sector 
investment; time consuming and 
costly procedures to establish 
companies, pay taxes and clear 
imports; weak coordination among 
government institutions for 
investment policy 

58  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 

Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

Core Engagement Area 1: Private Sector Development 

Data sources: Official data from Ministry of Justice, 
Tax Department and Port Authority/Pelindo/ JICT; 
PEPI progress reports; and DB report.  
4. Strengthened institutional structure and capacity of 
the Ministry of Trade to enable it to develop and 
implement more effective trade policies. 
Baseline: Absence of specialist teams that 
can provide the required level of analysis for policy 
decisions. 
Target: At least 4 specialized teams 
embedded in their respective DGs in the Ministry of 
Trade providing analytical support for the 
development of domestic and international trade 
strategies and for rapid policy response; the teams 
engage effectively with their policy counterparts in 
the Ministry. 
Data source: Policies developed by the 
Ministry of Trade and progress reports of specialist 
teams. 
5. Improved access to markets for Indonesian 
businesses in select commodity or industry-based 
sectors. 

Baseline: SMEs/entrepreneurs/farmers 
have little direct access to large markets.    
Target: New investment/financing for 
SMEs in supply chain; increased SME contracts with 
large firms; increased sales and incomes for 
impacted firms; price transparency increases. 
Data source: Internal M&E project review. 

• At least 3 specialist teams are set 
up and fully staffed by Ministry 
of Trade staff and advisors 
(2010) 
• Specialist teams are involved in 
the development of analysis for 
policy decisions (2011) 
• Sectoral policy/regulatory 
impediments in selected agrifood 
value chains presented to 
Ministry of Trade (2010). 

• Steady increase in investment in 
direct sourcing by lead firms 
(continuous)  
• Business linkages or forums 
created to facilitate lead 
firm/SME linkages (continuous). 
• Improvement in price discovery 
mechanisms of agricultural 
commodities via warehouse 
receipts system (continuous) 
• Improving SME competency to 
comply with market standards 
(continuous)  

Transparent and efficient linkages 
among smallholders, SMEs and rural 
businesses and commercial markets 
are weak 

59  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Increase the level and 
efficiency of public and 
private investments in 
infrastructure to meet 
needs and strengthen 
competitiveness 

Lack of investment in infrastructure, 
which has not kept pace with 
economic growth; investment in 
infrastructure fell from about 6% of 
GDP in 1997 to 2% in 2000, and was 
only 3.2% in 2005 

Indonesia’s infrastructure delivery 
requirements are massive, and beyond 
what can be supported through public 
investment 

Core Engagement Area 2: Infrastructure  
1. Increased quantity and efficiency of national and 
sub-national government spending on infrastructure 
through improvements in subsidy policy, incentives 
framework, expenditure planning and budgeting. 
Baseline: Actual spending on national 
infrastructure was Rp 18.9 trillion in 2006. 
Target: Actual spending on national 
infrastructure increased by 25% over 2006 level by 
2010. 

Data source: MoF. 

2. Increased private investment in infrastructure 
through the establishment of a fiscally sound, 
credible and transparent PPP framework. 
Baseline: Private sector financial 
commitments to private infrastructure projects were 
0.5% of GDP in 2005. 
Target: Private sector financial 
commitments to private infrastructure projects 
increase to 0.75% of GDP by 2010. 
Data source: MoF. 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 

• Increase in sub-national budget 
(APBD) capital expenditures by 
20% over 2005 level (2010) 
• 35% of urban population with 
access to piped water compared 
with 31% in 2006 (2010) 
• 60% of population with access to 
electricity compared with 55% in 
2003 (2010) 
• 84% of national roads remain in 
good/fair condition compared 
with 81% in 2006 (2010) 

• PPP transactions tendered in 
compliance with Perpres 
67/2005 
• Private sector financial 
commitments to private 
infrastructure projects increase to 
0.75% of GDP compared to 
0.5% in 2005 (2010) 

Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

Ongoing Financing: 
Strategic Roads 
Infrastructure; Domestic 
Gas Market Development; 
Eastern Indonesia 
Transport; WSSLIC III; 
Urban TF (PHRD); Water 
& Sanitation TF (AusAid) 

Planned Financing: IDPLs; 

National Roads Maintenance 
and Improvement; Pump 
Storage/ Hydropower; Dam 
Operations; Jakarta Flood 
Control; Private Infrastructure 
Finance; specific investment 
loans in water, transport, and 
energy sectors; IIF loans and 
IFC Investments; IFC PLN 
Central Java Coal-Fired IPP; 
infrastructure TF (AusAID) 

AAA/Other: Infrastructure 
sector notes; infrastructure 
development strategy; IFC 
Advisory Services 

60  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Reduce poverty levels and 
improve equity by 
improving livelihoods and 
service delivery, and 
decrease remaining 
pockets of vulnerabilities 
to strengthen inclusiveness 

Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

Ongoing Financing: KDP; 
UPP; SPADA; PNPM TFs 
(Netherlands, Australia, 
DFID); SPADA TFs 
(DFID) 

Planned Financing: 
PNPM-Rural; PNPM-
Urban; PNPMs Combined; 
Youth Employment; PNPM 
TFs 

AAA/Other: Poverty 
assessment; pro-poor jobs 
strategy; impact evaluations 
and studies of PNPM; 
impact evaluation of CCT; 
technical support to PNPM; 
guidance to BPS on poverty 
targeting and strengthening 
systems  

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 
Core Engagement Area 3: Community Development and Social Protection 

Around 110 million people still live 
under US$2 a day; large number of 
urban and rural poor due to lack of 
income and inadequate productive 
employment opportunities; lack of 
quality service delivery to poor 
people; wide regional disparities 
(particularly, eastern provinces); poor 
are vulnerable to shocks such as food 
price increases, natural disasters 

• Improved household expenditure 
rates or improved access to 
economic and social services in 
7,800 kelurahan (wards) (end 
2009) 
• Infrastructure built is 20% less 
expensive than that built by non-
community based approaches in 
80% of participating kelurahan 
• EIRRs >30% for major rural 
infrastructure types in PNPM 
kecamatan 
• 80% satisfaction level of 
beneficiaries regarding improved 
services and local level 
governance 
• Improved HH expenditure rates 
and improved access to 
economic and social services in a 
minimum of 2,500 poor sub-
districts (2008) 
• Improved HH expenditure rates 
and improved access to 
economic and social services in a 
minimum of 4,000 sub-districts 
(2009). Improved health and 
education indicators in 130 
kecamatan in 5 provinces 
through the PNPM Generasi 
CCT pilot 
• Performance-based DAK 
introduced  
• MIS established for checking 
conditionalities fulfillment of 
CCT program 
• Expansion of CCT coverage 
areas (continuous) 

1. Improved socio-economic and local level 
(kelurahan) governance conditions of the urban poor 
through wider implementation of poverty reduction 
and community empowerment programs for income 
generation or grants for tertiary level infrastructure. 
                [Baseline data and targets will be 
developed as part of Bank-supported projects and 
AAA.] 
2. Improved socio-economic and local-level 
(kelurahan) governance in rural areas through wider 
implementation of poverty reduction and community 
empowerment programs and the provision of 
investment resources to support productive proposals 
developed by communities, using a participatory 
planning process. 
 Baseline: Poverty rate of 16.7% in 2007.  
Target: Poverty level decreased to 12% by 

2012.  

Data source: BPS. 

3. Public expenditures made more pro-poor by 
reducing fuel subsidies and reallocating the savings 
to strategic targeted interventions for the poor and 
successful implementation of CCT. 
Baseline: 3.8% of GDP at US$83/bbl. 
Target: Fuel subsidies decreased by 50% 
and resources re-allocated towards pro-poor 
programs, amongst others. 
Data source: MoF.   

61  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 

Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

• Increased community-based 
ECED services in selected 
provinces. By 2010, 6000 
villages have adopted a 
community based approach to 
delivering ECED services 
• Establishment and utilization of 
standards for early childhood 
development services. By 2011, 
• ECED standards are issued and 
used in more than 10 provinces 
• Reduction in absenteeism of 
teachers: Target: to reduce 
absenteeism to 10 percent from 
19 percent (2002 survey) 
• Perverse incentives for districts 
on teacher hiring abolished 

Ongoing Financing: 
BERMUTU; Higher 
Education; ECED; Basic 
Education Capacity MDTF; 
BERMUTU and ECED TFs 
(Netherlands) 

Planned Financing: BOSs; 
SISWA 1 & 2; Education 
TFs 

AAA/Other:  Education 
sector review and 
assessment; support to 
RENSTRA; PERs; ESW on 
ECED; higher education 
(IMHERE); GDLN; 
BERKERJA; 

Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Improve basic education 
to achieve MDGs on 
primary enrollment rates 
and literacy targets and 
improve the quality of 
education to enhance 
competitiveness and 
inclusiveness 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Lack of affordable ECED services, 
particularly for the poor 

Low quality of basic education 

Inefficiency of spending resulting 
from weak management of education 
at the district and school level under 
incomplete decentralization 
framework 

Core Engagement Area 4: Education Sector 
1. Improved development of poor children between 
the ages 0 to 6 in selected provinces: Percentage of 
malnourished children aged 0-6 decreases. 
Baseline: 27% of children underweight 
(Susenas 2001). 
               Target: 20%.  
Data source: Susenas, IFLS.  
2. Increased number of basic education teachers 
meets academic qualification mandated by the 
Teacher Law. 
Baseline: 30% of teachers in primary and 
junior secondary schools hold S1 degree or more.         
               Target: 70% of teachers hold S1 degree or 
more. 
Source: Teacher census; Ministry of National 
Education (MoNE) data. 

3. Improved efficiency and equity in the use of 
resources to increase access to basic education; 
inefficiencies resulting from excess supply and 
unequal distribution of teachers are reduced: 
oversupply of teachers as measured by student-
teacher ratio (STR) in basic education is reduced. 

                Baseline: Primary STR=20 and junior 
secondary STR=14. 
Target: Primary STR=26 and junior 
secondary STR=22. 
               Data source: Teacher census of MoNE. 

62  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 

• Increased size and improved 
management of BOS 

• Improved curriculum in higher 
education institutions and private 
sector training providers 
supported by the Department of 
Higher Education and Non-
formal Education in MoNE. 

Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

High parental cost at all levels of 
education. 

Lack of competitiveness of graduates 
of the education system. 

Core Engagement Area 4: Education Sector 
4. Greater share of public education resources 
channeled to end-users making basic education 
affordable for poor students and increasing 
secondary education enrolment. 
4a. Average annual cost per student in primary and 
junior secondary for children in poorest quintile 
decreases. 
Baseline: Rp 310,296 for primary and Rp 
492,586 for secondary per student per year at 2006 
prices (Susenas, 2006). 
Target: Through co-financing of the BOS 
program, Rp 150,000 for primary and Rp 250,000 for 
secondary per student per year at 2006 prices. 
Data source: Susenas. 
4b. Net enrolment in secondary education (junior and 
senior combined) increases. 
Baseline: 57% (2007). 
Target: Through co-financing of the BOS 
program, increase to 70% (2012). 
Data source: Susenas. 
5. Improved training programs and higher education 
system:  

5a. Institutional accreditation awarded to higher 
education institutions and private sector training 
providers supported by the Department of Higher 
Education and Non-formal Education in the MoNE.  
Baseline: 215 private sector training 
institutions accredited, and no higher education 
institutions accredited.  
               Target: 430 private sector training 
institutions accredited and 5% of higher education 
institutions accredited. 
Data source: MoNE data. 

5b. Department of Higher Education and Non-formal 
Education in the MoNE conducts regular tracer 
studies of university graduates and graduates from 
job training programs to establish their subsequent 
position in the labor market.  
Baseline: Tracer studies not yet in place 
 Target: Tracer studies in place. 
Data source: MoNE data. 

63  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Lack of information, and weak 
monitoring and evaluation of 
education funding.  

Core Engagement Area 4: Education Sector 
6. Improved information and better implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of education funding 
through the BOS-KITA program.  
               Baseline: No systematic, regular 
independent monitoring of education funding.  
               Target: A Central Independent Monitoring 
Unit (CIMU) established and in operation on a 
sector-wide basis.  
               Data source: MoNE and CIMU data.    

Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 

• CIMU operating in selected 
regions and on selected 
programs. 

64  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Strengthen the capacity of 
the country to adapt to 
climate change and 
address environmental 
challenges to ensure 
sustainability 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 
Core Engagement Area 5: Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Mitigation 
Competition among national 
counterparts to lead climate change 
program: unclear mandates and 
partners; entrenched fuel and 
electricity subsidies reduce incentives 
for energy efficiency and  
renewables; continued governance 
problems that contribute to 
deforestation; conflicting and 
decentralized land use authority 
hampers ability to manage forest and 
peatlands 

1. Decrease in the growth of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions in the energy sector.  
Baseline: Continue downward trend in 
growth of GHG emissions intensity for energy sector 
emissions: 1995-99: 4% average annual growth; 
2000-04: 1.7% average annual growth.  
               Target: Additional 10% decrease in growth 
of emissions intensity during 2005-10.  
Data source: Data from the Ministries of 
Environment, Forestry, and National Climate Change 
Council  
Indonesia and Climate Change: Current Status and 
Policies,” 2007, PEACE/DFID/World Bank. 

Competition among national 
counterparts to lead climate change 
program: unclear mandates and 
partners; entrenched fuel and 
electricity subsidies reduce incentives 
for energy efficiency and renewables; 
continued governance problems that 
contribute to deforestation; conflicting 
and decentralized land use authority 
hampers ability to manage forest and 
peatlands 
Possible duplication of efforts due to 
the plethora of development partners 
in Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR); 
new Disaster Management Agency 
structure may not have the capacity to 
mainstream DRR 

Enhance capabilities to 
improve disaster risk 
preparedness, mitigation 
measures, and post-
disaster recovery and 
reconstruction 
responsiveness to 
strengthen sustainability 

2. Policies and pilots to reduce emissions from 
deforestation and degradation being implemented 
effectively. 
Baseline: Land-based carbon emissions of 
2,563 million tons CO2 equivalent (2005). 
Target: 2,307 million tons CO2 equivalent. 
Data source: Data from the Ministries of 
Environment, Forestry, and National Climate Change 
Council  

3.  Strengthened disaster risk reduction (DRR) in 
development planning and administration.  
Baseline: Existing level of funding for 

DRR. 

Target: 20% increase by 2010. 
Data source: National budget. 

65  

Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

Ongoing Financing: Coral 
Reef Rehabilitation (GEF); 
Ozone Depletion (OTF); 
Water Resources TF 
(Netherlands) 

Planned Financing: DPL5; 
CC DPL; Forest Carbon 
Partnership Facility; Forest 
Investment Fund; Climate 
Change TFs; IFC 
investments  

AAA/Others: Low carbon 
growth strategy; REDD 
study; DRR for Aceh; Aceh 
Government Transformation 
Program (AGTP) 

• Climate change coordination 
mechanism established (2008) 
• Regulations on geothermal 
business issued (2009) 
• National energy plan issued 
(2009) 
• Energy law regulations issued 
(2010) 
• Climate change actions 
incorporated in medium-term 
development plan (2010) 
• Actions budgeted and under 
implementation (continuous) 
• Central Kalimantan peatland 
master plan being implemented 
(2009-12) 
• Peatland inventory, baseline and 
risk analysis completed (2010) 
• Ministerial decree and guidelines 
for REDD program (2008) 
• REDD “readiness” achieved 
(2009) 

• National Action Plan for Disaster 
Risk Reduction issued by 
Bappenas (2010) 
• Disaster Management Agency 
operational (2009) 
• Local disaster management plans 
prepared (2011) 
• Emergency operations centers 
designed and functional 
(continuous) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indonesia’s Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Outcomes End-FY12 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones 

Appendix 2 

WBG Modes of 
Engagement 

Core Engagement Area 5: Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Mitigation 

4. Strengthen the institutional arrangement and 
enabling environment to facilitate participatory 
implementation of disaster risk reduction.  
                Baseline: Current situation is weak and 
fragmented DRR capacity and policies/regulations.   
                Target: Improve capacity and operating 
framework for DRR in target districts/provinces by 
2012.     
                Data source: Provincial governments. 

5. Public awareness program implemented to 
promote a culture of safety.   
                Baseline:  Currently no systematic quality 
public awareness program.  
                Target: Increased public awareness by 
2012.    
               Data source:  Provincial governments. 

• Disaster risk reduction policies, 
legislation and regulations 
prepared and implemented in 
selected provinces (2011)  

• Five-year strategic development 
plans are developed and 
implemented by provincial 
government (2011). 
• Public awareness programs 
developed and implemented 
(2011) 

66  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 3 

INDONESIA: Progress Toward the MDGs 

Performance with regard to the MDGs has been mixed.  Of the eight Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs) listed in the table below, the majority are on track. In 2006, the 
percentage of people living on less than US$1 a day was substantially below the MDG target of 
10.3 percent.  There have been notable improvements in educational attainment at the primary 
school level.  Also, net primary enrollment remains high, including when assessing the gender 
balance.  Under-five child mortality is falling steadily. Access to improved water facilities has 
increased dramatically, although it still tends to be low for the poor.  Other indicators are less 
positive, however.  Reductions in malnutrition have stagnated since 2002, undermining the 
progress made in the other indicator in the poverty alleviation goal, and maternal mortality fell by 
only 20 percent between 1993 and 2005, probably insufficient to meet the MDG target by 2015.  
Finally, despite recent progress, access to improved sanitation also remains significantly short of 
the MDG target for the environment goal.  

Indonesia’s Progress towards Achieving Its MDGs  

Goal 

1. Eradicate extreme 
poverty and 
hunger 

2. Achieve universal 
primary education 

3. Promote gender 
equality and 
empower women 

4. Reduce child 
mortality 
5. Improve maternal 
health 
6. Combat HIV, 
malaria and other 
diseases 

7. Ensure 
environmental 
sustainability 

Targets 

Halve the proportion of people living under US$1 per day 
(indicator: proportion of people living under US$1 a day) 
Halve the proportion of people suffering from hunger 
(indicator: prevalence of malnutrition)  
Ensure that all children can complete a full course of 
primary education (indicator: net enrollment in primary 
school) 
Eliminate gender disparities in primary and secondary 
education, preferably by 2005, and in all levels of education 
no later than 2015 (indicator: net enrollment girls in primary 
school) 
Reduce by 2/3 the under-5 child mortality rate (indicator: no 
of U5M per 1,000 live births) 

Reduce by 3/4 the maternal mortality ratio (indicator: MMR 
per 100,000 live births)  

Have halted, by 2015, and begun to reverse the spread of 
HIV/AIDS and other major diseases 
(indicator: HIV/AIDS prevalence) 
Have halted, by 2015, and begun to reverse the incidence of 
TB (indicator: TB prevalence per 100,000) 
Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable 
access to safe drinking water (indicator: proportion of 
people with access to safe water) 

Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable 
access to basic sanitation 
(indicator: proportion of people with access to basic 
sanitation) 

By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the 
lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers 

Integrate the principles of sustainable development into 
country policies and programs and reverse the loss of 
environmental resources 

2015 
Target 

10.3 

19 

100 

100 

33 

105 

Value As of 

8.5 

25.8 

93.2 

2006 

2005 

2005 

On 
track 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

99.7 

2005 

Yes 

46.0 

2005 

307 

2005 

Yes 

No 

Insufficient information 

Not 
available 
86 

262 

2005 

77 

2004 

Yes 

Yes 

73 

55 

2004 

No 

Insufficient information 

Insufficient information 

8. Develop a global  
partnership for 
development  

In cooperation with developing countries, develop and 
implement strategies for decent and productive work for 
youth. (indicator: youth unemployment rate) 

Not 
available  

 30.6 

2005 

No 

67 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 4 

INDONESIA: Poverty and Inequality in Indonesia: 
Summary of Recent Poverty Assessments 

Indonesia stands at the threshold of a new era.  After the historic economic, political, and social 
upheavals at the end of the 1990s, Indonesia has started to regain its footing, becoming one of the 
world’s emergent economically viable countries.  Poverty levels that had increased by over one-
third during the crisis are now at pre-crisis levels.   

Nevertheless, the challenge of reducing poverty in Indonesia remains one of the country’s most 
pressing issues.  The number of people living below US$2/day comes close to equaling all those 
living on or below US$2/day in all of the rest of East Asia besides China.  Recently, there was an 
unforeseen upturn in the poverty rate.  This reversal appears to have been caused primarily by a 
sharp increase in the price of rice between February 2005 and March 2006 which largely 
accounted for the increase in the poverty headcount rate to 17.75 percent.  One positive recent 
development, however, is that poverty fell to pre-tsunami levels in Aceh (see Box 1). 

Indonesia has a golden opportunity to reduce poverty rapidly.  First, given the nature of poverty 
in Indonesia, focusing attention on a few priority areas could deliver some quick wins in the fight 
against poverty and low human development outcomes.  Second, as an oil and gas producing 
country, Indonesia stands to benefit in the next few years from increased fiscal resources thanks 
to higher oil prices and reductions in fuel subsidies.  Third, Indonesia can harness still further 
benefits from its ongoing processes of democratization and decentralization. 

Poverty in Indonesia has three salient features: (i) Many households are clustered around the 
national income poverty line of about PPP US$1.55-a-day, making even many of the non-poor 
vulnerable to poverty;  (ii) The income poverty measure does not capture the true extent of 
poverty in Indonesia; many of those who may not be income poor could be classified as poor on 
the basis of their lack of access to basic services and poor human development outcomes; and (iii) 
Given the vast size of and varying conditions in the Indonesian archipelago, regional disparities 
are a fundamental feature of poverty in the country. 

An analysis of poverty, its determinants, and Indonesia’s history in reducing poverty points to 
three ways to fight poverty.  The three means for helping people lift themselves out of poverty are 
economic growth, social services, and public expenditures.  Each of these prongs addresses one 
or more of the defining features of poverty in Indonesia:  vulnerability, multidimensionality, and 
regional disparities.  In other words, an effective poverty strategy for Indonesia has three 
components: 
• Making Economic Growth Work for the Poor.  Economic growth has and will 
continue to be, fundamental to reducing poverty.  Making growth work for the poor is 
simultaneously key to linking the poor throughout various parts of the Indonesian 
archipelago to the growth process whether it is across the rural-urban space or across the 
various regional and island groupings.  So it is fundamental to addressing the issue of 
regional disparities.  To address the vulnerability characteristic of poverty associated with 
the dense concentration of income distribution in Indonesia, anything that can shift this 
distribution to the right will rapidly reduce the incidence of and vulnerability to income 
poverty. 
• Making Social Services Work for the Poor.  The delivery of social services to the poor, 
whether by the public or private sector, is essential to addressing poverty in Indonesia.  
First, this is key in addressing the non-income dimensions of poverty.  Lagging human 

68  

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 4 

development indicators, such as the high maternal mortality rate, must be tackled by 
improving the quality of services that are made available to the poor.  This goes beyond 
levels of public spending:  it is about improving systems of accountability, service 
delivery mechanisms, and even government processes.  Second, the nature of regional 
disparities transcends income disparity and is largely reflected in disparities in access to 
services which, in turn, result in disparities in access to services which, in turn, result in 
disparities in human development outcomes across regions.  Thus, making services work 
for the poor is key to addressing the problem of regional disparities in poverty. 
• Making Public Expenditure Work for the Poor.  Besides economic growth and social 
services, the Government, by targeting public spending to the poor, can assist them in 
countering income and non-income poverty.  Public spending can be used for helping 
those who are vulnerable to income poverty through a modern system of social protection 
that augments their own efforts to deal with economic uncertainty.  Also, public spending 
can be used to improve human development outcomes- hence, tackling the non-income 
multidimensional aspects of poverty.  Making expenditures work for the poor is 
particularly pertinent now given the increased fiscal space that exists in today’s 
Indonesia. 

• 

Three transformations are taking place in Indonesia, each of which can be more or less pro-poor.  
Policy measures that can make these changes rapidly reduce poverty include: 
• 
As it grows, Indonesia’s economy is being transformed from one with agriculture as its 
mainstay to one that will rely more on services and industry.  The priority for making this 
growth work for the poor is a friendlier rural investment climate, principally through 
better rural roads. 
As democracy takes hold, the Government is being transformed from one where social 
services were delivered centrally to one that will rely more on local governments.  The 
priority for making services work for the poor is stronger capacity of local governments 
and better incentives for service providers. 
As Indonesia integrates internationally, its systems of social protection is being 
modernized so that Indonesia is both socially equitable and economically competitive.  
The priority for making public expenditure work for the poor is to shift from intervening 
in markets for commodities that the poor consume (such as fuel and rice) to providing 
targeted income support to poor households, and using the fiscal space to improve critical 
services such as education, health, safe water, and sanitation.  

• 

69  

 
Appendix 4 

Box: Poverty in Aceh 

The 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami caused devastating damage and loss in Aceh, 
both in economic and human terms.  Poverty in Aceh increased slightly in the aftermath of the 
tsunami, from 28.4 percent in 2004 to 32.6 percent in 2005.  This occurred against falling poverty 
levels in the rest of the country.  In 2006, poverty fell to 26.5 percent below the pre-tsunami 
levels suggesting that the rise in tsunami-related poverty was short lived and reconstruction 
activities most probably facilitated this decline.   

Nevertheless, poverty remains significantly higher than the rest of Indonesia.  Aceh has 
experienced very low or negative growth for most of the past three decades, lagging behind 
Indonesia and North Sumatra for most years. Poverty in Aceh is predominantly a rural 
phenomenon, with over 30 percent of rural households living below the poverty line.  There 
appear to be two overlapping but distinctly vulnerable groups: the structurally poor, i.e. those that 
were poor before the tsunami; and the “shocked” who suffered loss of private goods and assets 
due to the tsunami. 

• 

• 

Priorities for alleviating poverty in Aceh include: 
• 
Longer-term development efforts should focus on the poorest areas of Aceh, in particular 
those in the rural interior and more remote areas. 
Any poverty alleviation strategy should focus on increasing the productivity of the 
agricultural and fisheries sectors. 
In order to avoid any renewal of the conflict, which has been closely linked to natural-
resource wealth, the Government of Aceh can: (i) diversify the economy away from 
natural resources; (ii) increase the transparency of the distribution and use of revenues; 
and, (iii) ensure the rule of law. 
The Government of Aceh should invest in a strong civil service that ensures an efficient 
allocation of resources, as well as the provision of quality public services. 
The Government of Aceh should scrutinize spending patterns, such as the increased 
spending on government administration and the civil service wage bill. 
The Government of Aceh should continue its high levels of investment in education, 
increasing the efficiency of spending. 
Better planning is necessary to match identified needs and allocation of resources in key 
sectors. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

70  

 
 
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA : Indonesia Doing Business 2008 

Appendix 5 

71 

 
 
Appendix 6 

INDONESIA: Toward Enhanced Environmental Sustainability and 
Disaster Risk Management 

Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Management have been identified as the two themes/areas 
that would be key to strengthening GoI’s efforts towards sustainable development over the next years. 
To date in Indonesia, the World Bank has only had a limited engagement with these two areas, 
particularly with respect to Climate Change, and plans to step up its presence over the next three 
years to respond to GoI’s request for support, enhance the Government’s relevant strategy and use 
EAP’s comparative advantages. 

Environmental Sustainability 
(i) Nature and extent. Climate change is receiving more attention in Indonesia now than ever before.  
Political leaders are adjusting to the realization that the country is the world’s third largest emitter 
of greenhouse gases.  Local and national stakeholders are energized by the possibility of avoiding 
deforestation with support from international payments.  Society is contemplating the risks and 
options for how a vulnerable country can adapt to the effects of climate change.  And Indonesia is 
increasingly in the international spotlight as host of this year’s COP 13 (Bali, December 3-14, 
2007). 
(ii) Development impacts (health and livelihoods). While Indonesia is likely to experience modest 
temperature increases, climate change will result in more intense rainfall and sea-level rise.  
Potential development impacts include: (a) increased threats to food security; (b) declining 
agricultural productivity; (c) inundation of productive coastal zones and communities; (d) loss of 
farming and coastal livelihoods; (e) consequences for water storage (water reservoirs, electricity 
generation, drinking water supply); (f) intensification of water- and vector-borne diseases; and (g) 
deterioration of coral ecosystems. 
(iii) Root causes. Indonesia’s high level of greenhouse gas emissions is being driven by deforestation, 
forest fires and degradation of land, especially peat swamps.  Underlying these emissions are 
good forestry policies and legislation, but weak implementation and enforcement.  Also, 
initiatives such as expansion of biofuel production and revitalization of forest industries may 
exacerbate emissions if they are not carefully planned.  Emissions from the energy sector are 
relatively small but rapidly growing also following GOI’s pursuit of a coal-fired power expansion 
program and barriers to the development of renewable energy sources.  Finally, there has been 
relatively little planning or investment in mitigation. 
(iv) Government strategy. Various government strategies are relevant to this theme including: (a) the 
National Action Plan Addressing Climate Change that was launched by the Ministry of 
Environment at the Bali COP13 in December 2007; (b) an interministerial strategy to reduce 
emissions from deforestation and degradation that was also proposed at Bali; (c) the national 
energy strategy; and (d) the Ministry of Finance’s intention to develop a low carbon growth 
strategy. 
(v) Bank and other key donor assistance. The international community is seeking ways to respond to 
this growing commitment to address the causes and consequences of climate change.  Financing 
for CDM projects has been actively promoted by Austria, Canada, Denmark, Japan, The 
Netherlands, and the World Bank, since Indonesia ratified the Kyoto Protocol, but with limited 
results.  More recently, the possibility of reducing greenhouse gas emissions through avoided 
deforestation has captured the imagination of the Ministries of Environment and Forestry.  In 
response, Australia has announced an A$200 million Global Initiative on Forests and Climate 
with a geographic focus on Indonesia.  The World Bank and donor partners are developing a 

72 

 
 
Appendix 6 

Forest Carbon Partnership Facility that would have an initial capitalization of US$300 million 
dollars and likely include Indonesia as a pilot partner. 
(vi) Strategic gaps in government strategy and/or donor response. Until the second quarter of 2007, 
climate change was primarily the responsibility of the Ministry of Environment and the main 
focus was on CDM projects.  Since then, the issue has garnered the attention of the President and 
key ministries such as Economic Coordination, Finance, Forestry and Trade, and ensuing donor 
support.  Perhaps the greatest remaining gap is that government policy in the energy sector has 
yet to incorporate or align itself with the climate change agenda. 
(vii) 
Proposed World Bank initiative(s) and rationale. The World Bank is one of several actors 
that have been active in climate change issues over the past five years.  This has included: (a) 
implementing activities with the GEF climate change mitigation program; (b) raising awareness 
about CDM opportunities; and (c) actively developing CDM projects for carbon financing.  Given 
the context described above, there is now a unique opportunity to increase the Bank’s 
engagement and effectiveness in helping Indonesia to tackle climate change issues.  Each of the 
following strategic pillars builds on one of these comparative advantages with the objective of 
supporting Indonesia’s ability to understand and respond to the key challenges presented by 
climate change. 
• Pillar 1: Setting the context of the debate. The Bank should use its convening and 
analytical powers to help stakeholders in Indonesia understand the issues and options 
faced by the country in mitigating and adapting to global warming. The two flagships for 
this pillar are (a) a recently-completed state-of-the-art synthesis of the most recent and 
reliable information on Indonesia and climate change (emissions, impacts and policies), 
and (b) a study of options for low-carbon growth that is being planned with the Ministry 
of Finance for 2008-09.  In addition, the Bank will be assessing carbon, energy and 
climate linkages as part of its work to prepare the Country Environmental Analysis. 
• Pillar 2: Focusing on avoided deforestation and degradation. As forest and peatland 
degradation are the overwhelming sources of Indonesia’s greenhouse gas emissions, it is 
sensible to begin the approach in this area. The objective in this area should be to help 
Indonesia develop and implement its strategy for reducing emissions from deforestation 
and degradation, both through technical assistance and financing of pilot projects.  
Beyond avoided deforestation, other aspects of climate change should be addressed 
through: (i) Continuing to increase the CDM portfolio for carbon financing; ii) Using the 
energy and transport programs to promote clean fuels and technologies; and (iii) 
Addressing longer-term issues of adaptation through the Bank’s infrastructure projects, 
development policy lending (including the possibility of a stand-alone climate change 
DPL in partnership with Japan and the ADB) and disaster management support. 
• Pillar 3: Mobilizing resources and support. As a multilateral development bank, WBG 
has unparalleled access to human, financial and technical resources, including 
international good practice.  The WBG should bring this comparative advantage to help 
advance work on climate change in Indonesia, e.g., by “climate-proofing” the Bank’s 
investment portfolio. The Bank has already mobilized nearly US$2 million in technical 
assistance for: (a) preparing the REDD methodology, strategies and pilot portfolios (with 
the Ministry of Forestry, DfID and Australia); (b) initiating the low carbon growth 
strategy (with the Ministry of Finance); and (c) enhancing the national adaptation strategy 
(with KLH and UNDP). During 2007, the Bank has been in discussion with the 
international community, through the Environment/NRM coordination group in Jakarta, 
about the establishment of a multi-donor initiative/fund on natural resources; growing 
donor interest by Australia, Germany, the UK and others around climate change issues in 

73 

Appendix 6 

Indonesia provides an incredible opportunity to move this initiative forward. Once 
established, this Fund can serve not only as a financing mechanism but also a forum for 
donor coordination as well as policy dialogue between the GoI and the international 
community on issues of climate change and natural resource management.   
(viii) Impact and monitorable indicators.  Monitorable indicators would include: 
• Lower CO2 emissions per capita and per US$ of GDP 
• Reduction in annual rate of deforestation 
• Reduction in total ha/year destroyed by forest fires 
• Ha/year of restored or protected peatlands 
• Lower CO2 emissions per GWh of electricity produced 
• 
Increase in percentage of energy supplied by renewable sources 
• Percentage of Bank projects that have incorporated adaptation measures 

Disaster Management 
(i) Nature and extent. Due to its geographic positioning, composition and demography, Indonesia 
and its population are highly vulnerable to disasters.  Between 2003-2005 alone, the national 
disaster agency (Bakornas) counted 1,430 disasters, including flooding and windstorms 
(accounting for 70 percent of all disasters), landslides and geological disasters (earthquakes, 
tsunamis and volcanic eruptions).  In addition, the country is prone to drought, forest fires, 
epidemics and anthropogenic (technological) disasters.   
(ii) Development impacts (health and livelihoods). Major events such as the 2004 Aceh tsunami and 
the 2006 Yogyakarta earthquake result in the loss of thousands of lives and billions of dollars.  
Nearly 170,000 people died in the tsunami with US$4.5 billion in damages and losses; over 5700 
people perished in the earthquake and economic costs were estimated at US$3.1 billion.  The 
local development impact of these extreme events is enormous, requiring major reconstruction of 
housing, infrastructure and the economy.  Equally important but less well-known are the dozens 
of smaller monthly disasters that result in deaths, injuries and economic hardship. 
(iii) Root causes. Natural disasters are caused by largely uncontrollable forces such as the movement 
of tectonic plates or the eruption of magma through the earth’s crust.  However, exposure and 
vulnerability to disaster risk are more controllable.  Exposure to risk is increased with poor spatial 
planning and natural resource management.  Vulnerability to risk is greater when there is low 
public awareness, inadequate infrastructure, poor enforcement of standards such as building 
codes, etc.  Greater exposure and vulnerability to risk factors increases the loss of life and 
property from disasters. 
(iv) Government strategy. In 2006, Indonesia issued a national action plan for disaster risk reduction 
(DRR) that seeks to: (a) ensure that DRR is a national and local priority; (b) identify, assess and 
monitor disaster risks and enhance early warning; (c) use knowledge, innovation and education to 
build a culture of safety and resilience; (d) reduce underlying risk factors, and (e) strengthen 
disaster preparedness for effective response.  In March 2007, the national parliament approved 
the Disaster Management Law that codifies this plan, sets out responsibilities for DRR as well as 
disaster response at the local and national levels and modernizes institutional arrangements for 
disaster management. 
(v) Bank and other key donor assistance. Donor assistance for disaster response in Indonesia has 
been significant, especially for major events.  Post-tsunami resources from bi- and multilateral 
donors as well as international and local NGOs amounted to over US$5 billion.  Support for DRR 
has been much less significant, with technical assistance and pilot initiatives being provided by 
UNDP, DfID, Germany, Japan, the U.S., Red Cross agencies, and NGOs. 

74 

Appendix 6 

(vi) Strategic gaps in government strategy and/or donor response. The Indonesia Country Assistance 
Strategy Progress Report (September 2006) identified “Disaster Risk Management” as a fourth 
pillar for the CAS because: (a) Aceh and Nias will require ongoing heavy engagement, especially 
in 2007-08; (b) lessons from the post-tsunami reconstruction are being applied to recovery work 
in Yogyakarta and Central Java; (c) Indonesia has become the epicenter for Avian and Human 
Influenza risks; and (d) these events, together with the country’s high level of hazard 
vulnerability and growing importance of adaptation to climate change, reinforce the pressing need 
for a disaster risk management framework.  This will entail efforts to build internal capacity for 
disaster risk reduction and response as well as strategic support to external partners for reducing 
and managing disasters. 
(vii) Proposed EAP initiative(s) and rationale. The internal and external components would be: 
(a) Building internal capacity for disaster risk reduction and response.  The Bank has a new 
policy on Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies (OP/BP 8.00, January 2007).  The last 
two years have provided the World Bank in Indonesia with intensive experience in 
responding to a range of emergencies and crises (Aceh and Nias tsunami & earthquake, 
Yogyakarta/Central Java earthquake, avian flu, Jakarta floods, etc.).  The Bank needs to 
capitalize on the new policy and existing resources to ensure that the Bank can effectively 
respond to future disasters and integrate disaster risk reduction as part of the lending and 
grant portfolio (this could be done in tandem with the integration of adaptation to climate 
change). Planned Key Outputs: a) creation of virtual disaster management team, drawing on 
field and headquarters expertise, for knowledge sharing, coordination and rapid response; b) 
training and raising awareness about OP/BP 8.00 and disaster risk reduction; c) facilitation of 
disaster risk reduction expertise and resources for task teams that are actively interested in 
including disaster preparedness and mitigation as part of their ongoing and planned 
operations; 

(b) Supporting external partners to reduce and manage disasters.  The OPCS paper, “Toward a 
New Framework for Rapid Bank Response to Crises and Emergencies,” calls on the Bank to 
promote a proactive approach to reducing disaster risk in high-risk countries and to work with 
all development partners to mainstream risk reduction.  The Government of Indonesia has 
recently issued a National Action Plan for Disaster Reduction (2006-2009) and the House of 
Representatives (DPR) is deliberating on a bill concerning disaster management.  UNDP, 
with support from DfID, is developing a program on “Safer Communities through Disaster 
Risk Reduction in Development.”  Thus, there is a mandate and opportunities to support 
external partners in reducing and managing disasters.  Planned Key Outputs: (a) mobilization 
of resources from the Global Fund for Disaster Reduction and Response (GFDRR); (b) 
specific support for preparation of the new National Action Plan 2010-2014 (Bappenas), 
capacity building for disaster management agencies and developing a framework for 
catastrophic risk insurance (Ministry of Finance); and (c) coordination with development 
partners, e.g., active participation in the UN Technical Working Group on Disaster Risk 
Reduction. 
(viii) Impact and monitorable indicators.  Some critical indicators would include: 
• Responsiveness and operational utility of the virtual disaster management team 
• 
Incorporation of DRR elements in 50 percent of new lending operations and 
retrofitting of measures in 25 percent of existing portfolio 
• Mobilization of resources (US$1 million ++) of GFDRR and other funds for internal 
and external activities 

75 

• Completion of at least one external partnership on either disaster response or risk 
reduction (with Bappenas, disaster risk management agencies and/or Ministry of 
Finance) 

Appendix 6 

76 

Appendix 7 

INDONESIA: Environmental Indicators 

Population, total (millions) 
Urban population (% of total) 
GDP (current US$) (billions) 
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$) 
Land area (sq. km) (thousands) 
Agricultural land (% of land area) 
Irrigated land (% of cropland) 
Forest area (% of land area) 
Annual deforestation (% of change) 
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area) 
Mammal species, total known 
Mammal species, threatened 
Bird species, total known 
Bird species, threatened 
GEF benefits index for biodiversity (0 = no biodiversity potential to 100 = maximum) 
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 
Energy use (kg of oil equivalent per capita) 
Combustible renewables and waste (% of total energy) 
Energy imports, net (% of energy use) 
Electric power consumption (kWh per capita) 
Electricity production from coal sources (% of total) 
CO2 emissions (kg per 2005 PPP $ of GDP) 
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita) 
PM10, country level (micrograms per cubic meter) 
Passenger cars (per 1,000 people) 
Renewable internal freshwater resources per capita (cubic meters) 
Annual freshwater withdrawals, total (% of internal resources) 

77 

Indonesia 
220.6 
48.1 
287 
1260 
1812 
26.4 
12.4 
48.8 
.. 
14.3 
.. 
.. 
1604 
121 
90 
3.9 
814 
28.5 
-46.7 
509 
40.7 
0.6 
1.7 
96 
.. 
12867 
3 

EAP 
1884.4 
41.5 
3056.6 
1633 
15871 
50.8 
.. 
28.4 
.. 
12.1 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
3.3 
1182 
15.5 
0.1 
1492 
70.4 
0.9 
3.3 
73 
14 
5022 
.. 

LMC 
2256.8
46.5
4013.6
1789
27977
42.1
26.3
26.5
..
12.8
..
..
..
..
..
3.6
1216
12.8
-14
1502
56.9
0.8
3.4
69
21
5769
..

 
 
 
            
Annual freshwater withdrawals, agriculture (% of total freshwater withdrawal) 
Improved water source (% of population with access) 
Improved water source, rural (% of rural population with access) 
Improved water source, urban (% of urban population with access) 
Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access) 
Improved sanitation facilities, rural (% of rural population with access) 
Improved sanitation facilities, urban (% of urban population with access) 
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000) 
Adjusted savings: gross savings (% of GNI) 
Adjusted savings: consumption of fixed capital (% of GNI) 
Adjusted savings: net national savings (% of GNI) 
Adjusted savings: education expenditure (% of GNI) 
Adjusted savings: energy depletion (% of GNI) 
Adjusted savings: mineral depletion (% of GNI) 
Adjusted savings: net forest depletion (% of GNI) 
Adjusted savings: carbon dioxide damage (% of GNI) 
Adjusted savings: particulate emission damage (% of GNI) 
Adjusted net savings, including particulate emission damage (% of GNI) 

Legend: LMC (lower middle income), EAP (East Asia and the Pacific) 
Source: World Bank, Little Green Data Book (2008) 

Appendix 7 

Indonesia 
91 
77 
69 
87 
55 
40 
73 
36 
27 
10.1 
16.9 
0.9 
11.5 
2.6 
.. 
0.9 
1.2 
1.6 

EAP 

.. 
79 
70 
92 
51 
36 
72 
31 
44.5 
10.1 
34.5 
2.1 
6.7 
0.6 
0 
1.2 
1.3 
26.8 

LMC 

..
81
71
93
55
39
76
37
39.4
10.2
29.2
2.5
10.4
0.6
0
1.2
1.1
18.4

78 

 
 
Indonesia:  CAS Completion Report 

Appendix 8 

Date of CAS:  October 29, 2003  
Date of CAS Progress Report:  September 5, 2006    
Period covered by the CAS Completion report:  FY04 – FY08  

Report No.  27108-IND 
Report No.  36856-IND 

This CAS Completion Report reviews the implementation and effectiveness of the World Bank 
Group’s (WBG) Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Indonesia for FY04-08 (Report No. 
27108-IND) approved on October 29, 2003.  A CAS Progress Report (CASPR) was completed in 
September 2006 (Report No. 36856-IND).  The CASPR made some adjustments to the original 
CAS with respect to the outcome indicators, extension of the CAS by one year to FY08 from the 
original completion date of FY07, and addition of a fourth focus area to respond to the emerging 
needs of the Government.  

Indonesia’s Longer Term Strategic Goals 
At the time of CAS preparation, Indonesia was still in the process of transitioning from an 
autocratic, centralized economy to a democratic, decentralized one.  The Government had been 
successful in restoring macroeconomic stability and reducing poverty to the pre-crisis levels.  
Despite this, the number of poor in Indonesia was high and many others remained vulnerable to 
falling under the poverty line as a result of an adverse shock.  Progress towards meeting the MDG 
outcomes was also slow.  Delivering basic public services in a decentralized framework was an 
opportunity, but also posed a challenge.  Although Indonesia had begun to address governance 
and corruption issues, these reforms were marred with slow implementation due to weak 
institutional capacity. 

The short term agenda of the Indonesian government was framed by its decision not to renew the 
IMF program after its completion in December 2003.  Instead, it prepared a comprehensive 
economic package of time-bound policy actions to be implemented in the short term (18 months).   
The economic package - or the ‘white paper’ - covered the core areas of macroeconomic 
management, financial sector reform, and policies to restore investment and growth.  It was 
comprehensive, but ambitious, especially to be implemented during an election year.   

The Government’s medium term framework for poverty reduction was laid out in the RPJM 
(medium term plan), representing the country’s development vision for 2004-09 and in the 
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP).  The three national development goals for 
2004–2009 were outlined in the RPJM as realizing a safe and peaceful Indonesia, a just and 
democratic Indonesia, and a prosperous Indonesia. 

CAS Objectives 
The CAS was designed to support the Government’s short-term and medium-term agendas.  It 
identified two primary constraints towards meeting these goals: (i) a weak investment climate, 
and (ii) lack of quality service delivery to poor people.  Progress in these areas was further 
hindered by the underlying problem of weak governance.  The Bank’s strategy was to support 
Indonesia in its efforts to strengthen the investment climate and improve basic service delivery 
while addressing the core issue of governance. The Bank faced additional challenges in 
responding to the unprecedented series of natural disasters (the Aceh earthquake and tsunami of 
December 2004, Nias earthquake of March 2005, Jogyakarta earthquake in May 2006) and the 
increasing concern over the spread of Avian Human Influenza (AHI).  Thus, a fourth focus area 
on enhanced disaster risk management was included in the CASPR.  These four became the main 
pillars of the CAS. 

 79  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

Pillar 1: Addressing the Underlying Issue of Governance11:  “KKN” (corruption, collusion and 
nepotism) was noted as the key constraining factor in achieving the country’s development goals. 
As a result, this ‘Governance CAS’ mainstreamed governance activities throughout the Indonesia 
program.  Addressing the core issue of governance was focused around making development 
planning more responsive to constituents, establishment of a well-regulated and transparent 
system of public financial management at all levels of government, effective implementation of 
decentralization, and putting in place a credible and impartial justice sector, and focused attention 
to safeguarding Bank-supported activities and associated resources. 

Pillar 2: Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment:  To improve the investment 
climate, the World Bank Group’s (WBG) assistance was focused in five areas: maintaining 
macroeconomic stability, fostering a stronger and diversified financial sector with more equitable 
access, supporting the environment for a competitive private sector, refurbishing infrastructure, 
and creating sustainable income generating opportunities for poorer households. 

Pillar 3: Making Service Delivery Responsive to the Poor:  The Bank’s efforts were directed 
towards accelerating the attainment of key MDGs in education and health and improving 
education and health outcomes for the poor. 

Pillar 4: Disaster Risk Management:  Rebuilding Aceh and Nias, responding to the Jogyakarta 
and Central Java earthquakes, and strengthening government effectiveness to curb the spread of 
AHI formed the key support areas of the disaster risk management pillar.   

CAS Outcomes 
Although the implementation of the CAS has largely been on track, the effectiveness of delivered 
activities as measured by the outcome indicators has varied.  The country performance and the 
results of the Bank’s program have been mixed with good progress and strong Bank support for 
economic management, education, community development and post-disaster reconstruction, and 
less effective results in the health and infrastructure (including water and sanitation) sectors and 
at the local government level.   

The 2007 CAE recognized that the “Bank-supported programs have made important contributions 
in supporting the restoration of macroeconomic stability, and in helping Indonesia to return to the 
pre-crisis income levels and to reduce poverty after the sharp increase experienced during the 
crisis”12.  The review found that measured against the Bank’s objectives, the Government’s 
success in achieving macroeconomic stability, the careful fiscal management, and the progress 
made in the legislative and institutional frameworks in many areas all represented important 
achievements.  The report noted, however, that the transition has not yet put in place the 
fundamentals required to move to the next level in terms of growth, poverty reduction, and social 
progress.  In particular, the report found that improvements are needed in the investment climate.   

As always, measuring the direct link between the Bank’s specific contributions and a specific 
country outcome is difficult because the WBG plays a small role in Indonesia’s development aid 
framework and some country outcomes are slow to materialize.   

11In the original CAS, governance was included as a third pillar. Given its overarching nature and cross-
sectoral nature, it was re-formulated as the first pillar in the CASPR. The CAS Completion Matrix 
(Attachment A) however, retains it as the third pillar. 
12Indonesia: Country Assistance Evaluation, IEG, June 2007, pp v. 

 80  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Appendix 8 

Pillar 1:  Addressing the Underlying Issue of Governance   

Country Progress 
Combating corruption is the top priority of the current administration and credible efforts were 
made by the Government to deepen the institutional and regulatory framework for addressing 
corruption 
issues 
including money 
laundering activities, freedom of 
information, and 
whistleblower protection.  Several new independent institutions have been created in the last 
several years such as the Anti-Corruption Commission, Judicial Commission, Financial Crimes 
Task Force, Commercial Court, Ombudsman, Election Commission, and the Special Investigative 
Team for Corruption Crimes.  These institutions are functioning, though with various degrees of 
effectiveness.  Successful prosecutions have been made against former ministers, business 
leaders, sitting governors, judges and legislators.  Hundreds of corruption investigations into high 
level officials have been approved by the President.  The special crimes case load of the Attorney 
General has increased by nearly six times in the past five years.  These are key outcomes related 
to Indonesia’s fight against corruption.  The improvement in Indonesia’s governance indicators as 
reflected in ‘Governance Matters VI’ suggests that these processes are having considerable 
impact13.  Laws and regulations have been passed on asset declarations of state officials, anti-
money laundering, criminalization of corruption offences, state finances, treasury, procurement, 
state audit, and accounting standards.  More recently, Indonesia has joined the World Bank and 
UNODC (United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime)-supported StAR (Stolen Asset Recovery) 
initiative.  Though it is too early to declare victory on the governance agenda, there are already 
clear indicators of progress.  However, progress in judicial and legal reforms has been 
disappointing. 

Civil service reforms were also launched with a delay starting with the full-scale reorganization at 
the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to deal with budget formulation and execution, tax and customs 
regulations, etc., that are often the very foundation of opportunities to engage in corruption.  In 
2006, the Government continued its program of extending modern tax offices with a major 
expansion to medium-sized tax offices and through the beginning of a reorganization of the 
central tax office to support the longer-term tax reform agenda.   

The implementation of Indonesia’s ‘big-bang’ decentralization of 2001, which has led to the 
creation of some 440 local governments, remains complex and continues to pose multiple 
challenges with effective execution of the administrative and fiscal responsibilities now vested in 
these local authorities.  On-granting and on-lending decrees that were approved in the early days 
were amended, but continued to pose constraints for provision of sub-national resources by 
development partners, including the World Bank, during the CAS period.  The roles and 
responsibilities at each level of government are still not fully clarified, leading to slow 
implementation of programs and inefficient service delivery at the local level. 

Bank Contribution 
Most importantly, over the CAS period, the WBG regained some of the credibility it had lost 
during the Soeharto years and was successful in reestablishing and strengthening partnerships 
with several key reform-minded stakeholders.  It was envisaged during CAS preparation that the 
entire lending and non-lending program will be designed to strengthen accountability and 
transparency through two approaches: (i) greater public participation in policy making and policy 
monitoring processes across different levels of government, and (ii) enhancing the capacity of 
institutions responsible for implementing governance reforms.  The earlier CAS had built a good 

13Kaufmann D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi, 2007: Governance Matters VI: Governance Indicators for 
1996-2006 

 81  

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Appendix 8 

foundation on which to expand the governance agenda (e.g., field-based governance advisor, and 
the establishment of an in-house anti-corruption committee).  In particular, the Indonesia team 
greatly ramped up the focus on safeguarding Bank supported activities against fraud and 
corruption issues, inter alia by including mandatory Governance and Anticorruption Actions 
Plans (GAAPs) as part of the Project Appraisal Document for projects approved over the CAS 
period.  However, the implementation experience and monitoring of GAAPs have been mixed 
across the portfolio. 

Bank advice for transparent and accountable public financial management (PFM) led to new 
legislation and regulations on State Finances, State Treasury, and State Audit. Through the 
Government Financial Management and Revenue Administration Project (GFMRAP), this 
enabled the reorganization of the MoF, strengthening accountability, eliminating overlap and 
duplication of functions, and allowing the MoF to focus more effectively on its core functions.   

The Bank is playing a leading role in supporting decentralization through the management and 
administration of a multi-donor Decentralization Support Facility (DSF).  IFC Advisory Services 
improved the investment climate by working with district governments on licensing and other 
regulatory reforms. A first generation of local government projects under implementation 
(ILGRP, USDRP, SPADA) are building capacity for improved local governance, accountability 
and transparency while maintaining the focus on poverty reduction programs at the decentralized 
level. As part of ILGRP preparation, local level poverty reduction strategies were formulated in 
15 kabupatens after public consultations.  The Bank currently fields the largest comprehensive 
biannual survey of public service delivery and corruption in Indonesia’s 440 districts, allowing it 
to track the impact of decentralization on governance outcomes over time.  However, slower-
than-expected implementation of the first generation local government projects because of issues 
related to on-lending and on-granting has delayed achievements of outcomes related to 
strengthening local governance. 

During the CAS period, the Bank had limited interventions in the justice sector.  A noteworthy 
contribution has been at the community level through the Justice for the Poor (non-lending) 
program.  Activities under this program have contributed to strengthening access to judicial 
services at the local level, focusing particularly on the poor and marginalized sections of the 
society.  The program also looked into different conflict situations proposing different informal 
dispute resolution processes.  At the national level, the Bank has supported the Anti-Corruption 
Commission (KPK) in its initial difficult phase of existence and together with IMF, built the legal 
basis for the KPK, helped ensure due process in the selection of the members, and supported the 
newly established commissions in being operational.  This led to an increase in the number of 
successful investigations and prosecutions including for some high profile cases. 

Pillar 2:  Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment  

Country Progress 
Most of the time bound actions of the Economic Package were met on time enabling a smooth 
exit from the IMF program.  Three policy packages were issued in 2006 on the investment 
climate, financial sector reform, and infrastructure.  A comprehensive policy package was issued 
in 2007 outlining 168 specific reform measures to be undertaken by December 2008. 

The 2006 CASPR reported that the fundamental weaknesses in the investment climate were being 
gradually addressed, leading to higher confidence and stronger sovereign credit ratings.  In 
response to improved policies, growth was rising, albeit slowly, and poverty was falling.  

 82  

 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

Although banking sector health showed improvement, the CASPR pointed to a need for greater 
financial sector diversification. 

Good macroeconomic and fiscal management and a favorable external environment have 
strengthened Indonesia’s economic foundation. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth was 5.5 
percent in 2006 and 6.3 percent in 2007.  Government debt fell from 80 percent of GDP in 2000 
to an estimated 35 percent of GDP by 2007, well below the 60 percent target specified in the 
State Finance Law – a major achievement.  A key driver of recent growth has been a recovery in 
investment with the investment to GDP ratio increasing from 22 percent in 2004 to 25 percent in 
2007.  Inflation rates (up until the recent fuel and commodity price hikes) had decelerated and the 
financial markets had become increasingly confident as reflected in the upgrading of Moody’s 
and S&P bond ratings in 2006.  As a result of the sharp reduction in fuel subsidies in 2005, as 
well as declining debt service payments and increasing revenues, Indonesia created additional 
“fiscal space” of US$15 billion annually.  Equivalent to around 4 percent of GDP, this is the 
largest increase in additional fiscal resources since the oil revenue windfall of the 1970s.  
However, higher food prices are driving overall inflation which is now 7.4 percent as food 
inflation is 10.4 percent (February 2008, year-on-year). Higher oil prices create a fiscal drain – 
fuel and electricity subsidies are likely to be close to or above US$20 billion in 2008, higher in 
nominal terms than the levels that led to the price adjustment in 2005. 

At the height of the financial crisis, nearly 80 percent of the banking system was effectively 
owned by the Government.  A major accomplishment during the post-crisis period was the sale of 
all the formerly publicly owned banks to largely credible foreign investors.  The share of state-
owned banks in the overall banking system has gone down by 10 percent since 2003 and now 
stands at 36 percent.  Regulation and supervision of the banking system has improved 
dramatically.  Prudent lending to the private sector (learning from the crisis) and rapidly growing 
Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) and consumer lending are now the strengths of the system.   
In the private sector, all major obstacles faced by businesses have declined consistently since 
2003, including the reduction in business start-up time from 168 days in 2003 to 105 days in 
2007.  Percentage of businesses identifying tax administration as a moderate, severe and very 
severe problem decreased from 57 percent to 38 percent, while those identifying customs and 
trade regulations as a moderate, severe and very severe problem decreased from 51 percent to 32 
percent during the same time.  Indonesia has also improved its ranking in the Doing Business 
indicator, moving up from 135 out of 175 surveyed in 2007 to 123 out of 178 in 2008. However, 
rigid labor laws continue to discourage new hirings in the formal sector.   

Improvements in the environment for infrastructure investment have been mixed with low private 
sector involvement.  A national committee on Policy for Accelerating Infrastructure Provision 
(KKPPI) was established in 2005 and a Risk Management Unit was established in MoF.  Two 
infrastructure summits were organized by the Government and attracted good participation from 
the private sector.  However, lack of bankable projects has limited actual follow through via PPP 
tenders.  Although there has been some private sector participation in the power sector, 
annulment of the Electricity Law in 2002 posed a policy issue with considerable price distortions 
affecting the energy sector/energy utility’s ability to operate effectively.  Institutional and 
regulatory improvements in the water and sanitation sector have been the least successful; the 
lack of progress within the Government on issues around arrears of PDAMs (public water 
utilities) has impeded provision of lending support by the Bank and other development partners to 
these entities. 

 83  

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

Bank Contribution 
One year into CAS implementation, Indonesia was successful in meeting the CAS high case 
triggers.  As a result, budget support through a series of DPLs was resumed in 2004 and four 
DPLs have fully disbursed for US$1.9 billion. The Bank’s first DPL was linked to the 
Government’s short-term agenda as outlined in the Economic Package and contributed to the 
smooth exit from the IMF program, thus helping to boost confidence.  Together, the DPLs have 
contributed significantly to the Government’s policy reforms in the areas of macroeconomic 
stability, investment climate, service delivery, public financial management, and anti-corruption. 

IFC’s program of investment went through three distinct phases before, during and after the crisis 
and were strongly impacted by the governance environment.  IFC’s investment commitments 
averaged about US$109 million per year before the crisis, focused mainly on manufacturing 
opportunities not linked to the Government.  During the crisis years (FY98-00), IFC focused on 
restructuring its problem investments and/or protecting its investments from contentious sponsors 
or other creditors who were not interested in following the principle of fair burden sharing among 
financiers of companies in financial distress.  It was a challenge for investors, including IFC, to 
enforce legal rights in the aftermath of the crisis due to the weak judicial system.  IFC’s new 
investment operations during the crisis years were limited to supporting existing client companies 
with support to complete ongoing projects whose original financing plan could not be followed 
because the banking system had collapsed during this period.  During the crisis years, IFC’s 
investment operations averaged only one project per year with an average financing commitment 
of US$16.9 million.  During the post-crisis years, IFC’s investment operations have recovered to 
pre-crisis levels, and have recently expanded in line with improvements in the governance 
environment and investment climate reforms.  IFC averaged four projects, with US$103.3 million 
of commitments per year, which gradually increased  through FY07 when IFC committed 
US$278 million in seven projects – two in agribusiness, three in the financial sector, one in 
general manufacturing and services, and one in education. 

During the CAS period, the focus of Bank’s financial sector program became more selective with 
non-bank issues moving to the center stage in an effort to improve the investment climate.  The 
Bank’s support related to pensions, debt markets, and capital market infrastructure has been 
instrumental in encouraging Bank Indonesia to be serious about meeting international standards. 
IFC has also increased its engagement in the financial sector.  IFC approved three long-term 
Indonesian Rupiah loans to commercial banks in Indonesia totaling US$305 million.  These loans 
were directed to SMEs in Indonesia.  IFC is also supporting the bank consolidation process.  The 
number of commercial banks remains over 130, which the authorities hope to reduce to about 70 
through raising capital requirements.  IFC has engaged with a few of them to facilitate and 
participate in their consolidation.  IFC’s Advisory Program has built the capacity of rural banks 
and micro finance institutions, which is now being complemented by investments.  IFC has 
worked with six women’s cooperatives, 153 farmers’ groups, and rural banks in Bali and Eastern 
Java.  IFC is contributing to the creation of the first wholesale microfinance institution.   

Private sector development has also been a focus for the Bank Group.  The Government passed 
three reform packages on investment climate policy issues alone in which WBG inputs were 
incorporated.  IFC Advisory Services began work in Indonesia in 2003 and it has collaborated 
with IBRD and FIAS on Investment Law reform.  Achievements include an average two-thirds 
reduction in the time and cost of business licensing at select sub-national districts saving 
businesses an estimated US$10 million annually; promulgation of a national guideline supporting 
the development of effective licensing offices; and, the implementation with the province of Aceh 
of a new model for investment promotion.  MIGA continues to use its online services to assist 
Indonesia to attract foreign direct investment by profiling potential investment opportunities in 

 84  

 
 
Appendix 8 

the country.  Along with the dialogue undertaken as part of Doing Business indicators survey and 
the preparation of bi-annual investment climate surveys, the WBG has been able to elevate the 
agenda on investment climate right up to the Presidential level.   

Slower progress has been made in refurbishing infrastructure, which remains a key impediment to 
improving the investment climate and delivering basic social services.  A first Infrastructure DPL 
in the amount of US$200 million was approved by the Bank’s Board in December 2007, which 
together with a Public Private Infrastructure TA project (PPITA), seeks to help achieve 
breakthrough on the large unfinished agenda relating to infrastructure and PPP policy reforms.  A 
set of roads, gas and energy, and irrigation projects are being implemented, but implementation 
progress has been slow.  Thus, while the WBG has become a strong partner with the Government 
with regards to infrastructure, and its expertise is being heavily relied upon, the pace of large-
scale infrastructure investment interventions needs to be accelerated.  The IFC Board approved a 
US$50 million loan to PGN (gas transmission, distribution and wholesaling). This was a first 
joint IFC-Bank team sub-national fund transaction in Indonesia, and the first globally with a 
utility company majority-owned by a national government. The WBG also supported the two 
infrastructure summits organized in Jakarta in 2005 and 2006, but they failed to attract a good 
number of PPP projects.   

The WBG’s support for increasing sustainable income creating opportunities for the poor was led 
by its coastal zone management program - the largest Bank-financed coral reef management 
program (COREMAP) in the world.  It includes 416 island communities, covering 2.6 million ha 
or 25 percent of coral reefs in the region, and has contributed to improved awareness and 
practices in the coastal communities.  Under the Farmer Empowerment and Technology 
Improvement (FEATI) project, outcomes have been impacted by preparation and startup delays in 
the project.  IFC’s Advisory Services have contributed to visible results in a number of sectors, 
including increases in seaweed farmers’ incomes, maize farmers getting access to finance (many 
for the first time), and small Indonesian businesses selling sustainably harvested wood as 
furniture into developed markets. 

Pillar 3:  Making Service Delivery Responsive to the Poor   

Country Progress 
Progress towards achieving the MDGs in the education sector has been stronger than that in the 
health sector as noted in the 2006 CASPR.  With decentralization, regional governments have 
become the dominant players in service delivery and are now spending almost the same amount 
as the central government.  However, the 2007 Public Expenditure Review highlighted the 
inefficient resource allocation in the health sector.  Coupled with weaknesses in capacity and 
governance challenges, public health service delivery remains poor, and is burdened by quality 
and access issues.  Net enrollment rates at primary school have increased and a Teacher Law to 
improve teacher quality and deployment has been approved.  In the health sector, utilization of 
health services has gone up, and so has the percentage of births attended by trained health 
workers.  However, translation of this into lower maternal mortality rates has been slow.  
Although operational water supply systems have been established in about 1,206 villages 
covering some 3 million villagers, the progress in improving sanitation services has been 
inadequate.  The recent (2006) Bank-financed household survey covering nearly 13,000 
households in 32 districts across 29 provinces revealed that 70 percent of Indonesians surveyed 
responded that health services have improved since 2001; more than 72 percent cited 
improvements in education services; and more than 55 percent cited improvements in 
administrative services. Poverty rate has declined to 16.6 percent as of September 2007 following 
a peak of over 23 percent in 1999 as a result of the financial crisis (17.4 percent in 2003).  

 85  

 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

Recently, the Government announced several major new poverty reduction initiatives, and in 
August 2006, the Government launched the first nationwide poverty reduction program 
comprising two pillars: the National Program for Community Empowerment or Program 
Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (PNPM); and, a pilot Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) 
Program.  

Bank Contribution 
Through its education sector dialogue and analytical work, the Bank supported the development 
of the Government’s "Strategic Priorities in Education Development Medium Term Program 
2005-2009" (RENSTRA) which is now the basis of a major sector-wide program that is under 
preparation.  The Bank also piloted the Early Childhood Development (ECD) programs which are 
now being scaled up.  These programs have been shown to have substantial impacts on helping 
children from poor families to get higher grades in primary and secondary school. The Bank 
administered National Education Reform Program (Netherlands and EC financing) was a catalyst 
for the Bank to re-engage in the education sector in Indonesia, and it has continued to provide 
extensive analytical support for policy formulation, development of the next RENSTRA for 
2009-14, the introduction of the new teacher upgrading law, and delivery of the ECD project.  
The Bank, with support from the same donors, established a Basic Education Capacity-Building 
Trust Fund (BEC-TF) to support the implementation of RENSTRA. 

In the health sector, the performance of the Bank lending interventions has been mixed, with only 
partial realization of expected outcomes.  Several of the completed projects were not successful 
(with sustainability unlikely), mainly due to limited capacity to carry out reforms and also 
complicated by the ambiguities created by decentralization with regard to the roles and 
responsibilities of local governments vs. higher levels of government.  The three Bank-financed 
Provincial Health Projects (PHPs) aimed at improving health outcomes by strengthening the 
capacity of districts, provinces and the center in managing a decentralized health system.  They 
have helped the Government in increasing birth deliveries by trained health workers and 
improving the immunization coverage for BCG and measles vaccine.  However, vaccination 
coverage for others (DPT, polio and HepB) has failed to improve. The Bank recently started 
getting engaged in HIV/AIDS dialogue, especially in the province of Papua where the risks are 
high.   

In April 2007, the Government announced plans for scaling up the long-running suite of Bank-
supported rural and urban CDD programs (Kecamatan Development Project, KDP, and Urban 
Poverty Project, UPP) as its national-level poverty reduction strategy. The two programs 
represent the largest Bank-financed CDD program in the world, covering 48 percent of villages 
(some 38,000) with a focus on the poorest.  These projects have been successful in increasing 
access of the poor (including women and vulnerable community members) to tertiary socio-
economic infrastructure and other services. The KDP and UPP model has also helped improve 
local level governance by involving communities directly in a participatory, empowering, and 
transparent framework.  The model is also being used effectively to support post-disaster 
reconstruction in Aceh-Nias and Jogyakarta. 

Pillar 4:  Disaster Risk Management 

Country Progress 
The Government responded quickly and comprehensively to the Aceh earthquake and tsunami 
tragedy of December 2004.  The first task was to prepare a Damage and Loss Assessment 
involving all the major donors and led by Bappenas.  It was completed in a few weeks with loss 
estimates totaling nearly US$4.5 billion.  It was presented to the Consultative Group meetings in 

 86  

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

January 2005 as the basis for mobilizing international financial support.  This was then followed 
by the preparation of a more detailed Master Plan for Rehabilitation and Reconstruction, also led 
by Bappenas and involving the donor community.  A major accomplishment was the creation of 
the Special Reconstruction Agency (BRR) and its immediate staffing with well known and 
credible Indonesians.  It was formally established in April 2005 and became operational a month 
later. 

Critical to the reconstruction process was the agreement on the peace accord between the 
Government and the GAM (Gerakan Aceh Merdeka) ending the decades-long conflict that had 
caused nearly 15,000 deaths and tremendous suffering to the people of Aceh.  The MOU sealing 
the peace agreement was signed on August 15, 2005 and was a strong basis for post-conflict 
peace-building. In addition to contributing to the delivery of post-tsunami support, the end of this 
conflict has led to an improvement in the quality of life and outlook for Aceh’s future 
development. 

Over the last two years, Indonesia has emerged as the epicenter for Avian and Human Influenza 
(AHI) risks.  The risks arise from the large size of the country, extensive holdings of poultry by 
millions of households, high-risk farming practices, and a decentralized administration with weak 
capacity.  As of January 30, 2008, 101 people have died from AHI.  Government response has 
been generally viewed as slow and uncoordinated although in recent months its public awareness 
campaign seems to be reaching most of the country’s population.   

Bank Contribution 
The Bank played an instrumental role in the preparation of the Damage and Loss Assessment, 
Master Plan for Reconstruction, setting up of the BRR, and for mobilizing funds from the donor 
community. The Damage and Loss Assessment was led by the Bank team on the donor side and 
was prepared in less than four weeks after the tsunami.  At the Government’s request, the Bank 
initiated, designed, and drafted the founding legislation and provided continuous TA and support 
during the first few months of BRR’s existence.  The Aceh Multi-Donor Fund (MDF) with 
current pledges of close to US$700 million - the largest post-disaster fund in the Bank – is 
considered a best practice mechanism for donor coordination in response to natural disasters.  
MDF’s close coordination with the BRR and the local government (newly elected Aceh 
Governor) has contributed greatly to its success.  The Bank also restructured three ongoing IDA 
projects (US$20 million) to include reconstruction components and mobilized JSDF grants 
(US$7.8 million) for emergency support. Additionally, reconstruction components were included 
in two new projects that were delivered to the Bank’s Board in FY05 (US$15 million).   

MDF-financed projects have delivered support in the recovery of communities, infrastructure and 
transport, capacity building and governance, and sustainable management of the environment.  
Further, the MDF covered the important cross-cutting issues of environmental protection and 
sustainable recovery.  The overall process of reconstruction is well underway with 85,000 new 
houses completed by September 2007, of which 4,400 were by the Bank.  In addition, 4,050 
houses have been rehabilitated.  Other accomplishments include: 43 community health clinics and 
282 schools built or repaired; 846 bridges repaired; 2,330 kms village roads and 199 km of urban 
roads rebuilt; 1,211 irrigation and drainage projects in rural areas and rehabilitation of 178 kms 
drainage in urban areas; 1,148 clean water systems and 1,032 sanitation units built by the Bank.  
Over 11 million workdays were generated through the Bank-supported infrastructure work as of 
August 2007.  The community based housing reconstruction program (REKOMPAK) in Aceh 
has functioned remarkably well and has been adopted by the Government as the model for post-
disaster housing interventions in Central Java and Jogyakarta.  The MDF is the largest single 
donor in the environment sector focusing on improved waste management services and protection 

 87  

 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

of forest resources.  The progress is not as good for the land titling project –over 121,590 titles 
have been distributed (by May 2008) to the population, compared to the target of 600,000 by June 
2008, as the National Land Agency (BPN) has faced challenges in implementing the project as 
designed.  The project design and establishment of targets were carried out in a short period to 
respond to the catastrophe; an additional complicating factor, particularly in the earlier phase has 
been the difficulty in obtaining data.  

Immediately after the tsunami, IFC management approved an allocation of US$2.5 million to 
support the relief efforts by the private sector in all tsunami-affected countries, through a 
matching grant program.  In Aceh, IFC contributed resources to three private sector companies - 
GE, Sampoerna and Cascal – to provide clean drinking water for the population and develop 
temporary schools for displaced children.  IFC also provide US$1 million and secured US$5.5 
million from AusAID to establish an IFC Advisory Service program in Aceh.  The program has 
established an Investment Outreach Office to support private sector investment, with IBRD 
provided policy advice to the Governor of Aceh on private sector policy issues, supported the 
livelihoods of shrimp farmers by helping to improve yields, and helped to improved business 
development services. 

The participatory approaches of CDD projects involving civil society, communities, private 
sector and other local organizations have also helped provide post-conflict assistance.  KDP was 
the only Bank project operating in Aceh during the conflict period and its network of facilitators 
played a crucial role in reaching out to the community in the immediate aftermath of the 2004 
tsunami devastation.  The project also facilitated the re-integration of GAM rebels. 

Reconstruction experience in Jogyakarta has also been remarkable.  Less than one year after the 
devastating earthquake in May 2006, almost 150,000 houses (more than half the total needed) 
were rehabilitated, most at low cost and with strong community participation.  The Bank also 
used its convening power in the aftermath of this tragedy to help bring together several key 
development partners around a US$84 million Java Reconstruction Fund (JRF). The Government 
also implemented a new Disaster Management Law in March 2007 to prepare and respond more 
effectively to disasters. 

Bank Performance 

This section reports on the Bank’s performance measured by the Bank’s own internal 
performance indicators for the portfolio, and reports such as PSRs, ISRs, CRMR, OED 
evaluations and the CAE (see Attachment A, CAS Completion Matrix).  Effectiveness of non-
lending services, including trust fund mobilization, is also discussed.  

Lending Deliveries 
During the CAS period, 23 IBRD/IDA projects were delivered for a total of about US$4 billion 
(see Attachment B).  Of this, US$0.9 billion (24 percent) was on IDA terms; and US$2.1 billion 
was for program support. PREM delivered the largest share of new loans at 49 percent (five 
operations, including four DPLs), followed by the Sustainable Development Network at 45 
percent (15 projects, including the IDPL operation), and Human Development Network at 6 
percent (three projects).  The lack of clarity and commitment by some counterparts on pipeline 
projects to a very high drop rate – between FY04 and FY08, 13 projects were dropped costing 
US$3.33 million in sunk preparation costs.  The average project preparation period was 35 
months indicating that the decision to drop majority of these projects was made at an advanced 
project preparation stage.  In addition, about a dozen projects that were included in either the 

 88  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

CAS or the CASPR were not prepared (i.e., they did not have an approved AIS and did not incur 
any preparation costs). 

Portfolio Quality 
As of April 2008, the Bank’s total portfolio stands at 24 projects with total net commitments of 
US$2.5 billion and undisbursed balance of US$1.8 billion.  Portfolio performance has been mixed 
with a disbursement ratio of 17 percent.  Proactivity index is maintained at 100 percent, but 
realism index is only at 40 percent.  This mixed result is due both to inadequate government 
capacity and internal Bank ‘hassle’ factors.  While the 2006 CASPR noted that important gains 
have been achieved in overall portfolio quality, it also noted some risk factors and emphasized the 
need for continued hands-on management.  The FY06 CPPR and the initial findings of the FY08 
CRMR have also identified major risk factors affecting the portfolio quality: weaknesses in 
project management, corruption in procurement of goods and services, misuse of project funds, 
delays in budget approvals and releases, lack of procurement planning and timely procurement 
actions, slow pace of disbursements, and weak M&E.  These portfolio reviews offered several 
actions and recommendations.  As noted earlier, GAAPs have now become a standardized 
component of all projects, normally serving as an annex to the PADs and subsequently 
incorporated into project operational manuals. 

Thirty-six Bank projects closed between FY04 and April 2008; of which 27 have been evaluated 
by IEG (see Attachment C).  Of the projects evaluated, 74 percent are rated satisfactory or 
marginally satisfactory on outcome.  The ratio of “at risk” to total projects (by commitments) is 
currently at 21 percent.  The associated risk factors include weak capacity for project 
management, procurement delays, corruption and misuse of funds, delays in releasing counterpart 
funding, and monitoring and evaluation.  The Bank addressed these by restructuring projects, 
canceling loans, continuous dialogue with the Government on counterpart funds, assisting the 
Government in resolving the misuse of funds, and providing support to strengthen the 
Government’s procurement team. 

During the CAS period, IFC has committed US$935 million in 43 projects.  As of March 30, 
2008, IFC’s outstanding exposure in Indonesia is US$709 million in 27 institutions (US$694 
million for IFC’s own account). The average loan risk rating was 3.6, an improvement over a year 
ago when it was 3.8.  The average risk rating on the equity side, as of the same date, was 3.8, an 
improvement from a year ago when it was 4.0.  

Non-Lending Services 
The WBG’s AAA program has evolved over time in line with the country’s emerging MIC status 
(see Attachment D).  The program focus shifted from a more structured ‘formal’ report preparing 
activities to responding to high-impact, just-in-time requests from the Government that largely 
required TA rather than detailed analysis and report preparation.  Dissemination also improved 
with more and more reports and policy notes being translated in Bahasa Indonesia and distributed 
to a wider country audience for greater impact.   

An important contribution by the WBG in the early CAS period involved preparation of a Policy 
Notes Package for the incoming government in 2004 consisting of 20 policy notes. The Package 
was the WBG’s initial “calling card” in discussions with the new President and his Cabinet and 
proved to be useful to key Ministers in developing their respective “100 day plans” at the 
President’s request.  Particularly worth highlighting is the Bank’s analytical input and ‘behind the 
door’ engagement and advice which resulted in the Government reducing the highly regressive 

 89  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

fuel subsidy in 2005, as well as their decision to reallocate most of the saved funds to health, 
education, village infrastructure, and implement an unconditional cash transfer (UCT) program.   

The INDOPOV program played an important supporting role for the government agencies on 
their poverty agenda with a three part agenda that reviewed and provided policy advice on pro-
poor growth, pro-poor spending and services for the poor. The Justice for the Poor program has 
been another key highlight of the Bank program. It has helped to develop strategies for a bottom-
up, demand driven approach to justice reform building popular constituencies to demand justice 
and push for necessary reforms to legal institutions.  The Bank was able to re-engage in two 
important sectors (education and environment) through its AAA program. Through programs 
such as the Forest Law Enforcement and Governance (FLEG) and the Program for Pollution 
Control Evaluation and Rating (PROPER), the Bank has reengaged in the areas of natural 
resources and environmental management, leading to many more initiatives, including supporting 
the Government to prepare for the landmark international Climate Change Conference in Bali in 
December 2007, under the aegis of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC). 

IFC’s Advisory Services plan to continue work on the investment climate, access to finance, 
supply chain development and plan to add programs on environmental sustainability and 
infrastructure.  A review of the largest Advisory Service project, PENSA, indicated that 
continued investment into PENSA would lead to even higher impact with implementation of 
more robust management processes.  In response, IFC has consolidated offices and closed 
programs that were not likely to yield strong systemic impact.   

Much of the WBG’s work is now done in partnership with local research institutes, other donors, 
NGOs, and in close collaboration with the Government. Over time, the Bank and its partners have 
pursued a programmatic approach to research and technical assistance, identifying key issue areas 
in Indonesia’s development path and framing a set of activities to provide analysis, policy 
recommendations and other support.   

Country Dialogue, Partnerships and Aid Coordination 
Partnerships with donors have remained strong, allowing the WBG to leverage significant 
amounts of financial and human resources for CAS implementation.  Indonesia is the largest user 
of Trust Funds (TFs) in the Bank.  Total active grants amount to US$1,245 million consisting of 
186 active grants (see Attachment A).  The biggest single TF is the Aceh-Nias MDF with total 
contributions of about US$700 million. The TF programs have contributed significantly to the 
CAS objectives.  The obvious outputs and outcomes include: pooling of resources for joint 
strategies and actions (education), greater responsiveness to unanticipated needs as in post-
disaster recovery efforts (Aceh-Nias MDF and JRF), provision of high quality research, policy 
dialogue and knowledge dissemination (Netherlands Institutional TF, DSF, INDOPOV).  The 
TFs have helped the Bank, the Government and development partners toward the goals of the 
Paris Declaration – harmonization, alignment and results.  The availability of TF financing has 
allowed a marked increase in the WBG’s analytical and advisory services, especially allowing the 
WBG to mobilize the right skills to respond to just-in-time government requests.  They have also 
supported more enhanced supervision than restricted Bank budgets would normally allow for 
complicated projects.   IFC has leveraged over US$40 million in grant resources to support IFC 
Advisory Services which focused on sustainable economic growth and development, with a 
geographic emphasis on Eastern Indonesia.  Program areas include access to finance for the 
underserved, investment climate reform, agribusiness linkages, sustainable wood supply chain 
and handicrafts.  Since 2003, IFC Advisory Services have contributed to an improved investment 
law, a reduction in the time and cost of business licensing at select sub-national districts, and 

 90  

 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

increased access to finance for small borrowers.  The IFC Board has already committed US$10 
million to PENSA for the next five years to catalyze a renewed multi-donor partnership.    

Strong partnerships are also being forged using other instruments. Joint policy reform operations 
have seen ADB, Japan and the Bank teaming up in support of the Government’s policy reform 
agenda through the co-financing of the Bank’s DPLs.  Sector wide approaches are being 
strengthened in education with the Netherlands and EU as key co-financiers.  The Banda Aceh 
office, initially set up through Dutch TF funding, continues to be a stronghold for partner 
coordination and dialogue and has contributed to strengthening the implementation of the MDF 
projects on the ground.  

Partnerships with Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), NGOs, and parliamentarians were also 
strengthened during the CAS period.  The Bank has taken every opportunity – either through 
lending or non-lending – to reach out to the NGO/CSO community.  In the immediate aftermath 
of the tsunami, the Bank worked closely with the NGOs that were part of the KDP project to 
provide relief services.  The Bank, through the WBI, has also provided capacity building 
activities for local governments and for parliamentarians. 

Overall Assessment and Lessons Learnt 
Despite the uncertainties surrounding project preparation and delayed implementation of some 
projects, on balance the implementation of the CAS has been satisfactory.  The effectiveness of 
the WBG’s activities as measured by the portfolio quality and outcome indicators has varied 
depending on the sectoral context, cross-cutting challenges, and the Bank’s own internal ‘hassle 
factors’, but good progress has been made in a number of the CAS focus areas.  

The Bank recognized its shifting role of supporting an emerging MIC agenda. During the CAS 
period, WBG interventions moved towards supporting a country-led and owned policy agenda 
consistent with Indonesia’s emerging status as a MIC. The Bank was well positioned to advise the 
Government on several issues, furthering its relationship and reputation with the Government as a 
“go to” partner on policy issues. A substantial effort was made to drive home emerging policy 
messages to policy-makers and to opportunistically engage, either through lending or non-
lending, in entry-points for a change (e.g., education, environment, fuel subsidy reduction, UCT, 
CCT).  Very important was the WBG team’s foresight in identifying problems to focus on before 
these were widely recognized as challenges, and the Bank’s flexibility to respond quickly to 
government requests and needs on demand.  

CDD projects continue to achieve results on the ground. The two Bank-financed CDD programs 
(KDP and UPP) were central to the enhanced service delivery and inclusive growth agenda of the 
CAS. They have been successful in delivering small-scale infrastructure, and basic services to 
poor communities.  These have built or rehabilitated schools, health center facilities, water and 
sanitation systems, roads, bridges, markets and electrification systems and are contributing to 
providing employment, building capacity and deepening local governance.   

DPLs contributed strongly to advancing cross-cutting reforms. The Bank team helped to design 
a home-grown program for the Government resulting in a smooth IMF exit.  The Bank’s first 
DPL was linked to this program, thus helping to build confidence.  With Indonesia successfully 
meeting the CAS high case triggers, budget support through a series of DPLs was resumed in 
2004 and four DPLs were fully disbursed for US$1.9 billion.  A first sectorally oriented 
Infrastructure DPL was also approved by the Bank’s Board in December 2007.  They have 
contributed significantly to the Government’s policy reforms in the areas of macroeconomic 

 91  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

stability, investment climate, service delivery, public financial management and anti-corruption, 
as well as pursuing the agenda on infrastructure and PPP policy reforms.   

Strong donor partnerships leading to trust fund mobilization allowed the WBG to re-engage in 
some sectors, and to deepen ongoing support in other sectors.  Partnerships with donors have 
remained strong, allowing the WBG to leverage significant amounts of financial and human 
resources for CAS implementation.  The availability of TF financing has allowed a marked 
increase in the WBG’s analytical, technical assistance, and advisory services.  For example, the 
Bank has emerged as an influential player in facilitating donor support for the Government’s 
education sector agenda.  However, the administrative costs associated with managing a large 
portfolio of TFs need to be assessed, and the strategic focus of the TF portfolio enhanced further.  
On the operational side, there is a need to better integrate TF resources with Bank budgets and 
programs. 

The Bank was effective in using its role as the key convener to respond quickly and efficiently 
to post-disaster reconstruction and other emerging requests.  The Bank’s role became evident 
during the immediate post-tsunami/earthquake period when the Government asked the WBG to 
lead a coordinated donor effort to address the reconstruction in Aceh, Nias, and Jogyakarta.  The 
WBG’s contribution towards this is the hallmark of the CAS period.  The Bank has also emerged 
as an influential player in facilitating donor support for the Government’s education sector 
agenda.   

The WBG’s strengths for implementing the CAS were largely in its skilled and expert staff   
that could be tapped into in a short time (e.g., post-tsunami/earthquake support), capacity to 
manage large donor TFs (MDF, DSF, BEC), bring global experience and apply it within the local 
context (e.g., UCT, CCT), mobilize support for private investment (IFC), and a large corps of 
national staff and consultants for provision of local knowledge and know-how. 

Less progress has been made in the infrastructure sector which remains a key impediment to 
improving the investment climate and delivering basic social services.  Although the 
Government was committed to improving infrastructure, results on the ground have not been very 
impressive and substantial gaps remain.  And while the WBG has engaged in this sector with a 
comprehensive lending and non-lending program, its support has not led to expected outcomes, in 
particular for attracting private sector investment.  The sector also continues to be plagued with 
corruption issues in Bank-financed projects, which has delayed project preparation and 
implementation and has serious implications for the future project pipeline. 

The local government ‘platform’ approach outlined in the CAS has not worked well as 
evidenced by the lagging performance of the first generation of related projects. A key 
constraint has been the lack of clarity in the roles and responsibilities at the district, provincial 
and national levels of government.  The challenges in the implementation of revised on-lending 
and on-granting decrees were another detrimental factor impacting the implementation of the 
ILGRP, USDRP, and SPADA.  Moreover, the health sector in Indonesia has been relatively slow 
to adjust to the country’s decentralization and transfer of service delivery functions from the 
central to the local governments, as indicated by lack of improvement in related outcomes.   

Lack of clarity and strong commitment by the Government has led to delays in project 
preparation and high costs of dropped projects.  Lack of long-term planning and inadequate co-
ordination among various government agencies led to an uncertain environment for project 
preparation.  Regular and coordinated dialogue with the Government (Bappenas, MoF and line 
ministries), and tighter management of lending pipeline are critical to minimize such costs in the 

 92  

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 8 

future.  In addition, there seems to exist a “missing middle” between the DPLs and CDDs.  
Government commitment and implementation/results have been much stronger for DPLs and 
CDD projects while a number of investment projects have been facing challenges affecting their 
full potential. 

Inadequate government capacity and internal Bank ‘hassle’ factors have led to slow project 
implementation and delayed realization of outcomes in some sectors.  Weaknesses in 
government capacity to implement projects and delays in counterpart funding, especially at the 
local level, have partly contributed to delays in project implementation.  Ideally, decentralized 
projects should be executed using the local level PFM framework.  However, since the on-
lending/on-granting guidelines were not fully developed, these projects were implemented 
through the national level PFM systems adding to implementation delays.  Internal “hassle” 
factors of dealing with the Bank processes and procedures have also emerged as contributing to 
delays related to procurement issues, with increased transaction costs for both the client and the 
Bank.  Strengthening support to build country systems within the Government’s decentralized 
framework will be critical to improving project performance. 

 93  

 
 
INDONESIA: CAS Completion Report: Results Framework – Completion Matrix 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Maintain macroeconomic 
stability   
• 
Inflation below 7% 
• Debt to GDP below 60% 
• 
Investment as % of GDP 
above 30% 
• Growth of at least 5% 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Pillar One: Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment and Growth 
Consolidate macroeconomic stability and 
• Deficit of 1.2% of GDP in 
• Budget discipline maintained; deficit of 1.1% 
focus increasingly on the microeconomic 
2004, 1% in 2005  
of GDP in 2007 (done) 
foundations of growth 
• Reduce debt/GDP ratio to 
• Debt management on sustainable path; 
• Continued vulnerability to shocks because 
below 40%  
debt/GDP ratio 38% in 2006, and 34% in 
of high debt 
2007 (achieved) 
• Non-oil tax revenue to GDP 
• End of Paris Club restructuring 
up 1%  
• Non-oil tax revenue was up 2% from 2001 to 
• Possible decrease in market confidence 
• Decrease in tax arrears 
2005, up 0.8% from 2005 to 2006 (11.5%)  
from IMF exit 
(achieved) 
• Weak tax and customs administration 
• Tax arrears decreased (done) 
• Nascent domestic government bonds 
market 
• Vulnerable financial sector with contingent 
liabilities to the budget 

Goal is to improve effectiveness and targeting 
of compensation schemes.  Engagement in 
fuel subsidies comes to a close with the 
evaluation of the UCT. Original outcome was 
subsumed under PFM (pillar 3) and 
performance of CCT schemes 
Focus was on improving pace and quality of 
public spending.  Similarly, outcome was 
subsumed under PFM (pillar 3) 

• Fuel prices get closer to 
market level 

• Fuel subsidies reduced in March and October 
2005. UCT program was implemented for a 
year. CCT program piloted (achieved) 

• Gradual increase in capital and 
social spending to 3.5% of 
GDP  

3.4% of GDP in 2006 and 3.5% in 2007. 
Including regional spending, total capital 
expenditures exceed 7% of GDP in 2006 
(achieved) 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Lending  
• GFMRAP  
• DPLs 1-4 
• IDPL  
AAA  
• Briefings for new Govt  
• CGI Briefs, PERs , 
DPR  
• Debt Management 
ASEM  
• Fiscal policy analysis 
• WTO advice, Fuel 
subsidy reduction 
advice 
TF 
• GFMRAP 
Partners 
ADB, JBIC, IMF, 
AusAID debt mgt, USAID 
trade 

94  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Stronger and diversified 
financial sector with 
equitable access 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Pillar One: Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment and Growth 

Weak governance of state banks was a critical 
issue 
• Lack of alternatives to banking sector for 
access to capital 
• Weak supervision in banking and non-
banking sectors  
• Public sector domination in bank ownership  
• Unsustainable blanket deposit guarantee  
• Inadequate access to financial services for 
SMEs and poorer households 
• Poorly developed institutional investors 
• Reduction of Blanket Guarantee to be 
pursued. 
• BI role as a lender of last resort has to be 
enacted by law 

Recommendations in NBFI report provided a 
basis for policy dialogue 
• Weak supervision in non-banking sectors was 
a challenge  
• Inadequate financial access to SME sector 
and poor households 
• Weak insurance industry 

Increase stability of finance sector 
• At least 20% private ownership 
of all state-owned banks 
• Indonesia in broad compliance 
with international standards  
• Financial sector safety net 
implementation continued  

Improve access to finance 
• Increase in non-bank financial 
sector’s share of financial system 
assets beyond 10%  
• Number of SMEs with increased 
access to finance  
• Strengthen insurance industry 
regulatory and supervisory 
framework and develop a 
strategy to deal with insolvent 
firms  

• State-owned banks’ private ownership 
exceeds 20% for 2 of the 4 state-owned 
banks. State bank share of overall 
banking system is 36% (ongoing) 
• Indonesia taken off the list of non- 
cooperative countries of the FATF 
(done) 
• BI has made serious efforts to comply 
with BCP; others, such as NBFIs,  are 
still lagging behind (slow/ongoing) 
• Blanket Guarantee removed as of 
September 2006. Coverage on deposits 
was reduced from Rp 5 billion in March 
2006 to Rp 100 million in March 2007 
(achieved) 

• NBFI assets comprise 22.3% of total 
financial sector assets (2006) (achieved) 
• Total credit realization by SMEs from 
commercial banks, as measured by BI, 
increased by 82%  from 2003 to 2005. 
Loans to SMEs comprised 52% of total 
loans (June 2007), compared to 47% in 
2003 (achieved) 
• Pension fund industry re-organization 
and restructuring slower than expected 
• Resolution of  unviable insurance firms 
slower than expected 
• Bapepam merged with GDFI. 
Strengthening of its regulatory and 
supervisory capacity slower than 
expected 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

IFC/MIGA  
• IFC investments in 
banks and non-banking 
financial institutions  
• IFC Advisory Service 
Initiatives 
AAA 
• Financial sector 
monitoring 
Partners 
IMF – Strengthening bank 
supervision and creation 
of financial sector safety 
net 

IFC 
• Advisory Service 
Initiatives 
AAA  
• NBFI report  

95  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Supportive environment for 
competitive private sector  

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 
Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 
Progress To Date 
Pillar One: Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment and Growth 
• Implementing regulations of the new 
• Overall improvement in 
• All major obstacles faced by businesses 
Investment Law not completed  
investment climate  
have declined consistently, but remain 
• Number of licenses in ministries to be 
• Reduce business start-up time 
high (ongoing) 
reduced 
from 168 (2003) to 30 days  
• Start-up time for new businesses takes 
• Transactions costs to business need to be 
• More effective tax services 
109 days (2008)  (slower than expected) 
reduced 
• Rolling out of tax administration 
• Weak regulatory frameworks 
reforms is on-track: 3 tax laws have 
• Lack of inter-agency cooperation to remove 
been introduced to Parliament and 
modern tax offices have expanded (on 
investment impediments 
• Unclear division of labor among levels of 
track) 
government 
• 170 local  nuisance taxes & fees were 
• Ineffective Competition Agency  
abolished between 2005-06  (ongoing) 
• % of businesses identifying tax 
• Lack of clarity & inconsistent  enforcement 
of environmental regulations 
administration as a moderate, severe and 
• Poor quality of higher education (skills) 
very severe problem decreased from 
57% in 2003 to 38% in 2007 (ongoing) 
• Average time to obtain VAT refunds has 
decreased from 12-18 months (2003) to 
4 months (2008) (on track) 

Clearance process to be exclusively 
computerized 

• More effective customs services  
• Clear criteria to implement 
customs regulations concerning 
use of priority, green, and red 
lanes stipulated 

• % of businesses identifying customs and 
trade regulations  as a moderate, severe 
and very severe problem decreased from 
51% (2003) to 32% (2007) (on track) 
• Average import clearance time has 
reduced from 8 (2004) to 6 days in the 
red lane (preliminary 2007 data)  (on 
track) 
• Use of lanes part of the investment 
package issued by GOI (done) 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Lending   
• GFMRAP 
• DPLs 1-4 
• IDPL 
IFC 
• IFC Advisory Service 
Initiatives 
AAA  
• Business Environment 
Surveys (bi-annual) 
• Review of draft 
Customs Law 
• Background notes on 
international best 
practices for 
implementing 
regulations of 
Investment Law 
• Value chain studies  
• Investment related 
labor market analysis 
• Background notes on 
trade policy reforms 
IFC 
• IFC Advisory Service 
Initiatives 
Partners 
ILO Youth Employment 
Network 

96  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 
Progress To Date 
Pillar One: Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment and Growth 
Rigid labor regulations discourage jobs creation 
• Implement flexible labor 
• New draft labor law being reformulated 
in the formal sector 
regulations  
after delays following strong resistance 
by labor unions (slower than expected) 
• Draft amendment to move from negative 
to positive list for regional tax items and 
to restrict the creation of nuisance and/or 
economically harmful charges and levies 
has been completed (on track) 
• Implementing regulations for Laws 22 
and 25 is slower than expected 

• Clarity of functions of central 
and local governments towards 
private sector development  
• Investment climate in about 40 
regions participating in local 
services platform projects above 
the national average 

Impact of new regulations on investment not yet 
materialized 

Improve the environment for 
infrastructure development 
• Main CAS outcome was that at 
least 5 model PPP projects be 
successfully tendered   

• A first Infrastructure Summit that drew a 
large participation from private investors 
was held in January 2005; a follow-up 
summit took place in November  2006 
(done) 
• A national committee on Policy for 
Accelerating Infrastructure Provision 
(KKPPI) was established in 2005 (done) 
• PPP Unit is being established within 
KKPPI as a center of technical expertise 
in project preparation (ongoing) 
• Risk Management Unit established in 
MOF, but needs to become fully 
operational (slower than expected) 

Lending 
• 
Private Provision of 
Infrastructure TA 
• DPLs 1-4 
• 
IDPL 
AAA  
• 
Infrastructure 
Summit 
Partners 
IFC, MIGA, JBIC, ADB 

Refurbished infrastructure 

GOI established a framework to develop 
infrastructure as a key national priority.  The 
Bank supports this program through a DPL   
• Remove policy road-blocks to public and 
private infrastructure investment.  (Increases 
in infrastructure investment was expected to 
be in the order of 1% of GDP over 2007-09) 
• Increase connections in 4 key sectors (Roads, 
Water and Sanitation, Energy and 
Telecommunication)   
• Ensure adequate social and environmental 
management of infrastructure investment (as 
measured by reviews of sample projects) 
Overall 
• Lack of public financing, and poor regulatory 
frameworks which preclude needed private 
sector participation 
• Ill-defined government responsibilities with 
decentralization 
Key sectors 
• Impending power shortages 
• Poor road maintenance 
• Low density of telecom connections 
• Bankrupt water utilities 

97  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Refurbished infrastructure 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Pillar One: Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment and Growth 
Lack of bankable projects limits the number of 
Road sector 
• Improved institutional arrangements 
PPPs 
• Improved institutional 
established for toll roads (done) 
arrangements to be established 
• Automatic tariff adjustment mechanisms 
for toll roads 
for toll roads completed (done) 
• Improve the condition of 
• The quality of the road network in 
national and other strategic 
Sumatra has been preserved with Bank 
arterial roads 
support (corresponding to about 24,000 
km) and subprojects implemented with 
Bank support have led to more than 
1500 km of improved roads and 4500 
meters of bridges in Eastern Indonesia 
(done) 

Focus was in particular on supporting the 
following government objectives: 
• Reduce the incidence of corruption in public 
and private roads projects 
• Establish public financing mechanisms to 
support sustainable maintenance of the 
national road network 

Institutional improvements not yet resulting in a 
significant increase in the number of actors 

Since Electricity Law was annulled in 2002, 
there is a lack of clear vision in the sector 

Energy sector 
• Increased number of actors in the 
oil & gas sectors  
• Improved tariff structure for gas 
sector  
• Partial privatization of key 
infrastructure SOEs, e.g. PGN 
• Increased number of actors in 
power sector 
• More efficient power sector 

• All elements for  opening oil and gas 
sector to competition, such as  regulator 
and implementing rules and regulations 
are in place; 3rd party open access is now 
in effect in transmission (with no 
evidence yet of  new actors); there are at 
least two newcomers (Petronas and 
Shell) in retail (ongoing) 
• Pricing study is completed and has been 
submitted by PGN to the regulator 
(done) 
• Partial privatization done for PGN 
where share of Govt is 39% (ongoing) 
• There has been some private sector 
participation in power generation: Two 
IPPs  came on line in 2006- 1320 MWs 
Tanjung Jati B and 600 MW Cilcap 
Coal Power Plants in Central Java  
(ongoing) 
• A 110 MW goethermal plant, scheduled 
for 2008 (Darajat plant in W. Java), is 
being tested (ongoing) 

Lending  
• East Indonesia 
Regional Transport 1, 
2 
• Sumatra Regional. 
Roads Project 
• Strategic Road 
Infrastructure 
AAA 
• Infrastructure Sector 
Study 
Partners 
IFC, MIGA, JBIC, ADB 
Lending  
• Domestic Gas Market 
Development  
• PGN Gas Distribution 
Project (joint 
IFC/IBRD) 
• Java-Bali Power 
Project 
IFC & MIGA 
• Support to investments 
in power and 
telecommunication 
AAA   
• Power Sector Policy 
Paper (funded by 
ESMAP) 

98  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Sustainable income-creating 
opportunities for poorer 
households 

Pillar One: Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment and Growth 
The performance of the Water and Sanitation 
Water & Sanitation 
• Project is expected to focus first on 3 
Sector (WSS) has remained stagnant at a 
The management and operation of 5 
PDAMs to be followed by a number of 
historical low investment level of about 0.5% of 
PDAMs start to improve 
other PDAMs joining the reform 
GDP.  The overall estimates of economic losses 
program [Note: it is expected that the 
due to lack of access to water and sanitation were 
successful implementation of the first 
estimated at 2.4% of GDP in 2002 
package will convince other PDAMs 
that debt restructuring under the reform 
program is possible] (ongoing) 
• Resolution of PDAM arrears to be 
initiated, following the enactment of 
related regulations and issuance of 
detailed procedures on debt restructuring 
by MOF (slower than expected) 
• Distribution of title certificates to land 
owners in the 9 LMPDP provinces is 
661,501, as at May 2007 Mid-Term 
Review.  A further 190,000 titles 
certificates completed and awaiting 
distribution.  (Number of titles 
distributed to women and joint owners 
[husband and wife] not available) 
(ongoing) 
• In Aceh, 121,594 land title certificates 
have been distributed to land owners, as 
of May 2008 (per BPN). (Number of 
titles distributed to women and joint 
owners [husband and wife] not 
available) (ongoing) 
• Land administration service delivery 
standards in place (done) 
• Land administration course now 
operating in three universities (done) 
• National consultative forum for National 
Land Policy Framework conducted in 
2006 (done) 

Urban and rural 
• Uncertain property rights and corrupt land 
management  
• Lack of access to natural resources & coastal 
resources (e.g., community- managed forests, 
coral reef ecosystems) 
• Limited access to capital  
• Unfavorable SME environment 
• Poor technology and a lack of information 
among farmers 
• Irrigation network poorly maintained 

• 2.5 million new land titles issued 
(50% in women’s’ or joint 
names) in project-assisted areas  

Lending  
• Land Management 
Policy Development 
Project (LMPDP) 
IFC 
• IFC Advisory Service 
Initiatives 
TF 
• Reconstruction of 
Aceh Land 
Administration System 
(RALAS) Project 
funded by MDF Grant 

99  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

• Average income of target groups 
of coastal communities from 
sustainable reef-based or reef-
substitute sources increases by 
10% until 2010  

Pillar One: Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment and Growth 
• Five local government land management 
pilots, under MoHA, completed in 2007 
(done) 
• More than 50% reduction in illegal and 
destructive fishing and coral mining in 
most of COREMAP1 pilot areas. Public 
awareness of the dangers of coral reef 
degradation increased from 39% to 75% 
(ongoing) 
• Baseline for COREMAP2 areas have 
been collected and progress in incomes 
is expected to be observable once results 
from the 2008 socio-economic surveys 
are available (ongoing) 
• 38,000 villages/cities through CDD 
programs have engaged in a 
participatory planning and financing 
process, increasing access to vital 
infrastructure and water/sanitation 
resources (achieved) 
• Villages covered by KDP showing 
significant HH expenditure impact as 
compared to non-KDP areas (achieved) 

• 30,000 villages/cities with 
improved access to roads, 
bridges, irrigation and other 
infrastructure through 
participatory planning and 
financing  
• Increased household income 
levels in the targeted 30,000 
villages/ cities 

Lending   
• COREMAP2 

Lending  
• KDP 
• UPP 
• SPADA 
• ILGRP  
AAA  
• Poverty Assessment  
TF 
• KDP 
• Water Resource & 
Irrigation 
• Poverty Reduction 
• NTB Water Resource 
Based Poverty 
Alleviation 
• ILGRP 

100  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Pillar One: Improving the Climate for High Quality Investment and Growth 
• Increase in household 
• An average of 70% of participating  
expenditure rates, incomes, and 
households in 3,000  villages adopting 
adoption rates of technologies in 
new technologies with increases in 
71 project-assisted districts 
incomes ranging from 35-60% from 
• 20% increase in income levels 
improved agribusiness development 
for farmers in the areas of 
activities (on track) 
improved irrigation systems  
• 250,000 ha of irrigated area benefiting 
from improved water management, and 
some 500,000 ha from repairs and 
rehabilitation to the physical 
infrastructure (ongoing) 

Lending  
• Water Resources & 
Irrigation Sector Mgmt  
• FEATI 
AAA  
• Rural Investment 
Climate Survey 
• Agricultural Extension 
Services in Indonesia 
• Horticultural 
Producers and 
Supermarket 
Development 
• Information and 
Communication 
Technologies for Rural 
Development 
• Issues in Indonesian 
Rice Policy 
Partners 
ADB, DFID, Dutch Trust 
Fund, JICA, EU, GEF, 
IDRC, CIRAD 

Better education outcomes 
for the poor 
Increased proportion of poor 
children who are ready to enter 
school by the age of 6 
(Enrollment in ECED programs 
remained at less than 20% from 
2002 to 2004) 

Pillar Two: Making Service Delivery Responsive to the Poor 
In Bank-assisted areas, improved quality, coverage, and utilization of basic education services, especially for the poorest 40% 

Legacy of overly centralized, unresponsive 
service provision: 
• Failure to account for community needs and 
service quality 
• Weak monitoring, evaluation and information 
dissemination 
• Limited funds used sub-optimally (e.g., pay 
for inputs, not results) 
• Limited private sector role 

Improved access to ECED services 

• Increased number of quality ECED 
service in targeted poor areas from 600 
integrated ECD centers that were 
established across 12 districts with Bank 
support as of 2006 (on track) 
• Increase in level of public financing for 
ECED and basic education (achieved) 

Lending  
• Early Child 
Development Project 
• ECED 
• BERMUTU 
AAA  
• ECE and Development 
sector report 

101  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Better education outcomes 
for the poor 

Improvement in Indonesia’s 
performance in international 
standardized assessment (e.g. 
TIMSS) (no evidence yet) 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Pillar Two: Making Service Delivery Responsive to the Poor 
In Bank-assisted areas, improved quality, coverage, and utilization of basic education services, especially for the poorest 40% 

• Poor targeting and accountability of social 
safety net programs 
• Roles of government levels  not clearly 
defined   (including for environmental and 
natural resource management) 
• Lack of service standards 
• Weak monitoring and feedback at local level 
(including on environmental quality) 
Impact on actual improvement in teachers’ 
quality and rebalance of deployment to be seen 

TF 
Early Childhood 
Education 

• Teacher Law to improve teacher quality 
and deployment approved in 2005 
(done) 
• National Education Standards Board 
established in 2005 to set standards for 
teacher certification (done) 

Improved quality of education 
services 
• Increased number of accredited 
HE programs that are rated A 
(i.e., meeting international 
standards) by an independent 
panel 
• Teachers’ standards developed, 
vetted by Panel of Experts and 
adopted by October 2007 
• 50,000 teachers (out of 2.7 
million) pass certification test by 
2008 

102  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Improved health outcomes 
for the poor 
• Maternal mortality rate 
decreases from 334 per 
100,000 (1995) to 307 per 
100,000 (DHS-2002/3) 
• Under 5 child mortality rate 
decreases from 60 per 
thousand live births to 46 per 
thousand live births (DHS 
2002/3). Rate is at 71 per 
thousand live births among 
poorest 40% 
• % of under 5 children who 
are underweight at 25% in 
2004 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Pillar Two: Making Service Delivery Responsive to the Poor 
In Bank-assisted areas, improved quality, coverage, and utilization of health services, especially for the poorest 40% 

• Increase in utilization rates of 
health services in targeted 
provinces  
• Increased % of institutional 
deliveries assisted by trained 
health workers 
• Increased % of childhood 
immunizations  
• Improved nutritional status, 
especially for children under 5 
• Commence pilot conditional 
cash transfer program 

• The decentralization process in the health 
sector suffers from lack of clarity in roles and 
responsibilities between central and 
decentralized levels  
• New shocks have increased the pressure on 
the Ministry Of Health to deliver quality 
services and rapid responses (avian flu risk, 
earthquakes) 
• The fuel-subsidies provided the sector with 
new resources 
• Policies addressing improved service delivery 
remain weak 
• Effective design and implementation of 
public expenditure and programs that benefit 
the poor needed 
• Local capacity weak 
• Political accountability evolving 
• Persistent funding shortages 
• Poor costing & funding strategies 
• Conflict-induced service disruption 

• Evidence shows that increased financing 
for priority health programs has 
translated into improved services in 
West Java and Banten where increase in 
utilization of services has been observed 
between 2001 and 2005. However, in 
other provinces, the poorer ones, 
evidence has yet to materialize (slower 
than expected) 
• The percentage of births attended by 
trained health workers increased from 
66% to 72% between 2002 and 2004 
(achieved) 
• Immunization with BCG and measles 
vaccine exceeded 80% in 2004 but the 
percentage of children completing DPT, 
polio vaccine and HepB was less than 
50%. Outbreaks of polio were recorded 
in 2005 (achieved) 
• CCT program designed and piloted in 7 
provinces (done) 

Lending  
• Provincial Health I and 
II 
• Health Workforce & 
Services (PHP 3) 
• WSSLIC 2 and 
WSSLIC 
3/PAMSIMAS 
AAA  
• Decentralization; 
• Private Sector 
Environment, 
• PROPER 
• Analytic and Policy 
Basis of HIV Control 
• Statistical Capacity 
Building Support 
• Health Workforce and 
Improving Services 
Delivery 
• WBI Capacity 
Building – Integrated 
Water Resources 
Management 
TF 
• Water & Sanitation for 
Low income 
Communities 
• Water & Sanitation 
Partners 
ADB, JBIC, JICA, 
Netherlands, AusAID, 
USAID, Unesco, Unicef, 
WHO, EU, DFID, 
WASPOLA 

103  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Improved health outcomes 
for the poor 
Increase in proportion of 
population with sustainable 
access to an improved water 
source and proper sanitation 
(urban/rural) (no recent data) 

Development planning is 
responsive to constituents 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Pillar Two: Making Service Delivery Responsive to the Poor 
In Bank-assisted areas, improved quality, coverage, and utilization of health services, especially for the poorest 40% 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

• Scaling-up the successful approach in access 
to water is a priority 
• Improving sanitation remains a challenge 

• Increased % of households with 
access to safe drinking water and 
sanitation in 2,500 villages and 
20 urban areas  
• Increased  % of households 
practicing improved key hygiene 
practices in target areas 

• Functioning water supply systems have 
been established in 1,208 villages 
(covering 3.04 million villagers) 
(achieved) 
• CLTS was introduced in mid-2005 in 12 
communities in 6 districts of Indonesia  
covered by the Bank’s WSLIC and 
ADB’s CWSH projects; within 1.5 
years, the CLTS movement 
spontaneously  expanded to over 120 
communities,  nearly 90 of which have 
reached the status of being free of open 
defecation. Following this excellent 
community response, WSLIC project 
decided to scale up CLTS to all its 34 
districts starting 2007 (ongoing) 
Pillar Three: The Core CAS Objective:  Addressing the Underlying Issue of Governance 
• Lack of political commitment to governance 
• Core group of at least 40 districts 
• 12 districts have fulfilled entry and pre-
reform  
participating in local services 
investment requirements of the LG 
• Poor accountability of political and economic 
platform projects records 
framework. Other 28 are expected to 
elites 
significant improvements in 
start participation in 2008 in order to 
• Local level governments face a legacy of 
governance outcomes 
graduate in 2010 (ongoing) 
overcentralization with little capacity  
• Governance performance of LGs is 
• Weak civil society organization and 
being monitored through GDS (GDS2 
results are currently being analyzed and 
hierarchical relations at the village level  
will be available for dissemination in 
2008; it covers 133 kabupaten, which 
constitute a representative sample at the 
national level; preliminary results show 
a surprisingly high level of satisfaction 
(85%) with LG performance on service 
delivery, but also show a negative 
correlation between cases of corruption 
and satisfaction level) (ongoing) 

Lending 
• WSSLIC 2 and 
WSSLIC 
3/PAMSIMAS 
AAA  
• Statistical Capacity 
Building Support 

Lending 
• ILGRP 
• USDRP 
• SPADA 
AAA  
• GDS2 
• Measurement 
Framework for 
Financial Management 
of Local Governments 
TF 
• ILGRP 
• Decentralization 
Support Facility 

104  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Development planning is 
responsive to constituents 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Pillar Three: The Core CAS Objective:  Addressing the Underlying Issue of Governance 
• Civil society involvement in government 
• By 2010, all villages in 
• 38,000 villages/cities in CDD areas 
policy-making and planning has increased 
Indonesia engage in a 
(50% of total) engage in a participatory 
but is still spotty 
participatory approach to 
process of planning and budgeting (on 
development planning, 
track) 
execution, and oversight 

Lending  
• KDP 
• UPP 
• WISMP 
• ILGRP 
• FEATI 
AAA  
• Poverty Assessment 
• Project M&E systems 
Partners 
DfID, ADB, Netherlands, 
Japan, Partnership for 
Governance Reform 
Lending  
• DPLs 1-4 
• GFMRAP 
IFC 
• IFC Advisory Services 
Initiatives 
AAA  
• Governance and 
Decentralization 
Survey 2 
• Forest Governance 
Initiative 
• Environmental 
Dialogue (AMDAL) 
TF 
• World Bank-
Netherlands Trust 
Fund for 
Decentralization 
Technical Assistance 
and Advisory Services 

Regulated and transparent 
public financial management 

An efficient and streamlined 
civil service 

Automated Treasury Payment system is a new 
outcome expected to be delivered by 2008.  
More than 18,000 commercial bank accounts 
handled government funds, with no standards for 
efficient authorization and management of 
balances 
• Substantial capacity building needed to 
ensure effective dissemination across all 
levels of government  
• Weak political commitment 

• Address root causes of poor public sector 
governance and corruption by instituting civil 
service reforms 
• Bappenas to monitor effectiveness and 
undertake independent operational 
assessment of the new compensation 
programs 

• Automated Treasury Payment 
system enables accurate and 
timely financial reporting and 
reduces incidence and size of  
idle cash balances  
• Consolidate from nearly zero to 
at least 50% of core government 
cash operations into TSA 

• All major government expenditure 
accounts are now zero balanced. 
Revenue accounts are not yet zero 
balanced. Work on the revenue accounts 
is ongoing (ongoing) 
• The procurement of the automated 
treasury system is still ongoing and is 
not expected to be implemented by 2008 
(ongoing) 

• All line ministries prepare 
financial statements using new 
government accounting 
standards  
• Establishment of national 
remuneration commission that 
reviews civil service salaries and 
transparency of pay packages 
• Reduced leakage in expenditure 
flows to end-users as measured 

• A consolidated financial statement for 
the central government was completed 
for 2004 for the first time, and 
completed again in 2005 (done) 
• GOI has launched pilots in Ministry of 
Finance and Education with the intent of 
designing a comprehensive CSR 
program (ongoing) 

105  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Effective implementation of 
decentralization  

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Pillar Three: The Core CAS Objective:  Addressing the Underlying Issue of Governance 
Focus on engaging sector ministries (Health, 
• Greater clarity of functions at 
• Decree PP38 of 2007 defines service 
Education, Environment and Public works) in 
each level of government 
delivery responsibility at each level of 
the preparation of ministerial decrees 
government.  Actual implementation yet 
• Uncertainties in the delineation of autonomy 
to be seen (slower than expected) 
at different levels of government 
• Clarification of roles and responsibilities for 
supervision and regulation 

• 

• Decentralization 
Support Facility 
Institutional 
Development 
Partners 
GTZ, Netherlands, DFID, 
JBIC, ADB, CIDA 

• Remove DAU hold-harmless provisions as 
scheduled in 2008 
• Increase funds for DAK in APBN, especially 
for social sectors  
• Speed up transfer of natural resource revenue 
shares (NRRS) to sub-national governments 

Improved mechanisms for fiscal 
transfer 
• Enhanced fiscal equalization 
performance of general purpose 
transfers (DAU) 
• Implement clear and consistent 
provisions for on-granting and 
on-lending donor finance 

Establishment of a credible 
and impartial justice sector 

• 

Significant improvements 
in corruption perception 
measures and in  

• Formal justice system lacks credibility 
among most Indonesians 
• Political commitment to reforming legal 
institutions is very weak 
• Poor face significant obstacles in reaching the 
formal justice institutions. 
• Given more rapid progress than  

• Positive trend in the number of 
investigations leading to 
prosecution (increase in 
investigations by AGO from 
1,384 in 2005 (and 1,320 in 
2003) to 1,758 in 2006 and in 
prosecutions from 729 in 2005 
(604 in 2003) to 807 in  

106  

• The “second big bang” created 
additional transfers to regions of almost 
50% (DAU by 64%). The poorest parts 
of Indonesia  have been the main 
beneficiaries. Ever since, fiscal 
equalization is not Indonesia’s main 
challenge – spending resources well at 
the local level is (change in priority) 
• The removal of DAU hold-harmless 
provisions is expected to be 
implemented in 2008 but since the 
“second big bang” only plays a minor 
role in  fiscal equalization (change in 
priority) 
• Ministry of Finance Decree on On-
Lending and On-Granting has been 
issued.  The new on-lending framework 
is piloted under USDRP.  But this is still 
to take off. The on-granting framework 
is yet to be launched under ILGRP 
(ongoing) 
• Investigative Units have been 
established in IG and are operational. 
Anti-Corruption Commission and Court 
are operational and have taken on 
several high-profile corruption cases. 
Law expanding legal mandate of BPK 
for auditing public finance  

Lending   
• SPADA 
AAA  
• Justice for the Poor 
• Partnership for 
Governance Reform 
Governance &  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

survey-based measurements of 
popular trust in court system in 
project-assisted areas: 
Corruption perception index 
and governance indicators (TI, 
WBI) point to a slight 
improvement since 2002 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Pillar Three: The Core CAS Objective:  Addressing the Underlying Issue of Governance 
anticipated on establishment of Anti-Corruption 
2006) 
passed (ongoing) 
Commission (KPK) and Anti-Corruption Court, 
• Full compliance with wealth 
• 20 districts (6 in conflict areas) have 
end-CAS outcome as expanded to include cases 
declarations by public officials 
started building networks of paralegal 
investigated by KPK 
as established by law 
and ALD assistance. Impact on access is 
Institutional and legal framework needs further 
• Increased % of poorer 
too early to tell (ongoing) 
strengthening 
households and SMEs using 
• 2 pilots in progress for establishing 
legal, paralegal and alternative 
network of paralegal assistance, 
dispute mechanisms in at least 
alternative dispute resolution 
40 districts  
mechanisms, and legal literacy training; 
• Issue implementing regulations 
expansion of pilots expected in 5 
provinces over next year (ongoing) 
on Witness Protection Law and 
Freedom of Information Act 
Pillar Four: Disaster Risk Management 

• Decentralization 
Survey 2 
• Anti-Corruption 
Studies 
TF 
• Governance 
Partnership 
Partners 
Partnership for 
Governance Reform, 
DFID 

Rebuilding a Better Aceh and Nias 
Restored economic growth 
The main challenge is to address the missing 
(GDP) and sustainable 
middle of district level infrastructure that will 
livelihoods 
connect houses into communities 

Inflation in line with national 
average 

Sustaining the peace process will depend on 
meeting GAM reintegration needs 

Reduced percentage of 
population living in poverty 
(household expenditure) 

• Decreased number of displaced 
people living in tents, barracks 
and with host families   
• Transparency and efficiency of 
reconstruction process 
• Decreased rate of unemployment 
among tsunami-affected 
populations, ex-combatants and 
others 
• Also see Pillar 1 for land survey, 
adjudication and title distribution 
progress under MDF Project on 
Reconstruction of Aceh Land 
Administration System  
• Forest monitoring and protection 
systems strengthened and 
implemented 

• 6,267 displaced people (mainly in Aceh 
Besar and West Aceh) still living in 
tents and barracks and estimated 
maximum 20,000 with host families 
(achieved/ongoing) 
• The process of reconstruction is 
underway: 85,000 new houses were 
completed by September 2007 of which 
4,400 were built by the Bank. 
Additionally, 4,050 houses have been 
rehabilitated (achieved/ongoing) 
• 43 community health clinics and 282 
schools built or repaired by the Bank. 
846 bridges repaired; 2,330 km village 
roads and 199 km of urban roads rebuilt; 
1,211 irrigation and drainage projects in 
rural areas and rehabilitation of 178 km 
drainage in urban areas; 1,148 clean 
water systems and 1,032 sanitation  

Lending  
• CDD projects (KDP, 
UPP) 
• SPADA 
IFC 
• IFC Advisory Services 
Initiatives 
AAA 
• GDS 
• Disaster Risk 
Management 
Framework  
TF 
• MDF for Aceh & Nias 
(housing, land, 
technical assistance, 
waste management, 
infrastructure and  
environment) 
• KDP for Aceh 
USA, Belgium, Ireland) 

107  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Partners 
MDF (ADB, Canada, 
Denmark, EU, Finland, 
Germany, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Norway, 
Sweden, UK, 

• 

units by the Bank; over 11 million 
workdays generated through the above 
Bank-supported infrastructure work as 
of August-2007  (achieved/ongoing) 
• About 10% of individuals aged 15 
years or older were seeking or 
available for work in first half of 2007 
(assessment completed)  
• KDP village survey completed 
covering assessment of infrastructure 
and social conditions (done) 
• Aceh Public Expenditure Analysis and 
Public Financial Management in Aceh 
Report published; Aceh Flood Damage 
Assessment completed (done) 
Separatist group (GAM) reintegration 
needs. Data analysis about the forest 
status completed. The baseline data is: 
Undisturbed forest 1,562,062 ha 
(68%); Disturbed forests (20%); and 
non forests 283, 836 ha (12%) 
• Nurseries established in four villages; 
rehabilitation of 280 ha with tree 
species selected by the communities 
based on livelihood needs; integrated 
village spatial planning completed in 
Pisang in A.Selatan. Livelihood 
projects based on the water sources 
identified. Project feasibility studies 
are being assessed (done) 

• 

Pillar Four: Disaster Risk Management 
• Community based forest and 
ecosystem rehabilitation for 
livelihoods and environmental 
services implemented 

108  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic and Longer-Term 
Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program During the Five Year Period 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expected End-CAS Outcome(s) 

Progress To Date 

Pillar Four: Disaster Risk Management 

Appendix 8: Attachment A 

WBG and Partner 
Contributions 

Responding to Yogyakarta & Central Java Earthquake 
Rebuild  housing 

• Reduced number of households 
without a house rebuilt  

• 2,000 houses have been built through 
Bank support as of September 2006 and 
a total of 6,000 houses rebuilt is the 
target (on track) 

Lending  
• Community Based 
Settlement 
Reconstruction and 
Rehabilitation Project 
(CSRRP) 
TF 
• Java Reconstruction 
Fund (JRF) 

Avian and Human Influenza and other Emergent Crises 
Sustainable income-creating 
Government strategy to respond to HPAI threat 
opportunities for poorer 
not yet clarified 
households 

Improved Institutional Framework for Disaster Risk Management 
Strengthened capacity for 
GOI and donors have been responding to the 
disaster risk management 
devastating disasters, but a coordinated pro-
active risk management framework needed. 

• A participatory system detects 
outbreaks and responds in 12 
districts  
• Communities trained to 
undertake quarterly vaccination 
of poultry in 6 districts 

Technical and capacity building 
support at national and local level 
for assessing post-disaster damage 
and needs 

• Government’s public awareness 
campaign appears to be reaching the 
bulk of country’s population (ongoing) 

TF 
• Avian and Human 
Influenza Facility   

• Mainstreaming disaster preparedness 
and risk management under 
consideration (ongoing) 

109  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 8: Attachment B 

INDONESIA: CAS and CASPR Completion Report: Planned Lending 
Program and Actual Deliveries, FY04-FY08 

FY
CAS Plans
2004 Coral Reef Rehabilitation & Management Program II
Eastern Indonesia Region Transport 2
Land Management & Policy Development
Initiatives for Local Governance Reform
Support for Poor and Disadvantaged Areas
Urban Poverty Project 3
Urban Sector Development & Reform Program
Catchment Protection (LIL)
2005 Government Financial Management & Revenue Adm in
Higher Education Project
Kecamatan Development Project 3B (not in CAS)
Domestic Gas Sector Restructuring
Strategic Roads Infrastructure
Environment & Sanitation
Provincial Health & Nutrition
Sustaining Microfinance
Urban W ater Services Improvement
High Case
First Development Policy Loan
East Java Development Reform Program
Grants
 MDF- Land Titling in Aceh (RALAS) (not in CAS)
2006 Early Childhood Education and Development (not in CAS)
W ater Supply & Sanitation For Low Income Communities 3
Farmer's Empowerment & Technology
Strengthening Capacity for Decentralized Education
Urban Local Government Reform 2
Urban W ater Supply
Initiatives for Local Governance Reform 2
Local Community Support Project (KDP4)
High Case
Second Development Policy Loan
W est Java Environment Management (APL2)
Energy Sector Project
Yogyakarta Regional Development & Poverty Reduction
Grants (not in CAS)
MDF- Aceh Forest & Environment
MDF- Community Based Settlement Reconstruction & Rehabilitation
MDF- Community Reconstruction through KDP
MDF- Community Reconstruction through UPP
MDF- Emergency Rehabilitation of Drainage & Flood System
MDF- Infrastructure Reconstruction Enabling Program (IREP) 
2007 Fisheries Revitalization Project
National Agency for Drug & Food Control
Catchment Protection 2
Community Based Education for Marginal Youth
Provincial Health & Public Health Functions
Umbulan Spring/Greater Surabaya W ater
Urban Community Development
W ater Resources & Irrigation Sector Mgt(APL2)
High Case
Third Development Policy Loan

200
175

80
40
70
100
100
100
50

250
70
200
50

100
40
50
50
30
100
100
70

250

32
32
45
67
22
3

(US$M)
(US$M )
IBRD IDA Grant Actual Deliveries IBRD IDA Grant
46
26
Delivered in FY04
33
23
200
Delivered in FY04
200
29
Delivered in FY04
33
28
Delivered in FY05
15
Delivered in FY05
69
Delivered in FY05
67
Delivered in FY05
45
Dropped
Delivered in FY05
Delivered in FY05
Delivered in FY05
Delivered in FY06
Delivered in FY07
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped

55
50
80
80
208

33
15
35
71

3
5
30
80

60
75
40
20

20
30

113
78

120
65

85
200
40

35

Delivered in FY05
Dropped

300

25

68
138
60

33

400

21
85
65
18
5
42

Delivered in FY05
Delivered in FY06
Delivered in FY06
Delivered in FY07
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Not prepared
Not prepared

Delivered in FY06
Dropped
Not prepared
Not prepared

Delivered in FY06
Delivered in FY06
Delivered in FY06
Delivered in FY06
Delivered in FY06
Delivered in FY06
Dropped
Dropped
Not prepared
Not prepared
Not prepared
Not prepared
Not prepared
Not prepared

Delivered in FY07

530

70

20
30
30
50

50
50

50
10
25
25
10

50
30

110  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 8: Attachment B 

FY
CASPR Plans
2007 KDP3 Second Phase - Additional Financing (not in CASPR)
UPP2 Additional Financing (not in CASPR)
Teacher Management (BERMUTU)
Government Financ ial Management & Revenue Adm inistration 2
Private Infrastructure Finance
Urban W ater Supply & Sanitation
Yogyakarta Earthquake Housing Reconstruction *
Grants
MDF- Infrastructure Reconstruction Financ ing Facility
MDF- KDP Nias
MDF- SPADA Aceh/Nias
MDF- Roads Lamno-Calang
JRF - Transitional Housing Projects
JRF - Permanent Housing & Community Infrastructure Project
2008 Fourth Development Policy Loan
Infrastructure DPL
National Program for Community Empowerment
National UPP (PNPM UPP)
Dam Operational Improvement
National Roads Improvement
Youth Employment Program
Bas ic Education (SISW A)
Electricity Access for Rural
Infrastructure Guarantee Fund
W est Tarum Canal
Agricultural Export Competitiveness
CCT to the Poor/DAK for CDD Operations

(US$M)
IBRD IDA Grant

70
60
60
35

500
100
100
50
80
300
40
120
100
50
80
70
10

70

40

76

100
26
25
12
6
76

300

35
110

100
100
20

40
80
52

20

150

Actual Deliveries
Delivered in FY07
Delivered in FY07
Delivered in FY08
Moved to FY09
Moved to FY09
Moved to FY09
Not prepared

Delivered in FY07
Delivered in FY07
Delivered in FY07
Moved project to UNDP
Delivered in FY07
Delivered in FY07
Delivered in FY08
Delivered in FY08
Delivered in FY08
Delivered in FY08
Moved to FY09
Moved to FY09
Moved to FY09
Moved to FY10
Moved to FY11
Moved to FY11
Moved to FY11
Dropped
Not prepared

(US$M)
IBRD IDA Grant
123
136
62

25
120
60
30

100
26
25

6
60

191
125

600
200
41
53
50
300
100
300
150
300
80

* Instead the Yogyakarta Reconstruction Fund (JRF) - Permanent Housing and Community Infrastructure Project as well as the Transitional 
Hous ing Projects were prepared.

111  

 
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA: CAS Completion Report: Projects Closed During CAS Period (FY04-FY08) 

Appendix 8: Attachment C 

Disbursed 

Cancelled Outcome 

Sustainability 

ICR 
Unlikely 
Unlikely 
Likely 

Likely 
Likely 
Likely 
Likely 

Likely 
Highly Likely 
Likely 
Likely 

Unlikely 
Likely 
Likely 
Highly Likely 
Unlikely 
Likely 
Likely 

Likely 

Likely 
Unlikely 

IEG 
Unlikely 
Unlikely 
Non-
evaluable 
Likely 
Likely 
Likely 
Likely 

Likely 
Likely 
Likely 
Non-
evaluable 
Unlikely 
Likely 
Unlikely 
Likely 
Unlikely 
Likely 
Likely 
Likely 
Non-
evaluable 
Likely 
Unlikely 

Institutional 

Development 
Modest 
Modest 
Modest 

Substantial 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Substantial 

Substantial 
Substantial 
Modest 
Substantial 

Modest 
Modest 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Modest 
Modest 
Substantial 
Modest 
Modest 

Substantial 
Modest 

Unlikely 

Substantial 

Nusa Tenggara Development 
Sulawesi Agricultural Area 
Corporate Restructuring 

Iodine Deficiency Control 
Quality of Undergraduate Education 
Central Indonesia Secondary Education 
East Java & NTT Junior Secondary 
Education 
Sumatra Secondary Education 
Urban Poverty 
Information Infrastructure Development 
Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management 

Fifth Health Project 
Bepeka Audit Modernization 
Bali Urban Infrastructure 
Water Resources Sector Adjustment Loan 
Railway Efficiency 
Safe Motherhood 
West Java Basic Education 
First Development Policy Loan 
Decentralized Agricultural/Forestry 
Extension 
Bengkulu Regional Development 
Sumatra Regional Roads 
Second Development Policy Loan 
Library Development LIL 
Sulawesi Basic Education 
Sumatra Basic Education 
Eastern Indonesia Regional Transport 
West Java Environmental Management 

Closing 

Date 
09/30/2003 
12/31/2003 
12/31/2003 

12/31/2003 
03/31/2004 
06/30/2004 
06/30/2004 

06/30/2004 
06/30/2004 
06/30/2004 
07/31/2004 

07/31/2004 
09/30/2004 
09/30/2004 
11/09/2004 
12/30/2004 
12/31/2004 
12/31/2004 
03/31/2005 
03/31/2005 

12/31/2005 
12/31/2005 
03/31/2006 
04/30/2006 
04/30/2006 
04/30/2006 
06/30/2006 
06/30/2006 

ICR 
U 
U 
S 

IEG 
MU 
MU 
MS 

S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 

U 
U 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 

S 

S 
S 

MS 
S 
S 

MU 

S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
MS 
MS 

U 
U 
MS 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
MU 

S 
MS 

MS 
S 
S 

MS 

US$M 
22.06  
23.10  
6.15  

18.77  
56.61  
93.06  
87.42  

93.58  
80.75  
24.89  
6.70  

32.71  
14.01  
72.13  
150.00  
57.39  
32.27  
99.46  
300.00  
16.59  

12.45  
178.01  
400.00  
4.15  
62.19  
73.86  
198.58  
13.15  

US$M 
4.94  
3.70  
24.50  

9.70  
9.89  
9.69  
3.90  

3.42  
0.00  
8.50  
0.20  

11.99  
1.77  
37.87  
150.00  
47.33  
10.23  
3.76  
0.00  
0.00  

8.05  
50.00  
0.00  
0.00  
0.00  
0.00  
0.00  
0.00  

112  

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Closing 

Disbursed 

Cancelled Outcome 

ICR 
MS 

IEG 
MU 

Appendix 8: Attachment C 

Sustainability 

ICR 

IEG 

Institutional 

Development 

Notes: Outcome ratings: HS - Highly Satisfactory; S - Satisfactory; MS - Moderately Satisfactory; MU - Moderately Unsatisfactory; U - Unsatisfactory 

Early Child Development 
Third Development Policy Loan 
Provincial Health II 
Global Development Learning LIL 
Kecamatan Development II 
Provincial Health I 
Fourth Development Policy Loan 
Infrastructure DPL (IDPL) 

Date 
12/31/2006 
03/31/2007 
06/30/2007 
12/31/2007 
12/31/2007 
12/31/2007 
03/31/2008 
03/31/2008 

US$M 
10.85  
601.29  
75.23  
1.45  
331.59  
31.26  
600.00  
0.00  

US$M 
10.65  
0.00  
32.00  
0.00  
0.00  
3.17  
0.00  
0.00  

113  

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA: CAS and CAS PR Completion Report: Key Nonlending 
Program and Actual Deliveries, FY04-FY08 

Appendix 8: Attachment D 

CAS Plans 

Averting an Infrastructure Crisis 
CGI Brief: Indonesia: New Directions 
DPR: Beyond Macroeconomic Stability 
Education in Indonesia: Managing the Transition to Decentralization 
Forest Policy Strategy 
Justice and the Poor 
Making Indonesia Competitive: Promoting Exports, Managing Trade 
Mining Indonesia's Wealth Responsibly 
PRSP Support 
Investment Climate Flagship 
Policy Briefs for Incoming Government 
Regional Expenditure Review 
Local Government Reforms Flagship 
Making Services Work for the Poor in Indonesia 
Public Expenditure Review 
Aceh RPER 
Poverty Assessment: Making the New Indonesia Work for the Poor 
Corruption and Legal Reforms Flagship 
Additional deliveries not in CAS 
Combating Corruption in Indonesia: Enhancing Accountability for Development 
Corporate Governance Country Assessment 
Health and Decentralization 
Water User Rights Analysis 

CAS PR Plans 

Notes on Aceh Reconstruction 
Papua Public Expenditure Analysis 
Preliminary Loss & Damage Assessment for Aceh 
Rural Electricity Access 
Accounting ROSC 
Aceh & Nias One Year after the Tsunami 
CGI Brief: Investing for Growth and Recovery 
ECED Sector Report 
Information and Communication Technologies for Rural Development 
Local Environmental Governance (AMDAL review) 
Local Government Financial Management 
Non-Bank Financial Institutions Study 
PRSP Support 
Public Private Partnerships in Agriculture 
Rebuilding Better Aceh & Nias-CFAN Report 
Rural Investment Climate Survey 
Yogyakarta and Central Java Preliminary Damage and Loss Assessment 
Conflict and Poverty 
Fuel Savings/Unconditional Cash Transfer 
HIV/AIDS 
Improving Rural Productivity 

114  

Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY05 
Delivered in FY05 
Delivered in FY05 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 
Ongoing 

Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY04 
Delivered in FY05 

Delivered in FY05 
Delivered in FY05 
Delivered in FY05 
Delivered in FY05 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 

 
 
CAS PR Plans 

Infrastructure Summit 
Local Government Platform Flagship 
Migration and Remittances 
Nias Public Expenditure Analysis 
Poverty Assessment 
Public Expenditure Review: Spending for Development 
Social Protection Study 
Teacher Management 
Aceh Poverty and Economic Development 
Conditional Cash Transfer 
Governance and Decentralization Survey 2 
Public Financial Management Measurement Framework 
Social Aspects of Poverty Reduction 
Corruption Monitoring Surveys 
DPR 
Employment Study 
Health Workforce and Improving Service Delivery 
Country Procurement Assessment Report 
Aceh BRR Support and Donor Coordination 
Aceh Program Implementation 
Creating a Diversified Financial System 
Good Environment Governance 
Governance Civil Service Dialogue 
Improving Investment Climate 
Improving Service Delivery 
Investment Climate Flagship 
National Governance Flagship 
Reducing Poverty Flagship 
WBI  Capacity Building Program for the Government 
Poultry Sector Strategy 

Additional deliveries not in CAS PR 
Aceh Stocktaking Report 
Nonbank Financial Institutions Review 
Budget Reform Strategy Priorities 
Horticultural Production and Supermarket Development 

Appendix 8: Attachment D 

Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY08 
Delivered in FY08 
Delivered in FY08 
Delivered in FY08 
Delivered in FY08 
Delivery in FY08 
Delivery in FY08 
Delivery in FY08 
Delivery in FY08 
Delivery in FY09 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Dropped 

Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY06 
Delivered in FY07 
Delivered in FY07 

115  

 
 
 
Appendix 9 

INDONESIA: Civil Society Consultations 
World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy for FY09-12 

In preparing the new World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Indonesia (FY 
2009-2012), a focus group discussion was held in Jakarta on February 13, 2008 to elicit inputs from civil 
society groups across the country. Fifteen groups from four regions –Sumatera, Sulawesi, Java, and Nusa 
Tenggara— participated in the full-day discussions. These diverse groups have been active in advocacy 
and development work, namely in the area of gender mainstreaming, democracy building, anti-
corruption and governance, sustainable natural resources management, community development, legal 
reforms, development research, grassroots capacity building, and micro-credit. 

The focus group discussion was facilitated by a team of civil society interlocutors led by Rustam 
Ibrahim, former director of LP3ES –a respected Jakarta-based development NGO. At the discussion, the 
World Bank team was led by Joachim von Amsberg, Country Director for Indonesia. 

This document summarizes the key recommendations from these civil society groups arising from the 
discussions.  

Key Recommendations for the World Bank Group 

A. General Recommendations 
1. Although the World Bank has a comprehensive Anti-Corruption Action Plan, taking actions against 
individuals or firms committing corruption in its projects, or demanding that the Government return 
the loan amounts; these measures are not sufficient in fighting corruption in Indonesia. The World 
Bank should ensure that the Government of Indonesia follow-up on these corruption cases through 
legal means. The Bank should also prepare a blacklist of ministries and regional governments that 
took part in corruption in Bank-financed projects.  

2. Gender mainstreaming should be an integral part of every Bank-financed project design and 
implemented consistently. Currently, the participation of women in project decision making is 
minimal.  

3. Some Bank-financed projects overlook local traditions, such as customary land rights (hak ulayat). 
The World Bank should not separate local values in the implementation of its programs. In order to 
avoid adverse impact on the environment, ensure sustainability, and increase ownership, the design 
and implementation of Bank-financed projects should factor in local traditions.  

4. Information on Bank-financed projects should be easily accessible to the public at the project site. 
There should be a clear complaint mechanism that would allow public feedback to be followed 
through.  

5. Community rights and human rights should always be considered in the design, planning, and 
implementation of every Bank-financed projects.  

6. The World Bank should help reduce Indonesia’s debt by providing incentives for its forest 
conservation efforts. Indonesia’s forests are the lungs of the world and people in the developed 
world benefit from its conservation. 
7. The Bank should carry-out environmental assessment for every investment project, such as in 
infrastructure and natural resources extraction, as they affect the livelihoods of the people. 

116  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 9 

8. Technical assistance should not be provided as loans, but as grants.  

B. Partnership with the Central Government 
9. With regard to regional autonomy, some government and ministerial decrees are in conflict with the 
spirit of decentralization. The World Bank should help review these decrees and analyze their 
adverse impact on decentralization in Indonesia.  Based on the review, the Bank could lay out the 
issues and provide recommendations to the central government to correct anomalies.  

10. The World Bank should devolve the implementation of financed projects to the district governments. 
In order to improve the efficient use of resources, the central government should merely play a 
policy making and monitoring role, and should not be the executor of Bank-financed projects. 

11. The World Bank should provide technical assistance for civil service reform. 

C. Partnership with Regional Governments 
12. The World Bank should provide technical assistance to mainstream participatory planning at the 
grassroots level. Development projects and programs are often weakly coordinated at the grassroots 
level. An integrated bottom-up approach to participatory planning prepared annually at the 
grassroots level will reflect the real needs of local communities. 

13. The World Bank should help build capacity of district level regional governments for both the 
executive and legislative branches. Officials at the local level need the technical knowledge and 
skills on drafting regulations, realizing the importance of academic review, assessing the impact of 
regulations on communities, and understanding the need for harmonization of regional regulations. 

14. The World Bank should support capacity building of Regional Audit Agencies (Bawasda), 
especially in enhancing their role in monitoring regional finances. 

15. The World Bank should provide technical assistance for regional governments in budget preparation 
to avoid delays in preparing the Regional Development Budgets (APBD). 

16. Successful Bank-financed projects, such as the Kecamatan Development Project (KDP) and the 
Urban Poverty Project (UPP), should be able to be sustained beyond their project life-cycles. The 
Bank should build partnerships with regional governments to continue supporting these initiatives 
through their own financing and ensuring that the original participatory approach is reflected in their 
implementation.  

17. The Bank should urge regional governments to issue Freedom of Information Acts and other 
regulations to promote transparency. 

18. Globally, tourism is a sustainable source of growth that spurs local economies. The Bank should 
assist regional governments in developing and managing their tourism sectors.  

D. World Bank’s Engagement with Civil Society 

19. To help ensure that Bank-financed projects are free from corruption, the Bank should work together 
with civil society groups. Credible groups with clear track records and knowledge of development 
could be empowered to monitor the implementation of projects on the ground. These groups should 
work independently and report their findings to the public. 

117  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 9 

20. In engaging Indonesian civil society groups at the project level, the Bank should take into 
consideration their past track records. The Bank should prepare basic guidelines and standard 
requirements that are based on competency, capacity and accountability. As an entity, a civil society 
group should be a non-profit organization and not a commercial consulting firm. Therefore, civil 
society groups should be treated differently from commercial entities in the procurement process and 
should be exempted from several regulations, such as Presidential Decree No. 80.  

21. The Bank should assist Indonesian civil society groups in improving their accountability and 
transparency. This could be done through technical assistance and capacity building support to 
umbrella organizations and civil society networks in building and developing self-regulation 
mechanisms. This will help encourage the adoption of a code of ethics and accreditation/certification 
mechanism among the civil society groups that will be self-administered by the umbrella network. 
The grant support for this technical assistance could be managed through existing entities supported 
by the World Bank, such as the Decentralization Support Facility (DSF). 

22. Consultations between the Bank and Indonesian civil society groups should be carried out on a 
regular basis, not only in the context of preparing a CPS, but also in the preparation and planning 
stages of every Bank-financed program or project in Indonesia. This could be done through the 
establishment of a regular working group which includes representatives of civil society, the 
Government, and Bank management. The Bank should ensure that regional CSOs, women, and 
marginalized groups are well represented in the working group. 

Participating Civil Society Organizations 

MATARAM, WEST NUSA TENGGARA  
• KONSEPSI-NTB 
• MITRA SAMYA 
• KOSLATA 
• SOMASI 
• YKPR 

PALEMBANG, SOUTH SUMATERA  
• YAYASAN PUSPA INDONESIA ( PUSAT STUDI PEMBERDAYAAN PEREMPUAN DAN 
ANAK SUMSEL) 
• PERSERIKATAN OWA INDONESIA 
• FITRA SUMSEL 
• Women Crisis Centre (WCC)  Palembang 
• WAHANA BUMI HIJAU 

MAKASSAR, SOUTH SULAWESI  
• YAYASAN PELITA DESA 
• YAYASAN MASYARAKAT MAJU  
• 
IPPM (Institut Penelitian dan Pemberdayaan Masyarakat) 
• AiLO SULSEL/ Asosiasi LSM/ORNOP SULSEL 

JAKARTA 
• LP3ES 

118  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 10 

INDONESIA: Addressing the Issue of Fraud and 
Corruption in WBG Supported Programs14 

Now a decade after the fall of the New Order regime, whose collapse exposed the tremendous costs 
of corruption for Indonesia’s stability and development, the salience of this issue has not yet 
diminished.  Indonesia has taken important steps forward in the course of this decade, creating a system 
of electoral accountability, opening up the space for an independent media and vibrant NGO community, 
and building a new institutional framework to prevent, investigate and prosecute corruption. President 
Yudhoyono has placed the fight against corruption at the center of his governing program. High level 
corruption investigations and indeed prosecutions are increasingly common. And the Government is 
beginning to implement important reforms in the key systems for public financial management, public 
procurement, business regulation, auditing, and monitoring and evaluation, which although rarely make 
headlines, often have a far more important and lasting impact on the opportunities and incentives for 
corruption. Though several international corruption indicators have shown some positive movement 
especially over the last few years, the progress has been modest and both public and investor perceptions 
of Indonesia continue to see corruption as endemic. Many claim that decentralization in the absence of a 
strong local accountability framework may even have worsened corruption at that level or, at the very 
least, made it more unpredictable. 

For the WBG in Indonesia, corruption remains a triple threat:  it undermines progress on the 
country’s broad development objectives; it is a serious risk to the effectiveness of WBG assistance; and it 
weakens public trust in development assistance overall.  One of the most important lessons of the WBG’s 
experience in Indonesia is that the success of its entire program will be judged by the contribution that our 
engagements in all sectors are seen to make towards greater transparency and accountability and by the 
standards of integrity with which that program is implemented. This has consistently been one of the main 
messages of the WBG’s CPS consultations with civil society. 

Under the previous CAS, the WBG committed to four key anti-corruption principles across its entire 
program in Indonesia: 

• The WBG must have a clear and consistent voice raising corruption concerns and promoting 
feasible policy responses across all sectors of our operations.  
• The WBG should select projects to open multiple entry points in the fight against corruption.   
• The WBG should build in mechanisms to mitigate corruption risks for all projects through 
empowerment, participation and transparency.   
• Where corruption allegations do arise, the WBG must be vigorous in investigating them and 
providing disclosure of the results in accordance with the WBG’s rules and policies.   

These principles, which were designed at a time when the WBG had limited engagement with the 
Indonesian Government on governance and anti-corruption issues, led to important changes in the 
Indonesia program. . Under the new CPS, there will be an enhanced focus on supporting the 
Government’s own anti-corruption efforts, working in partnership with a range of Indonesian anti-
corruption and fiduciary institutions. As such, in addition to protecting Bank-financed operations, the 
WBG’s anti-corruption efforts over the CPS period will be equally devoted to strengthening national 
institutions and systems that will directly impact a much wider scope of public expenditures.  In line with 
this approach, when corruption allegations do arise in WBG-financed programs, the WBG will make its 
best effort to support the Government’s own investigative and sanctions processes, in addition to 

14 “Fraud and/or corruption” refers collectively to “fraud, corruption, collusion, coercion and obstruction” as defined in the 
Bank's Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants. 

119  

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Appendix 10 

following the WBG’s own investigative and sanctions processes.  Under this CPS, the WBG’s 
engagement on anti-corruption will be guided by the following three principles: 

1)  Partner with Indonesian institutions that are leading the fight against corruption. Since the last 
CAS, the WB has developed strong working relationships with Indonesia’s key anti-corruption 
institutions:  the Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK), the Attorney General’s Office, the Audit 
Board (BPK), the Financial Development and Supervisory Board (BPKP), the Financial Transaction 
Reports and Analysis Center (PPATK), and the Office of the Ombudsman. Through trusts funds, the 
WBG has been able to provide direct technical assistance to strengthening Indonesia’s anti-corruption 
prevention campaign, improving auditing capacity, building capacity to recover stolen assets through the 
Stolen Assets Recovery initiative, and, in the oil, gas, and mining sector, to enhancing transparency 
through support for the adoption of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). The WB will 
continue to provide TA/support to the key government agencies (including KPK, BPK), as well as 
undertake efforts aimed at the strengthening of anti-corruption advocates and research institutes through 
several initiatives, such as:  (1) training and research on measuring the impact of governance and anti-
corruption programs through randomized evaluations in a long-term research partnership between the 
Poverty Action Lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Indonesia’s leading corruption 
researchers; (2) participatory expenditure reviews for regional government budgets led by regional 
universities through the PEACH initiative; and (3) support for Indonesian research on the identification 
and tracking of rents in various resource flows.  

2)  Select priority programs for WBG engagements to support “islands of good governance” in 
select government agencies and regions. The WBG will work within the framework of the cross-cutting 
and core engagements discussed in the CPS to open up multiple anti-corruption entry points at different 
levels of government and across different sectors. The WBG will seek to work and support Indonesian 
partners who demonstrate a clear commitment to undertaking institutional reforms to address the 
incentives and opportunity for corruption in publicly financed programs. These multiple entry points raise 
the likelihood of achieving demonstrable impact in specific areas that can be replicated to build success 
stories and counter impressions that “nothing can be done” in an environment of endemic corruption.  

3)  Build into the design of WBG-assisted government programs support for the strengthening of 
Indonesia’s own systems to mitigate corruption risks and handle corruption allegations. Since 2003, 
all WBG-assisted government programs have included Governance and Anti-corruption Actions Plans 
(GAAPs) as part of the implementation arrangements. Prepared together with the relevant government 
clients, these GAAPs are intended to assess the risks of corruption inherent in such projects and introduce 
design and supervision mechanisms executed by the Government to mitigate such risks. Over the past five 
years, these GAAPs have incorporated measures such as enhanced disclosure mechanisms for project 
documents and results, public complaints handling mechanisms to receive, investigate and resolve 
corruption-related complaints, external oversight measures for key stages of program implementation, and 
clearly defined sanctions and remedies so that small-scale corruption cases can be resolved within the 
framework of the program. Experience to date has demonstrated that the effectiveness of these GAAPs 
depends significantly on the degree to which the proposed mechanisms are integrated into the relevant 
Government agency’s own systems and procedures.  To ensure this integration, the WBG and Bappenas 
will carry out regular portfolio reviews of the implementation of all GAAPs with the participating 
Government agencies. In addition, GAAPs will continue to be disclosed publicly to allow for civil society 
oversight of anti-corruption mechanisms. 

Follow-up of corruption allegations in WBG supported projects:  

Both the GoI and the WB may receive allegations of fraud and corruption related to WB-supported 
programs and projects. When the WB receives such allegations, it will, subject to its relevant policies and 

120  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 10 

procedures applicable to corruption allegations and its disclosure policies and procedures, disclose these 
allegations to the GoI in a timely manner. It will also, where it considers it to be warranted, investigate the 
allegations for the purposes of possible WB administrative sanctions. 

If the GoI receives such allegations, the MoF has agreed to promptly inform the Bank about such 
allegations.  The MoF will direct WBG-provided complaints to the relevant GoI investigative and/or audit 
agency for follow-up. 

The GoI and the WB have agreed that for the foreseeable future the Director General of Debt 
Management and External Financing, Ministry of Finance will be designated as the GoI focal point for 
these exchanges of information. The focal point may change by mutual consent of GoI and WBG if 
deemed necessary in the future. 

The WBG will make its best efforts to provide, when requested, technical assistance to GoI agencies 
reviewing corruption allegations in WBG-financed programs, with a view to strengthening the technical 
capacity of relevant Indonesian agencies to investigate corruption allegations.  Such agencies may include 
the KPK, BPKP, BPK and the relevant Inspectors General of partner agencies.   

Regular meetings will be held with MoF to review the progress and follow-up actions of corruption 
investigations and discuss proposed remedies and sanctions; as well as discuss and agree on possible 
measures for prevention of recurrence in the future.  In the event that the WBG proposes to exercise legal 
remedies and/or apply administrative sanctions, it will, unless Bank management determines that 
exceptional considerations arise, explain to MoF the basis for its proposed action and provide MoF with 
the maximum possible advance notice before taking the action in question. 

To integrate these principles across the entire range of our partnerships, the Indonesia Country 
Team will continue to invest substantial resources into mainstreaming anti-corruption measures 
and initiatives. The Indonesia Country Office includes a Governance Adviser in the Country 
Management Team to coordinate its anti-corruption relationships and policy dialogue, oversee 
governance-related operations, advise projects on governance and anti-corruption strategies, and develop 
a comprehensive research agenda and monitoring framework on governance. A strong field-based 
Operations Support team has been put in place to lead the movement towards a systematic and effective 
supervision of fiduciary practices during project implementation.  An in-house Governance and Anti-
Corruption Committee will continue to meet regularly with representation across the sectors to serve as a 
focal point for integrating anti-corruption mechanisms into project design, support and review GAAPs, 
monitor implementation of GAAPs and liaise with our GoI partners.  A Senior Anti-Corruption Adviser 
will also be added to the staff to work closely with GoI agencies on all aspects of developing and 
implementing GAAPs and supporting relevant agencies in the investigation of corruption allegations in 
WBG-financed programs.  

121  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 11 

INDONESIA: Management of Trust Fund Operations 

The ability to mobilize trust fund resources has enabled the World Bank and other 
development partners to respond to priority needs of the Government of Indonesia in a timely 
manner and to explore and address emerging issues. The dramatic growth of the Indonesia trust 
fund portfolio reflects the Bank’s commitment to build broader and deeper partnerships with the 
larger development community. The grant financing provided under these trust funds are helping 
Indonesia to address emerging challenges of transforming and strengthening its institutions.  The 
outcomes of these partnerships include: pooling of financial resources for joint strategies and 
actions – whether it is to provide assistance at the sub-national level or to support vital policy and 
institutional reforms; greater responsiveness to unanticipated needs as in post-disaster recovery 
efforts; and high-quality research and policy dialogue. 

The Indonesia trust fund program has also helped to leverage the Bank’s own knowledge and 
resources in providing support for special strategic thrusts of the Government’s agenda.  There 
are numerous examples where trust funds serve as generators of knowledge, contributing to new 
development initiatives and allowing the testing of pilot projects that are being replicated on a 
larger scale. Availability of trust funds has allowed a marked increase in the Bank’s analytical 
and advisory activities, and more comprehensive supervision than limited Bank budgets would 
normally allow.  In addition to the post-disaster support work, among others, joint analytical work 
is helping to influence areas including policy reforms in education, service delivery, governance, 
decentralization, poverty programs, public expenditure and public financial management, and 
investment climate. Significant IBRD or IDA financing has also been complemented with 
cofinancing from donor partners for certain flagship programs such as the KDP. 

I. 

Indonesia Trust Fund Portfolio 

The Bank’s Indonesia trust fund portfolio has expanded dramatically; at the same time, the 
variety of trust fund arrangements has vastly increased the complexity of managing the 
program. At one end of the spectrum are large, multi-donor trust funds (MDF) or jumbo trust 
funds established to implement reconstruction programs and capacity building activities.  
Examples include: MDF for Aceh and Nias, Java Reconstruction Fund, Decentralization Support 
Facility, Basic Education Capacity Building Program, and the EC/Dutch Trust Fund for Public 
Financial Management and Revenue Administration Reform Program. At the other end are small, 
ad hoc trust funds to support specific activities (although these are reducing in number). 
Examples are: Support for supervision of the KDP in Aceh and North Sumatra; JSDF: Improving 
Rural Connectivity for Sustainable Livelihoods; PHRD grants for project preparation; IDF grants 
for specific 
institutional development activities; and, TFESSD Campaign 
to Improve 
Participation of Women in CDD Programs.  Total portfolio amount of current active trust funds in 
the Indonesia portfolio is about US$1.3 billion with 179 active grants. The biggest component of 
the portfolio is the MDF for Aceh and Nias, with total amount of about US$492 million (pledges 
about US$700 million). In terms of volume, Recipient Executed Trust Funds (RETFs) are about 
90 percent of the portfolio. Annual new contributions and disbursements over the last three years 
have been US$150 million and US$160 million respectively. 

122 

 
Appendix 11 

Need for a Shift in Strategic Approach 

As the supply of grant money continues to increase, the “opportunistic” approach to mobilizing 
trust funds to support “donor” projects needs re-thinking. Certain quarters in the Government 
hold the view that some trust funds are imposing CGI-like mechanisms, without really 
contributing to convergence of ideas on critical development issues or supporting the 
harmonization agenda. There is an increasing concern that “donor projects” are undermining the 
Government’s own interventions, especially if the activities are executed by the donors and the 
funding is not incorporated in the government budgets. With the thrust of the CPS on building 
national institutions and leveraging good practices on policies in an emerging MIC, there are 
opportunities to move from “donor projects” to government-led programs, with the Bank playing 
the role of a facilitator, convener, and fiduciary manager.  

Main Issues to be Addressed 

The diversity of objectives, combined with a largely decentralized process of mobilizing trust 
funds, pose unique challenges in ensuring strategic direction and selectivity. As the number of 
trust fund programs has grown, questions are being raised whether enough selectivity is being 
exercised across new initiatives, and whether the costs of managing them are well understood and 
taken into account at the time commitments are made.   

The trust fund program has grown to the point where existing systems and processes have found 
it difficult to keep pace with the increasing demands of the Government, donors, and Bank staff.  
A new management framework is thus being proposed as part of the CPS to ensure effectiveness 
of the program and make it sustainable.  This would require changing the way in which the Bank 
works with the Government and the commitment the Bank makes to donors, exercising more 
selectivity in acceptance of trust funds on the basis of alignment with the CPS, cost-effectiveness 
criteria, streamlined governance structures, and assessment of risks and expected outcomes and 
impact.   

A Proposed New Management Framework 

The main driver for the proposed approach would be to move away from an opportunistic, donor 
project approach to an engagement of development partners to support existing government 
programs included in the government’s budget. Such an approach would aim to link priorities of 
Bappenas, MOF and line ministries around the CPS challenges of enhancing competitiveness, 
inclusion, and sustainability in Indonesia. The new framework would focus on aligning the 
incentives of the Government, donor partners, and the Bank to help achieve results on the ground. 
The main elements of the proposed approach are:   
Pillar 1: Promoting a more strategic approach which focuses on: (i) selectivity of program 
activities; (ii) government leadership; (iii) creating linkages with priorities of Development 
Partners; and (iv) leveraging government programs. 

(i) Selectivity of Program Activities 

Trust funded activities will be aligned with and support key priorities of the CPS. These activities 
will be on the “front burner” of the program going forward: 

123 

 
Appendix 11 

Co-financing of core government programs such as PNPM and SISWA. In addition, 
opportunities will be explored in other sectors including roads, natural resource management and 
sustainable energy. 

Partnerships for strengthening public sector systems. Build upon ongoing justice for the poor, 
anti-corruption work and PFM reforms. 

Local government partnerships. 
 Areas of interest could be continued support for 
decentralization and local governance through the DSF. 

Global partnerships. Support the environmental, deforestation, natural resource management 
and governance nexus (where there are opportunities of supplements and buy-downs for 
mitigation) and help with adaptation planning and incorporating the climate change agenda using 
resources such as the new Climate Investment Funds and Carbon Funds. 
At the same time, the Bank and donors would like to leave the door open for new unspecified 
issues – an open menu which allows for expansion in areas where there are reform champions on 
the government side. It would also allow for responding to unforeseen needs, such as natural 
disasters and other emergency situations.  

(ii) Government Leadership 

The Bank is working with the Government to ensure full ownership of trust funded programs. 
In that context, the Bank intends to build upon successful trust fund models which have fully 
engaged the Government in their management structure. Two successful models are: (a) MDF for 
Aceh and Nias, in which BRR is responsible for soliciting proposals aligned with the Aceh 
reconstruction plan and then putting them to a Government-donor led Steering Committee; and 
(b) Basic Education Capacity Building Program which has helped to fund extensive analytical 
support for policy formulation to support the Government’s Medium-Term Education Sector 
Policy, or RENSTRA.  The Bank and the Government engage in a thematic dialogue based on the 
analytical work carried out under the trust fund.  

Other measures to promote government leadership could include: (i) establishment of a focal 
point in MOF or Bappenas; (ii) improved reporting for the Government on trust fund portfolio 
performance; and (iii) transferring to the Government consultant capacity developed at the Bank 
from trust fund financing. 
(iii) Linkages with Development Partners 

Development partners have also expressed interest in adopting more programmatic approaches to 
trust fund mobilization and management, possibly centered around cross-sectoral themes focused 
on joint objectives.  The Bank intends to take steps to decrease the number of ad hoc trust funds 
and approach the donors increasingly to sponsor thematic programmatic trust funds in line with 
the Government’s strategic directions.  Developmental needs and priorities would be identified as 
part of the sectoral dialogue between line ministries and donors. Funding requests for the 
resulting programs would be prioritized and a menu provided to donors after consultations with 
Bappenas. Modalities for the ensuing trust fund programs would be more standardized, with 
upfront agreements on levels of services with donors. The ideal model would incorporate agreed 
thematic objectives, and broad criteria for allocation of funds, with the Bank authorized to 
allocate within an annual planning framework. The Bank would also consider organizing an 
annual “Forum” together with the Government to present funding needs of priority programs.  

124 

 
Appendix 11 

(iv) Leveraging Government Programs 

The mainstreaming of trust funds into the government programming processes is essential and 
remains a major agenda item for the CPS.  The Government has already initiated a process to 
include RETFs and BETFs for recipient work in its budgeting process, although a specialized 
process may be needed to incorporate small trust funds which are approved during the 
government fiscal year. 
Pillar 2: Strengthening risk management and controls: While the acceptance of trust funds 
has strengthened partnerships and brought major benefits to the Government and the Bank, there 
are also a diverse set of risks that accompany the acceptance of financing from outside sources.  
As the Indonesia trust fund program has grown, it has become more important that these risks be 
understood and managed more explicitly. The key risks identified for the trust fund program are: 

Strategy and Policy – standardization, fee allocation, execution, and financing of staff costs; 

Processes and Systems – user-friendly templates, portfolio management, donor reporting, and 
systems enhancements;  

Administrative and Managerial – including issues of office space, accounting oversight, 
management of the portfolio; and, 

Operational – transparency and the clarification of accountability to enhance confidence in the 
Bank’s stewardship of trust fund resources; and development of new tools to help teams 
negotiating trust fund arrangements. 
Pillar 3: Improving operational effectiveness and processes: Recent policy changes for trust 
funds approved by the Board have created an enabling environment to make adjustments to the 
management framework for Indonesia trust fund programs.  The challenge for the Indonesia 
CMU is to develop systems which would help to increase efficiency and decrease complexity. To 
the extent possible, the CMU will implement a more mainstreamed approach, building on 
existing operational processes and encourage more coordinated, disciplined trust fund 
mobilization.  

Going forward, the increasing mainstreaming of trust funds into the regular business 
planning, resource management, and quality oversight processes will continue to be an 
important operating principle. Some of the key actions being proposed are: 

(i) 

Creating a Service Center for Trust Fund Management Support in the Jakarta Office. 
The Service Center will have responsibility for: 
• Quality assurance, M&E at the portfolio level, overall donor coordination, 
oversight, standardization of key provisions in agreements with donors, 
dissemination of good practice (e.g., in terms of negotiating trust fund support); 
• Results-based portfolio reviews, including follow-up on risky trust funds and 
support to complex trust funded operations; and, 
Improved coordination with HR, legal and other support units. 

• 

(ii) 

Encouraging teams to focus on substantive aspects of work and ensure staff are not 
“penalized” for raising TFs. 

125 

 
 
 
Appendix 11 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v)  

Improving managerial oversight of consultants in general and creating an internal 
research/support unit where skills can be tapped with the aim to move consultants in 
the medium term from BETFs to RETFs. 
Changing the cost effectiveness equation. Recover actual costs for complex trust fund 
programs building on the new cost recovery policy for the Bank.  
Recognizing good achievements in TF management and donor coordination in 
promotion decisions for staff and managers. 

It is expected that the improved systems and processes will better serve the goals of selectivity 
and achievement of results, as management works to ensure that there are no unfunded 
mandates. The approach could also mean turning away some trust funds that are not aligned to 
the priorities of the Government and to the new CPS. 

To support the implementation of the new framework, the CMU will develop a Trust Fund 
Management Plan (aligned with the Regional Trust Fund Management Plan as required in the 
new TF Framework approved by the Board) in line with specific business needs identified 
above. The Plan will be developed in a flexible manner to cater to the needs of the Government, 
development partners, and Bank staff. 

126 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 11: Attachment A 

INDONESIA: Trust Funds Portfolio (US$M) 

Engagement area
Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Mitigation

Major Donors

Multi-Donor Fund for Aceh and Nias (RETF)
Aceh Response - JSDF (RETF)
Java Reconstruction Fund (RETF)
Avian Influenza  (RETF)
Ozone Depletion Phase-Out (RETF)
Global Environmental Facility (RETF)
Central Government Institutions and Systems
Public Financial Management (RETF)
Public Financial Management (BETF)
Institutional Development (BETF)
Governance (BETF)
Sub-national Government Institutions and Systems
Decentralization Support Facility (BETF)
Private Sector Development
Smallholder Agribusiness (RETF)
Investment Climate and Trade (BETF)
Infrastructure
Water Supply and Sanitation (RETF)
Urban Development (RETF)
Water Resources Management (RETF)
Water & Sanitation (BETF)
Community Development and Social Protection
Poverty Reduction/CDD (RETF)

PNPM (RETF)
SPADA (RETF)
Education
Education - Cofinancing (RETF)
Basic Education Capacity (RETF)
Basic Education Capacity (BETF)

Notes :

EC, Netherlands, DFID, Canada,
697
WBG, Sweden
8
Japan
84
EC, Netherlands, DFID, Canada
15
EC, Japan
37 Multiple donors
9 Multiple donors

8
Japan
3
Netherlands
25 Netherlands
6
Netherlands

20 DFID, AusAID

5
7

AusAID
Netherlands

10 AusAID, Netherlands
5
Japan
15 Netherlands
3
Netherlands

107 Netherlands, DFID, EC
Denmark, Netherlands, DFID,
Canada, Australia
DFID

61
5

92 Netherlands
28 Netherlands, EC
13 Netherlands, EC

Figures above represent cumulative commitments and disbursements typically span multiple years (on average five years).
RETFs are Recipient Executed Trust Funds executed normally by government implementing agencies. BETFs are Bane 
Executed Trust Funds implemented by the Bank.
More than 90 percent of the trust funds are recipient executed (shown as shaded). For example, almost all trust funds for 
Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Mitigation are implemented by government entities.

127 

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 11: Attachment B 

INDONESIA: Key Active Trust Funds 

Multi-Donor Fund for Aceh and Nias (MDF): Multiple Donors (US$697 million): The MDF supports 
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Aceh and Nias in the wake of the earthquake and tsunami of 
December 2004, and the earthquake of March 2005.  The MDF serves as a common platform for 
mobilizing donor resources and providing financial assistance to support the Government’s recovery 
program using a coordinated framework to channel assistance in the areas of reconstruction, rehabilitation 
of infrastructure and transport, land titling, capacity building and governance, and sustainable 
management of the environment.   

Java Reconstruction Fund (JRF): Multiple Donors (US$84 million): The focus of the JRF is on 
addressing the reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts following the Jogyakarta-Central Java earthquake 
of May 2006.  The JRF has been funding the reconstruction of improved housing, damaged infrastructure, 
and livelihood conditions for those affected by the disasters.   

Decentralization Support Facility (DSF) I and II: Multiple Donors (UK, Australia) (US$20 million): 
The DSF I and II TFs support the formation and functioning of regional and local governments while at 
the same time promoting a harmonized donor approach to supporting Indonesia’s sub-national 
governance reform program. They support the partnership among government, the World Bank, and like 
minded donors who are involved in decentralization.  Funds are used for analytical and advisory activities 
to bring together donor policies and practices relevant for decentralization.   

Institutional Development and Capacity Building TF: Netherlands (US$25 million): The TF, 
supplemented by others, supports governance reforms, improvement of the investment climate, legal and 
justice sector reforms, civil service reforms, Eastern Indonesia development, and public expenditures. 

Better Education through Reformed Management and Universal Teacher Upgrading Project 
(BERMUTU): Netherlands (US$52 million): The TF co-finances the BERMUTU Project supported by 
the Bank.  The development objective of this grant is to contribute to the improvement of the overall 
quality and performance of teachers through enhancing teachers' knowledge of subject matter and 
pedagogical skills in the classroom.  The TF will contribute to improving teacher competency and 
performance to promote student learning and thus contribute to the development of quality human 
resources, ultimately leading to a growth in productivity and the improvement of Indonesia’s 
competitiveness in the global economy. 

Basic Education Capacity Program (BEC): Multiple Donors (US$40.5 million equivalent):  The BEC 
TF contributes to the Government’s achievement of MDG and EFA goals through good governance in 
education.  The purpose of the program is to support improvements in the delivery of decentralized basic 
education services by local governments and schools in selected program areas, and by extension, in other 
locations. 

128 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex A2 

129 

INDONESIA: At-a-Glance

1 0/2 4/0 7

East
Asia &
P acif ic

L owe r
m id dle
income

K ey Deve lopment Ind icators

I ndo nesia

(2 00 6)

Po pulation, m id -yea r (m i ll io ns)
Sur face are a (th ousand sq. km )
Po pulation g rowth (%)
Urban p op ulatio n (% o f to tal p op ulatio n)

22 4
1 ,86 0
1 .3
48

1,9 00
1 6,3 00
0 .8
42

2 ,27 6
28 ,54 9
0 .9
4 7

GNI (A tlas meth od, US$ billions)
GNI pe r cap i ta (Atlas metho d, US$)
GNI pe r cap i ta (PP P, internatio nal $)

31 6
1 ,41 0
3 ,95 0

3,5 39
1,8 63
6,8 21

4 ,63 5
2 ,03 7
7 ,02 0

GDP g rowth (%)
GDP p er capi ta growth (%)

5 .5
4 .0

9 .4
8 .6

8 .8
7 .9

(m ost rec ent es tim ate, 2 00 0– 20 06)

Po ve rty he adco unt ratio at $1 a day (P PP, %)
Po ve rty he adco unt ratio at $2 a day (P PP, %)
L if e e xp ectancy at b ir th (ye ars)
In fant mor tali ty (p er 1,0 00 live birth s)
Child malnutri tion (% of children un der 5)

8 .5
5 0
6 7
3 0
2 9

9
37
71
26
15

..
..
7 1
3 1
1 3

Ad ult li teracy, male (% of age s 15 and o ld er )
Ad ult li teracy, female (% of age s 15 and o ld er )
Gross p rimary e nro llment, male (% o f ag e g ro up)
Gross p rimary e nro llment, f emale (% o f ag e g ro up)

9 4
8 7
11 8
11 6

95
87
1 15
1 13

9 3
8 5
11 7
11 4

Acce ss to an improved wate r so urce (% o f p op ulatio n)
Acce ss to improved sani tatio n fac il itie s (% of po pulation)

7 9
6 0

79
51

8 1
5 5

Net Aid Flows

1 98 0

1 99 0

20 00

2 00 6

(US$ m il l ion s)
Ne t ODA and of ficial aid
Top 3 d on ors (in 20 06 ):
   Jap an
   Aus tral ia
   Ne ther lands

94 1

1 ,71 6

1,6 54

2 ,52 4

35 0
4 8
8 5

86 8
7 7
19 0

9 70
72
1 44

1 ,22 3
18 5
17 6

Aid (% of GNI )
Aid p er capita (US$ )

1 .3
6

1 .6
1 0

1 .1
8

0 .9
1 1

Long-T erm E conom ic Trends

Consumer pr ice s (a nnual % ch ange )
GDP imp licit de flator (annu al % chang e)

9 .5
31 .0

7 .5
7 .7

3 .7
20 .4

13 .1
13 .6

Exchang e rate (annual ave rag e, lo cal p er US$ )
Terms o f trade inde x (20 00 = 1 00 )

6 27 .0
..

1,8 42 .8
6 3

8 ,421 .8
1 00

9,1 59 .3
7 6

1 98 0– 90
1 99 0– 20 00
20 00 –0 6
      (ave ra ge ann ua l growth %)
1.8
1.5
6.1
4.2

Po pulation, m id -yea r (m i ll io ns)
GDP (US$ mi ll ions)

1 48 .3
78 ,01 3

1 78 .2
206 .3
1 14 ,42 6
16 5,0 21
  (% of GDP)
19 .4
39 .1
20 .7
41 .5

2 23 .9
3 64 ,45 9

1. 4
4. 9

Ag ricul ture
In dustry
   Manuf actur ing
Se rvices

24 .0
41 .7
13 .0
34 .3

15 .6
45 .9
27 .7
38 .5

12 .9
47 .0
28 .0
40 .1

3.6
7.3
1 2.8
6.5

2.0
5.2
6.7
4.0

3. 1
4. 0
5. 1
6. 5

Ho useho ld f inal con sump tio n expe ndi ture
Ge neral g ov' t final c onsumption e xpen diture
Gross cap ita l f ormation 

51 .4
10 .5
24 .1

58 .9
8 .8
30 .7

60 .7
6 .5
22 .2

62 .0
8 .6
24 .6

5.2
4.6
7.7

6.6
0.1
-0.6

4. 5
8. 3
5. 4

Expo rts o f g oo ds an d se rvice s
Impo rts o f g oo ds an d se rvice s

34 .2
20 .2

25 .3
23 .7

41 .0
30 .5

30 .9
26 .1

2.7
1.2

5.9
5.7

7. 7
9. 0

No te: Figures in italics are f or ye ars o ther than tho se sp eci fie d.  2 00 6 d ata are prel im inary.  .. indicates d ata are no t ava ilable.
a. Aid data are f or 20 05 .

Developme nt Eco nom ics, De velopme nt Data Gro up (DE CDG).

15

10

5

0

5

1 0

15

70- 74
60- 64
50- 54
40- 44
30- 34
20- 24
10- 14
0 -4

perc ent

Age dis tr ibut ion, 20 06

Male

Female

0

25

50

75

100

1 990

199 5

20 00

2005

Indones ia

East Asi a & Pac i fic

Under -5 mor ta lity rate (per 1 ,00 0)

-20

-10

0

10

20

9 0

95

00

0 5

GDP

GDP per capita

Gr owth of GDP a nd GDP per c apita (%)

 
 
 
 
Annex A2 

130 

In don esia

Bala nce of Payme nts and T ra de

20 00

20 06

(US$ m i ll ion s)
Total merchandise e xpo rts ( fob )
Total merchandise impo rts ( fob )
Ne t trad e in g oo ds and service s

6 2,1 24
3 3,5 15
2 9,8 62

10 3,5 14
7 3,8 68
1 9,5 39

Current acco unt b alanc e
   as a % o f GDP

2 3,9 82
1 4.5

9,9 37
2.7

Workers' remi ttances and

   comp ensation of emp loyee s (rece ip ts)

2,3 80

5,72 2

Rese rves, including go ld

2 9,2 68

4 3,0 83

Centra l Governme nt Fina nce

(% o f GDP)
Current revenue (including gran ts)
   Tax re ve nue
Current e xp end i ture

1 9.7
1 1.1
1 5.6

1 9.1
1 2.3
1 1.5

Technology a nd Infrastructure

20 00

20 05

Overall surplus/de fici t

-1.8

-0.9

Paved ro ads (% of total)
Fixe d l ine and mo bile pho ne
   sub scribe rs (pe r 1 ,00 0 p eo ple)
High te chno lo gy exp orts
  (% o f manuf acture d e xp or ts)

5 7.1

5 5.3

Highe st marg inal tax rate (%)
   I ndividu al
   Corpo rate

35
30

35
30

5

2 3

1 6.2

1 6.3

Externa l Debt and Resource Flows

Environment

(US$ m i ll ion s)
Total d eb t outstand ing and disbursed
Total d eb t service
Deb t re lief (HIPC, MDRI)

14 1,6 93
1 6,6 22
–

12 5,8 46
3 0,6 75
–

Ag ricultural la nd (% o f land are a)
Forest area (% of lan d area)
Nation ally pro tect ed area s (% o f land area)

25
5 4.0
..

26
7.3
4 .2

Total d eb t (% of GDP)
Total d eb t service (% of expo rts)

8 5.9
1 1.2

3 4.5
2 4.9

Fre shwate r reso urce s pe r cap it a (cu. mete rs)
Fre shwate r w ithd rawal (% of inte rnal re sour ces )

..
2.9

1 2,8 67
. .

Foreign d ire ct inves tme nt (ne t inf lows)
Po rtf ol io eq ui ty (net inflows)

-7,8 96
-1,9 11

2,8 77
-3 40

CO2 emissions p er capi ta (m t)

1.3

1.4

GDP p er unit o f e nergy use
   (200 0 P PP $ pe r kg o f o il e quivale nt)

4.1

4.1

Ene rg y us e p er c api ta (kg o f o il e quivale nt)

7 07

8 00

 World Ba nk G roup portf olio

20 00

20 06

 (US$ m i ll ion s)

 IB RD
   Tota l d eb t outstand ing and disbursed
   D isb urs eme nts
   Pr inc ip al rep aymen ts
   I nterest p ayments

1 1,7 15
1,0 51
7 61
9 50

7,4 23
6 96
1,4 03
4 25

 IDA
   Tota l d eb t outstand ing and disbursed
   D isb urs eme nts
   Tota l d eb t service

7 14
59
31

1,3 18
3 16
37

Private Se ctor Development

20 00

20 06

Time req uire d to start a b usiness (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI pe r cap ita )
Time req uire d to reg ister prope rty (days)

..
..
..

97
8 6.7
42

 IFC (f iscal ye ar )
   Tota l d isb urse d an d ou tstanding p or tfo lio
      o f which I FC own acco unt
   D isb urs eme nts f or IFC own a ccount
   Po rtf ol io sales, p re payme nts and
      rep ayments f or IFC own accoun t

8 80
4 80
20

4 62
3 25
46

Ranked a s a major con straint to b usiness
   (% of manag ers surveyed who agree d)
      E conomic and reg ulatory p ol ic y unce rtainty
      Cor rup tio n

43

46

..
..

48 .2
41 .5

 MI GA
   Gross e xp osure
   New g uarante es

56
0

50
0

Sto ck marke t capi tal ization (% of GDP )
Bank cap ital to asset ratio (%)

1 6.3
6.0

3 8.1
10 .5

No te: Figures in i talics are f or ye ars o ther than tho se sp eci fie d.  2 00 6 d ata are prelim inary.
.. indicate s data are no t availab le .  – indicate s ob ser vatio n is no t ap plicab le .

10 /24 /07

Developme nt Eco nom ics, De velopme nt Data Gro up (DE CDG).

0

25

5 0

7 5

10 0

Contr ol of corr uption

Rule of law

Regulator y qual ity

Poli ti c al stabil ity

Voi ce and acc ountabil ity

Countr y's per centi le rank (0-100)

hi gher va lues imply bet te r ra tin gs

2006
2000

Gove rnanc e indic ator s, 2 00 0 a nd 2 00 6

Source : Kaufman n-Kraa y-Mast ruz zi, Wo rld Bank

Short-ter m, 0

IBRD, 7,423

Other multi - 
lateral, 14,851

IMF, 0

IDA, 1,318

P ri vate, 63,567

B ilateral, 
38,687

Compos ition of tota l ex te rnal de bt, 2 00 6

US$ mi llions

 
 
INDONESIA : Country at a glance 

Annex A2 

Millennium Development Goals 

Indonesia

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and  2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years) 

Goal 1: halve the rates for $1 a day poverty and malnutrition
   Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, % of population) 
   Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population) 
   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%) 
   Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5) 

   Primary school enrollment (net, %) 
Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
   Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group) 
   Secondary school enrollment (gross, %) 
   Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24) 

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
   Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%) 
   Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment) 
   Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%) 
Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds 
   Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000) 
   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 
   Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths 
   Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births) 
   Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total) 

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
   Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49) 
   Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49) 
   Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people) 
   Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%) 

   Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
   Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population) 
   Forest area (% of total land area) 
   Nationally protected areas (% of total land area) 
   CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita) 
   GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development 
   Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people) 
   Internet users (per 1,000 people) 
   Personal computers (per 1,000 people) 
   Youth unemployment (% of total labor force ages 15-24) 

Indonesia

1995
13.9
15.7
..
34.0

..
96
..
..

..
29
13

66
48
63

..
37

..
55
..
1

..
..
..
..
1.2
4.6

18
0
5
13.4

2000 
7.2
27.1
8.4 
24.6

94 
97 
55 
.. 

96 
32 

8 

48 
36 
72 

230
64 

.. 
57 
.. 
20 

.. 
.. 
54.0
.. 
1.3
4.1

9 

50 
10 
.. 

2005
..
17.8
..
29.0

94
101
63
..

99
31
11

38
30
72

..
72

0.1
57
245
53

77
55
48.8
20.6
1.4
4.1

184
73
14
..

1990
..
..
..
..

97
94
46
..

93
29
12

91
60
58

..
32

..
50
343
..

72
46
64.3
..
0.8
4.1

6
0
1
8.9

Education indicators (%) 

Measles immunization (% of 1-year olds)

ICT indicators (per 1,000 people) 

0 25 50 75 100 125 

2005 

2000 
2002 
Primary net enrollment ratio 
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & 
secondary education 

100 
75 
50 
25 

0 

1990

1995

2000

2005

Indonesia

East Asia & Pacific

200

150

100

50

0

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG). 

2002 
2005 
2000
Fixed + mobile subscribers 
Internet users 

10/24/07

131 

 
 
INDONESIA: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and 
Management  

Annex B2 

As Of Date 7/7/2008 

2007 

2008 

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment 
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

2006 

26 
3.2 
3.8 
4.4 
7.7 
4.5 
20.9 

26 
3.7 
11.5 
7.1 
15.4 
10.9 
20.2 
Last Five 
FYs 

27 
3.8 
25.9 
13.9 
29.6 
17.5 
24.9 

Memorandum Item 
Since FY 80 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
267 
18 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
23,328.2 
1,325.2 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
24.2 
27.8 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 
22.0 
9.9 
a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio. 
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP). 
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the  
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only. 
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, 
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year. 

132 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA: Indicative IBRD Lending Program, FY09-12 

Annex B3 

Fiscal 
Year 
2009 

Product Title 

Proposed Policy Lending  
DPL5  
IDPL2 

Proposed Investment Lending Projects 
BOS (School Operations and Scholarships) 
PINTAR (GFMRAP2) 
National Roads (Western Indonesia) Improvement 
Dam Operational Improvement 
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation 
PNPM II (Rural) 
PNPM II (Urban) 
Jakarta Emergency Dredging Initiative  
Private Infrastructure Finance 

2010 

FY09 Total (with Standby Investment Projects) 
Proposed Policy Lending 
DPL6 
IDPL3 
Climate Change/other thematic/sector DPL  

Proposed Investment Lending Projects 
BOS/ Education SISWA  
Local Government DAU/DAK Support 
National Roads Maintenance Project 
PNPM III (Rural) 
PNPM III (Urban) 
Pump Storage Hydro-Electric 
Strengthening Indonesian Statistics (STATCAP) 
Other Sectoral Projects  

2011 

FY10 Total 
Proposed Policy Lending 
DPL/IDPL/CC DPL/other thematic/sectoral DPL 

Proposed Investment Lending Projects 
Education SISWA  
PNPM I (Combined Rural/Urban) 
Other Sectoral Projects  

2012 

FY11 Total 
Proposed Policy Lending 
DPL/IDPL/CC DPL/other thematic/sectoral DPL 

Proposed Investment Lending Projects 
PNPM II (Combined Rural/Urban) 
PFM/Civil Service 
Other Sectoral Projects  

IBRD            
US$ (millions) 
900  
700  
200  

1,590  
600  
145  
80  
50  
30  
250  
185  
150  
100  

2,490  

1,500 - 2,500 

1,500 - 2,500 

FY12 Total 

1,500 - 2,500 

133 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA: IFC Investment Operations Program 

2005 

2006 

Annex B3 

2008* 

2007 

Gross 
Net** 

639.6 
491.8 

742.3 
605.9 

873.1 
742.7 

718.3 
703.0 

5.0 
33.0 
160.4 
0.0 
2.8 
158.9 
61.8 
44.2 
0.0 
1.2 
12.4 
8.3 
3.9 
491.8 

1% 
7% 
33% 
0% 
1% 
32% 
13% 
9% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
2% 
1% 
100% 

60% 
13% 
4% 
17% 
5% 
100% 

3.8 
88.5 
148.1 
0.0 
2.8 
221.2 
84.6 
36.8 
0.0 
1.0 
11.6 
3.3 
4.2 
605.9 

1% 
15% 
24% 
0% 
0% 
37% 
14% 
6% 
0% 
0% 
2% 
1% 
1% 
100% 

80% 
7% 
3% 
6% 
5% 
100% 

1.3 
60.4 
116.4 
0.0 
5.2 
397.1 
113.0 
32.4 
0.0 
1.0 
11.6 
0.0 
4.2 
742.7 

0% 
8% 
16% 
0% 
1% 
53% 
15% 
4% 
0% 
0% 
2% 
0% 
1% 
100% 

84% 
5% 
2% 
7% 
1% 
100% 

0.0 
60.6 
100.7 
15.0 
5.1 
390.0 
106.2 
21.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
4.2 
703.0 

0% 
9% 
14% 
2% 
1% 
55% 
15% 
3% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
100% 

82% 
8% 
2% 
7% 
1% 
100% 

Commitments (US$m) 

Net Commitments by Sector (US$M) 

Accomodation & Tourism Services 
Agriculture & Forestry 
Chemicals 
Collective Investment Vehicles 
Education & Services 
Finance & Insurance 
Food & Beverages 
Industrial & Consumer Products 
Oil, Gas, & Mining 
Prof., Scient., & Tech. 
Textiles, Apparel, & Leather 
Transportation & Warehouse 
Wholesale & Retail Trade 

Net Commitments by Sector (%) 

Accomodation & Tourism Services 
Agriculture & Forestry 
Chemicals 
Collective Investment Vehicles 
Education & Services 
Finance & Insurance 
Food & Beverages 
Industrial & Consumer Products 
Oil, Gas, & Mining 
Prof., Scient., & Tech. 
Textiles, Apparel, & Leather 
Transportation & Warehouse 
Wholesale & Retail Trade 

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) 

Loan 
Equity 
Quasi Loan + Quasi Equity 
Guarantee 
Risk Management 
Total 
*  As of March 31, 2008 
** IFC's Own Account only 

134 

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA: Summary of Non-lending Services Selected Recent Completions 
and Activities Underway 

Product 

Completion FY 

Audiencea 

Annex B4 

Recent completions 
Aceh Program Implementation & Sectoral Support 
Aceh Public Expenditure Analysis 
Anti-Corruption Advice for Sub-national Entities 
Averting an Infrastructure Crisis 
CDD Platform Support  
Conflict and Poverty 
Decentralization Technical Assistance and Advisory Services 
Developing the Eastern Islands 
Fuel Subsidy Policy Analysis 
HIV/AIDS 
Indonesia Poverty Assessment 
Infrastructure Summit Follow-up & Policy Dialogue 
Justice for the Poor 
LDL Platform 
Migration and Remittance Research 
Nias Public Expenditure Analysis 
Policy Framework for Regional Electrification and Rural Access 
Public Expenditure Review 
Raising Rural Productivity 
Social Inclusion 
Social Protection Road Map 
Taking Stock of Decentralization Reforms  
Aceh Peace Process-Reintegration and Analytical Support 
Conditional Cash Transfer Program Development 
Decentralized Support Facility 
Governance and Decentralization Survey 2 
Social Aspects of Poverty Reduction 
Aceh Poverty and Economic Update 2008 
Deepening Expenditure Reforms in Indonesia 
Land Acquisition and Policy Development 
Public Financial Management Performance Measurement Report 

Underway 
Aceh Response TA Facility 
Anti-Corruption 
Corruption Monitoring 
CPAR 
Creating a Diversified Financial Sector in Indonesia 
Decentralization 
Health System Strengthening - Fiscal Space Analysis for the Health Sector 
Improving the Intergovernmental Framework 
Indonesia Country Environmental Analysis 
Indonesia DPR FY2008 
Indonesia Health Workforce and Improvement Services 
Indonesia Youth Investment  
Poverty and Sustainable Economic Development in Aceh (PASEDIA) 
Rice Policy Dialogue 
Social Protection Road Map 
Support for Teacher Management System Reform 
Supporting Indonesia's Anti-Corruption Institutions 

a.  Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 

135 

2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 

2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2008 

GOV 
GOV 
OTH 
GOV 
OTH 
OTH 
GOV 
OTH 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
OTH 
GOV 
OTH 
GOV 
PUB 
GOV 
GOV 
OTH 
GOV 
GOV 
OTH 
GOV 
OTH 
PUB 
OTH 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 

GOV 
OTH 
PUB 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
PUB 
PUB 
GOV 
GOV 
PUB 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA: Summary of Nonlending Services Planned Key Activities 
(FY09-12) 

Annex B4 

Product 
Grouped by clusters 

Completion FY 

Audiencea 

Central Government Institutions and Systems 

Indonesia Updates FY2009 
Policy Notes for the New Government 
Just-in-time Policy Advice 
Enhancing Demand for Legal and Judicial Reform 
Health Finance & Dialogue 
Indonesia's Development Strategy -- High Commodity Prices 
Supporting Post-Conflict Development (DGF) 
CPAR 
Comprehensive Country/Sector Analysis/CEM 
PER 
Support to RPJM 
Development Policy Review 

Sub-national Government Institutions and Systems 

Improving the Intergovernmental Framework for Enhanced Decentralization 
Information, Education & Communication/ DSF II  
Capacity Enhancement for Eastern Indonesia: Papua Public Expenditure 
Analysis and Capacity Harmonization Program (PEACH) 

Private Sector Development 

Improving Indonesia's Investment Climate, Trade Facilitation & Financial Sector 

Infrastructure  
Infrastructure Development 

Water Supply and Sanitation 

Community Development and Social Protection 

Poverty Reduction -- Pro-Poor & Poor Jobs Strategies and Programs 
Conditional Cash Transfers 
National Program for Community Empowerment (User Fee Assessment for  
CDD) 
Support to PNPM/CDD/Rural Programs 
Poverty Assessment 

Education  

Education Sector Review 
Support to RENSTRA 

Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Mitigation 

Low Carbon Growth Strategy 
REDD Study 
Aceh Economic Update 
Aceh Peace Program 
Local Government Support & Development Partner Coordination 
Aceh & Niah PER 
Aceh & Nias Poverty Assessment  

a.  Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 

136 

2009-12 
2009-10 
2009-12 
2009 
2009 
2009 
2009 
2010 
2010 
2010 
2010 
2011 

2010 
2010 

2012 

2010 

2009 
2010 

2009 
2009 

2009 
2009 
2011 

2010 
2010 

2009 
2010 
2009 - 2012 
2009 - 2012 

2009-2012 
2011 

2012 

PUB 
GOV 
GOV 
OTH 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
PUB 

GOV 
GOV 

PUB 

GOV 

GOV 
GOV 

GOV 
GOV 

GOV 
GOV 
GOV 

GOV 
GOV 

GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
GOV 
PUB 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA: Social Indicators 

Annex B5 

Latest single year 

Same region/income group 

POPULATION   
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
    Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY 
(% of population) 
National headcount index 
    Urban headcount index 
    Rural headcount index 

INCOME 
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (2000=100) 
Food price index (2000=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION 
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS 

Public expenditure 

    Health (% of GDP) 
    Education (% of GDP) 

Net primary school enrollment rate 
(% of age group) 
    Total 
        Male 
        Female 

Access to an improved water source 
(% of population) 
    Total 
        Urban 
        Rural 

Immunization rate 
(% of children ages 12-23 months) 
    Measles 
    DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth 
(years) 
    Total 
        Male 
        Female 

Mortality 
    Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
    Under 5 (per 1,000) 
    Adult (15-59) 
        Male (per 1,000 population) 
        Female (per 1,000 population) 
    Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1980-85 

1990-95 

2000-06 

163.0 
1.9 
26.1 
3.7 

.. 
.. 
.. 

530 
20 
15 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

26 
27 
.. 

59 
57 
60 

70 
109 

368 
308 
.. 
.. 

192.8 
1.6 
35.6 
2.7 

.. 
.. 
.. 

1,010 
44 
37 

34.4 
8.3 
43.1 

.. 
1.0 

96 
98 
94 

74 
90 
65 

63 
69 
27 

64 
62 
66 

48 
66 

275 
219 
.. 
37 

223.0 
1.3 
49.2 
2.2 

16.7 
.. 
.. 

1,420 
176 
121 

39.4 
7.1 
47.3 

1.0 
1.0 

95 
96 
93 

77 
87 
69 

72 
70 
24 

68 
66 
70 

26 
34 

172 
123 
420 
72 

East 
Asia & 
Pacific 

1,898.9 
0.9 
42.4 
2.0 

.. 
.. 
.. 

1,856 
138 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

1.8 
3.5 

93 
93 
93 

79 
92 
70 

89 
89 
13 

71 
69 
73 

24 
29 

165 
104 
150 
87 

Lower- 
middle- 
income 

2,276.5 
0.9 
47.3 
2.1 

.. 
.. 
.. 

2,038 
138 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

2.2 
4.8 

93 
93 
92 

81 
93 
71 

90 
89 
11 

71 
69 
73 

27 
36 

173 
108 
180 
86 

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to change from ISCED76 
to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one year of age or at any time before the survey. 
Source: World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 11 April 2008.  

137 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
Annex B8 

138 

INDONESIA: Key Economic Indicators 

Actual      
2005 

Estimate 
2007 

Projected 
2009 
2010 

Indicator 

2004 

2006 

2008 

2011 

National accounts (as % of GDP) 
Gross domestic producta 
   Agriculture 
   Industry 
   Services 

100 
14 
45 
41 

100 
13 
47 
40 

100 
13 
47 
40 

100 
14 
47 
39 

100 
13 
46 
40 

100 
12 
46 
42 

100 
11 
46 
42 

100 
11 
47 
42 

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

71 
22 
32 
28 

71 
24 
34 
30 

69 
24 
31 
26 

71 
25 
29 
25 

66 
26 
31 
24 

65 
27 
29 
22 

64 
27 
29 
21 

64 
27 
28 
20 

Gross domestic savings 

29 

29 

31 

29 

34 

35 

36 

36 

Memorandum items 
Gross domestic product (US$ million at current prices) 
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

256,837 
1,110 

286,969 
1,260 

364,612 
1,420 

432,815 
1,650 

485,599 
1,930 

559,994 
2,200 

631,633 
2420 

722,871 
2660 

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 00 prices) 
   Gross domestic product 

5.0 

5.7 

5.5 

6.3 

6.0 

6.4 

6.7 

6.7 

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 00 prices) 
   Gross domestic product at market prices 
   Total consumption 
   Private consumption 

3.6 
6.9 
7.5 

4.3 
1.3 
0.8 

4.3 
4.9 
4.5 

5.1 
6.8 
7.4 

4.7 
2.5 
4.4 

5.1 
4.5 
4.4 

5.4 
4.6 
4.5 

5.4 
4.4 
4.3 

Balance of Payments (US$ millions) 
  Exports (GNFS)b 
      Merchandise FOB 
   Imports (GNFS)b 
      Merchandise FOB 
  Resource balance 
  Current account balance 

84,212 
72,167 
71,257 
50,401 
12,955 
3,294 

99,760 
86,833 
91,319 
69,270 
8,441 
307 

115,032 
103,514 
95,493 
73,868 
19,539 
9,937 

130,439 
118,014 
108,458 
84,930 
21,981 
11,010 

152,570 
139,770 
117,888 
88,357 
34,682 
8,516 

164,133 
150,946 
123,208 
92,404 
40,925 
4,854 

180,049 
166,464 
132,560 
98,598 
47,489 
1,637 

200,236 
186,241 
142,972 
105,871 
57,264 
-1,312 

Memorandum items 
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR00 prices) 
  Merchandise exports (FOB) 
  Merchandise imports (CIF) 

5.0 

2.9 

5.4 

5.1 

7.1 

7.3 

7.5 

7.9 

24.0 
75.1 

33.3 
49.5 

48.8 
11.8 

18.6 
38.6 

7.6 
8.4 

8.4 
9.9 

8.6 
7.9 

9.1 
8.3 

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e 
  Current revenues 
  Current expenditures 
  Budget surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
  Capital expenditure 
  Foreign financing 

17.6 
18.6 
-1.0 
-- 
-1.2 

17.8 
18.3 
-0.5 
1.2 
-0.4 

19.1 
20.0 
-0.9 
1.6 
-0.8 

18.7 
20.0 
-1.3 
1.7 
-0.6 

20.0 
22.1 
-2.1 
1.9 
-0.3 

20.1 
22.0 
-0.9 
1.9 
-0.3 

20.5 
21.0 
-0.5 
2.2 
-0.3 

20.9 
21.0 
-0.1 
2.5 
-0.3 

Monetary indicators 
  M2/GDP 
  Growth of M2 (%) 

45.0 
8.1 

43.2 
16.4 

41.4 
14.9 

41.5 
18.9 

41.0 
11.4 

41.0 
14.4 

41.0 
13.1 

41.0 
12.6 

Price indices( YR00 =100) 
  Merchandise export price index 
  Merchandise import price index 
  Merchandise terms of trade index 
  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f 

115.2 
138.8 
83.0 
115.7 

137.9 
207.3 
66.5 
114.2 

162.3 
220.4 
73.6 
133.8 

183.7 
253.4 
72.5 
134.8 

225.0 
273.2 
82.4 
136.9 

243.0 
285.1 
85.2 
127.3 

268.0 
301.9 
88.8 
121.4 

299.8 
321.7 
93.2 
113.8 

  Consumer price index  (% change) 
  GDP deflator (% change) 
a.   GDP at market prices 
b.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services." 
c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants. 
d.  Includes use of IMF resources. 
e.   Consolidated central government. 
f.  "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation. 

6.2 
8.6 

10.5 
14.8 

13.1 
13.6 

6.5 
11.5 

7.5 
7.5 

7.0 
7.0 

6.0 
6.0 

5.5 
5.5 

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex B8 

INDONESIA: Key Exposure Indicators 

Indicator 

2004 

2005 

2006 

Estimate 
2007 

2008  

Projected 
2009  
2010 

2011 

Total debt outstanding disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a 137,026 130,651 128,736 136,640 

137,458 146,611 151,687 158,277 

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

-5,630 

-2,440 

-13,417 

-10,118 

-9,667 

-6,366 

-7,453 

-5,886 

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a  

31,519 

34,361 

30,669 

26,981 

28,783 

25,209 

23,661 

22,952 

Debt and debt service indicators (%) 
   TDO/XGSb 
   TDO/GDP 
   TDS/XGS 
   Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%) 
   IBRD DS/public DS 
   IBRD DS/XGS 
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
   IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m) 
   Loans 
   Equity and quasi-equity  /e 

162.7 
59.7 
37.4 
29.2 

25.4 
23.2 
2.3 
8,943 
996 

131.0 
47.1 
34.4 
28.3 

36.1 
30.4 
1.9 
8,132 
1,001 

111.9 
38.5 
26.7 
29.8 

22.2 
12.2 
1.6 
7,423 
1,318 

104.8 
34.5 
20.7 
28.2 

20.7 
20.6 
1.4 
6,821 
1,550 

90.1 
28.3 
18.9 
36.7 

19.2 
19.3 
1.0 
7,161 
1,390 

89.3 
26.2 
15.4 
33.8 

17.4 
17.8 
0.9 
7,570 
1,425 

84.2 
24.0 
13.1 
34.2 

16.2 
16.8 
0.6 
8,429 
1,447 

79.0 
21.9 
11.5 
34.0 

12.3 
14.7 
0.4 
9,645 
1,451 

492 
85 

606 
61 

743 
55 

703 
72 

300 
34 

350 
39 

400 
45 

MIGA 
   MIGA guarantees (US$m) 
.. 
b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances. 
    Bank for International Settlements. 
d. Includes present value of guarantees. 
e.  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments. 

.. 

.. 

50 

.. 

.. 

.. 

139 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 

Annex B8 

Closed Projects 

300 

IBRD/IDA * 
Total Disbursed (Active) 
          of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
          of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
          of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

 1,065.99 
 0.82 
 26,206.70 
 20,841.88 
 27,272.69 
 20,842.69 

 1,886.99 
 12.84 
 1,899.83 

Active Projects 

Project ID 

Project Name 

P085133 
P071318 
P071316 
P096921 
P092019 
P003701 
P097104 
P077175 
P089479 
P074290 
P083742 
P099757 
P085374 
P073772 
P076174 
P063913 
P079156 
P064728 
P076271 
P079906 
P078070 
P072852 
P084583 
P071296 
P059477 
P085375 
P059931 
P105002 
Total 

Govt Finl Mgt & Revenue Admin Project 
ID - Coral Reef Rehab and Management II 
ID - Coral Reef Rehab and Mgmt Prog II 
ID - National UPP (PNPM UPP) 
ID Kecamatan Development Project 3B 
ID ODS I- UMBRELLA 
ID-BERMUTU 
ID-Domestic Gas Market Development Proj. 
ID-Early Childhood Education and Dev 
ID-Eastern Indonesia Region Transp. 2 
ID-Farmer Empower. Agric.Tech.&Info 
ID-Geothermal Power Generation  Dev 
ID-HIGHER EDUCATION 
ID-Health Workforce & Services (PHP 3) 
ID-Initiatives for Local Govern. Reform 
ID-Java-Bali Pwr Sector & Strength 
ID-KECAMATAN DEV. 3 
ID-LAND MANAGEMENT &POLICY DEVT 
ID-PPITA 
ID-Strategic Roads Infrastructure 
ID-Support for Poor and Disadvant Areas 
ID-UPP2 
ID-UPP3 
ID-USDRP 
ID-WSSLIC II 
ID-WSSLIC III 
ID-Water Resources & Irr.Sector Mgt Prog 
National Program for Community Empower 

Last PSR  
Supervision Rating 
Development 
Implementation 
Objectives 
Progress 
MS 
MU 
MS 
MS 
MS 
MS 
# 
# 
S 
S 
S 
S 
MU 
MU 
S 
S 
MS 
MS 
MS 
MS 
MS 
MS 
# 
# 
S 
MS 
MS 
MS 
MS 
MU 
MS 
MS 
S 
S 
MU 
U 
MS 
MU 
S 
MS 
MU 
MU 
S 
MS 
S 
S 
MS 
MU 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
# 
# 

Fiscal Year 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 
IBRD 
IDA 
GRANT 
Cancel. 

Undisb. 

2005 
2004 
2004 
2008 
2005 
1995 
2008 
2006 
2006 
2004 
2007 
2008 
2005 
2003 
2005 
2003 
2003 
2004 
2003 
2007 
2005 
2002 
2005 
2005 
2000 
2006 
2003 
2008 

55 

33.2 
52.68 
80 

24.5 
80 

200 
32.8 

50 
31.1 
14.5 
141 
45.5 
32.8 
17.1 
208 
69 
29.5 
67.3 
45 

45 
41.19 
 1,395.17  

7.5 

0.166 

36.5526 

1 

4 

0.164 

5 

23 
125 
203 

61.5 

67.5 

60 

30 
74.5 
15 

45.5 
32.8 

35 
206 
71.4 

77.4 
137.5 
25 
190 
  1,485.10 

      48.05  

           1.33 

55.14 
6.21 
37.60 
180.34 
34.30 
10.08 
81.00 
48.21 
67.04 
141.47 
86.62 

65.32 
65.26 
16.23 
97.95 
2.28 
36.42 
4.52 
197.70 
92.70 
58.15 
27.70 
36.50 
7.92 
153.56 
54.36 
235.27 
 1,899.83 

Difference Between 

Expected and Actual 
Disbursements a/ 
Orig. 
Frm Rev'd 

43.14 
4.21 
21.77 

-106.51 
10.08 
-2.87 
13.21 
-0.41 
121.47 
5.50 

28.70 
52.94 
10.74 
90.90 
0.97 
21.46 
4.52 
-10.30 
53.21 
-95.56 
-43.79 
7.60 
-0.34 
27.30 
51.24 

10.49 

-18.65 
10.08 

11.34 

51.24 

4.52 
-0.30 

10.03 

24.85 

     309.19 

       103.59  

140 

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio (US$ Millions) 

Annex B8 

FY Approval   

Company   

Loan Equity 

Committed 
**Quasi 
Equity 

*GT/RM 

Partici 
pant 

Disbursed Outstanding 
**Quasi 
Equity 

*GT/RM 

Loan Equity   

3.67  

0   
0   
0   
0   
0   
0   
0   

0   
0   
0   
0   
0   
0   
0   
0   

2.2   
0.51  
0.7   
10.66  

6.21  
3.71  

0.11  
12.55  

0   

40.32  

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2.83 
1.03 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10.61 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

14.47 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
50 

50 

2006   
Bank Danamon   
2007   
Bank International Indo   
2008   
Bima   
2004   
Bona Vista School   
2007   
Fugui Indonesia   
2007   
Insurance Student Loan   
2004   
Medan NP School  
2002   
PT Gawi   
1989   
PT Agro Muko  
1989/ 1994/ 2003   
PT Astra  
2000/2005  
PT A stra Otopart  
2000/2002/2004/2005/2007   PT Bank NISP  
1993/1996  
PT Bina Danatama   
2004/2005  
PT Ecogreen   
1991/1995/1999/2004   
PT Indo - Rama  
2000/2006/2007   
PT Karunia (KAS)   
2000/2006  
PT Makro 
1993   
2004   
PT Nusantara 
PT Prakars (PAS)   
2006   
PT TAS   
2008   
PT TVS   
1995/2004  
PT Viscose   
2008   
Saratoga Asia II   
2005/2006  
WOM   
2004/2006/2007   
Wilmar   
Total Portfolio:   
* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products. 
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types. 

149.56 
123.43 
0 
0.86 
30 
0 
1.75 
9.72 
0 
0 
0 
65 
0.02 
45.83 
40.8 
46.52 
0 
0 
10.75 
7 
20 
7.88 
0 
14.84 
0 

573.96 

0 
0 
5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2.2 
0.51 
0.7 
10.66 
0 
0 
6.21 
0 
4.21 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
15 
12.63 
0 

57.12 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2.86 
1.03 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10.61 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

14.5 

5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2.46 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
50 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1.74 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1.92 
0 
0 
1.78 
0 
8.25 
1.6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

57.46 

15.29 

59.56 
123.43 
0 
0.86 
30 
0 
0 
3.57 
0 
0 
0 
35 
0.02 
45.83 
40.8 
46.52 
0 
0 
10.75 
7 
20 
7.88 
0 
14.84 
0 

446.06 

141 

Partici 
pant 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1.74 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1.92 
0 
0 
1.78 
0 
8.25 
1.6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

15.29 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Map of Indonesia ( IBRD No. 33420RI) 

142 

 
