Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 83148-NP

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND
THE MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
NEPAL
FY 2014-2018

Public Disclosure Authorized

May 1, 2014

Nepal Country Management Unit South Asia Region
International Finance Corporation South Asia Department
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

DATE OF CURRENT INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE
AUGUST 4, 2011
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
US$1.00 = 97 NPR (AS OF APRIL 2014)
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
JULY 16–JULY 15

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
CA
CAR
CAS
CPAR
CPS
CSO
DFID
DPO
EU
FDI
FY
GAFSP
GDP
GNDI
GoN
HNP
IBN
IBRD

Analytic and Advisory Services
Asian Development Bank
Constituent Assembly
Capital Adequacy Ratio
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Partnership Strategy
Civil Society Organization
UK Department for International Development
Development Policy Operation
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Fiscal Year
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
Gross Domestic Product
Gross National Disposable Income
Government of Nepal
Health, Nutrition and Population
Investment Board Nepal
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
IDA
International Development Association
IEG
Independent Evaluation Group
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IMF
International Monetary Fund
ISN
Interim Strategy Note
IWRMP Irrigation and Water Resources Management
Project
MDG Millenium Development Goals
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MoU
Memorandum of Understanding
SMEs Small and Medium Enterprises
MW
Megawatt

NBF
NBL
NEA
NGO
NLSS
NPPR
NPR
PAF
PEFA
PETS
PforR
PFM
PPA
PPP
PRG
RBB
ROSC
SARTI
SREP
SSRP
SWAp
TA
TF
UK
UN
USAID
WBG
WDR

Nepal Business Forum
Nepal Bank Limited
Nepal Electricity Authority
Non-Governmental Organization
Nepal Living Standards Survey
Nepal Portfolio Performance Review
Nepalese Rupee
Poverty Alleviation Fund
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
Program-for-Results
Public Finance Management
Power Purchase Agreement
Public-Private-Partnerships
Partial Risk Guarantee
Rastriya Banijya Bank
Report on the Observance of Standards
and Codes
South Asia Regional Integration in
Trade and Investment
Scaling Up Renewable Energy Project
School Sector Reform Program
Sector Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
Trust Fund
United Kingdom
United Nations
United States Agency for International
Development
World Bank Group
World Development Report

International Development Association
(IDA)
Vice President
Country Director
Country Manager
Task Team Leader

Philippe H. Le Houerou
Johannes Zutt
(vacant)
Johannes Widmann

International Finance Corporation
(IFC)
Vice President
Regional Director
Country Manager
Resident Representative
Task Team Leader

Karin Finkelston
Serge Devieux
Kyle Kelhofer
Val Bagatsing
Gunjan Gulati

Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA)
Vice President
Director
Task Team Leader

Michel Wormser
Ravi Vish
Paul Barbour

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR NEPAL
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.......................................................................................................... i

I.

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT .................................................................................................................. 1
A. Social and Political Context..................................................................................................... 1
B. Nepal’s Progress in Poverty Reduction ................................................................................... 3
C. Economic Developments and Prospects .................................................................................. 5
D. Development Challenges and Opportunities ........................................................................... 8
E. Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy .............................................................. 12
III. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR NEPAL ................................ 12
A. Lessons Learned from Previous Strategies and Feedback from Consultations ..................... 12
B. Proposed Assistance Strategy ................................................................................................ 13
Pillar 1: Increasing Economic Growth and Competitiveness................................................. 15
Pillar 2: Increasing Inclusive Growth and Opportunities for Shared Prosperity................... 19
Foundations and Cross-Cutting Dimensions.......................................................................... 22
C. Implementing the FY14-FY18 Strategy ................................................................................. 24
The World Bank Group Lending Program.............................................................................. 24
The World Bank Group Knowledge Program ........................................................................ 27
Partnerships ............................................................................................................................. 28
IV.

MANAGING RISKS ................................................................................................................... 29

Figures/Tables:
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4

: Nepal’s impressive progress on poverty reduction...................................................................... 3
: Population clustered around the poverty line .............................................................................. 3
: Poverty reduction correlates to increase in remittances .............................................................. 4
: Nepal’s historic growth rates ....................................................................................................... 5

Table 1
Table 2
Table 3
Table 4

: Investment needs per year by sector, 2011-2020 .......................................................................... 9
: IDA lending program FY14-18 .................................................................................................. 25
: Analytic and Advisory Activities FY14-18 ................................................................................ 27
: WBG engagement areas vis-à-vis development partners ........................................................... 29

Annex
Annex 1 : Results Framework for the Nepal CPS FY14-FY18 ................................................................. 31
Annex 2 : IFC Portfolio and Pipeline Summary ........................................................................................ 37
Annex 3 : Poverty in Nepal - Achievements and remaining challenges .................................................... 39
Annex 4 : Nepal Foreign Aid Structure ..................................................................................................... 48
Annex 5 : Lessons Learned from Previous Strategies ............................................................................... 50
Annex 6 : Feedback from CAS Consultations and Client Survey ............................................................. 54
Annex 7 : Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management ............................................... 57
Annex 8 : IDA Operations Portfolio .......................................................................................................... 58
Annex 9 : Nepal Trust Fund Portfolio ....................................................................................................... 59
Annex 10: Nepal IFC Portfolio ................................................................................................................... 60
Annex 11: Nepal at a Glance ...................................................................................................................... 61
Map of Nepal: IBRD 33455

WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR NEPAL
I.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
Nepal has achieved remarkable progress over the last years. The country managed to
halve the percentage of people living on less than $1.25 a day in only seven years, from 53 percent
in 2003/2004 to 25 percent in 2010/2011. Several social indicators in education, health and gender
have also improved. In addition, since the end of the civil war in 2006, Nepal has successfully
transitioned away from being a post-conflict country and former combatants have been integrated
into the country’s armed forces. While the country’s political transition – notably the drafting of a
new constitution – is taking longer than expected, the November 2013 elections, which resulted in a
peaceful transfer in power, were an important step toward the formation of an inclusive and
democratic state.
ii.
To build on this progress, Nepal needs to take advantage of its economic potential and
put in place the prerequisites that will provide faster, sustained and inclusive growth. While
the political process remains intricate (understandably so, given Nepal’s relatively short experience
with democratic governance), the country urgently needs to pay greater attention to the economy.
Remarkably, Nepal’s economy grew steadily even during the height of the conflict, and economic
management remained prudent, resulting in a budget surplus in 2013. Yet growth levels are too low
to enable Nepal to continue its past progress and relegate poverty to history. Current growth relies
heavily on remittances supporting consumption and growth in basic services with low growth
potential.
iii. To move to a higher growth trajectory, Nepal will have to remove bottlenecks to
private and public investment in key growth sectors. The most vivid example of Nepal’s
economic potential is hydropower. While the estimated potential for hydroelectricity generation in
Nepal is 84,000 megawatts (MW), of which at least half is economically viable, only 746 MW
(less than 2 percent of the viable potential) is currently developed. Hydropower development
could be a game changer for Nepal. Development of the sector would reduce load-shedding and
provide major revenues through exporting electricity to India and Bangladesh.
iv.
The World Bank Group stands ready to support Nepal’s aspirations for increasing
economic growth through increased investments in key sectors and making growth more
inclusive to help equalize opportunities across groups and communities. This constitutes a
major shift in World Bank Group (WBG) support away from short-term post-conflict assistance
towards establishing the foundations for increased, inclusive and sustainable growth. After three
consecutive interim strategies in Fiscal Years (FY) 2007, 2009 and 2011, the WBG will provide
more long-term support. The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) will cover four years from
FY2014-2018.
v.
World Bank Group support to Nepal will be aligned to the Bank’s twin global goals—
eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. A poverty “lens”, developed for
the CPS, concludes that Nepal’s progress on poverty reduction has been commendable, yet a
significant share of the population remains clustered around the poverty line. It confirms the need
for WBG support to focus on removing Nepal’s binding growth constraints to allow for higher

i

income levels. In this context the International Development Association (IDA), the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) will
collaborate to make maximum use of their joint comparative advantage. WBG efforts will be
organized within two pillars. Under pillar 1, the WBG will support increasing economic growth
and competitiveness, and will focus on expanding hydroelectric power generation, enhancing
transport connectivity, and improving the business environment. Under pillar 2, the WBG will
provide support to increasing inclusive growth and opportunities for shared prosperity, aiming to
enhance the productivity of agriculture and equalize access to health care, skills development and
social protection. Cutting across these pillars, WBG activities will contribute to improving the
effectiveness, efficiency and accountability of public expenditure.
vi.
WBG support will be guided by the principles of balancing risks and rewards,
selectivity and flexibility. In a shift from more cautious approaches taken in past strategies, the
WBG will engage in larger programs that strive for nation-wide impact. Regarding selectivity, this
strategy consolidates the WBG’s engagement into fewer sectors, where the Group has a
comparative advantage and can leverage its financing and analytical resources for greater
development impact. In addition, the WBG will maintain programming flexibility, given the
politically-fragile country environment.
vii.
The WBG’s engagement in Nepal will continue to face significant risks that could
affect strategy implementation. Given the challenges of developing hydropower potential in
particular, the overall risk rating is high—as well as the potential rewards. Among the most
significant risks are political instability that can impact economic performance, weak governance
and increased corruption and fiduciary risks, and low capacity for program implementation,
including for assessing and mitigating environment and social impacts. Specific mitigation
measures have been devised to prevent these risks from impacting CPS implementation and to deal
with them once they occur. These include, among others, a more active cross-party engagement
and communication to build all-party consensus on development needs; addressing both ex ante
and ex post dimensions of public resource use through public financial management activities;
increased focus on safeguards during preparation and implementation support through capacity
building, training and study tour programs for key officials involved in safeguard work; and in
hydropower in particular, taking a more holistic approach that focuses on the necessary governance,
policy and institutional frameworks and strengthening the synergies between IDA, IFC and MIGA.

ii

II.
COUNTRY CONTEXT
1.
Following a ten-year civil war that ended in 2006 and led to the transition from a
centuries-old monarchy to a republic based on a multi-party democracy, 1 Nepal remains at a
crossroads. It can either continue on a path of limited economic management that has delivered
modest growth with good human development outcomes, or it could engage in proactive reforms
that would provide a significant boost to the country’s growth and development prospects. As a
fragile state, Nepal stands out for its relatively-stable economic performance and its exemplary
results in poverty reduction and human development. Two key factors contributed to these
achievements: (i) a tradition of community participation as well as strong community institutions,
which continued to function even during the height of the conflict, and (ii) extensive labor migration
to other countries and a resulting expansion in remittances-fueled consumption. To continue to
reduce extreme poverty and increase the incomes of the bottom 40 percent, Nepal will need faster
and more sustained growth, and this will require it to boost investment and narrow a massive infrastructure gap, which is the single most important constraint to growth. Finally, Nepal will need to
make growth more inclusive and to provide opportunities for all Nepalis to participate in its
development.
2.
This strategy proposes a major shift in World Bank Group (WBG) support away from
short-term post-conflict assistance towards establishing the foundations for increased,
inclusive and sustainable growth. Based on Nepal’s progress to date, there is a compelling case to
provide assistance under a longer-term partnership strategy, while maintaining the flexibility needed
to accommodate a fragile country environment. To do this, the strategy aims to consolidate the
WBG’s current engagement in basic services while shifting focus on the binding constraints to
growth: inadequate infrastructure (especially in energy and transportation), a poor investment
climate, a fragile financial sector and a poorly skilled workforce. Given the reality of the Nepali
economy, it will also focus on agriculture. It also aims to shift the Bank’s engagement in the social
sectors from providing financing for access to services to providing knowledge and solutions for
improving quality, governance and opportunities for shared prosperity.
A. Social and Political Context
3.
Since the middle of the 20 century, Nepal has struggled to move away from a feudal
past toward a more open and inclusive society. This process has been made more difficult by
Nepal’s varied topography, ranging from the Himalayas in the north to the southern plains, and its
diversity of castes, ethnicities, and linguistic groups; formidable connectivity challenges have left
many communities isolated from the rest of the country even today. The overthrow of the autocratic
Rana regime in 1950 was followed by a period of democratic politics under a constitutional
monarchy, but by 1960, the king had overthrown the government and dissolved parliament,
establishing in its place an authoritarian Panchayat (assembly) system. Within this system, power
remained concentrated in the monarchy and a handful of elite high-caste families from Kathmandu,
and was used to extract resources for the benefit of the ruling elite rather than the poor. By 1990, the
first Jana Andolan (peoples’ movement) had forced the king to reinstate open national elections and
curtail royal power. But political parties failed to meet the high popular expectation for change, and
patronage under the Panchayat system continued. In 1996, a rebel Maoist movement took advantage
of popular disenchantment. Drawing support from marginalized rural groups that remained outside
of the political system and were disillusioned with the state as service provider, it launched a civil
war to end the monarchy and establish a socialist republic. By 2005, the Maoist movement had
th

1

A multi-party system already existed prior to 2006 under a constitutional monarchy, but multi-party democracy has
become the defining feature in the post-2006 political transition.

1

taken control of much of Nepal’s countryside, and in early 2006 the king agreed to restore the House
of representatives (dissolved in 2002). The interim legislature promulgated an interim constitution
in 2007, which proclaimed Nepal to be a secular federal republic, effectively bringing to an end its
history as a Hindu kingdom.
Box 1: Identity Politics in Nepal
2011 Census - Preliminary Results
Caste/ethnic group (percent)
Chhetri
Braham-hill
Magar
Tharu
Tamang
Newar
Yadav
Rai
Mother tongue (percent)
Nepali
Mailthali
Bhojpuri
Tharu
Tamang
Newar
Urdu
Religion (percent)
Hinduism
Buddhism
Islam
Christianity

Census Highlights
2001
15.8
12.7
7.1
6.8
5.6
5.5
3.9
2.8

2011
16.6
12.2
7.1
6.6
5.8
5.0
4.0
2.3

18.6
12.3
7.53
5.9
5.2
3.6
0.8

44.6
11.7
6
5.8
5.1
3.2
2.6

80.6
10.7
2.8
0.04

81.3
9.0
4.4
1.4

The rise of ethnic movements in recent years and the
domination of identity politics in the discussion of
federalism have complicated the process to agree a
new constitution. This struggle both epitomizes and
exacerbates Nepal’s highly complex ethnic, religious,
geographical, caste and class divisions, as different
communities have at times tried to secure special
privileges under a new constitution.
There are 123 languages spoken in Nepal, according
to the 2011 census, which also records 125 caste and
ethnic groups. Buddhists (about 9 percent of the
population) and Muslims (about 4 percent) are sizable
minorities among a largely Hindu population (about
81 percent).
Lower-caste people and rural residents have been
historically marginalized. Long-term structural issues
related to social exclusion remain unresolved and
severely affect specific larger communities in Nepal,
especially the Dalits (comprising different ethnic and
geographic groups), Tamang, Tharu, Magar, Muslims
(jointly nearly 40 percent of the population) as well as
selected Madhesi communities (residents of the Outer
Terai).

4.
While Nepal has made significant progress in consolidating peace and transitioning to
the new political system since the end of the civil war, there have also been setbacks. Nepal’s
post-war political transition has involved two interrelated processes: (i) consolidation of the peace,
and (ii) promulgation of a new constitution. It made good progress on the peace process – notably
by formally concluding the integration of ex-combatants into the armed forces in August 2012 – but
the political transition is taking longer than expected. Since the end of the monarchy, Nepal has
experienced seven different governments. A constituent assembly tasked in 2008 with drafting
Nepal’s new constitution was dissolved in May 2012 without completing its work, due to irreconcilable differences between the political parties and cross-party caucuses on the electoral system, the
shape of the future federal state, the devolution of powers and the structure of government. In
March 2013, after almost a year of political stasis, the main parties agreed to form an interim
government consisting exclusively of former secretaries (non-politicians, who were acting as
ministers), chaired by the Chief Justice (acting as prime minister). The interim government was
charged with holding new elections to form a new constituent assembly; these elections were
successfully held in November 2013 and the new assembly met for the first time in January 2014.
5.
The 2013 elections give cause for cautious optimism. They were widely lauded as free and
fair and were also carried out in a largely peaceful manner. Given Nepal’s short experience of
democratic government, political parties continue to struggle with finding an acceptable modus
vivendi. Even so, there have been significant political achievements in the last decade. First,
Nepal’s highly-diverse population found a way to continue to discuss difficult topics (such as
2

federalism, identity politics and the form of government) without returning to violence. Second,
within eight years of a civil war that brought an end to a Hindu monarchy, Nepalis have forged a
strong consensus that their country should be a secular, inclusive and democratic republic. These
achievements constitute a good foundation for future constitutional discussions.
B. Nepal’s Progress in Poverty Reduction
6.
Nepal has made dramatic progress in poverty reduction in recent years and appears on
track to make extreme poverty history. Nepal attained the first Millennium Development Goal
(MDG), to halve extreme poverty, ahead of time. The percentage of people living on less than $1.25
per day (the international line for extreme poverty) fell from about 53 percent of the population in
2003/2004 to 25 percent in 2010/2011, in just seven years, putting Nepal ahead of India and
Bangladesh in terms of poverty prevalence (see Figure 1). If poverty reduction continues at this rate,
extreme poverty could be eradicated within a decade. A poverty “lens” developed for this CPS is
presented in Annex 3. Nepal also shows remarkable progress on multi-dimensional measures of
poverty, which include education and health outcomes besides focusing only on consumption. In
2013, Nepal was the top performer among 22 countries for which a multi-dimensional poverty index
could be constructed.
Figure 1: Nepal’s impressive progress on poverty reduction

7.
Even so, vulnerability remains high
among the bottom 40 percent. The share of
overall consumption by the bottom 40 percent
increased from 18.5 to 23.6 percent between
2003/04 and 2010/11. As explained below,
this consumption increase was largely fueled
by remittances. The same period witnessed
declining inequality, as Nepal’s Gini
coefficient fell from 0.41 to 0.35. Yet, while
52 percent of poor households moved out of
poverty during this time, 13 percent of the nonpoor slipped back into poverty. As shown in
Figure 2, a significant share of the population
remains clustered around the poverty line with
very low levels of consumption. Over 70
percent of Nepalis live on less than $2.50/day
and over 90 percent on less than $4.00.

Figure 2: Population clustered around the
poverty line

Note: The x-axis measures the ratio of annual per-capita consumption
in 2010-11 to the international poverty line of $1.25 PPP converted to
local currency. A ratio of one means that per-capita consumption is
equal to the international poverty line of $1.25 PPP in 2005.

3

8.
Poverty and vulnerability are still predominantly a rural phenomenon, which correlates
with spatial concentration as well as caste and ethnicity. Nearly 92 percent of the poverty
reduction between 2003/04 and 2010/11 occurred in rural areas, but poverty continues to be more
severe (27 percent) there than in urban areas (15 percent). Poverty prevalence is also twice as high
in mountain areas (42 percent) as in the Terai plains (23 percent), even though the plains are home to
almost four times as many poor people (12 percent of the poor live in the mountain areas and 45
percent in the plains). Poverty is also most severe among ethnic and caste minorities – including a
staggering 43 percent among Hill Dalits – even though the varied population density between the
mountainous areas and the plains results in a less clear-cut ethnic-based pattern of total poverty.
Vulnerability is also higher than the national average in the Mid- and Far-West Hill regions and
higher among Terai middle castes, Dalits and other minorities.
9.
Remittances-fueled consumption has been the
main driver of poverty reduction. With about four
million Nepalis currently working outside the country
and sending part of their wages home, remittances have
soared and helped to give poor households the means to
increase consumption and lift themselves out of poverty.
Figure 3 shows the correlation between the increase in
remittances and the drop in poverty. But while labor
migration has provided a response to limited domestic
employment opportunities, out-migration involves
significant negative externalities, including dislocation
of families and the risk of inflows leading to real
appreciation and a shift of labor resources towards
production of non-tradeable goods. Remittances thus far
have not been used effectively to finance Nepal’s
development and jobs also need to be created “at home”
for Nepal’s growing youth population.

Figure 3: Poverty reduction correlates to
increase in remittances

10.
Several social indicators have significantly improved over the last decade. Most MDGs
related to health and education are within reach. In primary education, overall enrollment rates have
reached 95 percent, gender parity has been achieved and disparities across disadvantaged ethnic/
caste groups have decreased significantly. For example, in the mountain and hill areas, primary
enrollment rates for Dalits and Janajatis are now comparable to Brahmins and Newaris. In health,
the maternal mortality rate fell from 538 per 100,000 live births in 1996 to 380 in 2011; infant
mortality fell from 110 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 46 in 2011; and full immunization
coverage rose from 43 percent in 1996 to 87 percent in 2011. While this progress has been
impressive, Nepal still ranks low on the UN’s Human Development Index, at 157 out of 187
countries in 2013, and much remains to be done to bring human development indicators to middleincome country levels.
11.
Nepal has also made significant progress in enhancing gender equality and women’s
empowerment. Gender parity in primary education has been achieved, with completion rates for
girls at primary level being slightly higher (82.1 percent) than for boys (81.8 percent). There is also
little difference in enrollment rates between girls and boys at the secondary level. The percentage of
births attended by skilled birth attendants almost doubled, from 19 percent in 2006 to 36 percent in
2011, but women’s access to these services is much higher in urban than rural areas and more
4

prevalent in Terai than in mountain districts. Contraceptive prevalence rates have been constant at
about 48-50 percent for the last five years, yet the overall fertility rate declined from 3.1 (2006) to
2.6 (2011), far better than in similar-income countries. Women’s participation in the labor force is
relatively high compared to similar countries, with a female-to-male labor force participation ratio of
0.8. Nepal has also made progress in property ownership for women and in fighting gender-based
violence. Even so, women’s participation in the constituent assembly is about 30 percent, but there
is very little participation of women in the higher echelons of the executive.
C.
Economic Developments and Prospects
12.
Over the past decades, Nepal’s economy experienced positive but relatively modest and
uneven growth by regional standards. As shown in Figure 4, Nepal’s growth performance was
strongest from the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s, at around 5 percent per year on average. In the
subsequent two decades, growth averaged around 4 percent per year, significantly lower than in the
rest of South Asia. While the country managed to maintain positive growth rates during the 19962006 civil war – a laudable achievement – since then it has not been able to reap a major postconflict dividend or accelerate growth. Nepal appears to be stuck in a modest-growth trap,
characterized by weak industrial dynamism while agricultural and services sector performance
remains largely dependent on external factors (weather patterns and remittance inflows respectively).
In FY13, growth dipped to 3.6 percent, down from 4.9 percent in FY12. This weak performance
was due to unexpectedly low levels of activity in the agriculture sector, which grew at only 1.3
percent – the weakest performance for agriculture in five years – and the industrial sector, which
grew by 1.6 percent. By contrast, services sector growth reached 6 percent and now accounts for
over half of total value added in the economy.
13.
A shrinking industrial and export base is cause for concern. A sharp growth in private
transfers has masked (and to some extent also caused) a growing trade gap, which reached 27
percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in FY13. Since the late 1990s, Nepal’s exports as a share
of GDP have steadily declined, from over 25 percent in 1997 to under 10 percent today. Moreover,
this coincided with a decline of the share of industry (and particularly manufacturing, which most
strongly suffers from lacking infrastructure), which fell by 5 percentage points in 2000-2010.
Figure 4: Nepal’s historic growth rates

14.
Today, growth relies largely on remittances supporting consumption. In FY13,
remittances soared to an unprecedented $4.9 billion, growing 11.7 percent year-over-year in dollar
terms, equivalent to over 25 percent of GDP—exceeding both foreign aid and foreign direct
5

investment (FDI) by a considerable margin. These inflows were mostly channeled to consumption,
boosting aggregate demand, helping to lift household incomes, and driving expansion of services
(albeit mostly basic services with low sophistication or growth potential) and they also contributed to
a large current account surplus, despite a widening trade gap. In FY13, Nepal recorded a current
account surplus of 3.3 percent of GDP, with reserves building up to $4.9 billion (equivalent to 7.6
months of imports).
15.
The economy-wide potential for growth has been depressed by low levels of public and
private investment, despite available finance. Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) as a share of
GDP rose only moderately between FY05 and FY10, from 20 percent of GDP to a peak of 22.2
percent before ebbing again down to just above 21 percent in FY13, significantly below the shares
observed in most other South Asian countries. During that period, government GFCF has remained
in a narrow band between 2.7 percent and 4.7 percent of GDP, falling to 3.5 percent of GDP in 2013.
Strikingly, such modest levels of investment are not symptomatic of tight fiscal balances and/or
excessive recurrent spending: between FY10 and FY13, the budget balance has oscillated between a
low (deficit) of 1 percent of GDP and a high (surplus) of 2 percent of GDP in FY13 – with Nepal the
only country in South Asia to report a budget surplus in that year. Likewise private investment has
remained subdued despite expressed potential interest of foreign investors (and Nepal’s unexploited
hydroelectric capacity) and high private external inflows amounting to over 25 percent of GDP. The
spectacular growth in private transfers in recent years appears in a buildup of liquidity in the
financial system but low uptake by the private sector in terms of credit. Moreover, FDI has
increased but from a minuscule base (from $38 million in FY10 to $102 million in FY13), and it
remains marginal as a share of GDP (0.5 percent in FY13).
16.
Nepal’s labor force has expanded rapidly in recent years and will soon need more and
better jobs. Between 2001 and 2011, Nepal’s economically active population (aged 15-59) grew by
32 percent, from 12.6 million to 16.6 million. Employment remains highly informal, and the small
formal sector (5.8 percent of the employed) is overwhelmingly male (98.5 percent). While recent
gains in education may payoff in the medium-term, labor productivity has grown by a modest 0.56
percent annually, on average, between 1999 and 2008. Given that over two-thirds of jobs remain in
– or are linked to – agriculture, the job challenge will remain agrarian for years to come. Significant
gains can come from enhancing the conditions for labor mobility within and outside Nepal. Within
Nepal, gains can be reaped by enhancing labor mobility from rural areas to urban centers where they
can they can be more productive. Another opportunity is leveraging international migration, but
despite large numbers of Nepalis leaving for work overseas every year, 2 emigration remains costly
(about $1,500 for a worker going to Gulf countries and Malaysia), characterized by low-skilled work
and a low ability to invest savings in entrepreneurial activities in Nepal. Developing high-growth
sectors, e.g. tourism, will be pivotal for job creation, but still requires putting in place growthenhancing measures. For example, according to estimates by the IFC, making electricity more
reliable in developing countries can lead to 4-5 percent in annual job growth, an impact that is likely
to be even higher for Nepal.
17.
Macroeconomic and fiscal management have been prudent. Tax reform has had some
success, with revenues growing sharply in recent years to about 17.4 percent of GDP, which is the
highest in South Asia. The main focus of monetary policy has been maintenance of the Nepali
rupee’s peg to the Indian rupee (at 1.6:1), which can at times contradict the central bank’s mandate
2

In FY13, some 450,000 Nepalis obtained approval to work overseas and the total figure (including migrants to India
and those migrating illegally via India) is believed to be larger.

6

to contain inflation. Inflation has remained high in recent years (above 8 percent, but below double
digits), largely reflecting price movements in India (Nepal’s largest trading partner, by far), with
non-food and core inflation driven by wage pressures and increasing – administered – fuel prices.
Despite the prevailing political uncertainty, fiscal policy has remained disciplined, requiring only
limited use of domestic borrowing (not exceeding 2 percent of GDP in the past three years). The
flipside of this success has been a chronic inability fully to roll-out capital expenditure plans, with
negative implications for future growth.
Macroeconomic Prospects and Risks
18.
Going forward, Nepal’s growth is expected to remain dependent on consumption
(supported by remittances) and agricultural output (dependent on weather patterns), as well
as external developments. Real GDP growth is estimated to have slowed to 3.6 percent in FY13,
reflecting a weak monsoon and low levels of activity in India. Over the long run, Nepal’s ability to
spur significant growth will depend on: (i) achieving greater political stability, (ii) enhancing private
sector engagement by removing bottlenecks to investment, and (iii) investing in new and better
infrastructure.
19.
Macroeconomic policy remains on a steady path. Over the medium term, ongoing
reforms in tax administration are expected to increase fiscal revenue further, while expenditure is
expected to grow only moderately as a share of GDP. On the external side, slower growth of
remittances is expected to translate into an increasingly negative current account balance (from a
current peak surplus). With IMF data showing FDI growing at a modest pace, gross official reserves
are expected to decline gradually, from 7.6 months of imports in 2012/13 to just above 6 months at
the end of the CPS period.
20.
Financial sector risk and weaknesses remain. Nepal’s financial sector expanded rapidly
over the last eight years, with domestic credit to the private sector jumping from 28 percent of GDP
in 2005 to 55 percent in 2013. Following a downturn of the property market in 2009 and a liquidity
squeeze in early 2011, several financial institutions faced severe balance sheet stress. The central
bank took a range of remedial measures to avert a potential financial crisis, inter alia pursuing an
accommodative monetary policy (with remittances inflows only partly sterilized) to allow banks to
rebuild liquidity. As a result, in FY12, broad money grew by almost 23 percent, well above nominal
GDP growth (14 percent), although it moderated to 16.3 percent the following year as the pressure to
keep liquidity high to support the financial sector eased.
21.
Problem loans in the banking system are under-reported, contributing to the fragility of
the system. Reported results indicate that problems loan levels on an aggregate basis are a modest
3.8 percent, but a sizeable number of banks and financial institutions report high non-performing
loans (NPLs) and loan ever-greening. Problem loans are likely to have been building up—owing to
inadequate lending and risk management practices. Stress tests suggest that, in a protracted
recession, recapitalization needs in the banking sector could reach 2¾ percent of GDP, with 26 out
of 31 banks breaching the minimum capital adequacy ratio (CAR). An ongoing recapitalization of
the Rastriya Banijya Bank (RBB) and Nepal Bank Limited (NBL) – together 15 percent of the
banking industry – has improved the banks’ financial condition, but both remain noncompliant with
the minimum capital adequacy requirements. During 2013, the net worth of RBB and NBL became
positive for the first time in more than a decade. Since 2012, government has injected additional
capital into the RBB through a combination of share issues, conversion of preference shares into
common shares, and conversion of debt into equity.
7

22.
Debt and debt distress risks. Nepal’s total stock of public debt has been declining steadily
from over 35 percent of GDP in FY10 to under 31 percent in FY13, with external public debt
accounting for 64 percent of the total. A joint IMF-World Bank debt sustainability analysis (2011)
showed a moderate risk of debt distress, with external public debt dynamics broadly sound and
resilient to possible shocks under a baseline scenario. A new debt sustainability analysis is currently
underway and preliminary findings suggest a reassessment of Nepal's debt distress rating from
moderate to low.
D.
Development Challenges and Opportunities
23.
Nepal has the unique chance to make extreme poverty history, but to achieve this goal
the country needs to rekindle faster, more inclusive and sustained economic growth. Going
forward, the challenge for Nepal will be to move to a higher growth trajectory by removing key
bottlenecks to public and private investment. The good news is that, for both forms of investments,
the resources are already available and only need to be unlocked. Regarding public investment,
given that Nepal has the lowest fiscal deficit in South Asia – including a positive balance in FY13 –
and sustainable debt levels, the challenge is to use available resources to boost capital spending and
increase public investment. The financial sector points to a need to address supply-side constraints
in improving access to finance that would allow Nepal to attract more private investment.
24.
A first prerequisite for higher growth is greater political stability and policy certainty.
For the last years, Nepalis have focused their public dialogue on the political transition. But this has
shifted attention away from the country’s serious economic challenges and as a result growth has
slowed and competitiveness has continued to erode. According to the WBG’s Investment Climate
Assessment (ICA), private businesses in Nepal consider political instability the single most severe
obstacle to their day-to-day operations, even worse than the lack of electricity. Political volatility
and uncertainty have hampered growth-oriented fiscal policies and have prompted the private sector
to continuously adopt a wait-and-see position, manifested in a significant gap between expressions
of interest to invest and actual commitments; they may also explain why much of Nepal’s remittance
income is used for consumption rather than investment in the country. While the November 2013
elections were peaceful and delivered a relatively clear outcome, it will now be necessary for Nepal
to boost investment and undertake the structural reforms needed to tackle the enduring sources of
fragility, improve the investment climate, and restore external competitiveness.
25.
Beyond Nepal’s political challenges, poor and insufficient infrastructure is the single
most important economic bottleneck to growth in Nepal—and therefore to more jobs,
improved services, better livelihoods, and lower poverty. In the 2012/13 Global Competitiveness
Report, Nepal ranked 143rd out of 144 countries in overall quality of infrastructure. The most
binding bottlenecks to growth and investment are insufficient and unreliable electrical power and
low-quality transportation networks. Electricity and transport account for about two-thirds of the
total infrastructure investment need of about 8 percent to 12 percent of GDP per annum until 2020
(see Table 1). Higher infrastructure spending is needed for Nepal to break out of a vicious cycle—
low infrastructure investment, leading to poor quality infrastructure services, leading to a poor
investment climate, leading to low private investment, leading to low public investment.
26.
Limited access to reliable and affordable electrical power continues to be a fundamental
reason for Nepal’s poor economic competitiveness. Nepal has an estimated potential of 84,000
MW of hydroelectric generation capacity, of which at least half is economically viable, but only 746
MW is currently developed (or 1.7 percent of the total viable potential). This is far below peak
demand of about 1,100 MW. Moreover, real supply in winter is even less as glacial water flows
8

decrease sharply in the winter, only about 250 MW of capacity is actually available from December
through April. While 75 percent of the population is estimated to have access to electricity (grid and
off-grid) according to the 2013 census, service is not necessarily available due to shortage of supply,
with load shedding of up to 18 hours per day in grid-covered areas in the dry season. To expand
access to electricity and reduce load-shedding, Nepal urgently needs to increase its hydro-electric
generation capacity, import excess power from India in the winter (when India has a power surplus),
and expand its transmission and distribution systems to bring power to end-users. It also needs to
expand off-grid generation capacity. Given its high potential, export of power from Nepal to India
or other countries would be a significant source of revenue and potential game-changer. But to bring
outside investors into the sector, Nepal needs to improve the capacity and efficiency of the Nepal
Electricity Authority (NEA), the monopoly off-taker.
Table 1: Investment needs per year by sector, 2011-2020

Sector

Average share of GDP (%)

Electricity
Transport
Water and sanitation
Solid Waste
Telecom
Irrigation
Total

3.3 - 4.5
2.3 - 3.5
1.1 - 1.6
0.2 - 0.3
0.3 - 0.4
1.0 - 1.5
8.2 - 11.8

27.
Transportation services are equally underprovided, with many communities physically
isolated, and the country as a whole poorly connected with India, its largest trading partner.
With its challenging mountainous terrain, Nepal has the lowest road density in South Asia. Onethird of residents in the hill areas live on average more than four hours away from an all-season road,
and 60 percent of roads are unable to provide all-weather connectivity. The 2013 Road Sector
Assessment Study identified maintenance as the foremost challenge to improving transport services.
Although access to paved roads doubled (from 24 percent to 51 percent of the population) over the
past six years, the quality has not improved. In addition, Nepal needs to expand its regional
transportation connectivity to India and potentially China, 3 its huge and fast-growing neighbors.
Sharing an approximately 1,800 km long border and 26 border points, India is considered Nepal’s
“natural” trading partner. Nepal’s second largest trading partner in South Asia is Bangladesh and
facilitation of bilateral trade between Nepal and Bangladesh, through the Siliguri Corridor (India),
could provide further opportunities.
28.
A difficult regulatory environment and a high degree of informality constrain the
private sector’s growth engine. In Nepal, companies have to comply with 130 business processes
in order to start, operate or close their business, spread over at least 41 ministries and agencies.
According to an IFC stakeholder perception survey, 34 percent of businesses surveyed said they had
not made an investment due to regulatory hassles. In addition, the large share of informality, which
accounts for 70 percent of total non-agricultural employment, inhibits growth and fuels the need to
rely on remittances. Informality allows businesses to evade taxes and to avoid regulation and
inspection, which diminishes the quality of good and services.

3

Bilateral trade between India and China reached $58 billion in 2010; most of this trade travels by sea.

9

29.
There is also an urgent need to consolidate stability in the financial sector. As
mentioned above, the 2011 crisis revealed severe distress in a number of smaller development banks
and finance companies. A number of financial institutions remain at risk of insolvency, due to
inadequate risk management practices, poor corporate governance and high credit exposure
compounded by under-resourced supervision and weak enforcement of prudential norms. The
regulatory framework remains weak; operational capacity to manage the fiscal costs of a financial
crisis is limited; and so the capacity to prevent and manage potential crises remains a concern. In
addition, because both state-owned banks enjoy implicit state guarantees and have received public
subsidies to their private shareholders, they undermine effective competition within the sector.
While the outreach of the banking sector has increased, not all population groups have equally
benefited. Remote areas, small enterprises and women have lower access to financial services.
30.
Agriculture will continue to be an important source of growth, jobs and poverty
reduction, at least over the medium-term. Agriculture has a key role in promoting growth and
poverty reduction, as the second greatest source of value-addition in the economy, and the largest
source of employment and poverty reduction. It makes up over one-third of GDP while employing
over three-quarters of the population. About 92 percent of the poverty reduction achieved over the
last seven years took place in rural areas, and incomes in the rural areas are expected to continue to
drive poverty reduction over the medium-term due to the concentration of the poor in the countryside. Therefore, poverty reduction will continue in Nepal only if agricultural productivity improves,
rural households sell more of their produce in the market (the share has increased from 25 percent in
2003/04 to 41 percent in 2010/11), and at the same time, opportunities are created for surplus labor
to be productively employed in other areas.
31.
While Nepal has made good progress on many social indicators, persistently high
childhood malnutrition continues to undermine the human potential that is needed to achieve
sustained and resilient growth. Nepal has made impressive progress towards achieving a number
of MDGs, but it has made relatively less progress on reducing hunger. Chronic energy deficiency in
women remains high, at 23.9 percent in the Far-West and 19.3 percent in the Mid-West. Poor infant
and child feeding practices are prevalent, with only 24.4 percent of children between 6 and 24
months being fed adequately and 13.4 percent of babies being born with low birth weights and to
mothers below 20 years of age. Access to health services remains unequal and of low quality. In
2011, 78 percent of births in the richest quintile took place in health facilities, but the corresponding
number was only 11 percent for the bottom 20 percent. Furthermore, high out-of-pocket
expenditures for health care – due to a lack of health insurance – create a formidable poverty trap:
they represent about 49 percent of monthly household consumption among the poorest 20 percent.
Based on 2003, about 6.7 percent of households fall below the poverty line in a given year as a
consequence of these expenses. Improvements in health and nutrition are also closely linked to
necessary improvements in water and especially sanitation. While access to improved water and
sanitation are 87 percent and 91 percent, respectively in urban areas, for rural areas, water access is
85 percent but sanitation access is only 55 percent. Surveys show that 44 percent of existing rural
water systems are in need of repairs or rehabilitation. About 5.5 million people suffer from
inadequate water service and 16 million from inadequate sanitation facilities. Nepal aims to reach
universal access to water and sanitation by 2017.

10

32.
Other key challenges in the social sectors include low access to and low quality of skills
development, hindering employability. While Nepal has made good progress in enhancing equal
access to basic education (grades 1-8), 4 there are still major challenges in improving access to postbasic education, especially for children from poorer quintiles. Another key challenge is improving
the quality of education at all levels. In the area of skills development, there remain challenges in
increasing workers’ productivity and technical skills in both the formal and informal sectors, as well
as domestic and abroad. Over 400,000 workers migrate abroad each year for employment purposes,
providing the remittances that currently fuel growth and poverty reduction. But of those migrants,
more than 75 percent are engaged in low-skilled jobs. Wage premiums for higher levels of
education are considerable in Nepal, and a person with higher secondary education earns almost five
times more than a person with primary education (grades 1-5) and two times more than one with
basic education (grades 1-8).
33.
Despite the recent encouraging trends in poverty reduction, Nepali households remain
vulnerable to shocks. The existing social protection system is inadequate for providing reliable
safety nets. Social protection spending in Nepal has increased substantially in recent years, from 0.5
percent of GDP in 2004/05 to 2.4 percent in 2010/11, compared to 1-2 percent on average in South
Asia, but this increase in spending has been driven in part by a proliferation of costly and inefficient
social protection programs with a limited impact on reducing poverty and inequality. Some social
assistance schemes – including cash transfers and scholarships – have had only a modest impact on
poverty, due to small benefit sizes and weak targeting. Coverage is limited with only 15.5 percent of
Nepalis either directly or indirectly benefiting from a cash transfer program, well below the current
poverty level of 25 percent.
34.
Nepal is also heavily vulnerable to climate change and natural disasters. Recent records
show increasing incidents of drought, flood, hailstorms, landslides and crop disease. Climate
change is expected to increase these incidents, with floods, droughts, and ecosystem degradation
directly affecting the livelihoods of the poor. Nepal is located on the edge of a tectonic plate that
gave rise to the Himalayas, and so it is also subject to high earthquake risks, particularly in the
Kathmandu valley, which was once the bed of a glacial lake and so is prone to soil liquefaction.
35.
Finally, to address all of these challenges, Nepal would benefit from strengthening its
governance and management of public expenditures. Nepal continues to rank low on international governance indicators such as Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index
(116 out of 177 countries) and the World Governance Indicators (declining trend over the last
decade). Public Financial Management (PFM) also remains a critical issue: The Country Policy and
Institutional Assessment (CPIA) rating for the quality of budgetary and financial management fell
from 3.5 in 2007 to 2.5 in 2011 and has not improved since. A Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) assessment in 2007 found that while Nepal’s PFM and procurement systems
had some good design features, their implementation was limited, leading to fiscal and fiduciary
risks. There is some evidence of progress in transparency since then (e.g., the Open Budget Index
found an increase in budget transparency from 36 out of 100 in 2006 to 44 in 2012), but there is still
room for further improvement. Going forward, Nepal could streamline and strengthen budget
preparation, improve budget execution, and improve transparency and oversight.

4

In Nepal, basic education covers five years of primary education and three years of lower secondary education.

11

E.
Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy
36.
The Bank Group strategy will support the Government’s Development Plans. The
development plan is implemented through consecutive three-year plans. The new 2014-2016 plan is
currently being prepared and will build on the previous one (2009-2013). The overarching goal is to
improve the living standards of all Nepalis and to reach middle-income country status by 2022. The
key focus is on achieving higher growth and employment, specifically (i) to achieve job-centered,
poverty-reducing, sustainable and broad-based economic growth, with the joint efforts of the
government, private and community/co-operatives sectors; (ii) to develop physical infrastructure to
support both the future federal structure of the nation and regional economic development; (iii) to
emphasize inclusive and equitable development to achieve sustainable peace; (iv) to contribute to
socioeconomic and social services; (v) to make development results-oriented through ensuring good
governance and effective service delivery; and (vi) to boost economic growth and stability by
strengthening the private sector and promoting industrialization, trade and services.
III.

WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR NEPAL

A. Lessons Learned from Previous Strategies and Feedback from Consultations
37.
A self-evaluation by the Bank Country Team yielded lessons for the Bank’s future
engagement. Since previous strategies were of a short-term nature, an evaluation of outcomes
achieved under the previous engagement can be misleading. However, some broad lessons could be
learned (listed in more detail in Annex 5):
• The WBG program needs to shift toward a more strategic engagement and address longerterm systemic issues. In line with the findings of the 2011 World Development Report (WDR)
on conflict and fragility, the Bank’s program under previous strategies focused on building
public confidence by focusing on short-term tangible measures, such as cash-transfers to
conflict-affected groups. The next step proposed by the 2011 WDR is to focus on the more
arduous tasks of strengthening the capacity of state institutions and making them more inclusive,
to help build citizens’ trust in the state. The new strategy therefore proposes to phase out shortterm measures and instead contribute to building effective and inclusive systems. This approach
span across sectors, including social protection, education, energy, transport and agriculture.
• WBG engagement in priority areas need to consider the wider policy and institutional
environment that makes project implementation more conducive. For example, previous
engagements in the energy sector were considered too transaction- and project-focused and they
failed to address wider systemic constraints to sector governance. This led to severe
implementation challenges, due to the lack of ability of the sector to cope with a variety to
issues, such as safeguards, developing public-private partnerships, increasing operational
efficiency, etc. This CPS instead proposes a more holistic approach with a combination of
technical assistance, knowledge provision and policy reforms (through a development policy
operation) to induce the required structural transformation that would allow for successful
development of the country’s vast hydropower potential. It is proposed that this CPS will work
towards benefiting from the comfort of IFC’s intervention in attracting the foreign private sector
to explore further investment opportunities in the Nepal hydropower sector.
• Programmatic flexibility continues to be a key requirement in the Nepali context. For
example, IDA will take a cautious approach to providing financial support to power transmission
lines as experience shows that it can be extremely difficult for the Bank both to adhere to its
social and environmental framework and to overcome deep-seated ideological opposition to such
investment. In addition to the examples provided, the sections below describe in more detail
how lessons will be integrated into the program.
12

38.
To inform CPS preparation, multi-sector groups of Bank Group staff held
consultations with over 400 people in five regions outside and within Kathmandu. Annex 6
provides a detailed summary of the consultations feedback. The consulted stakeholder groups
included representatives from government, political parties, the media, development partners, the
private sector, civil society organizations, youth groups and women groups. Given the political
stalemate in the country at the time, broad consultations across a wide range of stakeholders were
crucial to obtaining a better understanding and alignment around development priorities.
39.
Infrastructure, education/skills, and agriculture emerged as the three highest national
priorities during the consultations. For infrastructure, most stakeholders highlighted access to
roads and electricity as the most central to Nepal’s growth and poverty reduction. With respect to
education, the key issue that emerged was the quality of education, linked with skills development
focused on employability for young men and women. In addition, agriculture commercialization,
irrigation and productivity increases were considered crucial contributors to growth and poverty
reduction. Stakeholders also highlighted corruption and weak governance as serious impediments to
inclusive growth and effective service delivery. Other areas highlighted included the need to foster
entrepreneurship, promote tourism, improve health, protect the environment, strengthen inclusion
and increase women’s empowerment.
40.
Another key feedback from the consultations consisted in stakeholder guidance to the
WBG to increase its development effectiveness. Stakeholders advised the WBG: (i) to leverage its
role as the largest development partner in Nepal and to use its influence to encourage reforms; (ii) to
be selective and provide targeted support in key areas and not spread its resources too thinly; (iii) to
avoid testing and piloting new approaches and instead focus on concrete and longer-term support
based on proven models; (iv) carefully to embark on transformational mega-projects while guarding
against corruption and governance risks; and (v) to maintain stability and continuity of assistance in
areas where there have been good results and avoid getting distracted by topical subjects in
international development.
41.
In December 2012, the World Bank Group also conducted a client survey about the
WBG’s effectiveness and suggestions for future engagement in Nepal. The survey identified
lack of peace and security stemming from weak governance as the top priorities. Respondents
valued the partnership with the WBG and were positive about its ability to contribute to greater
development effectiveness. They also urged better knowledge dissemination and grassroots
involvement from the Bank. More details are provided in Annex 5.
B.

Proposed Assistance Strategy
Summary Results Framework

Pillar 1: Increasing economic growth and
competitiveness
Outcome 1.1: Increased supply of electricity, including
import, and improved access to reliable and affordable
electricity within Nepal
Outcome 1.2: Improved transportation connectivity,
internally and with India
Outcome 1.3: Improved environment for private sector
investment, including increased financial sector stability

Pillar 2: Increasing inclusive growth and
opportunities for shared prosperity
Outcome 2.1: Increased agricultural productivity and
commercialization
Outcome 2.2: More equitable access to education and
skills development, of higher quality and relevance
Outcome 2.3: Improved health and nutrition services,
particularly for the poor and disadvantaged
Outcome 2.4: More efficient and transparent social
safety net system

13

42.
The WBG will support Nepal’s aspirations for increasing economic growth through
increased investments in key sectors while providing support to make growth more inclusive
and to help equalize opportunities across groups and communities. These focus areas are
considered to be most appropriate to reduce extreme poverty and increase shared prosperity in
Nepal. IDA, IFC and MIGA will continue to foster their ongoing collaboration in these areas to
make maximum use of their joint comparative advantage. As shown in the results framework in
Annex 1 and the summary above, WBG efforts will be organized within two pillars. Under pillar 1,
the WBG will focus on increasing economic growth and competitiveness. Given Nepal’s binding
growth constraints, WBG support will focus on hydroelectric power generation, enhancing transport
connectivity, and improving the business environment. Under pillar 2, the WBG will focus on
increasing inclusive growth and opportunities for shared prosperity. WBG support under this pillar
will focus on enhancing the productivity of agriculture and equalizing access to health care, skills
development and social protection, while also improving the quality of these services. Cutting
across these pillars, WBG activities will also help to improve the efficiency, effectiveness and
accountability of public expenditure.
43.
Based on the lessons learned from previous engagements and feedback from
consultations with key stakeholders, the following principles will guide the WBG’s engagement
in Nepal: (i) balancing risks with reward, (ii) selectivity, and (iii) flexibility.
•

•

•

Balancing risks and rewards. In a shift from the approach taken in past Interim Strategy Notes
(ISNs), the WBG will engage in larger programs that strive for nation-wide impact, such as
attracting active private sector participation in developing the potential for the country’s hydroelectricity generation. Some of the priority areas of the CPS are also areas with a mixed record
in project implementation, but nevertheless are crucial to support Nepal’s development. To
alleviate these risks, the CPS will put a strong focus on providing the necessary technical
assistance and policy reforms that will provide a more conducive environment for improved
project implementation and performance.
Selectivity. This strategy consolidates the WBG’s engagement into fewer sectors, where the
WBG has a comparative advantage and can leverage its financing and analytical resources for
greater development impact. It also consolidates WBG engagement within sectors, for example
in education with a proposed shift to skills building from the current broad engagement in
primary, secondary, tertiary education and vocational training. The rationale for selectivity is
based on: (i) country priorities; (ii) availability of resources, especially IDA, and the need to
utilize limited resources for its greatest impact; and (iii) WBG comparative advantage vis-à-vis
other development partners.
Flexibility. Programming flexibility will remain necessary, given the politically-fragile country
environment and low implementation capacity. While the CPS identifies engagement areas that
are high-risk (as well as high-reward) it will also retain the flexibility to make adjustments if
project implementation is seriously off track and potentially refocus on areas with a better track
record. Projects will also be restructured as needed and the program will continue to proactively
cancel resources and redirect them elsewhere, as circumstances warrant. A mid-term
implementation evaluation will provide a status update and potential course correction.

14

Pillar 1: Increasing Economic Growth and Competitiveness
Pillar 1: Increasing economic growth and competitiveness
Outcome 1.1: Increased supply of electricity, including import, and improved access to reliable and affordable
electricity within Nepal
Outcome 1.2: Improved transportation connectivity, internally and with India
Outcome 1.3: Improved environment for private sector investment, including increased financial sector stability

44.
This pillar will focus on removing the binding constraints to private investment and
growth by focusing on energy, transport, the financial sector and the business enabling
environment. As already mentioned above, growth is an important requirement for Nepal to further
reduce extreme poverty and to increase shared prosperity. Since infrastructure is the key binding
constraint to growth, a key focus will be on energy and transportation. Addressing these infrastructure constraints would not only promote growth, but also address poverty more directly. For
example, access to electricity is required to run clinics and hospitals. Transportation infrastructure
will help to connect many now-isolated communities in the poorest areas to social services, markets,
economic opportunities, and assistance during emergencies, and to enhance social inclusion, as
Nepal’s poor connectivity has historically been a driver of conflict. 5
Outcome 1.1: Increased supply of electricity, including import, and improved access to reliable
and affordable electricity within Nepal
45.
The WBG’s major focus during the CPS will be on increasing Nepal’s energy supply.
Ongoing and new projects, further described below, will contribute to on-grid generation capacity
(both rehabilitated and new), power imports from India to address the winter load-shedding, and
improvements to the distribution system over the medium-term. Over the long-term and beyond the
CPS period, the WBG will focus on developing Nepal’s hydropower with the goal to develop
markets for power exports. While progress has been elusive in the past, an April 2013 Memorandum
of Understanding agreed by seven major political parties provided a first turning point in Nepal’s
quest to develop an export-oriented hydropower sector (see Box 2).
46.
To lay the foundation for a more long-term engagement on hydropower, the WBG will
also provide support to improve the governance, operational efficiency and financial
performance of the energy sector. Focus areas are expected to include articulating a corporate
development plan for the NEA, to restructure its operations and reduce its financial losses (currently
about Nepalese Rupee (NPR) 2 per unit sold, or $55-93 million per year over 2009-12); improving
sector financing through improving operational efficiency, lowering costs and reforming the tariff
structure (inter alia to pass inflation and foreign exchange risks to the consumer, achieve cost
recovery, and achieve a positive return on NEA’s assets); enhancing the legal framework for public
and private investment in electricity generation and transmission, including particularly to address
local social and livelihood impacts, to provide needed credit enhancements, and to guarantee
government obligations under power purchase agreements (PPAs) where requested; initiating actions
for establishing an independent power regulator; developing a power trading strategy to ensure that
electricity generated in Nepal can be evacuated (ultimately) to a regional power grid; and working
with the private sector to enhance the sustainability of hydropower projects by building capacity to
assess and mitigate environmental and social impacts. Given the fact that the sector reform agenda
will involve complex change across many government entities over a number of years, a
Development Policy Operation (DPO) will be the Bank’s primary instrument of support to the
5

A 2009 study on poverty and conflict in Nepal noted that the intensity of conflict between 1996 and 2006 was less in
districts with higher road densities.

15

country in these areas. The proposed DPO would be linked with technical assistance provided under
ongoing and new investment projects that will focus on improving the capacity of key actors,
including both NEA (which is mandated to develop generation projects below 500MW) and the
Investment Board Nepal (which is mandated to develop projects of 500MW or more).
Box 2: The WBG’s renewed energy agenda for Nepal
Given a mixed history of supporting hydroelectric power generation in Nepal, the Bank Group’s renewed efforts in
this sector remain risky, but there have been positive developments over the past years:
•

•
•
•

Investment Board Nepal: In September 2011, the first Constituent Assembly passed an act to create the
Investment Board Nepal (IBN) as a central agency to mobilize private-public partnerships in infrastructure.
The Investment Board, chaired by the Prime Minister, was created to approve infrastructure investments
above NPR 10 billion, including hydropower projects with a capacity greater than 500 MW. The WBG
jointly with the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID) are currently
supporting the Investment Board, which received technical and institutional support by IFC in the initial
years, in carrying out due diligence for reviewing the feasibility of four large-scale (600-900MW)
hydropower generation projects.
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) among political parties: In April 2013, through the
coordination of the Federation of Nepalese Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FNCCI), seven major
political parties signed a MoU agreeing on the development of an export-oriented hydropower sector.
Transmission master plan: With IDA support, NEA is preparing a transmission system master plan
systematically to address key transmission bottlenecks in a coordinated manner, in consultation with
development partners.
Nepal-India power trading: The WBG and other donors are facilitating power-sharing discussions
between Nepal, India and Bangladesh, while Indian hydropower developers interested in developing
projects in Nepal are engaging Indian off-takers bilaterally to secure Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs)
to anchor their projects.

In addition, several WBG-supported investments are underway to put in place the necessary conditions for our
engagement:
•

•

•

Nepal-India transmission: The ongoing IDA supported Nepal-India Electricity Transmission and Trade
Project finances construction of a cross-border transmission line, and associated lines within Nepal will
provide the backbone for hydropower development. This regional project will allow Nepal to import
power from India to reduce winter load-shedding while also enabling Nepal to sell surplus energy to India
in the future, thus making Nepal’s hydropower development financially viable.
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) experience: The proposed IDA-IFC Kabeli-A hydropower project
provides government agencies with an initial experience in processing PPP hydropower projects. On this
basis, IDA and IFC are jointly working for hydropower development, as most projects at an advanced stage
are driven by private sector developers.
Infraventures: Nepal continues to be an important target market given the huge potential to do
transformative projects across various infrastructure sectors. IFC and the World Bank are working closely
to align on strategic priorities in Nepal, especially in the hydropower sector and have so far invested in
Upper Trishuli and Upper Marsyangdi.

47.
IDA, IFC and MIGA can play important complementary roles in developing Nepal’s
power sector. With sustained technical assistance from both IDA and IFC, NEA and the IBN are
already working with various sponsors to develop a number of large-scale hydropower projects for
both domestic and export markets. IFC has received signed mandates to invest in several private
projects, while IDA has been requested to provide financing for public projects or to guarantee the
PPAs or termination risks for several private ones. Some of these projects are now at an advanced
stage of development. In addition, IDA is engaged in building out Nepal’s transmission back-bone,
including interconnections with India, so that generated electricity can be effectively evacuated to
domestic and export markets, thus supporting growth both in domestic industry and in export
earnings and tax revenues. Going forward, IDA is helping NEA to improve its operational
16

efficiency, systems planning, project preparation and implementation, and also helping the
government to make the tariff and institutional reforms needed to improve operational efficiency. At
the same time, IFC is helping to streamline hydropower licensing procedures (using checklists,
screening criteria, and standard concession agreements) to improve the sustainability of hydropower
projects by addressing key environmental and social issues and to undertake a comprehensive review
of existing laws, acts and regulations to identify constraints and reform recommendations with a
view to remove impediments to private investment. As viable projects materialize, the WBG will
utilize all available instruments, including IDA and IFC investments and IDA and MIGA guarantees.
IFC is helping in developing enhanced financing options for hydropower projects in Nepal by
working with government to issue local currency bonds and by working towards providing credit
lines to Nepalese banks for small hydropower development, among other initiatives. In addition to
financing options, IFC plans to provide technical assistance that will include training programs and
workshops meant for capacity building of financial intermediaries and project developers, as well as
awareness-building of all other relevant stakeholders. Utilizing joint resources of IDA, IFC and
MIGA helps to reduce risk, create bankable projects and mobilize private sector investments,
resulting in more sustainable flow of investments.
48.
In association with large-scale electricity generation and transmission, the WBG will
also continue efforts to expand access to electricity in rural areas, through grid extension and
off-grid renewable technologies. In the short-run, to reduce acute load-shedding in urban areas, the
WBG is helping to develop a grid-connected solar power generation system to improve supply- and
demand-side efficiency; and to increase power imports through rehabilitating existing small-scale
cross-border links in local areas. In addition, the WBG will expand its support to mini- and microhydropower development, as well as the use and development of Solar Home Systems (SHS), which
today provide about 300,000 rural households with access to electricity and also support various
small businesses and other income-generation activities. The WBG will also continue to support
other off-grid technologies with a direct impact on the livelihoods of the poor, including cook stoves
and biogas. IDA and IFC will work with the private sector to identify and scale-up commerciallyviable business models to extend access to clean, sustainable and affordable energy solutions to the
underserved.
Outcome 1.2: Improved transportation connectivity, internally and with India
49.
The WBG will support transport connectivity, with a focus on rural transport and
connectivity to India, to improve access to markets for the poor and to facilitate national and
regional integration. The Bank will continue to support the Government’s all-weather upgrading
and maintenance efforts for both national and rural roads, with a special focus on improving
planning and maintenance and building institutional capacities. Going beyond the CPS period, the
Bank will also identify more strategic solutions to Nepal’s key transportation problems, such as the
“Fast Track” link between Kathmandu and the Terai. While this project would provide a clear
economic value, 6 many of the engineering works required to build the Fast Track are unprecedented
for Nepal (e.g., complex tunneling). After construction (which could take a decade), the Fast Track
would become a strategically-important national infrastructure lifeline and will warrant a rigorous
approach to asset management that is also unprecedented in Nepal’s roads sub-sector. Similar to its
6

At present goods and large passenger transport vehicles between Kathmandu and India make a 250 km detour. A 2008
feasibility study for a ‘fast track’ alternative alignment estimated potential time savings of 4-5 hours and potential fuel
savings on the order of NPR 3,000 (US$ 30) per one-way trip for a heavy truck. Preliminary economic analysis
conducted in 2008 forecasted Economic Rates of Return in excess of 30% and a fuel savings of approximately 32 million
liters of fuel during the first year of operations

17

approach in the energy sector, the WBG will therefore use a holistic approach through studies,
technical assistance and eventual investment financing – in partnership with other development
partners – for building the Fast Track. A Strategic Roads Network Operation prior to the Fast Track
will provide another stepping stone to funding detailed designs and institutional mobilization. In
addition, the WBG will build on successful partnerships in the trail bridges sub-sector to continue
supporting modes of connectivity beyond roads. An ongoing rural transport project is expanding
road access to rural areas. A complementary project during the CPS period and co-financed with
DFID would finance the local roads bridges within the project area. Finally, at the regional level, the
WBG will continue to support efforts aimed at removing infrastructure, policy, procedural and
institutional barriers to trade, and support country agreements to facilitate trade and transit between
Nepal and India as well as Bangladesh.
50.
The WBG will also help to strengthen key institutions in the transport sector, which
remains hampered by overlapping institutional roles and mandates. Local entities have low
levels of capacity and lack accountability, which, according to a 2011 Roads Sector Public
Expenditure Review, resulted in roughly 30 percent of expenditure transfers by the Government to
local government-led transport sector investments triggering some form of audit observation from
the Auditor General. The same study found that roughly 70 percent of spending in the transport
sector occurs in the last trimester of each year and that the budgeting, planning, procurement, and
contract management processes still need to work more smoothly. In the case of urban transport,
there are currently four different line ministries and roughly 23 different departments, divisions, or
local government bodies that have jurisdiction over issues relating to urban transportation in the
Kathmandu valley. IDA will support efforts to strengthen existing or new public sector institutions
that are currently struggling to discharge their functions in the transport sector.
51.
The WBG will also aim to improve the maintenance, safety and quality of transport
infrastructure and services. IDA will seek to forge new partnerships and exploit opportunities for
investments with local and national institutions to support improved quality and safety of urban
transport systems and other types of transport services. As part of an on-going rural transport project
the Bank will assess and potentially pursue opportunities of linking rural transport infrastructure
with major rural markets in order to improve the value chain of rural products including agriculture
produce. IFC is supporting airline expansion in the country, particularly through its investment in
Buddha Air. In response to government’s interest and request for support, IFC could provide PPP
transaction advisory support to strengthen aviation safety through capacity building of aviation
operators. IFC will seek to identify potential opportunities for collaborating in the aviation and
roads sub-sectors. The WBG will also seek to catalyze development partner support for criticallyimportant infrastructure investments that exceed the financial capacity of any one organization.
Outcome 1.3: Improved environment for private sector investment, including increased
financial sector stability
52.
The WBG will continue to provide both long-term and short-term support to efforts to
improve the business environment, with a view to removing binding constraints and catalyzing
private investments. The IFC’s investment and advisory services will continue to facilitate new
private investments and reduce the barriers to investment in key priority sectors, including tourism,
agriculture, and infrastructure (especially hydropower). IFC will also continue to engage in
providing advice to the Government on forming PPPs to speed up the development of much needed
infrastructure. In addition, IFC provides advice to SMEs and farmers to increase revenues and
expand access to markets by strengthening their management capacity (financial literacy, business
18

acumen) and technical skills (farmer productivity). Through the South Asia Regional Integration in
Trade and Investment (SARTI) project, IFC also aims to reduce time and cost burdens to trade and
investment in Nepal (as well as Bangladesh and western India).
53.
At the same time, WBG support to the financial sector will aim to address economic
risks stemming from the sector’s rapid expansion and associated distress in the banking sector.
To address financial-sector vulnerabilities, the Bank has been providing technical assistance in the
areas of crisis management, bank resolution and deposit insurance. A DPO, developed closely with
DFID and the IMF, helped to address some of the root causes of the sector’s difficulties. A followup DPO – building on a joint WBG-IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program as well as a DFIDsupported banking sector diagnostic – will aim to consolidate banking sector stability and pave the
way for developing a more robust and inclusive financial sector. At the same time, IFC has been
supporting increased access to finance through investments in microfinance and wholesale
institutions. It has been engaging with a wholesale microfinance lender and one of the most
prominent MFIs, providing technical assistance on risk management and micro-insurance. IFC will
also explore the possibility of engaging with the credit bureau to help accommodate microfinance
institutions for credit reporting. This intervention is expected to reduce risk of over-indebtedness
emanating from multiple lending. IFC will also continue to support trade finance in several
commercial banks, and its financial markets advisory practice will maintain its focus on financial
infrastructure, sustainable energy financing (SEF), SME lending, microfinance, credit information
bureaux, secured transaction registries, e-payment and support to long-term lending institutions. In
addition, IFC is working with local financial institutions to support SMEs and to improve their risk
management framework.
54.
In addition, the WBG will continue to provide both long-term and short-term
engagements in priority sectors to address binding constraints and catalyze private
investments. The IFC’s investment and advisory services will continue to facilitate new private
investments and reduce the barriers to investment in key priority sectors including tourism,
agriculture, finance, and infrastructure (especially hydropower). IFC will continue to engage in
providing advice to the Government on forming public private partnerships to speed up the
development of much needed infrastructure. In addition, IFC provides advice to SMEs and farmers
to increase revenues and expand access to markets by strengthening their management capacity
(financial literacy, business acumen) and technical skills (farmer productivity).
Pillar 2: Increasing Inclusive Growth and Opportunities for Shared Prosperity
Outcome 2.1:
Outcome 2.2:
Outcome 2.3:
Outcome 2.4:

Pillar 2: Increasing inclusive growth and opportunities for shared prosperity
Increased agricultural productivity and commercialization
More equitable access to education and skills development, of higher quality and relevance
Improved health and nutrition services, particularly for the poor and disadvantaged
More efficient and transparent social safety net system

55.
This pillar will focus on increasing inclusive growth and providing historicallydisadvantaged Nepalis with opportunities to improve their resilience and increase their
prosperity. As noted above, the rural economy remains a primary battlefield for reducing extreme
poverty and increasing shared prosperity in Nepal. In addition, having made strong progress in
investing in its human capital base, the WBG will support Nepal to make the most of its human
potential by helping to expand access to post-basic education and health and risk mitigation
strategies for all, particularly for the most disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. Further, it will
support strengthening the quality of those services including potentially through supporting fiscal
19

transfers from the central to the local level and supporting decentralization. Finally, it will support
building skills so that Nepalis can capitalize on economic opportunities.
Outcome 2.1: Increased agricultural productivity and commercialization
56.
The WBG will continue to help improve agricultural productivity with a stronger focus
on commercialization. Given the importance of agriculture to household incomes, ongoing IDA
support aims to shift agriculture from low-value food crops, such as cereals, which still dominate 80
percent of cultivated land, toward higher-value crops, which have a higher potential to raise farmers’
incomes. A particular focus will be on integrating small holders in value-chains for non-traditional
higher value commodities. In addition, the Bank will continue to support expanded crop production
through improving production inputs and expanding or rehabilitating irrigation schemes: currently,
only about 28 percent of Nepal’s arable land is irrigated, and most irrigation systems are farmermanaged and in dire need of modernization and rehabilitation. Embedded in these projects are
agricultural components, which will help to provide improved seeds and technology to make
efficient use of water resources. Other ongoing projects support activities aimed at addressing the
impact of climate change on agriculture production. An ongoing rural growth study will aim to
better understand the economic and structural transformations underway in rural Nepal, the key
drivers of poverty reduction in these areas (including the role of remittances), and the major
constraints to further progress.
57.
Another focus will be on agriculture commercialization and agribusiness. The focus will
be on the role of the private sector. IFC through technical assistance and capacity building aims to
promote growth of the local private sector and deliver a set of coordinated interventions to build
institutional capacity; strengthen financial literacy, business acumen and technical skills; and create
awareness in the marketplace by: (i) designing and implementing capacity-building interventions for
agribusinesses, dealers, retailers and farmers in the sugarcane subsector to help them address climate
change and production risks (such as through the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience); (ii)
providing technical assistance on post-harvest handling and crop waste reduction; and working with
private companies, financial institutions and government to establish a warehouse receipt financing
model; and (iii) helping agribusiness companies to systematically evaluate energy supply options
and develop renewable energy projects to establish a more reliable or cost effective energy supply
for own use and/or export to the grid. In order to stimulate investment in agribusiness, IFC is
currently exploring setting up an agri-business credit line/risk-sharing facility with private financial
institutions. IFC is also exploring opportunities in direct investment in agri-processing companies.
Outcome 2.2: More equitable access to education and skills development, of improved quality
and relevance
58.
The WBG will shift its ongoing engagement in the education sector toward a stronger
focus on equalizing access, improving quality and providing skills for jobs. The need to refocus
the WBG’s engagement in Nepal is most evident in the education sector. IDA currently supports all
levels of education – primary, secondary, tertiary and vocational training –through three distinct
projects. One project includes IDA financing of an education SWAp, the School Sector Reform
Program (SSRP), which is the Government’s program to support equitable access to basic education
and is supported by 15 development partners. Once SSRP closes, IDA will move away from its
current role as financier and administrator toward providing the global knowledge needed to increase
education quality and more inclusiveness, especially for the poor.
20

59.
As the Bank moves away from financing in basic education, it will provide continued
support in secondary and higher education. As mentioned above, given higher wage levels for
post-primary levels of education, providing Nepalis with higher levels of education will help reduce
extreme poverty and increase shared prosperity. The WBG comparative advantage lies therefore in
making sure youths are provided with the skills that would allow them to reach for higher earning
jobs, either at home or abroad. Learning from the implementation of the ongoing vocational
education and training project, the WBG will sharpen its focus on skills development in both the
formal and informal sector to enhance the productivity of migrant workers. It will also pay special
attention to safety and rights issues of migrants and to the role of financial intermediaries in
promoting more efficient remittance transfers. In addition, the WBG will support major institutional
reforms to Nepal’s higher education system with the aim to improve quality and relevance of the
skills acquired by graduates to better respond to market needs.
Outcome 2.3: Improved health and nutrition services, particularly for the poor and
disadvantaged
60.
Within the health sector, WBG engagement will focus on supporting expanding access
to and quality of services. IDA, along with other developmental partners, is providing ongoing
support through a health SWAp. Continued WBG support will combine finance with knowledge to
improve the effectiveness, efficiency and quality of health services (both public and private) and
improve its ability to serve the poor. One key challenge is to protect the poor against the potentially
catastrophic impact of high out-of-pocket expenditure for health care. This could be achieved
through targeting demand and supply side financing schemes for the poor and testing options for
moving towards a national health-insurance scheme. The WBG will also continue to support
interventions outside the health sector with impact on health outcomes, e.g., interventions to reduce
tobacco use, improve road safety, and provide water and sanitation in rural areas. Ongoing projects
focusing on nutrition and food security, complemented with expanded nutrition services within the
water and education sectors and efforts to incentivize food fortification by the private sector, will
continue to be the main instruments for tackling childhood malnutrition and hunger. A new rural
water supply and sanitation project will aim at continuing to expand water coverage, but with an
emphasis on less well-served districts to better target the poor; reduce Nepal’s significant sanitation
gap by scaling-up sanitation beyond the boundaries of the project’s water supply schemes; and
strengthen institutional support mechanisms in selected districts to enhance sustainability.
Outcome 2.4: More efficient and transparent social safety net system
61.
IDA financing will support the Government in consolidating its safety net program by
strengthening the building blocks of its social protection program, including management
information and payment systems. Over this CPS period, the WBG will focus on helping the
Government to consolidate its social protection portfolio and improve the efficiency of social
spending. In support of this objective, two recent WBG projects have contributed to the
development of a management information system and piloted electronic payments through
branchless banking, in several districts. Expanding these systems to other districts and programs,
while supporting institutional strengthening, will help enhance the Government’s ability to provide
payments more efficiently and transparently on the ground, track expenditures, identify leakages and
eventually consolidate overlapping programs. In parallel, the WBG will invest in broader policy
dialogue with key ministries to improve efficiency, transparency, and sustainability of social
protection expenditures.
21

62.
Beyond safety nets, the ongoing IDA-financed Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF) focuses
on helping excluded communities to be empowered, to build capacity and infrastructure,
develop skills and provide income support. A 2013 evaluation by the Independent Evaluation
Group (IEG) of WBG assistance to low-income Fragile and Conflict-affected States found that
community-driven development in Nepal has been a useful vehicle for short-term assistance to local
communities. Yet the same report also claimed that, in the absence of a mechanism to ensure
sustainability, their long-term viability remains a concern. Many of the PAF-supported communities
have already formed networks or cooperatives and are working on a sustainable basis. Others have
turned PAF funds into productive income/infrastructure activities that generate sufficient revenue for
their maintenance. The WBG’s main focus over this CPS period will be to find more sustainable
ways of funding, including by government, for community support to the poorest.
Foundations and Cross-Cutting Dimensions
63.
The WGB will continue to provide support to building the key foundations to
strengthen public sector capacity, governance and public expenditure management. Whereas
Nepal matches or exceeds its peers on many development indicators, it regularly underperforms on
indicators measuring the quality of governance. The WBG is well-positioned to improve public
sector capacity and governance through institution-building within its sectoral activities and also, in
a more cross-cutting way, through supporting improved PFM and increased transparency and
accountability in service delivery.
64.
The WBG will continue to provide support to strengthen Nepal’s public financial
management (PFM) with the aim of making sure public expenditure is managed efficiently and
effectively. While Nepal’s PFM framework is well designed overall, there is still a significant gap
between intention and implementation. As a result, the formal budget preparation and execution
processes do not translate into effective spending. There is need to strengthen the existing
foundations towards an improved and effective PFM system, both upstream, downstream and
through external scrutiny of the budget cycle. The Bank will continue to provide this support
through a PFM Multi-Donor Trust Fund. Key areas to be addressed in the CPS period include: (i)
upstream annual program budgeting, to ensure that development budgets are based on completed
sector work plans; (ii) downstream reporting on budget utilization that is transparent, timely and
reliable through the use of the treasury single account and upgrading of the Financial Management
Information Systems (FMIS); (iii) introduction of an internal audit function to enhance current
budget controls; (iv) implementation of key audit recommendations to improve the system; and (v)
incremental strengthening of budgetary processes, openness and public awareness to build the
foundations for heightened accountability.
65.
In addition, the WBG will continue to lead development partners in supporting
government efforts to continuously improve its public procurement system. Since the Country
Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) carried out in 2002, the Bank has been closely engaged in
sector dialogue and provided technical and financial support to implement CPAR reform measures,
including the 2007 Public Procurement Act. The Bank remains committed to continue its dialogue
on public procurement reform in coordination with other development partners, with the aim of
harmonizing public procurement practices and developing the overall procurement capacity at
regulatory, implementation and at service provider (private sector) levels. Given its cross-cutting
dimensions, improvement in the performance of the public procurement system will contribute to
achieving development outcomes in the sectors. In order to further this objective, the Bank, in close
coordination with the Asian Development Bank (ADB), is already supporting the preparation of the
Public Procurement Strategic Framework, Phase II. The Government may use this framework for
22

mobilizing external support for improving procurement performance through further reforms,
including the wider enforcement of electronic Government procurement and much-needed
procurement capacity building.
66.
The Bank will also continue to support government efforts to strengthen the demandside of the public expenditure process through social accountability measures. The Bank’s
main mutually-reinforcing activities would include: (i) disclosing budget information that is
understood by the common person through the preparation of a citizens’ pre- and post-budget and
the use of national media to expand awareness; (ii) supporting agencies in increasing compliance
through greater use of good governance legislation, citizens’ engagement platforms and strengthened
information disclosure legislation; and (iii) raising community-level citizen awareness of
entitlements. Grievance redress systems are being elaborated in the roads sector and such local-level
systems are currently being assessed through demand-side public expenditure tracking survey
research on social security entitlements. Plans are underway to centralize bidding processes; and
various measures have been taken to monitor financial probity. The Bank is well placed to
contribute to addressing these challenges through: (i) supporting the implementation and assessment
of grievance redress mechanisms in its portfolio and beyond; (ii) enabling the operationalization of a
central bidding procurement process; (iii) strengthening the monitoring and mitigation of risks; and
(iv) supporting more structured and intensive civil society capacity at the national and community
level on budget accountability, transparency and social inclusion.
67.
IFC will supplement the focus on citizens’ engagement by continuing to improve the
dialogue between the private and the public spheres. IFC is supporting the Nepal Business
Forum (NBF), a public-private dialogue platform established by the Government in 2010, which
brings together over 40 government and private sector agencies to dialogue and review government
policy and regulation towards the private sector, with the aim of improving the effectiveness and
accountability of private sector policy making, and regulatory enforcement. Given the political
uncertainty and civil unrest, the NBF has been an important tool in helping the country to refocus on
economic growth by facilitating constructive dialogue on constraints to investment, trade and export,
and finance and credit. In March 2014, IFC through the NBF, facilitated a high level hydropower
dialogue, which helped create awareness and obtained buy-in for hydropower development action
plan among key stakeholders. The event underscored the demand for regional power integration, as
confirmed by the declaration by the power secretaries of India, Nepal, Bangladesh and the state of
Bihar.
68.
Gender will continue to remain a cross-cutting dimension of the Nepal program, and it
will continue to be mainstreamed across the portfolio. The Bank’s strategies over recent years
had a strong gender focus, and gender issues are effectively mainstreamed across the portfolio. In
recent years, the Bank collaborated with ADB and the UK’s Department for International
Development (DFID) on a seminal Gender and Social Exclusion Assessment, which is helping to
shape government and donor policies on gender and social inclusion. A second volume (2013)
provides practical guidance on how to mainstream gender equality and social inclusion in seven key
service-delivery sectors, including agriculture, education, forestry, health, irrigation, rural
infrastructure (with emphasis on roads), and rural and urban water supply and sanitation.
69.
Climate change and risks from natural disaster will also continue to be addressed in a
cross-cutting manner. IDA and IFC together with other development partners (including ADB,
DFID, Denmark, United States) will continue to support Nepal in implementing climate investment
fund programs, such as the Scaling-up Renewable Energy Program and the Pilot Program for
23

Climate Resilience. IDA will continue to mainstream contingent emergency response components
across its portfolio, which allows government to request the reallocation of project funds to support
response and reconstruction in the case of an adverse natural event.
C. Implementing the FY14-FY18 Strategy
70.
Implementation of the strategy will make optimal use of the joint comparative
advantage of the WBG and the division of labor between IFC, MIGA and IDA. As already
outlined above, the WBG will continue to build on its close collaboration in Nepal. IFC and IDA,
which also share the same office in Kathmandu, will continue to work closely across all CPS
engagement areas, including through various joint projects in energy, agriculture, finance and other
potentially-emerging areas such as tourism. The focus of IFC will continue to be to incentivize
private investment, while IDA will continue to work closely with government on the necessary
policy reforms and the optimal use of public investment.
The World Bank Group Lending Program
71.
Implementation of the proposed strategy will require consolidation of the IDA
program. The current portfolio consists of 17 projects with net commitments of $1.45 billion, and
three regional projects with net commitments to Nepal of about $240 million. The average project
size is $86 million, near the Bank-wide IDA average of about $87 million. Cumulative disbursements as of January 31, 2014, were $633 million (about 46 percent of net commitments) for the
national and about $15 million (about 6 percent of net commitments) for the regional projects.
Nepal’s many needs for Bank support after the conflict initially resulted in a proliferation of small
projects. While many of those projects were justified at the time, their proliferation created high
transactions costs, prevented the use of resources for other purposes, and diverted the focus away
from potentially transformative engagements.
72.
Under IDA16 (FY12-14), Nepal’s total IDA allocation was about $630 million, and
similar indicative financing levels are expected for IDA17 (FY15-17). 7 To implement the
proposed strategy, the Bank together with the Government is aiming to prioritize its engagement and
move to a more limited number of larger projects and programs. This will allow for more attention
to details through programmatic approaches, where technical assistance, knowledge provision, and
policy reforms are linked to or come ahead of any large investments. As noted above, the focus will
be on sectors and areas where the Bank has the biggest comparative advantage and can achieve the
greatest impact with respect to reducing poverty and enhancing shared prosperity.

7

The actual allocation will depend on the total IDA resources available; Nepal’s performance rating, gross national
income per capita, and population; the terms of IDA assistance (grants/credits) and the allocation deductions associated
with Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) annual debt service foregone; the performance, other allocation
parameters, and IDA assistance terms for other IDA borrowers; and the number of IDA-eligible countries.

24

Table 2: IDA lending program FY14-18
Fiscal Year

Lending

2014

Strengthening the National Rural Transport Program
Irrigation and Water Resource Management AF
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project
Others (Trust Funds):
• Scaling-up Renewable Energy (SREP) – Biogas
Higher Education Reform Project
Second Financial Sector Development Policy Credit
Energy Sector Development Policy Credit
Grid Solar and Energy Efficiency Project
Kabeli A Hydroelectric Project
Technical Assistance for Preparation of Hydropower Project and Sector Reform
Others (Trust Funds):
• ESMAP – Wind Energy Resource Mapping
Third Health SWAp (Health, Nutrition & Population - HNP)
Second Energy Sector Development Policy Credit
Hydropower Project or IDA Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG)
Social Safety Nets Systems Building Project
Strategic Roads Network Project
Others (Trust Funds):
• Public Procurement Performance Improvement Project
Hydropower Project or IDA PRG
Skills Development
Local Roads Bridges
Hydropower Project or IDA PRG
Nepal Fast Track

2015 8

2016

2017

2018

Indicative IDA
($ m)
100
50
72

Total:
200-300

Total:
200-300

Total:
200-300
Total:
200-300

73.
To support an agenda with a potentially high impact on reducing extreme poverty and
increasing shared prosperity, the Bank will make use of all available instruments. The Bank
will continue to utilize instruments with the greatest potential for impact. A first DPO for the
financial sector helped to initiate important policies and reform, and will be followed by a second
and possibly a third in a series. An energy DPO will enable the Bank to support the governance
reforms that the sector urgently needs to make headway on a sustainable and potentially transformative hydropower agenda. While Nepal’s experience with Program-for-Results (PforR)
implementation has so far revealed its challenges in a low capacity context, similar but more flexible
approaches (for example the use of disbursement linked indicators in the education sector) show
promise. Given the large investment needs in energy and other sectors, the WBG will also seek to
develop financing partnerships with other donors, development banks, and the private sector; explore
opportunities to use the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) enclave
financing; and make use of guarantees from IDA, MIGA or even potentially IBRD to crowd-in
additional financing. Additional financing will continue to be a preferred option for those parts of
the portfolio that are showing scalable results.
74.
IFC’s committed investment portfolio in Nepal stood at $40 million as of March 31,
2014, consisting of power, transport, banking, microfinance, tourism, and trade finance lines.
IFC invested in 14 projects (for $57 million in total) over the last ISN period (FY12 and FY13) and
six projects (for around $4 million in total) in FY14 (as of March 31, 2014). On the advisory
services side, IFC is engaged in a range of areas including investment climate, access to finance and
8

Should the commitments proposed for FY15 be high relative to actual allocations, there may be scope to accommodate
these higher levels through front-loading from FY16 and FY16.

25

sustainable business advisory. 9 Besides, there is also a pipeline of advisory projects in the PPP
transaction space. IFC’s advisory services currently have an active portfolio of $12.7 million across
12 projects in Nepal.
75.
Most recently, IFC’s investments include hydropower investments, an airline
expansion, and credit for trade financing. That said, investments in Nepal, including from IFC,
are constrained by a challenging regulatory and legal framework for foreign investment, poor
governance and accounting practices, vulnerability of the domestic banking sector together with lack
of a swap market for the Nepali rupee, poor implementation of property rights, and heightened
political uncertainty. In addition, the country’s logistical limitations, absence of supporting
infrastructure and the relatively smaller size of projects constrain investments, especially in the
manufacturing sector. Domestic supply side constraints, especially the lack of reliable power supply
and high cost of credit, have also accentuated the sluggishness in private investment. Regulatory
constraints such as inadequacy or absence of competitive bidding to award infrastructure projects
and the lack of an adequate framework and limited capacity to conceive, implement and monitor
PPPs have limited IFC’s PPP transaction advisory work in Nepal.
76.
IFC’s investment instruments currently include senior and subordinated loans, long
and short-term credit lines, trade finance lines and guarantees, and minority equity stake in
companies – all in hard currencies. IFC’s additionality in Nepal comes through providing longerterm financing than is available in the market, patient equity capital, crisis response products such as
liquidity facilities, global and regional expertise and experience, and technical assistance to enhance
areas such as corporate governance and management of environmental and social risks. IFC aims to
continue to respond to client needs through facilities such as SME Venture Fund, Infraventures,
transaction advice for PPPs, and risk-sharing facilities (RSF). As local currency financing is
essential for companies and sectors that generate local currency revenues, including large scale
infrastructure hydropower-projects, IFC plans to continue its effort in partnership with IDA, with the
Government to create such instruments.
77.
As of March 31 2014, MIGA has no exposure in Nepal. Recently cancelled guarantees
were in the hydropower sector. MIGA therefore has room to expand the provision of political risk
guarantees in the country. Like IFC, MIGA are constrained by a challenging legal framework for
foreign investment, poor governance and accounting practices, absence of competitive bidding to
award infrastructure projects and the lack of an adequate framework and limited capacity to support
PPPs.
78.
Trust Funds (TFs) have gradually become an important supplement to the Nepal
program. The current IDA TF portfolio consists of a total commitment of over $225 million. Many
TFs are well integrated into the country program through analytic and advisory activities (AAA), cofinanced operations and capacity-building activities. Major TFs include the Global Program for
Education, supporting the School Sector Reform Program; the Global Agriculture and Food Security
Program (GAFSP); the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR); a multi-donor financed PFM
TF; the State and Peace Building Fund; and the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF). At the
same time, the broader TF portfolio beyond the core TFs is fragmented and lacking ownership: there
are 65 smaller activities, of which four in five are Bank-executed, undermining aid-effectiveness
principles of building capacity and enhancing ownership in recipient countries. In addition, the
9

To strengthen impact and client focus, from FY15 some IFC advisory services will be delivered through joint World
Bank Group Global Practices, while other will be more closely aligned with IFC’s industry departments.

26

Bank’s TF portfolio comprises several global programs without a clear benefit for Nepal. Going
forward, the Bank will reduce the number of TFs and allow new financing only in areas clearly
aligned with the CPS. IFC works with various donors on its advisory projects such as climate
resilience/mitigation, access to finance, investment climate reform and with lending agencies such as
IDA and ADB for infrastructure and the financial sector projects.
The World Bank Group Knowledge Program
79.
The WBG will strive to remain the leading global knowledge provider to Nepal. A key
focus of this strategy is to make sure the WBG continues to provide the kind of global knowledge
that Nepal needs to bring its economy to a higher growth trajectory, to end extreme poverty and to
increase the prosperity of the bottom 40 percent. Design of this strategy has benefitted from various
knowledge products by the WBG, in particular country diagnostics such as the recent policy notes
for the new government. Going forward, the WBG will focus on three types of knowledge
interventions as presented in Table 3 below: (i) advocacy, including diagnostics about future
opportunities beyond the CPS period; (ii) quality analysis to inform ongoing or planned
interventions; (iii) advice to government based on specific requests.
Table 3: Proposed AAA and TA (FY14-18)
FY14
Advocacy

FY15

FY16

FY17

FY18

Poverty and shared prosperity Non-lending Technical Assistance (NLTA)
Social protection
CEM/Growth study
Nutrition policy
Mapping local service delivery
Competitive industries diagnostic
Education PETS
Federalism

Quality

Hydropower dialogue, studies and TA
Fast Track study and TA
Financial sector strategy TA
Public Financial Management TA
Agriculture growth
PEFA
Education sector review
Skills development study

Advice

Policy notes
Economic updates
National risk assessment
ROSC
Governance reform

Governance reform

80.
The Bank’s knowledge program during the CPS period will be fully aligned with the
priorities set out in the CPS. Within the typology introduced above, the WBG’s knowledge
advocacy will build on the recent policy notes for the new government, with a focus on the three
“Is” needed for Nepal to reach higher growth levels: investment, infrastructure and inclusion.
Building on this work, the WBG will carry-out a Country Economic Memorandum to analyze
27

Nepal’s key drivers of growth in more detail, with a potential focus on exports, migration/
remittances, hydropower and public investments. Knowledge to provide the basis for ongoing or
planned interventions will concentrate on the selective engagement areas, including hydropower,
transport, skills development and social protection. IDA and IFC will continue to provide advice to
the Government, including the Investment Board, on potential PPPs for infrastructure development,
through identifying strategic options for particular projects, supporting the development of feasibility
studies and contract documents, and enhancing the capacity to take potential projects to the market.
Finally, the WBG will continue to provide just-in time responses to government demands. Based on
the progress in drafting the new constitution, an important research area will likely include
federalism and how to prepare for and roll-out decentralization.
81.
IFC’s advisory services will continue to facilitate new private investments and reduce
the barriers of investment in key priority sectors including tourism, agriculture, finance and
infrastructure (especially hydropower). In response to government’s interest and request for
support, IFC could provide advice on forming public private partnerships (PPP) to speed up the
development of much needed infrastructure. IFC is supporting the Government of Nepal (GoN)
with PPP transaction advisory to assist in evaluating its priority projects through a Memorandum of
Understanding with the Investment Board of Nepal. Under this MoU, IFC will provide support in
the development of feasibility studies, strategic options for particular projects, developments of
contract documents, as well as support and capacity building to take these projects to market.
Partnerships
82.
In Nepal, foreign aid represents about 26 percent of the national budget. As detailed in
Annex 5, total disbursements of foreign aid to Nepal amounted to about $1.04 billion in FY12.
Approximately 57 percent of aid is provided by multilateral donors and about 43 percent from
bilaterals. In FY12, the top five donors were the WBG, ADB, the United Nations, the United
Kingdom and India. The five sectors with the most financing included education, local development,
road transportation, electricity and health. A government analysis of Nepal’s development
cooperation concludes that, despite the focus of Nepal’s development plan on higher growth and
employment, foreign aid still predominantly supports social development (by about 40 percent),
followed by infrastructure development (30 percent) and economic development (19 percent). More
details are provided in Annex 5. In addition, the analysis highlights the high fragmentation of donor
portfolios, including the WBG’s, and a lack of cooperation among donors. The WBG is responding
to these findings by striving to reduce its portfolio size, focusing on fewer areas and building more
partnerships.
83.
The WBG’s engagement proposed in this CPS are based on its comparative advantage
vis-à-vis other development partners. An analysis of the current structure of foreign aid in Nepal
and consultations with other development partners have confirmed the WBG’s proposed engagement
areas as outlined in the CPS and its complementarity with other development partners. Table 4
shows the selectivity in the CPS engagement areas vis-à-vis other development partners. For
example, the WBG is already the lead donor in energy and road transportation and will continue to
play this role. At the same time, ADB is the lead donor for local development, agriculture and
drinking water—these are areas in which the WBG will play a supplementary but not dominant role.
In areas with a very strong development partners’ presence, such as education and health, the WBG
will increasingly reduce its financing obligations while continuing to provide global knowledge as
required. Table 4 shows the WBG engagement areas under this CPS and prior strategies vis-à-vis
engagement by other development partners.
28

More

Prior
WBG
Areas

Less

Table 4: WBG engagement areas vis-à-vis development partners
Engagement Areas
Top Five Development Partners
(size of commitments)
Electricity
WBG, Germany, ADB, China, India
Transportation
WBG, ADB, Japan, India, Switzerland
Finance
WBG, UK, ADB, Norway, Germany
Agriculture
ADB, WBG, UN, USAID, Switzerland, EU
Education/Skills
WBG, ADB, EU, Denmark, UN
Health/Nutrition/Sanitation WBG, UK, USAID, Global Fund, Germany
Primary/Basic Education
WBG, ADB, EU, Denmark, UN
Peace and Reconstruction
WBG, EU, UN, Denmark, Germany
Urban Development
ADB, Germany, Japan, WBG, UN
Local Development
ADB, India, UK, WBG, Finland
Social Development
UN, USAID, Denmark, UK, Norway, WBG

CPS
Engagement
Areas

Level of Engagement

84.
The WBG will continue to leverage financing by other development partners. For
example, the Bank has already started to build a platform for enhanced donor coordination and
financing on energy sector policy reforms, based on the planned energy DPO. A first donor
coordination round included ADB, Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), Norway, DFID
and the United States Millennium Challenge Corporation. Among the agreements were (i) regular
meetings; (ii) collaboration to agree key policy reforms; (iii) shared financing of various studies; and
(iv) possibilities of co-financing of the DPO. Further leveraging of financing is ongoing and planned
across all CPS engagement areas.
IV. MANAGING RISKS
85.
The Bank Group’s engagement in Nepal will continue to face significant risks that
could affect strategy implementation. The most significant risks are likely to arise from: (i)
external and internal factors that can impact economic performance; (ii) drivers of conflict and
fragility that could lead to greater political instability and possibly social unrest; (iii) poor
governance, and increased corruption and fiduciary risks; (iv) low capacity for program
implementation, including for assessing and mitigating environment and social impacts; (v) and
reputational concerns, particularly the risk that the Bank Group fails in implementing its strategy.
86.
The CPS program is deliberately designed to address and, to the extent possible,
mitigate these risks. The table below highlights the specific risks within each area and the
mitigation measures that are part of the CPS program.

29

Risks

Mitigation measures in the CPS program

Political Risks
Continued political uncertainty has become the norm in
The WBG will continue its active engagement with political leadership
post-conflict Nepal, which has been characterized by
across the political spectrum to confirm all-party support and policy
frequent changes in government. The May 2012 dissolution
continuity for its program, especially on risky sectors like hydropower.
of the constituent assembly without agreement on a new
A more active communication strategy will be pursued to share Nepal’s
constitution brought additional uncertainty, but the
development results with stakeholders and support an all-party
establishment of an interim election government in March
consensus around development needs. If requested, the Bank may also
2013 followed by successful elections for a new constituent
support government work on federalism and fiscal decentralization.
assembly in November 2013 provides cause for optimism.
Economy (External)
Nepal would likely suffer from a global economic slowThe WBG’s strong growth focus in areas such as infrastructure
down in Europe and the United States, and its economic
development, agriculture and private sector development is geared
fortune will continue to be closely linked to India’s. It will
toward helping to build a stronger and more self-reliant economy.
continue to be a “price taker” in most markets, and will not
be able to influence, for example, fluctuations in fuel and
food prices.
Fragility
While Nepal’s peace process has made good progress and
The WBG will continue to take into account the political economy
there are signs of a relative abatement of the traditional
environment in which it operates. It will strive actively to use its
drivers of conflict, political instability and the rise of
engagement, within its mandate, to strengthen those institutions that
identity politics continue to contribute to an overall fragile
create a more inclusive and stable state and society.
country environment especially if Nepal moves forward in
implementing decentralization.
Governance
Governance risks are related to (i) politics – varying power
The WBG will assert its influence on the parts of the governance agenda
factions within government have a detrimental impact on
with a major impact on development. At the central level, work on
building institutions that are oriented toward service
public financial management will address both ex ante and ex post
delivery for citizens; (ii) corruption—public and societal
dimensions of the use of public resources. Efforts to strengthen the
actors are diverting resources from the state, citizens and
demand side of governance, including the inclusion of social
donors; and (iii) society—continued instability and
accountability tools in Bank projects, will continue. The portfolio will be
deterioration in the rule of law are resulting in a lack of faith annually reviewed to ascertain progress in implementing the agreed
in government.
governance and anti-corruption measures. Annex 4 describes
governance risks and the Bank’s approach in more detail.
Capacity
Project implementation capacity is weak across various
A strong focus on project preparation will continue, with improved use
levels of government, exacerbated by frequent staff
of readiness filters. Intensive implementation support is a high priority,
turnover. In education, for example, which is decentralized
and the Bank will continue to highlight staff turnover issues. The Bank
in Nepal, this weak capacity could hamper efforts to deliver
will also continue to encourage early project restructuring, if the
equitable access and higher quality education.
circumstances demand it. In education, the Bank is working with local
communities to build capacity and strengthen their role in managing
schools.
Infrastructure activities are accompanied by additional attention to
safeguards during preparation and implementation support; for example,
these include capacity-building support for the government in
environmental and social impact assessments and mitigation under
Kabeli A, as well as training and study tour program for key officials
involved in safeguard related work.
Engagement
The Bank Group might fail in some of its high-risk and
Lessons learned from previous engagements have informed our
high-visibility endeavors, such as hydropower and fall short proposed new approach in the energy sector and other potentially highof the goal to provide reliable and affordable electricity in
risk but high-reward sectors such as transportation. Instead of focusing
Nepal.
on specific transactions, the WBG will take a more holistic approach that
focuses on the necessary governance, policy and institutional
frameworks before committing to specific transactions and projects. In
addition, the WBG will further strengthening its synergies between IDA,
IFC and MIGA and work closely with other development partners on
major engage-ment areas. To mitigate reputational risks, the WBG will
openly acknowledge the risks that are associated with its engagement in
specific areas, and intensify its outreach and engagement with external
stakeholders.
Weak capacity in assessing and mitigating social and
environmental risks may result in excessive delays in large
infrastructure projects, and undermine in particular efforts to
strengthen electricity supply and transport connectivity in
Nepal.

30

Annex 1: Results Framework for the Nepal CPS FY14-FY18
Country goals 10 +
Constraints/opportunities toward
progress on WBG goals 11
Country Goals:
Assist in economic progress and social
development by developing modern energy
through the production and distribution of
hydropower.
Constraints/Opportunities:
Lack of energy main constraint to boost
competitiveness and growth as prerequisite
for further reducing poverty.
High levels of load-shedding and need to
rehabilitate and add new generation
capacity as well as importing power over
the medium-term.
Need for increased transmission and
distribution both to improve access within
Nepal and to link with India for import and
eventual export of power.
High hydropower potential, but low power
generation capacity, low supply and low
reliability.

Indicative CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Targets = FY18 unless specified

Indicative Milestones

Pillar 1: Increasing economic growth and competitiveness
Outcome 1.1: Increased supply of electricity, including Milestone: Generation - (i)
Procurement for turbine
import, and improved access to reliable and
and main valve
affordable electricity within Nepal
rehabilitation completed by
Indicator 1: Power Generation Capacity added or
December 2014; (ii)
rehabilitated (MW)
Procurement for EPC
contract for 20 MW gridLocal Capacity:
connected solar project by
Baseline:
Target:
December 2014.
0 MW (added or
144 MW rehabilitated
rehabilitated; 2014)
and at least 20 MW new
Milestone: Transmission capacity
procurement for all
Power Imports:
substations, transformers
Baseline:
Target:
and conductors completed
100 MW
250 MW cumulative
by December 2014.
power import from India
by end-2017
Milestone: Successful
Source: Project Data (Bank and IFC)
commitment of 2 IFC
Indicator 2: Length of transmission and distribution
investments by end of
system added or rehabilitated
CY2015.
Baseline:
0 km (new or
rehabilitated; 2014)

Target:
600 km new and
rehabilitated

Source: GoN; Project Data

Ongoing and Indicative
WBG Program

Ongoing Financing:
(i) Kabeli-A Transmission
Project;
(ii) Nepal-India Electricity
Trade and Transmission
Project (IDA);
(iii) Kali Gandaki
Hydropower Rehabilitation
Project
Indicative Financing:
(i) IFC Investments in
Andhikhola, Upper Trishuli
and Kabeli projects;
(ii) IFC & SREP term loan
for banks for small
hydropower projects (<=10
MW) financing;
(iii) Grid Solar and Energy
Efficiency Project;
(iv) Hydropower Project or
PRG;
(v) Scaling-up Renewable
Energy Project (TF);
(v) Energy DPO;
(vi) Investment for the Indo
Nepal Power ( IDA);
(vii) IDA/IFC Kabeli A
Hydropower Project.
Ongoing AAA/Others:
(i) Technical Assistance for
hydropower project
preparation and sector
reform;
(ii) Hydropower Dialogue.

10
11

Approach paper to the 2013/14-2015/16 Development Plan (translated from Nepali original).
End extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity.

31

Country Goals:
Expand a sustainable and safe transport
network that contributes towards national
socioeconomic integration, regional
balance and development.
Enhance the opportunities of income and
employment by promoting domestic and
international trade.
Constraints/Opportunities:
Lowest road density in South Asia with one
third of hill residents living more than 4
hours from an all-season road.
Need to expand regional transportation
connectivity and trade with India and
potentially China.
Country Goals:
Ensure financial sector stability through
balanced monetary, foreign exchange and
financial sector polices.
Create enabling environment to improve
access to banking and use of available
financial means leading to accelerated
economic activity.
Increase foreign investment by promoting a
foreign investment friendly environment
for the development of priority sectors.
Constraints/Opportunities:
Instability in the financial sector, including
risks of insolvency of state-owned banks
and low levels of capitalization.
Low levels of private investment, including
compliance cost savings in climate
interventions. Low access to finance.

Outcome 1.2: Improved transportation connectivity,
internally and with India
Indicator 1: Number of district headquarters connected
with all-season roads DP
Baseline:
59

Target:
65

Milestone: All road
construction contracts
procured by 2016
Milestone: All road upgrading contracts procured
by 2016

Source: GoN and Project Data
Indicator 2: Average time from ship readiness to unload
to final destination for an imported container, on KolkataBirgunj-Kathmandu Corridor (days)
Baseline:
22 days

Target:
18

Source: Project Data
Outcome 1.3: Increased financial sector stability and
improved environment for private sector investment
Indicator 1: State-owned banks (NBL and RBB)
recapitalized as per prudential norms and NBL privatized
Baseline:
Capital Adequacy Ratio
(FY13):
NBL: -0.49%
RBB: 3.33%
GoN ownership of NBL:
30%

Target:

10% CAR for each one

GoN ownership of NBL:
0%

Source: NRB and GoN
Indicator 2: The NRB program of special inspections has
been completed and all undercapitalized institutions have
been either resolved or are under formal Prompt
Corrective Action.
Baseline:

Target:

No inspections

50% of assets of Class A
banks

Source: NRB and project data

32

Milestone: The
strengthened legal
framework for effective
bank resolution has been
enacted and conflicts
between the NRB Act and
BAFIA have been removed
Milestone: The legal
framework for deposit
insurance has been enacted
and DCGT has
operationalized the Act by
developing adequate
operating capacity and by
issuing enabling regulations
and bylaws
Milestone: 10 IFC led
technical advisory and/or
PPP projects by 2015
Milestone: 4 IFC led
investment projects by
2015

Ongoing Financing:
(i) Bridges Improvement and
Maintenance Program;
(ii) Road Sector
Development Project;
(iii) Nepal India Electricity
Trade and Transmission
Project;
(iv) Nepal-India Trade and
Transport Project;
(v) Rural Transport Project.
Indicative Financing:
(i) Nepal Fast Track;
(ii) Strategic Road Network
Project.
Ongoing AAA/Others:
(i) Fast Track Studies;
(ii) Fast Track TA.
Ongoing Financing:
(i) IFC facilitated syndication and sponsor equity
investment in indicative
500MW hydro project;
(ii) SEDF: Investment
Climate for Industry (IFC);
(iii) Access to finance in
SME Ventures and Poultry
(IFC);
(iv) Financial Sector DPC;
(iv) IFC equity and debt
support to infrastructure
companies, MFIs and FIs.
Indicative Financing:
(i) IFC Investments in
Andhikhola, Upper Trishuli
1, Joint Development
Agreement for Upper
Marsyangdi and, and Kabeli
power projects;
(ii) IFC’s support to tourism
by investing in hotel projects;
(iii) Second Financial Sector
DPC.

Indicator 3: Amount of new private investment
mobilized in priority sectors
Baseline: 0

Ongoing AAA:
(i) Competitive Industries
Study;
(ii) IFC Nepal Investment
Climate Reform Program
(SEDF);
(iii) IFC advisory with
existing clients in Nirdhan
and RMDC (FM+A2F);
(v) IFC payments projects;
(vi) IFC PPP transaction
advisory to GoN;
(vi) Financial Sector
Assessment Program
(FSAP);
(vii) Financial Sector
Development Strategy (TA);
(viii) AgriFinance advi-sory
to Nirdhan (TF);
(ix) IFC’s South Asia
Regional Integration in Trade
and Investment (SARTI)
Policy Program;
(x) IFC SME Banking and
Financial Infrastructure
Projects.

Target: $100m

Source: IFC
Indicator 4: Compliance cost savings of investment in
climate interventions
Baseline:

Target:

0

$18.5m

Source: IFC
Indicator 5: Access to finance: Improved access to
finance - to be measured by number of beneficiaries
(individuals and SMEs, disaggregated by gender)
Baseline:
SMEs: 43,900 (5,268
female owned);
Individuals: 2.3 million
(of which 1.5 million
female)

Target:
SMEs: 51,300
(6,300 femaleowned);
Individuals: 2.5
million (of which
1.6 million female)

Source: IFC

Country Goals:
To improve economic status of rural people
by increasing the production and
productivity of agriculture and livestock
commodities in line with the requirements
of farmers and other stakeholders.
To increase agricultural production and
productivity through efficient, sustainable,
effective and reliable irrigation system for
providing irrigation facility to the
agricultural land throughout the year
Constraints/Opportunities:
Agriculture second greatest source of
value-added to the economy; largest source
of employment, income and poverty

Pillar 2: Increasing inclusive growth and opportunities for prosperity
Milestone: Increase in
Outcome 2.1 Increased agricultural productivity and
production of tomatoes and
commercialization
milk by 8%, 32%
respectively; FCR
Indicator 1: Productivity of priority high value
reduction for poultry by 0.2
commodities
(2016).
Baseline:
Target:
Tomato : 84t/ha
110t/ha
Milestone: Increased
Milk : 978 ltr/year,cow
2,250 ltr/year,cow
cropping intensity by at
Sugarcane: 39.5t/ha
47 t/ha (IFC)
least 1.90% (2016).
Poultry FCR: 2.1:1
1.9:1 (IFC)
Source: Project Data (PACT and NPSCSP)
Milestone: Increased total
area irrigated to at least
Indicator 2: Percentage increase in the cropping intensity 18,000 ha (2016).
Baseline:
Target:
Cropping intensity: 1.68
2.20
Source: Project Data (IWRMP)

33

Milestone: Increased
volume of ginger marketed
by smallholder farmers by

Ongoing Financing:
(i) Project for Agriculture
Commercialization and Trade
(PACT);
(ii) Modernization of Rani,
Jamara, Kulariya Irrigation
Project (RJK);
(iii) Nepal Zoonoses Control
Project (TF);
(iv) Irrigation and Water
Resource Management
Project (IWRMP);
(v) Nepal Agriculture Food
Security Project (GAFSP
grant);
(vi) Nepal Poultry Supply
Chain Strengthening Project
(IFC).

reduction.
Only 28 percent of Nepal’s arable land is
irrigated; most irrigation systems are
farmer-managed and in need of
modernization and rehabilitation
Need to improve agriculture productivity
for marketable commodities and increase
integration of smallholders in value chains
for non-traditional higher value
commodities (market-oriented smallholder
production) to improve rural incomes.
Country Goals:
To provide opportunities for literacy and
continuous education to all Nepalese,
particularly to women and people from
poor communities by linking literacy with
way of life and by establishing interlinkages between skills and work.
Create skills and vocational training
opportunities to create human resource able
to compete both nationally and
internationally.
Constraints/Opportunities:
Low levels of access across to post-basic
(secondary and tertiary) education across
income groups and gender. Considerable
wage premiums for higher levels of
education in Nepal as well as for migrant
workers. Low levels of employability and
need for training to be more employment
focused.

Indicator 3: Area under irrigation farming
Baseline:
Target:
Irrigated area: 15,817 ha 26,800 ha
Source: Project Data (IWRMP)

25mt/year (min. 0.5% per
year; 2016).

Indicative Financing:
[Will be determined by the
outcomes of on-going AAA]
On-going AAA:
Sources of Growth in
Agriculture
Indicative AAA:
Strengthening the Poultry
Value Chain (IFC)

Milestone: 12,000 (3,000
per year) poor students at
secondary and tertiary
levels receiving
scholarships from 2014 to
2017
Source: GoN

Ongoing Financing:
(i) School Sector Reform
Program (SSRP; education
SWAp);
(ii) Pro-poor Targeted
Stipend Project (TF);
(iii) Enhanced
Vocational Education and
Training Project;
(iv) Second Higher
Education Project.
Ongoing AAA:
(i) Nepal Education Studies;
(ii) Impact Evaluation of
short-term training.
Indicative Financing:
(i) Higher Education
Reforms Project;
(ii) Skills Development
Project.
Indicative AAA:
(i) Evaluation of different
modalities of enhancing early
grade reading skills;
(ii) Skills Development
Study;
(iii) Education Sector
Review.

Indicator 4: Annual smallholder production marketed
Baseline:
Target:
Ginger: 2,288 mt/year
2,324 mt/year
Milk: 5,122,260 ltr/year
5,170,520 ltr/year
Source: Project Data (PACT)
Outcome 2.2: More equitable access to education and
skills development, of higher quality and relevance
Indicator 1: Enrollment rate (NER) in secondary
education (by gender and income quintile)
Baseline:
Male: 30.9%
Female: 30.3%
Poorest Quintile 12: 17.7%
Second Poorest: 25.9%

Target:
Male: 34%
Female: 33.5%
Poorest Quintile: 22.5%
Second Poorest: 25.9%

Source: GoN (NLSS if available)
Indicator 2: Number of students graduating annually
from tertiary accredited institutions
Baseline: 2,000

Target: 5,000

Source: GoN
Indicator 3: Percentage of graduates from supported
programs gainfully 13 employed at least for six months
after completion of the short term training
Baseline: 68%

Target: 70%

Source: GoN

12

Milestone: (by mid-term)
NER
Male:33.5%
Female: 33.0%
Source: GoN
Milestone: 3,500 students
graduating from accredited
HE institutions; 15
institutions are accredited;
45,000 persons trained

NER will be based on EMIS, whereas NER of poorest Qs is based on NLSS data.
Gainfully employed means that a graduate earns at least NRs 27,600 (NRs 4,600 per month on average) from the job (or self-employment) that is directly
related to the training received by the graduates. The graduate must have been placed in employment within two months of completion of the training.

13

34

Country Goals:
To increase equitable access and quality of
health, education and water supply services
to all citizens, especially the marginalized
population groups.
To increase equitable access to and quality
basic- health care services.
Provide basic drinking water and sanitation
facilities to all citizens of Nepal. Reach
universal access to water and sanitation by
2017.
Constraints/Opportunities:
Low birth attendance in health facilities/ by
skilled personal for the poorest quintiles.
Low progress in reducing hunger and
improving nutrition; high prevalence of
poor infant and child feeding practices.
High out-of pocket expenditures for health
and low enrollment in health insurance.
85 percent water access in rural areas and
55 percent sanitation access. High need for
repairs of existing rural water systems.
About 5.5 million people suffer from
inadequate water service and 16 million
from inadequate sanitation facilities.

Country Goals:
To enable economically vulnerable and
socially excluded marginalized
individuals, groups and communities to

Outcome 2.3: Improved health and nutrition
outcomes, particularly for the poor and disadvantaged
Indicator 1: Percentage of births delivered by skilled
birth attendants in the poorest two quintiles
Baseline:
Lowest 10.7%
2nd Lowest 23.7 %

Target:
Lowest 20%
2nd lowest 30%

Source: Project Data; DHS data
Indicator 2: Percentage of children 6-24 months of age
who consume a minimum acceptable diet in the most
disadvantaged VDCs of the 15 project districts
Baseline:
Target:
11.8
25
Source: Project Data
Indicator 3: Proportion of people in a district enrolled in
health insurance
Baseline:
0
Source: Project Data

Milestone: At least 500
Skill Birth Attendants
training to
doctors/nurse/mid-wives
completed every year
Milestone: at least 200
disadvantaged VDCs have
the nutrition project
Milestone: Impact
Evaluation of Health
Insurance completed
Milestone: People trained
on improved hygiene
behavior and sanitation
practices from zero (2014)
to 0.3 million (2015) and
1.6 million (2017)

Target:
10%

Indicator 4: New households with access to safe
drinking water, new Village Development Committees
(VDCs) that are open defecation free (ODF) and new
public latrines
Baseline:
Drinking water: 0 (2014;
project area only)
Sanitation: 0 VDCs
(2014; project area only)
Public latrines: 0 (2014;
project area only)

Target:
Drinking water: 177,000
new households (2017)
Sanitation: 240 new
VDCs or about new
116,000 households
(2017)
New public latrines: 600

Source: RWSSP3 project data
Outcome 2.4: Improved social protection
Indicator 1: Number of marginalized household
supported with productive assets

35

Milestone: Number of
Gender and Social and
Inclusion (GESI) Strategy
in key ministries monitored
for progress on gender and

Ongoing Financing:
(i) Second HNP and
HIV/AIDS Project (health
SWAp);
(ii) Community Action for
Nutrition Project.
Ongoing AAA:
(i) Food Security and
Nutrition Thematic Report;
(ii) Capacity Assessment of
Community Workers to
Implement Priority Nutrition
Actions in Nepal;
(iii) District Profiles of
Determinants of Malnutrition
in Nepal;
(iv) Review of Behavior
Change for Infant and Young
Child Feeding (IYCF)
Interventions in Nepal;
(v) Preparation of a strategic
communications plan to raise
awareness and increase
commitment for action
against food and nutrition
insecurity in Nepal;
(vi) Nepal Rural Water
Supply and Sanitation
Sector-Identification of
Options to Increase
Sustainable Access to
Services.
Indicative Financing:
(i) Third Rural Water Supply
and Sanitation Project;
(ii) Third Nepal Health
Sector Program.
Ongoing Financing:
(i) Emergency Peace Support
Project;
(ii) Poverty Alleviation Fund
II Project (PAF II);

cope and manage risks and vulnerabilities
by providing them minimum level of social
protection.

Baseline:
416,712 14
Source: PAF-II

Constraints/Opportunities:

Indicator 2: Percentage of vulnerable people benefiting
from safety net programs 16

Continued high vulnerability of
marginalized households, including lack of
availability of productive assets.

Target:
575,000 15

Baseline: 42% of poor receive SA
Target: 50%
Source: HDSP, SSNP and SPP
Indicator 3: Number of payment accounts opened
(disaggregated by gender)
Baseline: 0 (male vs. female: N/A)
Target: 1 mn (of which 0.12mn female)
Source: IFC’s TA Nepal Payments Regulatory Reform

14

inclusion scores.
Milestone: GESI Analysis
of 3 sectors completed.
Milestone: 4,500 new PAF
community organizations
by end of July 2015.
Milestone: 6,120 new PAF
community organizations
by end of July 2016.

(iii) Social Safety Nets
Project;
(iv) Human Development
and Social Protection Pilot
(TF)
Ongoing AAA:
(i) Human Development
Note (based on NLSS data);
(ii) Gender and Social
Inclusion Assessment of
NLSS;
(iii) Food Insecurity
Targeting;
(iv) Gender and nutrition
review of public works;
(v) IFC’s TA Nepal
Payments Regulatory Reform
Program
Indicative Financing:
(i) Social Safety Nets
Systems Building Project.
Indicative AAA:
(i) Social Protection Study;
(ii) Review of public works
program as a safety net;
(iii) Social Protection
Programmatic AAA.

The figure is based on PAF’s Progress Report (as of November 15, 2012)
This number is based on the estimates for the Second AF suggesting that PAF will cover an additional 153,000 households based on the additional financing of
$80 million for the second AF of PAF II. The additional financing will provide support for about 6,000 additional community organizations.
16
Poor people who are benefiting of a reliable and robust safety nets program which has an efficient delivery mechanism
15

36

Annex 2: IFC Portfolio and Pipeline Summary
Ongoing Non Lending Activites (IFC)

Access to Finance

7

Total IFC-managed funds**
(US$mn)
2.9

Investment Climate

3

7.4

Sustainable Business Advisory

2

2.4

12

12.7

Business Line

No of projects*

Total Non Lending Activities
* Based on primary business line
** Based on product wise split for the projects
*** Data as of Apr 14, 2014

37

Summary of Ongoing Non Lending Activites (IFC)
Project Name

Project Description

Access to Finance
Improve the financial performance of Nepalese industry by reducing energy
costs as well as emissions of greenhouse gases by helping 2-3 local Nepalese
banks to develop a sustainable business in EE finance and promote energy
efficiency within industry
AS to Nirdhan Bank
The overall objectives includes: (i) support Nirdhan to expand its operations
and outreach to the clients; (ii) strengthen its risk management system and
processes; and (iii) diversify and introduce new products and delivery
mechanisms
Nepal Payment Systems
Engage with Nepal Rastra Bank and the Ministry of Finance in Nepal to
Regulatory Reform
facilitate the formulation of regulations and policies concerning National
Payment Systems. The project also aims to provide capacity building for NRB
so that it is able to monitor and regulate the financial sector efficiently.
TA to M.Nepal on Launching of Engage with M.Nepal to develop and roll out mobile financial services by
Mobile Money Initiative and
developing a mobile banking strategy and product as well as an agent and risk
Agent Network Development
management framework.
TA to CEDBL, Nepal - Women
Increase access to finance for women entrepreneurs by providing advisory
in Business
services to a Nepali bank, CEDBL on strategy, product development and
portfolio development
Nepal SME Banking
Improve SME banking practices in Nepal through the following 2 key
objectives: (1) Developing SME Banking and Risk Management capacity
among regulators and BFIs, and dissemination of SME Banking and RM global
best practices through training programs; and (2) Advisory to banks on SME
Banking/RM
RMDC Risk Management and
Provide advisory to RMDC across two key components: (i) Support RMDC in
creating a strong risk management foundation & allow some of the largest MFIs
Microinsurance AS
in Nepal to prioritize RM practices. (ii) Build internal expertise & incentivize
RMDC to act as an aggregator & insurance agent in scaling up of Nepal's small
& medium size MFIs' insurance business
Investment Climate
Nepal ICRP - Regulatory Reform The objective of the Project is to improve the investment climate in Nepal by (i)
identifying and removing major regulatory constraints for starting and
operating a business, (ii) reducing tax compliance burden for businesses and
(iii) improving the efficiency of export-import procedures.
Nepal ICRP - Public Private
The project will comprise of the following three components: (i) Establishment
Dialogue
and Operationalization of NBF Mechanism; (ii) Support private sector reforms
to reduce the cost of doing business and capacity building; (iii)
Communications and stakeholder engagement
Nepal Investment Climate for
Support the Government of Nepal in streamlining procedures related to
Industry
investment, improving air safety and food standards, as well as enhancing the
capacity of investment promotion agencies, which will stimulate growth of the
tourism sector through additional investments.
Sustainable Business Advisory
Nepal SME Ventures
Build a pipeline of investable SMEs for the Fund by igniting interest and
helping SMEs develop their managerial capacity and thus become more
qualified and attractive for investments.
PPCR- Promoting Climate
Work with agribusiness lead firms to promote improved agricultural and water
Resilient Agriculture, Nepal
management practices and introduce new technologies among smallholder
farmers producing rice, maize and sugarcane to adapt to climate change.
Sustainable Energy Finance
Nepal

* Data as of Apr 14, 2014

38

Expected End
Date
FY14

FY16

FY14

FY14

FY15

FY16

FY17

FY14

FY14

FY16

FY17

FY17

Annex 3: Poverty in Nepal - Achievements and remaining challenges
South Asia houses the largest fraction (over 40%) of people living in extreme poverty (less than
$1.25/day) in the world and reaching the global goal of poverty eradication will depend on progress
on progress in reducing poverty in South Asia. Moreover almost 80% of people in South Asia still live
below $2.5/day and are thus highly vulnerable to shocks.
While Nepal only accounts for a small fraction of the extreme poor in South Asia (1.41%),
achieving the goal of bringing poverty prevalence down to 3% by 2030 is within reach. That said,
important challenges remain including: (i) addressing pockets of entrenched poverty in some of the
country’s more marginalized areas / groups, (ii) reducing vulnerability to shocks, which is still a reality
for a large share of the population, and (iii) managing the country’s upcoming demographic transition.
a) Poverty trends
There has been a dramatic reduction in poverty in Nepal. Between 2003/04 and 2010/11, the poverty
rate fell from 53.1% to 24.8% measured at $1.25 a day (PPP) – corresponding to an annual drop of over 4
percentage points. Using the new national poverty line -30 day recall period- and projecting it backward,
poverty has fallen from just below 50% in 2003/4 to close to 31% in 2010/11 – corresponding to a 2.65
percentage point drop per year. Using the more accurate 7 days recall measure of consumption, poverty
prevalence is estimated at 25.15%. Poverty reduction has been faster than in India or Bangladesh. At this
pace poverty could be eradicated within a decade. Had poverty incidence remained the same as in
2003/04, Nepal would have had nearly 15.1 million poor, more than twice as many as in fact today.
Table 1: Number of poor people in Nepal using $1.25/day poverty line (PPP)

Number of poor in Nepal

Total
population

Poverty
rate

Number of poor

2010/11

28,415,998

0.248

7,052,851

2003/04

23,701,451

0.531

12,592,581

Source : CBS (Population Monograph 2003, Census 2011), WDI

Figure 1: Poverty trend 1995-2011
80
70
50

20
10
-

NEW 2010-11
Pov Line

30

1995-96 Pov
Line

40
1995-96 Pov
Line

% Poor

60

1995-96

2003-04
2010-11
NLSS Survey Year
NLSS I-II poverty estimates
NLSS III poverty estimate
Trend based on 2010-11 PL
$1.25, PPP

Given the largely agrarian nature of Nepal, it is not surprising that the bulk of reduction in poverty
has taken place in rural areas. Nearly 92% of the poverty reduction between 2003/04 and 2010/11
occurred in rural areas. Although urbanization is proceeding at a fast rate, over the medium term, rising
39

rural incomes will continue to drive poverty reduction. At the same time the large discrepancy between
employment in the rural economy and its contribution to GDP suggests that there are significant
productivity gains to be reaped from movement of labor from low productivity occupations to higher
productivity jobs, either in rural or urban areas.
Table 2: Analysis of Poverty Reduction by Rural and Urban Sectors
Change
2003-04
2010-11
in
Contribution
Population
share

Poverty
Rate

Population
share

Poverty
Rate

Poverty
Rate

to total
change

Urban

0.1503

0.1764

0.1902

0.1326

-0.0438

3.6

Rural

0.8497

0.5504

0.8098

0.35

-0.2005

91.8

Total
Population shift
effect
Interaction
All Nepal

95.3
8
-3.4
1

0.4942

1

0.3087

-0.1856

100

Source: NLSSII, NLSS III (CBS)

The improvement in welfare over the last decade is also demonstrated by other indicators of
development. Multidimensional indicators of poverty like children’s education, maternal and child
health, and access to facilities show marked improvement from 2003/04 to 2010/11. Nepal’s Human
Development Index (HDI) also improved from 0.429 in 2005 to 0.463 in 2012. During the same period,
the HDI of the South Asia region went up from 0.514 to 0.558.
Assuming that the modest growth experienced in the last decade continues, poverty could be
virtually eradicated by 2030. Under, a moderate/baseline scenario17, with (i) per-capita gross national
disposable income (GNDI) growth at the average rate of the 5 years (2005/06 to 2010/11) and (ii)
constant poverty growth elasticity 18, the national poverty rate would fall to 3.15% by 2030. Growth
however would need to reach an average of 6% for poverty to fall to the target of 0.85%. Conversely, a
growth slowdown (3% - low case scenario) would translate into persistent poverty prevalence at 4.95% by
2030.

17

Note: Moderate per capita GNDI growth rate of 4.75% is the calculated six year average (2005/06 – 2010/11).
Low growth rate assumes growth rate of 3%. High growth rate assume growth rate of 6%.
18
The estimated poverty trend is calculated on the basis of growth elasticity of poverty. Between 2004 and 2011,
the poverty rate measured at $1.25 a day (PPP) declined by 53.2%, from 53.13% to 24.82%, with the annualized rate
of decrease of 10.3%. During approximately the same period, average annual growth rate in GNDI per capita
(constant NRs.) was 3.8%. Thus the “back of the envelope” growth elasticity of poverty was -2.71%.

40

Figure 2: Poverty Projection for Nepal
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

Poverty trend under moderate per capita GNDI growth rate
Poverty trend under low per capita GNDI growth rate
Poverty trend under high per capita GNDI growth rate
Source : GDP Historical Series (CBS), WDI and World Bank Calculations

b) Shared prosperity
Growth has been pro-poor. The share of overall consumption enjoyed by the “bottom 40%” increased
from 18.5% to 23.6% between 2003/04 and 2010/11.
Figure 3: Share of consumption enjoyed by each decile
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Poorest 2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th Richest
decile decile decile decile decile decile decile decile decile decile
2003/04 % of Consumption

2003/04 Cumulative %

2010/11 % of Consumption

2010/11 Cumulative %

Source: NLSS II, NLSS III (CBS)

Vulnerability, however, remains high and spatially concentrated. While 52% of the poor households
in 2003/04 had moved out of poverty by 2010/11, 13% of those that were non-poor in had slipped into
poverty over the same period. Adverse events like flood, drought, inflation, injury, sickness, and death
can easily push households to poverty. At the national level, drop in mean consumption of 5% would
result in increased poverty prevalence by 3.6% (in India and Bangladesh the corresponding figure is

41

4.5%) 19. However, in the Mid-West and Far-West Hill regions, vulnerability is twice as high. Also,
among ethnic groups, Terai Middle Castes, Dalits and other minorities suffer greater vulnerability – a 5
percent fall in consumption triggers a 4.5 percent increase in the poverty rate.
Nepal does not have a broad middle class. Mean consumption is at only 70% above the poverty line
which means that a significant share of the population remains clustered above the poverty line with very
low levels of spending. Over 70% of Nepalis live on less than 2.5 dollars a day and over 90% on less
than 4 dollars, indicating the virtual absence of a middle class in the country. The 40% cutoff line is Rs
24,076 which amounts in current dollar terms to a low 0.73 dollars a day.
Table 3: Movements in and out of poverty for panel households

2003/04

Poor
Non Poor

2010/11
Poor Non Poor
48.0
52.0
13.0
87.0

Total
100.0
100.0

Source : World Bank calculations based on NLSS II & NLSS III data

Figure 4: Poverty Headcount Ration in South Asia, 2010
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
$1.25/day

$2.5/day

$3/day

$4/day

Poverty headcount (%)
Bangladesh

Bhutan

India

Maldives

Nepal

Pakistan

Sri Lanka

Source : PovCalNet

c) Spatial dimensions of poverty
Poverty mapping and disaggregation reveal a twin challenge in addressing enduring poverty. On
the one hand there are pockets of “entrenched” deprivation with extremely high poverty prevalence
among disadvantaged groups and in remote regions. On the other hand a majority of the poor live in the
accessible plain regions and their socio-economic status does not map to clear patterns of ethnic-based
discrimination. For instance while a staggering 43% of Hill-Dalit headed households live below the
poverty line, they ‘only’ account for 15.2% of Nepal’s poor, less than the Hill-Chetri (16.6%) or HillJanjati (24.4%) headed households which however have a significantly lower proportion of poor among
them (as well as much lower severity of poverty). Likewise, while poverty prevalence is almost twice as
high in the Mountain regions (42.3%) than in the Terai plains (23.4%) the latter are home to almost four
times as many poor people (12% and 45.4% of the poor respectively).Therefore addressing the poverty
challenge can be decomposed into (i) a growth-redistribution agenda to make sure that the poor benefit
19
The share of vulnerable population is defined as those falling into poverty if the mean consumption were to fall by
5 percent. Nepal’s vulnerable population is estimated at 3.6 percent compared to 4.5 percent in India and
Bangladesh, using respective national poverty lines.

42

from economic activity where it happens and (ii) an “inclusion” agenda to expand the opportunity set of
hitherto marginalized populations (with obvious intersections between these two).
Figure 5: Pockets of poverty are concentrated in the Western Hill regions

Source: Small Area Estimates of Poverty, Nepal 2011

Figure 6: Most of the poor are densely populated in the Southern Plains

Source: Small Area Estimates of Poverty, Nepal 2011

43

Table 4: Poverty according to caste of the household head
Distribution
Caste of head of
household
Hill Brahmin
Hill Chhetri
Terai Brahmin
Terai Middle Caste
Hill Dalit
Terai Dalit
Newar
Hill Janajati
Terai Janajati
Muslim
Others
Nepal

Population
below poverty
line (%)
10.34
23.4
18.61
28.69
43.63
38.16
10.25
28.25
25.93
20.18
12.34
25.16

Poverty gap
(%)
1.73
5.55
1.75
5.36
10.89
8.09
2.07
6.64
4.48
3.38
3.58
5.43

Severity of
poverty
(%)
0.48
1.86
0.19
1.47
4.22
2.24
0.7
2.49
1.25
0.85
1.13
1.81

of the poor
(%)

of the
population (%)

5.2
16.6
0.4
17.6
15.2
6.9
2.5
24.4
7.3
3.5
0.5
100

12.7
17.8
0.5
15.4
8.7
4.6
6.2
21.8
7.1
4.3
0.9
100

Source : World Bank calculations based on NLSS III data

Table 5: Poverty Incidence by regions of Nepal

Source : World Bank calculations based on NLSS III data

d) Poverty dynamics
While static analyses of poverty (based on past trends and projecting them outward) provide useful
insights, they do not account for dynamic geographic and demographic changes which will drive
poverty trends in the future. Specifically three underlying trends will have a significant impact:
migrations, urbanization and demographic transition.
44

Migration has increased exponentially in recent years and remittances now constitute a significant
share of household incomes. Static counterfactual analysis shows that, without migration, the poverty
incidence would jump from 19.3% to 35.3% for households with internal migrants and the impact is
substantial for households with migrants abroad as well. Moreover, these counterfactual models do not
account for the indirect effects of remittances on economic activities and labor dynamics of the poor,
especially in rural areas. Given the importance of migrant labor and income (in effect Nepal’s largest
export) the policy framework to leverage them is surprisingly lagging. Households face unduly large costs
of emigration. The average cost for a worker going to Gulf countries and Malaysia is US$1,430 and
US$4,930 to go to “other developed countries”. Borrowers have to pay high interests rate of 23% per
annum and 30% per annum when borrowing from friends/relatives and moneylenders respectively. Even
the cost to obtain a passport in Nepal is the highest in the South Asia region. Moreover service providers
catering to migrants (placement agencies, remittance institutions, financial institutions) are poorly
regulated and expensive artificially increasing the transaction costs involved in migration and limiting the
extent to which accumulated skills and income can be translated into productive investment at home.
Table 6: The increasing Reach and Volume of Remittance Receipts in Nepal

1995/96
23.4
562

Percent of households receiving
Real per-capita remittance, NRs
Percent increase
Share of foreign source exc. India
Share of income for recipient
households

2003/04
31.9
1,309
233
53.5
35.4

22.4
26.6

2010/11
55.8
4,046
309
69.1
30.9

Source: Statistical Report, Volume II for NLSS III and World Bank calculations

Table 7: Counterfactual Analysis of Impact of worker Migration and Remittance on Poverty
(Proportion of poor, %)

Actual
2010

MODEL ESTIMATES of
poverty incidence

MODEL ESTIMATES of
change in poverty incidence

No
migration

No
migration

With 2003-04
mig. and rem.

With 2003-04
mig. & rem.

All households

25.2

28.1

26.6

-2.9

-1.4

Hhs with no migrants

23.7

23.7

23.7

0.0

0.0

Hhs with migrants within Nepal

19.3

35.3

29.1

-16.0

-9.8

Hhs with migrants abroad

26.4

32.1

30.1

-5.7

-3.7

Source : World Bank calculations based on NLSS data

Starting from a very low base, urbanization has accelerated sharply in recent years. With only 19
percent of the population living in urban areas, Nepal is predominantly a rural country but is rapidly
urbanizing with urban population growth rates of up to 7 percent. This shift in population from rural to
urban areas accounted for 8 percent of total poverty reduction between 2003/04 and 2010/11.
Finally, Nepal is at the eve of a major demographic transition which should enable it to reap the
‘demographic dividend’ that comes when the dependency ratio start falling. Indeed the ratio of
working age (15-64) to non-working persons has just started to increase for Nepal and it is expected to
peak in 2045-50 20, later than India and Bangladesh. Moreover, the significant decline in fertility in recent

45

years will also contribute to poverty reduction as the poverty rate increases monotonously with the
household size, starting from 3% for single person household and rising to 38% for households with 7 or
more members.
Figure 7: Trends in total Fertility Rate, 1984-2010 (Births per woman)

Source : Nepal Demographic and Health Survey, 2011

Figure 8: Projected dependency ratio of Nepal and its neighbors
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
2055
2060
2065
2070
2075
2080
2085
2090
2095
2100

0

Bangladesh

India

Nepal

Sri Lanka

Source : UN Population Prospects, 2010

These transformations, while they represent significant opportunities also involve challenges to be
tackled in the short to medium term. Urbanization, to date, has been largely biased toward the capital
Kathmandu imposing significant pressure on the provision of social and urban infrastructure. The
significant increase in the working age population will require putting to the fore a skills/employment
agenda while emigration will continue to act as a ‘safety valve’.

20
Must take this with a heavy pinch of salt, population decline in Nepal from census 2011 is not factored in here,
fertility is on decline faster than presumed because of migration of young men – some two million departed in the
last 10 years, so the peak come should sooner on current migration trends

46

Figure 9: Projected Labor force Growth (annual average %)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

47

Annex 4: Nepal Foreign Aid Structure
Figure 1: Share of Foreign Aid Disbursements in FY12

Figure 2: Total Donor Disbursements in FY11 and FY12

Figure 3: Sector Share of Foreign Aid Disbursement in FY12

48

Figure 4: Distribution of Foreign Aid Disbursement in FY12—per Policy Cluster of GoN
Development Plan

Donor Coordination Mechanisms: The aid effectiveness agenda in Nepal is driven by the Local Donor
Meeting, which serves as the main forum for dialogue and coordination between development partners
and Government on development policy issues. The meeting is chaired by the Ministry of Finance and
co-chaired by a development partner. The annual Nepal Portfolio Performance Review (NPPR) also
provides an important mechanism to discuss cross-cutting implementation issues and bottlenecks for
development programs, bringing together seven core development partners (including the World Bank)
and key government agencies to identify bottlenecks in program implementation actions to address them.
The NPPR Action Plan (focused on actions to improve country systems performance and mutual
accountability) is approved by the Cabinet, and a tracking mechanism reporting to the Cabinet has been
established. The current NPPR focuses on measuring performance against results. Among donors, the
International Development Partners Group (IDPG)—co-chaired by the Bank, the UN and Switzerland —
provides a bimonthly forum for information sharing, coordination and dialogue on common issues of
concern.

49

Annex 5: Lessons Learned from Previous Strategies
1.
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Nepal was from November 2003 and
covered FY04-07. It was followed by three ISNs: (i) from January 2007, covering FY08-09; (ii) from
May 2009, covering FY10-11; and (iii) from April 2011, covering FY12-13. An IEG Country Assistance
Evaluation (FY03-08) assessed the Bank’s program and performance during the time of the 2003 CAS,
including the last year of a 2002 CAS Progress Report, and the first year of the 2007 ISN. This CAS
Completion Report picks up where the IEG evaluation left off.

Nepal CAS/ISN Timelines
2002*
2003
CAS PR
(November 2002)

2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Country Assistance Strategy
Interim Strategy
(November 2003)
(January 2007)
IEG Country Assistance Evaluation 2003-2008

2010
2011
Interim Strategy
(May 2009)

2012
2013
Interim Strategy
(August 2011)

*Fiscal Years (July-June)

2.
Interim Strategies were considered more appropriate to provide flexible support during
Nepal’s transition period to peace and a more stable political system. The Bank decided on providing
interim support despite the Comprehensive Peace Accord in 2006 and the subsequent peaceful election of
a Constituent Assembly, tasked with drafting the country’s constitution, which gave Nepal relative
stability after the civil war. One key indicator for the eventual move to a full Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS) was considered to be the adoption of the constitution, which the 2009 ISN expected by 2010 and
the 2011 ISN by 2012.
3.
Building on the lessons from past strategy implementations the 2009 ISN put in place the
main characteristics of the current Bank Group Strategy, which were continued under the 2011
ISN. Based on shortcomings in the implementation of past strategies and an assessment from the
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) (see box), the 2009 ISN introduced a couple of key principles for
the Bank Group’s engagement in Nepal: (i) align with country priorities; (ii) harmonize/coordinate with
other development partners; (iii) build on Bank and IFC comparative advantages; (iv) retain a degree of
modesty; and (v) be flexible. Another key principle introduced in the 2011 ISN was to be more selective
as the country program at that point was perceived to be too spread out.
Box 1: Lessons from Previous Bank Group Strategy Implementations
The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) presented a Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) in May 2009, which
rated IDA assistance during 2003-2008 to Nepal as “moderately unsatisfactory”. On the positive side, IEG acknowledged progress in the social sectors, particularly in improving and expanding health services, significantly
increasing access to primary education, and increasing access to safe drinking water in rural areas. On the negative
side, however, there was little to no progress under the IDA objectives of achieving broad based growth and good
governance.
Given the shortcomings in these two key areas, IEG considered the Bank strategies in 2003-2008 as unrealistic and
overly ambitious especially given prevailing country circumstances at that time (the height of the armed conflict).
IEG’s key suggestions were therefore to inject greater realism in program design, retain flexibility to adjust to
changing country circumstance and to consult widely with national stakeholders and development partners. In terms
of sectors and instruments, IEG recommended a stronger focus on agriculture and rural development, better tracking
of the impact of the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF) on poverty and social inclusion, and continuing support for
public finance management and other institutional reforms through policy-based lending, if feasible, or through
Sector Wide Approaches (SWAps).

4.
In terms of key programmatic features, in 2009-2011 the Bank for the first time moved to a
more well-defined results framework. The 2009 ISN featured, in its own words, only a “partial results
framework”. Given Nepal’s circumstances, the framework anticipated only modest results focusing on
key actions, processes and intermediate outputs that were deemed achievable within a two-year
timeframe. It included outcome indicators in only a few areas, including education, health, rural water
supply and sanitation, and rural roads. The 2011 ISN—which featured a brief assessment of the progress
50

achieved under the framework of the 2009 ISN—was the first attempt at a results-based World Bank
Group strategy with relatively clear outcome indicators and targets albeit no milestones.
Table 1: ISN Pillars, Principles and Features
2011 ISN
Overarching Country Goal: Building a Peaceful, Prosperous and Just Nepal
 Pillar 1: Promoting capable state structures and
 Pillar 1: Enhancing connectivity and productivity
systems fostering accountable institutions
for growth
 Pillar 2: Laying the foundation for sustainable and
 Pillar 2: Reducing vulnerabilities and improving
inclusive economic growth
resilience
 Pillar 3: Enhancing equitable access to services and  Pillar 3: Promoting access to better quality services
social inclusion
Cross-cutting theme 1: Strengthening governance and
Cross-cutting theme 1: Helping to consolidate peace
accountability
2009 ISN

Cross-cutting theme 2: Fostering social inclusion
Key Principles:
• Align with country priorities
• Harmonize and coordinate with other development
partners
• Build on Bank and IFC’s areas of comparative
advantage
• Retain modesty and “keep it simple”
• Be flexible to respond to emerging opportunities
and challenges
Key Programmatic Features:
• Partial Results Framework with key actions,
processes and intermediate outputs
• Build on past areas of effective engagement
• Emphasize community-based operations
• Minimize numbers of projects
• Peace Filter – be sensitive to conflict causes and “do
no harm”
• 4-5 new IDA operations/year
• Reengagement in Agriculture
• SWAps expansion
• Potential DPC series
• Programmatic and “Just-in time” analytics

Cross-cutting theme 2: Fostering gender equality and
social inclusion
Key Additional Principles:
• Be selective

Key Additional Features:
• Results-based Strategy with ISN outcome indicators
and targets (but no milestones)
• Integration of Social Accountability Tools into the
country program
• SILs and AFs as primary instruments

5.
The 2009 ISN and in continuation the 2011 ISN laid out a framework for flexible and
realistic Bank engagement in a difficult country environment. There was strong alignment between
the country’s priorities and the strategic outcomes adopted under both ISNs. While the 2009 ISN featured
only a partial results framework, 2011 ISN increased the programs results framework through introducing
more tangible outcome indicators and targets. Both strategies focused on keeping the program simple and
flexible, which allowed the Bank to respond to shifting country circumstances. The 2009 ISN introduced
a “peace filter”, which helped to make the program more conflict sensitive and “do no harm”. The
marrying of the peace filter with governance action plans for each project contributed to strengthening
supply-side governance aspect and the introduction of social accountability tools into the portfolio
contributed to strengthening important demand-side aspects. While implementation can be strengthened
in each area and their application be further mainstreamed across the Bank’s portfolio, they do point into
the right direction for effective Bank engagement in a still highly fragile environment.
6.
New commitments increased to historic levels under the 2009 ISN but declined during the
2011 ISN. Annual new commitments were US$352 million in FY10 and US$289 million in FY11, which
fell within the US$600-740 range of projected ISN commitments. These are historically high
51

commitment numbers for the Nepal program, which averaged only about US$156 million in annual
commitments during the four previous years. It allowed the program to end IDA15 (FY09-11) on a high
note by delivering above the indicative IDA15 allocation of SDR332.3 million (about US$512 million)
for FY10-11. New commitments declined again to US$143 million in FY12, about 70 percent of the final
FY12 allocation for IDA16. FY13 delivery so far has been slow with only US$40 million new
commitments in the first half, even though an indicative, but highly uncertain, pipeline has the potential to
deliver another US$250 million. IFC invested in 14 projects (for US$57 million in total) over the last
ISN period (FY12 and FY13) and 12 projects (for around US$26 million in total) in the FY10-11 ISN
(over FY10 and FY11).
7.
Total disbursements increased in line with increased commitments and disbursement ratios
remained relatively high. Total disbursements held pace with greater commitments and increased from
an average US$95.4 million in annual disbursements during FY06-09 to US$178 in FY10-12. While
averaged annual commitments over both periods increased by 20 percent, total average disbursements
increased by a healthy 80 percent. Disbursement ratios remained at similar levels, averaging about 27
percent over both periods.
8.
The principles of flexibility in the Bank’s engagement continued to be an important element
in adequately responding to the difficult country environment. It has allowed the Bank to restructure
ongoing projects (Emergency Peace Support, Second Higher Education) and respond to government
requests for new support within the Bank’s strategic framework (Enhanced Vocational Education and
Training, Additional Financing to the Poverty Alleviation Fund).
9.
While Nepal stands out by being the first IDA country to use the new lending instrument—
Program for Results (PforR)—the application of more policy-based lending was slower than
expected. The 2009 ISN envisaged the expansion of Sector Wide Approaches (SWAps) from education
to health into other sectors such as rural roads, rural water supply and sanitation, and agriculture. In
addition, it planned the launch of a Development Policy Credit (DPC) series. Agreements on further
SWAp frameworks were deferred due to local insecurity, weak country systems and lack of clarity
regarding local responsibilities. The DPC series did not materialize, even though a standalone financial
sector DPC came on board for delivery in FY13. Support to public finance management and institutional
reform continues to be provided primarily through technical assistance. However, the Bridges
Improvement and Maintenance Program utilizes the new PforR instrument, specifically geared at
achieving development outcomes while building robust systems and institutional capacity for long-run
development.
Key Lessons and Recommendations
10.
While keeping development interventions simple is preferable to unrealistic over-ambition,
it runs the risk of missing opportunities. Previous Bank Group strategies kept Bank interventions
“simple”, in light of the fragile post-conflict environment, but retaining this approach over the long term
may result in missing out on areas with a major impact on growth, poverty and shared prosperity. The
Bank Group’s new strategy therefore will examine more complex areas with potentially transformative
impacts which try to unlock Nepal’s binding constraints. Examples include an expansion of engagement
in hydropower generation, which would support domestic growth as well as potential energy exports, as
well as establishment of a unified national identification, which has the potential to transform Nepal’s
service delivery with better targeting and transparency.
11.
Having supported immediate post-conflict needs, the Bank Group’s program needs to shift
toward a more strategic engagement and address longer-term systemic issues. In line with the
findings of the 2011 World Development Report (WDR) on conflict and fragility, the Bank’s program
focused on identifying the “stress factors” for instability and fragility as well as building public
confidence by focusing on short-term tangible measures. Accordingly, the previous interim strategies
established a “peace filter” to mainstream conflict analysis into project preparation and avoid “doing
52

harm”. In addition, the Bank’s program emphasized relatively short-term measures, such as cashtransfers to conflict-affected groups, including Maoist cantonments. The next step proposed by the 2011
WDR is to focus on the more arduous tasks of strengthening the capacity of state institutions and making
them more inclusive, to help build citizens’ trust in the state. The new Bank strategy therefore proposes
to phase out short-term measures and instead contribute to building effective and inclusive systems. This
approach will be taken across sectors, including social protection, education, energy, transport and
agriculture.
12.
Programmatic flexibility continues to be a key requirement in the Nepali context. To
provide effective support and respond to changes in a still-transitional country context, the Bank Group
will need to remain flexible. High levels of political fragility will continue to require a rapid ability to
respond and adapt to either deteriorations or improvements in the operating environment. This will also
mean continuing selectively to innovate and test different approaches, including scaling-up those that
work and dropping those that do not.
13.
A short-term strategy approach impedes continuity in engagement and accomplishment of
deep and longer-lasting results. Given the country’s track record and alignment among the key
stakeholders around development priorities, the Bank Group’s previous short-term planning horizon of a
maximum of 24 months has been too short to support the important institutional and systemic changes
needed to put Nepal on a stable development path and demonstrate higher-level results in the core priority
sectors for the country. The proposed strategy therefore covers four years of World Bank Group
engagement. A mid-term review after two years will allow for any course corrections, if necessary.

53

Annex 6: Feedback from CAS Consultations and Client Survey
During the months of November and December 2012, Joint IFC and World Bank teams conducted
extensive stakeholder consultations in six different districts across Nepal. The locations were
Kathmandu, Janakpur, Dhankuta, Dadeldhura, Baglung and Surkhet. Locations were identified in order
to make the consultations representative of the various geographical locations of Nepal from plains to
hills and from rural to urban areas. Stakeholders from 5-6 different districts in and around each of these
locations participated. Participants consisted of government officials, representatives of political parties,
civil society organizations, media, youth groups, women’s groups, the private sector and development
partners. Diversity of views was also ensured by the active participation from various historically
marginalized ethnicities central to the identity politics that contours the political landscape of Nepal
today.
Key Issues Identified:
The highlight of the consultation was that stakeholders throughout Nepal shared similar developmental
priorities and their ideas about the way forward were comparable.
Politics: Stakeholders recognized political instability, lack of political leadership and weak governance
structures coupled with lack of non-partisan and robust bureaucracy as major blockages to the drive for
development results. Besides these, there was an understanding that these issues were hindering public
accountability, creating an environment that turned a blind eye to corruption and deterred adequate checks
and balances.
Governance and lack of accountability: Although stakeholders link political instability and lack of
elected bodies to be at the heart of weak governance and accountability, social awareness, accountability
to beneficiaries, and financial transparency were identified as crucial issues to improve governance. The
need for robust monitoring and evaluation of public institutions and the need to invest in a wellperforming PFM system were also emphasized. In a similar vein, stakeholders emphasized the lack of a
regulatory framework to protect women rights
Right to Information: Lack of awareness about and access to public information appeared as a
crosscutting theme. This was especially important in the context of citizen’s ability to monitor service
delivery across sectors. Stakeholders cited examples of citizens’ inability and/or difficulty to access
information. They also made a case for a stronger drive to make information easily available to the
general public in so far as it would also facilitate monitoring of public institutions. There was a strong
case for further investment in tools that empowered citizens to enforce accountability.
Lack of Skills-based Education: While education was, by and large, articulated as an important area for
investment in Nepal, stakeholders pointed out quality rather than quantity of education and content of the
curriculum of the public schools as key areas for improvement. Discussions specifically highlighted the
need switch to a more skills-based education. The rationale is that education alone does not ensure
economic empowerment if it is not adequately supported by skills that translate into employment. Thus,
the suggestion is to not invest in primary and secondary education at the cost of skill based education.
Lack of jobs: Stakeholders emphasize the need for jobs and in this context also the ability to keep skilled
manpower in-country in order to be able to support the development agenda. Stakeholders recognized the
need for better public private partnerships and enabling an environment for private investment and the
growth of the private sector. Stakeholders highlighted the lack of energy with the need to invest in
hydropower; industrialization and the need to encourage entrepreneurship and small and medium
enterprises for a robust private sector.

54

Lack of infrastructure/Energy: Stakeholders thought that Infrastructure and in particular energy is an
area of comparative advantage for the Bank. However, they were also wary of the inability of the
government to drive the agenda for power infrastructure in the past. One of the key issues highlighted in
this area was endemic corruption that either stalled the progress of large infrastructure projects or
jeopardized the quality of infrastructure that was delivered.
Agriculture: With 75% of the population dependent on agriculture and farming, increase in agriculture
productivity was widely recognized (even in urban areas) as the answer to burgeoning food crisis and
food insecurity issues that grips Nepal regularly. Generally, the need for more jobs in the agro-industries
and the need to make it a viable option for sustainable youth employment were highlighted. In this
regard, the commercialization of agriculture and access to markets was advised. From a slightly different
perspective, some opined that agriculture productivity should not be treated in isolation with land use and
management issues because the ownership of land is directly tied to equitable distribution of development
dividends in the sector. Also integral to this view was that the Bank’s ability to reach out to the extremely
poor is via the development of this sector and that the correct implementation of programs and policies in
this sector could make a huge difference to the lives of the historically marginalized population in Nepal.
Inclusive Growth and Development: One of the challenges of development in Nepal was argued as
uneven distribution of development dividends among the population. Empowerment and inclusion of
women, the poor, marginalized and people with disability, through education, participation in political
decision making and availability of economic opportunities was seen as a part of the drive towards
positive change. Investment in human development and the need to regularly monitor human
development component in Bank funded projects was highlighted.
Lack of quality health service delivery: Lack of proper health care facilities and inadequate expansion
of health services targeted towards the poor especially in rural areas was accentuated. Severe lack of
medical staff and limited resource mobilization in this sector and inadequate monitoring of the quality of
services provided renders this sector to be a priority area that needs investment both to train manpower
and infrastructure to provide medical facilities. Capacity development in maternal health was identified as
an area for investment in the health sector.
Environmental Degradation and Climate Change: Stakeholders opined that development and
industrialization should not be welcomed at the risk of environmental degradation. Stringent safeguards
for environment need to be integrated and implemented into development programs, especially
agriculture (promotion of organic farming methods), roads (haphazard expansion) and infrastructure
related sectors have tremendous scope.
Other Issues: There was general consensus that the Bank needs to be selective of the projects that
requires its assistance. The effective utilization of the resource envelope demands being wary of the
comparative advantage and the need to identify donor coordination and avoid duplication of work.
Moreover, the Bank should use its convening power to guide public policy and reform the quality of civil
services such as public monitoring mechanism. Stakeholders advised the bank to be more proactive in
providing policy support to the government. There was also an appreciation for the Bank’s alignment to
country system and efforts to institutional strengthening. Many appreciated the fact that the Bank besides
providing “money” also provides “knowledge” and “skills”. Many hoped that the Bank could continue to
lead development in the country by effectively coordinating with other donors. By and large, the four
pillars envisioned in the new CAS have been endorsed by the participants and also believed that it was
well aligned with their needs and country’s development priorities.

55

THE WORLD BANK GROUP CLIENT SURVEY FY12
Background: A client survey was conducted in December 2012 to get better insight into client
perceptions about the World Bank Group. The survey was designed to provide the World Bank Group a
better understanding of stakeholders’ perception of the World Bank’s activities in Nepal. The feedback
from the survey would then inform the the CAS formulation process that the country team had started to
embark on in June 2012. The survey covered a range of questions that sought to explore stakeholder’s
views views regarding the general environment in Nepal; their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in
Nepal; Overall impressions of the World Bank’s effectiveness and results, knowledge and research, and
communication and information sharing in Nepal; And perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in
Nepal. It also sought to examine Bank’s areas of expertise and if it needed to be streamlined with its
current portfolio for optimum development effectiveness.
Process: Approximately 410 stakeholders were invited, through mailed questionnaires, to provide their
opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the
office of the President or Prime Minister; the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian;
employees of a ministry, ministerial department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors
working on World Bank-supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing
implementation of a project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral agencies;
private sector organizations; private foundations; the financial sector/private banks; NGOs; communitybased organizations (CBOs); the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-based
groups; academia/research institutes/think tanks; the judiciary branch; women’s groups; and youth
groups. 76% of the invitees participated in the survey.
Results: Overall in a country environment rife with governance issues and lack of security, respondents
are looking forward to a keener involvement of the Bank Group. Conversely, the overall effectiveness of
the Bank seems to have diminished as per the survey. However, the silver lining lies in stakeholder’s
sectoral ratings and their perception about education, poverty, growth, agriculture and private sector
development as contributors to development. They appreciate the Bank’s knowledge deliverables. They
seem somewhat disillusioned with the processes of dissemination and translation including its’ translatability into skills. Also, they are quite skeptical about the level of stakeholder involvement in what they
consider to be a highly valuable source of knowledge.
Areas of Focus: The country survey largely reiterated ‘peace and security’ as the foremost development
priority. The general country environment (read: political instability/Governance issues) that is weighing
the country down. Unequal participation in civil life was considered to be rife and a cause and effect of
the inability of the Nepalese state to unlock much needed reforms. Moreover the areas of focus for the
Bank Group as pointed out are lack of jobs and access to quality education, poverty and public sector
governance, energy and agriculture/rural development , tourism and private sector development are
critical priorities for growth and poverty reduction in the Nepalese Context.
Value to the Clients: In terms of value of the World Bank to the clients, most stakeholders value the
Bank for its financial resources. Many believe that the bank could perhaps reduce the complexity of
obtaining financing. Also respondents suggest that the quality of the Bank’s experts in Nepal seem to be
lower than in most countries. For added value, the Bank needs to interact more with local government and
private sector rather than restricting itself to the Government at the higher echelons.

56

Annex 7: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 4/15/2014

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

2011

2012

2013

2014

17
3.6
17.6
15.8
41.2
44.3
31.3

18
3.5
11.1
21.4
22.2
35.2
24.1

19
3.8
26.3
23.0
57.9
60.1
26.5

17
4.0
35.3
22.1
52.9
50.0
19.2

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
78
6
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
1,815.2
255.9
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
36.4
33.3
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
23.9
4.5

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

57

Annex 8: IDA Operations Portfolio
As Of Date 4/15/2014
Closed Projects

89

IBRD/IDA
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

730.96
0.00
770.19
422.00
1,501.15
422.00
683.47
6.66
690.13

Last ISR

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating

Disbursements a/

Active Projects

Project ID
P132289
P125495
P120265
P104015
P099296
P112893
P105860
P110762
P118179
P095977
P113441
P090967
P117417
P113002
P087140
P125359
P132750

Project Name
Kali Gandaki Rehab
NP: Bridges Program Support
NP: Emerging Towns Project
NP: Enhanced Vocational Educ & Trng
NP: Irrig & Water Res Mgmt Proj
NP: Kabeli Transmission Project
NP: PAF II
NP: Peace Support Project
NP: Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Proj
NP: Road Sector Development Project
NP: School Sector Reform Program
NP: Second Higher Education Project
NP: Second HNP and HIV/AIDS Project
NP: Social Safety Nets Project
NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade
NP:Community Actionfor Nutrition Project
SNRTP
Overall Result

Development
Objectives
MS
MU
MU
MS
S
MU
S
MS
S
MS
MS
MS
S
S
S
MU
S

Implementation
Progress
MS
MU
MU
MU
S
MU
MS
MS
MS
MU
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS
MU
S

Fiscal Year

IDA

2013
2012
2011
2011
2008
2011
2008
2008
2012
2008
2010
2007
2010
2009
2009
2012
2014

Cancel.

27.26
60
25
50
114.3
38
245
50
43
117.6
230
60
129.15
64.47
60
40
100
1453.78

6.43
10.37

0.03
13.06

5.18

35.07

Undisb.

Orig.

27.84
43.31
10.50
26.57
59.79
27.09
82.04
0.68
30.68
28.49
83.16
9.50
57.16
7.81
50.75
37.68
100.42
683.47

9.56
5.74
24.88
-4.73
8.51
-62.80
15.33
11.58
-46.72
-32.68
7.68
30.34
-30.67
8.50
2.63
0.67
-52.17

Frm Rev'd

-1.52
0.00
9.57
-4.69
13.71
-1.26
98.65
1.43
12.13

128.02

Regional Projects with Nepal Components
Project ID

Project Name

P144335
P121210
P115767

Nepal-India Reg Trade & Transport Prj
REG: Wildlife Protection: BD and NP
REG:Northeast Regional Electr. Transmiss
Overall Result

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

IDA

S
MS
MS

S
MU
MS

2013
2011
2011

99
39
138
276

58

Cancel.

Undisb.

93.2
31.3
122.6
247.0

Orig. Frm Rev'd

-6.0
20.3
64.3
78.5

186.1
90.6
324.9
602

Annex 9: Nepal Trust Fund Portfolio
(As of March 31, 2014)

1

P090038

TF 56440

Nepal - Biogas Program

2

P095978

TF 90264

Nepal - Village Micro Hydro

30-Jun-07

15-Dec-15

1.96

0.00

0.00

0.00%

1.96

3

P090967

TF 93397

Japan Social Development Fund Grant for Pro-poor Targeted Secondary School Stipend Project (C)

2-Jan-09

15-Jan-14

1.90

0.18

1.58

82.87%

0.33

4

P125198

TF 94724

Nepal REDD Readiness Preparation Program

26-Aug-09

30-Jun-15

3.60

0.73

1.43

39.64%

2.17

5

P119113

TF 98650

Program to Promote Demand for Good Governance (C)

24-Jan-11

31-Dec-13

1.41

0.19

1.32

93.53%

0.09

6

P123653

TF 97889

ADKF Small Grants Program

1-Mar-11

28-Feb-14

1.00

0.00

1.00

100.00%

0.00

7

P113441

TF 98235

Nepal: School Sector Reform Program

21-Mar-11

15-Dec-14

120.00

13.41

116.33

96.94%

3.67

8

P125891

TF 99675

Strengthening Institutional Capacity of the DNPWC for the Effective Management of Mountain Protected Areas

25-Aug-11

25-Aug-14

0.50

0.16

0.33

66.04%

0.17

9

P125331

TF 99288

Nepal: Human Development - Social Protection Pilot Project

29-Aug-11

31-Jul-14

1.50

0.34

0.79

52.69%

0.71

10

P124088

TF 99274

Additional Financing to the Poverty Alleviation Fund II

11-Oct-11

30-Jun-14

10.00

0.47

10.00

100.00%

0.00

11

P125770

TF 10452

Strengthening PFM Systems in Nepal

31-Oct-11

30-Jun-15

4.30

1.49

3.15

73.33%

1.15

12

P128744

TF 11208

Nepal: Making markets work for the conflict affected in Nepal

17-Feb-12

17-Feb-16

2.65

0.43

0.79

29.72%

1.86

13

P127040

TF 10455

NP: Strengthening the Office of the Auditor General

23-Feb-12

30-Jun-15

2.30

0.64

0.99

43.24%

1.31

14

P130089

TF 12273

Zoonoses Control Project (ZCP) (C)

5-Jul-12

31-Mar-14

10.00

3.56

5.06

50.60%

4.94

15

P129177

TF 11452

Nepal: Pilot Project for Seismic School Safety in the kathmandu

23-Jul-12

30-Jun-14

1.37

0.10

0.10

7.30%

1.27

Nepal PFM-MDTF Strengthening Civil Society Organizations' use of Social Accountability to improve PFM in Nepal

30-Aug-12

30-Jun-14

16

P131860

TF 12485

P127508

TF 13557

P127508

TF 13665

18

P130461

19

17

Project

Closing
Date
31-Jul-15

Net Commit.
Total Cum.
Disb. FY14
Amount
Disb.
7.00
1.57
3.55

USD in Million
Undisb.
% Disb.
Balance
50.73%
3.45

Effective
Date
3-May-06

S. No. Project ID

Trust Fund
Number

0.80

0.35

0.70

87.41%

0.10

15.00

0.00

0.00

0.00%

15.00
10.00

Building Resilience to Climate Related Hazards

20-Jun-13

30-Nov-18

16.00

6.00

6.00

37.50%

TF 13464

Output-Based Aid for Municipal Solid Waste Management

21-Jun-13

30-Jun-17

4.29

0.26

0.26

6.10%

4.03

P128905

TF 13719

Nepal Agriculture and Food Security Project

30-Apr-13

31-Mar-18

46.50

4.25

4.25

9.14%

42.25

20

P145359

TF 15780

JSDF for Pro-Poor Urban Regeneration Pilot Project

10-Feb-14

30-Sep-17

2.75

0.00

0.00

0.00%

2.75

21

P145736

TF 16296

Adolescent Girls Employment Initiative II

10-Feb-14

30-Sep-17

0.58
255.40

0.00
34.12

0.00
157.62

0.00%
61.72%

0.58
97.78

Effective
Date
31-Jul-08

Closing
Net Commit.
Total Cum.
Disb. FY14
Date
Amount
Disb.
31-Dec-14
3.94
0.09
3.81

Effective
Date
24-Sep-13

Closing
Date
30-Jun-14

TOTAL
S. No. Project ID COFN Number
20

P105860

Project

COFN C1200 Poverty Alleviation Fund II

% Disb.
94.29%

Undisb.
Balance
0.13

Project Preparation Fund
S. No. Project ID PPF Number
20
+

P143036

IDA Q8700

Name of Disbursing PPF
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Improvement Project

Utilization of Resources as of March 31, 2014 .

*

Exchange Rate Adjustment

#

Adjusted Trust Amount amount in columns 8 are figures derived after cancellation from original Trust Fund amount.
Note: 1) The matrix presents the disbursement status of only ongoing portfolio and closed portfolio with disbursement period open. Projects which are already closed are not included in the matrix.

2) Japan Social Development Fund Grant for Pro-poor Targeted Project (TF93397) extended until January 15, 2014 (extension letter dated July 31, 2012)
3) Social Protection Project (TF 99288) extended until July 31, 2013 (1st extension)
4) TF 94724 FCPF REDD Cell extended by one and half year with new closing date of June 30, 2015.(1st extension)

59

Net Commit.
Total Cum.
Disb. FY14
Amount
Disb.
3.00
0.00
0.00

% Disb.
0.00%

Undisb.
Balance
3.00

Annex 10: Nepal IFC Portfolio
IFC's Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 03/31/2014
(In USD Millions)

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

8.00

0

0

0.74

Buddha Air Nepal

5.45

0

0

2010/ 2013

Butw al Pow er Co

8.24

2014

Himtal Hydro

1998
2011/ 2012/ 2013/
2014
2009/ 2010/ 2011/
2013/ 2014
2012/ 2014

Jomsom Resort

-

NWEDC

-

2011/ 2012

Nepal BO2

-

2010

Nirdhan MFB

2012

RMDC Nepal

2009

Smartchoice

FY Approval
2008/ 2009/
2010/ 2011/
2012/ 2013/
2014

Company

2009/ 2013

Loan

Partici
pant

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

-

6.40

0

-

0.74

-

0

-

5.45

0

-

0

-

BoK

Laxmi Bank Ltd
NIC Bank

0

0

0

-

5.66

0

-

0

2.000

0

0

-

0

0

-

0

-

0

0

0

-

4.00

0

-

0

-

0

0

0.04

-

0

0

-

0.04

-

0

0

0.02

-

0

0

-

0.02

-

3.894

0

0

-

0

3.00

-

0

-

0.283

6.70

0

-

0

0.28

-

0

-

-

0.187

0

0

-

0

0.19

-

0

-

-

0.539

0

0

-

0

0.54

-

0

-

-

0.350

0

0

-

0

0

-

0

-

25.69

7.25

4.00
-

6.70

0.79

-

21.51

4.00

-

0.79

-

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

Nepal: IFC Investment Operations Program

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
E - Transportation and Warehousing
O - Finance & Insurance
P - Collective Investment Vehicles
V - Electric Power

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Guarantee
Loan-LN
Quasi-Equity (Loan Type)
Straight Equity (incl. Fund)
Total

* As of Mar 31, 2014

60

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014*

14
14

13
13

35
35

22
22

4
4

0
53
0
47
100

0
98
2
0
100

0
73
19
8
100

32
57
0
11
100

0
33
0
67
100

51
47
0
2
100

98
0
0
2
100

48
23
19
10
100

57
43
0
0
100

33
0
0
67
100

Annex 11: Nepal at a Glance

Nepal at a glance

2/11/14

Key Development Indicators

South
Asia

Nepal

Low
income

Age distribution, 2012

(2012)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

27.5
147
1.2
17

1,649
5,131
1.3
31

846
16,198
2.3
28

19.2
700
1,500

2,345
1,422
3,534

494
584
1,387

4.9
3.6

3.6
2.3

5.9
3.6

25
57
68
34
29

31
67
66
47
32

48.3
74.3
61
56
22

73
48
134
145

73
50
111
109

69
54
111
106

88
35

90
39

67
37

Female

75- 79
60- 64
45- 49
30- 34

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

15- 19
0-4
10

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2005–2012)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
150

100

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

50

0
1990

1995

2000

Nepal

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2012):
United Kingdom
United States
Germany

1980

1990

2000

2012

South Asia

2012

160

423

386

770

16
8
19

26
17
36

23
16
22

110
66
65

8.2
11

11.6
23

7.0
17

5.1
30

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
10
8
6
4

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

2
0
-2

Long-Term Economic Trends

-4
95

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

9.6
7.6

9.9
10.7

3.3
4.5

8.3
6.5

12.0
..

28.5
..

69.1
..

81.0
..

05

GDP per capita

GDP

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–12
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

14.4
1,946

18.1
3,628

23.2
5,494

27.5
18,963

2.3
4.6

2.5
4.9

1.4
4.0

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

61.8
11.9
4.3
26.3

51.6
16.2
6.1
32.1

40.8
22.1
9.4
37.0

37.0
15.4
6.5
47.6

4.0
8.7
9.3
3.9

2.5
7.1
8.9
6.2

3.3
2.7
1.2
4.6

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

82.2
6.7
18.3

84.3
8.7
18.1

75.9
8.9
24.3

77.8
10.7
34.9

..
..
..

..
..
..

3.6
6.0
12.4

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

11.5
18.7
..

10.5
21.7
..

23.3
32.4
..

10.0
33.4
..

..
..

..
..

-1.5
6.7

(% of GDP)

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

61

Nepal
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2012
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2012

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

971
1,713
-658

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

173
3.2

1,008
5,613
-4,918

Voice and accountability
Polit ical stability and
absence of violence

909
4.8

Regulat ory quality
Rule of law

Personal transfers and
compensation of employees (receipts)

111

Reserves, including gold

953

4,793

Control of corruption
0.0

2,345
20 12

Central Government Finance

25.0

12.2
8.7
9.4

18.6
15.9
13.5

Overall surplus/deficit

-3.3

-0.6

..
..

100.0

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Worldw ide Governance Indicators (w w w .govindicators.org)

Technology and Infrastructure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

75.0

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

20 00

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

50.0

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

..
..

2000

2012

53.9

53.9
1

56

0.0

0.3

29
27.2
17.0

30
25.4
17.0

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

2,878
102
–

3,818
223
–

52.4
7.5

20.1
9.5

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

0
0

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

92
0

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)
GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

8,223

7,298
..

..

0.14

0.14

2.7

3.2

350

383

Composition of total external debt, 2012
Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

Short-term, 113
Private, 2

IBRD, 0

Bilateral, 354

World Bank Group portfolio

2000

2011

IDA, 1,459

(US$ millions)
IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

Other multilateral, 1,686
IMF, 204

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2012

–
–
–

29
33.0
5

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account

2012

2000
..
..

..
..

14.4
..

21.9
..

MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

62

–
–
–
–

1,132
49
24

–
–
–
–

1,459
77
57

75
50
12

17
17
4

0

5

33
0

29
0

2/11/14

Millennium Development Goals

Nepal

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Nepal

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
..
..
..
..

1995
68.0
..
7.9
44.1

70
52
32
50

..
..
41
..

76
66
35
70

97
..
44
82

55
..
6

68
..
3

74
14
6

106
..
33

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

142
99
57

109
78
56

82
61
71

42
34
86

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

770
7
24

550
9
29

360
12
37

170
36
50

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

0.1
163
33

0.1
163
56

0.3
163
74

0.3
163
71

67
7
33.7
7.7
0.0
2.3

72
14
30.5
14.0
0.1
2.6

77
21
27.2
17.0
0.1
2.7

0.3
0.0
0.0
..

0.4
0.0
0.0
..

1.1
0.0
0.2
0.4

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)
Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Households with a computer (%)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

125

2000

2012
24.8
25.2
8.3
29.1

..
..
..
43.0

88
35
25.4
17.0
0.1
3.2

2.7
52.8
11.1
7.8

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
60

100

50

100
75

40

75
50

30

50

25

20
25

0

10
2000

2005

2010
0

0
1990

1995

2000

2012

2000

2005

2010

Pr imar y net enr ollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Nepal

South Asia

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

63

Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

2/11/14

82°E

80°E

86°E

84°E

88°E

To
Barga

Simikot

H

Chainpur

CHINA
¯ L ¯I
KARNA

Silgadhi

Dandeldhura
¯

Jumla

ali
rn
Ka

i

m

Mustan

Dunai

a

Tulsipur

Nepalganj

To
Lucknow

To
Shahajahanpur

l

A¯
D

H

Sallyan

28°N

Jomsom

LA

B H E R ¯ĪI

Birendranagar

AW

Dhangarhi

G A N D A K ¯ĪI

Baglung

Pokhara

¯ P T ¯I
RA

Mt. Everest
(8848 m)

a

Nuwakot

Butawal

To
Faizabad

y

¯ G M A T ¯I Kodan
BA
s

L U M B I N ¯ĪI

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

To
Xegar

a

N

Bhairawa

ani
ary

R M A¯T ¯
HA

S E T ¯ĪI

KATHMANDU
KATHMANDU

Lalitpur

Bhimphedi

Okhaldhunga

Hetauda

¯ ¯YANI¯
NARAYANI
NARAY
NARA
To
Faizabad

NEPAL

Sindhulimadi

JANAKPUR

Birganj

Lucknow

INDIA

To
Faizabad

Ramechhap

28°N

M E C H ¯ĪI

un
Ar

K O S ¯ĪI

Taplejun

To
Saidpur

Dhankuta

shi
Sun Ko

Ilam

Gaur

Dharan
Janakpur

Rajbiraj

Kanpur
SELECTED
CITIES AND TOWNS

Biratnagar

To
Baruni

ZONE CAPITALS
To
Faizabad

NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

SAGA

Baitadi

IR¯
I

ak

G

ah

i

M

30°N

NEPAL

L¯I

K al

To
Ranikhet

MA
H A¯ a
K A¯li

30°N

To
Baruni

26°N

26°N
0

MAIN ROADS

0

ZONE BOUNDARIES

50

25

75

50

100 Kilometers

75 Miles

To
Baruni

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
82°E

84°E

86°E

To
Jangipur

88°E

IBRD 33455

SEPTEMBER 2004

RAILROADS

25

