Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No.

43051-ET

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA

April 2,2008

Ethiopia Country Management Unit
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

DATE OF LAST COUNTRY STRATEGY
May 1,2006
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
July 8-JQ
7
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
US$l.OO = Ethiopian Birr 9.65 (as of April 2,2008)

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AfDB
AIDS
ADLI

Analytic and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Agricultural Development Led
Industrialization
AMP
Aid Management Platform
APL
Adaptable Program Loan
APR
Annual Progress Report
BPR
Business Process Re-engineering
C A A D P Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Program
CAE
Country Assistance Evaluation
CAS
Country Assistance Strategy
CAS CR Country Assistance Strategy Completion
Report
CBDSD Capacity Building for Decentralized
Service Delivery
C D M A P Capacity Development Management
Action Plan
CEM
Country Economic Memorandum
COMESA Common Market for Eastern and Southern
Africa
CPA
Country Program Assessment
CPIA
Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment
CPPR
Country Portfolio Performance Review
CSA
Central Statistical Authority
C i v i l Society Organization
cso
Coalition for Unity and Democracy Party
CUDP
DAC
Development Assistance Committee
(OECD)
Development Assistance Group
DAG
Department for International
DFID
Development (United Kingdom)
Demographic Health Survey
DHS
EAREP Electricity Access (Rural) Expansion
Program
European Commission
EC
Ethiopian Fiscal Year
EFY
European Investment Bank
EIB
EPRDF Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary
Democratic Front

EMCP
ESW
ERA
FDI
FSP
FTI
FY
GDP
GEF
GER
GEQIP
GoE
GTZ
HICES
HIPC
HIV
HLF
ICA
ICAS
ICB
IDA
IDF
IEG
IFAD
IFC
IFRS

IGAD
IHP
IMF
IRAPP
ISA
ITNS

JBAR

Expenditure Management and Control
Sub-program
Economic and Sector Work
Ethiopian Roads Authority
Foreign Direct Investment
Food Security Program
Fast Track Initiative
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Gross Enrolment Ratio
General Education Quality Improvement
Program
Government o f Ethiopia
German Agency for Technical
Cooperation
Household Income, Consumption, and
Expenditure Program
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
High Level Forum
Investment Climate Assessment
Interim Country Assistance Strategy
International Competitive Bidding
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
Independent Evaluation Group
International Fund for Agricultural
Development
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Reporting
Standards
Intergovernmental Authority on
Development
International Health Partnership
International Monetary Fund
IGAD Regional A I D S Partnership
Program
International Standards o f Auditing
Insecticide Treated Nets
Joint Budget and Aid Review

Joint Governance Assessment and
Measurement
Kilometers
KM
Learning and Innovation Loan
LIL
Monitoring and Evaluation
M&E
Multi-sectoral H I V / A I D S Program
MAP
Millennium Development Goals
MDGs
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
MDRI
Macroeconomic and Fiscal Framework
MEFF
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
MIGA
Agency
MOFED Ministry o f Finance and Economic
Development
N i l e Basin Initiative
NBI
NEPAD N e w Partnership for Africa's
Development
Nongovernmental Organization
NGO
National Nutrition Program
NNP
Non-Performing Loans
NPLs
Organization for Economic Co-operation
OECD
and Development
Official Development Assistance
ODA
PASDEP Plan for Accelerated and Sustained
Development t o End Poverty
Protection o f Basic Services
PBS
Pastoral Community Development
PCDP
Program
PEFA
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability
PER
Public Expenditure Review
JGAM

PRS
PRSC
PSCAP
PSD
PSNP
PTA
QAG
RCBP
RCIP
ROSC
RSDP
SDPRP
SIL
SLMP
SNNPR
SWAp
TWG
UAP
UEAP
UNDP
USAID
USD

WBI
WaSH

Poverty Reduction Strategy
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Public Sector Capacity Building Program
Private Sector Development
Productive Safety Nets Program
Parent-Teacher Association
Quality Assurance Group
Rural Capacity Building Project
Regional Communications Infrastructure
Program
Report on the Observance o f Standards
and Codes
Roads Sector Development Program
Sustainable Development and Poverty
Reduction Program
Specific Investment Loan
Sustainable Land Management Project
Southern Nations, Nationalities, and
Peoples' Region
Sector-Wide Approach
Thematic Working Group
Universal Access Program (WaSH)
Universal Electrification Access Program
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International
Development
United States Dollar
World Bank Institute
Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene

I
_
_
___I______

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team
Leader:
. .--.
"

Obiageli Ezekwesili
Kenichi Ohashi
-John
__ _ _Van -D y_c_ k. "

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................

i

I. INTRODUCTION..........................................................................................................

1

I1. COUNTRY CONTEXT ................................................................................................
1
A . Political Context ........................................................................................................ 1
B. Recent Economic Developments .............................................................................. 2
C. Poverty Context ......................................................................................................... 7

I11. ANALYSIS OF DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ................................................
A . Central Challenge in the Short to Medium Term ....................................................
B. Long-Term Challenges............................................................................................
C. The Challenge and Promise o f Regional Cooperation ............................................

10
10
13
14

I V . ETHIOPIA’S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY .........................................................

15

V . WORLD BANK SUPPORT PROGRAM ..................................................................
A . Lessons Learned......................................................................................................
B. Strategic Objectives .................................................................................................
C. CAS Lending and Non-Lending Program...............................................................
D. IDA Volume and Country Performance .................................................................
E. IFC and M I G A ........................................................................................................

18
18
19
21
32
34

V I. IMPLEMENTING THE PROGRAM .......................................................................
A . Monitoring Outcomes .............................................................................................
. . ..............................................................................................
B. Donor Harmonization
C. Portfolio Management.............................................................................................
D. Managing Risks.......................................................................................................

35
35
35
38
41

ANNEXES
Annex 1:
Annex 2:
Annex 3:
Annex 4:
Annex 5:
Annex 6:
Annex 7:
Annex 8:
Annex 9:
Annex 10:
Annex 11:
Annex 12:

Results Framework
Sequencing and Selectivity across Sectors
CAS Completion Report for FY 2003-2007
Ethiopia at a Glance
Social Indicators
K e y Economic Indicators
K e y Exposure Indicators
Selected Indicators o f Portfolio Performance and Management
I F C and MIGA Program for Ethiopia
IDA Program Summary for Ethiopia
Summary o f IDA Non-Lending Services
Status o f Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

BOXES
B o x 1:
Box 2:
B o x 3:

CAS Consultations: Learning from Stakeholders
Improving Labor Productivity: from Nutrition to Higher Education
Supporting Capacity Development

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.
Throughout i t s recent history, whether under imperial rule, the Marxist military
regime (‘Derg’), or the current government, a recurring theme has been Ethiopia’s
susceptibility to various forms o f shocks. Because o f population pressure, land
degradation, and climate, Ethiopia i s fundamentally vulnerable to weather-induced
shocks, such as the severe drought o f 2002/03 ’. Despite these difficulties, Ethiopia has
achieved remarkable progress in the last several years in terms o f economic development,
with GDP growth exceeding 11 percent for four straight years, and a major expansion in
access to public services.

..

An emerging ‘dual take-ofJ: ’ Ethiopia shows some signs o f having entered a new
phase o f more rapid economic growth, while simultaneously experiencing what might be
called a ‘service delivery take-off.’ If this take-off proves to be more than a short-term
anomaly, Ethiopia could leave the ranks o f the poorest countries in the world sooner than
might have been expected only a short time ago. The basic challenge therefore for
Ethiopia i s to sustain this dual take-off process that appears to be in i t s early stages.
11.

...

Creating conditions for the emergence o f this ‘dual take-off was no easy task,
and sustaining it will be s t i l l more difficult. Successful implementation o f several
important elements o f Ethiopia’s poverty reduction strategy, the Plan for Accelerated and
Sustainable Development to End Poverty (PASDEP), will be required. First, Ethiopia
will have to strike a delicate balance in macroeconomic management between the need to
manage overheating o f the economy and sustaining growth. Second, Ethiopia needs to
stimulate a greater supply response to the huge recent investments in physical and human
capital, which requires improving the investment climate further for businesses o f all
sizes and across sectors. Third, to make the economic growth inclusive, it i s important to
give targeted support to three particular groups o f Ethiopians, women, youth, and foodinsecure households. Fourth, on the service delivery front, the challenge now i s to
complete the expansion o f access and begin the more difficult task o f raising quality,
which requires not only additional resources but also greater scope for local initiatives
and decisions. Finally, the sustainability o f the dual take-off process in the longer term
will also hinge o n Ethiopia’s ability to overcome i t s fundamental vulnerability to shocks
by reversing the degradation o f land and water resources, facilitating movement o f some
people out o f agriculture, and accelerating the ‘demographic transition’ with measures to
reduce population growth.
111.

Meeting the challenge o f sustaining the dual take-off process will likely require a
shift from top-down to more bottom-up and open approaches in many spheres. The
Government’s program o f decentralization was indeed conceived as a way to achieve
such transformation in the long run. In deepening this process, Ethiopia will have to
overcome the legacy o f central control. A similar challenge can be anticipated in moving
toward a more market-based economic management system.
iv.

Many dates in this document are aligned with the Ethiopian Fiscal Year (EFY). In this case, 2002/03
refers to EFY 1995, or July 8,2002 to July 7,2003.

1

v.
The recent improvement in basic service delivery i s in itself an important
indication that ‘governance’ has been improving in a critical dimension; institutional
capabilities, especially at the local levels, seem to be building up, and the formal
processes o f citizen participation in local decision-making have been strengthened.
Nevertheless, much remains to be done to improve governance. Democratic practices at
the local level need to take deeper root. More broadly, the media and civil society
organizations need to mature and a greater space needs to be created for them, and the
effectiveness o f national level accountability mechanisms, such as parliamentary
oversight committees, courts, and the public audit system, need further strengthening.
Progress in these areas will naturally take time, but it deserves sustained attention as
transparency and accountability are critical for sustaining the ‘dual take-off in the long
run.
vi.
The Bank’s assistance strategy. The Bank’s lending and non-lending activities
will be structured to support Ethiopia in sustaining high levels o f investments in key areas
(both physical and human capital as well as institutional capacity building), while
addressing priority policy issues to maximize the impact o f such spending. Specifically,
this Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) aims to support Ethiopia in achieving four main
fostering economic growth, in order to
strategic objectives, consistent with PASDEP: (i)
improving access to and quality of basic
sustain the emerging economic ‘take-off; (ii)
reducing
service delivery, in order to sustain the emerging basic service “take-off; (iii)
Ethiopia’s vulnerability to help improve prospects for sustainability; and (iv) fostering
improved governance to support progress on the previous three objectives and empower
citizens, building on the framework set forth in the 2006 Interim Country Assistance
Strategy (ICAS). After eight years o f absence, I F C plans to increase i t s role in helping
growth become more private sector-led by reestablishing i t s presence o n the ground and
beginning more active engagement in key sectors. MIGA too i s exploring new
opportunities to support investment in Ethiopia.
vii.
The Bank’s program for FY 2008 i s based o n an initial IDA allocation o f SDR
391 million, equivalent to $635 million at current exchange rates. IDA amounts for FY
2009 - FY 201 1 will depend o n the finalization o f IDA 15 arrangements, Ethiopia’s
policy and institutional performance relative to other countries, portfolio quality, per
capita income levels, and population. The guiding principle behind the selection o f IDA
interventions will be the extent to which they can contribute in a demonstrable manner to
the 26 core outcomes that will measure the Bank’s performance in reaching the CAS’S
strategic objectives.

...

Though ambitious in scope, the pursuit o f the CAS’S strategic objectives may be
aided by opportune current trends, which suggest that Ethiopia may be breaking with the
past in important ways. Many opportunities for change are embedded in the broad
strategic directions articulated in PASDEP-including the opportunities provided by the
current process o f deepening decentralization, plans for economic empowerment o f
women and youth, and an emerging shift in the dynamics at local government levels, with
a younger generation o f more educated and open administrators. In certain areas, such as
viii.

..

11

reforms in the banking and telecommunications sectors and the encouragement o f more
private sector investments in infrastructure, there are some differences o f views between
the Government and the Bank on the approach. The Bank will continue a dialogue with
Government to seek to narrow the gap between these differing views.
ix.
Risks. Impressive as economic performance has been for the last four years, it
seems inevitable that there will be another severe weather-induced shock sooner or later.
The increasing export orientation o f Ethiopia’s economy also makes it less immune to a
slowdown o f the global economy. Moreover, there are sources o f regional instability in
the Horn o f Africa that could embroil Ethiopia in armed conflicts. Ethiopia’s ability to
avoid costly shocks where possible, and minimize the impact o f adverse events, will be
critical in protecting the current virtuous circle o f development progress. The Bank has
built (and will continue to build) flexibility into i t s lending portfolio so that it i s better
able to help Ethiopia cope with external shocks. Finally, Ethiopia i s in some ways s t i l l a
post-conflict nation (having experienced two major conflicts in the last two decades),
with many unresolved political tensions. The country’s ability to find peaceful ways to
overcome the inherent risks, while maintaining i t s focus on poverty reduction, will be
another important challenge. Some o f these risks are clearly political or have strong
political elements. The Bank will continue to work closely with the broad international
community to help mitigate such risks, while playing a leading role in advancing the core
development agenda in a way that i s increasingly harmonized.

...

111

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
I.INTRODUCTION
1.
The last World Bank strategy for Ethiopia, the Interim Country Assistance
Strategy (ICAS) covering FY2006 and FY2007, was discussed by the Board on M a y 25,
2006. The I C A S was developed in the aftermath o f the disputed 2005 parliamentary
elections, which demonstrated both the promise and the risks inherent in Ethiopia’s
democratic transition. In this context, the strategy aimed to support the Government o f
Ethiopia (GoE) in developing and implementing, in consultation with citizens, a
strengthened program o f institution building and governance reform that would help in i t s
efforts to accelerate pro-poor growth, while simultaneously continuing to improve basic
services.
2.
Since then, Ethiopia has made impressive strides o n both economic growth and
basic service delivery. This has been supported by progress in long-term institution
building and gradual improvements in governance, perhaps most notably in terms o f the
transparency and accountability o f basic service delivery by local governments. Efforts
have also been made to improve the functioning o f the parliament in a new environment
in which a significant number o f seats are occupied by opposition parties. Still, the
political divisions that emerged after the 2005 elections remain strong. At the same time,
the last two years have seen some openings that give cause for hope that Ethiopia may be
able to transcend these divisions.

3.
The I C A S foresaw the possibility o f a return to a full Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS) in FY2008, depending o n Ethiopia’s performance o n (i)
public expenditure
civil service and budget transparency; (iii)
management and financial accountability; (ii)
fairness and accountability in basic service delivery. With reasonable progress observed
in these areas, this CAS, as the Bank’s f i r s t fully results-based strategy for Ethiopia, will
aim to support Ethiopia in achieving many o f the outcomes envisioned in i t s Plan for
Accelerated and Sustained Development to End Poverty (PASDEP). This CAS covers
the period from FY 2008 to FY 201 1, one year beyond PASDEP’s own implementation
period. Should there be a major shift in the GoE’s development strategy beyond
PASDEP, the Bank will advance the preparation o f the next CAS accordingly.

11. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A. Political Context

4.
More than a decade and a half has passed since the current Ethiopian People’s
Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) government took power. In this time the
EPRDF-led regime has shifted from a rebel movement to a dominant political party. The
current government has had notable success in reversing many o f the economically

disastrous policies o f the previous Marxist military regime and implementing a program
o f decentralization o f responsibilities for basic service delivery to sub-national
authorities. Tentative strides have been made in the long t e r m shift from a highly
centralized, autocratic environment to an evolving democratic state-though this shift has
been characterized by a recurring cycle o f opening and closing o f political space.

5.
The current political landscape remains colored by the aftermath o f the M a y 2005
parliamentary elections. While the country is peaceful and opposition leaders have been
released from jail, the r i f t s exposed and deepened during this time are largely unhealed.
Opposition parties are characterized by their youth, weak capacity, undeveloped policy
agendas, and lack o f broad-based support across ethnic group and geographical
boundaries. As a consequence, nearly three years after the disputed elections, the largest
opposition grouping, the Coalition for Unity and Democracy Party (CUDP), has split into
a number o f discordant factions. Despite the weakened condition o f the opposition, the
Government continues to face a trade-off between increasing openness and participation
(with likely positive effects for development and growth, at least in the longer term) and
an aversion to risking a loss o f stability and control. Effective management o f this
tradeoff will pose a significant challenge, with possible implications for Ethiopia’s
growth and poverty reduction performance in the coming years.
6.
The trajectory o f Ethiopia’s democratic transition will be shaped by the upcoming
local elections, scheduled for April 13 and April 20,2008, and the next round o f
parliamentary elections, scheduled for 20 10. The local elections-which opposition
groups have warned that they may b o y c o t t - c o u l d be a key step in the process o f
democratic decentralization, and may have implications for the legitimacy o f the subnational governments that hold the responsibility for basic service delivery in Ethiopia’s
federal system. Both 2008 and 20 10 elections could not only be o f major importance
from a political standpoint, but also from a societal one. The perceived fairness o f the
electoral processes will influence whether the societal divisions revealed after the 2005
elections will flare up again, or begin to heal.

7.

Tensions between Ethiopia and Eritrea remain at heightened levels, and Ethiopian
troops remain continue to be engaged in Somalia. While the most likely near-term
scenario for both o f these flashpoints i s for a continuation o f the status quo, either
situation could escalate abruptly, whereas a resolution would appear to require a much
longer process in either case. Domestically, the Ethiopian military i s carrying out an
offensive to subdue a rebel movement in the Ogaden area o f the Somali Region. All
three o f these situations are closely intertwined, and they individually and collectively
have the potential to have severe consequences for development, stability, and economic
growth not only in Ethiopia but throughout the Horn o f Africa.

B. Recent Economic Developments
8.
Macroeconomic context. Ethiopia i s experiencing an unprecedented spell o f
economic growth, although this performance has been accompanied by growing
economic imbalances. For the fourth year in succession, Ethiopia’s economy has grown

2

at an annual rate o f over 11 percent- an important achievement for a country whose per
capita income in 2002/032 was same as in 1972/73. The average Ethiopian now has a
level o f income that i s about 43 percent higher than the level prevailing at the end o f the
1990s (figure 1). Yet given the extremely l o w initial per capita income, the country
remains one o f the poorest in the world, underscoring the urgency o f accelerated growth
and development on a sustained basis3 Moreover, the economy faces several risks, e.g.,
double-digit inflation, that imply that the understandable optimism over recent growth
should be moderated by caution over the potential threats to sustained economic
expansion.
Figure I:
Ethiopia’s Per-Capita Income: A Long Term Perspective

1,335

I

R e a l G D P percapita (Bar, m 1999100 prices)

4

I

2002/03 drought
War with Eritrea

1,235
1,U5
1,03 5
935

835

i

I , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,

, , , , ,

I

,

,

, , , ,

,a, ,

, , , , , , , ,

,

, , , , ,

The current boom i s a combination o f cyclical recovery and structural shifts in the
economy towards a higher growth path. The Ethiopian economy returned to growth in
the early 1990s after the overthrow o f the Derg and the end o f i t s repressive economic
policies. This recovery was however interrupted by two major shocks: the war with
Eritrea from M a y 1998 to June 2000 and a severe drought in 2002/03 (figure 1). Since
then growth has resumed and with a stronger momentum than before. The cumulative
impact o f public investment in basic infrastructure, in particular roads, power,
telecommunications, and water as well as public spending in education and health have
clearly raised the overall productivity o f the economy. Most macro indicators including
GDP have recorded growth rates much higher during the 2002/03-2006/07 period than in
any comparable period in the past. As shown in figure 2, imports, exports and foreign
direct investment grew at annual rates o f 27,24 and 39 percent respectively during the
9.

2

Many dates in this document refer to the Ethiopian Fiscal Year (EFY). In this case, 2002/03 refers to
EFY 1995, or July 8, 2002 to July 7, 2003.
See “Ethiopia Accelerating Equitable Growth,” Country Economic Memorandum, World Bank Report N o
368662-ET.

3

2002/03-2006/07 period, compared to 6, -1, and -14 percent during the 1995/96-2002/03
period.
10.
Economic growth has been broad-based. In contrast to the public sector
consumption led growth o f the 1990s, rapid growth o f private consumption has been the
driving force behind the current expansion-accounting for 8 8 percent o f growth during
2002/03-2006/07 period relative to 54 percent during 1997/98-2001/02 period.'
Agriculture, which accounts for 46 percent o f GDP and nearly 85 percent o f employment,
has grown at 13 percent per year since 2003/04. The higher agricultural growth has come
largely through increased area expansion (following the 2002/03 drought) as well as
though higher yields in selected crops. This has helped Ethiopia to gradually diversify i t s
exports to non-traditional products like flower and agro-based products. The services
sector, which accounts for 42 percent o f aggregate output, has grown at 12 percent per
annum during the last four years-helped by rapid growth o f financial services, retail
trade and transport and communication sectors. The industrial sector, which i s the
smallest o f the three sectors o f the economy and accounts for 14 percent o f GDP, has also
grown at an average rate o f around 10 percent per annum since 2003/04, with
construction sector being the biggest driver o f industrial growth in the country. In the
coming years, with i t s large potential for hydropower, Ethiopia i s expected to become
one o f the largest producers and exporters o f electricity in the region.
Figure 2: Most macroeconomic indicators including GDP
have registered rapid growth in the last four years
Movement of key macroeconomic indicators (Index, 1995/96=0

Average annual growth rate

ports of goods

5

-

4 -

&-Broadmoney

3 -

Exports of goods

2 -

-+-

i -

GDP at market
prices (real)

-ForeignDrect
Investment

Source: MOFED and :SA

11.
Ethiopia's strong economic performance can be attributed to a combination o f
several factors: improvements in structural policies, strengthening o f economic
institutions, and some good luck. Tariffs and non-trade barriers have been significantly
reduced, many sectors have been opened for domestic and foreign investors, and land
market distortions are being gradually addressed. Regional states have been given

The decline in private investment as a ratio o f GDP in recent years i s unusual, especially in light o f the
rapid growth in foreign direct investment and the visible increase in pace o f private economic activities,
especially in the urban areas. Since private investment i s measured as a residual item in the national
income accounts, the possibility o f it being underestimated cannot be ruled out.

4

considerable autonomy in developing independent economic policies and a more radical
devolution process i s underway, moving finances and functionaries to the woreda level.
The favorable global environment, generous debt write-off, large and increasing Official
Development Assistance (ODA) and remittances, and a long spell o f good weather have
all played important roles in moving Ethiopia to a higher growth trajectory, though these
favorable factors have been offset to some extent by the rising price o f oil, o f which
Ethiopia imports all o f i t s consumption.
12.
However, the good growth performance has been accompanied by some
economic developments that could pose risks to sustained economic growth and poverty
reduction. First, inflation has been in double digit figures for the last three years, with
food prices growing at an annualized rate o f 24 percent in recent months. The
distributional impact o f food price increase has been mixed.5 Many rural dwellers (most
o f whom are engaged in agriculture) have benefited from the price rise, but urban
inhabitants have seen a significant increase in their cost o f living. The main factors
underlying inflation are: rapid growth o f money supply, rising food demand caused b y
strong economic growth that has exceeded rises in agricultural productivity,
imperfections in agricultural marketing and continued global inflation. The Government
has recently announced new measures to combat inflation, including lifting taxes on
grains, tightening the monetary supply, and investigating anti-competitive practices by
food traders.
13.
Second, Ethiopia has benefited from the long spell o f good weather, but recent
history shows that this i s unlikely to last indefinitely. Ethiopia should therefore be
prepared for a cyclical change in weather that could result in a growth slowdown. In the
event o f a rainfall shock, given that output from crops accounts for 30 percent o f GDP, a
10 percent decline in crop production following a drought could reduce 3 percentage
points from the GDP growth rate. Major bilateral donors have already announced global
cutbacks in food aid due to higher food prices, which could constrain the response to
increased food insecurity in a future drought.
14.
Third, Ethiopia imported nearly US$875 million worth o f crude o i l in 2006/07, up
from $3 11 million in 2003/04. A further 20-30 percent increase in price o f o i l from their
current level could increase the import bill by as much as US$175-260 million annually.
With hard currency reserves having been reduced to only two months o f imports, a
further increase in o i l prices could be detrimental to the balance o f payments situation.
O n the fiscal side, the burden o f fuel subsidies i s becoming increasingly large despite
moves in recent years to pass through some o f the global petroleum price increases to
consumers. Between July 2007 and February 2008, fuel subsidies amounted to about
$23 0 million. Despite the subsidies, consumers (particularly the urban middle class,
which i s already being hit by higher food prices) are s t i l l feeling strong direct and indirect
welfare impacts from higher fuel prices.
15.
Ethiopia will have to work harder than before to be able to sustain i t s current
economic performance. The authorities face a difficult balancing act o f carefully
5

See ‘Explaining Sources o f Food Price Inflation in Ethiopia. Just in Time Policy Note. November 2007.

5

managing monetary policy to bring inflation under control and at the same time
maintaining an accommodative environment for continued growth. While the recent
economic performance has provided some cushion against future shocks, Ethiopia needs
to remain watchful against these emerging risks and take preemptive actions in order to
sustain i t s long-term growth potential o f 8-10 percent per annum.
16.
Fiscal context. In recent years, Ethiopia has maintained a prudent fiscal stance
by keeping i t s aggregate spending level consistent with i t s total revenue and grants. The
fiscal deficit (including grants) f e l l from 3.9 percent o f GDP in 2005/06 to 3.1 percent o f
lowest level since 2003/04 (see table 1). Fiscal policy has been
GDP in 2006/07--its
increasingly counter-cyclical-relatively l o w deficit during boom times and high deficit
during periods o f downturn-a sharp contrast to the pro-cyclical fiscal policy seen in
most developing countries. Ethiopia's expenditure performance generally has been
strong - especially on pro-poor spending and reduction in debt obligations. As shown in
table 1, pro-poor spending has been high and rising, and represents among the highest
efforts among all l o w income countries. Government has also managed a high level o f
fiscal discipline by ensuring that the deviation between the budgeted and actual deficit i s
kept small. More than h a l f o f i t s total spending i s for investment purposes
(approximately U S $ 2 billion), an indication o f the huge scale o f infrastructure in roads,
energy, irrigation and the urban sector that are likely to be available soon to support the
current growth momentum.
Table 1: Ethiopia's Government finances, in percent of GDP
-

.-_-._
.

l
_
l
l

Revenue
Tax revenue
External grants
Expenditure
Poverty sectors spending
Fiscal balance, incl. grants
Fiscal balance, excl. grants
External financing

2002103
15.9
11.2
5.0
28.0
12.2
-7.1
-12.1
4.3

2003104
__
16.1
12.6
4.6
23.7
11.8
-3.0
-7.6
2.8

2004/05
14.6
11.6
4.3
23.3
13.2
-4.4
-8.7
2.2

- ._"__^I_

I

2005106
14.8
10.8
3.6
22.3
13.9
-3.9
-7.4
1.1

2006/07
12.8
10.2
6.4
22.2
13.1
-3.1
-9.5
1.1

2007108*
14.4
10.4
5.7
24.5
14.6
-4.4
-10.1
1.6

Source: MOFED and IMF
* IMF esfimate.

17.
Debt. Following debt relief through the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) Initiative in 2004 and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) in
2006, the net present value o f external debt relative to GDP has fallen to 6 percent and to
exports at 36 percent, far below the thresholds that signal unsustainability. Domestic
debt i s relatively small at 28 percent o f GDP and new external debts have been contracted
mostly on concessional terms, conducive to debt sustainability.

6

C. Poverty Context

18.
Over the past decade Ethiopia has made significant strides in improving the living
standards o f i t s citizens. Household survey evidence suggests that between 1999100 and
2004/05, real total expenditure per capita grew by 19 percent (15 percent with respect to
1995/96). This has resulted in significant reductions in poverty: the headcount f e l l by
12.4 percentage points between 1999/00 and 2004/05, and by 18.5 percentage points
since the mid-1990s (see table 2). The poverty headcount ratio must have declined
further following three years of double digit growth after the 2004105 household survey.
Despite this progress, monetary poverty remains a significant challenge, particularly
considering that around 25 million people thought to be living below the poverty line in
Ethiopia.
Table 2: Trends in monetary poverty and inequality, by area of residence
(Percent of households)

199516
National Dovertv line

Headcount
Depth of
Poverty

National
199910 200415

199516

Rural
199910

200415

199516

Urban
I99910

200415

46

44

39

48

45

39

33

37

35

13

12

8

13

12

9

10

10

8

Severity of
Poverty

5

5

3

5

5

3

4

4

3

Gini
Coefficient

0.29

0.28

0.30

0.27

0.26

0.26

0.34

0.38

0.44

Sources: PASDEP, HICES survey 1995/96, 1999lOO and 2004/05.

19.
Progress in poverty reduction across urban and rural areas has been uneven6.
While urban areas contributed an estimated 60 percent o f economic growth over the
decade up to 2004/05, they saw stagnant poverty reduction. This seems to have been
driven by a “U-shaped” incidence o f growth, with households both in the top and bottom
twenty percent o f the distribution experiencing strong and positive growth, with little or
even negative growth for the middle o f the distribution. This resulted in little growth
around the poverty line, and raised income inequality. It seems likely that urban areas o f
different types fared differently over the period - indeed evidence from panel data in the
seven largest cities points to uneven trends in inequality across urban areas, and to a
greater variability in the inequality trends than i s revealed by national household surveys.
20.
The determinants o f such a rise in inequality in the context o f increased
urbanization are currently being investigated. Available evidence points to labor market
developments (such as the slow-down in creation o f manufacturing jobs, the growth o f
informal sector), changes in the urban demographic structure (with an increase in the
The full impact o f recent growth acceleration o n poverty and income distribution i s not known yet since
there has not been any household survey in Ethiopia after 2004105. Since the last survey, there have been
three more years o f double-digit growth and i t s impact o n poverty i s expected to be sizeable.

7

number o f dependants in urban households) and the effects o f internal migration all as
possible drivers o f these developments. Changing returns to assets, and particularly to
primary education (with a growing number o f heads with completed primary education
living in poverty), might have also driven the rise in inequality. While no household data
for the period after 2005 are available, simulations suggest that the recent increase in
food prices might have significantly contributed to worsening the welfare o f the urban
poor over the last two years.

2 1.
Despite less rapid growth, poverty reduction has been more marked in rural areas,
where, given the l o w urbanization rate in Ethiopia, nearly 80 percent o f the poor live.
The 6 percentage point decline in rural poverty between 1999/00 and 2004/05 suggest
that those at the l o w tail o f the distribution have been able to benefit from agricultural
growth. After a decade o f balanced growth across all income groups, inequality has
remained l o w and stable in rural areas, with a Gini coefficient o f 0.26. Panel data,
however, reveals greater heterogeneity in these trends, with significant income mobility
and reversals o f fortunes over the decade up to 2005 in rural areas. Further, even areas
growing high potential export crops (such as coffee or chat) were found in some years to
experience higher poverty, due to the drought. It seems likely, therefore, that the muted
impact o f the high growth that Ethiopia started experiencing since 2003/04 partly reflects
the high vulnerability that continues to characterize rural areas.

The progress in reducing poverty i s mirrored in significant gains in human
22.
development indicators, with all key Millennium Development Goal (MDG) indicators
showing substantial improvement. The headline achievements for education, health and
water sectors include the following (see figure 3):
Gross primary enrollment (GER) for grades 1-8 rose to 92 percent in 2006/07,
compared to 80 percent in 2004/05 and 62 percent in 2001/02;
Some underserved regions like Afar and Somali have experienced the highest
increase in enrollment;

There has been considerable reduction o f the gender gap for primary schooling defined as the ratio o f girls to boys - from 0.87 in 2004/05 to 0.93 in 2006/07 for
grade 1-4 and from 0.69 in 2004/05 to 0.78 in 2006/07 in grade 5-8;
Similar improvements have been recorded in the health sector, though information
for the most recent years i s not yet available. Between 1999/00 and 2004/05:
P Infant mortality rate has fallen from 97 to 77 per 1,000;
P Under-five child mortality has been reduced from 166 to 123 per 1,000
P L i f e expectancy at birth has increased from 49 to 5 1 years;
P Immunization coverage has improved from 30 to 54 percent and DPT3
coverage has increased from 5 1 to 76 percent;
P Distribution o f insecticide treated bed nets increased from about 3 million
in 2005 to 18.2 million in 2006, and deaths from malaria decreased from
110,000 in 2005 to less than 60,000 in 2006; and
P Household access to water has risen from 29 to 36 percent.

8

Some o f these improvements have been supported by the pilot Citizens Report
Card (2004), which reported improvement in access to services, increased voice o f
the users and greater citizen satisfaction with public service delivery in Ethiopia.

Figure 3: Impressive Improvements in Human Development Indicators
Education Indicators - Changes between 2004105 and 2006107

Health Indicators - Changes Between 2000 and 2005

180 7
160
140
120

100
80
60

40
20
0

Net enrollment rate
for grade 1-4
"

Net enrollment rate
for grade 5-8

Primary School
girlsboys ratio,
grade 1-4

Secondary school
gidslboys ratio,
grade 9-10

Infant Mortality Rate Child Mortality Rate
(per 1000)
(per 1000)

Stunting (under 5)

""

Source: Government o f Ethiopia, World Development indicators and Staff estimates.

23.

Despite the recent socio-economic progress, significant challenges remain and
new ones have emerged. Gender disparity i s an example o f a persistent challenge: in
rural areas female-headed households are more likely to be poor, and are also more likely
to stay poor over time than their male-headed counterparts. Further, despite a massive
increase in female enrolment in secondary education, a powerful means to escape
poverty, the gender gap has widened.
24.
The HIV/AIDS epidemic appears to have stabilized and may even be declining in
urban areas, though it remains a major concern. However, signs point to increasing
infection rates in rural areas, particularly small towns, which i s o f serious concern since
the large majority o f the population lives outside o f urban areas. Rural prevalence varies
among regions, with most regions having a relatively l o w prevalence o f HIV, but a few
demonstrating prevalence rates greater than five percent. One o f the most critical
manifestations o f the epidemic i s the rising number o f HIV/AIDS orphans, thought to
number 750,000 in 2005.

25.
While vulnerability i s very high in both urban and rural areas, there are concerns
about the persistence o f poverty in rural areas. This appears to be driven by the l o w
productivity o f subsistence agriculture, increasing fragmentation o f rural land-holdings,
the risks posed by soil nutrient depletion and environmental degradation, and the
difficulties in connecting farmers to markets and providing them with market
information. The l o w levels o f inequality identified in rural areas might also reflect the
difficulties o f generating real dynamism and opportunities for diversification outside o f
agriculture, as non-farm employment remains associated with greater poverty and
vulnerability.

9

111. ANALYSIS OF DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
A. Central Challenge in the Short to Medium Term
26.
Under its two poverty reduction strategies, the Sustainable Development and
Poverty Reduction Program (SDPRP) and PASDEP, Ethiopia has achieved significant
results in economic growth and provision o f basic services. Indeed it seems that Ethiopia
may be experiencing not only the possible beginning o f an economic take-off, but also
what might be called a ‘service delivery take-off..’ The basic challenge for Ethiopia at
present i s to sustain the dual take-off process that appears to be getting underway.
Looking ahead, it i s clear that Ethiopia needs to contend with a number o f challenges in
this regard.
27.
Economic take-offi Having invested heavily in physical infrastructure and
human resources over the last decade, the economy has achieved an unprecedented level
o f economic growth over the last four years. Sustaining the rapid growth and creating
large numbers o f jobs are critical for not only poverty reduction but also social and
political stability. The sustainability o f this impressive growth, however, i s not assured.
Ethiopia will have to address several challenges in both the short and medium term.
28.
In the near term, macroeconomic management will pose a challenge, as was
already pointed out in the economic developments section. With strong demand
stimulus, driven both by the general rise in incomes and ambitious investments,
inflationary pressure has built up. Moderating this without derailing the growth process,
especially in the context o f rising international prices on petroleum, grains, construction
materials, fertilizers, and other key commodities, will demand skillful stewardship o f
macroeconomic policies. Possible turbulence in the global economy as well as any
weather-induced shock could further complicate this task.
29.
In the medium term, Ethiopia will have to face some structural issues. While
public investment has increased from 12.8 percent o f GDP in 2002/03 to 18.2 percent in
2006/07, private investment has fallen as a share o f GDP, from 9.0 percent to 6.7
percent7. Given the immense needs for infrastructure investment, this increase in public
investment i s appropriate and has contributed to accelerated growth. In the longer term,
however, private investment needs to grow more rapidly to sustain rapid growth. Despite
some adverse developments (such as high prices o f o i l and construction materials), it
seems that external factors have been on balance favorable (good weather, rise in
remittances and aid, buoyant commodity prices, economic globalization, move toward
regional integration, etc.) and have also contributed to the current economic boom. Many
high growth episodes have benefited from such accidental factors in the initial stages.
However, turning such serendipitous beginnings into a virtuous circle o f sorts requires a
set o f sound policies.
As noted earlier, private investment i s measured as a residual item in national income accounts and
therefore the limitations o f the data should be noted. The possibility o f private investment being
underestimated cannot be ruled out.

10

30.
Heavy investment in recent years has created many new economic opportunities
for the private sector, yet the private sector has not responded as strongly as could have
been hoped. Eliciting a more robust supply response therefore must be at the heart o f the
growth agenda. GoE policies have tended to favor a narrow range o f industries and
larger investors. There i s a strong case for creating a more level playing field for all
investors. This i s likely to help Ethiopia sustain rapid growth and make the economy
more resilient to external shocks.
3 1.
Given the reliance o f the majority o f the population o n agriculture and livestock
as the mainstay o f their livelihoods, Ethiopia needs also to raise the productivity o f
agriculture to broaden the base o f growth. The Government has recognized this by
making agriculture a central focus o f i t s development strategy. Yet, overall productivity
in this sector has not grown significantly,' leaving a large number o f households
chronically dependent o n food assistance. In order to raise the bottom o f the growth
base, stronger support to the agriculture and livestock sectors seems warranted. At the
same time, Ethiopia's infiastructural endowment remains l o w despite recent increases in
levels o f investment, so Ethiopia clearly needs to continue investing in expansion and
upgrading o f basic infrastructure as well.
For growth to be inclusive and poverty reducing, Ethiopia will need to address
three special issues. First, some 8.3 million Ethiopians remain more or less perennially
dependent on food security programs, and several million more are susceptible to food
insufficiency in the event o f adverse climatic shocks. They tend to be in very weak
positions to share in the benefits o f rapid macroeconomic growth. Building on existing
programs such as the Productive Safety Nets and the Food Security programs, a more
comprehensive strategy needs to be developed to l i f t this most vulnerable segment o f the
population out o f the poverty trap and put them on a sustainable path toward better
economic lives. Second, a rapidly growing number o f young Ethiopians with high school
level education face unemployment. Likewise, despite significant progress in the social
outlook on gender issues, women remain at a disadvantage in pursuing economic
opportunities. If the country i s not able to engage these two groups in more productive
economic activities, the result would be an immense waste o f resources, a loss o f growth,
as well as possible social tensions. Third, though much smaller in scale, there i s growing
evidence that poor households in urban areas experience serious food shortage and other
stresses. While the rural poor have been supported by various safety net programs, their
urban counterparts have not received comparable help. With rural-urban migration
increasing, providing some form o f safety net for this group as well may be important.

32.

33.
Service delivery take-ofl: Through massive increases in pro-poor spending,
rudimentary infrastructure has been put in place for basic education, basic health care,
and agricultural services. Moderately trained front-line service providers (teachers,
development agents, and health extension workers) are in place at the kebele (ward) level.
Supported by the Protection o f Basic Services (PBS) Project and the Public Sector
There are, however, many small pockets where effective extension services and introduction o f
technology have raised productivity sharply. The key i s to expand such successes more widely.

11

Capacity Building Program (PSCAP), decentralization has played a critical role in this
process. This has improved access to basic services at an unusually rapid pace and to a
very significant extent, but quality remains a concern. Yet, there i s a widespread sense
that with a few more resources and greater space for local decision making, not only
access but quality, too, can begin to improve sharply. I t appears that Ethiopia may be on
another path o f take-off, but to achieve significant improvement in these services on a
sustained basis, a number o f challenges need to be met.

34.
Continued enhancement o f good governance will be key to this take-off. W h i l e
the overall trends have been very encouraging, it i s clear that the results vary significantly
across localities. Given the l o w base o f administrative capacity and the long history o f
autocratic governance in Ethiopia, this i s hardly surprising. But, it does mean there i s a
need for continued capacity building for both local institutions and citizens. Particularly
in a situation o f fledgling democratic processes, with relatively l o w administrative
capacity, it i s important to mobilize the energies o f a range o f civil society organizations
(CSOs) as well. They can help to strengthen the voice o f common citizens, as well as
supplement governmental capacity in service delivery.
35.

Despite the sharp expansion in budgetary resources for basic services at the local
levels, there remain large unmet needs for both completing the access agenda and
beginning to make significant headway on quality. Securing the financial resources will
be a major challenge. Thus far, expansion o f the local budgets has relied primarily on
rapidly increasing transfers from the Federal Government (supplementedby strong donor
support). Although this relationship may not change in the near term, local governments
will have to step up their efforts to strengthen their own revenue bases, so that in the
longer term, they will be able to finance significant portions o f local services and local
investments out o f their own revenues. Developing such revenue streams will at least in
the long run also give local governments an ability to borrow against future revenue
streams.

36.
Although Ethiopia i s often thought to be one o f the least corrupt countries in the
region, there are concerns that corruption may be growing. The increasing resource
flows in both the public and private sectors, the windows o f opportunity created at local
levels by decentralization, and the identification o f a few but increasing number o f
instances o f corruption, all suggest the need for better understanding o f the scale and
nature o f corruption, more effort to monitor hotspots and trends, and to generally increase
vigilance.
37.

Continued improvements in service delivery will be critical in producing the
human capital needed to support the diversification o f the economy into new areas,
including in agriculture. Improvement in the effectiveness o f agriculture and livestock
extension services can also have an immediate and direct impact on growth. In turn,
continued growth will allow GoE to raise much needed additional resources to improve
basic services, and improved economic opportunities will raise the demand for better
quality education. Thus the two take-off processes are mutually reinforcing.

12

B. Long-Term Challenges

3 8.
To make the task o f sustaining the dual take-off more challenging still, Ethiopia
will have to cope with a set o f long-term issues around rapid population growth and
environmental vulnerability. Although the total fertility rate has begun to decline (5.9 in
2000 and 5.7 in 2005), it remains high. For Ethiopia to reap the economic benefits o f a
‘demographic bonus’ arising from an increase in the relative size o f the working age
population due to a rapid drop in fertility, the process o f demographic transition needs to
accelerate. In this regard, it i s well established that girls’ education plays a particularly
important role. In the meantime, however, rapid population growth has led to a halving
o f average land holding in the rural areas since 1960, to a level that i s generally
considered subsistence level at best. Furthermore, population pressure has also led to
degradation o f farm land as well as much o f the watershed areas. This in turn has made
vast numbers o f rural households increasingly vulnerable to climatic shocks, thereby
encouraging unsustainable exploitation o f natural

resource^.^

39.

The environmental threat that Ethiopia faces today i s increasingly recognized.
Sustainable land and water management will have to be at the center o f any
comprehensive response to this long-term challenge. Although good beginnings have
been made to reverse this vicious circle (for instance through the Productive Safety N e t
Program, the proposed Land Management Project, and the proposed Tana Beles
Integrated Water Resource Development Project), far more needs to be done. Such
efforts will also help Ethiopia cope more effectively with the impact o f climate change.
Integral to such an endeavor will have to be a long-term strategy to shift large numbers o f
rural people o f f the land and out o f agriculture, and to help those who remain in
agriculture to move into high-productivity, more commercially oriented agriculture or
agro-industries.

40.

Finally, Ethiopia’s economic development efforts since the 1990s cannot be
separated from i t s attempt to break from the strong centralization (and top-down)
tendencies o f the previous regimes, which had marginalized local voices, suppressed
regional diversities, and contributed to the civil war. The Government views
decentralization as the main strategy to address such grievances, and assure peace and
better service delivery. Still, the deep-rooted tradition o f top-down decision making as
well as the social norms that generally accord women a l o w status do pose significant
obstacles to decentralized democratic processes that are meant to improve accountability
and transparency at the local levels. Aware o f this, GoE has emphasized a wide range o f
capacity building programs. In the sphere o f economic management, too, GoE was faced
with the legacy o f a highly centralized, top-down system that allowed l i t t l e space for
private or local initiatives. While seeing the expansion o f the private sector as the
strategic response, GoE has approached it in a measured and deliberate manner. Initially,
it has tended to focus more o n a directive role o f the state. As GoE moves toward
creating an increasingly open environment for the private sector, it may again face the
tradition o f control-oriented government institutions. In both o f these broad areas, i.e.,
9

Unsustainable use o f water resources i s taking place more generally, for Ethiopia lacks a system o f
integrated water resource management for the most part.

13

decentralization of public services and private sector development, how the legacy o f
central control, top-down tendencies, and hierarchical social norms may hinder the
change process requires further analysis and careful tracking over time.

C. The Challenge and Promise o f Regional Cooperation

41.
Ethiopia inhabits a difficult neighborhood, which has seen numerous domestic
and cross-border conflicts in recent years. At the same time, i t s economic fortunes are
closely linked with neighboring countries in a number o f ways. First, as a landlocked
country since the independence o f Eritrea in 1993, Ethiopia i s reliant on i t s neighbors for
access to the sea, and hence, for much o f i t s access to global markets. While Djibouti
had been the main outlet to the sea for Ethiopia starting from the opening o f the railway
linking Addis Ababa to the former French colony in 1917, it was overtaken by the port o f
Assab, now in Eritrea, which came to handle up to 90 percent o f Ethiopia’s international
trade from the 1970s to the 1990s. However, with the outbreak o f war with Eritrea in
1998, Djibouti recaptured the entirety o f Ethiopian sea trade. While the quality o f roads
linking Ethiopia and Djibouti has steadily improved, the aging railway line continues to
operate short o f i t s full potential, posing a constraint to trade. Ethiopia’s landlocked
status also means that i t s access to undersea internet backbone cables depends on regional
cooperation.
42.

Second, historical circumstances have limited Ethiopia’s ability to develop i t s
large potential for hydropower and irrigation. The N i l e Basin Initiative (NBI), bringing
together all 10 N i l e riparians to cooperatively develop the N i l e River as a common
resource, represents a major breakthrough that can help enhance Ethiopia’s ability to
make use o f the waters o f the Nile, in ways that can also benefit other riparians. The
current-and most ambitious-phase o f the NBI agenda involves a push to r o l l out largescale, cooperative investment projects. I t includes major opportunities for large-scale
power generation and transmission, irrigation, flood control, and watershed management.
Efforts are also underway to finalize a ‘Nile Cooperative Framework’ treaty that
establishes principles and a permanent N i l e River Commission-a prerequisite for
sustained cooperation, as well as for publidprivate financing o f N i l e investments.

43.
Third, increased regional trade has the potential to benefit Ethiopia and i t s
neighbors, particularly in specific areas o f comparative advantage.
Though Ethiopia i s part o f the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
(COMESA), COMESA countries account for only about 10 percent o f Ethiopia’s total
trade (of which 5 percent i s Djibouti, and the rest mainly Sudan, Egypt, and Kenya). This
appears to be due in large part to similar production structures, inadequate infrastructure,
and lack o f information o n trade opportunities. A major opportunity for growth in
regional trade i s in exports o f Ethiopian hydropower to neighboring countries, many o f
whom face high power costs, shortages o f electricity, and a reliance o n carbon-based
generation. At the same time as Ethiopia could reap high returns from such trade, it will
also allow investments o n a larger scale (and therefore at a lower average cost) than could
otherwise be realized. Ethiopia i s moving to link i t s power grid to Sudan and Djibouti

14

soon, and a connection to Kenya i s envisaged in the medium term. For other overland
regional trade, a key priority will be improving road transport linkages to neighboring
countries.

44.
Finally, cross-border issues in agriculture and health pose special challenges that
can only be addressed with collaboration between countries in the region. Diseases such
as HIV/AIDS and malaria, for example, do not respect international boundaries, and
therefore international cooperation must be part o f an effective strategy to combat them.
The IGAD Regional HIV/AIDS Partnership Program (IRAPP) i s one example.
Similarly, cross-border migrations o f crop pests, livestock diseases, and other threats such
as locusts can threaten domestic agriculture. Moving from regional risks to regional
opportunities, there are clear benefits to regional cooperation in agricultural research and
in setting priorities, as under the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Program (CAADP), under NEPAD".

45.
Deeper regional integration in these areas can not only bring economic benefits,
but can also build greater interdependence, which could reduce the likelihood o f intraregional conflict. In both respects, it can be a key factor in helping to sustain Ethiopia's
recent economic growth.

IV. ETHIOPIA'S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
46.
Overview. Ethiopia i s currently implementing i t s second poverty reduction
strategy (PRS), known as the Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development to End
Poverty (PASDEP). Over time, the PRS has become established as the overall
government strategy for development. PASDEP shows a strong vertical coordination o f
sectoral strategies with the overall government strategy and i s well integrated with the
budget through the Macroeconomic and Fiscal Framework (MEFF) and the Joint Budget
and Aid Review (JBAR) prepared by Government and donors.

47.

PASDEP's strategic vision i s one o f rapid and sustained growth primarily through
scaled up development assistance and large domestic investments targeted at eliminating
the poverty traps that have hindered the development o f the country. This vision shows
great elements o f continuity with the first PRS (SDPRP, the Sustainable Development
and Poverty Reduction Program) in areas such as infrastructure, human development,
rural development, human security and capacity building. However, significant new
elements have been introduced, namely an explicit link with an exercise o n what it would
cost to achieve the MDGs in Ethiopia. New elements also include a renewed focus on
growth, specifically in the areas o f private sector and urban development, industry and
the commercialization o f agriculture. These innovations reflect both new thinking on the
need to rebalance the growth strategy and some developments, such as the private-sector

10

Under CAADP, Afiican governments have committed to address issues o f growth in the agricultural
sector, food security, and rural development, and to significantly increase the share o f national budgets
allocated to agriculture.

15

led growth in the floriculture sector and the apparent stagnation in urban poverty
reduction. PASDEP priorities in key sectors are summarized in the following paragraphs.
48.
Market based development of agriculture. The strategy identifies the
predominance o f subsistence agriculture, characterized by poor land management and a
limited resource base, the l o w supply and dissemination o f technology, the limited flow
o f information and inadequate implementation capacity as some o f the major problems in
the sector. To address these issues, PASDEP focuses on human resource development,
technology, and economic infrastructure in the context o f a strong enabling environment
for private sector activity and improved infrastructure. The interventions identified under
PASDEP include: training programs, the introduction o f appropriate technologies and
marketing systems with a strong push on marketing cooperatives, measures to improve
land use and the conservation o f natural resources, improved access for farmers to
agriculture inputs, markets, rural financial services, and improved security o f land tenure.
Investment priorities will be based o n the CAADP framework.
49.
Private sector development. PASDEP emphasizes the integration and
interdependence between the agricultural and industrial sectors as key to the country’s
economic development and to the expansion o f the service sector. The Industrial and
Trade Development Policy Strategy under PASDEP aims to ensure export oriented
development by providing support to the private sector, coordinating and guiding the
activities o f all stakeholders and addressing market failures. Central to the program i s an
active industrial policy, based o n selective interventions in strategic sectors. Selected
value chains and clusters are targeted, following the highly successful example o f the
floriculture sector, where interventions targeted at technology, coordination and market
failure were directed by public-private partnerships. Infrastructure, power generation,
and construction and supply opportunities are also highlighted in PASDEP as high
potential areas for private sector participation, and so are the social sectors based on the
substantial growth o f private schools in urban areas.

50.
Urban development. Under PASDEP, the strategy i s to provide efficient and
effective public services to urban residents, with particular emphasis o n regional equity.
The strategy i s built o n four pillars: support for micro and small enterprises and j o b
creation, integrated housing development, improved access to land infrastructure,
transport, and services, and promoting urban-rural and urban-urban linkages. A priority
that cuts across all four pillars i s the on-going effort to strengthen urban governance.
5 1.
Infrastructure. Road network expansion, as well as increased access to
electricity, water and telecom services (along with their maintenance), are seen as central
to the growth agenda and contain strong elements o f continuity with the past, particularly
in the road sector. A major innovation i s a large-scale rural electrification program, the
Universal Electrification Access Program (UEAP). Under U E A P access will be extended
to 24 million people, reaching penetration o f 50 percent o f the country over five years.
Further, during the PASDEP period 11 electric power generating stations will be
constructed with a total capacity o f 4,091 MW. PASDEP through the Universal Access
Program for water supply and sanitation services (WaSH-UAP), aims to provide access

16

to clean potable water to the entire population and improve sanitation outcome within
seven years. I t also aims to promote integrated water resources management with multi
purpose water resources development and providing emphasis to irrigation development
in an integrated manner. Finally, the strategy’s goal i s for the entire population to have
access to telecommunications within a 5 km radius.
52.
Human development. In education, the Government aims to implement a twentyyear sector plan aimed at improving the quality, equity, and relevance o f education, with
special emphasis o n primary education for all by 20 15, as well as Technical and
Vocational Education Training (TVET), teacher’s training and cross-cutting issues such
as gender, civic, ethics and HIV/AIDS education. In the area o f health services the
Government continues implementing i t s Health Sector Development Program (HSDP) I
and 11, and will extend it into HSDP 111with an increased focus o n poverty-related health
conditions such as communicable diseases (HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria) and health
problems that affect mothers and children. PASDEP also includes an enhanced focus on
nutrition, with a new National Nutrition Strategy (NNS) having recently been approved.
53.
Governance. PASDEP includes a number o f interventions to promote Ethiopia’s
commitment to open, transparent, and democratic governance. These include: improving
the capacity o f Parliament and political institutions through stronger law making and
public consultation mechanisms; performing annual public audit reports and
implementing systems o f annual disclosure o f accounting and performance information
directly to the public; and holding local elections for woreda (district), kebele, and city
councils. T o ensure human rights protection and enforcement a number o f public
awareness campaigns will be organized and human rights legislation and conventions
will be published. A comprehensive series o f reforms has been planned under the
PASDEP including participatory mechanisms to be established at the local level and
many legal and administrative regulations for CSOs to be amended. The performance o f
the judiciary will be improved through a computerized database system in courts
implementing case management system and judge training programs. The Justice Sector
Reform program also includes measures to improve the performance o f the police,
prosecutors, and prison system. Specific measures will be instituted during PASDEP to
strengthen the freedom o f the press and freedom o f access to information, including
issuing o f licenses for community radio operators.
54.
VuZnerabiZity. The Food Security Program (FSP), initiated during SDPRP
implementation, remains the Government’s strategy to overcome food insecurity and
building
reduce reliance o n food aid. The key interventions under the FSP are: (i)
household assets through on-farm activities; (ii)
voluntary resettlement from
the Productive Safety Nets
environmentally degraded to more productive areas; (iii)
program, which i s helping transition from food-aid to cash-aid while building community
assets; and (iv) promoting non-farm income generating activities. Related efforts include
an increased focus o n nutrition and putting in place flood preparedness and early warning
systems.

17

V. WORLD BANK SUPPORT PROGRAM

A. Lessons Learned
55.
A Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CAS CR) prepared by the
Ethiopia country team for the period from 2003 to 2007” found several lessons o f
experience applicable to the Bank’s program. These include:
The enhancedfocus on governance in the FY2006 ICAS should be
continued in future support, and mainstreamed through the Bank portfolio.
For projects under implementation, the Bank and Government will need to
continue to apply measures instituted to further enhance transparency and
accountability, especially at the local level. These measures include: using
clear and transparent criteria for selecting project sites and beneficiaries;
ensuring greater involvement o f a broad range o f stakeholders in project
preparation and implementation; strengthening M&E systems and
operationalizing them in a more participatory manner; and strengthening
implementation support, particularly oversight on the fiduciary aspects o f
projects. N e w projects should incorporate such measures from the beginning.
The importance of the Bank staying engaged in a constructive manner
during slzocks. The Bank’s partnership with Ethiopia i s long-term and events
like the contested 2005 elections might change the terms o f engagement, but
should not radically alter the Bank’s overall involvement in the country. The
Bank reacted in a very measured and timely manner by shifting i t s support
from general budget support to the innovative PBS project, which allowed the
Bank and other donors to act as a stabilizing force and assured continuation in
the improvement o f governance and service delivery to poor people.
Recognition of the unique advantages of budget support. Despite the
successful shift in financing modalities from budget support to the PBS in
reaction to the 2005 crisis, the benefits o f budget support could not be fully
replicated by PBS, as a more narrowly focused investment instrument.
Budget support provided an important forum for dialogue, especially o n issues
related to growth and structural reforms. In addition, the multi-donor dialogue
fostered by budget support enhanced donor harmonization and reduced
transaction costs. These factors argue for the resumption o f Poverty
Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) once donors and Government agree that
conditions are appropriate.
The need for enhanced results and monitoringframeworks. The 2003 CAS
and the 2006 I C A S contained modest monitoring frameworks that could only
give a limited view o f h o w Bank activities contributed to outcomes. New
11

The Bank’s program in this period was guided by two strategies: the FY03 CAS and the FY06 ICAS.

18

strategies will need to include a more explicit results chain that l i n k s country
goals with outcomes, outputs and milestones in order to facilitate monitoring
o f progress at various stages o f the CAS period.

56.
Evaluations of Bank support. The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) o f the
World Bank recently completed a Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) o f the World
Bank’s support for Ethiopia from 1998 to 2006. The review recognized the relevance o f
the Bank’s CASs to Ethiopia’s development priorities and deemed the Bank’s support for
the pro-poor growth strategy i t s e l f a success. However, citing what it considered weak
outcomes on private sector development and mixed outcomes o n governance-and the
importance o f these two areas for pro-poor growth-the C A E rated Bank assistance over
this period as “moderately unsatisfactory.” The evaluation recommended that the Bank:
(i)
seek consensus within the country team and with Government o n priority areas for
restrict i t s interventions to policy dialogue and analytic work (rather than
support; (ii)
lending) in areas where there were clear policy disagreements with Government; (iii)
view private sector development constraints as governance issues; (iv) improve i t s
knowledge base on social, political and cultural factors; and (v) continue to work closely
with non-governmental stakeholders in Ethiopia. The country team has carefully
examined these recommendations, and i s working to identify ways to take them on board
in ways that can improve the Bank’s effectiveness.
57.
In 2005, the Bank’s independent Quality Assurance Group (QAG) conducted a
Country Program Assessment (CPA) assessing all Bank work in Ethiopia during 20032005. The CPA found the Ethiopia Country Program during FY2003-05 to be
satisfactory in all key aspects: responsiveness to government plans and needs, strategic
relevance o f analytical efforts and lending interventions, coordination with other donors,
the design and quality o f tasks, implementation, and likely impact. The CPA
recommended an enhanced focus o n agriculture, private sector development, and public
expenditure management. It suggested that future scaling up o f ODA and IDA
allocations to Ethiopia should be conditional upon demonstrated success in these areas.
B. Strategic Objectives

58.
The World Bank’s strategy for the period FY 2008-FY 2011 will aim to help
sustain the ‘dual take-off o f growth and basic services by supporting the implementation
o f key elements o f the PASDEP framework. This will, however, require addressing a set
o f vulnerability issues. A continued focus on governance will be important in building
on the progress that has been made, as governance has dimensions that go beyond service
delivery and economic management.
59.
Therefore, the CAS aims to support Ethiopia in achieving four main strategic
objectives, consistent with PASDEP: (i)
fostering economic growth, in order to help
sustain the emerging economic ‘take-off‘; (ii)
improving access to and quality of basic
sewice delivery, in order to sustain the emerging basic service “take-off; (iii)
reducing
Ethiopia’s vulnerability to help improve prospects for sustainability; and (iv) fostering
improved governance to support the first three strategic objectives and citizens’

19

empowerment, building on the framework set forth in the ICAS, and with continued
emphasis o n institutional capacity building. This CAS i s also aligned with several o f the
World Bank’s six strategic themes12 and the Bank’s Africa Action Plan.

Box 7; CAS Consultations: Learning from Stakeholders
InNovember and December 2007, the Country Team conducted extensive consultations with
a wide range o f stakeholder groups from the government, the private sector, c i v i l society
organizations, academia, donors, opposition members o f parliament, and other community
groups. The discussions took place in the capital Addis Ababa as well as in Oromia, Amhara,
Gambella and Afar regions. Although different groups naturally brought diverse perspectives,
there were also significant areas o f agreement.
Most stakeholders indicated that life in general had become better in the last 3-5 years.
Incomes have risen, provision o f infrastructure has improved, and access t o basic services
has expanded. Nevertheless, serious concerns remained about the quality o f services.
Decentralization, at the level o f formal processes and resource allocation, has gone far,
but true empowerment remains more limited. The relationship with the Federal
Government tends to be experienced as ‘top down.’ M a n y local governments and
communities feel they know their own solutions to the local problems but lack the
resources and clear decision rights to implement them. These concerns were particularly
prominent in remoter regions.
M a n y participants were eager for more economic opportunities. M a n y in women’s groups
have already had some exposure to micro-credits and saw great potential in their
expansion. Youth groups too were keen to have more access to such support.
Though improved significantly, biases against women remain widespread. Economic
empowerment o f women would be critical in addressing such biases.
There remain concerns about the lack o f space for open political discourse. While
recognizing the complexity o f the democratization process, many f e l t that more openness
i s needed t o strengthen transparency and accountability o f the government at all levels.

60.

The pursuit o f these strategic objectives will be aided by a number o f
opportunities for change that appear to be present in Ethiopia today. Such opportunities
could help make a break with the past. Many o f these opportunities for change are quite
consistent with the broad strategic directions articulated in PASDEP-including those
provided by the current process o f deepening decentralization, plans for economic
empowerment o f women and youth, and an emerging shift in the dynamics at local
government levels, with a younger generation o f more educated and open administrators,
who may receive added legitimacy through the upcoming local elections. In other areas,
such as banking and telecommunications reforms and increased private sector investment
in infrastructure, the Government and the Bank have differed o n the modalities and the
l2The CAS contains major efforts on three o f the Bank’s six strategic themes: the Poorest o f the Poor,
Knowledge and Learning, and Global Public Goods. The other three themes are: the Arab World, MiddleIncome Countries, and Fragile and Conflict States.

20

pace at times, though not so much on the eventual goal. Changing circumstances may
present new opportunities to re-examine these issues and help deepen reforms.

C. CAS Lending and Non-LendingProgram

6 1.
Instruments and selectivity. The CAS aims to maximize the impact o f the Bank’s
assistance in Ethiopia through: (i)
IDA credits and grants, primarily in the form o f
investment projects, but also with the possibility o f development policy lending if there i s
consensus between the Government, Bank, and partners that conditions are appropriate;
(ii)
analytical work, policy advice, and technical assistance; (iii)
increased involvement o f
other institutions o f the World Bank Group, with IFC planning to reopen an office in
Ethiopia; (v) capitalizing o n the increased scope for regional initiatives since the N i l e
Basin Initiative (NBI) has matured to the point that significant new opportunities are
available; and (iv) leveraging financial resources beyond the country allocation through
partnerships and donor coordination.
In terms o f sector focus, GoE has requested based on PASDEP resource
62.
requirements that about 50 percent o f the lending should be for ‘infrastructure’, 30
percent for basic services (mostly through PBS), and the remaining 20 percent for other
interventions including capacity building and certain “catalytic” investments that can
leverage significant donor financing or support key policy directions. This framework
will continue to guide the Bank in selecting future areas o f focus (see Annex 2) o n
selectivity o f the lending program. After FY2008, the lending program i s expected to
become increasingly selective, with fewer and larger projects, to ensure careful
preparation and strong implementation. For example, while the FY2008 pipeline
includes eight projects with an average size o f about $80 million, the FY2009 pipeline
will consist o f four projects averaging $155 million (see Table 5). The CAS also aims to
strengthen selectivity in relation to other donors. Injointly-supported projects, the Bank
will focus on foundational aspects (such as the sector framework, or the bulky part o f
funding), while bilateral donors may focus more o n extensive institutional support or
components that require specialized implementation skills. In many sectors, this division
o f labor has already allowed productive collaboration.

63.
Lendingprogram. In the spirit o f harmonization, the lending portfolio will move
further toward a sector-focused, programmatic approach. Already, three large-scale
multi-donor programs, viz., PBS, PSCAP, and PSNP, form an important part o f the
program (accounting for nearly one-third o f the current IDA commitment) and will
continue to be the backbone o f Bank support to basic decentralized service delivery and
safety net. In the road sector, too, a well coordinated investment program has emerged
(accounting for a quarter o f IDA commitment). In this CAS period, the Bank will seek to
shift support to increasingly programmatic approaches (whether through sector-wide
support instruments or PRSCs) in areas such as water supply and sanitation, access to
electricity, urban development, rural development, and private sector development.
Nevertheless, there will be areas where a project-based approach, even in a sector with a
sector-wide program, will be more appropriate (typically to support one-off investments,
introduce innovations, or facilitate policy focus on new issues). The Bank will be

21

selective in using investment lending to keep the number o f operations contained and
reduce the transaction costs for both the Government and the Bank.

64.
Two years after suspension o f direct budget support, the international partners and
the Government are increasingly recognizing the importance o f resuming this modality o f
assistance. Moving gradually toward direct budget support i s an internationally accepted
priority for harmonization. It provides important opportunities to engage in policy
dialogue on wide-ranging structural issues (such as macroeconomic policy and growth)
that are not feasible in conventional investment or even sector-focused operations.
Resumption o f budget support will likely require that development partners feel some
confidence that the political process in Ethiopia i s able to provide effective validation o f
development priorities. Thus implementation o f the local elections in a way that i s
broadly seen as free and fair, and continued progress o n the PASDEP governance agenda,
may be important milestones in moving back to budget support. In terms o f the policy
content, development partners seem to broadly agree that addressing key structural issues
that hinder more robust growth o f the private sector should be central to the program.

65.
Analytical work, policy advice, and technical assistance will all be important
means by which the Bank will seek to attain the CAS core outcomes. With the tempo o f
development quickened, GoE i s beginning to encounter a set o f challenges in both
economic management and structural policies that are new and yet demand urgent
attention. This creates a particularly fertile environment for constructive policy dialogue.
Hence good AAA work i s likely to have especially high returns. Flagship analytical
activities (between four and six per year) envisioned in the CAS period are shown in
Table 3. The l i n k s o f these pieces to the specific CAS outcomes are broadly explained in
the following section. This l i s t i s not meant to be comprehensive, nor does it contain a
number o f policy notes and just-in-time advisory pieces that are anticipated in response to
Government requests. Building o n recent trends, a growing number o f analytical
activities are expected to be undertaken jointly with Government and domestic and
international partners.

22

Table 3: Planned Major Analytical Reports
FY2008

Investment Climate
Assessment (ICA) update
0
Rural Investment
Climate Assessment
0
Regional Growth
Reports (Amhara)
0

FY2009

FY2010

Strategic Obiective 1 : Fostering Economic Growth
Strategic Review of
0
Eastern Nile Strategic
Road Sector Development Basin Assessment
0
Making Finance Work
0
Energy Strategy
for Ethiopia
0
Regional Growth
0
Development Policy
Reports (Addis Ababa)
Review (DPR)
0

FY2011

0
Investment Climate
Assessment (ICA) update
0
Rural Economy
Survey

Strateaic Obiective 2 : lmw-oving Access t o
and Qualitv of Basic Service Delivery
0

Health Financing

0
Service Delivery
Quality & Decentralization

0

Public Finance Review
(annual)

0

Strateaic Obiective 3: Reducina Vulnerability
Gender and Poverty

Adaptation to Climate
Change

Strategic Obiective 4 : Fostering ImDroved Governance
0
Public Finance Review 0 Public Finance Review 0 Public Finance Review
(annual)
(annual)
(annual)
0
Joint Governance
Assessment and
Measurement (JGAM)
0
Country Integrated

66.
CAS Focus Areas and Outcomes. Under each strategic objective, the Bank will
concentrate i t s support around a number o f focus areas that are likely to help sustain the
dual take-off process and reinforce trends that may be promoting positive societal
change. Progress toward the CAS’s strategic objectives will be measured based on
performance relative to a set o f 26 core CAS outcomes (see table 4), with between one
and three outcomes per focus area. These outcomes have been selected in such a way
that satisfactory performance could be said to have been achieved if 70-75 percent o f the
entire set o f outcomes are fully attained. The rationale for this approach i s to ensure the
appropriate mix o f high-probabilityybut relatively low-impact outcomes, and some
lower-probability, but higher-impact outcomes.
67.
The guiding principle behind the selection o f interventions i s the extent to which
they can contribute in a demonstrable manner to the CAS outcomes. The CAS proposes
to have a continual process o f learning and problem-solving in regard to how best the
Bank can support Ethiopia to meet the development challenges discussed in section 111.
Government, donors, and Ethiopian stakeholders are expected to be key interlocutors in
this process. The remainder o f this section lays out the core principles and sectoral
strategies that are expected to guide this process, across all o f the CAS’s focus areas. The
detailed linkages between all ongoing and planned analytical and financial support and
the CAS outcomes are presented in the CAS Results Framework in Annex 1.

23

Table 4: Focus Areas and Core CAS

1.
2.
productivity of investment in
infrastructure in a sustainable manner

3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

outcome^'^

ing economic growth
_ ”
Structural and macroeconomic polices are
conducive to sustain internal and external balance
Strengthen road sector institutions and domestic
road construction industry
Enhance regional integration
Creation of an enabling environment to make growth
corridor conceot a realrtv
Increase agricultural productivity in selected
intervention areas
Small town development, rural land management,
and rural credit svstems s u ~ ~ orural
r t diversification
Improve financial sector performance
Improve urban governance
Reduce cost of internet service
Improved investment climate helps Ethiopia benefit
from increased globalization
Quality of Basic Sewice Delive Substantiallv achieve universal access to mimaw
education ahd increase girls’ enrollment ’
Increase sustainable access to potable water and
sanitation services
Increase delivery of key health services: malaria and
HIV/AIDS control, vaccination, contraception
Improve quality of education
Roll-out of the kebele health extension package
leads to improved services
Greater use of community radios for improved
service delivery
Increase PTA engagement in schools

__

_
”
ll”l

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

2.3 Enhance citizens’ voice to improve
quality of basic services

16.
17.

ive3: R
3. I Reduce exDosure to chronic food
insecurity and’shocks
3.2 Address environmental degradation
and population pressures

21.
22.

3.3 Support greater economic

I

”I

- -

~”

Reduce food insecurity
Develop long-term strategy for food security
Increase investment in community-based watershed
management
Accelerate demographic transition
Improve access by women and youth to micro

- -- - -in-development
- - - - - __ - - prccesseK - __
- Harmonization and Partnerships
5. I Deepen partnerships and donor
26
Increase donor harmonization through IDAharmonization
supported multi-donor programs

for accountability
- - -- - - - - - - -

I

18.
19.
20.

- -- -

13

Detailed indicators with baseline and target information, and the Bank and partner activities expected to
support these outcomes, are described in the CAS Results Framework in Annex 1.

24

Strategic Objective 1: Fostering economic growth

68.
Support macro-fiscal stability. Ethiopia has a good track record o f
macroeconomic management. The Government i s keenly aware that continuation o f this
good performance will be a prerequisite for success in attaining PASDEP goals. In
coordination with the IMF, the Bank will aim to support the Government in undertaking
structural and macroeconomic polices to address domestic imbalances, such as inflation
and fiscal pressures, and external ones, including maintaining a competitive exchange
rate and keeping the current account deficit within sustainable limits. Given that the
Government welcomes well-formulated policy advice, AAA will remain the main
instrument for support, though a PRSC may be considered as a means to enable
concentration o f policy attention on some key issues. Just-in-time policy advice, such as
has been provided by the Bank recently on food price inflation, i s expected to be a
valuable tool in this regard. While the sustainability o f Ethiopia’s debt has improved
drastically in recent years due to the debt r e l i e f granted under MDRI and the enhanced
HIPC initiative, the Bank will also work in conjunction with the Government and the
IMF to monitor Ethiopia’s debt burden.

69.
Accelerate the level and productivity of investment in infrastructure in a
sustainable manner. Infrastructure has accounted for a major share o f IDA’S support in
recent years, as well as GoE’s own public expenditure program. The current strategy will
seek to continue this trend, given Ethiopia’s massive infrastructure needs. There is,
however, important scope for strengthening the capacity o f both government institutions
and domestic contracting industries to quicken project implementation and reduce costs.
In the roads sector, the largest single sector supported by IDA, the Bank will emphasize
strengthened institutions and a more capable domestic road construction industry. With a
sector review, the Bank will seek to assist GoE in developing a more effective strategy to
effect such changes. In energy, supporting investments to boost access to electricity will
be critical. Since the lumpy nature o f investments in power generation will mean that the
sudden boost in generating capacity will not be able to be quickly accommodated with
new distribution networks, increasing regional power trade will also be a priority so as to
generate export revenues and smooth variability in energy supply. Given the massive
investment requirements o f the sector, increased private sector participation in energy
finance will be promoted. Policy notes, on-going advice, and lending instruments will be
used to support the energy sector.
70.
Regionally, there are an increasing number o f potential win-win infrastructure
development opportunities between Ethiopia and i t s neighbors that can be exploited. The
N i l e Basin Initative (NBI) has been the catalyst for a number o f these opportunities (two
IDA investments in irrigation and power trade have already been made possible through
the opening created by NBI). The Bank will continue to play the role o f coordinating
international support for NBI, and further capitalizing on possibilities for supporting
investments made possible by the initiative, particularly in terms o f additional power
trade investments, hydropower, water resources management, and flood control. Outside
the NBI framework, another promising opening with the potential for eventual Bank

25

support i s an increased focus o n regional transport corridors, particularly in terms o f the
proposed Eastern Africa Regional Road Network, involving Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania,
and Uganda, as well as the rehabilitation o f the Ethio-Djibouti Railway. Ethiopia i s also
eligible to participate in the Bank’s $424 million Regional Communications
Infrastructure Program (RCIP), which aims to increase broadband internet connectivity in
East and Southern Africa.

71.

Domestically, returns o n infrastructure investments can also be boosted by
encouraging network effects, i.e. by grouping complementary investments in high
potential ‘growth corridors.’ In addition to providing financial support for such
investments, the Bank will focus on creating an enabling environment to make the growth
corridor concept a sustainable reality, through supporting the establishment o f local
organizations in high-potential areas to coordinate investments from the natural resource
management point o f view. The Proposed Tana Beles Integrated Water Resource
Development Project will be a key instrument
to set a working example o f such a vision. A
Box 2: Improving labor
series o f studies o n other growth corridors i s
productivity: from nutrition to
also planned, starting with Addis Ababa.
higher education

72.
Increase productivity of agriculture.
Recent agricultural growth has been driven
significantly by an expansion in the areas
cultivated, rather than by wide-spread
productivity gains. Raising the productivity
o f agriculture and livestock will strengthen the
base o f growth and reduce the food insecurity
o f the poor. Priorities for IDA lending and
non-lending support will be: (i)
continue to
build the capacity o f the agricultural extension
system and make agricultural research work
more demand driven; (ii)
help strengthen the
rural-urban economic linkages; (iii)
support
more efficient agriculture input markets to
improve availability; (iv) support more
physical investment (irrigation, electrification,
market access); and (v) improve the land
management system to facilitate
commercialization o f agriculture and, where
appropriate, diversification o f farm
households out o f agriculture. In all this,
connectivity with the market i s a cross-cutting
theme. Value-chain analysis and a study on
development o f small towns (which are
critical l i n k s between villages and the global
markets) will be used as tools to identify
specific areas o f policy interventions. Helping

26

The Bank’s recent Investment Climate
Assessments (ICAs) have underlined that
a major constraint on Ethiopia’s
international competitiveness i s low
labor productivity, which i s estimated to
be less than half o f the sub-Saharan
Africa average and far below that of
developing countries in Asia.
Evidence from the PROFILES project
suggests that malnutrition and stunting
due to iron and iodine deficiency alone
costs Ethiopia as much as 10 percent of
GDP in lost productivity per year.
Therefore, the Bank will begin a new
emphasis on supporting improved
nutrition in this CAS period, through
Ethiopia’s new National Nutrition
Program (NNP).
At the top end of the labor market, the
lack of highly skilled workers i s also a
constraint on productivity. Continued
Bank support for higher education will
aim to support the ongoing expansion of
and quality improvements in the
university system. In this regard, raising
tertiary completion rates for women i s
critical for women’s empowerment.

GoE to scale up o f the success stories will be the focus on lending support.

73.

Strengthen supply responsiveness of industry and services sectors. The Bank
strongly supports PASDEP’s expanded focus o n private sector and industrial
development. The forthcoming Investment Climate Assessment notes a number o f
improvements in the investment climate, with Ethiopia now the gthranked business
environment in Sub-Saharan Africa according to Doing Business. On the other hand,
several important constraints to private sector development prevent an even greater
improvement in the investment climate. In this regard, the Bank will seek to support a
less targeted, more open approach to investment promotion (with attention to the role o f
the Ethiopian diaspora), an improved enabling environment for small and medium
enterprises, and more efficient urban land management systems to allow easier access to
land. Access to banking and telecodinternet services are close to the lowest in the
world, constraining growth and limiting Ethiopia’s ability to compete successfully in the
global market.

74.
The Bank will seek to support new approaches in these sectors to improve
competitiveness, and will explore with Government and donor partners whether renewed
budget support could have the potential to anchor broad policy dialogue o n such
structural issues. Small-scale studies on specific issues in these key sectors and notes on
policy options will be used to anchor policy dialogue. The Bank will also support the
improvement o f the institutional infrastructure for corporate financial reporting standards
and practices, using the Reports on the Observance o f Standards and Codes (ROSC)
initiative and a possible IDF grant. Government’s improving overall support for the
private sector has made it possible for the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the
private sector arm o f the World Bank Group, to decide to reopen an office in Ethiopia
after an absence o f nearly eight years. IFC, together with IDA, will aim to help the
economic system become more flexible, and can play an important role in improving the
availability o f financial services and foreign exchange to the private sector. Periodic
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) updates, with support from the World Bank
Institute (WBI) will help track trends in the business climate over time.

Strategic Objective 2: Improving Access to
and Quality o f Basic Service Delivery

75.

Improved access/coverage of basic services. Ethiopia’s recent ‘take-off in basic
service delivery has been driven by the Government’s commitment to boost rapidly propoor expenditures at the sub-national level, with support from IDA and donor partners
through the PBS project and earlier budget support and sectoral SWAps. By the end o f
the CAS period, Ethiopia will have nearly achieved the MDG o n universal primary
education, l4
and will have made significant progress toward eliminating gender
disparities in primary and secondary education, increasing access to potable water,
decreasing malnutrition, and increasing delivery o f key health services, such as malaria
l4Because o f a significant pastoral population, Ethiopia does face a special challenge in reaching a certain
segment o f children.

27

and HIV/AIDS control, vaccination, and contraception. PBS, and i t s envisaged successor
(‘PBS 27, will continue to pool donor funds in support o f this important process,
alongside stand-alone support for nutrition, H I V / A I D S prevention, water supply and
sanitation, and support for decentralization at the level o f municipal administrations (with
a large focus o n urban water supply and sanitation). While water supply and sanitation i s
included in the basic services supported by PBS, a stand alone water and sanitation
project i s s t i l l planned during the CAS period since local capacity remains inadequate to
manage water supply and sanitation services independently. The Bank will focus
particularly o n strengthening results monitoring with technical assistance so as to
improve further enhance the impact o f public spending on basic services. Through the
second Multi-Sectoral HIV/AIDS project, the Bank will help address concerns over the
potential for a sharp increase in rural infection rates, through support for prevention
activities.

76.
Enhance quality of basic services. As access to basic services has expanded
rapidly in recent years, improvements in the quality o f services have not been as easy to
come by. Improving quality will depend on deepening decentralization in several
dimensions, for which the Bank will step up support: allowing greater space for local
initiatives and local determination o f priorities; increasing non-salary resources at the
decentralized levels, and focusing on sustainable building up o f institutional capacity at
local levels (e.g., making civil service careers more attractive). The Government has
fully recognized the need to begin shifting attention from expanding access to improving
quality, and in education has developed a General Education Quality Improvement
Program (GEQIP), which the Bank expects to support together with donor partners.
77.
Enhance citizens’ voice to improve quality of basic services. Another promising
means o f improving the quality o f basic services i s through greater involvement o f
communities, citizens, and c i v i l society. This can promote enhanced accountability and
alignment with local needs and priorities. The Bank will seek to support increased
community involvement in service quality improvement (such as Parent-Teacher
Associations, as envisioned in GEQIP); expanded statehon-state partnerships for service
delivery; increased space for civil society organizations, building o n openings such as
C i v i l Society Report Cards and PBS component four social accountability activities; and
greater media attention as a way o f improving transparency and accountability in public
service delivery. The Bank will undertake deeper analysis o f social dynamics around
citizen participation in public decision making and try to contribute to improvement in a
number o f programs that involve citizens and communities. Independent community
radio service can also help improve service delivery quality, if used as a vehicle for
promoting awareness and social accountability.

Strategic Objective 3: Reducing Vulnerability
78.
Reduce exposure to chronic food insecurity and shocks. Despite some
significant efforts, such as the IDA-supported Productive Safety N e t s Program (PSNP)
and Food Security Project, which have shown great promise recently, Ethiopia’s

28

vulnerability to adverse weather remains significant. The Bank will continue to support
Ethiopia in addressing food insecurity issues to improve the lives o f the poorest and
protect the take-off process. An essential next step i s to help develop a coherent national
strategy to assist poorest farm households to ‘graduate’ from food security programs in a
sustainable manner. In this regard, raising the productivity o f agriculture and livestock i s
critical. S t i l l it i s likely that Ethiopia can overcome the basic imbalance between the land
and the population only through more structural changes in the economy. Thus the
national strategy will have to examine the prospects for non-agricultural sectors to give
incentives for a significant portion o f the rural population to shift away from agriculture,
as well as the sensitive issue o f resettlement o f rural dwellers. Upcoming discussions on
the next phase o f PSNP should provide a natural platform for this discussion, and the
Bank plans to contribute analytical inputs for the national strategy. As an emerging issue,
the needs o f the urban poor (currently not covered under the PSNP mechanism) require
attention, especially in light o f the recent high levels o f food price inflation.

79.
While risk mitigation strategies are critical, ensuring an effective and timely
response to any shock, so as to allow the poorest households to cope effectively, also
remains important. Further support to the development o f early warning indicators and
contingency planning systems, particularly for large, slow-onset emergencies such as
drought remains vital. This can also include pilots o n weather insurance. Both the PSNP
and the Pastoral Community Development Program (PCDP) will continue to work to
strengthen government capacity in these areas. In addition, these programs have adopted
the use o f contingent components, which are triggered in response to pre-identified risks.
The flexibility created by these components will allow a more rapid and effective Bank
response should a shock occur.
80.
Address environmental degradation andpopulation pressures. Continued
degradation o f Ethiopia’s land threatens the prospects for sustainable growth and poverty
reduction. Estimates are that erosion from cropland involves a loss o f 2-3 percent o f
agricultural GDP per year in Ethiopia, and degradation o f watersheds exacerbates the
impact o f droughts. While estimating the impact o f climate change on Ethiopia’s
productive resources, particularly land and water, s t i l l requires further analysis, it i s clear
that the impact i s significant and will require robust adaptation measures. The problem
calls for a renewed effort to develop and implement a comprehensive land resource
management plan, and increased investment in community-based watershed
management. This can build on the promising beginning in undertaking small-scale civil
works to reverse degradation under PSNP. Potential entry points include integrated water
resource management within the Tana and Beles sub-basins, promotion o f improved land
tenure security, and the generation and dissemination o f knowledge on best practices and
innovations in managing land sustainably. A particular emphasis will be placed o n using
the Bank’s knowledge to raise the public awareness o f the urgency o f the land
degradation issue.
8 1.

A main driver o f land degradation i s Ethiopia’s population growth, currently
expanding by more than two million people every year. As a result, land holdings per
rural person have more than halved over the past 40 years and a land poor class i s
emerging-20 percent o f the rural households have not enough land to produce half o f
29

their caloric needs. Given the constraining effect high population growth rates have on
economic growth and services, Ethiopia needs to develop and implement a coherent
action program to accelerate i t s demographic transition. The 2006 Bank report
“Capturing the Demographic Bonus in Ethiopia” recommends expansion o f family
planning services, with emphasis on improving availability o f contraceptives even in the
most remote rural areas. The report also showed that if Ethiopia succeeded in
compressing the demographic transition period, that would significantly boost per capita
income growth (‘demographic bonus’). The interest in sustaining rapid growth could
facilitate more policy attention on an issue that has tended to be treated as a ‘given.’

82.
Support greater economic engagement of women and youth. In the traditional
social systems prevalent in many part o f Ethiopia, women and youth tend to be given
much less voice. This disempowerment appears highly correlated with development
outcomes. The Bank will seek to expand support for PASDEP’s focus on women and
youth, particularly in regard to improving their economic independence and tapping their
energies for development. Such support could involve scaling up micro finance and
technical support for the two groups, developing special support programs in education to
improve female completion rates, or focusing on employment and income generating
opportunities. The Bank supported a successful pilot Women’s Development Initiatives
Project not long ago to help develop modalities for helping poorest women build their
ability to generate income outside the home. This experience, in addition to GoE’s
ongoing programs, can provide useful lessons on how to scale up programs for women
and youth. The Bank plans to undertake a review o f these programs, and use the results
to help GoE focus i t s resources on the most effective program design. If a suitable
funding instrument can be found while avoiding proliferation o f projects, the Bank i s
prepared to provide funding support as well.

Strategic Objective 4: Fostering I m p r o v e d Governance

83.
With i t s strong focus o n governance, capacity building and decentralization in the
PASDEP, the Government recognizes the importance o f enhancing the effectiveness and
quality o f government operations, and i s beginning to pay more attention to the ways by
which to enhance the role o f citizens in the equitable development o f Ethiopia. The
ICAS strongly emphasized governance, and specified the Bank’s leading role in
supporting governance in areas consistent with i t s mandate-particularly in “core” areas
such as public sector reform, decentralization, PFM, and local-level accountability and
empowerment-while leaving more political areas to donor partners. This emphasis
remains valid, and should be sustained in this CAS period.
84.

It i s important to recognize, however, that building good governance i s a long-

term effort. Bank support should be approached strategically, and be able to adapt to
both the peaks and valleys that will inevitably accompany this process. This CAS
promotes the integration o f governance in
therefore envisages a parallel approach that: (i)
the sectors aimed at supporting the dual growth and service delivery takeoff; and (ii)
continues to target support in core areas o f governance - elaborating the need for ongoing

30

supply side reform, significant improvement in accountability structures and
mechanisms, as well as new efforts to help strengthen civil society.

85.
The quality o f governance cuts across all sectors and impacts every type o f
development intervention. At present, a number o f sectoral, decentralization, and
capacity building projects include a systemic approach to governance. This approach
will be strengthened in the CAS period by making mechanisms for improving governance
inherent to project design. New projects will also include descriptions o f the (implicit or
explicit) governance and anticorruption strategies underpinning the activities to be
supported.
86.

Support for the core governance
agenda will be organized around the
following focus areas:

87.
Improve government effectiveness
and quality of public administration. As
the Government’s main vehicle to improve
governance and service delivery at all levels
o f government, the Public Sector Capacity
Building Program (PSCAP) will be central
to the Bank’s capacity development
strategy. Near term priorities will include
civil service regulations, human resource
management business process reengineering (BPR), and results-oriented
performance evaluation. Given the recent
increase public expenditures, especially at
decentralized levels, the capacity o f public
financial management should also be
strengthened.

88.

Enhance the accountability and
responsiveness of government. A concerted
push towards improved accountability i s
planned and being implemented through
PBS and PSCAP efforts, improving woreda
capacity for engagement with citizens and
promoting improved transparency and
access to public information. A support
program will be developed to diagnose the
nature and scope o f corruption in Ethiopia,
and to develop strategies for tackling
corruption hotspots. Donor support to the
development o f an effective system o f
oversight institutions continues alongside
this program o f work. WBI i s helping to

Box 3: Supporting Capacity
Development
Capacity building has been at the heart
o f Ethiopia’s two poverty reduction
strategies, first in the SDPRP and now in
the PASDEP. Government’s capacity
building strategy was launched in 200 1,
with the establishment o f the Ministry o f
Capacity Building and the launch if the
National Capacity Building Program
(NCBP) as a multi-sectoral,
intergovernmental program response to
the capacity building demands o f GoE’s
planned institutional transformation.
In line with the N C B P and the World
Bank’s Capacity Development in Africa
Management Action Plan (CDMAP),
Bank support for capacity building i s (i)
mainstreamed across a l l interventions,
and (ii)
the specific focus o f a subset o f
operations that focus explicitly on
capacity development in priority areas.
K e y among these operations i s PSCAP
(and the planned PSCAP II)
which
,
supports improvements to the scale,
efficiency, and responsiveness o f public
service delivery at the federal, regional,
and local levels. Other capacity
development initiatives seek t o
strengthen capacity in the private sector,
financial sector, agriculture sector, and to
promote use o f ICTs for development. A
significant focus i s also expected on
building capacity for both local
governments and c i v i l society t o enhance
accountability through enhanced
citizens’ participation.

strengthen capacity in Parliament so that i t can more effectively carry out i t s financial
oversight role. Urban governance presents a unique set o f challenges, which the Bank i s
seeking to help address in collaboration with partners including Germany and France.
89.
Increase empowerment and demandfor accountability. Empowering citizens
will require improved capacity, access to resources, and access to information. Focus
will be on establishing c i v i l society’s role in social accountability, improving the interface
with government at national and woreda levels, and giving greater latitude for
communities to determine development priorities. The development o f an improved
enabling environment i s critical, as i s the broadening o f dialogue between the private
sector and GoE to include a larger profile o f f i r m s . Enhanced space for the media
through the new Press L a w and within the boundaries o f an accepted code o f conduct i s
also critical for improved accountability, and for providing a forum for dialogue o n
development priorities.

90.
Finally, better measurement o f governance in Ethiopia i s necessary to improve
targeting and to develop a better basis for dialogue with government. Over the next two
years, the Bank will work with government and donors to develop a more
comprehensive, reliable set o f actionable indicators that measure key achievements (e.g.,
transparency, civil service reform, public financial management), and areas o f change
(e.g., corruption, civil society, private sector development).
D. IDA Volume and Country Performance

9 1.

Table 5 summarizes IDA’Sproposed lending program for the CAS period.
Ethiopia’s IDA allocation for FY 2008 i s SDR 391 million, equivalent to $635 million at
current exchange rates. l5 The FY 2008 IDA program could exceed this allocation if
additional IDA resources become available during the IDA 14 period.

The lending program for the rest o f the CAS period from FY2009 - 201 1 will
92.
depend on the IDA 15 replenishment, which envisages funding increases for IDA
borrowers. Since the country allocation process has not yet been completed, indicative
IDA allocations for the rest o f the CAS period are based on the FY2008 norm allocation
o f SDR 391 million. Actual allocations during FY2009 - FY2011 will be determined
annually o n the basis o f Ethiopia’s performance as measured by the Country Policy and
Institutional Assessment (CPIA) relative to the performance o f other countries. The
CPIA i s the Bank’s mechanism for linking a country’s policy and institutional
performance to IDA country allocations. In this process, indicators on governance carry
much heavier weight than other indicators o n economic management, structural policies,
and social inclusion. Other factors influencing country allocations are the quality o f
portfolio implementation, per capita income level, population and the number o f other
active IDA borrowers.

l51 Special Drawing Right (SDR)

equaled 1.625 U S D on M a r c h 24,2008.

32

r

m

0
N

-I

r

t

0
v)

K

a

a

a

U

a,
n

2

a

v)

v)
v)

m

0

0
t-

0
N

t
M
M

m
0

0
N

t

z

0

to
0
0
N

t

%

0

0

m m

93.
Since the CPIA system contains an inherent mechanism for aligning the IDA
allocation to changing country performance, the CAS does not specify high, low, and
base case scenarios. The exception to the general reliance o n the CPIA and IDA
allocation formula for determining the level o f annual IDA support would be in the
unlikely case o f a dramatic deterioration in the Ethiopia’s risk profile or performance, in
which case the Bank might be required to reconsider rapidly i t s provision o f support
rather than waiting for the annual recalculation o f the CPIA.
94.
Depending on circumstances, there are several other projects that may be
appropriate for delivery in FY 2008 through FY 201 1 in addition to, or lieu of, the
projects included in table 5. These include a possible PRSC in the later years o f the CAS,
and possible investment support for empowerment o f women and youth, power
generation, the Ethio-Djibouti Railway, an Ethiopia-Kenya Regional Transport Project,
and N i l e Basin Initiative projects, such as the Eastern N i l e Joint Multipurpose Program
and a Flood Control project. Availability o f Regional IDA funds will be a key factor in
the provision o f support for regional projects. As with all Bank support, the possibility o f
such additional projects would need to be discussed with the Government and relevant
partners prior to commencing project preparations in earnest.

E. IFC and MIGA
95.
IFC. In early FY 2009, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) plans to
reintroduce a permanent presence in Addis Ababa. IFC’s previous presence on the
ground ended in 2000. W h i l e IFC had largely refrained from new investments in the last
decade due to currency and foreign ownership restrictions, the improving environment o f
government support for the private sector has led I F C to work with the authorities to
identify creative ways to operate within these constraints.
96.
The I F C strategy for Ethiopia involves the possible scaling up o f support in four
directions: exploring direct investment in high growth priority sectors (for example,
building materials, tourism, and agribusiness); development o f small and medium
enterprises; supporting financial markets; and encouraging public private partnerships.
Support could take the form o f equity participation, loans, or technical assistance,
depending on discussions with the authorities and potential private sector partners, and
would be highly complementary to the activities envisioned by IDA. While specific
details are yet to be finalized, I F C expects to be in a position to approve new investments
in Ethiopia before the end o f FY 2008.
97.
MIGA. The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) played an
important role in helping resolve expropriation claims dating from the ‘Derg’ regime. In
this role, now completed, MIGA helped Ethiopia resolve almost all outstanding claims.
MIGA has indicated i t s openness to considering guarantee applications for investments
into Ethiopia.

34

VI. IMPLEMENTING THE PROGRAM

A. Monitoring Outcomes
98.
The overall CAS Results Framework i s presented in Annex 1. I t specifies desired
outcomes and defines intermediate indicators in order to keep the program focused and
enable regular tracking o f progress. The framework uses as i t s starting point the goals o f
the PASDEP, and narrows down the range o f PASDEP outcomes to those that the Bank
can demonstrably influence over the CAS period. Since most o f the new operations
foreseen in this CAS will likely not finish implementation until well after 201 1, results
during this CAS period will come mainly from existing operations, and the quickerdisbursing interventions included in this CAS such as the PBS Additional Financing and
i t s follow-on operation, PBS 2. A summary o f the results framework is presented in
Table 4.

99.
Monitoring and evaluation. Measurement o f the impact o f CAS interventions
will be bolstered by ongoing efforts to strengthen existing government mechanisms for
data collection around the PASDEP, as well as outcome and output indicators available in
the Bank portfolio o f projects and analytic work. The Government i s continuing to
implement i t s "Strengthening SDPRP Monitoring and Evaluation Action Plan" to refine
the Government's monitoring and evaluation framework and to make it a simpler and
more effective framework for measuring implementation progress, around which partners
can increasingly harmonize their o w n monitoring systems. This effort includes
increasing participatory aspects o f monitoring and evaluation, creating an Integrated
Management Information System at the Welfare Monitoring Unit in MoFED,
strengthening statistical capacity in the Central Statistical Authority (CSA) including
establishment o f a Socio-Economic Database, strengthening the results framework o f the
PRS, and improving reporting o n PRS indicators in Annual Progress Reports (APRs).
The Bank and other donors are working with M o F E D to help implement this plan. The
Bank will also work with the CSA (and other agencies if needed) to improve the
coverage, reliability and timeliness o f GOE's national income accounts and household
surveys.

B. Donor Harmonization

100. Official Development Assistance (ODA) to Ethiopia has been increasing steadily
since 2000. A large number o f donors are active in Ethiopia, with 25 bilateral and
multilateral donors averaging more than $5 million per year in O D A from 2000-200616.
However, development aid to Ethiopia remains well below the average for sub-Saharan
Africa inper capita terms, as shown in table 6.

l6Agencies with greater than $5 million in ODA per year from 2000-2006: IDA, United States, EC, Global
Fund (GFATM), United Kingdom, AfDB, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Japan, Canada, Sweden, Ireland,
Norway, WFP, UNICEF, France, UNDP, UNHCR, IMF, IFAD, Finland, Belgium, Austria, and Arab
Agencies. (Source: OECD DAC).

35

Table 6: Net ODA flows
(excluding humanitarian aid)
2000

2001
2002
--_..-I

2003

2004

2005

2006

579
287
116

1005
698
434

1169
772
464

958
456
247

1428
729
476

1330
679
247

1642
887
332

9

15

17

14

21

19

23

~

(millions of US Dollars)
Total net ODA, Ethiopia
olw: MuItilateral
olw: IDA
(US Dollars)
ODA per capita, Ethiopia

Source: OECD DAC

101. Ethiopia i s a pilot country for the OECD D A C harmonization agenda. Both the
Government and a majority o f international partners are keen to proceed with the
deepening o f the harmonization process in the spirit o f the Rome Declaration (2003) and
the Paris Declaration (2005). The Bank, with UNDP and one bilateral donor, i s one o f
the rotating co-chairs o f the Development Assistance Group (DAG), the main forum for
donor coordination in Ethiopia, made up o f about 30 bilateral and multilateral agencies.
Under the DAG, efforts are underway to make strong progress on the implementation o f
commitments in the Paris Declaration, including joint ESW (much o f the Bank’s major
analytical work has already been prepared jointly with partners) and joint missions.
M u c h o f the collective effort i s focused on furthering harmonization through a few major
multi-donor programs and policy areas o f importance.
102. The Government and development partners’ commitment to broaden
collaboration and harmonization i s supported by a partnership structure, starting with
High Level Fora (HLF) to discuss policy issues. A Harmonization Secretariat was
established within the Multilateral Cooperation Department o f M o F E D with technical
assistance from DAG. Support has also been provided to assist the GoE to develop an
Aid Management Platform (AMP). The Government and donors have also agreed for the
f i r s t time for chairmanship of some DAG thematic policy dialogue groups to be led by
the key ministerial heads. Government-donor harmonization i s also supported by
regional initiatives to harmonize and set priorities, such as through the NEPAD C A A D P
process.
103. There has been some progress towards the Paris Declaration indicators which
include the following:
Ownership: Donors are organized around PASDEP and the thematic working
groups now have Government counterparts and in some cases chaired by the
Government.
Alignment: Progress is evidenced by (a) multi-donor programs that aim to
support improved public financial management;(b) a larger percentage o f aid
that i s reported o n the Government’s budget; (c) a decrease in the number o f

36

parallel project implementation units; (d) the latest OECD figures showing 96
percent o f aid demonstrates in-year predictability; and (e) OECD figures also
showing that 39 percent o f aid i s untied in Ethiopia.
Harmonization: OECD data reveals a number o f indicators which reflect
greater harmonization in the country. These include: (a) 53 percent o f aid
delivered in the form o f program-based approaches; (b) 27 percent o f all
donor missions are joint; and (c) 50 percent o f donor analytical work i s joint.
Managingfor results: DAG thematic working groups have been asked to
systematically report on sectoral results, which will be posted on the new
DAG website. The revitalization o f the High Level Forum and the inclusion
o f Government representation in all Thematic Working Groups (TWGs) will
make it easier for Government to assess donor performance.
Mutual accountability. The revitalization o f the High Level Forum and
Harmonization Task Force along with inclusion o f Government representation
in DAG TWGs will also improve mutual accountability.

104. The CAS includes one outcome focusing on harmonization: increased donor
harmonization through multi-donor programmatic approaches (a Paris Declaration
indicator). This outcome aims to build on the success o f the Bank in recent years in
working with other donors o n developing an innovative set o f harmonized
instruments to reduce transactions costs, align support with the country’s decentralized
model, and enhance the predictability o f aid17. These instruments allow for large-scale
leveraging o f IDA support. Such approaches include:
Protection of Basic Services (PBS) program. First phase: IDA US$2 15
m i l l i o n (May 2006), donor partners US$580 million. Second phase: IDA
US$215 million (December 2007), partners about US$560 million
(planned). M a i n partners: DFID, AfDB, EC, CIDA, KfW, Netherlands.
Public Sector Capacity Building Program (PSCAP). First phase: IDA
US$lOO million, DFID 625 million, others US$30 million. Second phase
planned in FY2010.
Productive Safety Nets Program (PSNP). Total support over next 5 years
expected to reach US$1.2 billion. IDA US$245 m i l l i o n to date. M a i n
partners: CIDA, DFID, EC, IrishAid, USAID, WFP, SIDA.
Water Supply and Sanitation. IDA $100 m i l l i o n through 2009, with
DFID co-financing o f 670 million through 2012). Second phase
envisioned with additional IDA and AfDB through 20 12.
Sustainable Land Management. Proposed support includes IDA $20
m i l l i o n (late FY2008); GEF $15 million, GTZ, Nordics, UN agencies.

17

There are also important opportunities for increasing the linkages between such programs, particularly
between PBS, PSCAP, and PSNP.

37

105. Trustfunds. M u c h o f the harmonized donor support described above i s
channeled to Ethiopia through a variet o f Bank-administered trust funds, and trust
funded-grants, o f all three main types.‘ In fact, Ethiopia has one o f the largest World
Bank-administered trust fund portfolios in the Africa Region, at about $560 million in
total commitments. Trust fund disbursements have expanded sharply in recent years as a
result o f the close collaboration with donors on the Protection o f Basic Services Program,
and will grow further as spending accelerates under the Productive Safety Nets
Partnership. The emergence o f recipient-executed trust funds as a way to complement
and scale up the use o f IDA resources for this program, reflects both country
circumstances, and the Bank’s support for the Paris Declaration agenda o n harmonization
and aid effectiveness. In addition, Bank-executed trust funds have helped cover the costs
o f donor coordination, and provided resources to oversee the use o f recipient-executed
trust funds.
106. Trust fund resources administered by the Bank are subject to the same quality
standards and fiduciary controls as IDA financing. The recent increase in the volume o f
trust funds has increased the financial management and procurement capacity workload;
in response the Bank i s strengthening staffing in these areas and offering additional trust
fund and fiduciary training for staff. Trust funds that cofinance IDA projects are by
nature well aligned with the Bank’s strategy, and share the same arrangements for results
monitoring. For other trust funds, more care will need to be taken to ensure selectivity,
strategic fit, and systematic reporting o f results.

107. As a l o w income country that faces major challenges on the management o f
global public goods, Ethiopia i s well placed to benefit from many o f the vertical
initiatives launched in recent years, to address specific parts o f that agenda-including
the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; the Global Environment
Facility; and the Education For All-Fast Track Initiative Catalytic Fund. The Bank
plays a financial role in administering many o f these funds, and varying roles in their
implementation. As part o f the wider harmonization agenda, we will actively explore the
scope to ensure resources from such funds are strongly coordinated with, and benefit
from, the country-level operational expertise that we can bring to bear.
C. Portfolio M a n a g e m e n t

108. As o f the end o f December 2007, Ethiopia’s portfolio o f IDA operations
constituted 24 projects with a total net commitment o f US$2.4 billion and an undisbursed
balance o f US$1.5 billion. Since the ICAS, there has been a substantial increase in net
commitments o f nearly US$ 500 million. Disbursements have been averaging about

18

Executive Directors recently approved the paper A Management Framework for World BankAdministered Trust Funds (R2007-0198) which defines these three types as follows:
a) Recipient-Executed Trust Funds which the Bank passes on to a recipient, and for which the Bank
normally appraises or supervises activities supported by these funds; b) Bank-Executed Trust Funds
which are directly executed by the Bank; and, c) Financial Intermediary Funds which typically
encompass multi-donor vertical initiatives to implement international agreements or global partnerships for
targeted sectors or themes.

38

US$350 million in the last five years,” but with the maturing o f a few large-scale
interventions in roads, rural electrification, and basic services, the pace o f disbursement i s
expected to quicken. In the past 12 months, a number o f projects have exited the
portfolio, and consequently the age o f the portfolio has dropped from an average o f 4.0
years at the time o f the I C A S to 2.7 years at present. About one-third o f the current IDA
portfolio i s in the form o f grants.

109. The overall performance o f the Ethiopia portfolio i s better than the Africa Region
and Bank-wide performance in three key categories-problem projects, commitments at
risk, and proactivity (Table 7). One project out o f the 23 active IDA projects (or 4.3
percent) are currently rated as a problem project (i.e. rated unsatisfactory for meeting
development objectives andor satisfactory implementation progress). This compares
favorably with the Africa Region and the Bank as a whole where 12.5 and 11.8 percent o f
projects, respectively, are rated unsatisfactory. The portfolio has improved since the
ICAS and both in terms o f realism and proactivity has exceeded the Regional and Bank
wide average with 100 percent.
Table 7: Ethiopia IDA Portfolio Performance
March 25,2008
Ethiopia

Africa Region

World Bank

23
2,376
1
4.3
150
6.3
100
100

36 1
21,545
45
12.5
5,338
24.8
50.0
70.2

1332
96,553
157
11.8
16,458
17.0
63.6
72.5

._l_-l._l

Number of Projects
Net Commitments ($ million)
Problem Projects (no.)
Problem Projects (%)
Commitments at Risk ($ million)
Commitments at Risk (%)
Realism (%)*

* Realism index: The ratio of actual problem projects to total projects at risk.

** Proactivity index: The proportion of projects rated as actual problem projects twelve month earlier that have been
upgraded, restructured, suspended, closed partially or fully cancelled.

110. The overall performance o f the portfolio has been satisfactory, with less than five
percent o f the projects as problem projects. However key issues identified in the Country
Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) report o f June 2007, are: (a) the need to foster
enhanced transparency and accountability, (b) procurement delays, (c) financial
management shortcomings, and (d) weak monitoring and evaluation and results
framework. Actions are underway to address key constraints in all o f these areas, as
described below.
111. Transparency and accountabizify. In parallel with I C A S preparation in 2006, the
Bank undertook a project-by-proj ect analysis o f risks and developed specific
recommendations to further strengthen transparency and accountability in current and
l 9 FY03 - US$362million, FY04-$422million, FY05- US$373 million, FY06-$282.3millionand FY07 US$3 17 million.

39

future projects. These recommendations have been mainstreamed into project
preparation during the I C A S period, and will continue to be adhered to in the period
covered by this strategy. They include: (a) clear and transparent criteria for selecting
project sites and beneficiaries; (b) greater involvement o f a broad range o f stakeholders in
project preparation and implementation; (c) strengtheningM&E systems and
operationalizing them in a more participatory manner; and (d) strengthening
implementation support, particularly oversight on the fiduciary aspects o f projects. For
new projects, i t was also agreed with the Government that there would be public
disclosure o f project information in the Ministry o f Finance and Planning website and
mechanisms in projects to ensure citizen’s participation in public policy making and
budget processes.

112. Procurement and Contract Execution Delays. Procurement and contract
execution delays continue to be a major problem for the portfolio which also negatively
impacts o n disbursements. Major reasons for the delays include the Government’s
ambitious roads and energy programs, which have stretched the procurement capacity o f
the implementing agencies and have generally experienced a slower than expected pace
o f contract execution, necessitating enhanced supervision. Nationally, there has also
been continued deterioration in the quality o f procurement documentation that some
project implementation agencies submit to the Bank. In order to assist the Government,
the Bank has increased the number o f staff in Ethiopia and devolved greater decision
making powers to the country office. With respect to procurement capacity, feasibility
studies are underway to assess the potential to establish a certificate or diploma program
in procurement at a national educational institution such as the C i v i l Service College.
Action i s being taken to provide training for relevant government agencies on the Bank’s
guidelines. Under PSCAP, responsibility for international competitive bidding i s being
devolved to sub-program and Regional levels. The Bank and other donors have agreed
o n a harmonization agenda that aims to promote increased reliance o n country systems.
113. The progress in procurement reforms in Ethiopia has seen the enactment o f a
federal public procurement proclamation and issuance o f federal public procurement
directives in 2005 including the establishment o f a Public Procurement Agency. Three
actions that are a priority for the functioning o f the public procurement system are: (i)
the
creation o f functional Procurement Units in all Government entities; (ii)
the creation o f a
institutionalized annual independent
professional public procurement cadre; and (iii)
procurement audits.
114. Financial Management Weaknesses. Ethiopia has been making public financial
management improvements through the Expenditure Management and Control SubProgram (EMCP) o f the Government’s C i v i l Services Reform Program. This i s being
supported by the Bank and other development partners. There has been significant
progress in strengthening public financial management in recent years. Country financial
management systems are being used to a significant extent in many projects.
Development partners have adopted common financial management arrangements and
requirements to a very high degree. While financial management performance in many
projects i s satisfactory, there are significant weaknesses in other projects. Fifty percent

40

o f the federal-level project implementing u n i t s used computerized accounting systems in
FY2006, compared with 38 percent in FY 05. There i s however need for improvement in
the quality and timeliness o f financial reporting. Major delays in submission o f audit
reports o n Bank-financed projects are a significant issue. A major underlying factor i s
weak capacity especially at the local government level (regions and woredas). These
problems lead to disbursement delays and have also delayed the approval o f some new
projects.

115. Discussions are ongoing with the Government on measures to address these
capacity
problems, some o f which are being implemented. These include: (i)
enhancement (e.g., posting o f additional accountants) particularly at the regional and
woreda levels; (ii)
training; (iii)
implementation support from the federal level and
project u n i t s to regional and woreda level entities; (iv) increased use o f private audit
f i r m s by the Office o f the Auditor General; (v) continuous or interim audits during the
year and early start o f the annual audit; (vi) ensuring readiness for implementation at
project start; and (vii) streamlining and simplifying financial management arrangements
across the portfolio. The strong emphasis on public financial management reforms at the
federal, regional and woreda levels will continue. Another area o f emphasis i s the design
and implementation o f a program to increase the number o f qualified accounting and
auditing technicians and professionals to work in the public and private sectors.
116. Weak monitoring and evaluation and resultsframework. The need to focus on
monitoring and evaluation i s continuously stressed by both Government and Bank teams.
This i s an area that needs substantial work. Currently many o f the projects in the
portfolio and new projects are focusing on baseline surveys and ensuring that impact
evaluations are carried out. The Task Teams are working closely with A F T Q K to
improve the results frameworks for many projects, and there i s a greater focus by
management o n results monitoring in the review o f supervision documents.

D. Managing Risks
117. In implementing this strategy, the Bank will need to focus centrally on the key
risks that might threaten to reduce the effectiveness o f i t s support. Many such risks are
well known and have been discussed in previous Bank strategies. In the medium term,
the most serious risk i s likely to be Ethiopia’s vulnerability to external shocks, in
particular drought and possible regional conflict. Although Ethiopia’s economy has
become increasingly diversified, a severe drought, which based on history seems
inevitable, will likely cause not only immediate hardships to the poorest, but also
seriously disrupt the take-off process by forcing the Government to divert resources from
development to emergency aid. A regional conflict, particularly given tensions with
Eritrea and Ethiopia’s military involvement in Somalia, could have similar effects.

118. There i s little the Bank can do to reduce the risk o f such shocks itself, at least in
the short term, but there are ways in which the Bank can help mitigate the impact o f a
shock. First, Bank projects such as PSNP and PCDP that address vulnerability have built
in contingency components that can be activated in the event o f certain shocks. A second

41

key measure i s the gradual shift in the portfolio structure toward greater use o f more
programmatic funding instruments (e.g., PBS and PSNP), which allow acceleration o f
disbursement to meet unexpected fiscal needs in specific sectors o f high importance. As
the Bank continues the recent trend toward replacing traditional investment instruments
with additional programmatic approaches (S WAps and/or PRSCs) in the main sectors,
this built-in flexibility to deal with shocks should increase further. Moreover, while
estimating the exact magnitude o f the impact o f climate change s t i l l requires more
analysis, existing research shows that climate change will have a significant impact on
Ethiopia’s agriculture. The Bank i s seeking to mitigate the impact o f drought on
development in the longer run through i t s support to the safety net and food security
program, agriculture, and environmental programs (including in particular sustainable
land management). The Bank has also urged the Government to adopt a more countercyclical fiscal policy.

119. The ICAS underscored the importance o f governance-related risks, and outlined
two possible scenarios o f deterioration in governance, and the potential risks for
development:
Continued uncertainty, conflict, violence and concerns about human rights.
This can threaten or reduce aid, discourage investment, and put strains on the
credibility and legitimacy o f the state.
Weak and eroding institutional checks and balances, raising the risk o f capture
o f decentralization, block grants and the civil service, alongside a lack o f level
playing field or credible environment to attract private investment for growth.
120. Two years after the I C A S was prepared, the likelihood o f such risks materializing
appears to have diminished, but cannot be dismissed entirely. At present, two domestic
governance risks appear particularly relevant over the near term: the possibility o f
disputes over the coming local elections in April 2008 (and eventually over parliamentary
election in 20 lo), and the ongoing military action in the Ogaden area o f Ethiopia’s
Somali region to subdue separatist rebel elements. The presence o f these risks calls, as
stated in the ICAS, for basing Bank support on a careful understanding and management
of political economy risks, while seeking firmly to address core governance challenges
jointly with donor partners. T o the extent that such risks can be mitigated by external
actors, the Bank relies o n the interventions o f the broader international community for
these types o f political risks. If the future evolution o f the political context causes these
risks to become heightened, the Bank will seek to adjust i t s support accordingly, both to
help the country address the risks, and to manage the level o f resources entering an
environment that may not be conducive to development.
121. O n the macroeconomic front, the highly positive growth trajectory o f recent years
i s not without some risks: inflation has risen sharply, with food price increases hurting
the urban poor and middle class. Good growth has been in the face o f a strong headwind
from rising o i l prices; continuing o i l price increases could exacerbate inflation further and
constitute a greater constraint o n growth. These risks were explained in some detail in

42

the Recent Economic Developments section (section 11. B.) The Bank will continue to
assist the Government in identifying and implementing actions to limit the negative
growth and distributional consequences o f food and o i l price increases.

122. Finally, the shortage o f skills and weak capacity especially at local levels o f
government carries risks for the Bank program, notably in procurement and financial
management. The long-term nature o f capacity building means that these risks are likely
to remain for some time. Such risks, and measures being taken by Government and the
Bank to mitigate them, are discussed in section V1.C o n portfolio management.
123. For IDA’Soverall lending program, the CPIA provides a mechanism by which the
Bank can adjust i t s support in response to positive or negative developments in
governance and other key aspects o f the development effort. In the case o f a severe
deterioration in the development environment in Ethiopia, the Bank would reduce new
lending and rely more o n non-lending support. O n the other hand, as Ethiopia makes
progress towards the key outcomes contained in PASDEP, and improves i t s policy and
institutional performance, a steady increase in IDA support can be envisioned.

43

ANNEXES
Annex 1:
Annex 2:
Annex 3 :
Annex 4:
Annex 5:
Annex 6:
Annex 7:
Annex 8:
Annex 9 :
Annex 10:
Annex 11:
Annex 12:

Results Framework
Sequencing and Selectivity across Sectors
CAS Completion Report for FY 2003-2007
Ethiopia at a Glance
Social Indicators
K e y Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Selected Indicators o f Portfolio Performance and Management
I F C and MIGA Program for Ethiopia
IDA Program Summary for Ethiopia
Summary o f IDA Non-Lending Services
Status o f Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

44

I

L

r

a,
v)

c

h
I
I

K

0

N
u

vN
r

93
L$(I)

3

E

a,

s0.l
E

2
v)

-0
S

m

0

Y

*-

0

c

C

c

S

a,

m
a

s

b

E

4

m

a

s

0

Pcn
cm

O n

L

3 8

5
4

d

2

m

2

In
J

a
5
fn

U

m

2
a,
0

c

m
0

E

E

8

a,

>

d

m

2

d
J

np.

a2

g
N
m a
om

nra

P

2

r'

i-i

U

2

a
m
a

L
m

9

3
T

J

a

a,

fn2

U

m a

om

nra

A
U
m

2

A

/
v

2
0

z

2
0

v)

v)

a

a

IY
7

P

a,
n
u)
u)

0

a

IY

a,
n
u)
u)

0

a

E
‘t:
0
Q
Q

0

z

3
v)

CI
v)

a

04
P

cv

a

3
v)

a

b

E
.-u)
L

3

0

I-

;;xi
an

3g

v)m

no

a,
0

c

F
L

a,

>

si

Annex 3: CAS CR

Annex 3:

CAS Completion Report for FY 2003-2007
March 5, 2008

Date o f CAS: March 23,2003
Date o f CAS Progress report: August 25,2004
Date o f ICAS: M a y 1,2007
Period covered by the CAS: March 2003-June 2005 (FY03-FY05)
Period covered by the ICAS: M a y 2006-July 2007 (FY06-FY07)
Period covered by this report: March 2003-July 2007
Report prepared by: Johannes Widmann and Diana Hristova
1. Introduction

1.
This CAS Completion Report (CASCR) presents an assessment o f the International
DevelopmentAssociation’s (IDA) Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Ethiopia for FY0305 and the Interim Country Assistance Strategy (ICAS) for FY06-07. The report therefore
covers FY03-07, referred t o as the “review period” throughout this document. The CASCR aims t o
evaluate the effectiveness o f IDA’Sstrategies in i)aligning their objectives with the country’s long
t e r m strategic goals; and ii)contributing to country goals by achieving C A S and I C A S outcomes.
In addition, this report will evaluate the Bank’s portfolio performance, provide lessons learned and
highlight the issues that should be dealt with in the next CAS. It i s based o n reference documents
such as Project Appraisal Documents, Implementation Status and Results Reports, Implementation
Completion Reports and Economic and Sector Work completed within the C A S and I C A S periods.
Furthermore, this report draws from IndependentEvaluation Group (IEG) and Quality Assurance
Group (QAG) evaluations o f Bank performance, and the self-assessment o f the country team as
well as feedback from clients, stakeholders, and partners. This report also benefited from the
discussion between the Country Team and IEG during the preparation o f IEG’s recent Country
Assistance Evaluation for Ethiopia.
2.
Progress under the CASDCAS period (F‘Y03-07) i s rated moderatelysatisfactory
overall. This overall rating i s based on the following sub-ratings for each CASCR pillar (see
section I11for a detailed explanation for each rating):
Enhance pro-poor growth (moderately satisfactory).
(i)
Enhance
human development outcomes (satisfactory);
(ii)
Deepen
Ethiopia’s
core governance program (moderately satisfactory);
(iii)
(iv)
Reduce vulnerability (satisfactory).

II. CAS Context
3.
I n August 2002, the Government published its first Poverty Reduction Strategy-the
Sustainable Development and Poverty Reduction Program (SDPRF’). The overarching
objective o f the strategy was t o reduce poverty through measures complementary to growth and at
the same time to maintain macroeconomic stability. The document had strong ownership within
the Government and its preparation was utilized as a forum for policy discussions with c i v i l society
and the donors. Government’s Agricultural Development Led Industrialization (ADLI) strategy
took center stage in the SDPRP with the agriculture sector-which counts for 40 percent o f
national GDP, 90 percent o f exports, 85 percent o f employment, and 90 percent o f the poorc i v i l service
considered key toward poverty reduction. Others pillars o f the strategy included: (i)
governance, decentralization and empowerment; and (iii)
capacity building. K e y
reform; (ii)
sectoral reform areas, in addition t o agriculture, were: (i)
education; (ii)
health; (iii)
HIV/AIDS;
(iv) roads; (v) water and sanitation; (vi) gender and development. In i t s first Annual Progress

60

Annex 3: CAS CR

Report o n the implementation o f the SDPRP, the Government added a major new pillar on food
security. Government’s commitment t o SDPRP implementation was shown by the increase o f propoor spending from 43% o f total government expenditures in FY02 to 62% in FY06, among the
highest o f any Sub-Saharan African country. Table 1 shows the progress towards the overarching
objectives o f the SDPRP.

4.
In January 2007 the Government finalized i t s second poverty reduction strategy, called the
Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development to End Poverty (PASDEP), which builds on the
progress made under SDPRP. The PASDEP places rapid and sustained growth at the center o f the
strategy with a re-affirmed focus o n pro-poor spending. The strategic emphasis o f the growth pillar
i s placed o n (i)
market-based development o f agriculture; and (ii)
private sector development. A
significant innovation o f the PASDEP i s i t s greater recognition o f the central role o f urban areas in
growth and poverty reduction. The strategy retains i t s strong emphasis o n human development and
aims to build on the major achievements o f SDPRP.
SDPRP Outcome Indicators
10% reduction in poverty headcount
7% average annual GDP growth
Average annual inflation in single digits,
preferably less than 5%

FYO3-07 Progress
12.4% reduction in poverty headcount (from 44.2% in
I999100 to 38.7% in 2004105)
Average annual GDP growth of 11.8% (200314-200617)
Average annual inflation of 12.1% (2003-2006)

5.
The FY03-FY05 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Ethiopia was based on the
SDPRP and sought to focus Bank support around three strategic objectives: (i)enhancing
pro-poor growth; (ii)improving human development outcomes; and (iii)reducing
vulnerability. Although it was not prepared under the “results-based CAS” framework, the CAS
recognized that the ultimate success o f World Bank support to Ethiopia would be measured by
achieving results o n the ground based o n SDPRP priorities. Therefore, the C A S set out a
framework o f “Core CAS monitoring indicators.” The monitoring framework was further refined
in the CAS Progress Report o f August 2004. These monitoring indicators, which are also used by
this CASCR, covered most-but not all-outcomes that the CAS wanted to achieve.

6.

A new CAS was planned for FY06. However, the aftermath o f disputed May 2005
elections led to an elevation in governance risks that threatened continued progress on
development. Accordingly, the Bank decided to draft an Interim CAS t o support Government in
developing and implementing, in consultation with citizens, a strengthened program o f institution
building and governance reform to help in i t s efforts t o accelerate pro-poor growth. Specifically,
the I C A S focused Bank support around five strategic objectives: (i)
deepening Ethiopia’s ‘core’
providing basic services for poor people in a fair and accountable way;
governance program; (ii)
(iii)
enhancing the investment climate and raising investor confidence; (iv) increasing agricultural
productivity; and (v) developing infrastructure to support development o f towns and growth
corridors. As opposed t o a full CAS, the shorter timeframe o f an Interim Strategy was deemed to
be more appropriate in order to allow for a transitional period where Government, stakeholders, the
Bank, and partners could develop consensus around a strengthened governance agenda.

7.
One major shift under the ICAS was the Bank’s decision to suspend direct budget
support, which the Bank had provided during FY04-05. The Bank, together with other budget
support donors in Ethiopia, based this decision on increased risks relating t o governance,
particularly the risk that unconstrained budget support could be vulnerable to political capture or
diversion from the core priority o f basic service delivery. However, the Bank recognized that in
the absence o f direct budget support, development partners should not abandon critical support t o

61

Annex 3: CAS CR

delivery o f basic services, which enable people to break multi-generational poverty traps. I t
therefore prepared the Protection o f Basic Services (PBS) Project to support a continuation of the
upward trends in access to basic services at sub-national levels, and to strengthen empowerment
and decentralized decision making t o ensure that resources are allocated according t o people’s
priorities. The PBS absorbed the c i v i l society capacity building project, under preparation since
the FY03 CAS period, to provide stronger leverage to the c i v i l society empowerment and social
accountability agendas through i t s significantly larger f l o w o f resources. The operation has
prevented the roll-back o f hard-won gains in human development outcomes in the aftermath o f the
political crisis and has become a vehicle for mobilizing coordinated donor support t o Ethiopia with
an annual volume o f over $400 m i l l i o n and with eight development partners.

Table 2: Alignment of CAS, ICAS into Consolidated CASCR Evaluation Framework
FY03 CAS
Objectives
1. Pillar: Enhancing Pro-Poor
Growth
I,
1 Accelerating rural growth
1.2 Fostering an enabling
environment for urban growth
(by enhancing the investment
climate)
1.3 Supporting the development
of financial markets
1.4 Promoting rapid growth of
exports

FY06 ICAS
Objectives
1.IIncreasing agricultural
productivity
1.2 Enhancing the investment
climate and raising investor
confidence
1.3 Developing infrastructureto
support development of towns
and growth corridors

2. Pillar: Enhancing Human
Development Outcomes by
Improving Governance
2.1 Providing basic services for
2.1 Improving delivery of
poor people in a fair and
education services
2.2 Expanding access to health accountable way
services
2.3 Improving access to clean
water
supply,,,and
sanitation
........ .........................
.... ...... ....,......,....
.......
........... ................
”

2.4 Supporting the reform of
public sector systems
2.5 Deepening and
strengthening decentralization
3. Pillar: Reducing
Vulnerability
3.1 Improving food aid delivery
and other safety net programs
3.2 Reducing vulnerability to
terms of trade shocks (CAS CR
Objective 1.4)
3.5 Increased attention to
environmental issues

3.1 Deepening Ethiopia’s ‘Core’
Governance Program

(Vulnerability included under
objective 2.1, Providing basic
services for poor people in a fair
and accountable way )

FY08 CASCR Evaluation
Framework
1. Pillar: Enhance Pro-Poor
Growth
1.IAccelerated rural growth
and increased agricultural
productivity
1.2 Enhanced investment
climate
1.3 Developed financial markets
1.4 Rapid export growth and
reduced vulnerability to terms of
trade shocks (CAS Objective
3.2)
1.5 Developed infrastructure
2. Pillar: Enhance Human
Development Outcomes
2.1 Improved delivery of
education services
2.2 Expanded access to health
services
2.3 Improved access to clean
water supply and sanitation
3. Pillar: Deepen Ethiopia’s
‘Core’ Governance Program
3.1 Reform of public sector
systems
3.2 Deepened and strengthened
decentralization
3.3 Empowered civil society
4. Pillar: Reduce Vulnerability
4.1 Reformed relief food aid
delivery and other safety net
programs
4.2 Increased attention to
environmental issues

Since the FY06 I C A S can be regarded as a continuation of the FY03 CAS’S support to
8.
the GoE’s poverty reduction strategy, this report integrates key strategic objectives and
outcomes of both strategies into one coherent framework to facilitate the evaluation of

62

Annex 3: CAS CR

results. Table 2 shows the CASCR evaluation fiamework. While merging o f both frameworks
requires a certain degree o f retrofitting o f outcomes and indicators, it also allows building a more
meaningful results chain and showing the Bank’s contribution t o outcomes. As with all Bank
CASs at the time, the FY03 CAS was not designed as a “results-based” strategy even though it did
contain several progress (or “benchmark”) indicators. The FY05 CAS Progress Report introduced
more comprehensive “CAS Monitoring Indicators”. The I C A S introduced various “longer-term
outcomes for which the I C A S i s expected to contribute” as well as “shorter-term outputs expected
to result from the I C A S program” that also fit into the broader strategic framework o f the FY03
CAS. Another benefit for merging both frameworks i s that having a longer period covered by the
evaluation framework (FY03-07) allows the main trends to be seen more clearly.

111. CAS and ICAS Outcomes

9.
This section evaluates outcomes achieved under each objective during the review
period and the Bank’s contribution to these outcomes. The report focuses o n key outcome
indicators as listed in the CAS, I C A S or CAS Progress Report. Where necessary, it will also use
additional indicators that were not available at the time o f the CAS/ICAS design.

1. Pillar: Enhance pro-poor growth
10.
Overall progress under the f i r s t strategic objective i s rated moderately satisfactory.
There has been major pro-poor growth over the review period, at rates unparalleled in Ethiopia’s
long history. Growth averaged nearly 12 percent between 2003/04 and 2006/07 and given a
relatively l o w level o f income inequality (estimated Gini o f 0.30) growth in Ethiopia has been
inclusive and pro-poor. As shown in table 1, poverty rates have declined significantly. In
particular, the three percentage point decline in rural poverty between 1999/00 and 2004/05
suggests that those in the poorest (rural) areas have been able to benefit from agricultural growth.
However, while agriculture growth has been very strong, agricultural productivity rose only slowly
and the Bank’s dialogue in the sector yielded only limited progress.

11.
The review period saw a notable shift in Government’s strategy with respect t o the role o f
the private sector as the engine o f growth, and that growth itself i s n o w much more centrally a
feature o f the development strategy, an evolution with which the Bank has been closely associated.
As confirmed by the forthcoming FY08 Investment Climate Assessment (ICA), there has also been
tangible progress in improving the investment climate and increasing the role o f the private sector
in the economy, but a number o f constraints to private sector development remain. K e y among
these constraints i s the lingering inefficiency o f the financial sector, which, according t o the FY08
ICA, functions poorly in allocating scarce capital to the most productive f i r m s . The Bank’s
dialogue has been especially difficult in the area o f telecommunication and the slow progress in the
sector i s disappointing. Within the wide range o f interventions covered under this pillar, the roads
sector (which received the largest financial support from IDA o f any single sector) stands out as an
example o f strong achievement. Energy generation has grown, but progress in increasing access to
electricity-above a l l in rural areas-remains slow.
Key Outcome indicators
Increased productivity of agriculture

Increased adoption of productivity-enhancing
technologies by farmers

FYO3-07 Progress
Increased productivity from 1.37 (tons per hectare) cereal
production (2002) to 1.44 (2006)
Increased use of fertilizer by private peasant holdings from
0.66 quintal per hectare (2003/04) to 0.75 (2005/06)

63

Annex 3: CAS CR

12.
Rural growth has been remarkably strong, but progress in agriculture productivity
has been disappointing. The agriculture sector has experienced not only a remarkable recovery
from the 1990s, but sustained growth at an annual average rate o f almost 13 percent between
2003/04 and 2006/07. Increases in agriculture productivity over the past decade can be explained
mainly through area expansion in response to liberalization under ADLI since the 1990s. Land
productivity at 1.15 tons per hectare remains l o w and labor productivity very l o w (value added per
worker in the agriculture sectors i s US$144 vs. US$329 average for Sub-Saharan Africa).
Subsistence agricultural o n small plots o f land with limited irrigation and fertilizer use remains the
predominant production model in much o f Ethiopia. Coupled with this are severe environmental
degradation in many parts o f the country and high climatic variability, leading t o recurrent weather
shocks.
13.
Over the period there was significant improvement in the manner o f provision o f
agricultural extension services, and some significant improvements in farm level diversification
and marketing opportunities. Respondents to a Citizens Report Card survey in 2005 were satisfied
overall with agriculture extension services and more than 58 percent felt that agricultural extension
services have improved over the last two years. In addition, there have been some success stories
during the CAS/ICAS period with respect to agriculture research with improved varieties reaching
higher crop yields. Recent successes in the flower industry, where revenue generated for 2006/7
amounted t o US$63.6 million, point toward the importance o f new strategic directions namely
toward market-driven diversification and commercialization, and increasing exports, with a greater
focus o n private sector investment.
14.
The Bank’s policy dialogue through the PRSC achieved limited progress in
agriculture sector reform. Government’s ADLI strategy emphasizes intensification to increase
agricultural productivity focusing o n a combination o f technology, credit, fertilizers, seeds and
improved management practices t o raise productivity. The ADLI strategy evolved over the review
period placing increased importance on marketing and the private sector. The Bank’s policy
dialogue initially focused on decreased government intervention in the sector and-where there i s a
rationale for state involvement-the promotion o f more effective government systems to support
agricultural development. Progress was slow at the beginning o f the review period and the Bank
had t o reduce the originally agreed credit amounts for PRSC Iand I1by US$30 m i l l i o n and US$20
million, respectively (from US$150 million originally envisaged for each PRSC) due to lack o f
sufficient progress with respect t o fertilizer marketing, commercializing agriculture and developing
rural markets (in addition to telecoms, see below).

15.
However, a range o f timely and relevant analytic work allowed the Bank to improve
i t s dialogue with Government. A Vulnerability and Risk Assessment was completed in 2005,
analyzing the management o f risk as important determinant o f poverty and outlines social
protection strategies for better risk management. The 2005 Poverty Assessment-“The Role of
Agriculture and Agency”-highlighted the importance o f complementing agriculture research and
extension with market development, i.e. proper incentives for farmers and traders, a facilitating
institutional environment, and infrastructure to improve market connectivity. The 2007 CEM,
which has a major focus and separate chapter on agriculture, confirmed these findings. It found
that an ADLI-like strategy was s t i l l appropriate, even as agriculture was losing i t s overall impact
o n growth, but that a more holistic strategy was required. A W o r l d Bank Water Resources
Assistance Strategy for Ethiopia: Managing Water Resources to Maximize Sustainable Growth was
done in March 2006. In June 2006 a major Rural Development Review was completed, which
conducted comprehensive analysis o f the agricultural sector and recommended strategic options for
increasing agricultural productivity.

64

Annex 3: CAS CR

16.
The Bank provided support for the rural program through various multi-sectoral
operations. The Capacity Building for Agricultural Services project aims at strengtheningthe
agriculture technology system, making it more responsive t o clients needs, and enhancing the
capacity o f producers t o select economically viable technologies and practices. The project had to
be delayed to a FY06 delivery as a consequence o f the slow pace o f reforms (and due the lack o f
availability o f IDA13 funds). The Productive Safety N e t Program (PSNP), further discussed below,
replaced the emergency-based humanitarian relief system for the chronically food insecure
population with what i s effectively a major rural development program. It has shifted assistance
from a relief-oriented system funded o n an emergency basis, to a development-oriented safety-net
funded o n a multi-annual predictable basis, enabling better local level planning by communities
and local authorities, and focusing o n longer term outcomes. In addition, the Food Security,
Pastoral Community Development and Emergency Drought Recovery projects contribute to the
empowerment, income security and improved service delivery t o marginalized and disadvantaged
sections o f the population. The projects are already registering tangible results, for example:
capacity building to support local governments; facilitating voices o f the poor and their
development priorities were addressed; strengthened confidence o f rural poor, particularly women
and unemployed youth, to engage in income generating activities; in areas where rural microfinance was nonexistent, these projects have supported many rural households to save, and invest
in productive assets.

Key Outcome Indicators
Improved investment climate

Increased capacity of private sector firms

Increased growth of private sector

FYO3-07 Progress
Decreased amount of days required to start a business
from 44 (2003) to 16 (2007)
Total factor productivity (TFP) in representative
industries? Increased in food sector from 51 (2002) to 87
(2006); Increased in garment sector from 43 (2002) to 67
(2006); Increased in wood worWfurniture from 113 (2002)
to 145 (2006)
Increased private investment from U S 7 7 3 million
(2002/03) to US$1,302 million (2006/07)

Increased inflow of FDI from U S 1 4 9 million (2001/02) to
U S 4 8 2 million (2006/07)

Ethiopia made good progress in improving the investment climate and enhancing
17.
private sector activities albeit from a low base and despite many remaining challenges. Doing
Business ranked Ethiopia as a top ten reformer on business start-up procedures in 2005. Ethiopia i s
n o w the gthranked business environment in Sub-Saharan Africa. There has been notable success in
reducing the cost and time required t o start a business, due to improvements in business registration
and licensing. Additional positive outcomes include reduced time required t o clear customs, lower
tax burden for small businesses, and an increased availability o f land for business and industry in
urban areas. A 2006 Investment Climate Survey has concluded that “practically every aspect o f
industry’s business environment in Ethiopian has improved over the past four to five years. As
shown in Figure 1, there has been significant progress since 2002, with the rate o f complaint
significantly lower than the low-income cross country average with respect t o almost a l l
institutional factors. In addition, the share o f private investment nearly doubled and FDI inflow
almost tripled, and there i s evidence for the increase in the capacity o f private firms based on an
increase in total factor productivity per worker. Still, there remains a large agenda for further
reforms t o enhance the investment climate, particularly in regard to improving the access t o
finance; reducing anti-competitive practices; developing a more open, less targeted approach to
26

Market share weighted industry average TFP (upper middle income countries = 100)

65

Annex 3: CAS CR
investment promotion; improving the enabling environment for small and medium enterprises, and
improving the efficiency o f urban land management systems to allow easier access to land.
Figure 1: Percent rating factor as obstacle to business operations (all industries), 2006
60%

Electricity

Transportation

Tax
Administration

Access to
Finance

Corruption

--”

Access to land

Customs and Anticompetitive
Trade
practices
Regulations

Ethiopia 2002 0 Low Income Countries

18.
The Bank’s analytic work and PRSC dialogue contributed to positive changes in the
business climate. In general, Ethiopia provides many complexities regarding the dialogue on
private versus public sector involvement in the economy, including unorthodox policies such as
endowment-owned enterprises and the substantial state role in directing private sector development
through, inter alia, the banking system. M u c h o f the progress achieved since 2001/2002 resulted
from policy dialogue based o n firm ESW/AAA, including: four policy conferences, two investment
climate assessments, a 2006 Value Chain Analysis, a 2006 Tourism Sector Strategy and two
CEMs. A 2002 I C A survey identified business constraints in Ethiopia and gave recommendations
on the institutional reforms t o spur enterprise development, which the Government included in i t s
reform program. A 2004 follow-up t o the survey confirmed improvements in business registration
and licensing. The 2006 ICA pointed out the need t o further increase f i r m s ’ productivity and
competitiveness. Improvements in the investment climate were listed as prior actions under PRSC
Iand resulted in reduced cost and time required for business registration. PRSC I1supported the
Government’s privatization strategy with a focus on a wider assortment o f divestiture instruments
(e.g. public-private partnerships). The PSD Capacity Building project further supports the
privatization agenda and aims t o create conditions for improved private sector productivity and
competitiveness. The project was restructured to have a stronger focus o n export development,
which emerged as a Government priority following the Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (see
more below).
Key Outcome Indicators
Increased private access to finance
Reduced share of NPLs in total loans
outstanding
Increased credit provided to the private sector

FYO3-07 Progress
Decreased percentage of firms considering access to
finance a ‘major’ or ‘very severe’ obstacle from 50% (2002)
to 41% (2006)
Decreased share of NPLs in total loans outstanding from
61% (2002) to 20% (2006)
Increased credit provided to the private sector from $1,105
million (2001/02) to $2,265 million (2006107)

19.
Financial markets recovered over the review period, as evidence by increased access
to finance, reduced share o f non-performing loans and increased private sector credit.
According to the 2001 and 2006 ICA surveys, the share o f f i r m s that see access to finance
constraints as “major” or “very severe” was reduced from 50 to 41 percent. Access to finance
improved also but moved overall from being the fourth t o the second major concern for the private
sector. Another key goal was the reduction in non-performing loans (NPLs), which was
successfully carried out, and laid the basis for recovery o f the financial sector. In parallel, there has

66

Annex 3: CAS CR
been a gradual expansion o f private banking (more than 50 percent o f the market today, up from 20
percent in 2001)’ and o f MFI lending, both o f which are n o w high by African standards. Positive
outcomes from these developments are evident in the doubling o f the credit provided to the private
sector over the review period.
20.
The B a n k moved from general policy dialogue to specific lending support. The Bank’s
support in this sector was closely aligned with the general policy dialogue regarding the role o f the
private sector discussed above. Over the period, the Bank’s focus moved from restructuring o f the
banking sector to specific focus on increased access to finance. The PRSC series supported the
restructuring o f the Commercial Bank o f Ethiopia and directly contributed to a reduction o f the
amount o f NPLs. The FY06 Financial Sector Capacity Building Project i s closely aligned with the
CAS outcome aiming at an improved financial sector that allocates resources to the private sector
more effectively and efficient. The project was officially launched in February 2007 and so far
shows satisfactory process.

Key Outcome Indicators
Improved ratio of exports to GDP

Diversificationof exports (share of coffee in
merchandise exports)

FYO3-07 Progress
Increased exports of GNFS from US$983 million (2001/02)
to US$2,486 million (2006107). Total value of merchandise
exports doubled from US$660 million to about US$1.2
billion.
Diversification improved from 40% share of coffee to total
exports (2001) to 36% (2007)

21.
The review period saw strong export growth and showed Ethiopia’s potential for
export diversification. Average annual export growth was over 16 percent in the past six years.
The total value o f exports increased from US$660 m i l l i o n in 2001/02 t o US$1.2 billion in 2006/07.
Coffee remains Ethiopia’s largest export item but significantly reduced world prices but major
droughts since 2001 led t o a relative decline in its share vis-a-vis total exports. In 2001, coffee’s
share was only about 40 percent o f total exports from 60-70 percent in the preceding decade and,
even though world prices rebounded somewhat, remained at 36 percent in 2007. However,
coffee’s relative decline as key export product i s also due t o some emerging sectors that signal
Ethiopia’s potential for more export diversification: For example, the review period saw the
discovery o f Ethiopia’s potential for high-quality horticulture produce and spectacular growth in
the sector. Revenues from Ethiopia’s flower exports increased from US$660,000 in 2001 to an
estimated US$63 m i l l i o n in 2007. While there were only four main flower producers in 2002, it i s
estimated that the industry attracted up to 80 producers by the end o f 2006. In addition, oilseeds
are also increasingly important, accounting for 2 percent o f total exports in 1997 and 2 1 percent in
2006.
22.
While the main effort was on the part of Ethiopian economic actors, the Bank
contributed to Ethiopia’s export growth and diversification through key analytic work.
Ethiopia’s 2003 Industrial Development Strategy identifies export-oriented manufacturing as a key
vehicle t o generate employment and reduce poverty. Among other things, the strategy supports
entrepreneurs t o compete in global markets by providing incentives through tax privileges, access
to capital and land. The Bank and partners prepared the 2004 Diagnostic Trade Integration Study,
which identified key constraints to Ethiopia’s integration into the multilateral trade system and the
global economy. The study suggested a program o f technical assistance to strengthen Ethiopia’s
ability t o increase i t s participation in world trade, including accession t o the WTO, which was
supported under the Bank’s PRSC series and formally initiated in December 2006. The 2007 C E M
highlights further reforms t o accelerate export growth within sectoral discussions o n agriculture
and rural development, private-sector led growth and infrastructure. Export growth in general

67

Annex 3: CAS CR

requires a holistic approach and the Bank provided inputs through various sectors (e.g. agriculture,
private sector development, etc.) covered under different sections in the report. The PSD Capacity
Building project was restructured t o have a greater focus o n export development following the
DTIS.
Key Outcome Indicators
Increased road density
Reduced road transport costs per km
Increased teledensity
Increased electricity coverage

FYO3-07 Progress
Increased road density from 27 km (2001) to 38.6 km (per
1,000 km2) road density in 2007
Little change evident
Increased teledensity from 0.6 lines per 100 persons
(2002) to 2.0 lines (2006)
Increased from 17% in 2005/6 to 22% in 2006/7

Progress under the objective has been positive in roads, mixed to weak in other areas, and
overall infrastructure levels remain low. Strong progress was made in increasing Ethiopia’s
road network: Road density increased to 3 8.6 km (per 1,000 km’), but remains below the African
average o f more than 50 km. Further progress indicators include improved road conditions from
35 percent asphalt roads in 2002 to 60 percent in 2007 and a reduced average distance t o all
weather roads from 17 km t o 14 km over the same period. Teledensity grew over the review period
from a l o w base, but the growth has lagged most other sub-Saharan Africa countries. Overall
telecommunications coverage in Ethiopia remains among the lowest in the world, with about two
telephone lines per 100 Ethiopians (about h a l f o f which are fixed, and the other h a l f mobile). This
compares to about 14 lines per 100 people in sub-Saharan Africa (one fixed line and 13 mobile
lines per person). Internet access also lags; there are about 0.2 o f 100 Ethiopians are internet users,
compared to about 3.2 o f 100 sub-Saharan Africans. Total energy production in 2006/7 reached
3,386 GWH, and the total electricity coverage o f the country has increased from 17 percent in
200516 to 22 percent by the end o f 2006/7.

23.
The Bank’s investment lending in roads was an important contribution to positive
sector outcomes. The strong progress in roads i s an indicator for successful Bank financial
intervention. The road sector accounted for US$600 m i l l i o n in IDA commitments, or 26% o f total
IDA support, from FY03-07. The review period coincides with the second five-year phase o f the
10-year Road Sector Development Program (RSDP, 1997-2007). While the first phase, through
2002, focused on rehabilitation and upgrading o f main roads, including regular maintenance, the
second phase aims to consolidate the achievements o f the f i r s t phase by increasing network
connectivity and providing sustainable road infrastructure to rural areas. The Bank provided
phased support t o the RSDP from i t s onset through a Road Sector Investment Project, followed at
the start o f this CAS period by the Adaptable Program Lending (APL), currently in i t s third stage.
Good effort was also made to build the capacity o f the domestic road construction industry, and
mainstream HIV/AIDS prevention measures into road sector activities. The Bank’s large volume
o f support and close collaboration with the Ethiopian Roads Authority (ERA) highlight the direct
contribution by the Bank t o the positive improvements in transport sector outcomes.
24.
Telecommunicationwas a difficult part o f the Bank’s policy dialogue with only
limited results. Under the PRSC series, the Bank focused on revision o f the telecommunications
policy, allowing for partial liberalization o f the sector and for a reduction in mobile phone tariffs.
However, while government liberalized some peripheral segments o f the telecom sector (e.g.
internet services) it decided against larger reforms, such as the licensing o f a second mobile
operator. The Government produced a telecom action plan in 2004, as part o f the required
“triggers” for PRSCII financing. However, the Bank considered the plan to be insufficient t o

68

Annex 3: CAS CR

achieve the needed growth in telecom access. As a consequence, financing o f PRSCII was reduced
to US$130 m i l l i o n instead o f the U S $ l 5 0 million originally envisaged.
25.
IDA investments in electricity generation have contributed to strong increases in
power production and efforts to expand access in rural areas are receiving increasing
attention. The Energy I1project financed construction o f the Gilgel Gibe hydropower plant (180
MW), completed in 2004. The FY05 Energy Access project aims at establishing a sustainable
program for expanding the population’s access to electricity and improving the quality and
adequacy o f electricity supply. Progress o n implementation has been slow but i s expected to
accelerate as major contracts begin implementation. The Rural Access Expansion project series
focuses on the same objectives but concentrates on supporting the push t o expand access to
electricity in rural towns and villages.

2. Pillar: Enhance human development outcomes
26.
Overall progress under the Second Pillar i s rated satisfactory. Excellent progress was
made in increasing pro-poor spending and expanding access t o services, though increases in quality
were slower. The positive outcomes under this pillar are closely related t o governance reforms
especially the decentralization o f service delivery. The review period coincides with increased
decentralization o f service delivery and the transfer o f fiscal resources t o sub-national levels o f
government. After a f i r s t wave o f decentralization o f fiscal resources t o the regions in 1994, this
period from 2002 o n saw an increased devolution o f power and resources t o the districts (woredas).
Woredas are n o w increasingly responsible for the delivery o f primary and secondary education as
well as health services (see below for more details). A Bank study o n Enhancing Human
Development Outcomes through Decentralized Service Delivery analyzed woreda-level data before
and after decentralization in Oromiya and Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region
(SNNPR). The study concluded that overall the decentralization to woredas seemed t o have had a
positive impact both o n increased service delivery as w e l l as o n health and education outcomes.
One o f the key recommendations from the report was to increase the block grants from the Federal
government to the regions and from regions t o woredas in order to increase their budget envelopes
and commensurate to improved service delivery. This provision o f resources t o the Federal block
grant transfer system i s one o f the cornerstones o f the PBS project, which, together with other Bank
projects and programs, contributed positively to enhanced human development outcomes.
CAS Outcome Indicators
Increased primary enrollment rate
Improved primary completion rates

FYO3-07 Progress
Increased gross primary enrollment (grades 1-8) from 68%
(2003/04) to 92% (2006/07)
Increased primary education completion rates for grade 5
from 44% (2003/04) to 65.2% (2006/7)

Primary enrollment increased, with the focus shifting toward the quality o f education
27.
during the review period. Total primary enrollment went from 8.1 m i l l i o n students attending
primary school in 2000/01 t o 14 m i l l i o n in 2006/7. There has been considerable reduction o f the
gender gap for primary schooling - defined as the ratio as girls t o boys - f r o m 0.87 in 2004/05 to
0.93 in 2006/07 for grade 1-4 and from 0.69 in 2004/05 to 0.78 in 2006/07 in grade 5-8. The GER
for secondary (grades 9-10) stood at 36 percent in 2006/07, about double the level o f 2002. A
pattern that can be observed in any country where enrolment rates increase substantially i s that
teacher training naturally lags before catching up. In Ethiopia, the pupil-teacher ratio at the primary
level (grade 1-4) increased from 42 in 1997 to a peak o f 71 in 2005. However, this trend has been
reversed over the past two years and the ratio declined to about 64 in 2007 with GoE’s increased
efforts on teacher recruitment and training. At the same time, primary completion rates more than

69

Annex 3: CAS CR

doubled over the review period. Still, improving educational quality must be a key focus for Bank
support in future interventions.
28.
The Bank contributed to education outcomes in a harmonized manner with donor
partners based on a comprehensive sector development plan, first through a Sector-Wide
Approach (SWAP), then through the PRSC series, and finally through the PBS Project. The
Ethiopian Government launched the 20-year ESDP Iin 1997, funded through a SWAP to which the
Bank contributed through a US$lOO million investment operation. Starting with PRSC 1,the Bank
facilitated a successful shift from SWAP financing to general budget support as the main vehicle
for providing financing to the second phase o f the education program. The PBS project, with i t s
focus on protecting basic services provided at the sub-national level, continued this function
providing financing t o the third phase o f Government’s education sector development plan. A
comprehensive Education Country Status Report by the Bank informed the third phase o f the sector
plan and thereby contributed t o the improvements in the efficiency and effectiveness in education
spending. The importance o f education beyond primary was also recognized during the earlier half
o f the review period and the Bank conducted a study on higher education development that
identified concrete necessary conditions for successful higher education reform. Building on these
findings, the Post-Secondary Education Project (FY05) has begun t o contribute to an increase in
the quality o f instruction and management o f tertiary institutions.
Key Outcome Indicators
Improved primary health care coverage
Increased percentage of children under 5-years
of age who sleep under an insecticide treated
bednet
Increased proportion of children under I-year of
age vaccinated with DPT3 and measles vaccine
Increased contraceptive prevalence rate

FYO3-07 Progress
Increased health care service coverage from 62% (2002)
to 77% (2005)
4 percent in 2005 (no baseline available)
Additional indicators: Increased distribution of bednets
from 3 million (2005) to cumulative 20 million (2007)
Increased proportion of children under I-year of age
vaccinated against (2000-2005):
DPT3 from 21% to 32%
(0
Measles from 27% to 35%
(ii)
Increased contraceptive prevalence from 8% (2000) to

29.
There has been good progress on health indicators during the review period. Health
care coverage increased considerably during the review period with positive effects on overall
health outcomes. According to the 2000 and 2005 demographic and health surveys (a new survey
i s currently underway), under-five mortality decreased from 166 (per 1,000) to 123 between 2000
and 2005 and infant mortality decreased from 97 to 80 (per 1,000) over the same period. HIV
figures are currently being revised. They appear below 5 percent - lower than previously assumed.
The nutritional status o f children improved between the two health surveys. The proportion o f
children underweight fell from 47 percent in 2000 to 38 percent in 2005. From the intermediate
outcome indicators that were selected under the CAS/ICAS ,vaccination rates and contraceptive
prevalence rates showed good progress. The percentage o f children 12-23 months fully vaccinated
increased by 43 percent from 14 percent in 2000 to 20 percent in 2005. Three in five have received
the Bacille Calmette Guerin (BCG) vaccination for tuberculosis and 35 percent have been
vaccinated against measles. The coverage for the first dose o f D P T i s relatively high (58 percent).
However, only 32 percent go o n to receive the third dose o f DPT. The distribution o f ITNs
increased from about 250,000 in 2000 to 3 million in 2005 t o 18.2 m i l l i o n in 2006; the number o f
deaths from malaria decreased t o less than 60,000 in 2006 (from 110,000 in 2005). L i f e
expectancy at birth has also increased slightly from approximately 47 t o 49 years between 1995
and 2005.

70

Annex 3: CAS CR

30.
The Bank successfully managed the shift from investment lending within a SWAP to
financing under the PRSC series and the subsequent protection o f positive sector outcomes
through the PBS project. As with education, effectiveness o f public spending in health has been
facilitated by the development o f a comprehensive sector development plan. The Bank contributed
investment lending to a SWAP to finance the f i r s t phase (FY 1997-2002) o f the plan with a strong
focus o n expansion o f access to primary health services. The PRSC series supported financing o f
the second phase o f the health sector program and contributed to the implementation o f an
extension health package and training o f health extension workers. The Bank’s Country Status
Report for Health provided analytic underpinning for that implementation phase, e.g. by assessing
the impact o f expenditure increases in the areas o f outreach, prevention, and behavior change
programs o n reducing infant and child mortality rates. The PBS project i s closely aligned with the
current third phase (FY2006-20 10) o f the health program. The project has a special component on
promoting the health MDGs by providing predictable financing for those critical inputs for primary
health service delivery subprogram that cannot be efficiently financed through the project’s general
financing o f sub-national basic service delivery. This health MDG component aims at among
others accelerating and sustaining malaria control, reducing infant mortality through vaccines,
improving the delivery o f primary health services. It i s directly aligned with some o f the positive
outcomes achieved over the past years as mentioned above, particularly malaria due to i t s
significant role in increasing ITN distribution.
Obiective 2.3 Imt>rovedaccess to clean water sumlv and sanitation
Key Outcome Indicators

-

FYO3-07 Progress

I (2004/05) to 52% (2006/7)

-

3 1.
Overall access to improved water sources increased during the review period,
however, differences between rural and urban areas persist. Total access t o safe drinking
water increased. Nationally, access t o water rose from 42% in 2004/05 t o 52 percent in 2006/7.
Between 1995/96 and 2006/07, water access increased from 72 to 82 percent in urban areas and
from 9.6 to 46 percent in rural areas.
While the Bank undoubtedly contributed to improved access to water, a clearer link
32.
between outputs and outcomes i s needed to show actual impact. The Water Supply and
Sanitation Project i s directly aligned with the CAS objective by aiming at increased access to
sustainable water supply and sanitation services for rural and urban users, through improved
capacity in the sector. The Development Objective i s based o n the lessons learned from a
predecessor project, rated as satisfactory by IEG, which identified sector capacity building,
decentralized implementation responsibility, and integration o f hygiene and sanitation into the
water supply projects as key building blocks. Accordingly the project was designed t o build
capacity o f public and private sector stakeholders to plan, construct and maintain water supply and
sanitation facilities. Progress so far i s satisfactory, with indicators o f progress including
establishing o f systems for demand-driven planning in more than 200 woredas and other
institutional reforms at central and district level. The project i s currently improving efforts t o
define a monitoring and evaluation program that should help t o show more results o n the ground.

3. Pillar: Deepen Ethiopia’s ‘Core’ Governance Program
33.
Overall progress under the third pillar i s rated moderately satisfactory. The relatively
short review period showed good progress in many areas, e.g. decentralization, intergovernmental
fiscal relations, procurement and public financial management, also with respect to the relatively

71

Annex 3: CAS CR

narrow outcome indicators as defined in the CAS. Progress on transparency and accountability
accelerated toward the end o f the review period with support from the PBS program. However, the
elevated governance risks that became evident after the disputed 2005 elections, while having
moderated, remain a concern as the country continues to be politically polarized. Strong efforts by
the Bank and other partners continue to be necessary to support improvements o n the overall
governance agenda.
34.
As already discussed under the previous pillar, the Bank’s main focus during the
review period was the transfer o f power and resources to sub-national levels of government.
The Bank’s innovative financing (e.g. the Public Sector Capacity Building Support Project and the
PBS project) and analytics (e.g. the Joint Budget and Aid Review) contributed t o improved
efficiency o f the public sector and public spending as well as increased decentralization and
citizens’ empowerment. A key highlight i s the strengthening o f government functions on the
woreda level, which-in addition t o the positive service delivery outcomes discussed abovecontributed t o improvements in the satisfaction o f beneficiaries. However, public sector
the size and diversity
transformation processes take time, and progress remains uneven, due to: (i)
o f a country o f 77 m i l l i o n people; and (ii)
the fact that Ethiopia i s a federal republic with
significant regional autonomy. Significant improvements in governance and public sector capacity
across the board, from such a l o w base, will take about a generation, not five or ten years.

Key Outcome Indicators
Improved public expenditure management and
financial accountability, as evidenced by PEFA
indicator scores
Improved income and non-income incentive
environment for public servants measured by a
gender disaggregated wage decompression
ratio and privatelpublic comparators

FYO3-07 Progress
The 2007 PEFA assessment shows that there has been a
fairly successful track record of public financial
management improvements at the Federal level.
Public salary increased during the review period. Wage
decompression ratio is 1:16.5 (2006).

35.
While much work remains to be done, improvements have been noted in modernizing
fiscal and financial management and some evidence for an improved incentive environment
in the civil service. The 2007 PEFA assessment shows that at the Federal level the budget process
supports aggregate fiscal discipline. The credibility o f the budget i s strong with l o w deviation
between the budgeted and actual out-turns and l o w level o f expenditure arrears. Resources are
allocated strategically with an orderly budget process, good budget classification system and good
information in the budget documentation. However, efficiency in service delivery i s affected by
weaknesses with regard t o l o w predictability o f availability o f funds by spending units,
procurement systems, internal controls for non-salary expenditure, financial reporting, and internal
and external audit systems. As a more general proxy indicator for increased government
effectiveness, overall tax revenues increased from 1.1 billion Birr in 2003 t o 1.9 billion Birr in
2007. The indicator on the incentive environment for public servants was derived from the FY04
Public Sector Capacity Building Support Project (PSCAP). However, the project s t i l l has not been
able to report o n these indicators only noting unspecific “salary increases” in the public sector and
wage decompression ratios for 2006 (without baselines for comparison).
36.
The Bank contributed to progress through innovative and joint financing and
analytics. PSCAP catalyzed the formation o f a multi-sectoral SWAP for public sector reforms.
The SWAP aims to: (i)improve the scale, efficiency, and responsiveness o f public service delivery
at the federal, regional, local level; (ii)
empower citizens to participate more effectively in shaping
their own development; and (iii)
promote good governance and accountability. Unlike traditional
sector development programs, PSCAP resources are provided to regions as performance-based

72

Annex 3: CAS CR

transfers that are separate from basic regional subsidies. Several multilateral and bilateral donors
have joined the Bank in pooling resources through PSCAP, and the approach i s being adopted by
other programs. For example, the multi-sector Productive Safety Net Program (see below)
incorporated many o f the harmonized features o f PSCAP in i t s design. An Institutional
Governance Review (IGR), completed in FY05, was the Bank’s key analytical instrument to
support the Government’s state transformation process with benchmarking surveys and a focus on
M&E o f the performance o f the overall public sector reform program. The Bank conducted a
CPAR and a CFAA in FY03 and a FY04 Public Expenditure Review on public spending in the
social sectors. Since FY05, these diagnostics have been combined in annual Joint Budget and Aid
Reviews (JBAR) conducted jointly by Government and Development Partners (including the
Bank).
Key Outcome Indicators

FYO3-07 Progress

I

I
Increased regional revenue mobilization

Education: 54% of beneficiaries in rural areas and 72% in
urban areas satisfied (2005)
Health: 49% of beneficiaries in rural areas and 47% in
urban areas are satisfied (2005)
Sanitation: 47% of beneficiaries in rural areas and 26% in
urban areas are satisfied (2005)
Water: 68% of users of public taps in rural areas and 43%
in urban areas are satisfied (2005)
Agriculture extension: 53% of beneficiaries in rural areas
are satisfied (2005)
Increased size of woreda transfers from 55% of regional
budget (2002/03) to 71% (2005/06)
Increased (total) regional revenue mobilization from US$81
million (2004) to US$109 million (2006)

37.
Progress on strengthening decentralization on the woreda level has been substantial.
As mentioned above, woredus are n o w responsible for a large proportion o f basic service delivery:
(i)
in the education sector, woredas establish and manage kindergartens and primary and-in some
regions-secondary schools; (ii)in the health sector, woredas establish and manage health posts,
clinics and health centers; (iii)
in the water sector, woredas in almost all regions have the mandate
to develop and operate springs, hand-pump wells, water supply lines, water and soil conservation
schemes, ponds, water harvesting schemes and small-scale irrigation schemes; (iv) all woredas
have the mandate t o construct, maintain and manage rural roads; and (v) in the agriculture sector,
all woredas have the mandate to operate environmental rehabilitation programs, operate and
manage veterinary clinics and farmers’ training centers.
3 8.

Satisfaction with available local government services i s relatively high, though there
remains room for improvement. One o f the key outcomes during the review period was the
strengthening o f decentralization associated with devolution o f responsibilities for basic service
delivery to woreda as evidenced by an increase in the size o f woreda transfers and regional revenue
mobilization. A Citizens Report Card-the f i r s t o f i t s kind in Ethiopia-conducted by a local CSO
provides an important feedback from users o f public services. The survey i s based on a sample o f
3,800 households in 10 woredas in the rural regions o f Tigray, Oromiya and Southern Nations,
Nationalities and Peoples Region (SNNPR) as well as the urban region o f D i r e Dawa. The public
service with the highest satisfaction rating i s education especially in urban areas. Perhaps
surprisingly, health services receive relatively high satisfaction ratings o f close to 50 percent in
rural areas, higher than in urban areas. Users o f public taps are generally satisfied, however, access
to these water sources remains l o w with a large number o f people depending o n rivers, ponds and
unprotected springs. As already mentioned above, respondents are also overall satisfied with

73

Annex 3: CAS CR

agriculture extension services and more than 5 8 percent feel that agricultural extension services
have improved over the last two years.

39.
The Bank supported decentralization through various related interventions.PRSC I
supported decentralization through efforts to stabilize public management systems and t o promote
performance across tiers o f government. PRSC 2 prior actions included issuance and cabinet
approval o f a fiscal decentralization strategy for municipalities and woredas. The Bank’s Capacity
Building for Decentralized Delivery Project aims to enhance service delivery performance by
initiating long-term public sector capacity building through institutional reforms, systems
development and training at the federal, regional and woreda levels. The project so far achieved
various outputs, e.g. the development o f capacity building plans for regions and federal agencies,
capital investment plans for municipalities, staff training, etc. Other relevant projects with respects
to decentralization include PSCAP and PBS, which are discussed more in detail in other sections o f
this report.
Key Outcome Indicators
Citizens are better informed on public budget
processes (budget formulation, allocation and
expenditures)

FYO3-07 Progress
Improved access to public budget information: Budgets are
publicly posted in all regions and most woredas in 2007
(from zero in 2005)

40.
Civil society remains weak in Ethiopia, both in terms o f its own capacity and the
limited space available for it to operate in relation to the state. Limited progress was made in
opening new space for c i v i l society to enhance i t s role in promoting vertical accountability. With
the support o f the PNBS project, access t o budget information increased, though efforts are s t i l l
underway t o measure increased participation o f citizens in budget processes. According to
evidence from the J B A R and the PBS project, budget information i s n o w increasingly accessible to
a l l citizens especially o n the regional and woreda level, where this kind o f information did not exist
before 2005. However, the fact that increased budget information i s available does not guarantee
that people can understand and engage in public budget processes. A Financial Transparency and
Accountability Perception survey i s currently underway t o measure and provide baselines for this
dimension.
41.
The Bank contributed to enhanced empowerment and accountability through several
projects. The C A S envisioned a C i v i l Society Capacity Building Project in FY05 to support the
capacity building o f c i v i l society, with two distinct financing windows, one for Government-led
initiatives (enabling environment) and one for c i v i l society-led initiatives (capacity building). The
content o f this operation was folded into the PBS with the intention that the large f l o w o f resources
attached t o the PBS would provide stronger leverage to the c i v i l society empowerment and social
accountability agendas. The ICAS considered the PBS project a key catalyst to focus Bank
projects supporting decentralized service delivery and strengthening empowerment. The PBS
project, through its third and fourth components, supports the development o f accountability
mechanisms o n both the government and citizens’ sides and directly contributes to better integrate
citizens into the budget process. Still, the issue o f empowering c i v i l society remains a difficult on
in Ethiopia, and one on which innovative approaches will be required in the new CAS.

4. Pillar: Reduce vulnerability
42.
Overall progress under the fourth pillar has been satisfactory. While the large
amounts o f food aid traditionally received by Ethiopia have prevented the starvation o f millions,
traditional food relief has not addressed long-term development needs, and has often distorted local

74

Annex 3: CAS CR

food markets. The Ethiopian Government decided that an alternative system was needed to support
the needs o f chronic, predictably food-insecure households, as well as t o address some o f the major
underlying causes o f food insecurity. In 2005 it started implementation o f a new program, the
Productive Safety N e t Program (PSNP), which had been endorsed at the G-8 Summit o f June 2004
as a major element o f the effort t o end famine in the H o r n o f Africa. The PSNP replaced the
emergency humanitarian appeal system as the chief instrument for initially assisting about 5
million chronically food-insecure people in rural Ethiopia. It was scaled up t o reach 7.23 million
people in 2006. W h i l e PSNP has yet to be tested under a severe drought, results so far are very
encouraging-beneficiaries report less food insecurity, less recourse to selling assets to buy food,
increased use o f health and education services, and increased creation o f assets.

Key Outcome indicators
Increased amount of cash assistance relative to
food aid

Number of chronically food insecure people
covered by multi-year productive safety nets
Improved food security and resilience to shocks
for chronically food insecure households

FYO3-07 Progress
Increased amount of cash aid from negligible in 2003 to
approx. $90 m in 2005, and $140 in 2006 with
commensurate reduction in amount of food-aid
Increased number of chronically food insecure peoule
covered by multi-year productive safety nets from
negligible to 5 million in 2005 and 7.3 million in 2006
75% of beneficiary households report improvement in food
security in 2005 as compared with 2004

43.
The review period saw a major reform o f the emergency food aid system. The reforms
supported under PSNP aimed t o address not only chronic food shortages, but also the underlying
causes o f food insecurity through a public works component with an integrated watershed
management focus that would tackle the severe environmental degradation in many food insecure
areas. Indicators for changes in the food aid system include the increase in the amount o f cash aid
relative to food aid and the substantive increase in the number o f people covered by multi-year
productive safety nets.
44.
The Bank took the lead role in catalyzing donor support and directly contributed to
major reductions in the vulnerability o f poor households. The Bank conducted a risk and
vulnerability assessment and focused o n the issue in the Public Expenditure Review at the
beginning o f the review period. B o t h argued that more effective management o f risks should
require increasing the productive element o f safety net transfers, protecting household assets
through expanding the coverage o f the food security program, and enhancing rural growth. The
PRSC series supported defining o f institutional arrangements, implementation modalities and
monitoring mechanisms for a system o f multi-annual productive safety nets. The Bank prepared an
Emergency Drought Recovery Project, which assisted the Government t o respond t o the drought in
a timely manner, while increasing i t s fiscal capacity to protect other public expenditures and/or
significantly expand the public programs relating to food insecurity and vulnerability. Furthermore,
a community intervention component generated direct employment for over 900,000 individuals.
45.
The lessons from the latter component proved beneficial for the Productive Safety N e t
Program, which in its f i r s t phase provided predictable cash and in-kind resources t o around 5
million chronically food insecure households in rural Ethiopia. The second phase o f the A P L
expanded to cover 7.23 m i l l i o n food insecure households eligible for the program. Evidence o n the
PSNP so far indicates that the program i s well targeted. As t o impact the picture i s mixed, with
some positive evidence regarding the impact o n food insecurity and asset protection, especially
when the combined effect o f the PSNP and the FSP are considered. Additional efforts t o strengthen
the transparency o f the program as w e l l as the appeals and grievance procedures were introduced in
2007. The Program s t i l l faces challenges including the need to build adequate capacity to ensure

75

Annex 3: CAS CR

timelier, more predictable payments and effective implementation o f public works. While the
safety net program represents significant progress, the phenomenon o f increasing urban
vulnerability and poverty s t i l l remains an unmet challenge.

Key Outcome indicators
Strengthen regulatory and institutional capacity

Reverse loss of environmental resources

FYO3-07 Progress
Environment Proclamation approved in 2004; Woreda
Environmental Management Plan completed in 2006/07
17 million seedlings planted and 245,000 km of stone
bunds constructed in 2005 with support of PSNP

There has been progress in strengthening the legal and institutionalframework for
46.
environmental management. At the federal level, the Parliament approved the Environment
Proclamation in 2004, which among other things, defines the organizational arrangements for
environmental protection and environmental assessment requirements. On the regional level,
progress included the establishment o f regional environmental protection units and the completion
o f woreda environmental management plans.

47.
The Bank supported the process of institutional environmental strengthening through
the PRSC and analytic support. Approval o f the Environment Proclamation was a prior action
under PRSCl. Other achievements under the program included issuance o f environmental
guidelines o n agriculture, industry, dams, mining, and roads. The Ethiopian Environmental
Protection Authority in close collaboration with the World Bank and DFD launched a Country
Environmental Analysis in April 2003. The PSNP addresses environmental degradation in the
areas most seriously affected in the country. The public works in the PSNP are implemented
within an integrated watershed management logic and focus o n soil and water conservation
activities, specifically aimed at environmental sustainability. These works include bunds, ponds,
canals, and maintenance and development o f springs and wells. The PSNP represents a huge
reforestation effort for Ethiopia, with over 17 million seedlings planted in 2005 alone. Evidence
from Ethiopia and other countries has shown that these types o f activities/approaches can have a
profound impact o n the environment. However, more attention i s needed to reverse land
degradation which i s a major cause o f Ethiopia’s l o w agriculture productivity, persistent food
insecurity and rural poverty.
IV. Measuring Bank Performance

48.
Levels o f financing were below “base case” in the CAS, but slightly higher than
envisioned under the ICAS. Bank lending over the CAS period (FY03-05) was US$1,174
million; below the “base case” lending scenario o f US$1,504 million. This shortfall was due to
lack o f availability o f IDA 13 resources, as frontloading by other countries reduced the amount o f
IDA available t o Ethiopia. Bank lending over the I C A S period (FY06-07) was US$l, 135 million.
Overall, there have been n o major dropped projects or slippages from the financing program as
envisaged under the CAS and ICAS. Some projects envisioned in the FY03 CAS were folded into
other projects t o exploit synergies and streamline the program. Appendix 2 shows planned versus
actual financing during the C A S and ICAS periods.
49.
Portfolio quality was satisfactory. Table 3 shows Ethiopia’s portfolio performance
during FY2002-2007. The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) rated 70 percent o f Ethiopia
operations assessed during FY02-07 as satisfactory for development outcomes. This rating
corresponds with the average rating for operations in the Africa Region over the same period. It
rates slightly below the Bank-wide average. Ethiopia operations rate relatively l o w on

76

Annex 3: CAS CR
sustainability and institutional development impact in comparison with the regional and Bank-wide
average.
Table 3: Ethiopia portfolio performance FY2002-2007
Fiscal year
2003
2004
2005
Portfolio Size
19
20
22
Net Comm Amt (US$ million)
1,844.5
1,941.4 1,614.2
Number of Problem Projects
1
3
1
IEG Evaluations
Number of Projects
4
2
3
Net Commitments
258.4
215.4
563.8
Outcome % Satisfactory
75
100
66.67
100
0
50
Sustainability % Likely
50
0
50
lnst Dev Impact % Substantial
AFR
Outcome % Satisfactory
68
72
72
63
66
74
Sustainability % Likely
lnst Dev Impact % Substantial
43
49
54
Bank
Outcome % Satisfactory
73
78
81
73
79
84
Sustainability % Likely
lnst Dev Impact % Substantial
50
56
57

2006
22
2,010.6
1

2007
21
1,990.3
1

FYO3-07

4
297.7
50
0
100

4
446.4
75
nia
nia

17
1,781.7
73
37.5
50

65
64
40

61
nla
nla

68
67
47

83
83
53

76
75
75

78
79
58

50.
An Ethiopia Country Program Assessment during FY2003-2005 by the Quality
Assurance Group (QAG) was satisfactory overall. The Q A G panel rated the Ethiopia country
program as highly positive with respect to responsiveness to government plans and needs, strategic
relevance o f analytical efforts and lending interventions, coordination with donors, the design and
quality o f tasks, implementation and likely impact. The country program was underpinned by a far
range o f highly innovative, timely and influential analytics. Appendix 3 lists all the Bank analytic
support during the CAS and ICAS periods, most o f which was delivered as envisaged. Additional
unplanned activities, such as PSNP which was introduced in response to the Government’s new
Food Security Program, demonstrated the Bank’s responsiveness t o changing priorities.
Within the latest Country Portfolio PerformanceReview for FY 2006, a review o f the
5 1.
Ethiopia portfolio and consultations with government and World Bank task teams identified four
portfolio-wide risks factors that have adverse impacts on implementation and results: (i)
transparency and accountability, (ii)
financial management, (iii)
procurement, and (iv) M&E. Weak
financial management and procurement delays were identified in the last CPPR (2005); although a
number o f agreed actions were implemented, including training programs, these problems continue
to occur. Specific actions to address procurement delays have been adopted: systematic training in
procurement for relevant government agencies and the Bank; finalization o f standard bidding
documents for national competitive bidding; feasibility studies together with M o F E D on the
potential to establish a certificate/diploma program in procurement. T o improve financial
management project implementing agencies will accelerate computerization o f their accounting
systems to facilitate accurate record-keeping and close accounts o n time; “roving accountants” will
be recruited to provide targeted assistance in financial management to weaker project
implementing agencies, and the use o f financial monitoring reports, instead o f SOEs based on
transactions, will be piloted in two or three new projects in FY 2007/08.

77

Annex 3: CAS CR
V. Pronram-wide Lessons Learned and Issues for the new CASz7
52.
F o r projects under implementation,the Bank and Government will need to continue
to apply measures instituted to further enhance transparency and accountability, especially
at the local level. These measures include: using clear and transparent criteria for selecting project
sites and beneficiaries; ensuring greater involvement o f a broad range o f stakeholders in project
preparation and implementation; strengthening M&E systems and operationalizing them in a more
participatory manner; strengthening implementation support, particularly oversight on the fiduciary
aspects o f projects. For new projects will be designed with measures t o strengthen transparency,
local accountability, and oversight mechanisms.
53.
I t i s important for the Bank to stay engaged in constructive manner during shocks
rather than pull-out all support. The Bank’s partnership with Ethiopia i s long-term and events
like the contested 2005 elections might change the terms o f engagement, but should not radically
alter the Bank’s overall involvement in the country. The Bank reacted in a very measured and
timely manner by shifting its support from general budget support t o the highly innovative PBS
project, which allowed the Bank and other donors stay engaged. The Bank thereby acted as a
stabilizing force and assured continuation in the improvement o f governance and service delivery
t o poor people.

54.

Despite the successful shift in financing modalities from PRSCs to PBS in reaction to
the 2005 crisis, the benefits o f PRSCs were apparent and could not be fully replicated by
PBS, as a more narrowly focused investment instrument. The two PRSCs had an overall
positive impact and catalyzed many important reforms. They provided and important forum for
dialogue, especially o n issues related t o growth and structural reforms that would need to be
continued, e.g. t o push for further reforms in telecom and the overall development o f a market
economy. The public expenditure framework and governmental transfer systems are welldeveloped to allow budget support t o have i t s intended impact. In addition, dialogue within the
PRSC enhances donor harmonization and reduces transaction costs. These factors argue for the
consideration o f resuming PRSCs as soon as donors and government agree that conditions are
appropriate.

55.
The next CAS will need to develop a more comprehensive results and monitoring
framework. The 2003 CAS aligned the Bank’s program with broad objectives. It listed a few
monitoring indicators that were, however, insufficient to link Bank contribution t o outcomes. The
new CAS will need to include a more logical results chain with that links country goals with
outcomes, outputs and milestones that will facilitate monitoring o f CAS progress at various stages
o f the CAS period.

’’

SectoraVthematic lessons learned are reflected in Appendix Table 1, Summary Table o f C A S Completion
Report.

78

0

u

. .

. .

....

0

.

.

-

e

e

e

e

e

e

0
00

e

.

.

e

. .
0

c
(I)
v)

a,
0
0

m
a,

c

.-F

h

U

a,

28
e

.

..

e

e

c

0

h

F

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

.

-

e

e

.

.

.

.

&

n

e

.

e

.

.

e

e

.

e

.

.

e

.

.

.

e

.

e

0

0

0

0

0

m
00

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

I2

I

0

0

0

0

0

0

c

Annex 3: CAS CR

CAS CR Appendix 2: Planned and Actual Financing FYO3-07 (US$ million)
~

~~~

FY03 CAS PLANNED
FY
2003

2004

2005

Enerav Access
Cap&y Building (CBDSD)
ESRDF Supplemental
Emergency Drought Recovery
Pastoral Community Development
Roads II
PRSC I
Roads II (Supplement)
Capacity Building (PSCAP)
Water & Sanitation
Post-Primary Education
Rural CB
PSD Capacity Building
ICT Capacity BuildingPRSC II
Decentralized Infrastructure Fund
Nile Basin
MAP II
Civil Society Capacity Building

IDA
132.7
26.2
28.3
60
30
127
150
170
100
70
50
60
30
20
150
150
100
30
20

Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual (RSDP APL I)
Actual
FY05 (Roads APL II)
Actual
Actual
FY05
FY06
FY05
FY05
Actual
FY08 (PBS AF)
FY08
FY07
FY08 (merged with PBS)
Additional Actual
Financing:
Roads APL II
Post-Secondary Education
PSD Capacity Building
ICT Capacity Building
Productive Safety Nets I

Subtotal FY04
Subtotal FY05

IDA
132.7
26.2
28.3
60
30
126.8
120

--

GRANTS

_---

60
30
126.8
120

---

I00
100

25

130

130

160.9
40
24
25
70
404
320
449.9
1, I 73.9

--

-----

-----

5
-55.7
216.8
145.0
190.7
552.5

STATUS

2007

Roads APL 2 Supplemental
Rural Electricity Access Expansion
Financial Sector Capacity Building
Capacity Building for Agricultural
Services
Productive Safety Nets I1
Local Investment Grants
MAP II
Rural Electricity Access Expansion II
Tana Growth Corridor
Irrigation and Drainage
Roads APL 3
Urban Development
Subtotal FY06
Subtotal FY07
TOTAL FYO6-07
TOTAL FYO3-07

215
87.3
133.4
15

215

87
125
15

Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual

49

Actual

54

--

175

175

Actual
FY08 (PBS AF)
Actual
FY08
FY08
Actual
Actual
Actual (Urban WSS)
491
400-550
891-1.041
2,395.22,545.2

86

--_
---

---

15

--

30
--

-----

I00
225
I00
504.7
600
1, I 04.7

230
205
435

2,278.6

987.5

Annex 3: CAS CR

CAS CR Appendix 3: FY03-07 Planned and Actual Non-Lending Program

FY
2002

2004

2005

FY03 CAS PLANNED
PRODUCT

FY07 COMPLETION REPORT
STATUS

CFAA
CPAR
Joint Staff Assessment of PRSP
Irrigation Note
Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR)
Paramedical Manpower
Social Protection Strategy
Public Expenditure Review (PER) on Basic
Services
Gender Assessment
Integrated Trade Framework
Vulnerability and Risk Assessment
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA)
Education Country Status Report
CEM - Sources of Growth
Health Country Status Report
Higher Education Review
Rural Development Review
Poverty Assessment
Country Environmental Analysis
Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR)

Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Merged with Vulnerability and Risk Assessment
Actual (FY04)
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual

State Transformation
Water Strategy
Poverty reduction in Cities
Financial Sector Development
Service Delivery in a Decentralized Framework
M&E Support

Additional Actual Nonlending:
Joint Staff Assessment Note (1st APR)
Legal and Judicial Assessment
Actual (FY06 Institutional Governance Review)
Actual
Actual (Urban Housing)
Actual
Actual (FY06 Decentralized Service Delivery)
Actual (IDF grant through FY08)

FY05 CAS Progress Report
Health Country Status Report
MDG Costing
Soil Fertility and Poverty

Actual
Actual (Improving Understanding of MDGs)
Actual (FY07 Soil Degradation)

(FY04)
(FY04 Trade IF DTlS Study)
(FY04)
(FY04)
(FY05)
(FY05)
(FY06)
(FY05)
(FY05 Environment Country Status Rpt.)
(FY05)

Additional A ctual Nonlending:
HIV/AIDS Community Involvement
Joint Budget and Aid Review

2006

FY06 ICAS PLANNED
PRODUCT
PSlA (oil prices)
Telecom Fiscal Analysis
Joint Staff Assessment Note (2nd APR)
CEM: Growth and Governance
Rural PER
Labor Market Study
Joint Budget and Aid Review FY06
Population
Rural Risk Management (Weather Insurance)
Value Chain Analysis
Tourism
Health Financing
Nutrition
Investment Climate Assessment update
Debt Sustainability Analysis

87

FY07 COMPLETION REPORT
STATUS

Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual (FY07)
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual (FY07)
Actual
Actual
Actual (FY08)
Actual (FY07)
Underway
Actual

Annex 3: CAS CR

2007

Urbanization Study
Joint Budget & Aid Review FY07
Growth Corridors
Poverty Update
Banking Sector Corporate Governance Review
Urban PSlA
Rural Investment Climate and Markets

Actual
Actual
Underway
Underway
Underway
Actual (Employment PSIA)
Underway
Additional Actual Nonlending:
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Food Price Inflation Study

88

Annex 4:

Ethiopia at a Glance
31308

Ethiopia

Sub
Saharan
Atka

Pcpuldion, midyear (millims)
S u f z e area(tbusmd sq. km)
Pcpulaion goMh (Oh)
Urban ppulaion(% of btal ppulation)

727
1,104
20
17

770
24,265
2.3
36

2,403
29,215
16

GNI (Atlas mtthod, US$ billms)
GNI percapita(At1as metbd, US5)
GNI per capita(PPP, internatonal 5)

14.3
201
1.19)

648
842
2,032

1,562
2,698

10.9
11.6
8.6

5.6

80

3.2

61

Key Development Indicators

LON
ircome

Aae distribution, 2006

(2006)

Male

Female

8064

5064

30

4044
3034

2024

650

10 14
04

GDP at market price, growh (%)
GDP at constant factor wst, growth
GDP per capib growth (Oh)

20

10

20

10

0

pe rcenl

(most recent estimate 2000-2006)

Poverty heactourt rdio d $1 a CBy (PPP, %)
Pwerty headcourt rdio it 52 a c?ay (PPP, %)
Life expedancy d birth (years)
lnbnt mortality(per 1,Oa) live tirths)
Child mdnutRion(% of children mder5)

41
72
47
96
29

78
43

m
38

Adrlt literacy, mab (% d ages 15 a d olCBr)
A&lt literacy, female (%of ages 15 m d older)
Grosspnmaryenrollmen[ male(% ofage group)
Gross pnmary enrollment female ( O h d age TOW)

50
23

Access to an inproved water source(% ofpopulaticn)
Acccss to inprovedsantation faasties (% of ppuldion)

35

s
64

Under4 mortdityrate (per 1pOO)

59
75

69
50
98
86

72
50
108
96

56
37

75
38

lW0

19%

nEthiopla

Net Aid Flows

1980

1990

2000

2006

21 1

1,003

686

1 937

19
7
4

50
183
35

130
26
11

625
67
75

6

84
20

8.5
11

15 8
27

Consumer prices (annual % chmge)
GDP inplkil deflator (annual % chmge)

12 5
43

5.2
3.3

6.2
6.9

12 3
11 6

Exchange rate(mnualavwzge, lccalper US$)
Terms d trade index (DO0 = la))

21
131

21
151

8.1
100

87
79

(US$ rnlims)
Net ODA m d offclal a d
TOO3donors (in 2003
Unlted States
taly
United Kingdom
A d (%of GNI)
A d percaplta (US5)

34

ZOO0

2005

rJSub-Saharan Afrlca

'
Growth of GDP a d GDP per capita(%)
D T

Long-Term Economic Trends
90

95

+GDP

05

00

-GDP per capita

1980-90 1990-PO0
2000-06
(amage innualgrowth %)
Pcpuldion, midyear (millims)
GDP (US5 millions)

37 7
7.269

51 2
12,083

64 3
8,180

72 7
15,166

3.1
22

2.3
45

2.0
6.7

47 5
12 6
45
39 9

08
32
29
43

36
46
40

Agc~k~re
lndrstry
bnufadunrg
servloes

60 3
105

49
29 2

(ss of GDPJ
54 0
49 4
11 1
12 2
55
48
34 9
38 4

53

51
87
55
75

Household fnal mnsurnptan expenjiture
GeneralgovY fnal consumpbon a p w d i t u e
Gross captal fonnatm

80 0
98
145

77 2
132
129

73 8
17 9
20 3

86 4
12 1
24 2

12
40
49

34
90
65

84
04
80

Exports of g o d s m d servlces
l m p r k of p o d s and servces
Gross savlrgs

76
I19
10 8

56
86

12 0
23 9
16 2

13 8
36 5
15 1

32
32

70
58

13 9
13 0

119

Note:Figuresin italicsareforyearsotherthanthose s p c l i e d 2006data are pelimnary. .. indicatesdataarenot avaibbb
a. A d &ta are for2035.
Develcpment Econanics, DwebpmentData Grcup (DECDG)

Note: data presented in this standard table may differ from data cited in elsewhere in the CAS due to differences in time
period (Ethiopian fiscal year vs. Western calendar year) or the definition of indicators used.

89

EthioDia
Balance of Payments and Trade

a000

2006

(US$ m'llicns)
Total merchmdise eWorts(fcb)
Total merchmdise imports (a0
Net tra& in mods and services

486
1,611
-976

1,000
4,592
-3.443

Voice and accountabihv

Current amcunt balance
asa%ofGDP

-335
4.1

-1,386
-9.1

Regulatory qualiiy

Governance ndicdors, 2000 and 2 M 6

~I
I

I

R uI e of law

Workers' remittances and
mmpensatan ofemployees (receipts)
Reserves. irchdirg gold

53

169

349

1,158

CWnrol o1corrupbon
0

Central Government Finance
(76 of GDP)
Current revenue (ircbdirg giants)
Domestic revenue**
Tax reverue
Total expenditure**
Current ewendture

15.7
14.0
9.5
26.0
20.6

16.0
14.6
10.8
22.3
11.6

Overall surplusldefct

-9.4

-6.3

25

50

rm

75

U2W6

Country's percentbe rank (C-lW)

LPWO

hgherwliloca ~mplybatbrrdnps

%urn: Kaufmann-Kraay-Martruza, Work Bank

Technology and Infrastructure

Hi@est marginal tax rate (%)
hdiudral
Corpaate

,I

Paved mads (% d total)
Fked ihe ani moble phone
srhsmbers (per 1,000 people)
High Bchmlogyexports
(% d manufacturedexprls)

35
30

2000

2005

12.0

19.1

0.1

0.2

31

32

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ m'liicns)
Total debt cutstmdingand dstursed
Total debt service
Debtrelef(HPC, MDRi)
Total deb! (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of =pats)
Foreim dired irwestment (net infbws)
Pcrtfdb equily(mt inlows)

5,483
137
2284

2326
163
1,383

67.0
13.1

15.3
7.6

135

0
0

AgriarlClrd Land (%of i m d area)
F a s t area (%of land sea)
Natiomllyprdectd areas (% oflandarea)
Freshwater resources Der caaDita (cu. mters)
Freshwater wthdrawal(% d inbrml resources)

C 0 2 emissions per cagta (mt)

Composition oftotal external debt, PO6

1.712
4.6
0.09

0.71

GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 F?P $per kg dollequivalent)

2.8

2.9

Energy use per capita (kg of al equivalent)

291

303

IBRD
Totaldebt oulstardingand dbbused
Disbursements
Prircipaf repiymalts
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt oulstardingand disbused
Disbursements
Total debt service

1,779
137
34

553
9S*'
39

0
0
0

0
0
0

0

0

-

-

( U S mdrons)

Idem1 560

Private Sector Development
Timerewired tostart abushess (days)
Cost to start a busimss (% d GNI percaMta)
Timerewired toregisterpmperty (days)
Ranked asa majorcmstraht to tusfless
(% of mmagers surveyed who a g e d )
Tax rates
Tax adninistratan

PO0

2006

-

16
45.9
43

IFC (fiscalyear)
Total disbursed and octstandingportfola
of rhich IFC own acmunt
Disbursementsfor IFC own a m u n t
PorifoSo sales,prepayments and
repayments fcr F C wn amount

72.2
59.2

MlGA
Gross expcsure
New grarmtees

Stock market capitalhition (% of GDP)
Bmk capital toasset rata (%)

Note: Figures i n itaics are for years other thanthose specified 2006data are pelrnflafy.
.. hdicatesdataare not malable. -indica& otseluationisnot alplicable.
** IDA dsbusement ofboth granls andcredit amount to U S 3 0 1 2 m i l i m in2006 fiscal y e s .
Develcpment Econanics, DevelopmentData Grcup (DECDG).

-

3/3/08

Note: data presented in this standard table may differ from data cited in elsewhere in the CAS due to differences in time
period (Ethiopian fiscal year vs. Western calendar year) or the definition of indicators used.

90

Millennium Development Goals

Ethiopia

With selected targets to achieve between 7990 and 2015
(esimde closest todate shown, +/- Pyewsj

Goal 1: halve the r a t e s f o r t l a daypoverty and malnutrition
Poverty healcount ratioat $1 aday(PPP, % o f poptiatan)
Poverty healccunt ratioat natanal p o w w line (% d populatim)
Share of mcane orcmsunptionto thepoorestqunltile(%)
Prevalence of malnutntion (% of chiklren under 5)

1990

1995

2200

2005

44 2
91
47 2

387

72

477

Goal 2: ensure that children areable to complete primary schooling
hmary school enrolment (net, %)
hmary completlon rate (% of relevart age g o l p )
Secmdaty school enrolment (gross, %)
Youth literaqfrate (% of people a p s 15-24)

384

2
26
13

18

36
37
17

78
58
35

204
122
38

179
107
38

151
92
52

123

87 1
6

673
6

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity h education and empowerwomen
Ralo ofgirlsto boysinpnmaryand semndaryeducatan (96)
Wanen emfloyed m the mnagnailtural secbr(% of mnagnailtural employmen9
Proportionof seets held bj wrnen in natanal parliament (%)
Goal 4: reduce under4 mortality by two-thirds
Undsr-5 m r b l t y rat? (per 1,000)
hfant mcrtdityrate(per 1,000 iue births)
k a s l e s immmizatan (propoltion of one-year otds immunzed, %)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality bythlee-fourths
NIatemal mortalityrstio (modeled estimate, per 100,003 live tirths)
Births attended by sldled health stsff (% d totab
Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread o f HIWAIDS and othermaior diseases
Prevalence of HIV(% ofpopulatim ages 15-49)
Cortracepfveprevalenoe (% of women ages 15-49)
hcaence of tuberculosis (per 103,000 people)
Tuberailasis cases detected under DOTS ( 5 6 )
Goal 7: halve the proportion of peopb without slstahableaccessto basic needs
k c e s s to an improued wster source (% of population)
k c e s s to m ~ m v e ds i i t a t o n fasiliies ( % ofpopulatim)
Forest area (%of totd land area)
Nalonaly protected arms (% of tobl land area)
C02 emsslms (metnc tom p a capta)
GDP per lnit d energy use (constant2000 W P $per kg 13oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Faedline and m b i k phme subscnbers (per 1,000 people)
htemet users (per 1,030 people)
Persond computers (per 1,000 people)
Youth lnemployment (% of totd labor force ages 15-24)

77
66

1.4

23

19

28

36

0.1
2.8

0.0
2.5

0.1
2.8

0.1
2.9

0

0

0.0
0

0.2
2

iducation indicators (%)

Aeasles imrnun ization (Oh of 1-year olds)

3T indicators (per 1,000 people)

100 7

Irn1

10.

4

7-0
2000

-9-

zom

2005

Primary n et e nrollmentra S o

~Raeodgnstoboysin~marya
secondary educabon (. .)

OEhbPia

WubSaharan Nrica

Note:Figuresin italicsare foryearsotherthanthose specified .. hdicatesdata aenot available.

313’08

Development Econanics. DwebpmentData Grcup (DECDG).

Note: data presented in this standard table may differ from data cited in elsewhere in the CAS due to differences in time
period (Ethiopian fiscal year vs. Western calendar year) or the definition of indicators used.

91

Annex 5:

Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1980-85

1990-95

1999-05

SubSaharan
Africa

43.4
2.8
11.5
7.1

56.5
2.0
13.9
6.2

71.3
2.1
16.0
5.3

741.4
2.3
35.2
5.5

2,353.0
1.9
30.0
3.7

745
127

580
128

3.4

3.1

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)
INCOMElCONSUMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNl)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access t o an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
lmm un ization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same regionlincome group
Lowincome

38.7
35.1
39.3
180
45
41

150
92
84

170
117
117

32.4
8.7
41.6

40.0
7.2
47.7

30.0
9.1
39.4

0.6
1.o

0.9
2.6

1.1
7.3

22
25
19

69
73
64

23
81
15

36
92
25

56
80
43

75
88
70

12
6

38
57
48

59
69
38

64
64
29

63
67
39

44
42
45

44
43
45

43
42
43

47
47
48

58
58
59

123
206

107
179

80
127

100
168

80
122

49 1
401

448
358

451
425
673
6

489
467
92 1
42

298
244
684
41

80
83
77

02/20/08
CAS Annex 85. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

92

Annex 6:

Indicator
National accounts (as YOo f GDP)

Key Economic Indicators

2003

Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

Actual
2004
2005

2006

Estimate
2007

2008

Projected
2009
2010

2011

100
42
14
44

100
44
14
42

100
47
13
40

100
48
13
39

100
46
13
40

100
46
14

100
46
14

100
46
14

40

40

40

100
46
14
41

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

92
22
13
9

91
25
16
10

97
23
15
8

98
24
17
8

94
25
18
7

92
25
19
6

96
23
17
6

96
23
17
6

94
23
17
6

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

13
27

15
32

15
35

14
37

13
32

13
30

13
32

13
31

13
30

Gross national savingsc

21

21

17

15

20

24

18

17

19

8558

10054

12305

15166

19395

23749

27341

31221

35117

120

140

170

200

230

280

330

380

420

Real annual growth rates ('YO,calculated from 1999100 prices)
-2.2
13.6
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income
-3.3
10.4

11.8
13.4

10.9
12.0

11.1
11.0

8.8
8.5

7.2
6.3

7.1
6.4

7.5
6.9

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1999100 prices)
11.4
-4.2
Gross domestic product at market prices
9.8
Total consumption
18.0
7.0
-2.8
Private consumption
20.1
7.5
-0.1

8.6
11.2
12.1

8.9
5.1
6.7

6.6
3.2
3.5

5.1
9.4
10.1

4.9
4.5
4.7

5.5
3.4
3.4

2486
1185
6266
5 126
-3780
2885
-882

3025
1425

3992
1694

7779
6428
-4754
3772
-1012

3572
1590
8884
7384
-5312
3782
-1595

9856
8193
-5864
4214
-1811

4482
1881
10643
8792
-6161
4869
-1534

Industry
Services

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)
E X P O ~ ~(GNFS)~
S

Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise CIF
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( 1987 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

1140
483
2347
1856
1207
1164
-109

1494
600

1858
847

3 175
2587
-1681
1338
-406

4367
3633
-2509
1773
-77 1

2105
1000
5548
4592
-3443
2095
-1386

123
360
205
155
-111
-262

150
412
259
152
249
-405

150
27 1
387
-1 16
562
-21 1

365
80
222
-142
544
397

482
239

522
734

60 1
1254

874
1026

997
699

329
-168

43
-287

68
-329

98
-188

102
-264

-14.1

-16.7

-20.4

-22.7

-19.5

-20.0

-19.4

-18.8

-17.5

6.0

29.0

17.6

4.4

10.4

13.9

12.4

7.9

11.8

17.4
1.9

14.0
23.5

15.6
26.4

-1.5
17.6

-3.4
2.7

35.4
19.1

11.0
10.8

10.5
9.3

10.1
5.7

-

/Continued)

93

Indicator

2003

Public finance (as % o f GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
20.2
Current expenditures
19.3
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
0.9
Capital expenditure
8.7
Foreign financing
5.1
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth o f M 2 (YO)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( 1987 =loo)
Merchandiseexport price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandiseterms o f trade index

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (YOchange)
GDP deflator (% change)

Actual
2004
2005

2006

Estimate
2007

Projected
2009
2010

2011

19.5
13.8
5.7
9.9
4.0

17.5
12.4
5.1
10.9
3.7

16.7
11.6
5.2
10.7
2.8

16.3
10.4
5.9
10.8
2.9

16.1
10.9
5.2
12.5
4.6

15.4
10.6
4.8
11.4
4.2

15.1
10.5
4.6
11.0
3.9

15.8
10.4
5.3
11.1
3.6

41.5
14.7
-39.4

39.0
10.9
10.2

38.0
19.6
30.1

36.1
17.4
42.2

33.3
19.7
37.9

31.7
21.9
44.9

32.2
21.6
39.1

32.6
20.6

33.1
18.8

73.2
104.0
70.4
44.5

70.6
117.3
60.2
42.0

84.7
130.3
65.0
45.0

95.8
140.1
68.4
49.2

102.8
152.2
67.5
51.9

108.5
160.3
67.7

107.7
166.2
64.8

106.4
168.7
63.1

105.7
171.3
61.7

15.1
12.8

8.6
3.9

6.8
9.9

12.3
11.6

17.8
16.8

15.9
17.6

12.6
11.7

10.9

8.8

a. GDP at factor cost

b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c.
d.
e.
f.

2008

Includes net unrequitedtransfers excluding official capital grants
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." A n increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

94

Annex 7:

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

2003

Key Exposure Indicators
Actual
2004
2005

Estimate
2007

2006

7272

6644

6261

2326

364

403

572

89

92

100

89

163

604.2
85.0
7.6
87.6

402.4
66.1
6.1
85.3

302.6
50.9
4.3
82.2

101.0
15.3
7.1
65.9

0.0
67.4

0.0
78.4

0.0
56.2

0.0
55.0

0.0

0.0

0

0

0.0
0

0.0
0

2008

Projected
2009
2010

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)"
N e t disbursements (US$m)"

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators

TDO~XGS~
TDOiGDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionaliTDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSipublic DS
Preferred creditor DSipublic

DS (%)'
IBRD DSiXGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
O f which present value o f
guarantees (US$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio (YO)
IDA TDO (us$mld

0

0

0

0

3179

3488

3359

553

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity IC
MIGA

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f I M F credits and net shortterm capital.

b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

95

2011

Annex 8: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management
As of March 25, 2008

Indicator"
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a*
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$OOO)
Average Supervision (US$OOO/project)

Memorandum Item

Proi Eva1 bv OED bv Number
Pr4 Eva1 b; OED b; Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

FY05

FY06

FY07

FY08**

19
2.9
5.3
0.4
5.3
0.4
27.8

27
3.2
4.5
2.0
13.6
3.4
29.0

27
2.5
4.8
4.3
9.5
5.8
27.6

23
3.0
4.3
1.3
17.4
6.3
12.9

Yes
$ 1,551
$67

No
2,658
98

Yes
3,286
122

No
2,260
98

Since
FY 80
63
3,800.7
33.3
22.3

Last
Five FYs
16
1,754.0
25.0
17.2

Total number of projects active for current FY.
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
** Year to date.
Source: World Bank

96

Annex 9:

IFC and MIGA Program for Ethiopia
As of March 22, 2008

IFC approvals (US$m)

2005

2006

2007

2008

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Investment instrument@)

Loan
Equity

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Potlfolio

As of March 22, 2008

Year

Original Gross Commitments
Loan
Equity Participant

BorrowerIPurpose

0.0

Total commitments now held

Source: World Bank.

97

0.0

0.0

Total

0.0

Annex IO: IDA Program Summary for Ethiopia
As of March 25, 2008

year

Project
(M)

strategic
Rewards
(H/M/L)

Implementation
Risks (H/M/L)

FY 2008

Ethiopia Nutrition SIL
30.0
Pastoral Community Development 2
50.0
Sustainable Land Mgmt SIL
20.0
Tana Beles Integrated Water Res Devt
45.0
Urban Local Govt Development
100.0
NBI Power Export: Sudan lnterconnector 41 .O
Rural Electricity Access Expansion 2
133.5
Protection of Basic Services
215.0
Total FY08
634.5

H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H

M
H
M
M
M
M
M
H

FY 2009

PBS 2
Quality of Educ Improvement SIL
Tourism Project SIL
Roads APL 4
Total FYO9

H
H
H
H

H
M
M
M

H
H
H
H
H

M
M
H
H
M

H
H
H
H
H
H

M
M
M
M
M
H

FY 2010

FY 201 1

*

**

635**

Productive Safety Nets APL 3
Rural Electricity Access Expansion 3
Rural Development
PSD Support
PSCAP 2
Total FYlO
NBI Power Export: Kenya lnterconnector
Water Supply and Sanitation
Sustainable Land Management 2
Pastoral Community Development 3
Roads APL 5
Possible PRSC
Total FYI 1

Already approved by Board
Indicative amount based on FY08 allocation

98

635**

635**

Annex 11: Summary of IDA Non-Lending Services
As of March 22, 2008
Product

Completion
FY

Cost*
(US$OOO) Audiencea

Recent completions
Value Chain Analysis
Institutionaland Governance Review
Rural Development Assessment
Decentralized Service Delivery Assessment
Labor Market Constraints Review
Population Study
Tourism Study
Joint Budget & Aid Review
CEM
PSIA Higher Oil Prices
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Housing Sector Study
Review o f Expenditure in Rural Development
Urbanization Study
Soil Degradation Study
Rural Risk Management
Costing o f Nutrition Program
PSIA Employment Creation
Food Price Inflation

FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07

342
334
648
420
552
36 1
142
99
18
36
25
74
97
245
212
55
83
95
41

Underway
Investment Climate Assessment
Health Financing
Rural ICA
Public Finance Review JBAR
Education & Nutrition Linkages
ROSC Accounting & Auditing
Regional Growth Report: Amhara
Regional Growth Report: Addis Ababa
Gender and Poverty
Making Finance Work for Ethiopia

FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY09
FY09
FY09

243
72
220
124
2
98

Plunned/Proposed
Public Finance Review
Strategic Review o f Road Sector Development
Agriculture PER I1
EasternN i l e Strategic Basin Assessment
Land Administration
Development Policy Review (DPR)
Joint Governance Asst. & Measurement (JGAM)
Country Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (CIFA)
Rural Economy Survey
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) update
Service Delivery Quality and Decentralization
Adaptation to Climate Change

FY09-1I
FY09
FY09
FYlO
FYlO
FYlO
FYlO
FYlO
FYll
FYll
FYll
FYI 1

a. (G) Government, (D) donor, (B) bank, (P) public dissemination.
b. (A) Knowledge generation, (B) public debate, (C) problem-solving.
* Cost is actual cost for ongoing and completed activities.

99

25 1
283

--

--------

--

----

__

Objectiveb

2

2

1%

2

B
2

.8

I

g
I

24.

.-

I

cor-NcomcoNcomr-r-m~r0bco*mmr-bw

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
NNNNNN(uNNNNNNN(uNN(u(u(u(u(u

I

3

0
0

