Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 43022-AFR

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
SUBSAHARAN AFRICA

March 18, 2008

World Bank
Regional Integration Department
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without the World Bank’s authorization.

Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa
ACRONYMS

AAA
AAP
ACGF
ACP
ADB
AFCRI

m

AfT
AFTQK
ACGF
AGOA
APL
APN
APRM
ARCAN
AT1
AU
BCEAO
BDEAC
BEAC
BOAD
CADAP
CAEMC
CAS
CDMAP
CEEAC
CEMAC
CEN-SAD
CER
CET
CGIAR
CESS
CMU
COMESA
CPS
DBSA
DFI
DfJD
DPL
DTIS
EAC
EARPN
EASSy
EBA
EC
ECCAS
ECOWAS
EITI
EPA
ECDPM

Analytical and advisory activities
Africa Action Plan
The Africa Catalytic Growth Fund
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group o f States
African Development Bank
Africa Regional Integration Department (AFR)
Africa Region
Aid-for-Trade
Operational Quality and Knowledge Services (AFR)
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund
Africa Growth Opportunity Act (US)
Adaptable Program Loan
Agriculture Policy Network
African Peer Review Mechanism (AU)
African Regional Capacity Building Network for HIV/AIDS Prevention, Care, and
Treatment F'roj ect
African Trade Insurance
African Union
West African Central Bank
Banque de DCveloppement des Etats de 1'Afrique Centrale
Regional central bank
West African Development Bank
Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Program (NEPAD)
Central African Economic and Monetary Community (see CEMAC)
Country assistance strategy
Capacity Development Management Plan
CommunautC Economique des Etats de 1'Afrique Centrale
(Economic Community o f Central African States)
Communaute' Economique et Mone'taire de l'Af/ique Centrale (see CAEMC)
Community o f Sahel-Saharan States
See REC
Common external tariff
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
Comite' Inter-Etats de Lutte contre la Se'cheresse
Country management unit
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
Country Partnership Strategy
Development Bank o f South Africa
Development finance institution
Department for International Development
Development policy loan
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
East African Community
East Africa Road Network Project
Eastern Africa Submarine Cable System
Everything But Arms (EU)
European Commission
See CEEAC
Economic Community o f West African States
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Economic partnership agreement
European Centre for Development Policy Management

ESW
ETIDP
EU
FDI
FSAP
GDP
GEF
GSP
HNP
IBRD
IDA
IDB
ICA
ICR
ICT
IDF
IDP
IEG
F C
IGAD
IGADD
IOC
PPF
IS1
ISN
LDC
LVEMP
M&E
MDC
MDG
MFA
MFN
MIGA
MIC
MIS
MMA
Mmst
NAFTA
NBA
NEPAD
NPV
NTB
OAU

oms
OPE
OURES
QAG
PA
PBA
PDIU
PEAC
PHRD
PPIAF
PPP
PRS
PSD

Economic and sector work
Sudan Emergency Transport and Infrastructure Development Project
European Union
Foreign direct investment
Financial sector assessment program
Gross domestic product
Global Environment Facility
Generalized System o f Preferences
Health nutrition population
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Development Agency
Islamic Development Bank
Investment climate assessment
Implementation Completion Report
Information and communications technology
Institutional Development Fund
Internally displaced population
Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development
Intergovernmental Authority on Drought and Development
Indian Ocean Commission
Infrastructure Project Preparatory Fund (NEPAD)
Import-substitution industrialization
Interim Strategy Note
Least developed country
Lake Victoria Environmental Management Program Iand I1
Monitoring and evaluation
Maputo Development Corridor
Millennium Development Goals
Multifiber Arrangement
Most favored nation
Multilateral Investment and Guarantee Agency
Middle-Income Country
Management information systems
Multilateral Monetary Agreement
Million short tons
North American Free Trade Agreement
Niger Basin Authority
New Partnership for Africa's Development
Net present value
Nontariff barrier
Organization o f African Unity
Senegal River Valley Authority
Overall Performance Evaluation
Open, unified regional economic space
Quality Assurance Group
Protected area
Performance-Based Allocation
Project Development and Implementation Unit
Pool Energktique de 1'Afi-iqueCentrale
Policy and Human Resources Development
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Public-private partnership
Poverty reduction strategy
Private sector development

FTA
RBO
REC
REP
HAS
RTPP
RISDI
RTA
SACU
SADC
SAP
SAPP
SARS
SASOL
SME
SSA
STAP
TA
TB
TDA
TTL
UDEAC
UEMOA

UMA
UNComtrade
UNECA
USAID
VAT
WAEMU
WAGP
WAPP
WITS
WTO

Preferential Trade Area for Eastern and Southern Africa
River basin organization
Regional Economic Community (Communaute'e'conomique re'gionale)
Regional Economic Program
Regional Integration Assistance Strategy
Regional Communications Infrastructure Program
Regionally Integrated Spatial Development Initiative (AU/NEPAD)
Regional trade agreement
Southern Africa Customs Union
Southern African Development Community
Strategic Action Program
Southern African Power Pool
Severe acute respiratory syndrome
African petroleum giant
Small and medium-size enterprise
Sub-Saharan Africa
Short-Term Action Plan (NEPAD)
Technical assistance
Tuberculosis
Transboundary Diagnostic Assessment
Task team leader
Union Douaniire et Economique de I'Afrique Centmle
L' Union Economique et Mone'taire Ouest Afficaine
(West African Economic and Monetary Union)
Arab Maghreb Union
United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database Statistics Division
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
United States Agency for International Development
Value-added tax
West African Economic and Monetary Union
West Africa Gas Pipeline
West African Power Pool
World Integrated Trade Solution
World Trade Organization

The World Bank
Vice President: Obiageli K. Ezekwesili
Director: Mark D. Tomlinson
Task Team Leader: Jacob Kolster

CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

.

...........................................................................................................
......................................

I

.

I1

.

I11

.

IV

i

AFRICA IN CONTEXT: GLOBALLY AND REGIONALLY

5

A.

Global Perspective ...................................................................................................

5

B.

Africa’s Connectivity and Regional Integration......................................................

8

INTEGRATING AFRICA: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

..........

10

A.

Regional Integration for Sustained Growth and Poverty Reduction .....................

12

B.

Regional Institutional Architecture

.......................................................................

21

C.

Basic Principles for Regional Integration..............................................................

22

TAKING STOCK OF PAST BANK SUPPORT FOR REGIONAL INTEGRATION
24

...........................................................................................................................................

A.

IDA Regional Pilot Program and Status o f Loan Portfolio ...................................

24

B.

Knowledge Program. Partnerships. and Capacity Building ..................................

28

C.

Sector Development Plans and Other Regional Initiatives ...................................

30

D.

Emerging Alignment o f Regional and Country Programs ....................................

30

E.

World Bank Group Collaboration (IFC and MIGA) .............................................

32

F.

Implications for Future Work on Regional Integration .........................................

33

PROPOSED REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A.

................34

Strategic Framework for Regional Integration and Cooperation: Pillars o f
Assistance ..............................................................................................................

35

B.

Criteria o f Engagement and Selectivity .................................................................

40

C.

Strategy Implementation and Activity Programs ..................................................

41

D.

Proposed Activity Program for FYO9 ....................................................................

46

E.

Bank Processes and Instruments............................................................................

48

F.

Results Framework and Risk Management ...........................................................

49

BOXES
Box 1. Rationale for regional integration arrangements................................................................
Box 2. Multilateral and regional trade arrangements affecting Africa ..........................................
Box 3 . NEPAD’s Regionally Integrated Spatial Development Initiatives ....................................
Box 4 . Brief on IDA’SRegional Pilot Program.............................................................................
Box 5 . Complexity of operating environment for regional projects..............................................
Box 6 . Africa Region-wide programs............................................................................................
Box 7 . IDA15 Regional Program...................................................................................................
Box 8 . Focus Areas in Regional Infrastructure...........................................................

11
14
17
25
27
30
34
37

FIGURES
Figure 1. Sub-SaharanAfrica Compared ........................................................................................ 6
Figure 2. IDA Regional Commitments. FY04-08 ......................................................................... 26

TABLES
Table 1. Regional Public Goods: Typology and Examples...........................................................
Table 2. Program Focus by Strategic Pillar and World Bank Roles .............................................
Table 3 . RIAS Indicative Lending Program by Pillars..................................................................

20
42
47

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
. AFRICA’S GROWTH DIVERGENCEBY GEOGRAPHIC OPPORTUNITY
CATEGORY .....................................................................................................................

52

APPENDIX I1. THE EVOLVING INSTITUTIONALARCHITECTURE FOR REGIONAL
INTEGRATION IN AFRICA ........................................................................................... 54
APPENDIX 111: REVIEW OF PAST BANK LENDING AND ANALYTICAL AND
ADVISORY ACTIVITIES SUPPORT FOR REGIONAL COOPERATIONAND
INTEGRATIONINAFRICA ............................................................................................

66

APPENDIX I V. SECTOR STRATEGIES AND IMPLICATIONS FOR REGIONAL
APPROACHES ................................................................................................................ 77
APPENDIX V . SUMMARY OF STRATEGIC APPROACHES TO SUBREGIONAL
INTEGRATIONINAFRICA ............................................................................................ 86
APPENDIX V I. CAS REVIEW FY2000-FY08

.........................................................................

APPENDIX VI1. REGIONAL IMPLEMENTATIONPLAN FOR RIAS.. INITIAL
GUIDELINES O N PROCESS AND CONTENT ............................................................

141

143

APPENDIX VIII: RESULTS FRAMEWORK FOR THE REGIONAL IMPLEMENTATION
146
PLANS.............................................................................................................................
APPENDIX IX. MONITORING FRAMEWORK FOR THE ROLL-OUT OF RIAS ................153
APPENDIX X . RISK MATRIX .................................................................................................. 157

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The overarching objective o f this paper i s to provide a coherent strategic framework to
guide the World Bank’s assistance in support o f regional integration and regional programs in
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Reflecting the priorities and flagships o f the revised Africa Action
Plan (April 2007), the proposed strategic framework builds o n experiences gained in
implementing the IDA Regional Pilot Program since 2003 and distills key elements o f current
thinking regarding the economics o f integration, including the (forthcoming) World Development
Report 2009. Activities to be implemented through the SSA-portion o f the I D A 1 5 Regional
Program constitute the core purview o f the proposed strategic framework. However, the strategy
also aims to ensure increasingly systematic reflection o f regional priorities in the Bank’s country
assistance strategies and in Africa-wide sector strategies. In addition, the strategy proposes areas
for enhanced World Bank Group collaboration to leverage support for Africa’s regional
programs and integration.
Regional integration and the creation o f a Pan-African common market has been a central
vision o f African leaders since the early years o f independence. Early experiences with
regionalism in the 1970s and 1980s largely failed, largely because their policy focus was toward
import-substitution. More recently, African leaders have moved toward consensus on three
strengthening and broadening Africa’s growth requires policies that are more outwardpoints: (i)
looking; (ii)regional integration i s indispensable for Africa to meet the competitiveness
challenges o f global markets; and (iii)policies for regional and global integration are
complementary and need to be pursued with equal vigor. This vision o f integration underpins
most regional initiatives underway in Africa, notably those under the auspices o f the African
Union (AU), including NEPAD. However, progress toward the vision has been challenging, with
significant disconnects between stated regional priorities and national policies, and variable
follow-through o n regional commitments.
The World Bank has had a long-standing commitment t o global priorities and regionwide programs. In Africa, the thrust o f t h i s commitment was through region-wide sector
strategies and programs, plus limited direct support for multicountry projects. With the launch o f
t h e IDA Regional Pilot Program in late 2003, the ability o f IDA to assist regional integration in
Africa received a significant boost. Design o f the regional pilot provided strong incentives to
IDA-recipient countries to leverage their national development efforts through regional
collaborations. The result was a dramatic increase in requests for IDA t o provide financial
support for regional projects and programs. Establishment of the Regional Integration
Department in the Africa Region in 2004 bolstered the Bank’s ability to respond and provide
lending and nonlending assistance to regional integration. From 2004 through the end o f FY07,
total IDA commitments for regional projects in Sub-Saharan Africa amounted to nearly US$1.9
billion. The 15th replenishment of IDA, agreed in December 2007, increases the funding
available for regional programs in Africa from approximately US$8lO m i l l i o n under I D A 1 4 to
US$1.44 billion over the IDA15 period o f FYO9-Ey11 (equivalent to nearly US$2.1 billion in
total funding when the one-third country allocations are included).
The proposed Regional Integration Assistance Strategy (RIAS) i s presented in three main
parts: (i)
strategic framework to guide Bank engagement in assisting regional integration and

i

cooperation, structured around 3 pillars and 1 cross-cutting theme; (ii)
key guiding principles and
selectivity criteria to crystallize trade-offs and choices (and to guide selectivity in the face o f
demand far exceeding resources); and (iii)
modalities for implementing the strategy, including
through subregional implementation plans.
Strategic Framework for Regional Integration and Cooperation: Pillars of Support
Pillar I: Regional Infrastructure. Stronger and better-connected infrastructure platforms
can help unlock economies o f scale and sharpen competitiveness in Africa, not least for Africa’s
15 landlocked countries. Regional infrastructure w i l l facilitate more intraregional trade and
exports from the continent, thus strongly supporting Africa’s growth agenda. Bank support will
focus on three areas: (a) expanding and upgrading selected trade corridors and transport
networks, (b) improving access to clean energy and improving supply reliability, and (c)
improving telecommunication connectivity. Assistance to trade corridors and transport networks
w i l l have a special focus o n improving the connectivity o f landlocked countries. Current resource
needs far exceed the development assistance and fiscal resources Africa i s likely to be able to
mobilize. Thus, mobilizing private financing i s critical to accelerate Africa’s pace o f
infrastructure development. Infrastructure programs assisted under RIAS will partner with IFC
and MIGA to unlock more o f the potential to leverage private financing for regional
infrastructure development.
Pillar 11: Institutional Cooperation for Economic Integration. The benefits o f
strengthened economic integration include enhancing economies o f scale facilitated by regional
infrastructure, promoting trade diversification, and providing learning-by-exporting experiences.
Combined with improved regional economic and political stability, closer economic integration
will enhance incentives for both domestic and foreign investment, spurring existing industries
and new business start-ups. Bank assistance w i l l focus o n six areas: (a) reducing Africa’s
external trade tariffs toward the rest o f the world; (b) reducing tariff and nontariff barriers t o
intraregional trade; (c) implementing customs unions and free trade agreements, including
analytical work related to new trade agreements and ongoing WTO-led multilateral trade
negotiations; (d) improving regional environments for business, investment and industrial
cooperation; (e) developing regional financial markets and related institutions; and (f)
developing regional dimensions o f initiatives to improve governance and financial management.
Pillar 111: Coordinated Interventions to Provide Regional Public Goods. Bank assistance
will focus on (a) improving management o f shared water resources, (b) raising agricultural
productivity (including research and knowledge-sharing on likely implications for SSA of
climate change and assistance in developing mitigation strategies); (c) regional and subregional
programs to address the cross-border dimensions o f malaria prevention and treatment; (d)
increased access to HIV/AIDS prevention methods along main transport corridors, and improved
preparedness to respond to transboundary pandemics, other infectious diseases, and pests; and (e)
regional rationalization o f research and tertiary education to strengthen regional knowledge
assets and technical capacity. In addition, the Bank w i l l explore potential avenues to enable it to
assist with regional dimensions o f conflicts and emergency responses.
Cross-cutting theme: Strengthening Regional Strategic Planning and Connections with
National Development Plans. Bank assistance w i l l focus on three areas: (a) SSA-wide themes

centered o n capacity development o f the AU (including NEPAD), (b) capacity development o f
selected Regional Economic Community (RECs) and subsidiary regional bodies, and (c)
strengthened connection between regional policy commitments and national planning.

Guiding Principles of Engagement and Selectivity Criteria
In addition to broad selection criteria that w i l l be used to determine whether and h o w the
Bank w i l l support regional integration activities and the specific eligibility criteria embedded in
the IDA Regional Program, the Bank’s assistance and advocacy for regional integration in Africa
will observe the following guiding principles:

1. Open Regionalism concerns both regional and global integration, which as
complements need to be pursued in parallel and with equal vigor.
2. Start Small and Build on Success. The larger the number o f participants and/or areas
in a regional program, the more complex are coordination challenges, making failure
more likely. Build on success and take o n new challenges incrementally.

3. Credible Mechanisms to Compensate Losers (or Redistribute Benefits). Participants
o f regional programs often do not share equally in benefits. Mechanisms for benefit
redistribution or compensation are critical to achieve political consensus in many
integration programs.
4. Attention to the Neighborhood. Neighborhoods o f countries have important
implications for the focus and sequencing o f strategies toward regional integration,
particularly for landlocked countries.

5. Champions of Integration. Realizing the benefits o f regional integration requires
strong, sustained commitment from member countries. Having the leading countries
o f Africa as “champions” for regional integration would provide an important
impetus to the process.

Implementation Modalities
Lending and nonlending programs o f Bank assistance will be developed in four
subregional implementation plans, covering West, Central, East, and Southern Africa,
respectively. These plans w i l l tailor Bank assistance to reflect the varying political and economic
integration priorities o f different country groupings. They also w i l l ensure needed ownership o f
regional programs at the national level, and within the Bank Group itself (among Bank Country
Teams, IFC, and MIGA). The implementation plans will have rolling two-year time horizons.
The first set o f four plans w i l l be developed and finalized in FYO9. The plans will outline both
regional and national program activities that support regional integration. They thus will enable
country teams to coordinate CAS objectives and business plans in areas in which regional
solutions can strengthen outcomes at the national level, or which facilitate creation o f important
regional public goods not achievable through national action alone. The implementation plans
also w i l l devote particular effort to capacity development as an integral component o f Bank work
under each o f the strategy’s three pillars. Particular objectives will be to strengthen the policy
functionality o f selected RECs in areas related t o trade policy, regional infrastructure, and trade
facilitation and to improvement alignment and harmonization in regional programs. Each

...

111

implementation plan i s expected to place considerable emphasis o n building and maintaining
strategic partnerships, thus leveraging assistance able to be provided directly by the Bank Group.
Development o f this strategy has benefited from an extensive consultation process.
Valuable inputs were received from a variety o f African stakeholders-notably,
regional
economic communities and other regional bodies, national governments, academia, private
sector representatives, and representatives o f civil society organizations-as well as development
partners. In addition to numerous meetings with individual interest groups, two major
stakeholder consultations were undertaken, the first in Nairobi in January 2007, and the second
in Washington, D C in October 2007. Both were valuable fora in which the Bank was able to test
evolving thinking and receive feedback on how to reposition and rebalance the assistance
strategy to best leverage Africa’s leadership.
The close engagement with stakeholder groups during the preparatory phase o f the
strategy will be continued during implementation, with the objectives to (i)
leverage impact by
involving African stakeholders in developing regional implementation plans, (ii)
extend debate
on regional and global integration issues through active dissemination o f this document, and (iii)
obtain continuous feedback on strategy implementation to inform needed course adjustments and
other adaptations in light o f client and stakeholder experiences.

The strategy includes a set o f K e y Performances Indicators to help monitor and evaluate
progress in implementation, along with a risk matrix. The strategy also sets out a proposed
results matrix to be developed for each o f the subregional implementation plans. It i s expected
that the regional results matrices progressively w i l l be aligned with those in the CASs to fully
align country and regional results matrices by the end o f IDA15.
The proposed strategy covers FYO9-FY11, corresponding to the IDA replenishment
cycle. I t i s proposed that a mid-term implementation review be discussed with the Board in F Y l O
and that the first generation o f regional implementation plans be attached to the package for
information.

iv

I.
A.

AFRICA IN CONTEXT: GLOBALLY AND REGIONALLY

Global Perspective

1.
Over the past three decades, the continued expansion o f the global marketplace for goods,
capital, labor, and ideas has forged ever-closer integration among countries and regions. Global
markets have served as the mainstays o f economic growth throughout much o f the world,
particularly for developing countries. Between 1990 and 2005, low- and middle-income
economies doubled their market share o f world merchandise exports from approximately 15
percent to almost 30 percent. Trade among developing economies grew even faster, at nearly 15
percent annually, to reach approximately 8 percent o f world merchandise exports. Over the same
period, international private financial flows tripled as a share o f world GDP. Meanwhile, net
inflows o f foreign direct investment (FDI) to developing countries soared 10-fold: from less than
US$25 billion in 1990 to more than $325 billion in 2006.

2.
The increased flow o f people across national borders-as tourism and migration-has
been another prominent feature o f global integration. International tourist arrivals in SSA have
nearly doubled since 1990, bringing revenue exceeding US$SOO million in 2005. The
destinations o f one-third o f these travelers are developing countries, which are attracting new
visitors at faster rates than developed-country destinations. Similarly, the rising force o f
international migration i s reflected b y the $200 billion-plus in recorded remittances repatriated
by developing economy migrants in 2006.
3.
The forces o f globalization have dramatically increased the consequences o f countries’
domestic economic policy choices. Opportunities offered through the expansion o f global
markets have enabled developing countries that have embraced integration-most notably in
East Asia and the Pacific and more recently South Asia-to achieve unprecedented economic
growth and lift hundreds o f millions o f people out o f poverty. Other developing countries have
been more reluctant to embrace opportunities from global and regional integration. Among them,
particularly landlocked countries and those saddled with the disadvantages o f small domestic
markets typically have made much less progress in accelerating growth and poverty reduction.
4.
Nowhere i s the need for a shift toward greater integration more urgent than in Africa-a
continent still, despite strong growth in recent years, largely marginalized globally. Home to
approximately 12 percent o f the world’s population, Sub-Saharan Africa accounts for less than 2
percent o f world income and 2 percent o f global trade, down from approximately 4 percent in
1970 (figure 1). Africa’s share in global agricultural exports has declined continuously since
1970. At the same time, i t s share in global manufactured exports (approximately 0.5 percent) has
hardly changed and i t s share o f textiles and clothing exports-the spearhead o f an export push
for many developing countries-has remained stagnant. Net foreign direct investment (FDI)
flows to SSA have doubled since the 1990s; they averaged US$10 billion during 2001-06.
Nevertheless, this doubling pales compared to the 10-fold increase in total FDI inflows to all
developing countries during the same period. Moreover, FDI inflows to SSA are heavily skewed

5

toward mining industries, especially petroleum, and telecommunications are highly concentrated
injust a few countries.'
Figure 1. Sub-Saharan Africa compared economically

1 -Dewlaping
-SSA's

35 %

% of D d o p n g Country FDI inflows (I& a m )

1

SSAs Proportion of World GDP and
Population

SSA Merchandise Export Performance vs.
Other Developing Countries
--

------ ---------

I!

Countries (excludmg SSA)

-SSA

- - i t 3500
3000

-

2500

5

2000

-

0

6

1500
W

1000

4

c

500
0

Source WwU DevebDmnt hdkalors 2007

5.

Africa's export performance has risen with the boom in commodity prices. Rapidly
growing economies, especially in Asia, are offering new export markets o f considerable
potential. As a result, since 2000, Africa has experienced exceptionally strong real economic
growth. The oil-exporting countries are growing at an average rate o f approximately 8.5 percent,
and the rest o f SSA at a more modest 4 percent. Nonetheless, Sub-Saharan Africa overall has
trailed other low-income regions in economic growth and poverty reduction-and
for a
considerable time. On average, from 1970-2007, population-weighted per capita annual GDP
growth in Africa was barely 0.5 percent, compared to 4.3 percent in 64 developing countries in

'

More than 90% o f FDI is destined for the continent's four main o i l producers-Angola, Equatorial Guinea,
Nigeria, and Sudan-and South Africa. With new investors, including Chinese, Indian, and Southern and Northern
African operators, patterns o f FDI have started to diversify into agriculture, manufacturing, construction, and
services. Nevertheless, Africa has not attracted many foreign investors due to the prevailing business environment
and market conditions. The continent continues to face challenges to mobilize domestic investments for the same
reasons. In 2006, virtually a l l FDI inflows went to the aforementioned five countries.

6

other regions. See appendix I for a brief discussion of this comparative analysis and of the
implications of using population-weighted growth rates.
6.
N o t surprisingly, therefore, Sub-Saharan Africa lags significantly behind other
developing regions in progress toward achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Sadly, while over the last 20 years the incidence o f absolute poverty (measured as below
US$l/day) in the world has been falling, in Sub-Saharan Africa, it has been growing. Today,
SSA i s home to more than 30 percent o f the world’s poor, compared to 10 percent in the early
1980s.2
7.
Sub-Saharan Africa i s too large and diverse a region to be treated as an aggregate. I t s
defining physical and economic geography i s i t s massive but sparsely populated land area
divided into 42 countries and 6 island states3 with very different natural resource endowments.
Geographically, the continent’s 770 million people (2006) are approximately evenly spread over
3 distinctly different types o f countries: resource-rich, coastal resource-scarce, and landlocked
resource-scarce. Globally, these three categories have had distinct growth performances. The
best-performing category has been the coastal, resource-scarce countries; the worst performing
category has been the landlocked, resource-scarce c o u n t r i e ~ . ~
8.
Africa has broadly followed this global pattern, with three important differences. First,
Africa’s coastal resource-scare countries have under-performed significantly compared to other
developing regions. During 1980-2007, population-weighted, per-capita growth in nowAfrican
economies in this category exceeded that o f their African counterparts by nearly 4 percent per
year. The second difference has been in the category o f resource-rich countries. These have been
the fastest growing group in Africa but consistently under-perform compared to other developing
regions. The third major difference i s that nearly one-third o f Africa’s population lives in
landlocked countries, compared to less than 1 percent o f other developing regions. This fact
results in Africa’s population being heavily skewed toward the globally slow-growing category
o f landlocked, resource-scarce countries. In the developing world other than Africa, nearly 90
percent o f the population lives in the coastal, resource-scarce countries; approximately 10
percent in the resource-rich countries; but barely 1 percent in the landlocked, resource-scarce
countries. Indeed, and disregarding political borders, nearly 80 percent o f Africa’s population
lives more than 100 kilometers f r o m the coast compared to approximately 30 percent in the
OECD countries and 60 percent in Latin America. The importance o f distinguishing the three
categories highlights Africa’s unique combination o f challenges and underscores the importance
o f regional approaches to counteract the disadvantages o f being landlocked. See appendix I for a
brief discussion of this comparative analysis.

Frangois Bourguignon, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, Branko Milanovic, and Martin Ravallion, Global Inequality and
Poverty, World Bank, January 2007.
Cape Verde, Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, SHo Tom6 and Principe, and Seychelles.
See Paul Collier, “Growth Strategies for Africa” (Centre for the Study o f African Economies, Department o f
Economics, Oxford University; January 2007) for discussion o f how Africa’s physical, economic, and social
geography has affected the continent’s economic performance, and implications for policy options.

7

B.

Africa’s Connectivity and Regional Integration

9.
Inadequate access and connectivity to global markets and insufficient scale economies
are at the root o f Africa’s marginal role in the world economy, which in turn i s intrinsically
linked to the limited strides made in regional integration. A s noted earlier, to a large extent, the
considerable challenges o f integration can be traced back to the continent’s particular human and
political geography. Africa has more countries per square area than any other developing region,
and i t s population density i s lower than any other developing region. Nineteen African countries
have fewer than 5 million people. As a result, except for the t w o dominant economies-South
Africa and Nigeria-the continent comprises countries that have small domestic markets, limited
economic diversification, and generally poor connectivity with neighboring countries.
10.
Inadequate connectivity (transport and communications infrastructure) and costly and
unreliable power are severe constraints to thousands o f African enterprises. While Africa has
abundant energy resources (oil, coal, hydroelectricity, natural gas, biomass and other renewable
sources), investment climate surveys indicate that unreliable power supply and poor access to
Similarly, although roads are the
power are the major constraints to business and in~estment.~
dominant transport mode in Africa (accounting for 90 percent o f interurban transport), road
density i s less than 7 kilometers (km) per 100 s q km o f land. This figure compares with 12 km in
Latin America and 18 km in Asia. Lack o f roads i s especially constraining for the high
proportion o f Africa’s population in landlocked countries. R a i l transport i s made difficult by the
coexistence o f three different railway gauges, inhibiting interconnections among regions and
corridors to the sea. For landlocked countries, the overall impact i s that transport costs can be as
much as 75 percent o f the value o f exports. These weaknesses in connectivity combined with
poor power supplies significantly raise the cost o f doing business in Africa, constrain trade, and
undermine competitiveness.

11.
Africa’s connectivity to global markets i s further challenged b y high-cost, low-efficiency
air and maritime transport, which carries more than 95 percent o f Africa’s international trade.
Africa has approximately 80 major ports with facilities ranging from conventional berths to
terminals for containers, white and crude oil, and bulk cargo. However, only one seaport i s
owned by a globally recognized top port operator. Most container terminals are nearing or have
reached capacity limits and are under-equipped. Air transport received a major breakthrough in
1999 with the adoption o f the Yamoussoukro Declaration, which liberalized access to air
transport markets in Africa. Nevertheless, only four airports (Cape Verde, Ethiopia, Ghana, and
South Africa) have attained U S Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Category I status,
required to implement open skies. Moreover, while Africa accounts for just 4.5 percent of global
air traffic, sadly it suffers 25 percent o f air accidents (2004).
12.
Compounding the challenges due to weak physical infrastructure, webs o f ”behind-theborder,” “on-the-border,” and “between-the-border” constraints further handicap private business
and trade. These realities undermine efforts to attract private (foreign and domestic) investments,
increase scale economies in production, and expand markets to improve competitiveness and

Surveys reveal that roughly 40% o f enterprises identified deficient power supply as a major constraint to doing
business. As many as 50% maintain their own generation facilities to insulate themselves f r o m unreliable public
supplies.

8

expand opportunities to strengthen export performance and economic growth. Constraints
include poorly developed financial markets; the absence o f cross-border financial instruments;
complex and lengthy procedures regulating private business activity; high trade tariffs; complex
customs arrangements; and limited regional harmonization o f policies, regulations, and
procedures. Poor transit systems and numerous informal roadblocks along trade corridors create
additional obstacles. Thus, while better regional infrastructure i s a sine qua non to strengthen
Africa’s global competitiveness, improvements also depend in no small way on tackling
“behind-on-and-between-the-border” constraints to business efficiency and trade.

13.
Limited regional integration clearly has stifled Africa’s opportunities to accelerate
export-led growth. A more integrated Africa could tackle some o f the most stubborn supply-side
constraints, facilitate stronger integration in the global economy, and unlock more o f the
continent’s economic growth potential. There i s broad agreement on this among Africa’s leaders,
who have maintained strong political commitment to regional integration. This commitment i s
manifest in the comprehensive institutional architecture that Africa has constructed to drive and
coordinate regional initiatives. Today, regional economic communities (RECs) operate in West,
East, Central, and Southern Africa. In total, the continent i s home to some 30 regional or
subregional organizations. The effectiveness o f these bodies in driving priority regional
programs often has been constrained by obligations arising from their overlapping memberships
and responsibilities and b y chronic shortages o f resources and professional capacity.
14.
The international backdrop o f integration in Africa i s increasing regionalism worldwide
and slow progress in the ongoing Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations. O n the
continent, there i s rising frustration with the slow pace o f implementation o f priority regional
programs. T o respond, Africa’s leaders have renewed efforts to broaden and deepen integration
and spur the effectiveness o f key regional and continental bodies. The N e w Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) under the Africa Union (AU) has regional integration as a core
objective. NEPAD i s encouraging the RECs to delineate their roles, responsibilities, and
membership based o n a focus on “open regionalism.” However, progress has been hard to win.
Consequently, much o f the continent’s undisputed potential remains locked by the need to
accelerate progress o n global and regional integration.

9

11.

INTEGRATING AFRICA: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

15.
Regional integration i s not a panacea that will enable Africa to leapfrog challenges posed
by i t s fundamental physical, economic, and human geography. However, appropriately
conceived and accompanied by sound national policies, regional integration well may b e the
stepping-stone for Africa’s meaningful integration in the global economy and the missing
building block for stronger, more broad-based economic growth and poverty alleviation.
Summarizing the consensus o f the academic literature, B o x 1 l i s t s the extensive potential
benefits to Africa o f regional integration as well as some o f the pitfalls and potential costs.
16.
Regional and global integration are not substitutes. In Africa more than anywhere, they
are complements needing to be pursued in parallel and with equal vigor. Regional integration
policies can help to achieve economies o f scale and build the supply capacity and
competitiveness o f Africa through targeted regional infrastructure to interconnect the continent;
and reforms to facilitate cross-border trade, investments and financial flows, and migration.
Global integration and accompanying policies are essential, first, to scale up demand by securing
market access that matches a growing supply capacity. Second, these policies would provide
access to efficient intermediate goods suppliers, often an important element in improving African
countries’ international competitiveness.
17.
Regional integration holds a particularly strong promise for Africa’s 15 land-locked
countries since their economic potential i s inherently linked to the particular interests and
conditions o f their surrounding countries. Most obviously, they are dependent o n coastal
neighbors for access to the sea. Landlocked countries also have an interest in the economic
governance o f neighboring countries. If the latter forgo opportunities o f integration, possible
benefits to landlocked countries automatically are expunged. For example, Niger’s prospects for
economic development are linked in no small way to Nigeria’s success in harnessing i t s massive
opportunities for growth. Similarly, landlocked countries cannot integrate in subregional markets
unless their neighbors desire this and implement policies aimed toward doing so. These
unreciprocated dependencies effectively confine the extent o f national sovereignty o f a
landlocked, resource-scarce nation and highlight the importance o f regional solutions. The
challenge i s to create strong neighborhoods in which regional considerations increasingly are
reflected in national policies combined with a regional political-institutional architecture that
wields the credibility required to influence national policies.

10

Box 1. Rationale for regional integration arrangements
Potential benefits of regional integration
Increased returns and increased competition. Enlarging markets through integration o f small economies (a)
promotes possibilities to achieve economies o f scale, (b) improves efficiencies, and (c) increases competition,
leading to lower prices and expanded supply.
Trade and location effects. Preferential reductions in tariffs within regional agreements can induce shifts in
both demand and supplies. Net effects on national income depend on costs o f alternative supply and trade
policies toward nonmember countries.
Investments. Regional cooperation and established agreements can attract more FDI b y (a) enlarging markets
(particularly for “lumpy” investment viable only above a certain size) and (b) reducing distortion and
lowering marginal cost o f production.
Coordination and collective bargaining power. Regional integration agreements may enable countries to
coordinate negotiating positions in international fora, thus raising visibility and possibly leveraging
bargaining power.
Management of shared natural resources. Many watersheds, mineral deposits, fisheries, and sensitive natural
environments are shared among countries. N o country acting alone can ensure sustainable management,
which depends on collaboration.
Management of “regional commons. ” Effective action to combat migratory diseases, such as HIVIAIDS and
malaria, and vulnerabilities arising from climate change depend on collaborative efforts among groups o f
countries.
Policy lock-in and commitment mechanism. Regional agreements can provide a “commitment mechanism”
for countries’ domestic trade and other policy reforms, reducing the likelihood o f policy reversals. Such
mechanisms apply to political as well as economic reforms.
Insurance. Integration agreements provide insurance to members against exogenous shocks (terms o f trade
shocks, conflict, protectionism in developed countries, and impacts from climate change).
Security. Risks o f conflict are perceived to be lowered through integration agreements as a result o f improved
intraregional confidence and trust, common defense arrangements, and interdependence in key aspects o f
countries’ national development.

Potential costs of regional integration
Trade diversion. Displacement o f low-cost products from nonmembers b y higher cost products from
countries within a regional integration arrangement has been a major problem with several regional
integration arrangements. Welfare gains are realized if trade creation dominates trade diversion, but this
outcome cannot be ensured in advance.
Revenue loss. Trade integration agreements reduce governments’ tariff revenues, both directly through tariff
cuts and indirectly through shifts away from imports subject to tariffs from nonmembers. N e t costs depend on
how much new trade i s generated from the integration agreement but can be high when trade facilitation i s
difficult.
Indirect costs. Arising from the freer movement o f people and capital across national borders (capital flight
and losses o f skilled human resources, for example) and the extra vigilance required to prevent cross-border
crime.

18.
Africa’s middle-income countries (MICS)~occupy a unique position in the continent’s
economic and political geography-and for the regional integration agenda as well. These 7
countries generate approximately 40 percent o f SSA’s income and are endowed with significant
institutional capacity and, in the case o f South Africa, world-class education systems. Thus,
Africa’s MICs are uniquely placed to influence and promote the continent’s economic
development and progress toward regional integration. Dominated by South Africa, the MICs are
a significant source o f direct investments and entrepreneurial experience for the rest o f Africa.
Botswana, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles, South Africa, and Swaziland.

11

They also offer indigenous African capacity in areas critical to many o f their low-income
neighbors (for example, higher education system, administration, infrastructure, financial
systems). Moreover, some MICs hold a particularly strong position o f influence in key RECs
(South Africa in SADC/SACU and Mauritius in COMESA). Furthermore, South Africa i s in a
position o f influence in powerful global fora that include not only WTO but also in the context o f
G8 and G24 and with other large emerging countries such as Brazil and India. Due t o this
positioning, South Africa i s able to be the champion o f Africa o n global issues affecting the
continent at large. Finally, MICs also stand to benefit significantly from regional solutions in a
number o f critical areas, notably in addressing contagious diseases such as H I V / A I D S and
malaria and in pooled regional infrastructure. Leveraging the particular strengths o f Africa’s
MICs to strengthen regional integration, and ensuring that they are brought into regional
solutions are important challenges in advancing the regional agenda.

19.
In considering the opportunities and associated challenges o f regional approaches, one
size does not fit all. Economic geography, national politics, and the neighborhoods o f countries
have critical implications for the focus and sequencing o f strategies to advance regional and
subregional integration. Effective institutional mechanisms and capacities are central ingredients
o f successful integration. The regional economic communities (RECs) and their member states
have major roles to play in developing and sustaining such effectiveness through appropriate
policies and the provision o f necessary political support, materials, and human resources.
Obviously, their uneven levels o f capacity to drive t h i s process have implications as well.

A.

Regional Integration for Sustained Growth and Poverty Reduction

20.
Regional integration i s not an end in i t ~ e l f Rather,
.~
as a complement to national
development programs and global integration, i t i s a means to achieve superior economic growth
and poverty reduction. In Africa, achieving these superior outcomes will depend o n expanding
trade and investment through economic integration, improving regional infrastructure and
connectivity, promoting macroeconomic stability, and extending financial integration. Moreover,
strengthened regional cooperation offers possibilities to improve sustainable management o f
shared natural resources-water and sensitive ecosystems, in particular-and to more effectively
address “regional commons,” such as migratory diseases and climate change.
Economic Integration

21.
Waves o f regionalism initiated in the 1970s and 1980s engaged in inward-looking,
import-substitution industrialization policies to protect regional markets. These introspective
approaches failed to spur factor integration and FDI, and hence failed to expand export growth
opportunities. It i s critically important for Africa to advance regional and global integration in
parallel through “open regionalism.” Important markers o f this approach will be moves toward
relatively l o w external tariffs and suppression o f internal tariffs. In addition to ensuring access to
additional opportunities for export-led growth, “open regionalism” promotes inclusive growth
through broadening participation among the poor. This participation i s especially important for
landlocked, resource-scarce countries that need physical connectivity, market expertise, and
~~~~~~

7

This section builds significantly on the findings and terminology developed in Souleymane Coulibaiy, “On the
Complementarity of Regional and Global Trade,” background analysis carried out for the WDR09 chapter on
Regional and Global Integration, 2008.

12

distribution networks. As developing economies have comparative advantage in labor-intensive
products, increasing demands for such products increase demand for labor and small plots o f
land, which typically are the only assets o f the poor. By integrating with neighboring, larger
economies, smaller and less developed countries become better positioned to participate in
regional and global supply chains, thereby expanding and broadening the base o f their growth
opportunities.

22.
Economic integration typically requires action on three fronts: behind-the-border, at-theborder, and between-the-borders. First, behind-the-border refoms involve mutual recognition
agreements on technical standards and business procedures, regional trade agreements, and
logistics and transport facilitation initiatives. These all expand the size o f regional markets, and
are increasingly important. Domestic and foreign f i r m s increasingly assess investment
opportunities and related government policies and behavior (property rights, regulation, taxes,
finance, infrastructure, corruption and macroeconomic stability) as a regional rather than national
package in deciding whether a particular country i s attractive. By aligning domestic reforms with
international standards, a neighborhood can increase its trade opportunities and at the same time
improve i t s FDI attractiveness. The adoption o f international standards i s particularly important
for countries trying to connect to global production networks-the
situation o f most SSA
countries.
23.
Second, at-the-border reforms liberalize the movement o f production factors (capital,
labor, intermediate goods and services) so can help develop cross-border production networks.
WTO provides the multilateral frameworks within which these liberalization initiatives are
discussed, and almost all new regional trade agreements include provisions o n service
liberalization. Financial and monetary cooperation can improve capital mobility and regional
attractiveness to FDI. All o f these “at-the-border” reforms in a neighborhood o f countries also
will enhance the diffusion o f knowledge and information, further stimulating development o f
cross-border production structures and markets. (See box 2 for a brief discussion o f key
multilateral and regional trade agreements affecting Africa.)

24.
Finally, between-the-borders reforms are critical to address the underlying causes o f the
high cost and unpredictability o f infrastructure. These reforms are particularly important for
transport services and power. Inefficient logistical services, over-regulation o f the transport
sector, oligopolistic behavior among freight forwarders, and informal roadblocks along
international corridors sap competitiveness by adding to costs and physically throttling trade
facilitation. Likewise, reforms in power sector planning and regulation to promote regional
approaches are essential to lower costs and improve supply reliability. These reforms w i l l be key
to develop Africa’s global-scale energy resources. Similarly, regional collaboration in
telecommunications and information and communications technology (ICT) development i s
indispensable to strengthen regional interconnectivity and drives down costs. Regional
approaches to manage Africa’s 69 shared water basins also can provide superior levels o f water
security and more sustainable management o f these resources than achievable through national
action.

13

Box 2. Multilateral and regional trade arrangements affecting Africa
Under the auspices o f W T O multilateral trade negotiations, the global trading system has evolved significantly in the last
20 years with the consensus that free trade i s good for growth. Progress in the Doha Round o f trade talks has been
disappointing. Nonetheless, Africa stands to benefit from more vigorous implementation o f the agreements reached to date
and needs to prepare itself for additional changes in the trading regime as they occur. Tariff rates in Sub-Saharan Africa
are s t i l l the highest among developing regions. However, some progress has been achieved: average rates have fallen from
22 percent in 1997 to 15 percent in 2006. The continent’s trade policies would gain credibility from binding tariffs at levels
closer to WTO-applied rates.
The lack o f progress in the Doha Round i s particularly disappointing for Africa. A successful outcome would reduce
barriers to market access in developed countries b y lowering tariffs, reducing tariff escalation and cutting subsidies on
goods that African farmers produce competitively, such as cotton, groundnuts, fruits, and clothing. Moreover, b y ushering
in freer trade globally, African producers would gain access to growing markets in Asia, which maintain higher tariffs than
North America and Europe. If Africa i s to make the greatest possible gains from the Doha Round, all W T O membersdeveloped and developing-will need to open their markets.
Meanwhile, Africa has benefited from several existing preferential arrangements, notably the Everything-But-Arms (EBA)
initiative extended b y the European Union to African least-developed countries and the Africa Growth Opportunity Act
(AGOA) extended by the United States. Apparel benefits under AGOA have been particularly visible. A surge in
production and exports o f textiles and apparel followed reductions in tariffs and quota barriers maintained under the
Multifiber Arrangement (MFA). However, expiration o f the MFA in January 2005 enabled China to dominate global
textile trade and has significantly reduced AGOA’s apparel benefits. African apparel exports dropped dramatically in both
2005 and 2006. The full effects o f China’s global textile domination probably remain to be seen. However, it i s s t i l l
possible that African textile exports could recover from the current setback if production capacity in African countries can
be sustained or, more probably, if niche rather than mass markets are targeted.
Founded with the specific objective to bring trade relations between the EU and ACP countries into compliance with
WTO-rules (which prohibit discrimination among member countries), the economic partnership agreements (EPAs) with
the European Union were meant to provide a broader and more comprehensive approach to economic relations between
Africa and the EU. Negotiations o f EPAs in Africa, undertaken through four RECs, commenced in 2001 but made little
headway in resolving fundamental disagreements, both between African countries and the EU, and among African
countries themselves. In October 2007, t h i s stalemate prompted the EU to adopt a new approach to the EPAs. I t added
additional flexibility in three areas: (a) geographic scope (by introducing variable geometry, in which negotiations are
undertaken pragmatically at whichever level has the willingness to proceed); (b) policy coverage (with WTO-compatible
market access arrangements for merchandise trade as the only minimum requirement); and (c) timing o f EPAs (countries
may elect to revert indefinitely to the EU’s basic Generalized System o f Preferences (GSP) or i t s Everything-But-Arms
arrangement). Following these adjustments, agreements were reached on several interim EPAs b y end-2007, including
with the EAC, ESA, a subgroup o f SADC, and a number o f individual countries (with SADC, covering Botswana,
Lesotho, Namibia, Swaziland, and Mozambique; and individual agreements with Cameroon, Cote d’Ivoire and Ghana).
Several factors determine the effectiveness o f an EPA in promoting development. These include the degree o f additional
most-favored-nation (MFN) status, liberalization in goods and services; restrictiveness o f rules o f origin; and the extent o f
trade diversion that could occur in the event o f no reduction in MFN border protection. Because tariffs in Africa are
relatively high and internal barriers within country groupings s t i l l prevalent, enacting EPAs without prior action on these
issues could result in hub-and-spokes patterns o f trade integration, trade diversion, and-in a worst-case scenario-net
losses o f income. Without action on external and internal barriers, giving EU f i r m s preferential access to African markets
well could divert trade from more efficient producers in non-EU countries to EU producers. African governments w i l l need
to show strong commitment to implement required complementary supply-side reforms to meet these challenges. The EU
w i l l need to support these r e f o r m s 4 v e n if they may conflict with i t s near-tern commercial interests.

K e y contentious issues included the geographic configuration o f the regional EPA-groups (inability to reach
agreements on a common external tariff), strong opposition among some countries to the proposed comprehensive
policy coverage o f EPAs. Other countries opposed the envisaged WTO-compatible reciprocal liberalization o f
merchandise imports (with continued demand from some for an extension o f the Cotonou preferences and WTO
waiver, or for a special category o f improved trade preferences for the ACP under the EU’s GSP).

14

Cross-Border Connectivity and Regional Infrastructure

25.
Improved cross-border physical connectivity can strengthen growth and reduce poverty
by enlarging markets; promoting economic diversification; and reducing transport, energy, and
communications costs. All o f these expand opportunities for the poor to participate in production
and trade. Cross-border infrastructure such as transport, energy, and telecommunications are
essential to move goods, services, people, and information across borders and can reduce high
penalties currently imposed on Africa’s competitiveness. Such linkages also expand market
access; reduce economic distance; and facilitate trade, investment and labor mobility. The
resulting intensification o f cross-border economic activities can help to generate employment,
particularly in labor-intensive sectors, thereby providing additional opportunities to the poor.g

26.
Strengthening physical connectivity requires a combination o f cross-border hard
infrastructure and related software: harmonization o f regulations, procedures, and standards.
Technical, project-related software i s always inseparable from hard infrastructure, but the
concept o f software i s broader. Improvements in roads and railways can reduce transport and
logistics costs, but they are not sufficient to encourage cross-border trade. Differing legal and
regulatory frameworks, inefficient systems o f customs clearance, and other barriers also need to
be targeted. In t h i s sense, greater physical connectivity requires regional collaboration in both
hard infrastructure and related software.
27.
Regional collaboration to develop financial infrastructures also can increase capital
mobility in a neighborhood, which i s vital when national financial systems are small and lack
instruments and systems for cross-border transactions. Small financial markets tend t o be less
competitive and less efficient, often lacking economies o f scale, and are less able to diversify
investment and operational risks. Likewise, financial regulations in small markets tend to result
in higher costs and lower quality than in larger markets. Furthermore, in the former, ancillary
components o f financial infrastructure such as credit information services are likely to be
absent. loDeveloping capital markets and deepening financial intermediation are crucial to
mobilize resources for growth and sustainable development. The RECs have been working to
establish new regional institutions to support financial cooperation and integration. These will
become progressively indispensable, as increasing capital flows place ever-higher burdens on
Africa’s fragile and fragmented banking sectors. Banking regulation and supervision need to be
strengthened in parallel, at both national and regional levels.

A recent study b y Soulemane Coulibaly and Lionel Fontagne (“South-South Trade: Geography Matters,” Journal
of Afncan Economies 15 (2):31341, 2006) estimates that a regional investment initiative to pave all unpaved
portions o f interstate roads in West Africa would triple the intraregional trade performance and positively impact
these countries’ global trade. Another recent study b y Piet Buys, U w e Deichmann, and David Wheeler (“Road
Network Upgrading and Overland Trade Expansion in Sub-Saharan Africa,” World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper 4097, 2006) extended this analysis to the whole SSA region and found that a continental network upgrading
would expand overland trade by approximately $250 billion over 15 years. The upgrade would have major direct
and indirect benefits for the rural poor. Initial upgrading would require approximately $20 billion and maintenance,
$1 billion annually.
lo
Regional and global trade in financial services i s the best way to cope with these problems created b y small size.
Trade in financial services can be achieved by (a) opening national markets to the flow o f capital to and from
foreign markets; (b) opening national markets to foreign financial intermediaries by facilitating the purchase o f local
banks; or (c) fully or partially integrating the regional financial system.

15

28.

Combining considerations o f location, inherent economic potential, and agglomeration
effects provides a promising framework to guide and focus Africa-wide efforts to improve crossborder connectivity and expand trade and investment. Historical cross-country evidence suggests
that spatial disparities in average incomes often relate to a single dominant factor: distance from
ports. Reliable and cheap connectivity to international ports i s significant in explaining
differences between landlocked regions that have been able to exploit inherent economic
potential (in Africa, primarily from natural resources, chiefly minerals, and agriculture) and
regions that have not. Given reliable and cheap connectivity to ports, and hence global markets,
and given an improved environment for economic activity at large (trade, investments, labor)
resource-rich regions have tended to become the natural anchors for related upstream and
downstream investments. They become poles o f growth with catalytic effects for neighboring
countries, including through opening opportunities beyond minerals and agricultural sectors. By
attracting capital, entrepreneurs, labor, and new ideas, these regions provide the basis for
development o f new markets in intermediate and final goods, thus entering a virtuous circle o f
cost savings and efficiency gains.

29.
With these considerations in mind, under i t s “Regionally Integrated Spatial Development
Initiatives” (RISDI) of 2006, the NEPAD Secretariat adopted development corridors as a key
framework for configuring, prioritizing, and promoting interrelated infrastructure and large-scale
investments in defined geographic areas (box 3). Based o n preliminary findings, in addition to
already identified development corridors in Southern Africa, NEPAD has identified and ranked
12 such corridors. They were selected based on four criteria: their potential to (a) promote trade
and investment-led economic growth, (b) optimize the use o f private and public sector
investments in infrastructure, (c) encourage value-added processing, and (d) enhance the
competitiveness o f African economies. The development corridor i s a promising framework to
guide and focus development and regional integration efforts.

This development corridor approach figures centrally in the October 2007 draft, “Strategic Business Plan in
Support o f Regional Integration, Trade and NEPAD,” ADB Regional Integration Department.

16

Box 3. NEPAD’s Regionally Integrated Spatial Development Initiatives

NEPAD’s Regionally Integrated Spatial Development Initiatives (RISDI), or “development corridors” are an
instrument to configure, prioritize, and promote interrelated infrastructure and large-scale economic and sector
investments in defined geographic areas. The objectives are to promote trade and investment-led economic
growth, optimize infrastructure use, encourage value-added processing, and enhance competitiveness. Economic
potential rather than political borders i s the guiding principle for locating development corridors, with the focus
on maximizing a corridor’s aggregate economic benefit. Twelve prospective development corridors have been
identified. Each w i l l be vetted to validate economic potential by the African Development Bank (ADB) and
NEPAD. This work w i l l be completed in 2009.
RISDIs build on the successful experiences with several spatial development initiatives in Southern Africa,
including the initial Maputo Development Corridor (MDC) between South Africa and Mozambique. Launched in
1995, M D C i s serving as a model for replication across the region. I t successfully rehabilitated under-used and
out-dated transport infrastructure and linked i t with energy, minerals processing, and industrial park investments,
both private and public, domestic and foreign.
RISDIs generally are anchored by a large-scale investment, typically in resource extraction. Coordinated
investments in infrastructure (power, transport, and communications) and related upstream and downstream
services and industries along the corridor help ensure value-added to raw materials prior to export, agglomeration
effects (knowledge spillovers and cost savings), and promotion o f economic diversification. B y focusing scarce
resources on coordinated and spatially tied investments, the cost effectiveness o f infrastructure i s greatly
increased through more intensive use. Upgrading infrastructure also provides opportunities for jobs, investments,
and diversification beyond those associated with the anchor industry, such as tourism.
Given Africa’s current commodity boom, a focus o n RISDIs i s timely. They provide opportunities to leverage
benefits from the anchor industry in value-added processing, infrastructure upgrading, and economic
diversification. All o f these are critical to ensure that, should currently high commodity prices eventually begin to
drop, Africa w i l l have a broader economic platform to underpin continued growth.

30.

However, the development corridor approach also poses several challenges. N o t the least
o f these relate to i t s scale and complexity. Equally challenging are the present implementation
capabilities of the regional bodies that would take lead roles in coordinating activities regionally
to leverage development from the national “anchor” partner. The approach likewise requires
robust justification o f the proposed anchor investment and associated investments along a
development corridor (in relation to the opportunity costs o f resources employed-power, for
example); strong buy-in from stakeholders; and credible mechanisms to ensure coordination,
implementation, and compensation (for countries or regions that w i l l not benefit).

31.
As the spearheads to accelerate growth, the effectiveness o f the development corridor
approach depends fundamentally o n two conditions: (a) progress to improve investment climates
to attract the required anchor investment, typically in resource extraction, and (b) legal
arrangements capable o f ensuring equitable sharing o f benefits among sponsors and involved
host country agencies. Effective corridors also require standards o f governance and fiscal
systems adequate to protect intermediate rents from the anchor investment to underpin
infrastructure development throughout the corridor and promote linkages and diversification.
Finally, the approach requires adequate prior progress with integration to facilitate mobility o f
capital, human resources, and services to leverage the broadest development possible.

32.
Thus, while an appealing intellectual construct, the considerable advantages o f the
development corridor approach do not offer shortcuts in tackling the fundamental issues of

17

regional integration. Whether they can provide adequate incentives for breakthroughs in
collaboration w i l l depend on whether the anchor investments secure at the outset tangible
benefits for all country participants, directly or indirectly.

Macroeconomic Stability and Convergence
33.
Macroeconomic stability i s important in promoting regional economic integration and a
sine qua non to develop robust regional financial and capital markets. Maintaining stability will
require strengthened policy coordination and macroeconomic convergence, which over time and
with varying speed, depending o n the subregion, can become building blocks toward deep
integration and monetary unification. The transition toward a monetary union can be gradual or
fast. The gradual strategy involves a long transition o f macroeconomic convergence among
prospective members, along the lines o f the European Monetary Union. A “big bang” strategy
entails a much faster transition without convergence, as evidenced in the monetary unification in
Germany in 1990.

34.
Whereas the traditional optimal currency area analysis does not point to the inevitability
o f a single African currency,12 the strongest argument for monetary unification in Africa might
well come from the benefits o f increased macroeconomic ~ t a b i 1 i t y . l ~
The record o f
macroeconomic mismanagement in several African countries suggests that a monetary union,
functioning as an agent o f fiscal restraint, could produce large gains for i t s members. However,
the success o f monetary integration also depends on the interplay o f various political economy
factors, notably the ability to design and create strong supranational institutions (regional central
bank, supervisory institutions, and regulatory bodies) that are able to take into account political
economy constraints.
35.
W h i l e a single currency and a common central bank in Africa may remain aspirations for
quite some time, strengthened policy coordination and macroeconomic convergence are entirely
within the realm o f the feasible in most subregions of Africa. Five regional economic
communities have set macroeconomic convergence criteria and deadlines to guide the transition
toward the realization o f monetary unions.14 The WAEMU Commission has a good record in
conducting macroeconomic surveillance over each government’s public policies by setting
convergence criteria covering specific public finance indicators. The ECOWAS Commission i s
planning to scale up this experience to the whole West Africa region. W h i l e t h i s could be a
unique opportunity to establish a stable and growth-friendly West African neighborhood, the
endeavor hinges critically o n Nigeria’s commitment to deep integration and willingness to
compromise national priorities for regional imperatives.

The traditional view on optimal currency areas i s that a high degree o f trade integration between prospective
members and a strong positive correlation o f shocks across countries are the two preconditions for monetary union.
On these grounds the case for monetary unions in Africa i s not particularly strong as trade flows within African
regional economic communities are s t i l l relatively small.
l3
Mundell, Robert. 2002. “Does Africa Need a Common Currency?” Keynote Presentation, African Development
Forum 111, March 3-8, United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, Addis Ababa.
l 4 The West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA), the Economic Community o f West African States
(ECOWAS), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), the East African Community
(EAC), and the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) have established convergence
targets for macroeconomic policies and for monetary, fiscal, and financial integration.

18

36.
Nevertheless, critical issues remain unresolved. They include the definition o f
mechanisms for bank supervision and lending o f last resort, the design o f decision-making
procedures to prevent big economies from dominating the union, and the realization o f a regional
surveillance system to monitor national economic policies. The success o f any monetary union in
Africa w i l l depend o n the ability o f policymakers to take efficient actions t o address these issues
and on the commitment by national leaders to monetary integration.
37.
Although separate processes, financial and monetary integration are intrinsically linked.
The degree o f financial market integration affects the transmission o f monetary policy as well as
monetary (and other) shocks across countries in a monetary union. Moreover, well-developed
regional financial markets and institutions facilitate the exchange o f goods and services, the
mobilization o f resources, and their efficient allocation to profitable investment projects, as well
as the diversification o f risks. T o make progress o n this front, Africa needs to further strengthen
and harmonize banking regulation and supervision, while financial structures will have to adapt
more rapidly to the changing international environment.

Provision of Regional Public Goods
38.
Effective cooperation in the provision o f regional public goods and management o f
regional commons i s critical to ensure that economic growth in Africa i s sustainable;
vulnerability i s reduced; and remaining risks are pooled. Coordinated interventions can help
address market failures that characterize regional public goods. Due to their transboundary
nature, many o f the critical environmental, natural resource, and disease challenges facing Africa
cannot be tackled effectively by national governments alone. Individual countries also are
unlikely to be willing to bear the full cost burden o f public goods if benefits are shared with
noncontributing neighbors. Even if such unilateral willingness does exist, the effectiveness o f
any initiative likely will be blunted by restricted freedom o f operation outside the country’s
sovereign borders. For all o f these reasons, regional cooperation i s imperative to capture the
mutual benefits, and mitigate the negative externalities, associated w i t h the provision o f regional
public goods and management o f regional commons.

39.
A good understanding o f the types o f regional public goods better able to be provided
effectively through joint action can help to address coordination failures. Table 1 presents a
typology o f regional public goods that incorporates their three essential properties: nonrivalry,
excludability, and aggregation of contributions. The third property, which informs the way that
individual contributions combine to form the overall level o f a public good, i s crucial in the
provision o f a regional public good. I f the contributions o f countries are perfect substitutes, such
as the cleansing o f a shared river, there i s more room for free-riding, making it harder to
coordinate the provision o f such goods. If the good to be provided can disproportionately benefit
a subset o f participating countries, such as those with the highest energy deficit in a power pool,
these latter have sufficient incentives to push to provide the regional good.

19

Table 1. Regional public goods: Typology and examples

I
Impact of countries’ contributions
on quality and quantity o f good

I Each contribution i s the same.

Pure public goods

I Cleansing a lake

Some countries have an interest in
contributing more.

Curbing the spread of
H I v / A I D S and malaria

Contribution of the weakest member
sets the quantity and quality o f the
good.

Implementing
international financial
standards

Contributions o f the weaker members
set the quantity and quality of good.

Forestalling the spread
of pests
~

~~

Impure public goods
Goods for which
exclusion i s easy

Activities generating
various public goods

1 Transnational park I Preserving the rainforest I
Power grid

Eliminating transnational
terrorist threats

!
I
Airport hub-spoke
network

Prevention and mitigation
of natural disasters

Transportation
infrastructure

Internet connectivity

Satellite launch
facility

Regional peace-keeping

Biohazard facility

Agricultural research and
bioprospecting

~~~

Contribution of the leading country
sets the quantity and quality of the
good.

Curing a disease

Contribution o f the leading countries
set the quantity and quality o f the
good.

Discovering an
effective treatment

The range o f issues concerning regional public goods and regional commons facing SubSaharan Africa i s quite broad. However, a few specific challenges and opportunities deserve
special attention because they reflect areas in which collaborative management can be especially
effective. Diseases such as HIV/AIDS and malaria do not respect political boundaries and
devastate human development and labor force productivity. National efforts at prevention and
treatment easily can be undermined by cross-border transmission through migrating vectors and
movement o f people and goods along regional transport corridors. Restrictions along these
corridors would severely harm much needed trade development. Similarly, agricultural output
periodically i s alarmingly vulnerable to migratory pests such as locusts. Both impacts damage
growth but also fall disproportionately on the poor.

40.

41.
Management o f water resources i s critical for environmental protection, basic
consumption, and agriculture. The majority o f Africa’s water resources are part o f international
basins; therefore, management inherently requires a regional approach. Effective management i s
all the more urgent given the potentially disruptive impact o f climate change o n rainfall and
increasing demands for water and potential conflicts arising from limited supplies. Similarly,
fisheries and mineral resources that lie across borders require regional cooperation to ensure
sustainable harvesting, and to prevent conflicts.
42.
N o t all efforts need to focus on mitigation. Regional provision o f public goods also can
proactively assist development. For example, regional centers o f excellence have proved to be an
effective tool to promote research, knowledge-sharing, and dissemination o f best practice in
agriculture; and offer similar opportunities in the rationalization and provision o f tertiary
education.

20

I

B.

Regional Institutional Architecture

43.
T o leverage opportunities through regional integration Africa needs the strong impetus o f
coordinated domestic policy reforms combined with collective regional actions. Therefore,
getting the institutional architecture right-regional institutions to push integration, their roles,
responsibilities, capacities, and linkages to national governments and planning bodies-is a
major challenge for Africa to realize benefits from integration.
44.
The institutional architecture that Africa i s establishing to support integration processes
comprises strata o f executive continental bodies, regional economic communities (RECs),
regional sector technical bodies, and linkages to relevant national planning bodies. In all, there
are more than 30 such entities (appendix 11). The responsibilities o f each stratum vis-&vis i t s
counterparts are not yet clearly defined. In addition to complexities arising from overlapping
memberships, functional responsibilities for strategy, program development, project
development, and financing also are not yet clearly delineated. This lack o f clarity has slowed
progress in translating Africa’s leaders’ political vision o f integration into clear regional
strategies, realistic programs for integration priorities (such as regional infrastructure and trade
integration), and technical plans for specific projects.

45.

As regards planning, completion by ECOWAS and U E M O A o f a regional Poverty
Reduction Strategy for West Africa (2006) was a significant milestone. Other regions also have
completed strategic planning exercises, for example, the Regional Indicative Strategic Plan
developed by SADC and an E A C Master Plan. As yet, linkages among these regional strategic
plans and countries’ national programs are limited. Improved linkages are critical to ensure
coordinated implementation o f regional programs, which i s essential to leverage outcomes at the
country level. W h i l e political declarations o n regional integration convey clarity o f vision, they
mask the Herculean efforts required o f RECs and other regional bodies to align regional and
national planning, including by first developing the needed capacity.
46.
In terms o f regional projects, Africa does not have readily available the considerable
resources simultaneously to undertake technical and financial preparation o f a large number o f
complex regional operations. N o r have donor partners been accustomed to providing assistance
with project preparation o n the scale required. The resulting slow pace o f project development
has slowed project implementation and raised political frustrations. These have led to pressures
o n RECs to supplant project development roles normally shouldered by associations of technical
bodies (such as power utilities). Shortages o f resources for project development and unclear
responsibilities among regional bodies have combined to exacerbate progress in this critical area.
47.
In short, overcoming the following four institutional issues are critical steps in further
developing an effective institutional architecture to accelerate regional integration:
a. Clarifying the roles and responsibilities o f each stratum o f regional bodies concerned
with regional integration, and delineating overlapping memberships

b. Strengthening the professional capacity o f key regional bodies to strengthen regional
strategies and champion policy harmonization in priority areas

21

c. Strengthening concerned national planning organs to strengthen linkages between
regional strategies and national development plans

d. Strengthening delivery mechanisms for priority programs (for example, regional
infrastructure) to underpin confidence in integration b y delivering tangible results.

48.
Africa’s efforts to strengthen regional integration have focused largely on the fourth
challenge. Yet national support for regional programs overall has been limited in the face o f
governments’ national priorities. Limited reflection o f regional priorities in national plans has
slowed priority programs, sapping governments’ willingness to cede sovereignty to other
regional initiatives-a vicious circle. Better progress requires rebalancing effort among the four
institutional challenges. More emphasis i s needed on strengthening linkages between regional
strategies and national development plans, clarifying the roles and responsibilities o f regional
bodies, and strengthening their professional capacity.

49.
Efforts to rationalize the RECs should focus o n addressing the overlapping regional
communities and their multiple memberships. Rationalization would make it easier for member
countries to meet financial obligations to their REC and, above all, would help these important
institutions develop the improved effectiveness they need to lead the integration, growth, and
trade agendas within and outside Africa. However important the process o f rationalization, it i s
bound to be politically complex and most likely gradual. These realities underscore the need for
pragmatism in the approach t o capacity development to support regional integration by accepting
a “variable geometry” based o n existing structures but with built-in levers to support parallel
efforts to bring about rationalization.

C.

Basic Principles for Regional Integration

50.
Regional integration offers significant “win-win” possibilities for the region’s economies,
particularly for landlocked economies. Integration offers possibilities t o leverage and extend
economic comparative advantage at a regional level in ways not accessible through national
development programs. Regional integration also can become a tool for countries to facilitate
and manage their globalization. Advantages in managing regional “commons” and in creating
new regional public goods are similarly accessible through strengthened regional integration.
However, the process toward integration i s inherently complex and fraught with pitfalls that can
easily stall or block progress. As noted above, not all countries stand to gain equally from
integration or commensurately with the costs they incur. Some countries or subregions are more
advanced and politically prepared than others. Furthermore, large economies inherently are more
self-reliant than small economies. These are just two examples among webs o f realities in the
geography and political economy o f Africa that countries must navigate in moving forward to
integrate regionally.
Past experiences, experiences from other regions, and the emerging consensus in
51.
academia suggest five basic principles to guide Africa’s regional integration:

Open Regionalism-Think Global. The market to conquer i s outside, not inside. Thus,
the ultimate goal o f any regional integration policy should be an outward-looking policy
effective in increasing Africa’s share o f global markets. Promotion o f an outwardoriented approach to integration i s critical to reduce obstacles to trade and investment

22

through market-driven integration. Collaboration to expand markets and encourage
competition across borders will sharpen competitiveness and comparative advantage.

Start Small and Proceed in Increments. Regional integration implies a coordination o f
policy actions o f many countries. The larger the number o f participants, the more
complex i s the coordination, making i t the more likely that integration will fail. Most of
the successful regional integrations to date (EU, North America, East Asia) highlight this
principle. Moreover, regional economic integration does not necessarily require full
political integration. Experiences in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa demonstrate
that adopting very ambitious, comprehensive agreements at an early stage o f integration
may result in poor implementation. In contrast, modest, specific agreements based o n
areas o f mutual interest can incrementally build regional integration by providing a
platform for mutual trust and further institution building. Specific cooperative initiatives
in both trade and nontrade areas can slowly build a stronger neighborhood and
~ubregion.’~
Credible Mechanisms to Compensate Losers (or provide incentivesfor those with no
immediate gains). Regional trade integration o f asymmetric countries i s likely to lead t o
winners and losers. l6Establishing credible mechanisms to compensate losers (or ensure
the redistribution o f unequal gains) i s critical for a more ambitious integration to take
hold and eventually succeed. Building on Africa’s existing institutional architecture, this
principle underscores the importance o f rationalizing and strengthening the RECs.
Moreover, strategies should include a transparent, equitable, rules-based system for
sharing gains and resolving disputes.
The Neighborhood Matters. The economic geography and neighborhood o f countries
have critical implications for the focus and sequencing o f strategies toward regional
integration. For landlocked countries in particular, integration considerations are
intrinsically sensitive to the particular neighborhood o f countries that surrounds them.
Champions of Integration. Realizing the benefits o f regional integration requires strong,
sustained commitment from member countries. Having the natural lead countries o f
Africa in the role as “champions” for regional integration would provide an important
impetus to the process. Political leaders should view these arrangements as more than
good “sound bite” economics and politics, dedicating the effort required to make them
work.

l5Examples o f a focused and incremental approach include the EU, which began by pooling coal and steel
resources. Similarly, East Asia’s regionalization began with Japan exporting equipment, technology, and
construction materials to China in return for coal and crude oil. The North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) started with bilateral free trade agreements between the U S and Canada.
l6For example, regional integration among low-income countries tends to lead to income divergence between the
least developed and the relatively more advanced member countries. Moreover, small countries tend to be more in
favor o f integration while large countries prefer integrating with countries o f equal size because the gains from scale
economies exceed the political cost o f integration. Finally, when countries with different levels o f domestic
infrastructure integrate, the countries with the best domestic infrastructure tend to attract a larger share o f industrial
activities. The deeper the integration, the more t h i s uneven spread o f economic activities w i l l increase.

23

111.

TAKING STOCK OF PAST BANK SUPPORT FOR REGIONAL INTEGRATION

52.
The World Bank’s long-standing commitment to global priorities and region-wide
programs gained considerable momentum with the launch o f the IDA Regional Pilot Program
(Regional Pilot or The Pilot) in 2003.17 Until then, Bank support for regional priorities in Africa
had been limited lar ely to region-wide sector strategies and the occasional support for
multicountry projects. The “Southern Africa Strategy” paper, discussed by the Bank’s Board in
April 1998, marked a turning point. I t explicitly argued the benefits o f integration in the
subregion and became the first in a series o f subregional interim assistance strategies developed
for West, Central, and East Africa in ensuing years. However, only with the launch o f the
Regional Pilot did the Bank obtain a lending instrument and resources geared specifically to
support regional projects and programs.

’’

53.
This chapter reviews the implementation experience o f the Regional Pilot to date, and
discusses key lessons learned thus far and implications for the regional integration assistance
strategy g o i n g forward. The chapter also summarizes issues and strategic directions of
relevance to regional integration emanating f r o m t h e Africa Action Plan and from k e y
sector strategies adopted over the past 5-6 years, and highlights k e y Africa regional
programs that are not p a r t of the regional integration portfolio. Finally, t h e chapter
briefly reviews collaboration experiences with IFC and MIGA.

A.

IDA Regional Pilot Program and Status of Loan Portfolio

54.
Created in recognition o f the increasing importance o f regional integration for growth
and poverty reduction in poor countries, the IDA Regional Pilot significantly strengthened the
ability o f JDA to support regional actions in Africa b y leveraging IDA’S country-based
engagements (box 4). Resources earmarked for this mobilized nearly US$1.6 billion o f IDA
assistance to regional programs under IDA13 and IDA14, leveraging total IDA commitments for
regional projects o f nearly US$2.4 billion over FY04-08. O f these, US$1.9 billion went to SubSaharan Africa.” Following the commitment o f US$375 million to assist 5 operations in FY0405, the Pilot leveraged financing for 5 projects o f US$480 million in FY06 and more than
US$730 million for 7 projects in FY07. So far in FY08 (by March 1, 2008), 3 projects have been
approved with a commitment o f US$326 million, thereby virtually exhausting the Pilot funding.
17

The World Bank’s involvement in global programs dates back to the establishment, in 1972, o f the Consultative
Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). Since then, the Bank’s participation in global programs has
grown steadily, reaching over 160 global programs and partnerships b y FY07.
During the period 1979-2002, the Bank provided assistance to 10 regional projects in Africa totaling US$315
million. Included was support to the West African Development Bank (BOAD) for capacity building and
infrastructure development and for the launch o f Africa Trade Insurance (ATI), s t i l l the only trade insurance agency
able to operate continent-wide.
l 9 To anchor ownership o f the regional effort within the national I D A program o f participating countries, the
Regional Pilot Program requires that country IDA allocations cover one-third o f the regional project costs
attributable to each country. The remaining two-thirds come from the separate Regional Pilot Program funding
envelope. The Regional Pilot thus provided separate funding to top-up country resources o f approximately US$580
million for the last 2 years o f IDA13, and nearly US$1 billion under IDA14. Combined with country contributions,
the total envelope available for regional projects under IDA13 and I D A 1 4 amounted to approximately US$2.4
billion. O f that, more than 80%, or US$1.9 billion, went to projects in Africa.

’*

24

Box 4. Brief on IDA’S Regional Pilot Program
Based on the general conviction that regional integration can be a strong engine o f growth and poverty reduction in
poor countries, IDA’S Regional Pilot Program was designed to address issues that had emerged in earlier regional
development projects. The most important among these issues are summarized below.
To anchor ownership o f regional efforts within the national IDA programs o f participating countries, the Regional
Pilot Program requires that country IDA allocations cover one-third o f the regional project costs attributable to each
country. In recognition o f the significant positive externalities o f regional projects, the remaining two-thirds i s
provided from a separate Regional Pilot Program funding envelope.
In cases in which project costs or benefits are not able to be split into country components, a legally eligible
regional entity can take on the IDA credit on behalf o f the region. An important caveat i s that experience with
regional projects has shown that the least successful projects have relied on new institutions. More successful
regional projects have built on existing ones.

For regional projects to qualify for funding, the Pilot requires that they must demonstrate four criteria: (a) at least
three countries need to participate; (b) participating countries and the relevant regional entity must demonstrate
strong commitment; (c) economic and/or social benefits o f the investments must “spill over” country boundaries;
and (d) projects are expected to provide a platform for policy harmonization among countries and be priorities
within a well-developed and broadly supported regional strategy.
While the Pilot requires participation by at least three IDA countries, i t does not oblige countries to take on
investments simultaneously or for identical purposes. Pilot funding for a regional project through an adaptable
program lending (APL) instrument, either “horizontally” to support the different pace o f preparation for regional
members or “vertically” to support different investments for a given member, can be considered when the project i s
part o f a regional program to which all members have committed (for example, a regional power pool).

55.
Overall, implementation o f the Regional Pilot in Africa has been guided by three main
objectives: (a) to scale up assistance to priority regional programs in l i n e with the strategic
priorities emanating f r o m the NEPAD Short-Term Action Plan (STAF’); (b) to fold this
assistance into the mainstream o f the Bank’s Africa program, specifically in the context o f the
Africa Action Plan (AAP); and (c) to deliver this assistance within the Bank’s country-based
approach to ensure the national ownership needed to underpin implementation. Requests for
regional assistance from IDA clients have greatly increased, to the point that the funding
envelope available for Africa under the I D A 1 4 Pilot Program has been virtually exhausted
almost ,a year early (figure 2).

56.

To implement the increased availability o f IDA regional financing, the Bank established
the Regional Integration Department (AFCRI) in the Africa Region in 2004. In addition to
projects financed by the IDA Pilot Program and a preexisting Regional Trade Facilitation Project
( F Y O l ) , the department also assumed responsibility for six regional projects funded by GEF
grants. Four HIV/AIDS grant-funded projects also were transferred to the department’s
portfolio.2o

2o These GEF and HIV/AIDS grant-funded projects added approximately US$275 million in commitments to the
department’s portfolio.

25

Figure 2. I D A regional commitments, FY04-08
800

7

700

600

.--5
.-

500

I 400

n
v)

t----------

3 300

200
100

0
FY04

FY05

NO6

FY07

FY08

57.
As o f February 1, 2008, the Regional Integration Department’s project portfolio
contained 3 1 IDA/GEF projects, with a total commitment o f almost US$2.1 billion. I t i s the
largest portfolio in the Africa Region in number o f projects and third in net commitments. In line
with priorities set out by NEPAD and AAP, regional infrastructure (power, transport corridors,
and communications) make up nearly two-thirds o f the portfolio. The remainder i s divided
among water resources management and environment (20 percent), financial sector integration
(approximately 10 percent), and H I V / A I D S and regional agriculture. By subregion, West Africa
with 18 projects has received the most assistance, followed by East Africa (10 projects), Central
Africa (7 projects), and Southern Africa (6 projects).21*22
58.
In addition, AFCRI manages an Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
H I V / A I D S project financed b y the Africa Catalytic Growth Fund,23several multidonor trustfunds for agricultural research and promotion a c t i v i t i e ~ a, ~MIGA
~
guarantee project assisting the
West Africa Gas Pipeline, and the N i l e Basin Initiative trust-funded umbrella program. To date,
the N i l e Basin Initiative has funded over 20 subprojects for over US$81 million, many o f them
focused o n institutional strengthening o f basin organizations.
59.

As to lending instrument, the portfolio i s dominated by projects that are structured as
Adaptable Program Loans (APLs). Sixteen o f the 3 1 projects, or more than 80 percent o f total
commitments, use the APL instrument. I t s dominance aligns well with findings o f the FY06
Africa Regional Integration Portfolio Review: APLs are well suited for the complex and
multicountry nature o f regional integration projects because they are able to accommodate the

21 Of the total Africa Regional Integration Portfolio, 18 projects committing US$1.9 billion have been funded
through the IDA Regional Pilot Program, and 15 projects committing US$297 million have been funded through
GEF or HIV/AIDS funds, or predate the Pilot Program.
22 Note that projects are not additive since 1 project may cover more than one subregion.
23 The IGAD Regional HIV/AIDS Partnership Program, USD14.5 million grant, W 0 7 .
24 Including one that supports the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa ( F a ) and one for the Association for
Strengthening Agricultural Research in Eastern and Central Africa (ASARECA).

26

sequential nature o f many regional programs and enable countries to time their participation
accordingly (appendix 111).

60.
Implementation experience o f the regional portfolio i s limited, with an average project
age o f 2.2 years. Nevertheless, recent portfolio reviews suggest reasons to be cautiously
optimistic that a large proportion o f regional projects will achieve satisfactory development
outcomes.25 Appendix I11 updates the portfolio’s performance and discusses actions being taken
to maintain good performance. L o w disbursement i s a general concern for the portfolio. The
complex nature o f regional projects and the requirement for coordination among multiple
countries has tended to delay effectiveness and implementation. (Box 5 discusses the effects o f
the complexity o f regional projects). Procurement and M&E challenges are other common issues
within the portfolio. Actions are underway that w i l l systematically address these issues.
Box 5. Complexity o f operating environment for regional projects
0
0

0

0

0

0

0

Low capacity i s common in regional economic communities and other regional institutions.
Country ownership o f regional integration initiatives varies depending on each country’s interpretation o f
regional protocols, priority and timing given to these protocols, availability o f funding, and the level o f
coordination among ministries.
Coordination challenges within regional projects are significant. Typically, projects include RECs, other
regional institutions, national ministries, multiple donors, project implementation units, implementation
partners, civil society, and multiple internal World Bank departments.
Legal issues for countries involved in regional projects are more complex. They often involve negotiating
legal frameworks among countries, defining international legal relationships, defining the legal status o f
regional organizations, and ensuring compliance during implementation.
Safeguards issues for regional projects include (a) linking safeguards requirements to, and verifying whether
they are already covered by, national programs; (b) designing mechanisms to deal with future environmental
matters; and (c) ensuring that safeguards requirements are met in situations in which project implementation
roles and responsibilities are unclear.
Procurement and financial management issues include reconciling multiple procurement and financial
management systems and complex arrangements to ensure appropriate division o f responsibilities.
Monitoring and evaluation systems across countries and regions often differ greatly, and in some cases
render measuring and monitoring outcomes difficult if not impossible.

_
.

61.
The portfolio has benefited f r o m recent institutional reviews o f Bank-wide and Africa
Region experiences with regional integration programs, including the FY06 IEG report, “The
Development Potential o f Regional Programs: An Evaluation o f World Bank Support o f M u l t i Country Operations,” and the FY06 Africa Regional Integration Portfolio Review conducted by
the Africa Region Quality and Knowledge Services Unit (AFTQK). These reviews distilled
valuable lessons learned for regional integration programs going forward, and are discussed in
detail in appendix 111. The main lessons are:
a. Strategic alignment. The importance o f a continent-wide strategic framework for
regional integration to ensure coherence among subregional strategies, sector
strategies, and country programs and to guide choices and trade-offs and facilitate
monitoring and evaluation o f progress.

’’ Reviews conducted by IEG in FY06, the Africa Region’s Operational Quality and Knowledge Services unit
(AJTQK)in FY06, and an internal review conducted specifically for preparation o f M A S cautiously draw similar
conclusions; that regional projects can be comparably successfully as single-country projects.

27

b. Ownership and accountability. Ensuring ownership among regional and national
stakeholders i s essential for successful implementation. Improved governance
structures to clarify accountability among governments, the concerned REC,
implementing agencies, and donors are essential to project success. Partnerships are
particularly important to the success o f regional projects.
c. Financing and instruments. Countries with small IDA allocations have difficulties in
financing their participation in regional projects in IDA14, but this concern was
addressed by provisions in I D A 1 5 that cap the one-third country contributions at 20
percent o f a country’s total IDA resources. IDA can finance only projects in IDA
countries. Hence, innovative solutions and partnerships will be crucial to facilitate
regional projects that require the participation o f IBRD countries. The lack o f a grant
window for regional projects in IDA also presents challenges to financing
supranational organizations that cannot borrow from IDA and financing regional
HIV/AIDS projects for which many countries are not willing to borrow. For large
infrastructure projects, MIGA and IBRD/IDA partial risk guarantees and enclave
project structures w i l l be instrumental in facilitating private sector investment and
PPP arrangements to mobilize the needed financing.

d. Bank organization, resources, and skills. Continuing efforts are needed to strengthen
coordination across country units. Regional projects require more resources for
preparation and supervision than do single-country projects. Budget and staff time
need to be allocated accordingly. Given the additional workload required to prepare
and implement regional projects, extra incentives are necessary to encourage staff
with the required skills to manage and work on them.
B.

Knowledge Program, Partnerships, and Capacity Building

62.
In addition to an extensive lending portfolio, the Regional Integration Department has a
sharp focus on regional knowledge creation, which w i l l assist Africa to strengthen the analytical
base underpinning regional policy debate and policy formulation. In addition to sector-wide
work undertaken in the Africa Region, the department carried out some 15 regional diagnostic
studies during FY03-07. Thematically closely aligned with the priorities o f NEPAD and the
relevant REC, the E S W portfolio has prioritized work o n regional financial and trade integration.
This work has included reviews o f implementation o f customs unions along with financial sector
integration diagnostics (for EAC, SADC, and ECOWAS) and analyses of gaps in regional
infrastructure (for EAC; Central African Economic and Monetary Community, or CEMAC; and
SADC). Other work has assisted development o f collaborative plans for managing shared natural
water resources (in the Nile, Niger, Zambezi, and Senegal river basins), shared fisheries (in West
Africa and East Africa), and sensitive environments (wetlands in the Niger Basin and watersheds
in southern Africa). Other analyses have explored opportunities for rationalizing specialized
service provision regionally (agricultural research in West, East, and Southern Africa; tertiary
education in Southern Africa; and capacity development in East and Southern Africa).
Notwithstanding these efforts, the analytical and advisory activities (AAA) portfolio needs
scaling up considerably to respond effectively to the regional priorities outlined above. M o r e
work i s needed to address knowledge gaps in infrastructure (power pool and transport corridor
development); environmental challenges (climate change adaptation and mitigation, disaster

28

response, and water basin management); financial sector integration; regional health solutions
(migratory diseases and health worker training); regional opportunities in education and
agriculture (regional centers o f excellence and specialized training programs); and governance
(regional aspects o f the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, or EITI; agenda;
governance structures for RECs and regional projects; and the African Peer Review Mechanism
or APRM). Appendix I11discusses the regional AAA program in detail.

63.
The demands o f working regionally have been n o less pronounced for the Bank’s
analytical products than for i t s investment projects. A comprehensive quality review i s planned
during the remainder o f FY08 and early FY09. Meanwhile, a cursory examination o f the regional
AAA program suggests mixed results, mostly reflecting generic issues identified by the FY06
QAG Review of Africa Region AAA. M a i n challenges include weaknesses in internal
governance and quality management o f AAA, and insufficient attention to dialogue around, and
dissemination, o f AAA.26A particular issue related to regional AAA has been the Bank’s limited
ability to undertake such work jointly with RECs due to their capacity constraints. A significant
scaling up o f REC capacity i s needed to leverage the effectiveness o f Bank regional AAA.
During FY06, the Africa Region Office o f the Chief Economist established a fund to sponsor
cross-cutting analytical work o n regional issues. The objective has been to advance thinking and
public debate continent-wide on core issues of regional integration. The resulting “flagship”
products are presented in broad international fora. Within the Bank, these products are distilled
subregionally to inform the more operations-oriented, analytical program administered by the
Regional Integration Department.

64.
Partnerships are critical levers for the Bank’s regional integration assistance. Nearly all
Bank regional integration projects have joint financing or implementation partners. The African
Development Bank (ADB) has become a particularly close partner, sharing in the development
o f complex infrastructure programs and cofinancing many large investments. A new partnership
o f the AU Commission, United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA), W o r l d
Bank, and ADB w i l l assist the AU Commission to explore practical options to improve R E C
effectiveness through rationalizing overlapping memberships. This work w i l l build on existing
U N E C A analyses and options assessments. A promising trilateral partnership among the Bank,
ADB, and European Commission (EC) also i s taking shape, focusing o n R E C capacity
development, trade integration, and development o f regional development banks and regional
infrastructure. Other partners have included the Development Bank o f Southern Africa (DBSA),
DflD, Islamic Development Bank (IDB), as well as France, Germany, Japan, and Nordic
countries. An important Bank contribution to partnerships has been support o f regional policy
alignment through the Bank’s engagements in country policy dialogue.

65.
Since IDA14, and now in IDA15, it has been agreed that the criterion for IDA making
resources available o n grant terms i s the country’s risk o f debt distress. This agreement poses a
challenge in providing direct financing on grant terms to regional organizations. I t has hampered
possibilities for the Bank to complement capacity development assistance provided by other
partners in areas o f key importance to the Bank, particularly R E C abilities to create and drive
26 “Quality o f Global and Regional AAA: A QAG Assessment,” November 2006. The QAG panel reviewed 37
regional ESW delivered between July 1, 2004 and December 31, 2005 o f a total of 102 (or 36 % o f tasks) and
comprising 77 % o f their cost ($23 million of a total o f $30 million). For TA, the panel reviewed 32 of 86 regional
tasks (37 %), which comprise 74 % o f the total cost.

29

regional policy debate in critical areas such as trade integration. The Bank has provided limited
support through partnerships and bilateral trust funds. However, this fragmented and limited
funding has made it difficult for the Bank to provide assistance commensurate with the strategic
importance o f developing capacity in key regional bodies. More work in developing innovative
partnerships will be key to finance the capacity development program needed in supranational
bodies to facilitate progress in regional integration.

C.

Sector Development Plans and Other Regional Initiatives

66.
Bank-wide and Africa Region sector strategies, Africa Region Governance and AntiCorruption (GAC) Implementation Plan, and Africa Action Plan each was reviewed for sector
inputs to RIAS (appendix IV). These strategies share some common cross-sector themes.
Important among these are (a) the need for innovative financing structures and instruments to
assist infrastructure development and leverage private sector investment, particularly as regards
participation by MICs; (b) spillover from development in one sector can beneficially impact
other sectors, including agriculture, environment, private sector development, trade, education,
and health-indicating that cross-sector coordination and collaboration o n regional projects i s
beneficial; (c) harmonization o f sector policies and frameworks across countries and
implementation o f existing protocols generally are slow and require acceleration; (d) capacity
development o f regional organizations i s a priority; and (e) regional aspects o f the governance
agenda need to be addressed, including demand-side accountability, nonrenewable natural
resource management (the “EITI-plus” agenda), public finance management, and procurement.

67.
Even though the IDA Regional Pilot i s the main source o f financing assistance for
regional integration, the Africa Region does manage several umbrella regional programs that
have indirect and direct benefits for regional integration (box 6). Although not managed by the
Africa Regional Integration Department, the department will continue to coordinate with these
programs to ensure leverage into the regional programs assisted by the Regional Pilot.
Box 6. Africa Region-wide programs
Multi-Country HIV/AIDS Program: The program assists SSA countries to provide increased access to
HIV/AIDS prevention, care, and treatment (PCT) programs, with emphasis on vulnerable groups.

Roll Back Malaria: The program coordinates the international fight against malaria among more than 90
partners.
TerrAffica: A partnership among SSA countries, donor countries and agencies, c i v i l society, and the research
community with the collective goal o f scaling up and harmonizing support for effective and efficient countrydriven sustainable land management.
Sub-Saharan Africa Transpofi Policy Program: A long-standing international partnership to facilitate
transport sector policy development and related capacity building with a focus on safe, reliable, and costeffective transport.

D.

Emerging Alignment of Regional and Country Programs

68.
As mentioned above, implementation o f the Regional Pilot Program in Africa has been
guided by the strategic priorities emanating from the NEPAD Short-Term Action Plan (STAP),

30

Bank’s Africa Action Plan (AAP),and Bank sector strategies. The FY06 review o f regional
programs by E G concluded that the Bank’s regional engagement in Africa was strategically well
aligned with the priorities o f the IDA Pilot Program and with NEPAD, particularly the
infrastructure-focused STAP, notwithstanding that strategic priorities have extended beyond
infrastructure.

69.

T o guide the Bank’s regional assistance, and following the first subregional strategy for
Southern Africa completed in 1998, the Bank produced similar strategies for Central Africa, East
Africa, and West Africa. The last was produced in parallel with the joint development in 2006 by
UEMOA and ECOWAS o f a regional poverty reduction strategy (PRS). Although broadly
similar in thrust, the subregional strategies have significant variations in rationale, objectives,
and priorities; guiding principles; and methodology. Most o f these differences arise from specific
conditions in each o f the four subregions, including geography, neighborhood, and the political
economy o f regional integration among groups o f countries.

70.
Implementation experience working through the subregional strategies has highlighted
how the Bank’s assistance to regional integration in Sub-Saharan Africa could be enhanced by a
continent-level strategy. This strategy would link Bank assistance-and i t s outcomes-more
explicitly with AAP priorities and CAS and would provide a coherent framework for
neighboring country teams to develop regional plans for implementation. A comparative review
o f the four subregional strategies (appendix V) suggests a framework that a continental strategy-RIAS-should
systematically take into account:
Typology or hierarchy o f integration options, with appropriate benchmarks to
facilitate monitoring and evaluation (M&E) o f progress
Distributions o f benefits and costs in regional activities, and the importance o f
credible mechanisms to ensure equitable distribution among participating
countries

Risks o f trade diversion through regional blocs t o help ensure that commitments
to global trade agreements (offering potentially more powerful gains) are not
undermined

Risks o f geographic polarization o f economic activities, which could occur with
or without integration but could be mitigated more effectively through regional
arrangements

Needs for full and early involvement o f country (and sector) departments in
preparing regional implementation plans-critical for success and sustainability
Ongoing needs for broad consultation with external stakeholders to validate the
Bank’s approach and receive feedback on implementation experiences

Needs for regular follow-up to address implementation issues as they arise and
share lessons learned across subregions.
71,
Closer internal coordination and consultations among Bank country teams, sector teams,
and the Regional Integration Department are leading to increased explicit recognition o f regional
priorities in country assistance and sector strategies. The proportion o f CASs reflecting regional

31

integration considerations has increased noticeably since the launch o f the Regional Pilot in
F Y 0 4 (appendix VI). Almost 70 percent o f CASs brought to the Board during FY04-FY0827
included considerations o f regional integration, compared to only 30 percent during FYOO-03.
Almost 40 percent o f CASs brought forward during FY04-FY08 included regional integration
projects in lending programs and associated results matrices, compared to barely 10 percent in
WOO-FYO3. Regional integration concerns also are beginning to inform country programs and
CASs more broadly. Nevertheless, only 5 o f 43 CASs considered b y the Board f r o m F Y 0 4 to
N O 8 focused explicitly on regional issues beyond regional integration projects financed under
the Pilot. Thus, while progress has been encouraging, the challenge o f mainstreaming regional
integration in CASs and country dialogue remains considerable.

E.

World Bank Group Collaboration (IFC and MIGA)

72.
Partnerships with IFC and MIGA have been significant in leveraging private financing
for regional infrastructure.28For example, over the last two years, the Bank has collaborated with
I F C and MIGA to organize infrastructure finance workshops for governments, private sector
investors, and the development community in Southern Africa. The East Africa Trade and
Transport Facilitation Project, Regional Communications Infrastructure Program, and Lighting
Africa are three recent examples o f programs in which I F C and the Bank have collaborated on
financing and implementation. Often, E C advisory services o n structuring infrastructure PPPs
build o n earlier reforms b y the Bank, sometimes with regional impact, such as the successful
concession o f the Kenya-Uganda Railway. Underlying these collaborations i s a shared
conviction that Africa's needs for regional infrastructure to spur export growth cannot possibly
be provided, and certainly not expeditiously, without stronger leverage o f private investment and
know-how. Likewise, the Bank and IFC recognize that initiatives to expand markets, deepen
trade integration, and attract additional FDI-all
with the objectives o f sharpening export
competitiveness and growth-must be centered on the needs o f private business. In i t s most
recent Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa (IFC/R2006-0297), I F C explicitly added a cross-border
component to emphasize the importance o f regional projects in infrastructure and other areas.
73.
Beyond additional collaborations to assist regional infrastructure development (focusing
o n power, ports, and telecommunications), the Bank and F C collaborate in a number o f areas
related to development o f regional markets. In support o f regional dialogue o n private sector
development, I F C and the Bank plan joint work at the regional level related t o policy
harmonization bearing on private sector development including, for example, through developing
R E C partnerships with regional chambers o f commerce. I F C also i s providing technical advisory
services to help implement IDA-sponsored initiatives o n improving trade logistics and trade
facilitation in a number o f countries (Rwanda, for example). I F C and the Bank also are working
to improve the functioning o f capital markets and their ability to serve subregional markets.
74.
Importantly, IFC also continues to target assistance to companies establishing regional
production and service networks. It i s through these companies that the benefits o f regional
As o f end-December 2008.
An example i s the Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (US$424 million). The program supports
development o f a telecommunications system for Eastern Africa that may interconnect up to 24 countries. F C
provided $33 M i l l i o n o f the total $115 M i l l i o n financing for the submarine cable system, supplemented by
complementary financing for essential terrestrial linkages. Transmission was provided by the IDA Regional Pilot.
27

28

32

integration can be captured as economies o f scale and better products and services for regional
markets and exports beyond Africa. Notable recent examples include banks having subregional
and regional networks, such as Standard Bank o f South Africa and Ecobank Transnational in
West Africa; an East African steel producer expanding into Southern Africa; a Malian hotel
operator expanding in several other West African countries, and continuing support to Celtel as i t
develops a continental network o f cellular telephone service.

75.
MIGA has worked with the Bank to provide guarantees to regional infrastructure
projects, including the West Africa Gas Pipeline project, SASOL, and institutional support for
West African Development Bank (BOAD), while providing TA to the NEPAD Secretariat to
develop databases o f priority regional programs.

F.

Implications for Future Work on Regional Integration

The foregoing discussions provide important guiding principles for Bank work to
advance regional integration:

76.

a. The Africa Regional Integration Department (AFCRI) will proactively and systematically
work with country management units (CMUs) and sector units to ensure incorporation o f
regional integration issues and solutions in future CAS and sectors strategies.

b. A F C R I will work proactively with project teams and relevant corporate units to ensure
that regional project teams receive adequate professional support, clear processing
guidelines, and assistance to develop adequate reporting systems for regional projects.
Additional incentives (such as increased weight in OPES)w i l l be considered to encourage
staff with desired skills to manage and work o n regional projects. Support to project
teams will be provided to ensure that design and implementation lessons from reviews o f
regional programs are incorporated in ongoing and future projects and lead to improved
portfolio quality.
c. A F C R I will continue t o explore with relevant World Bank Group departments options to
adapt relevant IDA and IBRD instruments. These would facilitate capacity development
o f regional organizations, creation o f regional public goods in joint IDA and IBRD
country neighborhoods, and participation o f MICs in regional projects.

d. T o strengthen monitoring and performance o f the project portfolio, A F C R I will (a) with a
view to improve disbursement ratios, work with the Africa Region’s procurement team
and management to perform a procurement portfolio review, and recommend and
implement follow-up actions where needed; (b) finalize portfolio M&E; and (c) work
closely with project and country teams to accelerate the process in cases o f delayed
effectiveness. Appendix I11elaborates o n these actions.

33

IV.

PROPOSED REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

77.
The overarching objective o f this strategy i s to provide a coherent and strategically
focused framework to guide the Bank Group’s assistance in support o f regional integration and
regional programs in SSA. With a point of departure in the experiences gained over the past four
years under the Regional Pilot Program, the strategy focuses on the priorities and flagships o f the
revised Africa Action Plan (AAP). The recent agreements on the 15* replenishment o f IDA
doubled the topping-up funding available for regional programs to nearly US$1.5 billion over
FYO9-FY 11. This increase significantly boosts the Bank’s ability to assist regional integration
efforts in Africa (box 7 ) and underpins the importance o f a strategic framework to focus and
guide that support.

Box 7. IDA15 Regional Program
As part o f the IDA15 replenishment agreement reached on December 14,2007, donors decided to allocate SDR400
million per year, or SDR1.2 billion for the 3 years FYO9-FY11, for the IDA Regional Program. This total
represents a 100 percent increase compared to the initial allocation under the I D A 1 4 Pilot Program (SDR200
million) and a 60 percent increase compared to the increased allocation o f SDR2.50 that donors retained at the
IDA14 mid-term review. As previously mentioned, 80 percent o f this allocation i s envisaged for Africa, amounting
to SDR320 million per year, or SDR960 million in total for IDA15. Taking into account the required one-third
funding contributions from country allocations, the total envelope o f IDA financing available for regional projects
in Africa during IDA15 w i l l be SDR1.44 billion, or approximately US$2.1 billion.
As with IDA14, regional projects w i l l be financed under the 1/3:2/3 formula. One-third o f funds w i l l be contributed
from the individual countries’ IDA performance-based allocation (PBA) envelope, and two-thirds w i l l be met with
funds from the regional envelope. This split has proven to both provide incentives for regional integration and
ensure country buy-in and commitment to regional projects. While the 1/3:2/3 split generally has worked well, in
several instances, the 1/3 contribution requirement has constrained the participation o f countries with a small PBA
envelope. To alleviate this problem, for countries with small national IDA allocations, IDA15 limits aggregate
national contributions to regional projects to a ceiling o f 20 percent o f the country’s PBA envelope. Additional
national contributions w i l l be covered 100 percent from the regional envelope.

The IDA15 mid-term review w i l l present an opportunity to reflect on the scaling-up o f the Regional Pilot Program
and experience with the 20 percent contribution ceiling aimed at countries with small IDA allocations to determine
whether any adjustments are necessary.

78.
The proposed regional integration assistance strategy i s set out below, in three main parts.
First, the strategic framework o f the strategy i s presented, structured around three strategic pillars
(regional infrastructure, institutional cooperation for economic integration, and coordinated
interventions to provide regional public goods) and one cross-cutting theme (strengthening
regional strategic planning and connections with national development plans). Reflecting this
structure, a second part outlines key principles and criteria to guide the Bank’s lending and
nonlending engagements within the three pillars (and the cross-cutting theme). A third part
outlines how implementation o f the strategy will be undertaken through subregional plans, in
parallel with continent-wide assistance to capacity building and efforts to strengthen donor
coordination and harmonization. These implementation plans will be developed in FY09. In the
interim, a brief discussion o f the proposed FY09 lending and AAA program i s provided. In
addition, a number o f implications for Bank-internal process and issues related to Bankinstruments are summarized. Finally, key performance indicators related to the principal actions
34

in the roll-out o f the strategic framework are presented with a discussion o f the most important
risks associated with the proposed strategy.

79.

The core purview o f the proposed strategic framework i s the IDA Regional Program and
i t s associated lending and nonlending activities. However, the aim i s gradually to enlarge the
scope and reach o f the strategic framework to ensure a more systematic reflection o f regional
priorities in the Bank’s country assistance strategies and in Africa-wide sector strategies.
Moreover, the strategy aims to strengthen synergies among IDA, IBRD, IFC, and MIGA b y
enhancing collaboration and coordination.

80.
The architecture o f the proposed strategy i s deliberately open and flexible. In this way, i t
will be able to facilitate a gradual enlargement o f i t s scope over time and facilitate adjustments to
the strategic framework in the face o f partnerships and the comparative advantages o f other
multilateral and bilateral agencies assisting regional integration. Ongoing changes in external
trade and economic agreements as well as the fast-evolving field o f bilateral and multilateral
donors, private sector investors, and regional institutions will shape and reshape the political and
economic landscape in which Africa integrates and in which the Bank Group provides i t s
assistance to regional integration. In conjunction with the institutional challenges involved in
gradually moving toward a comprehensive Bank Group strategy, these considerations underscore
the importance o f an open architecture that allows adaptations and alignments in response to
external developments and implementation experience.
8 1.
Development o f the strategy has benefited from extensive inputs from stakeholders:
regional bodies, national governments, academia, private sector representatives, c i v i l society
representatives and development partners. In addition to numerous meetings with individual
stakeholder groups, stakeholder consultations held in Nairobi in January 2007 and in
Washington, D C in October 2007 were valuable fora in which the Bank was able t o test evolving
thinking and receive feedback on how to reposition and rebalance i t s assistance strategy to best
leverage Africa’s leadership.
82.
The engagement with stakeholder groups commenced during the development o f the
strategy will be continued, with the objective to (i)
leverage impact by involving African
extend the debate o n regional and
stakeholders in developing regional implementation plans, (ii)
global integration issues through active dissemination o f this document, and (iii)obtain
continuous feedback on strategy implementation to inform needed course adjustments and other
adaptations in light o f client and stakeholder experiences.
A.

Strategic Framework for Regional Integration and Cooperation: Pillars of
Assistance

83.
The proposed strategic framework for the Bank’s assistance to regional integration i s
closely aligned with the revised A M z 9and i s organized around three main pillars: (a) regional
29 Seven of the 8 flagships o f the revised AAP are embedded in the 3 pillars o f the proposed U S : (a) strengthen
the African private sector; (b) build skills for competitiveness in a global economy; (c) raise agricultural
productivity; (d) improve access to, and the reliability of, clean energy; (e) expand and upgrade road networks and
transit corridors; (0 increase access to safe water and sanitation; and (8) strengthen health care systems and combat
malaria and HIVIAlDS.

35

infrastructure, (b) institutional cooperation for economic integration, and (c) coordinated
interventions to provide regional public goods. Bank engagement also will aim to assist Africa
with the important cross-cutting challenge o f strengthening regional strategic planning and i t s
connections with national development plans.

84.
Helping Africa to maintain regional macroeconomic and financial stability i s an
important ancillary objective, as i s the longer-term aim o f gradually moving toward monetary
integration and, ultimately, unification. While assistance to national macroeconomic stability i s
provided primarily through the Bank’s country programs, assistance to regional mechanisms
pursuing macroeconomic convergence w i l l be considered in the context o f Bank assistance to
RECs and other regional bodies.
Pillar I.Regional Infrastructure

85.
Physical connectivity is the foundation for many o f the world’s economic communities.
Transport and communication connections are essential to move goods, services, capital, and
people across countries and borders. Integrated power systems lower costs and improve
reliability. In Africa, stronger and better-connected infrastructure platforms will unlock
economies o f scale and sharpen competitiveness. Improving connectivity through regional
infrastructure is especially important for Africa’s many landlocked countries, doubly challenged
by their small economic size and geographical isolation. Regional infrastructure will facilitate
more intraregional trade and exports from the continent, strongly supporting Africa’s growth
agenda and offering new opportunities to broaden the base o f pro-poor growth.

86.
However, new physical structures are only part o f the challenge. Equally important i s the
accompanying “software” to enable effective use o f infrastructure systems. This “software”
encompasses harmonization o f technical standards and development o f common regulations,
procedures, and legal codes. Crucially, it also includes developing the capacity in national and
regional agencies to drive the harmonization agenda and design and implement cross-border
regulatory arrangements. This complementary aspect to connecting infrastructure i s especially
important for landlocked economies-for the reasons highlighted above.
87.
In line with the revised AAP flagships, Bank assistance to regional infrastructure w i l l
focus on three areas: (a) expanding and upgrading selected trade corridors and transport
networks, (b) improving access to clean energy and improving supply reliability, and (c)
improving telecommunication connectivity. As a priority, Bank assistance for trade corridors and
transport networks w i l l seek to improve the connectivity o f landlocked countries, especially in
the context o f regions or areas o f high economic potential. In this regard, close coordination will
be maintained with the NEPAD (and A D B ) Spatial Development Initiatives. (See box 8 for
further discussion o f the three focus areas.)

88.

Financing for infrastructure hardware will require significant complementary assistance
for related capacity development. At the planning stage, good strategic planning and policy
harmonization are essential to maximize benefits from a financing pool that i s limited compared
to the continent’s immense needs for infrastructure. Likewise, constructing regional
infrastructure requires sound management to ensure quality and efficiency in complex projects
that involve multiple owners and stakeholders. Likewise, operations able to fully leverage

36

benefits from new infrastructure “hardware” require accompanying technical support to develop
the required software, trade, and investment facilitation measures; and to coordinate and
harmonize sector regulations, procedures, and standards. Therefore, the Bank’s assistance to
regional infrastructure will be accompanied by programs to develop capacity in concerned
technical and policy bodies at both regional and national levels. W h i l e assistance to technical
bodies usually can be provided within an investment operation, assistance for policy bodies,
particularly for REC capacity building, often demands grant funding. For these purposes, the
Bank w i l l seek to mobilize grant funds and to leverage the NEPAD Infrastructure Project
Preparatory Fund (IPPF).

Box 8. Focus Areas in Regional Infrastructure
Assistance to trade corridor and transport networks development w i l l continue to combine extension and
rehabilitation o f physical l i n k s along arterial corridors with parallel investment in trade facilitation. Physical
investment w i l l focus on highways, ports and border-crossing facilities. Additional opportunities w i l l be sought
to leverage private financing and investment, for example, in concession agreements for railway operations and
road maintenance. Assistance to trade facilitation w i l l span countries’ efforts to accelerate implementation o f
customs unions and to deal with arrays o f issues hindering trade processing, including harmonization o f customs
procedures and ‘behind-the-border’ issues such as informal roadblocks. Other assistance w i l l help Africa
modernize regulation and security in air transport, a critical mode for high-value exports.’
Support for power sector development will remain a priority, reflecting both the pressing power shortages that
many countries are experiencing and the importance o f integrating mostly small national power systems to lower
costs and improve supply reliability. Africa has opportunities for clean power development that are global in
scale-in both absolute size and potential economies o f scale. Assisting efforts to unlock more o f the continent’s
potential for hydropower w i l l be a special focus. In the near term, assistance w i l l emphasize accelerating
preparation o f these large and complex projects for financing while establishing needed transmission
interconnections.
Assistance to telecommunications will continue to concentrate on strengthening Africa’s international
interconnections and access to broadband internet. These are essential elements o f the business infrastructure
that African firms need to access international markets and compete. IDA assistance w i l l be used to complement
private financing o f international cables and other facilities able to be provided commercially. Additional
opportunities to assist e-government initiatives, including through connecting tertiary education and specialized
health facilities regionally, also will receive priority

Pillar 11. Institutional Cooperation for Economic Integration

89.
W h i l e less visible than physical connectivity constraints, the policy, operational, and
institutional barriers to the free movement o f goods, services, and people in and among countries
are equally problematic to the development o f larger and more efficient markets. Institutional
cooperation and integration at the regional level are essential to surmount the wide array o f
“behind,” “between,” and “at-the-border” constraints. Benefits from strengthened economic
integration include enhancing economies o f scale facilitated by regional infrastructure,
promoting trade diversification, and providing learning-by-exporting experiences that help
African f i r m s launch successfully into global markets. When combined with improved regional
economic and political stability, closer economic integration can enhance incentives for both
domestic and foreign investment, thus spurring existing industries and new business start-ups.

37

Strategically, regional institutional cooperation also can enhance Africa’s presence in
international trade negotiations, strengthening i t s bargaining power. By complementing benefits
from infrastructure hardware, closer institutional cooperation and collaboration will leverage
gains in competitiveness and encourage growth through increased intraregional and global trade.

90.

At the core o f an outward-oriented approach to regional integration i s the removal o f
obstacles to trade and investment in global markets. Institutional cooperation toward economic
integration includes lowering tariff and nontariff barriers to trade among regional groupings and
with global markets; and developing integrated and deeper financial markets, free trade
agreements, and customs unions. I t also includes harmonizing technical standards; developing
common procurement or financial management regulations, procedures, and codes; and
enhancing the capacity o f regional professional associations. The last also carries significance
regarding the governance agenda. Accomplishing these aims w i l l require improving the capacity
o f national and regional agencies to drive the reform and harmonization agenda and to design
and implement cross-border regulatory arrangements.

91.
Bank assistance to economic integration w i l l focus on six main areas: (a) reducing
external tariffs to the rest o f Africa and the rest o f the world; (b) reducing tariff and nontariff
barriers to intraregional trade; (c) implementing and harmonizing customs unions and free trade
agreements, including ongoing WTO-led trade negotiations; (d) improving regional
environments for business, investment and industrial cooperation; (e) strengthening regional
financial markets and related institutions; and ( f) assisting regional initiatives to improve
governance (for example, the Africa Peer Review Mechanism, the EITI-plus agenda, public
financial management, and procurement).

92.
In implementing this pillar o f the strategy, the focus w i l l be to define opportunities and
challenges in more specific terms. D o i n g so will better equip regional policy discussions, thus
garnering political constituencies for policy changes to unlock more business and trade potential.
Complementing policy assistance will be support for capacity development in RECs and other
relevant regional bodies and financing for regional programs able to leverage gains from policy
reforms. Bank lending i s expected primarily to assist trade and transport facilitation projects and
regional capital market development (in collaboration with IFC and MIGA).
Pillar 111. Coordinated Interventions to Provide Regional Public Goods
93.

Beyond the economic opportunities o f regional integration, other important development
challenges that cut across national boundaries also can be addressed more effectively through
coordinated intervention. National campaigns against HIV/AIDS, for example, are reinforced by
action along regional trade corridors. In the same way, campaigns against malaria and avian
influenza are more effective when organized among groups o f countries. Similar considerations
apply to controlling migratory pests such as locusts. Coordinated intervention also i s needed for
water and sensitive
sustainable management o f shared natural resources-particularly
ecosystems (the 47 countries o f Sub-Saharan Africa share 69 international water basins). Africa
also i s moving to create new types o f regional public goods based o n improved regional
knowledge. More effective agricultural research and dissemination through developing regional
centers o f excellence i s but one example that holds considerable potential. Conversely,
coordinated interventions are being developed to tackle some types o f negative public goods,

38

such as food insecurity from flooding, pests, and drought; risks to health and ecosystems f r o m
accidental pesticide stockpile leaks; and-certainly
not least-potential
impacts o f climate
change.

94.
Bank assistance in support o f regional solutions and regional public goods will focus on
(a) improved management of shared water resources; (b) raising agricultural productivity
(including research and knowledge-sharing on likely implications o f climate change, and
assistance in developing mitigation strategies); (c) regional and subregional programs to address
cross-border dimensions o f malaria prevention and treatment; (d) increasing access t o H I V / A I D S
prevention methods along main transport corridors, and improving preparedness t o respond to
transboundary pandemics, other infectious diseases, and pests; and (e) regional rationalization o f
research and tertiary education to strengthen regional knowledge assets and technical capacity. In
addition, the Bank w i l l explore potential avenues to enable i t to provide assistance to address the
regional dimensions o f conflicts and emergency responses. A combination o f lending and M A
i s envisaged to assist in these areas, and the Bank w i l l deploy concerted efforts to mobilize grant
funding on a larger scale.
Cross-CuttingTheme: Regional and NationalPlanning

95.

Successful regional initiatives are rooted in coordinated national actions: harmonizing
policies, developing complementary institutional capacity and knowledge, and coordinating
implementation and management o f shared programs at national levels. Presently, convergences
o f political willingness to work regionally largely reflect constituencies developed through crossborder technical associations, such as regional associations o f national power utilities or river
basin authorities. In other words, regional initiatives to date-while individually importanthave tended to be activity based rather than strategically selected at the regional economy level.
This opportunistic approach has been pragmatic while regional strategic planning was in a
nascent stage. However, the former only partially exploits the leveraging o f outcomes feasible
through more strategic approaches to regional integration. Since activity-based initiatives tend to
be championed by national technical agencies, the approach does not naturally evolve into
strategic engagement at the level o f whole economies. In the absence hitherto o f coherent
statements o f regional priorities, activity-based initiatives can make only limited progress toward
the vision o f integration set out by Africa’s leaders.

96.
The opportunity to leverage regional integration more fully i s inextricably linked with the
challenges to strengthen regional strategic planning and build stronger interconnections with
national development planning. These, in turn, are linked with the challenges to develop the
capacity o f key regional bodies and the national planning organs to which they relate. Competent
RECs, with delineated memberships and clear responsibilities, thus have a uniquely important
role in moves toward stronger regional integration in Africa. Important aspects o f this role
include facilitating provision o f regional public goods and brokering credible mechanisms to
compensate losers in specific integration initiatives. However, the complex patchwork presented
by RECs’ overlapping memberships raises numerous problems for policy and program
coordination and has been an underlying reason for their mixed success.
97.
Improving the effectiveness o f Africa’s regional institutions i s central to accelerate
regional integration. Without stronger professional resources-including
additional skills in

39

specific areas-it i s difficult to conceive h o w Africa can lead and accelerate regional policy
formulation and policy harmonization spanning infrastructure, trade integration, trade
facilitation, financial sector integration, PSD, water security, and others areas. Moreover, the
limited capability o f regional organizations constrains implementation o f regional programs
feasible to undertake now. Understandably, national governments are reluctant to cede
responsibility to implement important parts o f their national development programs to
institutions they regard as having limited capability.

98.
Bank assistance in this area will focus o n three priorities: (a) support for SSA-wide
themes centered o n capacity development o f the AU (and NEPAD), (b) capacity development o f
select RECs and subsidiary regional bodies, and (c) support to strengthen connection between
regional policy commitments and national planning. The assistance under (a) and (b) initially
w i l l focus on the joint ADB-World Bank program to develop a capacity building initiative for
regional integration, discussed below, and a dedicated AAA program.
Table 2 summarizes the program focus by strategic pillars and World Bank roles (a
source o f financing, builder o f capacity, provider o f knowledge, and honest broker).

99.

B.

Criteria of Engagement and Selectivity

100. The strategic framework presented in the previous section sets the main boundaries
within which the World Bank’s engagement to assist regional integration in SSA will be
considered. Regional integration and cooperation offer many win-win opportunities, particularly
activities under Pillar I,
which do not require or warrant any particular role for either the Bank or
other multilateral or bilateral partners. However, coordination failures (lack o f trust among
countries, lack o f administrative capacity, dissimilar political priorities) and perceived economic
and political risks will prevent many win-win possibilities from materializing without public
intervention (from organizations such as the Bank). In practice, regional integration i s often
about less clear-cut situations, with a complex geometry o f perceptions among stakeholderslosers as well as winners-and for which an equitable “pay-off matrix” i s more difficult to
establish. Because demand for assistance with regional programs far exceeds available resources,
and to help focus Bank assistance, the following broad selection criteria will be used to
determine whether and how the Bank w i l l assist regional integration activities that fall within the
strategic framework discussed above:
In win-win situations, particularly Pillar Itype activities but also some Pillar I1 type
activities, with clear coordination problems (for which priority regional public goods or
investments will not be provided in the absence o f outside coordination or intervention).
Bank support should serve primarily to foster and facilitate partnerships between
countries involved and the private sector. Seed funding and/or guarantees may be
considered, but kept to a minimum, to leverage Bank engagement.
In situations in which there are inadequate incentives for a country to take into account
the needs or interests o f neighboring countries (in other words, a pay-off matrix that i s
less than clear-cut). Bank engagement through lending and/or otherwise can create the
incentives necessary to involve all the partners. In the case o f transport infrastructure, this
typically would involve one or more land-locked countries (as winners) and a

40

neighboring coastal country. Some Pillar Iand several Pillar I1activities would fall in this
category.
Traditional regional public goods (“pure” public goods, as defined in table 1 o f chapter
11) along with capacity building activities often warrant direct outside assistance, without
which they often are not able to be undertaken. The Bank’s role and nature o f
engagement w i l l depend on the regional priority assigned to the activity and the
availability o f support from other partners.

101. Furthermore, the Bank’s financial assistance in support o f regional integration will
continue to observe the criteria for what constitutes regional projects established under the
Regional Pilot Program. Namely, these projects:

C.

a

Involve three or more countries, all o f which need to participate for the project’s
objectives to be achievable (that is, the project would not make sense without the
participation o f all o f these countries)

a

Produce benefits, either economic or social, that spill over country boundaries
(that is, projects that generate significant positive externalities or mitigate
negative ones)

a

Involve clear evidence o f country or regional (such as E C O W A S or SADC)
ownership and demonstrate commitment o f the majority o f participating countries

a

Provide a platform for a high level o f policy harmonization among countries (this
i s key to the success o f a regional initiative) and are part o f a well-developed and
broadly supported regional strategy.

Strategy Implementation and Activity Programs

102. The core purview o f the strategic framework discussed above i s the IDA Regional
Program and i t s associated lending and nonlending activities. However, the aim i s t o gradually
enlarge the scope and reach o f the strategic framework to ensure a more systematic reflection o f
regional priorities in the Bank’s country assistance strategies and in Africa-wide sector
strategies, as well as to strengthen synergies among IDA, the IBRD, IFC, and MIGA b y
enhancing collaboration and coordination. Furthermore, since the political economy o f regional
integration differs across Africa, it i s o f fundamental importance to tailor Bank Group assistance
to reflect the varying priorities (political as well as economic) o f different country groupings.
Regional ImplementationPlans

103. With this in mind, specific lending and nonlending activities for Bank assistance will be
elaborated in four subregional implementation plans, covering West, Central, East, and Southern
Africa, respectively. Ensuring strong partnerships and donor coordination as well as SSA-wide
efforts to support capacity building in RECs will be two other key elements in implementing the
strategy.

41

Table 2. Program focus by strategic pillar and M rld Bank roles
World Bank in different I les
Financing source
Capacity builder
Knowledge bank/Honest broker
Expand and upgrade selected
trade corridors and transport
networks
Improve access to clean
energy and supply reliability
Improve telecommunication
connectivity.
Trade facilitation (improving
regional environments for
business, investment, and
industrial cooperation)
Regional capital market
development and integration

Develop coordinated
approaches to create regional
and subregional networks o f
transportation, energy, and
communication

Transboundary water
resources
Cross-border dimensions o f
malaria prevention and
treatment
Increasedaccess to HIVlAIDS
prevention methods along
main transport corridors
Improved preparedness to
respond to transboundary
pandemics, other infectious
diseases, pests, and natural
catastrophes

Regional rationalizationof
research and tertiary education
to strengthen regional
knowledge assets and technical
capacity
Development o f regional
bodies to track migratory
infectious diseases
Development o f river basin
authorities

Support to RECs to implement
and harmonize customs unions
and free trade agreements,
including analytical work
and/or TA related to new trade
agreements (including EPAs
with the EC) and ongoing
WTO-led multilateral trade
negotiations

Support analyses to underpin trade
corridor and transport network
development, and partnerships to create
constituencies for action among country
neighborhoods
Help ensure fair and appropriate sharing
of costs and benefits
Analyses to assist RECs in negotiating
and implementing new trade agreements
as well as harmonization among RECs.
Analyses to delineate and prioritize
aspects o f Aid-for-Trade in the context
of EPAs and WTO negotiations
Regional distillations of country
InvestmentClimate Assessment work
and Doing Business reports and
disseminationthrough partnerships
between private sector bodies and RECs
Regional approaches to good governance
Analyses of implications of climate
change and development o f mitigation
strategies
Exploration of avenues for Bank
assistance to help address regional
dimensions o f conflicts and emergency
responses

Capacity development of
select RECs and subsidiary
regional bodies (joint ADBWorld Bank RECs Capacity
Building Initiative)
Support for SSA-wide themes
centered around capacity
development o f A U (and
NEPAD)
Support to strengthen
connection between regional
policy commitments and
national planning

104. RIAS sets out a continent-wide strategic framework to prioritize knowledge, capacity
development, and investment around broad strategic pillars. Implementation through subregional
implementation plans secures two criteria essential for effective implementation o f the strategy:
0

Subregional implementation plans enable country teams to coordinate CAS
objectives and business plans in areas in which regional solutions hold potential to

42

strengthen outcomes at the national level, or which facilitate creation o f important
regional public goods not achievable through national action alone
0

Subregional plans likewise enable implementation o f R I A S through the Bank’s
country-based approach and in a manner that strengthens t h i s approach through
leveraging national engagements into coordinated regional programs, mostly
within the scope o f the Bank’s country engagements.

105. Initiated b y the Regional Integration Department, co-led by the concerned country teams,
and involving relevant departments in IFC and MIGA, the first generation o f implementation
plans for the 4 subregions will be prepared over the next 12 months (by the end o f FYO9). Each
plan will identify areas in which their CASs will assist countries to implement regional solutions,
and identify specific regional knowledge, capacity development, and investment activities in
which the country teams w i l l j o i n in collaborative efforts to strengthen outcomes at the national
level.

106. Within these subregional plans, priorities for collaboration with IBRD, IFC, and MIGA
will be opportunities to catalyze private financing in regional power, telecommunications and
transport programs, and knowledge activities (including policy development) dealing with
regional private sector development. An especially important role for I F C will be to lead the
preparation o f priority regional projects through i t s new project preparation facility. The Bank’s
normal strategy review processes w i l l ensure that region-wide sector strategies and C D M A P are
appropriately reflected in the development and updating o f regional implementation plans.
(Appendix VII contains preliminary guidelines for the envisaged regional implementation plan.)
Results Framework

107. A results-based monitoring framework that includes a set o f indicators to monitor the
progress o f subregional implementation plans has been developed (appendix VIII) and will be
refined as the implementation plans are developed. Situated within the focus and flagships o f the
revised AAP, the framework identifies broad outcomes to be achieved and the Bank’s planned
contributions to achieve them. At the continental level, R I A S outcomes w i l l be aggregations o f
outcomes recorded through the subregional implementation plans developed by groups o f
country teams.
108. Each o f these plans w i l l include a results-based monitoring framework to track specific
regional activities. Thus, arrangements for monitoring require a consistent approach between the
continental level o f RIAS and i t s subregional implementation plans, and among country teams in
their areas o f regional collaboration. This consistency w i l l take time to develop and phase into
the CASs. Subregional implementation plans will be developed over the next nine months. Each
will include plans to develop the needed consistency in results monitoring. As regional databases
are developed, outcome indicators and markers o f progress toward objectives in the subregional
plans w i l l be fine-tuned. By the end of IDA15, African CASs, regional implementation plans, and
regional and national M6E frameworks are expected to be fully aligned.

43

Capacity Development

109. The Bank’s full engagement in assisting with strengthening the professional capacity and
effectiveness o f regional knowledge and policy bodies i s central to the successful
implementation o f RIAS. Work o n capacity development i s not planned separately f r o m
knowledge partnerships or investment assistance. Capacity development i s an essential
component o f the activities that w i l l help steer these engagements toward successful outcomes.
As such, plans to assist capacity development are integral parts o f the activities to which they
relate. The Bank’s limited experience to date has demonstrated that capacity development work
with regional bodies i s most effective when cast in the context o f a specific program priority,
whether a knowledge activity to assist in driving regional policy debate or preparation o f a
regional investment project. Thus, capacity development under R I A S will focus o n two broad
areas: (a) support for R E C capacity development and relevant sector subsidiaries as they relate to
the three RIAS pillars and the cross-cutting challenge o f connecting regional and national
strategic planning, and (b) more general capacity development, although targeted to specific
areas.
110. In terms o f the strategic pillars, capacity development related to regional infrastructure
will concentrate on assisting RECs to develop regional regulatory structures in transport, power,
telecommunications, and air transport. Assistance also will be provided to strengthen R E C work
t o facilitate private investment and public-private partnerships (PPPs), especially those related to
regional power opportunities and international telecommunications. Assistance to RECs will be
complemented b y assistance to regional technical bodies to develop planning capabilities.
Capacity building assistance to institutional cooperation w i l l focus foremost o n building capacity
in trade policy at both regional and national levels. Assistance will be provided particularly in the
context o f ongoing discussions and negotiations with the E C on EPAs. Other assistance will
focus on developing capacity among selected RECs to interface more directly with regional
private sector groupings to better inform policy harmonization and regional policy formulation
related to PSD.

111. Finally, in relation to regional public goods, the priorities will be to assist capacity
development in bodies concerned with managing regional water resources and fisheries and
fighting HIV/AIDS and malaria. Assistance related to climate change will focus o n developing
REC capacity to broaden dialogue at the senior political level. In relation t o regional and
strategic planning, the Bank w i l l assist R E C efforts to develop and update regional strategic
plans. Bank work w i l l focus on strengthening collaborative engagements among the planning
authorities o f the concerned countries. Assistance with capacity development i s envisaged at
both regional and national levels. Thus, the Bank will seek to ensure a more systematic reflection
o f regional capacity development priorities in the CASs, thereby strengthening linkages with
capacity building undertaken through country programs.
112. Regarding more general capacity development, prospects o f providing direct assistance
depend to a considerable extent on the availability o f a suitable regional grant instrument, which
i s not available under the IDA Regional Program. A joint effort o f the Regional Integration
Departments o f the ADB and the World Bank i s underway to develop a capacity building
initiative for regional integration. T o establish a shared platform able to pool financial and
knowledge resources to develop capacity and to implement this with enhanced alignment and

44

donor harmonization, assistance to selected RECs and other regional bodies could focus o n three
areas. These would be (a) harmonization o f regional trade arrangements and other REC policies
in support o f regional integration, (b) constituency building (for RECs with weak commitment
and support from member countries), and (c) demand-based support in 2-3 key functional areas
(such as fiduciary systems, human resource management, M&E, and economic analysis). A first
consultation meeting with RECs and other key African organization, organized jointly by the
World Bank, ADB and the AU, i s planned to take place by end-March 2008.

Partnership and Donor Alignment
113. The field of bilateral and multilateral donors, private investors, and civil society
stakeholders supporting Africa's regional investments, knowledge activities, and capacity
development i s continuously expanding. Some partners have been working regionally with
Africa for a considerable time; others, including the Bank, are relative newcomers. Most donors
face challenges o f working regionally through country-based engagements and national financial
instruments. As has the Bank, many partners also have faced challenges to arrange assistance
strategically before the development o f clear linkages between regional integration strategies and
national development plans.
114. Limitations o f the RECs' capacity have added to these challenges in two ways. Their
limited capacity has overstretched possibilities for clear and strong leadership o f donor groups,
with consequences for alignment with REC priorities. Second, RECs have lacked the needed
capacity to develop and implement management and fiduciary arrangements to harmonize
assistance using client systems. As a result, donor alignment and harmonization in regional
programs have yet to mirror the impressive progress in country programs spurred by the Paris
Declaration o n Aid Effectiveness. There have been encouraging initiatives among groups o f
donors. However, alignment and harmonization in regional programs generally w i l l benefit
further from stronger client leadership set within frameworks that more clearly link regional
strategies with national development programs.
115. Deeper Bank partnerships with the AU Commission and with selected RECs will be vital
to achieve the knowledge and policy-related outcomes targeted under RIAS, which are chiefly to
assist Africa to develop more effective regional policy bodies. Following from the discussion
above, important aspects o f these partnerships will be to assist improvements in donor alignment
and harmonization, hence to assist regional bodies to exercise stronger leadership o f donor
engagements. In these respects, the Bank's engagement in, and assistance to, REC capacity
development are ~ r i t i c a l . ~ '
116. In parallel, the Bank will seek to engage in strategic partnerships with key donors to
leverage outcomes from regional initiatives within R I A S pillars. Strategic partnerships are being
pursued with the ADB (focused on support for cross-border infrastructure and REC capacity
building), the E C (focused on trade and investment integration and, similarly, o n REC capacity
building), and key bilateral donors (DfID, France, the Nordic Countries, Germany, and Japan)
with the dual objective o f mobilizing support for the RECs capacity building initiative and, more

In this regard, the Bank would support extension o f the Paris Declaration to cover alignment and harmonization in
regional programs.
30

45

broadly, to seek greater alignment and harmonization in assistance for regional integration in
Sub-Saharan Africa. Furthermore, the Bank will also seek to engage with China and India with
the purpose o f achieving greater collaboration and coordination, particularly in the areas o f
regional infrastructure.

D.

Proposed Activity Program for FY09

117. As the four subregional implementation plans will be developed only during FY09, the
proposed FYO9 lending and nonlending program i s summarized below.
Lending Program

118.

While likely to increase in absolute terms, financing for the first pillar o f RIAS-regional
infrastructure-is
expected to account for approximately 70 percent o f IDA regional funding.
Lending w i l l focus on assisting development o f additional trade corridors, expanding access to
clean energy (particularly hydropower), extending international telecommunications and internet
access, and modernizing air transport regulation and security. Under the second pillarinstitutional cooperation for economic integration-financing i s envisaged primarily in support
o f trade facilitation and regional financial markets, and i s expected to account for approximately
an additional 15 percent o f resources. Investment lending will focus on extending availability o f
cross-border financial instruments, further development o f regional capital markets, and
assistance to selected regional development banks.
119. Under the third pillar-coordinated interventions and provision o f public goods-the
main priorities for Bank assistance will be programs to manage regional water resources.
Assistance in this area benefits from a considerable investment in partnerships and developing
regional knowledge, particularly under the N i l e Basin Initiative and work on the Senegal River.
This work strongly positions the Bank to assist in supporting priority projects. Other Bank
assistance with shared resources will give priority to forestry and sustainable management o f
marine fisheries.

120. Assistance in combating migratory diseases and agricultural pests will aim to leverage the
effectiveness o f national campaigns through helping countries target cross-border and regional
vectors. Priorities will be to step up the fights against HIV/AIDS and malaria. Bank engagement
w i l l comprise capacity development o f concerned cross-border organizations (including CSOs)
and investments related to education and prevention, particularly infrastructure programs that
strengthen connectivity. Bank assistance to tertiary education, research, and health w i l l support
initiatives by groups o f countries to improve outcomes through moving toward increased
specialization in regional centers o f excellence. Additional assistance i s planned to support
NEPAD’s Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Program (CADAP). The Bank also
will undertake knowledge work to explore options for collaboration in capital-intensive science
and technology tertiary education and in regional approaches to monitor disease.
121.

The proposed IDA lending program for FYO9 i s set out in table 3.

46

Table 3. RIAS indicative lending program by pillars (US$ millions)

Expand and Upgrade Road Networks and
Transit Corridors (AAP VI)

Abidjan-Lagos Transport and Transit Project

242

Improve Access to and Reliability o f Clean
Energy

East Africa Power Market APLl
West Africa Power Pool (Phase 111- 1)

100
60

Improve Telecommunication Connectivity

Central Africa Backbone
East Africa Telecommunications RCIP I1

45
35

Increased Trade with Regional and
Nonregional Economies

East and Southern Africa TA Services
Project (APL1)
Regional Trade Facilitation S I L 2

20

100

Strengthen African Private Sector (AAP 1)

Central Africa Financial Sector Integration

50

Raise Agricultural Productivity (AAP IV)

West Africa Reg. Project for Fisheries

45

Increased Access to Safe Water and Sanitation
(AAP VII)

Lake Victoria Environmental Mgt. Project
Phase I1

180

Build Skills for Competitiveness in Global
Economy ( A M 111)
Strengthened Health Systems and Combat
HIVIAIDS and Malaria (AAP VIII)

AAA Program
122. Knowledge products and their dissemination w i l l be important to progress, and underpin
implementation o f RIAS. Strategically, the main areas o f concentration will be AAA in
conjunction with investment assistance around the three strategic pillars. Objectives will be to (a)
assist regional bodies to create and drive policy discussion of matters in which regional dialogue
i s needed to promote policy harmonization; and (b) develop needed additional knowledge to
underpin priority regional investments. Emphasis will continue to be given to areas in which
there are clear gaps in regional knowledge and regional databases are not yet well developed.31
Illustrative in this regard are several regional diagnostic studies carried out in FY06 and FY07.
They include a review of implementation of customs unions, analyses o f gaps in regional
infrastructure (covering trade corridors, regional power systems, and international
telecommunications links), and three regional assessments o f financial sector i n t e g r a t i ~ n ,with
~~
emphasis on access to trade-related financial instruments. Concerning water resources, an
Given the high priority o f regional integration in Africa, the AFR Regional Integration Department has allocated
15% o f its budget for regional analytical products, considerably above the norm for country departments during
FY06 and FY07.
32 This very successful ESW is continued with TA follow-up work in East Africa.
31

47

assessment o f the economics o f multisector investments in the Zambezi Basin provides the
analytical foundation to assist riparian countries t o define a collaborative long-term strategy for
investments in the basin.
123. Ongoing AAA continue these strategic investments in knowledge. They encompass
options assessments for trade integration among groups o f countries, strategic assessments o f
regional mineral sector developments, assessment o f possible impacts o f climate change,
prioritization o f multipurpose investment options in the N i l e Basin, and assessments o f
opportunities to develop regional centers o f excellence in agricultural research.
124. Work on regional infrastructure will assist technical bodies to delineate investment
priorities in programs dealing with power pools, transport corridors and international
communications; and to prepare specific projects for financing. The Bank w i l l participate in
additional implementation reviews o f the NEPAD Short-term Action Plan, development o f the
NEPAD Medium-Term Action Plan, development o f infrastructure programs under the Spatial
Development Initiative, and implementation reviews and other analyses under the G8 Africa
Infrastructure Consortium. M u c h o f this work will be undertaken in collaboration with ADB.

125. Work on institutional cooperation (in support o f trade, investment, and financial
integration) will focus o n assisting countries in the aftermath o f the negotiation o f the Economic
Partnership Agreements (EPAs). Work will assist selected RECs to harmonize trade policies o f
member countries and simplify and reduce trade tariffs; and assist countries to define priority
needs in relation to Aid-for- Trade (AfT).33Other work planned will complete a regional I C A to
assist regional policy dialogue on PSD, and additional assessments o f opportunities to advance
financial sector integration. Also planned i s a regional analysis o f remittances by the African
Diaspora into and among Southern African states.

E.

Bank Processes and Instruments

126. Outcomes from R I A S can be enhanced through adjusting some processes and through
accelerating decentralization o f staff working on regional programs. The I D A 1 4 Mid-Term
Review and the FY06 IEG review o f Bank regional programs identified aspects o f present
business processes that are awkward in processing regional programs. These recommendations
are planned to be implemented in the remaining months o f FY08 and in FYO9. Included are
proposed adjustments to staff incentives. Most regional activities are more complex than
activities within a single country and often take more time. Bank management i s committed to
give additional weight to regional work to reflect the corporate importance now attached t o the
regional agenda.

I t i s expected that the EPAs w i l l have a considerable impact on the regional integration agenda in AFR, RECs'
configuration, and regional and national production capacities and trade flows. EPAs' potential as a tool for regional
integration i s particularly high, especially when accompanied by complementary initiatives o f other donors in
several fields (economic diversification, tax revenue diversification and tax reforms, RECs capacity building, trade
in services).
33

48

Bank Instruments
127. W h i l e IDA credits have been made to regional organizations on at least five occasions in
the association’s history, IDA’Spractice has been to provide financing primarily to sovereigns.
In a departure from t h i s practice, the IDA pilot included explicit provisions for lending to
regional institutions, particularly in cases in which project costs cannot be allocated to individual
countries. It remains a challenge for IDA to provide financing directly to many regional
organizations that are unable to borrow. Since IDA14, the sole criterion for making IDA grant
resources available i s a country’s risk o f debt distress. At the same time, it seems evident that
without more effective regional policy institutions, the sustainability o f at least some regional
programs i s questionable. Other sustainable opportunities are unlikely to be exploited without
strong partnerships with other donors. Finally, some o f the poorest IDA countries are constrained
from participating in regional projects because their IBRD neighbors do not have access to
concessional finance and are unwilling to borrow at market rates.

F.

Results Framework and Risk Management

Results Monitoring
128. As mentioned earlier, results matrices will be developed for each o f the four subregional
implementation plans. For purposes of monitoring the roll-out of the strategy, appendix IX sets
out key pe$ormance indicators related to actions under Bank control.

Managing Risks
129. A matrix has been developed that identifies the main risks facing RIAS implementation
and how these might be mitigated, to the extent feasible (appendix X). The risk matrix and
mitigating strategies and actions cover eight main risk areas.
130. Political support constituencies.The main risk facing progress in regional integration i s
that political support weakens under the continuing frustration o f slow implementation o f priority
regional programs. R I A S w i l l limit i t s exposure through focusing on areas in which political
commitment to integration i s most solid and at the continental-level and regional partnerships
have shown themselves to be durable. Exposure to exogenous risks i s mitigated also by the
Bank’s assistance to regional integration in each region o f Africa. It i s highly unlikely that
political support could suffer a general collapse. It i s less unlikely that political support for
integration could change from region to region. Regional collapses o f commitment undoubtedly
would harm the effectiveness o f RIAS in the area concerned and probably in the CASs
concerned. However, reallocations of resources would enable RIAS to step up assistance in other
regions. Thus, wavering political commitment t o integration i s likely to impact the geographic
distribution o f Bank assistance to a greater extent than it would the overall effectiveness o f
RIAS.
13 1. Institutional architecture. The overlapping memberships and responsibilities o f the
RECs risk constraining the effectiveness o f all development partners, and-more importantlyo f Africa’s own efforts to progress integration. The AU i s championing reform efforts by leading
political discussions to rationalize the number o f regional bodies and their responsibilities. This
effort i s building political momentum. Nevertheless, changes w i l l be politically sensitive and
49

take time. I t i s not clear that any adjustments are likely within the R I A S implementation period.
At stake i s not a failure o f R I A S but limitations to the strategy’s effectiveness if priority
programs are impaired through limited coherence and coordination among regional bodies. It
therefore i s important for RIAS to assist rationalization efforts b y the AU. T o limit exposure,
RIAS w i l l base engagements primarily o n alignments o f national political support, rather than o n
REC strategies.
132. Capacity development. The capacity o f regional institutions, RECs in particular, i s
critical to progress in integration. M o r e substantive regional policy debate in areas such as trade,
infrastructure development, and financial sector integration i s essential to improve alignment
between regional and national policy priorities. Absent improved capacity, it will be difficult to
achieve policy alignments to unlock additional integration opportunities. Notwithstanding this,
REC capacity i s less a risk to the effectiveness o f RIAS than an opportunity to leverage further
impact. Implementation o f R I A S will not hinge o n REC programs, nor does the strategy look
toward RECs to lead critical activities. Although more effective RECs would unlock additional
opportunities through deeper integration, it i s feasible to exploit numerous integration
opportunities with RECs functioning as they are. Therefore, successful implementation o f R I A S
i s not predicated on stronger RECs.
133. Linkages with country programs. The effectiveness o f RIAS will be determined largely
by how it i s implemented at the national level. Central to the strategy’s design is, first, that much
o f i t should be implemented through the Bank’s country-based business model. Second, the
strategy should focus o n leveraging CAS outcomes through exploiting regional opportunities in
national development programs. Proposed arrangements for implementation address t h i s
challenge head-on.
134. Alignment and harmonization. Partnerships with both the private sector and official
development partners are essential t o leverage impacts from Bank assistance-hence are critical
to the effectiveness o f RIAS. The strategy therefore places considerable emphasis on
partnerships. Particularly in programs o f regional infrastructure, R I A S will emphasize catalyzing
private know-how and investment. Programs involving official donors will emphasize
sharpening alignment and harmonization to leverage the effectiveness o f available resources.
While recent progress been encouraging, for the most part, alignment and harmonization in
regional programs have not yet matched the improvements achieved in country programs.
135. Program complexity. Mindful o f the capabilities o f all partners, including the Bank, a
general challenge to implement R I A S will be to limit the complexity o f regional programs. By
their nature, regional programs often are more complex than national programs, involving
multiple clients and arrays o f national agencies and stakeholders. Although regional programs
require agreement o n core objectives, the objectives o f participants usually are aligned less than
perfectly. Thus, there i s a tendency for regional programs t o incorporate the national components
considered priorities by individual countries. The resulting regional program can become both
complex and fragmented, stretching the implementation capabilities o f all parties.
136. To succeed, RIAS will need a disciplined approach to program design. The aim w i l l be to
focus activities o n core objectives not achievable through stand-alone national actions.
Associated programs considered important by participating countries will be assisted through

50

country programs. (The Regional Communications Infrastructure Program, developed jointly
with IFC, i s an example o f this approach.) Grounding implementation o f RIAS in country
programs will ensure that associated national priorities are followed up and resourced in a timely
manner.

137. Implementation challenges Regional programs often bring together national systems o f
procurement and financial management, which, although all in line with Bank policies, are
subject to different institutional arrangements andor implementation provisions. This presents
additional challenges in program design and implementation. The Bank will ensure that
assistance provided during implementation i s adequately resourced, both financially and in the
availability o f specialized staff. Moreover, in the context o f investment engagements, special
attention w i l l be given to strengthen the capacity o f regional technical organizations (power pool
and river basin authorities, for example) to manage multicountry implementation. A mid-term
review o f progress in IDA15 w i l l assess the extent to which Bank implementation arrangements
are appropriate and recommend adjustments where needed.
138. Bank instruments, policies, and processes IDA financial instruments, designed
primarily for country programs, meet the needs o f regional financings to varying degrees. Some
types o f regional public goods, particularly those for which countries are willing to use only
grant financing, may not be able t o be financed directly by IDA (for example, REC capacity
development). The IDA15 mid-term review will afford an opportunity to assess IDA policies as
they apply to regional projects to determine whether these can be adapted to enhance the IDA
Regional Program’s effectiveness. Bank processes likewise meet the needs o f regional work to
only a limited extent. Internal reviews have identified where changes are needed to sharpen staff
incentives and strengthen support to task teams. These changes w i l l be implemented early in
IDA15.

51

APPENDIX I.AFRICA’S GROWTH DIVERGENCE BY GEOGRAPHIC
OPPORTUNITY CATEGORY
1.
The common approach to measuring continent-wide growth for Africa has been t o take
the simple average o f GDP growth across all countries. However, this i s a rather crude
measurement in that i t gives the same weight to both very small and very large countries and
therefore does not accurately portray the economic experiences o f the “typical” African. This i s
especially problematic in that South Africa accounts for roughly half o f Africa’s total GDP, but
only 6% o f the continent’s population. By weighting GDP per capita growth figures by country
population, the end result i s presumably a much closer approximation o f the “typical” economic
growth experience.
2.

Table A l . l gives the average population-weighted GDP per capita growth rates by
decade for 43 Sub-Saharan African countries’ and 64 Developing countries outside o f Africa’ for
which a full data set was available. Beyond the aggregate figures, the countries are further
broken down into three categories based on the two defining economic realities o f African
economies - availability o f natural resources and physical geography: Resource-Rich countries3,
Resource-Scarce Coastal countries and Resource-Scarce Landlocked countries. (Coastal and
Landlocked Resource-Rich countries have been aggregated into a single group as being
landlocked has not been shown to be an impediment to extraction o f valuable resources and
empirically there i s little to n o difference between the growth rates of the two group^.)^ SSA’s
population i s broadly split among the three groups, with roughly 29% falling into the ResourceR i c h country category, 37% in Resource-Scarce Coastal category and 34% in Resource-Scarce
Landlocked category. Globally, these three categories o f countries have experienced diverging
growth performance, with a roughly parallel result in Africa.

1

Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Comoros, DRC, Republic o f Congo, Cote d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger,
Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Georgia,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz
Republic, Latvia, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua N e w
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovak Republic, Sri Lanka, St. Lucia,
St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Syria, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen
A country i s classified as resource-rich starting in the f i s t year the country satisfies the following three conditions:
Current rents from energy, minerals and forests exceed 5% o f GNI; A forward moving average o f these rents
exceeds 10% o f GNI; The share o f primary commodities in exports exceeds 20% for at least a 5-year period
following this initial year. For SSA the countries are Angola, Botswana, Cameroon, Congo, Equatorial Guinea,
Gabon, Guinea, Liberia, Mauritania, Namibia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Zambia and Swaziland. Other resource-rich
developing countries include Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, Indonesia, Iran, Kazakhstan, Malaysia,
Oman, Papua New Guinea, Syria and Yemen.
4
Collier, P. and S. O’Connell, 2007, African Economic Growth: Opportunities and Choices, in Ndulu, B., R. Bates,
P. Collier and S. O’Connell (eds.) The Political Economy of African Growth 1960-2000, Cambridge University
Press

*

52

3.
The divergence in population-weighted per capita growth performance between Africa
and other developing countries has been high, nearing an average 4% gap since the 1970s. The
bulk o f t h i s divergence has come from the resource-scarce coastal countries category, where SSA
has consistently underperformed in comparison to other developing rivals. Globally, this has
been the highest performing group and accounts for nearly 88% o f the total population from the
other developing countries sample, while in SSA this group accounts for only 37% o f the
population and has actually performed worse than i t s resource-rich neighbors. Africa’s
landlocked countries have experienced the least divergence, though this i s mostly due to the poor
performance o f rivals, not superior growth in these countries. In fact, SSA’s high number o f
landlocked countries (15), and large population within the Resource-Scarce Landlocked
countries category (roughly 34% compared with less than 2% in the sample group o f other
developing countries), has skewed the aggregate result heavily toward this globally slow
growing category.
4.
The result o f SSA’s divergence has been dramatic, with most countries outside o f SSA
greatly reducing poverty over the past four decades, while the per-capita growth rates in SSA
have generally lagged behind population growth, resulting in increasing numbers o f individuals
in poverty.
Table Al.1: Population Weighted Growth Per Capita by Opportunity Category and Decade

Growth Differential
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000-07
Total Average

-2.49
-4.95
-4.46
-3.06
-3.77

-2.85
-2.27
-0.35
- 1.46
-1.74

-2.62
-5.60
-4.26
-3.48
-3.91

53

-1.37
-3.18
-2.30
-0.27
-1.86

APPENDIX 11. THE EVOLVING INSTITUTIONAL ARCHITECTURE FOR
REGIONAL INTEGRATION IN AFRICA
1.
The seeds o f Pan-Africanism-the movement to unite the African continent economically
and politically, date back to the 18* century among African visionaries and members o f the
Diaspora. The idea began to take a more concrete shape with the first Pan-African Congress held
in 1900, gradually gaining momentum until formally enshrined in the founding charter o f the
Organization o f African Unity in 1963, the precursor to the modem African Union. Originally
focused on supporting independence movements, gradual progress toward decolonization
provided the opportunity for the O A U to realign i t s priorities toward Pan-African integration.
The Lagos Plan o f Action in 1980 articulated the goal o f a common African market to be
achieved by 2000, and expressed notion that emerging regional bodies and configurations should
ultimately converge to form a single Pan-African arrangement.
2.
Within the context o f the movement toward continent-wide integration, regional and
subregional institutional arrangements have been growing in number and complexity since the
1960s. Africa i s now home to more o f these organizations than any other world region. While
these institutions were generally formed to serve their o w n unique logic and purpose, they also
are viewed by many as stepping stones toward the higher aspiration o f Pan-African integration.
3.
The driving forces behind the multitude o f regional-level organizations that exist in
Africa today are both internal to Africa and in response to developments elsewhere in the world.
The ‘first-generation,’ or ‘first wave’ o f regional level institutions took shape in the 1970s
through early- 1980s. Prevailing import-substitution industrialization (ISI) policies o f the time
underscored the necessity o f regional integration as a means to provide sufficient scale
economies required to spur adequate demand for domestic (or regional) industries and to lower
costs per unit o f output. The success o f the European Community’s first enlargement in the
1970s served as an additional catalyst behind the proliferation o f regional arrangements.

4.
The first-generation regional integration schemes ultimately failed for several reasons.
Built on weak national institutions, member countries failed to implement solutions emanating
f r o m regional commitments. Regional institutions, being o f an intergovernmental form, were too
weak in mandate and capacity to pursue activities associated with member states’ deep
integration objectives. This inward-looking, state-led regional integration strategy o f the early
integration schemes also failed for the same reasons as the underlying national importsubstitution policies.

5.
As countries progressively switched from import-substitution to more outward-oriented
policies starting in the early 1980s, the ‘second-generation’ or ‘second wave’ o f regional
integration schemes in SSA took hold, accelerating into the first half o f the 1990s. The second
generation regional institutions were generally not new creations, but arose f r o m revitalization
and expansion o f the mandates o f preexisting, but largely defunct regional bodies. In marked
contrast to their isolationist predecessors, the new bodies were typically characterized by open
regional arrangements to increase integration not only among member states but also with global
markets. Nevertheless, progress toward regional integration remained slow and Africa
experienced increasing exclusion from economic linkages and benefits o f globalization. Thus,
the 1991 African Heads o f State Summit in Abuja adopted a treaty with the objective o f creating

54

an African Economic Community by 2028, and which set out a timetable for integration o f the
continent. A phased process o f progressively deeper and broader integration was envisaged,
starting with free trade areas and customs unions, moving to common markets, and ending in an
economic and monetary union among the continent’s 53 countries (including North Africa).

6.

Recognizing changes in the external environment and on the continent, at the beginning
o f the new millennium, African leaders resolved to adapt their development strategy and
accelerate regional integration. For this purpose, they changed the Organization o f African Unity
and the Abuja Treaty into the African Union (AU) through a Constitutive A c t o f 2002. The AU
objectives are more comprehensive than those o f the OAU, while i t s underlying principles
represent a new approach to Africa’s integration and development. The AU continental
institutional architecture reflects these principles, with the Constitutive A c t providing for a PanAfrican Parliament and the Economic, Cultural and Social Council which uphold the principles
o f democracy and civil participation; an African Court o f Justice to promote the r u l e o f l a w and
adjudicate on human rights violations affecting African citizens; and the Peace and Security
Council and associated institutions to upholding peace o n the continent. N e w governance
principles are embedded in the African Peer Review Mechanism and development approach and
strategy represented b y NEPAD. A major shift in approach o n sovereignty i s discernible through
the growing support for upholding human and people’s rights; provision for regional intervention
in intrastate conflicts and wars; and first steps toward continental supranational structures away
from the intergovernmental forms o f regional integration espoused in the past. See box A2.1 for
brief description of the AU and NEPAD.

7.
Similar to the Abuja Treaty, the Constitutive A c t of the AU recognizes the regional
economic communities as the pillars o f continental integration and institutions to which every
state should belong, entrenches their legal status as distinct and independent entities and provides
for the creation o f an instrument to govern relations with RECs.

8.
While the RECs have made substantial achievements in several areas, as described i n box
A2.2, overall progress toward regional integration and strengthened cooperation is mixed. Only a
small fraction o f the RECs have thus achieved their targets for trade among members and
similarly few have undertaken concerted efforts toward common labor laws, free movement o f
labor, and rights o f residence and establishment. Moreover, many also are lagging on almost all
critical elements necessary for the success o f the next phases o f integration such as customs and
monetary unions. Even with regard to the sectoral programs needed to deepen African
integration, a third to a half o f the regional economic communities acknowledge shortcomings in
the effectiveness o f their initiatives toward the integration goals.

55

Box A2.1 A U and NEPAD
The African Union (AU) i s a Pan-African organization o f 53 member countries, aimed at creating a united
continent through a process o f political and economic integration. The AU was launched at the Durban Summit in
2002, as a successor o f the Organization o f African Unity (OAU).

The purpose o f the AU i s to help secure Africa’s democracy, human rights, and to promote a sustainable economy,
especially by bringing an end to h a A f r i c a n conflict and creating an effective common market. W i t h these aims,
the AU i s planning the set up o f a human rights court, a central bank and monetary fund so as to become an
African Economic Community with a single currency b y 2023. In 2004 the Peace and Security Council was
created for deployment o f military force in situations o f genocide and crimes against humanity as well as
peacekeeping missions-a significant departure from the O A U principle o f noninterference.
The AU i s composed o f three main bodies: (i) Assembly, the AU’s main decision-making body, comprised o f the
heads o f state o f member countries, (ii)Executive Council, the advising organ to the Assembly’s members,
comprised o f the foreign ministers o f member states; and (iii)
the Commission, the administrative organ comprised
o f 10 commissioners, with the aim o f implementing AU policies and coordinating the body’s activities and
meetings.
The New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) i s a vision and strategic framework for Africa’s
renewal, which was adopted at the 37th Summit o f the O A U in July 2001, as a program o f the African Union to
meet its development objectives. The highest authority o f the NEPAD implementation process i s the Heads o f
State and Government Summit o f the African Union.

NEPAD overarching objectives are to eradicate poverty, to promote sustainable growth and development, to
enhance Africa integration into the global economy and, to accelerate the empowerment o f women.
NEPAD priority action areas are: (i) putting in action the African Peer Review Mechanism; (ii)
facilitating and
supporting implementation o f the short-term regional infrastructure programs covering Transport, Energy, ICT,
Water and Sanitation; (iii)facilitating implementation o f the food security and agricultural development program
in all subregions; (iv) facilitating the preparation of a coordinated African position on Market Access, debt relief
and O D A reforms; and (v) monitoring and intervening as appropriate to ensure that the Millennium Development
Goals in the areas o f health and education are met.

56

Box A2.2. Successes in African RECs and regional cooperation
Although progress in African cooperation and integration as well as the effectiveness o f RECs i s mixed, RECs
have made progress particularly in the area o f market integration, infrastructure cooperation and sharing o f
common resources.
Increased intraregional trade and improvements in international competitiveness are key common objectives
among Africa’s integration arrangements. In ECOWAS, for instance, countries not members o f the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) have decided to implement WAEMU’s external tariff structure b y
2007 with the objective o f establishing a single regional market. In Central Africa, a free trade zone linking 11
countries, including members o f CEMAC (Central African Economic and Monetary Community), has recently
come into effect. In East Africa, the E A C has established a customs union in 2005, COMESA, which created an
FTA in 2000, intends to create a customs union in 2008 and SADC in 2010. The Souther Africa Customs Union
(SACU) has been renegotiated and the new S A C U Agreement intends to deepen and broaden the customs union.
All RECs also are implementing trade facilitating measures, notably in the area o f transport. IntraREC
cooperation i s increasingly taking place, e.g. between COMESA, SADC and the E A C to harmonize trade and
trade-related regimes.
Progress in implementing and monitoring macroeconomic convergence criteria i s more advanced under currency
unions, which tend to have a stronger motivation and institutional framework for promoting convergence, e.g.
through a common central bank. However, even in these cases a number o f the convergence criteria are not being
observed by the member countries, for example in both WAEMU and CEMAC. In regional arrangements without
currency unions, such as COMESA, SADC and the E A C , convergence criteria are rather loosely defined, at this
stage. In general, differing economic structures and performance among members o f subregional groups as well
as the lack o f effective institutional surveillance mechanisms help to explain the limited progress on
macroeconomic convergence.
Regional cooperation in infrastructure and other areas o f development can be illustrated by the case o f SADC
whose early program o f action focused on transport and communications, agriculture, energy, and human
development. Similar approaches are found in other subregional arrangements, including efforts to harmonize
business and regulatory practices for larger markets to attract investment. Cooperation in the area o f infrastructure
i s well illustrated by RECs’ endeavours to benefit from scale economies and minimize energy cost through
sharing energy across across countries. SADC has been a pioneer, with 12 members creating the Southern African
Power Pool in August 1995. In ECOWAS the connections between Benin and Nigeria and among Benin, CBte
d’Ivoire, Ghana, and Togo are the most important l i n k s of the West African Power Pool. Power Pools have also
been established in Central Africa (2003); and Eastern Africa (2005).
Cooperation on shared water resources takes place through water river basin mechanisms and initiatives such as
the Nile Basin Initiative, Lake Victoria Development, and Zambezi River Basin Authority. Cooperation on land
use and wildlife management i s taking place through transfrontier conservation initiatives. In all o f these cases,
functional or area specific cooperation mechanisms are driving cooperation and program implementation.
Source: Various sources. Economic Commission for Africa and African Union, 2006

9.
There a multitude o f interrelated challenges and factors undermining the success of the
regional economic communities and regional integration initatives. Some o f the principle factors
are explored below:
0

Proliferation and overlapping membership: the number o f RECs and other
regional bodies on the continent has been steadily growing, w i t h many countries
members o f multiple arrangements. Even though some RECs (such as E C O W A S
and UEMOA) have taken significant steps toward rationalization, the issue

57

remains by and large unaddressed, resulting in a complex web o f regional
organizations o f which, only eight are officially recognized by the AU’ (seefigure
A2.1 and table A2.1 for depiction of the “spaghetti bowl” and description of SSA
RECs and regional bodies). Such multiplicity has several drawbacks, including:
fragmented markets and approaches to regional integration; inconsistent
objectives and conflicting operational mandates; contradictory obligations and
loyalties for member countries; increased financial cost o f country membership;
duplication o f programs and efforts; unhealthy rivalry for donor funds; and
consequently reduced ability to pursue coherent and effective integration
programs.
0

Limited capacity and inadequatefunding: the RECs’ ability to play a lead-role in
successful regional cooperation and integration are often limited by inadequate
mandates, capabilities, insufficient and unpredictable funding, poor remuneration
for staff members (resulting in high turnover and extended vacancies), and weak
capacity in general. In many cases, member countries have expanded the mandate
o f the regional economic communities without a commensurate increase in

funding
0

Lack of supranational authority and slow/inadequate implementation of agreed
plans. A number o f RECs have been unable to fully implement integration
programs o n a timely basis. Delays partly reflect the lack enforcement authority,
as sanctions are rarely applied to countries in breach o f common agreements. This
has opened a substantial gap between the stated aspirations o f member countries
as expressed in the treaties and protocols creating the regional economic
communities, and the reality o n the ground. The poor and limited translation o f
regional goals into national plans and budgets and inadequate implementation o f
regional programs at the national level also can be explained by a general
reluctance o f countries to cede their national powers to the regional authorities.

0

Low popular participation in the Regional Integration debate and agenda:
dialogue o n integration i s typically dominated by governments and
intergovernmental organizations. As a result, the institutions and consultation
mechanisms developed often exclude many relevant stakeholders and the wider
population. The importance o f consultation and popular support for regional
integration and reform i s increasingly being recognized and c i v i l society i s
increasingly becoming engaged through official channels and independent
advocacy. However, much more needs to be done to stimulate lively debate over
priorities and in the process ensure that the regional integration agenda maintains
legitimacy and political buy-in.

0

Lack of

information regarding the costs and benefits of integration2:
Uncertainty regarding whether and to what extent a country may benefit f r o m

The African Union only recognizes the following institutions as RECs: Arab Maghreb Union (UMA), Community
of Sahel-Saharan States (CEN-SAD), COMESA, EAC, ECOWAS, Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD), and SADC.
“Assessing Regional Integration in Africa 11: Rationalizing Regional Economic Communities”. The UN Economic
Commission for Africa and AU. 2006.

58

regional integration and regional initiatives have in many cases led to a reluctance
by national authorities in adopting and committing sufficient resources and
authority to regional arrangements. This i s particularly true for weaker countries,
which may have valid reason to fear losses both in trade and customs revenue. T o
overcome such apprehension, i t may be important for countries to conduct a costbenefit analysis and to make sure that compensation mechanisms are in place for
weaker countries. According t o recent U N E C A report3, approximately “42% of
countries that have undertaken cost-benefit analysis studies of integration
concluded that regional integration portends net long-term gains for the country,
and only 8% concluded that they are likely to experience net long-term costs from
integration.
’)

0

Controversy surrounding the path and pace of regional integration and
liberalization4: liberalization o f regional trade and tariff regimes i s the main
driver o f all integration schemes. The path that liberalization should follow and to
what extent remain a controversial issue, especially when the regional
arrangements are comprised o f members o f different levels o f competitiveness,
often frustrating the integration process. Even among countries with relatively
simlar economies, a slight advantage o f one over the other can be compounded by
integration and liberalization o f trade and tarriffs. Moreover, tariff liberalization,
whether unilateral or otherwise, can significantly affect government revenue.

Poor labor and factor mobility’: paradoxically, the integration process in Africa
has facilitated more outward-looking trade and mobility o f factors o f production
than intraregional trade. Xenophobia i s one o f the causes o f this paradox, with the
result that labor movement among members i s partly constrained, while capital
mobility has been inhibited by the slow development o f financial markets.
0

Little continental coordination and alignment: while the RECs have made some
efforts to adopt mechanisms to coordinate their activities (for example,
memorandums o f understanding, periodic coordination meetings, regular
exchange o f information, joint programming, joint review o f programs, and joint
implementation committees), use o f these coordination mechanisms i s limited.
This i s reflected in the fact that RECs, which have distinct legal status in the
continental institutional architecture, have often taken precedence over
continental integration decisions in approaching integration. Nonetheless, the AU
Commission, the UNECA, NEPAD and other institutions are actively promoting
coherence, complementarities and synergy both among RECs and with
continental institutions and programs.

10.
One o f the main challenges confronting Africa in i t s quest for continental integration and
unity i s to address the issues raised above and ensure the rationalization and alignment o f i t s
“Assessing Regional Integration in Africa 11: Rationalizing Regional Economic Communities”. The UN Economic
Commission for Africa and AU, 2006.
Dinka T. and Kermes W., Africa’s Regional Integration Arrangements, History and Challenges, ECDPM,
Discussion Paper No. 74, September 2007.
Africa in the World Economy-The National, Regional and International Challenges Fondad, The Hague,
December 2005.

59

regional economic communities. The question was raised during the 2006 AU Summit in Banjul:
the outcomes did not include a clear-cut guideline on how to proceed but the Assembly called for
a policy coordination and harmonization o f the existing communities and endorsed the
recommended moratorium on the recognition o f new RECs. The focus on rationalization i s
premised on the notion that efficiency and effectiveness are essential for Africa to meet i t s stated
objectives. For this purpose, the focus o f any effort to rationalize the R E C should be on
addressing the overlapping communities and multiple memberships as they are associated with
large resource costs and seriously binding financial constraints. Rationalization would make it
easier for African countries to meet their financial obligations to the regional economic
communities and, above all, would allow the continent to reap the full benefits o f integrationparticularly those for growth and for trade within and outside Africa. Countries have a central
role in the regional development and integration process and they have to make every effort to
translate continental political commitments into subregional commitments and implementation.

60

Figure A2.1: “The Spaghetti Bowl”

BURKINAFASO
GUINEA BISSAU

AMU:ARAB MAGHREB UNION
CEMAC.ECONOMIC AND MONETARY COMMUNITY OF CENTRAL AFRICA
CEN-SAD: COMMUNITY OF SAHEL-SAHARANSTATES
CEPGC ECONOMIC COMMUNITY OFTHE GREAT LAKES COUNTRIES
COMESA. CQMMON MARKET FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA
EAC.EA5T AFRICAN COMMUNITY
ECaUrAS:fCONOMICCOMMUNITYOFWEST AFRICAN STATES
ECCAS ECONOMIC COMMUNITYOF CENTRAL AFRICAN STATES
GAD: INTER-GOVERNMENTALAUTHORITY FOR DEVELOPMENT
LOC.INDIAN OCEAN COMMISSION
MRUMANO RIVER UNION
SKUSOUTHERN AFRICAN CUSTOMS UNION
SAW SOUTHERN AFRICAN DEVELOPMENTCOMMUNITY
WAEMUWEST AFRlCAECONOMlC ANDMONETARY UNION

61

c

C

.-+C

2
C

3e
e

E
rc
C

.....

0

.

.

. . . . e

..

0

.

e . . . .

8
E
e,
E

n
e

e,
e,

9

Y

B

w

OI

2

P4
\D

G

.-0rd
Y

8

a

0

8
3

3
J?
v)

8

E:
0

.e
Y

fi

S
E:

._
V

'2

8
8a,

S
0

3

E

00

2

8
e

C

.
I

e

e

.

e

e

.

c

C

.r

Y

E

3

.-

r

\o

s

M

a

E
C
.r

C

+

.e

$
C
C

E

.

3

0

.

...

\o

h

2

2

a

W

M

E

.e
Y

0

E

sb

h

%

B

u;
e,
*

I

!2

.w

V

rc

0

m

5

B

"

Y
m

8

Y

D

2
e,
E

.9

e,
*

1

0

m
Y
o

E

sb
a

'?
e,

&

E

Y

d

2

8

3

e,

>

4c

G
M

c

3

A

.

?

3

a
3

P

n

>

T

0

.

.

....

APPENDIX 111: REVIEW OF PAST BANK LENDING AND ANALYTICAL AND
ADVISORY ACTIVITIES SUPPORT FOR REGIONAL COOPERATIONAND
INTEGRATION IN AFRICA

A.

Review of Loan Portfolio Managed by the Regional IntegrationDepartment

1.
As of, February 1, 2008 the Africa Regional Integration Portfolio contains 31 IDA and
GEF projects, with a total commitment o f almost US$2.1 billion (Table 2). Seven projects were
approved in FY07 with a total commitment o f US$730 million, exceeding pipeline projections.
So far in FY08 (by February 1, 2008), three projects have been approved with a commitment o f
US$326 million, thereby virtually exhausting the IDA Regional Pilot funding envelope almost a
year ahead o f schedule. In addition, A F C R I manages one ACGF-grant funded H I V / A I D S project
(Africa Catalytic Growth Fund) approved in FY07 several multidonor trust-funds (MDTFs) for
agricultural research and promotion activities including one that supports the Forum for
Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) and one for the Association for Strengthening
Agricultural Research in Eastern and Central Africa (ASARECA); two guarantees projects to
fund the West Africa Gas Pipeline and WAEMU Capital Market Development; and the N i l e
Basin Initiative trust-funded umbrella program to manage water resources development,
environmental management and infrastructure investment in the N i l e Basin. T o date, the N i l e
Basin Initiative has funded over 20 subprojects worth over US$81 million, many focused on
institutional strengthening o f basin organizations.

';

2.

By sector, infrastructure projects dominate the portfolio o f IDA and GEF projects, in
accordance with NEPAD, World Bank Africa Action Plan (AAP), and Africa Regional
Integration strategies (figure 1). Power, transport, and communications projects comprise 62
percent o f total portfolio commitments. Environment and water resources management projects
comprise 20 percent, followed by finance projects at 11 percent, H I V / A I D S at 5 percent, and
agriculture at 2 percent. Approvals in FY07 were even more dominated by infrastructure
projects. Ninety-one percent o f F Y 0 7 commitments were for power, transport, and
communications projects; 6 percent for agriculture; and 3 percent for environment and water
resources management.

The IGAD Regional HN/AIDS Partnership Program, USD14.5 million grant, FY07.

66

Figure A3.1: Regional integration portfolio (July 2007): N e t commitments b y sector

Env and Water
Resources M
20%

MAP
HIVIA1DS
5%

Ag ricuItu re
2%

I

Power, Transport

I

11%

3.
Eighteen of the 3 1 projects in the IDNGEF portfolio are funded by the IDA Pilot
Program for Regional Integration, accounting for almost US$1.9 billion, or 92 percent, o f
portfolio commitments. Nine projects are funded by GEF grants, and three by I D A 1 3 H I V / A I D S
grants. Since it was approved in FYO1 and so predated creation o f the IDA Pilot, one IDA
project (Regional Trade Facilitation Project) has not been financed by the IDA Pilot. After the
creation o f the department in the fall o f 2004 (FY05), the three HIVIAIDS projects and three
GEF projects were transferred into the Regional Integration portfolio. Since then, the department
has focused o n delivering o n NEPAD and AAP priorities that comprise the development o f
infrastructure and financial services, and trade facilitation in Sub-Saharan Africa. In FY07, four
o f the seven projects approved, with a total commitment o f US$707 million and comprising 97
percent o f FY07 commitments, were funded by the IDA Pilot. The remaining three projects
(comprising three percent o f FY07 commitments) were funded by the Global Environment
Facility (GEF). With the termination and nonrenewal o f the IDA13 grant facility for HIV/AIDS,
no new HIV/AIDS projects were approved by IDA; In FY07, the creation o f the Africa Catalytic
Growth Fund grant facility facilitated the development o f one new regional HIV/AIDS project.

4.
By instrument, 16 o f the 31 projects in the IDNGEF portfolio, or 82 percent o f total
commitments, are structured as APLs. All but three projects approved during FY07 and FY08
were designed as an APL. The three exceptions were GEF operations that required all countries
to implement them concurrently through a regional institution. This fact reflects a lesson learned
from the F Y 0 6 Africa Regional Integration Portfolio Review. That review had found that APLs
accommodate well the complex and multicountry nature o f regional integration projects. APLs
enable each country to j o i n when i t i s ready rather than force all countries to j o i n at once, even
when some do not have the capacity or the legal and institutional frameworks in place.

5.
By subregion, West Africa i s the most active with 18 projects in the portfolio covering
countries in the subregion. East Africa i s second with 10 projects, followed by Central Africa
with seven projects and Southern Africa with six projeck2

Please note that projects at not additive since 1 project may cover more than 1 subregion.

67

Portfolio Performance

6.
With 3 1 projects, the Regional Integration portfolio i s the largest portfolio in the Africa
Region in terms o f number o f projects (the next largest portfolio contains 23 projects), and the
third largest in terms o f net commitments. As o f February 1, 2008, the Regional Integration
portfolio contains eight projects ‘at-risk,’ seven o f which are ‘problem’ projects, representing 26
percent o f the department’s projects and 36 percent o f total commitments. These figures are
slightly higher than those for the Africa Region as a whole (25 percent o f projects are ‘at risk,’
representing 24% o f total commitments). I t i s worth noting, however, that the Regional
Integration portfolio contains a Country Record flag that automatically labels projects with two
other flags as ‘at-risk’. If the Country Record flag i s removed, as was discussed with QAG in
Spring 2006, there would be one fewer project at-risk.
7.
Three o f the problem projects (West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program, MalawiMozambique Transmission Interconnection, “Inga” Regional and Domestic Power Market
Development) entered problem status in the last two months due to delayed effectiveness, a
common problem among Africa Region projects. Delayed effectiveness i s already a challenge
for single-country projects in the Africa Region as many countries require parliamentary
approval before projects can be declared effective. Inherently, for multicountry projects, this
challenge i s magnified by the number o f countries involved and compounded with the
differences in political cycles in different countries, especially when a l l the Financing
Agreements need to be approved before a project can be declared effective.
8.
T w o o f the problem projects are GEF projects with l o w commitment amounts, US$2.9
million for the GEF L a k e Chad Basin project and US$7.0 million for the GEF SADC
Groundwater and Drought Management project. The Lake Chad Basin project i s experiencing
counterpart funding and project management challenges which leaves at risk the achievement o f
the project’s deliverables and development objectives by the time o f project closing in July 2008.
Only US$.7 million remain to be disbursed. A F C R I will explore with the project team the
possibility o f implementing a Rapid Results Clinic to help the project achieve i t s goals during the
last six months o f the project’s l i f e until closing. The SADC Groundwater and Drought
Management project has been in problem status for 13 months due to project management
challenges. The project manager has been fired and the project i s in the process o f recruiting a
new project manager. AFCRI also i s discussing with the project team the possibility o f using the
Rapid Results Approach to help the team develop a short-term implementation plan, kick-start
implementation, and maintain implementation momentum for the duration o f the project.
9.
The Southern Africa Power Market APLl project has been in problem status for 13
months due to procurement delays during the first four years o f implementation that have led to
very high cost-ovemns and the need to clear additional land for the transmission line that would
not have been needed had the project been implemented on schedule. This project w i l l not get
out o f problem status unless the additional financing package o f US$136 million i s completed
and approved, and an extension o f four years i s granted. A one-year extension was granted in
December 2007. The additional financing package and remaining three- year extension i s
expected to be approved in April 2008.

68

10.
The WAEMU Capital Markets Development project has been experiencing procurement,
M&E and slow disbursement challenges. The project i s currently being restructured. The
restructuring i s expected to be completed in February 2008.
11.
Three projects in the A F C R I are classified as requiring proactive action: WAEMU
Capital Markets Development, Southern Africa Power Market APL1, and SADC Groundwater
and Drought Management. Action has been taken on all three projects. The restructuring for the
WAEMU Capital Market Development project i s expected to be completed in February 2008.
The additional financing and extension package for the Southern Africa Power Market APLl
project w i l l help it get out o f problem status, although proactive action w i l l not be reflected in the
portfolio until the package i s approved and the procurement process i s completed (so that
performance can be upgraded) which may take a few months. A new project manager i s being
recruited for the SADC Groundwater and Drought Management project but proactive action will
not be reflected for a few months to allow the new project manager to turn the project around and
the performance o f the project can be upgraded.
12.
P o r t j X o Age. The portfolio i s young with an average portfolio age o f 2.2 years. Ten
projects are not yet effective while 11 are aged one year or less.
Table A3.1: Portfolio performance: Regional Integration Portfolio vs. Regions and Bank-wide

Cross-CuttingIssues and Portfolio Management Plan

13.
Cross-cutting issues that impact the AFCRI portfolio include procurement, M&E, and
delayed effectiveness. These also are common issues across the Africa Region portfolio. The
AFCRI team i s taking the following actions to address these cross-cutting issues:

i.

..

11.

Procurement: AFCRI will work with the Africa Region Procurement Team and
Management to perform a Procurement Portfolio Review, and recommend and
implement follow-up actions where needed, including: providing extra
procurement support to projects that need it, and providing procurement training
clinics to counterpart project teams and in some cases, private sector partners
(contractors),
M&E Portfolio Review: AFCRI has commenced the Portfolio M&E Review
which i s expected to be completed in March 2008. Results frameworks,
monitoring plans, data collection and reporting will be reviewed with all project

69

teams. The Review also will recommend follow-up actions and A F C R I will work
closely with project teams to implement action plans (with the support o f AFTRL
where needed).

iii.

B.

Delayed Effectiveness: Where delayed effectiveness i s due to the in-country
political approval process, AFCRI i s working closely with the project team and
Country Management to place pressure on Governments and counterparts to
accelerate the process. I t must be noted that in some cases, the process i s very
much beyond the Bank’s control. Where delayed effectiveness i s due to other
reasons, AFCRI i s working with the project team to aggressively address the
barriers to effectiveness.

Summary of (other) Recent Reviews

14.
In addition to the short-term portfolio management plan discussed above, three recent
reviews o f regional integration experiences across the Bank in general and in the Africa Region
in particular yield valuable lessons for ongoing management o f the Africa Region’s regional
integration portfolio. These include: (i)
the FY06 Portfolio Review o f the Africa Regional
Integration Portfolio by the Africa Region Quality Results and Knowledge Unit (AFTQK); (ii)
the FY06 IEG report, “The Development Potential o f Regional Programs: An Evaluation o f
World Bank Support o f Multi-Country Operations”; and (iii)
the FY06 QAG Review o f Regional
AAA. These lessons are summarized below.

FY06 AFTQK Portfolio Review: Lessons Learned
15.
The FY06 Portfolio Review drew lessons for the design and implementation o f regional
integration projects from (a) ICWIEG reviews o f closed projects, (b) QAG and AFTQK reviews
o f projects under implementation as o f FY06, and (c) lessons from other institutions.
Ownership and Accountability
a.

Political economy factors can make obtaining government commitment for
regional projects difficult. As such, it i s essential to focus on consensus building
and ownership issues early in the preparation process. Although t h i s lesson i s
generic and also applies to single-country projects, the challenge i s magnified for
regional projects. Good coordination with project stakeholders including client
countries, relevant RECs, donor community, civil society, and programs should
also be leveraged to facilitate prepreparation activities including consensusbuilding, capacity development, development o f the operational manual, M&E
system, baseline data, legal advice, and basic procurement documentation.

b.

Governance structures that clarify accountability among governments, regional
institution, implementing agencies, and donors and that pay attention to conflict
o f interest issues are essential to project success. Implementation roles and
responsibilities and operational procedures, especially those that relate to
procurement, should be defined early in preparation.

70

c.

Partnerships are key to the success o f regional projects. Other donors and partners
are needed not only for cofinancing but also for implementation support. For
example, UNAIDS3 and UNHCR4 have played critical financing, technical
assistance (TA), and coordination roles for the Great Lakes Initiative on
HIV/AIDS. The Africa Emergency Locust Project partnered successfully with the
UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) for essential coordination,
procurement, and TA. The Bank works closely with the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) on macroeconomic and trade issues, including helping the E A C
implement the Monetary Union. The ADB participates in most infrastructure and
trade facilitation projects developed by the Bank. The Bank and ADB have also
established a collaboration framework for the transport sector. In addition, the
Bank has collaborated well with the European Commission and bilateral donors,
including DfID, Finland, France, GTZ, Norway, Sweden, and USAID, to ensure
that each donor’s comparative advantage i s leveraged for specific initiatives or
projects. Partnering with governments, civil society, and the private sector also i s
essential for the same reasons.

Design Features and Implementation Arrangements

d.

Keeping project design simple i s especially important in an extraordinarily
complex operating environment.

e.

The use o f strong institutions i s key to a project’s implementation success. I t i s
often more effective and more efficient to use existing institutions and develop
their capacity than to establish new institutions. National institutions should be
leveraged during implementation to offset the weak capacity o f regional
institutions and to maximize national ownership.

f.

Procurement issues are the most commonly mentioned barriers to successful
implementation and often contribute to effectiveness delays. They include (i)
more time required than expected for procurement o f big contracts; (ii)
less bidder
interest for small, fragmented contracts; (iii)
difficulty in hiring procurement staff,
especially for unattractive locations; (iv) weak client capacity; (v) procurement
transparency issues on client side and, (vi) slow Bank response and complexity o f
Bank systems. Although these problems also are common to single-country
projects, two major procurement issues that are unique to regional projects are the
(i)multiplicity o f systems and (ii)division o f responsibility. The need to
harmonize systems, come to agreement on which system to use, or negotiate the
assigning o f responsibility for supranational contracts requires significantly more
time and effort. For all these reasons, advancement o f procurement processes
helps ensure successful implementation.

g.

Developing M&E frameworks for regional projects tends to be more challenging
than for single-country projects because o f the need for alignment among

Joint United Nations Programme o n HTv/AIDS.
United Nations High Commission for Refugees.

71

participating countries and for alignment with the regional institution or REC.
Moreover, the lack o f regional M&E systems, especially systems to track REC
outcomes or outcomes that other regional institutions need to track, i s a major
contributor to the weak capacity o f regional organizations. It also hampers the
RECs’ ability to align project outcomes to desired results.

h.

APLs provide an appropriate instrument to facilitate the implementation o f
regional projects when concurrent effectiveness i s not r e q ~ i r e d .These
~
loans
enable countries to enter project arrangements only when they are ready and limit
the lending commitment o f the Bank to components and countries that are ready
to borrow.

i.

As a category, regional HIV/AIDS projects are relatively difficult projects. The
strong public goods nature o f HIV/AIDS implies that regional collaboration i s
essential in addressing the problem and that benefits from regional collaboration
can be high. At the same time, these public goods characteristics combined with
the social stigma associated with HIV/AIDS in many client countries mean that
grants are necessary to finance regional HIV/AIDS projects. The cessation o f a
grant window for HIV/AIDS projects in IDA14 w i l l impact the sustainability o f
regional HIV/AIDS initiatives. The quality-at-entry issues and implementation
and
problems experienced by the two early HIV/AIDS projects-ARCAN
Regional HIV/AIDS TAP-have raised concerns about the Bank’s approach to
regional HIV/AIDS problems. However, the good performance o f the two latter
HIV/AIDS projects (Abidjan-Lagos and Great Lakes Initiative on HIV/AIDS)
demonstrate that mistakes made in the earlier projects have been well learned.
Lessons from the Bank’s experience with regional HIV/AIDS projects include;
0

0

Garnering ownership from the variety o f stakeholders requires significant
time and resources.
The lack o f strong existing institutions means that an intensive amount o f
time and resources are spent to prepare projects and that the early years o f
implementation are spent building institutional arrangements needed for
implementation.

Recently, the Great Lakes Initiative on HIV/AIDS project developed an
operational manual that has been adopted by the ADB as a model for West Africa
regional integration efforts.
Financing and Instruments

j.

The IDA Pilot Program for Regional Integration funds two-thirds o f regional
project financing, with countries contributing the remaining one-third from
country IDA allocations. The pilot provides an incentive for countries to support
regional programs, but the impact o f financing criteria on small country programs

’ APLs may not be appropriate for projects that require countries to become effective at the same time, such as
projects with high public-goods characteristics.

72

has been a concern until recently. There are also limitations to the ability o f IDA
to finance projects that require capacity building, financing regional
organizations, or supranational components; and projects that integrate borrowers
with different Bank borrowing status. The FY06 Review recommended that IDA
pilot guidelines be revisited for (i)
countries with small IDA envelopes, (ii)
projects involving countries with different Bank Borrower status, and (iii)
projects
that involve supranational components or capacity building. Funding 100 percent
o f regional projects that involve public goods should be considered.
a

Impact of I D A Regional Pilot on small I D A country envelopes. For several
small countries, the requirement that participants in regional programs
fund one-third o f their country’s share o f the financing from their IDA
allocation meant using their entire IDA allocation to finance their

participation in regional projects. The reason i s that the definition o f
benefits and subsequent burden-sharing o f regional projects bears no
relation to a country’s IDA Performance-Based Allocation (PBA). A small
country may have to bear significant investment costs if i t s benefits are
correspondingly significant for a specific project, regardless o f i t s PBA.
Based on the recommendation o f the IDA14 Mid-Term Review for
Regional Integration Projects, IDA15 has limited the country IDA
allocation to regional programs o f country programs with small IDA
envelopes to 20 percent. This change should help incentivize small
country programs to support regional integration projects.
Limitations of IDA funding for regional organizations, supranational
components and capacity building efforts. Few regional organizations
qualify to borrow from IDA. I D A 1 4 guidelines also do not allow grants to

regional organizations or funding o f supranational project components.
These restrictions limit the Bank’s ability to provide critical capacity
building for weak regional agencies. The only Bank funds available for
capacity building o f regional institutions are IDF grants, which often are
too small for many TA projects or components,6 especially relative to the
transaction costs that they entail. The Africa Catalytic Growth Fund and
the AAP Capacity Building Program are possible sources o f funding,
although the amounts available under these programs are insufficient.
e

Diversity of Bank borrowing status. Differences in Bank Borrower status
(IBRD, IDA, grant-eligible) among member countries also impact country
incentives to sponsor a project, especially for projects involving public

goods (such as HIV/AIDS, regulatory bodies). For example, a regional
HIV/AIDS project under preparation for Southern Africa has been
experiencing difficulty getting support from IBRD countries, even though
these IBRD countries (including South Africa, Botswana, Namibia,
Swaziland) are at the heart o f the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Southern Africa.

Normally maximum $500k, but recently changed to $1 million for regional projects.

73

Bank Organization, Resources, and Skills

k.

Regional projects are s t i l l a new area o f focus for the Bank and the Bank’s
systems, organization, policies, and processes have not been set up to support
them. Issues include reporting systems; organization o f fiduciary, M&E,
supervision, quality assurance, and management support functions; CMU, A F C R I
and sector roles; and strategic staffing. Specifically, the human resources
management and organization o f the fiduciary functions s t i l l reflect a country
focus. The legal, procurement, and financial management functions are only
starting to adjust their staffing plans to accommodate the scale-up in the regional
integration portfolio.

1.

Regional projects require more resources for preparation and supervision than
single-country projects for obvious reasons. I t i s essential that appropriate budget
and time be allocated for their quality preparation, implementation, and
supervision.

m.

Because o f their difficult and complex nature, regional projects require
appropriate skills. Project teams should include staff with sector technical skills;
as well as staff with knowledge o f specific country contexts; staff who are
familiar with regional integration issues, regional organizations, and RECs; and
staff who possess strong procurement skills. Leveraging field-based staff for
preparation and supervision also helps reduce the coordination burden o f regional
projects and increases the Bank’s responsiveness.

n.

Additional incentives and more proactive performance management (for example,
increased weight in OPE assessments) are necessary to encourage strong staff
with desired skills to manage and work on regional projects.

0.

The Bank should develop in-house expertise o n RECs, other regional institutions,
and issues associated with regional projects. This in-house expertise would be
used to help TTLs and project teams with project preparation and supervision,
including assessing institutional capacity and readiness for implementation,
providing stakeholder relationship management support, facilitating transactions
and negotiations, and helping design capacity building plans. Logically, this role
should reside in the Regional Integration Department.

FY06 IEG Review of Regional Programs: Findings and Recommendations
16.
The FY06 IEG report, “The Development Potential o f Regional Programs: An Evaluation
o f W o r l d Bank Support o f Multi-Country Operations,” assessed the World Bank’s support for
regional development programs active between fiscal years 1995-2005. These programs
accounted for less than 1 percent o f total Bank financing during this period. The key findings are
that: (a) regional programs can deliver strong results; (b) success and sustainability depend on
strong ownership b y all participating countries; (c) the Bank has been particularly effective in
fostering country interest in regional programs through analytical work and resource
mobilization; (d) the Bank has been less effective in helping countries manage conflicting

74

interests, delineate the roles o f national and regional institutions, and plan for the sustainability
o f program activities and outcomes; and (e) some Bank structures and processes geared to singlecountry programs are poorly suited to the planning and oversight o f regional programs. The
evaluation identified five design features that have proven critical to the success o f regional
programs. These reinforce many o f the lessons discussed in the Africa Region FY06 Portfolio
Review o f Regional Integration Projects: (a) strong country commitment; (b) scope o f objectives
matched to national and regional capacities; (c) clear delineation and coordination o f the roles o f

national and regional institutions; (d) accountable governance arrangements; and (e) planning for
sustainability. The evaluation concluded that the Bank has an opportunity to adopt a potentially
bigger role b y building on examples o f successful experience. T o do so, the evaluation
recommended that the Bank (a) establish regional program strategies and integrate them into
Country Assistance Strategies (CASs), (b) work with partners to put together grant and loan
financing packages for individual regional programs, (c) give more attention to improving the
impact o f Bank support on regional partnerships, and (d) strengthen corporate incentives and
capacities to provide effective regional program support.

FY06 QAG Review o f Regional AAA
17.
World Bank support for Regional Analytical and Advisory Services (AAA) total $0.2
billion and 3,167 activities during FY1995-2005. In addition, the volume o f global and regional
AAA (ESW and TA) has almost quadrupled in dollar terms (from US$16 million to US$56
million), and almost doubled in numbers (from 140 tasks to 239 tasks), during FYO2-FYO5.
18.
Within the Africa Region, the Regional Integration Department funded 16 ESW tasks
during FYO3-07, at a cost o f US$1.6 million, and 11 TA tasks at a cost o f US$1.1 million. N o
AAA activities were funded in FY04 during the transition period to create the Regional
Integration Department. After the creation o f the department in FY05, regional integration AAA
activities funded by the department ramped up considerably.
By sector or thematic focus, most ESW tasks (seven) were focused on regional financial
19.
and trade integration. This number demonstrates the Bank’s support to the RECs during the
convening, negotiation, and decision-making stages o f regional integration discussions.
Infrastructure development, water resources management, and HIV/AIDS were supported by
only one ESW each. Three additional E S W were associated with strategy development for the
subregions and were used as input in the subregional RIASs. All o f these tasks are relevant to the
strategic priorities o f the RECs, NEPAD, and the AAP. However, the strategic relevance o f the
remaining three ESW tasks (Municipal Development Tools; SSA Universities Staff Retention;
AFR Gender, Time Use, and Poverty), all completed during FY06, i s unclear. Although these
three activities may have region-wide application, their strategic alignment with the priorities o f
the RECs, NEPAD, and AAP i s not obvious. Sectodthematic focus for TA activities i s similarly
distributed, with all activities being strategically relevant to the regional integration priorities o f
the RECs, NEPAD, and the AAP.

20.
By subregion, three ESW activities are focused on West Africa, 1 o n Central Africa, 4 on
Eastern Africa, 4 on Southern Africa, and 5 activities are relevant to all Sub-Saharan Africa. For
TA, 2 activities are focused on West Africa, 3 on Central Africa, none o n Eastern Africa, 3 on
Southern Africa, and 3 activities for all Sub-Saharan Africa. As Southern Africa has been

75

lagging other subregions in readiness for regional integration, the Bank’s support to the
subregion has been relatively more geared toward capacity development through ESW and TA
activities.
21.
N o quality review has ever been conducted for the AAA portfolio o f the Regional
Integration Department. A brief examination o f this portfolio suggests that quality i s variable
across the portfolio and that a quality review i s recommended for FY08 to gamer lessons learned
for future governance o f regional integration AAA. However, the lessons from the FY06 QAG
Review o f Regional AAA for the Africa Region are quite relevant for this portfolio, including
that the Africa Region lags other regions in terms o f AAA quality. Specifically, more attention
needs to be paid to:
0

0

AAA governance (Bank Inputs and Processes) including quality assurance,
planning, budgeting, and reporting.
Internal quality. Task objectives need to be clearer, results indicators more

explicit, and scope better aligned with objectives.
0

Dialogue and dissemination. Dissemination strategies should be elaborated and

funded at entry, because they are usually ineffective when elaborated during
implementation.
22.
B y network, the QAG Review found that the INF Network lags behind others for AAA
quality. Dialogue and dissemination and Bank inputs and processes are areas requiring
significant improvement in INF. More attention i s needed to ensure closer involvement o f clients
and key stakeholders. Dissemination strategies need to be elaborated at entry, funded and
followed by appropriate implementation. Greater managerial attention needs to be paid by the
SMU to quality-at-entry and throughout implementation. Infrastructure comprises the largest
share o f the Africa Regional Integration lending portfolio. Therefore, it i s a major strategic driver
for regional integration in Africa. In reviewing AAA mapped to the network, the Regional
Integration Department should pay close attention to the QAG lessons for the INF Network.
23.
Although the Bank i s coordinating w i t h development partners to provide capacity
development support to the RECs and their member countries, AAA activities o f the Regional
Integration portfolio require significant scale-up to meet the enormous capacity development
needs o f these constituents.

76

e,

%J

9

e

Q

9

h

Y

I

3s
8

%

P
3

2

.3

Y

E

Y

e

.e
Y

d

3
e,

E

e,

I5
0

P
0
e,

1

a

o!

Q

x

t:

8
Y
Y

2
E

c"

0

c"
0

.e

.e
Y

2

¶

bo

m

3
;; 2
N
d

v)

I-

s

.e

B
=f
D
9

3
cd

L,

M

e

1-

3d
e,

x

9

d

0

E
8

c
x

-2
0

.e

M

2

N

2
0
P4

9

I

a

E
0

.e
Y

P
d

2
0

..

w

2

E

0,

E

1

8

Y

cd

8C
cd

E
a

E

B

z

a

s

Y
m

45
0

M

E
0

Y

1

i

6

24

rr
0

C

0

.e
Y

1

D

.e
1-

a

s

P

APPENDIX V. SUMMARY OF STRATEGIC APPROACHES
TO SUBREGIONAL INTEGRATION IN AFRICA
Overview
1.
This appendix summarizes the ensemble o f analyses, reviews, and proposed frameworks
undertaken between 1998 and 2006 to lay out the World Bank’s approach to subregional
integration in Eastern Africa, West Africa, Central Africa, and Southern Africa. I t also identifies
their key commonalities and specificities to draw out their implications for developing and
operationalizing a comprehensive regional integration strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
W h i l e the case for integration remains equally strong in all four subregions, the political impetus,
geographical and historical circumstances, strategic approach, institutional capacity, and progress
to date have varied considerably from one subregion to the next. The Bank’s mandate to support
regional integration in Africa has been strengthened by recent developments. Consequently, a
stock-taking o f these experiences should draw lessons learned, reassess priorities and
opportunities, and define next steps to inform current discussion o f a coherent and coordinated
approach to regional integration in the continent.

2.

There have been a number o f strategy documents on regional integration and cooperation
in Africa. This summary i s based mainly on four subregional papers:

1.

“Regional Integration and Cooperation in Eastern Africa: Identifying Strategic
Opportunities for World Bank Regional Interventions,” June 2006

2.

“Regional Integration and Cooperation in Central Africa,” January 22, 2006

3.

“Study on Regional Integration in West Africa: Review o f Strategies and
Priorities”

4.

“Regional Integration and Cooperation in Southern Africa: Identifying Strategic
Opportunities for World Bank Regional Intervention. Final Report,” June 30,
2006.

3.
The objectives and methodologies o f these subregional papers differed, reflecting the
varying extent o f Bank support and involvement in regional integration at different times. For
Central and Western Africa, strategies approved by the Board in 2003 and 2001, respectively,
were followed up with subregional integration assistance strategies (subRIASs) in 2006. For
Southern Africa, a strategy presented to the Board as early as 1998 provided the basis for a
comprehensive analysis to undergird an operational strategy for the subregion now under
discussion. For Eastern Africa, an initial subRIAS was prepared in June 2006 to lay out the
Bank’s strategic approach to strengthen support for integration and identify specific areas for
support. Accordingly, the range o f factors and trends analyzed by the individual strategic pieces,
as well as the processes o f dialogue and consultation that informed them, also differed.
In providing a schematic overview o f the papers (see Table A4.1 “Coverage o f World
4.
Bank SubRIASs in Africa”), this summary inevitably foreshortens considerable analysis and
detail. This approach was chosen not to dismiss the relevance o f the individual papers’
particularities nor to validate a particular methodology at the others’ expense, but rather to distill

86

the main elements o f each paper according to comparable analytical frameworks. The focus o n
the rationale and objectives, strategic priorities, implementation experience, critical issues, and
next steps would inform the Bank’s effort to scale up i t s support for regional integration in a
significant, systematic way, and facilitate practical implementation and monitoring o f agreed
actions.

5.

The summary also should indicate the extent o f strategic reflection, consultation, and
even innovation that have prompted the current effort to provide an overarching strategy for
scaling up Bank support for regional integration in Africa. In retrospect, these earlier efforts
constituted an initial due diligence process and provided a baseline o f data and experience t o
build on. While updates, revisions, and further analysis may be needed in some areas, Bank
assistance for integration and cooperation in all four subregions i s grounded in a review o f five
areas. These are existing mechanisms, processes, and institutions to promote integration and
cooperation; analysis o f economic and development trends; assessment o f sectoral issues;
surveys o f analytical work and investment operations to date; and identification o f critical gaps
and opportunities.
Key Commonalities and Specificities

6.
While broadly similar in thrust, variations in rationale, objectives, and priorities; guiding
principles; and methodology emerge from reviews o f the Bank’s strategic approaches t o
integration and cooperation in Eastern, Central, Western, and Southern Africa. While these
differences stem for the most part from specific conditions in each subregion, acknowledging or
addressing them explicitly should provide a more systematic and detailed assessment o f
integration and cooperation issues across the region, and o f their implications for an overarching
regional strategy.
7.
Rationale. N o t surprisingly, the rationale across the subregions for strengthening
integration and cooperation rests on the potential for spurring growth-and thereby supporting
poverty reduction-through gains in trade, private sector development, and economies o f scale in
infrastructure and services. I t also rests on the increasingly urgent need to strengthen
management o f common goods-such as water resources, forestry, and biodiversity-and illssuch as communicable diseases. This overarching rationale i s closely aligned with international,
regional, and subregional agendas that call for greater integration and cooperation in Africa (for
example, NEPAD and AAP). However, there are differences in emphasis and appreciation in the
Bank’s approach to each subregion:
e

The degree of integration supported by the Bank varies by subregion. In East
Africa, in which the E A C Customs U n i o n has been launched, efforts focus o n
liberalizing the flow o f goods and services. In Central and West Africa, in which
each subregion has a customs union as well as a monetary union, additional
objectives are economic integration and/or convergence and financial sector
reforms. In Southern Africa, multiple, overlapping regional integration
arrangements (RIAs) are nevertheless less developed, and the SADC agenda i s
explicitly driven by development (rather than by growth-oriented) objectives. In
t h i s subregion, the scope for formal integration at any level i s more limitedalthough the scope for deep integration i s large, as i t s economies are relatively

87

open. Meanwhile, labor migration i s identified as an important factor in all four
subregions but does not seem to be a strong focus for any o f RIAS.
a

Different trade-related risks are highlighted from one subregion to the next.
W h i l e the potential growth f r o m trade i s acknowledged as a powerful rationale for
integration, the potential risks are not analyzed systematically across the
subregions. These include risks with respect to benefits distribution, briefly
highlighted in the Bank’s strategic approach to integration in East Africa;
geographic polarization o f economic activities, considered in West and Southern
Africa (due to the economic dominance of CBte d’Ivoire, Nigeria, and South
Africa); and trade diversion by regional blocs versus globalization, also
considered in developing the Bank’s approach to subregional integration in West
Africa.

0

While the Bank’s approach in each subregion is closely aligned with the agendas
of the main coordinating bodies, the Bank’s scope for supporting integration is
limited by political and other constraints specific to each subregion. The weak
financial and institutional capacity o f these bodies as well as poor regional
infrastructure are common to all four subregions. Additional constraints include
conflicts and natural disasters/emergencies in West Africa, the recent windfalls
from o i l revenues in Central Africa, and the imbalance in trade flows between
South Africa and its neighbors. Lack o f political leadership or commitment to
integration and cooperation has been identified as critical. I t remains to be seen
whether the Bank’s proposed interventions-with
their emphasis o n dialogue,
analytical work, and capacity building-are
sufficiently robust to build such
commitment.

8.
Objectives and priorities. Consequently, the main areas for support are broadly similar
across subregions-trade, transport, telecommunications, energy, river basin management, and
capacity building. However, the specific strategic objectives and sectoral priorities vary.
9.
In East Africa, subregional trade i s highly concentrated in a number o f agricultural and
value-added goods, as well as services. Thus, efforts are focused on increasing market
transparency and reducing costs; integrating agricultural markets; and building economies o f
scale in transport, telecommunications, energy, tourism, and higher education services.
10.
By contrast, there i s l o w complementarity among the economies o f Southern Africa,
limiting the scope for merchandise trade, and significant mismatch between demand and supply
for strategic natural resources such as water and energy. The subregion also has the highest
HIV/AIDS prevalence in the world-sufficiently high to have a measurable negative impact o n
development and economic growth. Hence evolved the Ba&’ s emphasis o n strengthening
cooperation through a subregional electricity system and power pool, and subregional
infrastructure projects to increase water storage capacity. Notably, H I V / A I D S prevention efforts
are mainstreamed into road transport projects.
11.
Guiding principles. While the Bank’s approach to integration and cooperation in each
subregion i s explicitly guided by the principles o f open regionalism and subsidiarity, as well as
implicit additional criteria, it i s unclear h o w consistently these principles have been applied

88

across subregions. Besides open regionalism and subsidiarity, additional criteria for Bank
support have been applied in one or more o f the four subregions, although these have not always
been articulated explicitly. These criteria include:
a

High impact and sustainability-defined
in East Africa as positive effects that
exceed the high project preparation and transboundary negotiation costs

e

Political commitment and institutional capacity to implement complex agreements
involving several countries

a

Donor partnerships-& rigueur due to the large investments typically required
for regional and subregional projects

e

Additionality-defined as activities that clearly increase the institutional and
financial capacity o f subregional coordinating bodies

a

Civil society and private-sector involvement-an explicit guiding principle o f the
Bank’s approach to integration and cooperation in Central Africa.

12.
Because Bank support has remained anchored in individual CASs and country programs,
and these as well as implementation experiences are unevenly reviewed in the individual
subregional strategic pieces, the relevance and effectiveness o f these principles i s difficult to
assess.
13.
Methodology. As a review o f separate efforts to develop a strategic approach to
integration and cooperation in each subregion shows, Bank assistance has been grounded in five
reviews. These comprise reviews o f existing mechanisms, processes, and institutions to promote
integration and cooperation; analyses o f economic and development trends; assessments o f
sectoral issues; surveys o f analytical work and investment operations to date; and identification
o f critical gaps and opportunities.
14.

However, there i s some unevenness in four areas:
e

The extent o f dialogue and consultation undertaken in each subregion varies
considerably. The Central and West Africa subRIASs appear to have benefited
from the most interaction with external stakeholders. N o formal consultations
appear to have been organized in any o f the subregions.

e

Not all o f the strategic pieces include a comprehensive review o f implementation
experience or draw clear lessons learned that might be applicable across the
subregions. W h i l e specific issues encountered in individual activities are
identified, broader lessons do not always emerge clearly.

e

While there i s a clear emphasis on the need for further analytical work in all four
subregions, discussion o f planned lending operations i s less developed.

89

Implications for Coordinated Regional Integration Strategy
15.
In light o f these variations, it may be worthwhile for current discussions o f a coordinated
regional integration strategy to provide a normative framework that would explicitly and
systematically-in all four subregions-require consideration o f the following issues:
0

A typology or even hierarchy o f integration options, with appropriate benchmarks
(such as degrees o f freedom in movement o f capital, goods, services, and persons)
to facilitate monitoring and evaluation o f progress.

0

Benefits distribution, to ensure that poverty reduction objectives are not
undermined and tensions not fuelled among countries. Upfront assessments o f
benefits would facilitate management o f expectations and, where necessary,
development o f redistribution mechanisms.

0

The risk o f trade diversion through regional blocs, to ensure that overarching
commitments to global trade agreements (offering potentially more powerful
gains) are not undermined.

0

The risk o f geographic polarization o f economic activities, which may well occur
with or without integration but which, if anticipated, could be better managed
through regional institutions and arrangements.

0

A formal consultations plan to validate the Bank’s approach with external
stakeholders.

0

Regular follow-up to address implementation issues as they arise and share
lessons learned across subregions.

0

A broadened set o f guiding principles for supporting subregional integration and
cooperation, which would establish a burden o f explanation when one or more
principles are not applied.

0

A proposal for scaling up lending operations for integration and cooperation.

Summaries of Subregional Integration Papers

1.

Eastern Africa

Rationale and Strategic Objectives
16.
Responding to increasing recognition-most notably, in the N e w Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) in 2002 and the E A C Development Strategy in 2006-of the significant
contributions to growth and poverty reduction that regional integration programs can bring, in
recent years, the Bank began to deepen i t s support for such efforts. T o ensure complementarity
with Country Assistance Strategies (CASs) and alignment with regional initiatives such as the
Africa Action Plan (AAP) and the Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF), a subRIAS was

90

developed in 2006 to provide a strategic framework for the Bank’s interventions in the
subregion.

17.
According to the subRIAS, economic trends in the subregion (Table A4.2), the structure
and volume o f trade (Tables A4.3-A4.4), factor markets, common resources and constraints to
growth, and economies o f scale suggest significant gains from strengthening regional
approaches. These gains appeared in:
0

Economic and trade integration. The market size o f the subregion’s economies, i s
small. Susubregional trade i s highly concentrated in a number of products and
gives rise to value-added goods.’ The potential for gains i s expected to come less
through significantly expanded trade than through increased market transparency
and reduced transaction costs-thus
promoting investment and accelerating
growth. In particular, there i s scope for integrating agricultural markets by
addressing infrastructurerelated and administrative disruptions t o supply chains;
building regional production networks (such as cotton-to-garment); and increasing
trade in services (such as freight forwarding and ports logistics). Integration also
would increase food security in the subregion. There also i s room for modest
capital and labor market integration.

0

Management of commons and cooperation on public goods. While East African
countries have an extraordinary natural resource base, much o f i t i s shared across
neighboring countries, has spill-over effects, and i s subject to increasing stress. A
number o f externalities, such as infectious diseases, also present a challenge to
public goods across the subregion, Both issues strengthen the case for increased
cooperation in managing water resources, wildlife, forestry, and health.

0

Economies of scale. Given the volumes and patterns o f passenger and cargo
traffic in the ~ u b r e g i o n ,as
~ well as demand for key resources and services,
potential economies o f scale are obvious. These can be achieved through
development o f regional infrastructure and markets in t r a n ~ p o r t ,power
~
and
energy,’ telecommunications,6 tourism, and higher education. These sectors are
~~

“Regional Integration and Cooperation in Eastern Africa: Identifying Strategic Opportunities for W o r l d B a n k
Regional Interventions,” June 2006.
A large share o f intraregional trade i s petroleum product reexports f r o m Kenya to Burundi, Rwanda, and Uganda.
Kenya has the most diversified exports-manufactures, pharmaceuticals, processed foods, and other goods for
reexport. The other countries trade mainly energy, cereals, processed iron, processed foods, and some light
manufactures. The expansion o f intraregional trade thus has provided a platform for expanding trade in value-added
foods, although the challenge i s to transform these industries into internationally competitive ones.
F o r instance, the regions surrounding Lakes Victoria, Tanganyika, and Nyasa alone are estimated to host over 30
m i l l i o n people involved in fishing, agriculture, and trading.
The East African transport infrastructure includes road and r a i l networks, airports, o i l pipelines, and inland lake
and maritime transport. Transit arrangements for land transport also are a critical rationale for regional engagement.
They would benefit the landlocked countries through increased access to global markets while benefiting the coastal
countries through expansion o f trade-related services.
Total installed power generation capacity for Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda was only 2,043 MW, despite
rapid demand growth and untapped energy resources including hydropower, coal, natural gas, geothermal, and solar
energy. At the same time, the cost o f power i s substantially above international prices per KWh.
K e y indicators suggest that the availability of basic telecommunications and ICT services is significantly below the
average for Africa. W h i l e the subsector is one o f the fastest-growing in the region, comparable coverage i s l o w for

91

plagued by l o w reliability, high cost, and under-developed linkages-all o f which
inhibit growth and discourage investment. Regional efforts to rehabilitate and/or
upgrade networks, undertake new investments, privatize the provision o f some
services and encourage competition, and reduce administrative burdens would
increase reliability, avoid duplication, and lower costs.

18.
The Eastern Africa subRIAS notes that while benefits from regional cooperation and/or
integration are likely to be very substantial, benefits may not be equally distributed among
participating countries. Inequitable distribution, in turn, may create conflicts among members o f
regional initiatives and reverse or slow down integration, thereby reducing benefits for all.
Careful upfront assessments o f the benefits for all and for each partner separately that can be
expected from various regional integration efforts should thus be undertaken. Their goals should
be to manage expectations and-if
necessary-trigger
development o f a redistribution
mechanism to establish equity among the cooperating partners.

19.
The over-arching mandate for integration i s outlined in the Africa Action Plan (AAP) and
the IDA14 Guidelines. T o provide for selectivity in the Bank’s support for integration efforts, the
subRIAS lays out the following principles for proposed interventions:
e

Bona fide regional issue and subsidiarity. Proposed interventions should address
genuinely regional issues, rather than issues that are merely similar for several

countries. Such issues would necessarily have to be addressed at a regional, as
opposed to the national, level-thereby adhering to the principle o f subsidiarity.
e

High impact and sustainability. The impact o f proposed interventions should be
sustainable and exceed the high transaction costs associated with project

preparation and negotiation across borders
supranational bodies.
e

and between national and

Strong commitment by all countries. Projects should have strong national and

supranational commitment, as reflected by priorities in national and regional
development strategies as well as explicit endorsement by the relevant bodies o f
the roles and responsibilities defined for each.
e

Capacity to execute implementation arrangements. T o ensure sustainability,

projects should take into account capacity constraints both at the E A C Secretariat
level and in the implementation bodies within the countries, and provide for an
explicit decision-making arrangement to avoid delays. Priority should be given to
programs that regional bodies, either existing or created ad hoc, have an explicit
mandate to implement.
e

Emerging partnerships among donors. The large volume o f funds typically
needed for regional programs, especially in infrastructure, calls for the Bank to
prioritize projects financed in partnership with other donors. In particular, unlike
the Bank, the A f D C i s able to provide grants to supranational entities, thus
facilitating the financing o f some components. Joint funding arrangements should

mobile and fixed line subscribers, and the cost o f calls remains significantly higher in East Africa than in virtually
any other part o f the world.

92

be as simple as possible, with clear delimitation o f financing responsibilities
between donors and activities.
a

Critical role of the Bank. Equipped with new instruments and structures such as
the SDR300 million Regional IDA Envelope-80 percent o f which i s allocated to

Africa-the Bank should prioritize projects for which, due to complexity, risk, or
financing requirements, other donors and/or the private sector are unlikely to take
the lead. I t should also be able to leverage other Bank Group instruments.
20.
On monitoring and evaluation (M&E) frameworks, the subRIAS specifies that proposed
interventions’ effectiveness should be monitored at both the activity and the aggregated regional
assistance program levels. Detailed indicators should be defined according to the activities
(investment operations, TA, capacity building, analytical work). Benchmarking and targeting
should be harmonized across countries and aligned with national, regional, and partnership
frameworks.
Strategic Priorities

21.
Based on the sectoral analyses and applying the principles outlined in the subRIAS, the
Eastern Africa regional program focuses on two main lines o f regional intervention: support for
the EAC’s comprehensive integration agenda to build an open economic space in East Africa,
and support for efficient region-wide infrastructure services and/or management o f regional
public goods. The subRIAS identifies the following priority areas for Bank engagement, through
investment projects as well as analytical work, over three years, with the expectation that these
priorities will evolve through client engagement and as knowledge gaps are filled through the
proposed ESW and TA programs:
Investment Operations

22.
Environment: Lake Victoria Environmental Management Program (LVEMP) II. The
second largest fresh water lake in the world, Lake Victoria i s a shared asset o f three countries:
Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. In addition to i t s environmental values, it supports an important
export fishing industry, hydropower production, and lake transport. Since the 1960s, the lake and
i t s watersheds have experienced a decline in water quality that, if not reversed or stabilized, will
have serious consequences for the whole region. The Bank supported the rehabilitation o f the
lake ecosystem through the Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project I(LVEMPl),
implemented beginning in 1996 and extended until the end of 2005. That plan focused on
acquiring knowledge about the complex ecosystem as an input to a second longer-term
investment phase, LVEMP2, which was to promote socially and environmentally sustainable
economic growth. LVEMPZ i s under preparation, with financial support from three PHRD grants
and a GEF Grant. GEF also approved a US$l.O million grant to support the preparation o f a
Transboundary Diagnostic Assessment (TDA) and Strategic Action Program ( S A P ) .
a

Energy: East African Power Master Plan. The integration o f the power systems
o f Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda i s critical to reducing the relatively high cost o f
electricity supply and the collective vulnerability o f the E A C to drought-induced
power supply disruptions, including issues related to common water resource

93

management. The recently concluded East African Power Master Plan Study
estimated that the benefit of regional power integration would be o n the order o f
US$500 million NPV compared with the current scenario o f each country
developing i t s own resources. The Bank and the E A C Secretariat have held
preliminary discussions for a three-country operation to finance the East African
Power Pool, which would require physical investments and rehabilitation,
institutional restructuring and regulation, and establishing the required
institutional and technical market mechanisms. This project i s a priority
intervention o f the E A C Development Strategy.
0

Telecommunications: East Africa
Submarine Cable System. Poor
telecommunications service and high cost are one o f the main constraints to
private sector and export development in East Africa. The private sector-led,
multicountry Eastern Africa Submarine Cable System (EASS y) project aims at
expanding broadband connectivity by laying a submarine fiber-optic cable that
would connect coastal countries from Mtunzini, South Africa, to Port Sudan,
Sudan, including inland branches to various landlocked nations. The impact o f
this project through economies o f scale will be very significant, as demonstrated
by a Bank cost-benefit analysis. A feasibility study financed by the IFC
completed in 2004 estimated the total cost at US$200 million-US$230 million. O f
this, approximately 65 percent has been secured through private funds, leaving a
financing gap o f US$70 million-US$80 million.

0

Road transport: Completion of the East African Road Network Project (EARPN).
In i t s new Development Strategy, the E A C has identified five major regional road
corridors for develppment and rehabilitation under EARPN. The network
measures 15,273km and comprises 8,361km o f main routes and 6,912km o f
feeder routes. Forty-three percent o f the network i s paved. These corridors will
connect the three partner states; their areas o f production and markets; and other
transport modes including ports, railway stations, and airports. Funding has been
secured for approximately half the roads.

0

Energy: Kagera River Basin and Rusumo Falls Hydroelectric Project. The
Kagera River i s the largest river draining into Lake Victoria. I t flows across
Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda and i s another major shared water
resource. In 2005 Rwanda, Burundi and Tanzania approached IDA for grant
support for a US$154 million operation to build a hydropower facility and a
backbone transmission interconnection system that would bring cheaper
electricity to the subregion, and thus alleviate deforestation caused by the use o f
biomass as the sole source o f energy. Given the Bank’s involvement in other
power projects in the region and the link to the Lake Victoria projects, the Bank
would have a critical role to play, especially in mitigating the risks. Most notably,
there i s no existing regional body through which the beneficiaries could interact,
so most o f the institutional infrastructure would have to be built from scratch.
Existing capacity for project preparation and implementation, in particular in
Burundi and Rwanda, i s very low. Owing to the large size o f the investment,
partnering with other donors would be necessary, including grants to a
supranational framework to be established for the project.

94

a

Transport: Linkages with northern neighbors. As the peace processes move
forward and the situation stabilizes in Sudan, and possibly also in Somalia,
pressure will mount to restore the deteriorated transport infrastructure linking
them with the E A C countries. Better transport l i n k s would be an important driver
o f economic growth in the wider region and contribute to regional security.
Currently, roads between Sudan and K e n y a g a n d a , and between Somalia and
Kenya are nonexistent or in an extremely poor state. The Bank has started
prepreparation o f the Sudan Emergency Transport and Infrastructure
Development Project (ETIDP). I t will include rehabilitation and construction o f
roads and bridges, enhancement o f railways, buildinghpgrading o f selected
airports, and improvement o f the regional l i n k s with neighboring countries
bordering southern Sudan, that is, Kenya and Uganda.

a

Health: HN/AIDS. East African countries are among the most heavily affected by
the HIV/AIDS epidemic; infection rates vary between 7 percent and 12 percent.
Major drivers o f the epidemic act regionally, especially along transport corridors,
and can therefore best be addressed at a regional level. Developing regional
activities would enable building economies o f scale in both financial and human
resources, and the sharing o f best practices among countries. T o complement the
Bank-supported African Regional Capacity Building Network for HIV/AIDS
Prevention, Care, and Treatment (ARCAN) in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Uganda, the
Bank could explore preparing a regional project to prevent the spread o f
HIV/AIDS in the northern or central transport corridors. Studies show that a wellcrafted program to increase condom use to 90 percent along the MombasaKampala highway would decrease new infections by 55 percent.

Analytical Work
a

a

Constraints and opportunities for regional trade expansion. T o distill the regional
aspects and complement recent reports on trade integration issues prepared by the
Bank for five East African countries, additional analytical work i s needed.
Analyses are needed particularly for three areas:

1.

Trade in agriculture products (grains) in which nontariff barriers (NTBs)
have remained substantial.

2.

A regional cotton-to-garment chain to take advantage o f opportunities
offered by the launching o f the E A C Customs Union, the production o f
good cotton in Uganda, the revival o f Tanzania’s textile industry, and
Kenya’s garment-manufacturing infrastructure.

3.

Regional tourism chains, to assess the potential for cooperation, in
particular between the smaller tourism providers-Burundi,
Rwanda, and
Uganda. These three countries offer specific attractions (such as gorillas)
that complement the wider range o f recreational activities offered in Kenya
and Tanzania.

Regional dimension of labor markets. The free movement o f skilled and unskilled
labor, capital, and services across the region could contribute to growth and

95

reduce poverty. This complex agenda would require detailed study o f legislation
on, among other things, freedom o f residence and work, financial services and
insurance, and diplomas equivalency and mutual certification. Given the
potentially large benefits from progress o n t h i s agenda, an analytic activity i s
needed that would also review existing work and partnerships (such as w i t h the
ILO) and lay out the issues, drawing on the Bank’s growing work program o n
remittances, jobs, and trade in educational services.
0

e

EAC trade policy. As a Customs Union, the E A C member states have agreed o n a
common trade policy. I t comprises a common external tariff (CET), Rules o f
Origin, a l i s t o f goods that are banned f r o m imports (for safety, hygienic, and
other reasons), and a schedule o f “sensitive goods” that receive protection above
the CET rates. Furthermore, E A C i s expected to formulate a common trade policy
for i t s member states vis-&vis WTO. , and to coordinate members’ positions o n
trade issues relating to the current economic partnership agreement (EPA)
negotiations, and vis-&vis other regional trade agreements (SADC, COMESA).
This i s a priority for the E A C in the near future, and the E A C Secretariat has
expressed the need for advisory support f r o m the Bank. Such support would
encompass analytic work on the E A C trade policy (review o f the current common
trade policy, in particular to further integrate in a common market; review o f
member states’ commitments to WTO; and proposals for harmonization and
rationalization o f international trade negotiations) and capacity building in the
E A C Secretariat and the relevant bodies in member states.
Regional water resource management. As noted above, a number o f areas for
strategic Bank involvement encompass shared water resources. They include L a k e
Victoria environmental management, water basin management, and hydropower
projects in Eastern Africa. Multiple uses for these resources create tensions both
across countries and across uses (irrigation, hydropower) and environmental
functions. A priority for analytic work would be to gain a better, multisectoral
understanding o f the magnitude and nature o f these tensions.

23.
The subRIAS recommends that the integration program remain open to requests for
advice, notably in areas in which the Bank i s already providing country support. For instance, the
E A C Secretariat i s seeking support to develop regulations and procedures for implementing a
Regional Competition L a w that it has drafted and a Regional Financial Integration initiative
under preparation.
2.

Central Africa

Strategic Context, Rationale, and Objectives

24.
The World Bank Executive Board in 2003 approved a subRIAS for Central Africa aimed
at strengthening the ongoing integration in the Comrnunaute‘ Economique et Mone‘taire de
Z’Afrique Centrale (CEMAC)7, and to contribute to building a more open economic space with
The Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) includes the CEMAC member states as well as
Angola, Burundi, DR Congo, Rwanda, and Sao Tome e Principe. ECCAS i s not systematically covered by the

96

fewer barriers to the flow o f goods, labor, and services among countries. The subRIAS was
guided by the principles o f open regionalism, subsidiarity, and the participation o f private sector
and civil society. The strategy was based o n the premise that regional integration and
cooperation can reduce poverty by strengthening the l i n k s among the poorer landlocked
countries and their more prosperous coastal neighbors and more generally by helping to establish
the basis for faster economic growth. (see box A5.1)

Box A5.1: CEMAC Zone
The six-country Central African Economic and Monetary Community CEMAC zone comprises Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Equatorial Guinea, and Gabon. The zone covers roughly 3
million square km so i s considerably smaller than the West and the Southern Africa subregions. Chad and the
Central African Republic are landlocked, and Equatorial Guinea i s largely offshore. C E M A C i s home to only 32
million inhabitants in an area roughly the size o f India, which has over 1 billion people.
A product o f French rule, the regional grouping i s based on a combination o f a customs union and a monetary
union, with a common currency, common external tariff, and a range o f associated regional institutions. In 1994
the member countries signed a treaty to formally create C E M A C as an umbrella organization over the existing
Union Douanihre et Economique de 1’Afrique Centrale (UDEAC) and BEAC, the regional central bank. The
treaty was formally ratified b y the countries in 1999.
Linked partly b y geography and partly b y history, the economies o f the CEMAC zone share a number o f
distinctive characteristics. All have achieved very l o w historical growth in per capita incomes and limited strides
in poverty reduction over several decade. The zone also i s characterized b y a high dependence on o i l and forest
exports, volatility in economic growth, domination b y two economies, Cameroon and Gabon, very limited
intraregional linkages, juxtaposition o f richer coastal and poorer landlocked countries, and political instability
within CEMAC and neighboring countries.

25.
Specifically, the subRIAS identified key domains for assistance to regional integration
and cooperation, and core, noncore, and contingent activities (Table A4.5). Priority areas for the
domain o f regional integration were considered t o be macroeconomic policies, trade policies,
financial sector integration, and the business environment, whereas the remaining activities
(infrastructure services, forestry/water, human resources) were held to be in the domain o f
cooperation. ‘Core’ activities, in which the Bank expected to take a leadership role, were t o have
first claim on Bank resources, whereas in ‘noncore’ activities another development partner
would take the lead. Contingent activities consisted mainly o f long-term studies.

26.
The subRIAS proposed an envelope o f US$140 million including 1 infrastructure project
(US$lOO million) for roads and 6 technical assistance projects (US$40 million). The latter were
proposed for financial sector microfinance (US$ 10 million), capital market development
(unspecified), trade facilitation (US$5 million), transport facilitation (US$5 million), air
transport (US$5 million), forestry (US$5 million), and HIV/AIDS (US$lO million). The regional
payments project (US$15 million) was approved in July 2002.
In 2006 a follow-up report (“Regional Integration and Cooperation in Central Africa”)
assessed the status o f implementation o f the subRIAS through a sector-by-sector analysis and a
survey o f developments in a number o f policy areas, prior to and after approval o f the subRIAS.

27.

subFUAS. Established in 1983 in anticipation o f an African Common Market, since 1992, ECCAS has been
paralyzed b y sociopolitical crises and armed conflicts that have affected 7 o f the 11 member states.

97

The report also proposed recommendations o n h o w the Bank strategy might be revised going
forward, as regards themes to be addressed, principles governing Bank interventions, and
institutional arrangements.

28.

On the whole, the report found that the Bank’s strategy remains relevant. Nevertheless,
the large oil windfalls suggest that more emphasis needs to be placed on the careful management
of these resources and their productive use for generating economic growth within CEMAC.
CEMAC’s emphases have been and remain reducing the barriers to the movement o f goods and
services through making the customs union effective, enforcing macroeconomic policy
convergence, pursuing financial sector integration, and promoting cooperation o n sector policies
and projects. These emphases remain important to lower transaction costs for private sector
business development. However, the large inflows o f o i l revenues to the subregion in recent
years and the ensuing volatility require proper macroeconomic and monetary management and
development financial intermediation mechanisms to channel these resources to productive
investments.

29.
The 2006 report also assessed the degree to which the relevant CASs support the
integration agenda in the subregion. It found that the pace of implementation of the subRIAS has
been slow and uneven for a variety of reasons, including “back-loading” the strategy (with the
bulk o f operations envisaged for the latter fiscal years). Other reasons were unfunded mandates
for key pieces o f analytical and operational work and the lack of lending instruments to deal with
a weak regional partner (the C E M A C Secretariat). There had not been significant progress on
the central activities of the CEMAC agenda: macroeconomic management, trade and transport
facilitation, andfinancial sector integration. As o f 2006, none o f the projects included in RIAS
had been approved by IDA.
30.
Nevertheless, C E M A C has made modest progress o n a broad number o f fronts: analytical
work on transit facilitation, a regional financial sector assessment, a project to improve the
regulatory framework for air transport in CEMAC, and a capacity-building grant for institutional
strengthening o f the C E M A C Secretariat.
3 1.
Meanwhile, the CASs for the countries in the subregion all recognize the importance o f
regional integration issues (although some address them more actively than others):
0

Cameroon CAS i s explicit in noting the importance of improving the
serviceability o f multicountry transit corridors toward Chad and the Central
African Republic. I t also recognizes the regional role o f the Chad-Cameroon
pipeline and the Douala Infrastructure project.

0

Gabon CAS emphasizes the need o f Gabon to exercise i t s leadership and honor i t s
commitments to the subregion.

0

Chad CAS emphasizes trade and transport facilitation and focuses on a Diagnostic
Trade Integration Study (DTIS) to identify obstacles to regional integration.

0

Central African Republic Interim Strategy Note (ISN) advocates support for the
regional transport program.

0

Congo I S N stresses the role o f regional economic management.

98

Strategic Priorities

32.
In light o f the detailed review o f the subRIAS, identifying priority areas for support i s
critical to regaining momentum in implementing the Bank’s strategy. Equally critical are
addressing the funding, commitment, and procedural issues that have hobbled progress to date.
These issues are urgent because there are significant opportunities for scaling up assistance in the
coming years. T o effectively support regional integration and cooperation moving forward, Bank
activities should focus on six key areas:

1.

First priority: Strengthen the core CEMAC institutions. The Africa Action Plan
emphasizes strengthening regional integration, and recognition i s growing that the
slow pace o f capacity development remains a binding constraint to poverty
reduction. Consequently, the Bank’s work needs to focus o n the development o f
capacity in CEMAC’s institutions by addressing the institutional and financial
weakness of the CEMAC Secretariat head on. The envisaged US$30 m i l l i o n
C E M A C Regional Financial Institutions Support project will be vital in this
regard.

2.

Second priority: Improve the level of the macroeconomic dialogue and policy
advice regarding the management and use of oil reserves. Together with the IMF,
the Bank can advise B E A C o n the management of o i l resources, and the possible
investment o f these resources in higher yielding securities or future generation
funds that would finance economically profitable investments within CEMAC. In
parallel, Bank advice and projects will be needed in the financial sector to help
effectively manage these windfalls and strengthen financial intermediation.

3.

Third priority: Increase the Bank’s work on regional infrastructure-especially
transport and telecommunications-the most important component of the original
strategy. As was envisioned, US$100 m i l l i o n i s being back-loaded to 2007 and
2008 to help finance road projects to build the key remaining segments o f the
Central African road network that l i n k s all the Central African capitals. In
parallel, IDA support for strengthening the regulatory framework for air transport
could improve the infrastructural foundations for the subregion.

4.

Fourth priority: The Bank should facilitate trade policy and transit. Under the
Bank’s Regional Trade and Transport Facilitation Project, there could be a reform
o f some o f the cumbersome customs and transit procedures that have made the
costs o f doing business in the subregion some o f the highest in the world.
Moreover, the Bank can help prepare the C E M A C countries in their negotiations
o n the EPAs with the European U n i o n by conducting analytical work on the fiscal
implications o f the trade liberalization.

5.

Fifth area: Bank could work on business environment, especially for private
sector development. This isue i s not as important as the other issues, and the Bank
may not have the resources or a comparative advantage. Nevertheless, two areas
in which the Bank could be particularly effective at the regional level would be to
advise on competitiveness issues and o n the legaujudicial framework, as well as

99

the accounting framework, for conducting business. This area also i s important to
the financial sector, in which legal and judicial frameworks for financial contracts
and their enforcement need to be improved.

6.

Finally, if it has resources and the instruments, the Bank can play a role in
helping CEMAC countries jointly address issues pertaining to public goods and
cross-border externalities through enhanced regional cooperation. Numerous
cross-border challenges can be effectively addressed only at the regional level,
especially regional environmental problems. Examples are the shrinkage o f L a k e
Chad, poor navigability along the Congo River, and difficulties in forestry
management. Similarly, with regard to HIVAIDS, cooperation can help control i t s
spread along the critical transit corridors.

33.

Scaling up support in these areas w i l l need to be undertaken in collaboration with other
donors, notably the EU and the ADB. Scaling up w i l l be successful only if there is an equivalent
increase in commitment to enhance integration and cooperation on the part of the highest level
of CEMAC. Moreover, security is a sine qua n o n to improved economic pe$ormance. A revised
or relaunched subRIAS should be informed by a thorough analysis o f this issue.

34.
Meanwhile, for the Bank to implement the following activities-proposed,
preparation, or already approved-should advance the current agenda:

under

Analytical Work
0

Macroeconomic management of oil revenues. Advise regional Central Bank,
BEAC, o n the development and operation o f savings and stabilization funds to
channel the o i l windfalls and o n financial diversification o f these resources into
higher-yielding, fixed-income securities. Provide analysis o f the management o f
volatility. Conduct analytical work o n Dutch disease issues in Central Africa and
bring global experience into policy dialogue.

0

Trade and transport. Analyze barriers to trade and continue to assess the
implementation o f trade and tariff reforms. Advise o n EPA negotiations w i t h the
European Union and analyze fiscal impact o f trade liberalization. Assess
implications o f additional tariff reform and possible convergence with the
U E M O A tariff levels. Analyze implementation o f reform o f transit regime
focusing on improving the f l o w o f goods and services along transit corridors and
establishing a regional transit regime fully in line w i t h international norms.

0

Financial sector. Analyze role o f development bank, BDEAC, in channelling
resources to productive investment. Examine the possibilities o f establishing an
effective guarantee system for transit trade. Advise on microfinance regulatory
framework and use Bank’s role as knowledge broker to disseminate international
experience. Follow up o n financial sector assessment program (FSAI?) work on
the legal and judicial environment, at both the regional and national levels, for
credit activities, enterprise reorganization, restructuring and bankruptcy, and
accounting and auditing frameworks.

100

0

Business environment. Scale up analysis o f Doing Business reports to develop a
regional overview o f problems. Advise C E M A C on the development o f a regional
regulatory framework for telecommunications. Conduct more detailed and
systematic assessments o f the competitiveness and the legal environment in
Central Africa using Investment Climate Assessments (ICAs), Diagnostic Trade
Integration Studies (DTISs), and Financial Sector Assessments (FSAPs) and
integrate these findings with operational activities.

Investment Operations
0

Financial sector. N o w that erstwhile delays have been overcome, timely
implementation o f the Regional Payments Project, originally approved in 2002,
must continue. This project i s expected to increase the efficiency and safety o f
payment mechanisms available to governments, businesses, and the general
population through the introduction o f electronic payment systems. I t also will
facilitate the implementation o f regional monetary policy by enhancing the ability
o f B E A C to obtain real-time information on commercial bank liquidity.

0

Preparation o f the proposed Regional Institutions Support Project should proceed
apace, with Board presentation scheduled in FY09 (US$30 million). A follow-up
to the Regional Payments Project, t h i s support project aims to develop policies
and mechanisms to better manage the regional economic and monetary union;
strengthen existing regional institutions for central banking, economic
management, microfinance security markets and money laundering; create a
regional credit information bureau; facilitate the financing o f regional integration
investments through strengthening BDEAC, which has been appointed to manage
the regional integration fund (FODEC); and prepare the technical, financial,
economic, and environmental aspects o f a pipeline o f regional integration
investment projects. A follow-up project o n financing the physical investments
for regional integration, possibly through BDEAC, t h i s operation i s intended to
also help recycle the substantial o i l surpluses in the region into productive
investments.

0

Trade and transport sectors. The implementation o f the West and Central Africa
Air Transport Safety and Security Project (US$14.5 m i l l i o n grant to Cameroon
approved in April 2006) should be pursued. The preparation o f the C E M A C
Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (US$150 million) should proceed apace
with a view to Board presentation in early FYO9. This project is of key importance
to the Bank’s support to regional integration as i t aims to provide financing for
key missing l i n k s o f regional road and rail infrastructure; and to substantially
reduce transport and logistical costs through modernization o f trade transport and
transit procedures. The overall outcome i s expected to be a significant
strengthening o f the C E M A C customs union.

0

Telecommunications. Consideration could be given to a regional communications
infrastructure project, similar t o that in East Africa: a Central African Broadband
Backbone (mainly Cameroon, CAR, and Chad) to improve cross-border and
international connectivity for landlocked countries. This project would need to go

101

hand-in-hand with the modernization o f the legal and regulatory framework,
which will be required to achieve sustainable growth in this sector.
0

Natural resource management. Support to implementation o f the L a k e Chad
Water Basin project should continue, and more done to stress the importance o f
the socio-economic issues the project i s addressing as well as the potential
economic gains likely t o result from better management o f water resources in
Central Africa. T o t h i s end, consideration could be given to a project similar to
the river basin projects under implementation in West Africa in partnership with
other donors.

35.
In two strategic sectors-forestry
and energy-there
are n o significant proposals
currently. Yet the Bank should continue to work with other donors, as in the recent past, on
deepening regional cooperation in the forestry sector. Similarly, there are significant
opportunities for electricity generation in Central Africa, based essentially on hydropower along
the Congo and Oubangui, which could reduce the cost o f energy in CAR, Northern Cameroon,
Chad, and northwestern DRC. Furthermore, development o f hydropower could produce other
significant external benefits: improved water resource management, flood control, regulation o f
water flows including toward Lake Chad, and development o f inland fisheries.
Implementation Experience and Emerging Issues

36.
The review o f the Central Africa subRIAS includes a methodical assessment o f progress
for each o f the core and noncore regional integration and cooperation activities identified in the
strategy. The review usefully provides a survey o f the relevant context, developments in the
decade prior to the subRIAS, and developments since then, including the activities o f other
agencies. Implementation experience and emerging issues identified by the review are:
0

Macroeconomic management. While overall macroeconomic stability has been
reached and economic convergence improved, the large inflows o f o i l revenue
pose macroeconomic challenges for the conduct o f fiscal and monetary policies
and for the successful management o f these windfalls to contribute to povertyreducing economic development. The inflationary consequences o f excess
liquidity also will have to be contained through proper monetary management,
and a proper mechanism w i l l need to be developed t o divide o i l inflows between
saving and spending. Moreover, there i s a danger that the o i l producers may cause
a Dutch-disease contraction o f the nonoil tradable sector, or at least handicap
growth.

0

Trade policy. Progress with regard to implementation o f C E M A C trade policy
reforms has been very slow. Looking forward, the trade policy agenda would
consist essentially o f two themes:

1.

Pursuing and completing the tariff and tax reform, including i t s revenue
consequences, in particular, a further reduction o f tariffs to bring them into
line with those in U M O .

102

2.

Ensuring that the Competitiveness Institute (TCI) i s made fully
operational so that funds due to landlocked countries, the regional
development fund, and the C E M A C Secretariat are effectively transferred
and put to good use.

In addition, an assessment o f the fiscal and economic impact o f the regional EPAs
with the EU needs to be undertaken as this issue w i l l become more and more
salient in the coming decade as the edifice o f preferences i s dismantled under the
auspices o f WTO. There exist possibilities for large fiscal losses as well as costly
trade diversion as more expensive EU imports may replace cheaper nonEU
imports. Consequently, the EPAs may have a potentially adverse impact o n the
region’s competitiveness.

Trade policy in general and tariff policy in particular have passed from national to
regional competence, but the Bank’s channels for dialogue have not evolved
accordingly. An explicit decision to revive the trade policy dialogue would
require a clear definition o f responsibilities between the Regional Integration
Department and PREM Trade coordinators regarding the substance o f the trade
dialogue with RECs.
Cooperation also needs to be renewed with other partners-in particular the IMF,
which i s taking the lead o n the dialogue. There has been no or little high-level
donor dialogue with the EU and France to follow up on the two Brussels meetings
in 2003 that provided the roadmap to make the customs union more effective. T o
be an effective partner, the Bank w i l l need to recreate the kind o f specialized and
experienced team it had prior to the 1994 devaluation and to integrate the DTIS
diagnostics into country economic work and operational activity.
Finally, a decision will be needed on the W o r l d Bank’s scope o f intervention
regarding ECCAS. The Bank should, however, concentrate i t s effort o n C E M A C
rather than expand i t to include ECCAS. The reason i s that i t w i l l probably take
years before ECCAS will have an acceptable level o f capacity to benefit from
AAA. O n the other hand, there i s scope to look more deeply into improving trade
relations and removing barriers to trade between the C E M A C countries and
certain neighbors, in particular Nigeria, D R C and Sudan.
e

Trade and transportfacilitation. The poor level o f road infrastructure remains one

o f the most important challenges to regional integration. Due to a combination o f
dense forests, insufficient public investment, and inadequate maintenance, the
current road network o f 3,500 km i s inadequate to the region’s needs. While there
has been major progress toward connecting the capital cities, in large part thanks
to the EU, some significant gaps remain, notably in Central African Republic and
Chad. Moreover, river transport along the Congo and Oubangui rivers has been
hurt by political crises and the lack o f dredging in the port o f Brazzaville and the
rivers. Finally, air transport in C E M A C needs to be upgraded to include direct
flights between many o f the capitals o f the zone.

103

The transit regime remains problematic from beginning to end-from the initial
clearance in Douala to customs clearance in landlocked economies-and the
guarantee system does not function well. It i s clear that regulatory/institutional
issues are the most difficult to address and that clients (including regional
institutions) prefer “hard” over “soft” components. “Soft” reform issues are the
ones for which it i s much harder to reach consensus. “Hard”’ project components
have clear electoral benefits (such as giving local politicians the opportunity to
inaugurate new roads), whereas “soft” issues often involve taking o n vested
interests (customs officials, truckers). The World Bank i s the only donor that has
a comparative advantage in policy reforms through policy dialogue and
development-policy-loan-type operations. However, DPLs cannot be the only
instrument. For the long-term development effectiveness o f donor financing, the
Bank will need to give sufficient weight to the preparation and discussion o f
policy reforms by integrating these aspects in regional and country investment
and TA lending operations.
Telecommunications. The lack o f easy cross-border and international connectivity
remains a pressing problem, as does the large gap between telecommunications
services demand and supply. The pricing structure in Central African countries
continues to pose tough challenges for users. There also i s the need to regulate the
thriving mobile phone market in Central Africa.
Restructuring
telecommunications administrations from the traditional monopolistic structure to
independent commercial entities has been slow. Modernizing the legal and
regulatory framework in parallel with strengthening the newly created regulatory
authorities will be critical to achieve sustainable growth in this sector (key
infrastructure and services to support the economy).
Business environment. The business environment in Central Africa remains
difficult, although there i s significant variance across countries, w i t h the
landlocked countries suffering from the worst investment climate. While there i s
overall macroeconomic stability in the region, there has also been a proliferation
o f microeconomic costs o f doing businesses. Anecdotal and survey evidence
confirm that bureaucratic red tape, weak contract enforcement, and ambiguities in
property rights have prevented the development o f the small and medium-size
enterprises (SMEs) that elsewhere in the world have contributed to employment
and output growth. The Bank needs to identify clearly the areas in which
involvement i s justified at the regional level as opposed to country operations.
The two areas in which region-wide action has a chance o f being more effective
are competitiveness and the legal/judicial environment. The regional
competitiveness observatory (or a similar mechanism) would be a way to
overcome the influence of national vested interests and exercise much needed
“peer pressure” o n heads o f state and governments to h o l d them accountable.
Financial sector. The financial sector in C E M A C lacks depth and i s highly
fragmented, and i t s stability i s exposed to significant risks. Access to financial
services i s among the lowest in Africa. The sector i s dominated by a
noncompetitive banking sector that i s highly vulnerable to credit risk. The
banking sector does not perform the critical role o f financial disintermediation.

104

Weaknesses in cash management practices by governments and in the systemic
liquidity framework exacerbate financial sector vulnerabilities. The regional
financial markets are poorly developed, and as a result, there i s no regional
financial integration. The lack o f an effective monetary policy implementation
framework limits the ability o f B E A C to effectively tackle the excess liquidity.
Lack o f credit hinders private sector investment, in spite o f excess liquidity at the
regional banks. Banks have difficulty in ensuring creditworthiness o f private
sector investment. Microfinance remains on a small scale, and the regional
development bank does not fulfil i t s role o f providing t e r m finance for
investment.
8

8

HW/AIDS. Central Africa has one o f the fastest-growing HIV populations in the
world, with close to 10 percent o f the adult population infected. While i t i s in
better shape than many o f i t s neighbors in Southern Africa, in which 25 percent to
35 percent o f adults have HIV, HIV’s spread through the transit corridors o f
Central Africa needs to be monitored, particularly through the Bangui-Douala
axis. An aggressive campaign needs to document the regionalization o f this
disease. The Bank needs to adopt a multisectoral approach to regional HIV
projects and develop a system o f flexible financing. Since HIV/AIDS has been the
first area in which the Bank has responded with a large-scale use o f grants,
significant possibilities exist to improve funding. I D A 1 4 regional integration
funds only provide two-thirds o f regional project financing with individual
countries required to contribute the remaining one-third from country IDA
allocations.
Energy. In terms o f a forward-looking regional strategy, efforts should be
enhanced by C E M A C countries and by the C E M A C Secretariat to strengthen the
Pool Energktique de Z’Afrique Centrale (PEAC), the regional entity in charge o f
following energy issues and initiating infrastructure projects to capture synergies
among the countries of Central Africa. PEAC should seek out and support crossborder investments. The C E M A C Secretariat has defined a Plan o f Action and
accompanying budget o f CFA155 billion (€236 million) over 5 years (2007-1 1).
The plan i s based on the following priorities and budgetary allocations: CFA63
billion for hydropower (41 percent), CFA57 billion for projects to provide
electricity (37 percent), CFA16 billion for solar energy (10 percent), and CFA9
billion for biomass and natural gas development (6 percent), and administrative
and organizational tasks accounting for the rest o f the budget. The viability and
success o f the plan will be closely linked to obtaining the requisite financing
modalities.

As articulated by the CEMAC, one o f the potential strategies to improve the
energy access for Central Africa could be to tap into the enormous hydropower
potential o f the Congo River and others. Harnessing the potential o f the various
rivers through a series o f microdams i s a possibility, given the hydro power, l o w
cost, and l o w environmental impact. The Inga project could help support Central
African electricity integration projects, but the project remains unlikely to move
forward quickly at this time.

105

0

0

0

3.

Lake Chad Basin. Lake Chad i s being depleted due to rainfall shortages combined
with excessive water use and degradation o f the environment, affecting the
livelihoods o f fishermen and farmers. An entire region i s dependent o n this lake,
but international support for replenishment efforts has been weak. There i s
potential for ambitious regional projects to improve water resource and natural
resource management, associated with income-generation activities to boost local
and national development that can leverage regional growth and enhance
cooperation between riparian countries. The development o f multisectoral
projects combining water and natural resources development with other
productive sectors such as energy and irrigation i s critical for the sustainable
revival and preservation of the Lake Chad resource. However, the long-pending
project to transfer water f r o m the Ubangi River up to the Lake Chad through the
Chari tributary seems unrealistic at this stage due to many social and
environmental uncertainties and economic sustainability o f such a huge project.
Forestry and environment. Despite major developments, there are several
outstanding issues. Some, such as the ratification o f the treaty o f Brazzaville by
all participating states, are being resolved. Others are more complex and deal with
the institutional will and implementation capacity o f the C O M I F A C countries to
implement their o w n share and the transnational portion o f the convergence plan.
Financial resources also are strained, and while C O M I F A C i s funded at the
required level by member states, this situation may reverse if momentum i s lost.
Efforts are well underway and there has been marked improvement in regional
cohesion of efforts to sustainably manage Congo Basin forests. Nevertheless,
there i s s t i l l a need to further harmonize policies, increase levels o f enforcement,
and channel external support through multidonor, nationally executed sector
development programs (in line with the March 2006 Paris Declaration o n Donor
Coordination and Harmonization).
Strengthening CEMAC institutions. The C E M A C Secretariat remains weak and
unable to fulfil i t s mandate and requires considerable financial and institutional
strengthening. The union continues to be plagued with problems that have not
changed much since its inception. The T C I mechanism i s not functional, in large
part due to Cameroon’s arrears build-up. The financing i s inadequate to maintain
both the C E M A C Secretariat and the regional projects and compensation fund.
Political divisions within the zone continue to weaken the credibility o f the
regional organization. Finally, donors, with the partial exception o f the EU, do not
have sufficient flexibility and appropriate instruments to deal with capacity
building for the regional institutions.

West Africa

Background, Rationale, and Objectives

37.
The World Bank’s Executive Board in 2001 approved a subRIAS for West Africa aimed
at creating open regional markets to reduce risks and transaction costs for private-sector
activities, as well as facilitating regional cooperation on cross-border issues such as
communicable diseases and environmental resources. The subRIAS was guided by the principles
106

of subsidiarity, private-sector primacy, pragmatism and progressivity, and partnership with
other donors. The strategy was based on the premise that improving the competitiveness of the
small and fragmented West African economies is essential to enable them to participate more
successfully in globalization. This took account o f the debate on the effectiveness o f trade blocs
in the context o f globalization. It did not deny the possibility o f some trade diversion during
market integration. However, deeper factor and infrastructure market integration were expected
to significantly reduce costs, thus making countries more competitive in the global economy,
which in turn would spur global trade, investment, and export-led growth. The risk o f geographic
polarization o f economic activities was expected to occur with or without integration. However,
its extent and the consequences were thought to be more manageable within the institutional
framework and financial safeguards offered by increased integration.

38.
Finally, it was expected that sound macroeconomic policies through a convergence
mechanism would improve the framework for private investment. Hence came the case for
integration in West Africa:
0

The economies o f the subregion need to become more competitive and capable o f
participating in globalization. Regional integration can provide economies o f
scale and increased competition in a larger and open subregional space. This
regional integration can be achieved by integrating goods and factors markets,
including nontrade activities, such as infrastructure services.

0

It i s essential for the subregion to become more attractive to private investors
through a more open policy that i s consistently applied and credible. Regional
integration can help achieve this by providing joint commitments acting as lock-in
mechanisms and restraints against unsound and inconsistent policies. Such
commitments would improve macroeconomic convergence and stability and
strengthen national liberalization programs.

0

It i s important to deal more effectively and humanely with labor migration issues.
By facilitating population movements across the subregion, regional integration
would provide the framework for developing a more effective supply o f labor in
growth poles, while enabling the fruits o f growth to be redistributed across the
subregion, thus alleviating poverty.

0

Regional integration may help deal more effectively with common causes and
cross-border issues, such as shared resources and security and health, and to
increase bargaining power in world fora. Regional integration can provide the
framework for dealing with positive (such as conservation, river basin
management) and negative (such as communicable diseases, conflicts) crossborder externalities.

39.

Despite the clear case for integration in the subregion, it was fully expected that there
would be difficulties in steering integration forward for three reasons. They are the (1) high
fragmentation o f the subregion (box A5.2), (2) large number o f countries, and (3) lack o f a real
economic magnet with sufficient resources, leadership, and motivation. Since the regional
market would remain too small to offer a strong stimulus to increase productivity and

107

diversification, the subRIAS emphasized the need for the subregion to reinforce i t s policies o f
openness to the rest o f the world.
Box A5.2: West African Subregion
West Africa i s highly fragmented as a result o f geographic, demographic, and historical reasons. I t s population o f
approximately 250 million inhabitants in 2003 i s highly unevenly distributed among countries. Nigeria contains

over half o f the total, whereas 3 countries (Cape Verde, the Gambia, and Guinea Bissau) have 1.5 million or fewer
inhabitants. Population density i s low, except in the urbanized areas along the Atlantic coast. Internal distances are
enormous, and transport infrastructure i s deficient. National markets are tiny, and regional markets are underdeveloped. As a result, infrastructure costs are among the highest in the world, which translates into an especially
high cost o f doing business in the subregion.
The subregion i s among the poorest in the world. In 2003 the 15 countries o f the subregion had a combined GDP o f
approximately US$109 billion and a GNP o f approximately US$89 billion, equivalent to Malaysia's, which had 10
times fewer inhabitants (GNI o f US$93.4 billion for a population o f 24.3 million inhabitants). The combined GDP
o f 4 countries o f the 15 (CBte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria, and Senegal) represented approximately 80% o f the total
GDP o f the subregion (Table A4.6).
Approximately 60% o f the population lives on less than $1 per day. Life expectancy i s 46 years, and 111 infants
out o f 1000 births die before their first birthday. There i s a high diversity in these indicators. Sierra Leone i s at the
lower end with a life expectancy at birth o f 37 years and an infant mortality rate o f 166 per thousand. Cape Verde i s
at the higher end o f the spectrum with a life expectancy at birth o f 69 years and an infant mortality rate o f 26 per
thousand. The overall illiteracy rate i s 42%. The subregion has been severely affected b y internal conflicts, which
had spill-over effects on neighboring countries. Three countries are emerging from civil war (Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia, and Sierra Leone), and three countries have had an unsettled political situation (CBte dIvoire, Guinea, and
Togo) over several years.

!O.
The subRIAS consequently proposed a work program focused o n the creation o f an open,
unified regional economic space (OURES), which was to absorb 90 percent o f the resources. The
central criterion for deciding Bank assistance, both analytical and financial, was the extent to
which such assistance would contribute to the OURES. The work program for FY2002-04
allocated 100 percent o f IDA lending to infrastructure and finance, and 40 percent o f the
administrative budget to analytical and advisory activities (AAA) in support o f regional
integration institutions. T h i s central theme would account for over 90 percent o f total assistance,
with infrastructure services comprising approximately half, concentrated in air transport and
enernv: and tinanciai sector market intenration. n e a rl v a third. ' 1 h e nronoseri work on trade

would focus o n the adoption and implementation o f an ECOWAS common external tariff
(harmonized with a revised CET in UEMOA) and. to a lesser degree. on removing other barriers
to trade.

41.
At the same time, in keeping with the principle o f subsidiarity, the subRIAS emphasized
that country-level assistance should remain the fundamental pillar o f Bank assistance to the
subregion and to regional integration itself. Country assistance both helps strengthen overall
country performance (an indispensable precondition) and can be used to help countries respect
their regional commitments and handle additional requirements imposed by regional integration.
The subRIAS indicated that Bank assistance at country level would continue to help countries (1)
compensate for transitional fiscal losses arising f r o m increased openness, (2) finance the national
portions o f regional public-sector infrastructure networks, and (3) improve their business
environment for region-wide private sector investment. However, it was recognized that, for this

108

support to be effective, i t would need to be coordinated across West African countries and made
coherent with the regional initiatives.
42.
In 2006 the Board approved the Africa Action Plan, with recommendation to mainstream
regional integration in the Bank’s support programs. A follow-up report. “Study o n Regional
Integration in West Africa: Review o f Strategies and Priorities,” was prepared to review the
subRIAS for West Africa in light o f political and other developments in the subregion and to
reassess the conceptual framework and work program as needed. The review’s main findings are
as follows:
0

The basic premise o f the subRIAS remain valid: implementation o f a vigorous
reform program i s essential for the countries in the subregion to make progress
toward the Millennium Development Goals. At the present rate o f poverty
reduction in West Africa o f 1 percent per annum, reducing poverty by half would
be achieved only in 2025. Progress i s slow in reducing infant and maternal
mortality. In several countries, the rates have stagnated in past years; they have
increased in C8te d’Ivoire and Liberia as a result o f internal conflicts. The
prevalence o f HIV/AIDS has not been reduced in West Africa, and the incidence
o f malaria has increased. More than 40 percent o f the population in West Africa
continues to lack access to potable water.

0

A number o f initiatives have been taken in support o f regional institutions,
particularly in infrastructure services for a unified market, financial markets,
water resource management, and prevention o f communicable diseases. In
addition, innovative projects have been developed to support the integration o f
energy and financial markets and to facilitate road transport. Nevertheless, little
progress has been made on the central agenda o f the subRIAS, which emphasizes
macroeconomic convergence, trade liberalization, and business environment
improvement. Decisions have been made by Heads o f State or Government on
these issues, but most o f them have been honored more in the breach than in
reality.

0

Internal conflicts have cost the subregion dearly. Several countries are in a postconflict situation, and are understandably more concerned with reconstruction
than with regional integration. Others have not yet been able to settle lingering
internal conflicts, with negative impacts on their development and that o f the
region-notably Cote d’ Ivoire, which had served as a growth pole. Despite
progress made in trade liberalization, trade within the region remains constrained
by many nontariff barriers. The investment climate i s poor, with most countries at
the bottom the Doing Business index.

0

Only 50 percent o f actual lending went to unplanned interventions in HIV/AIDS
and emergency locust control, which were requested by ECOWAS and UEMOA.
This shift was also the result o f the difficulties inherent in preparing and financing
regional infrastructure projects, offset by a somewhat opportunistic approach in
other sectors in which sensible things could be done. While the focus o f the
FY2006-08 work program for West Africa has returned to infrastructure-with

109

60 percent earmarked for the West African Power Pool, air and road transportthe share o f AAA has fallen sharply to only 5 percent.
0

Yet, recent developments in the subregion are favorable for a reexamination o f
Bank support to regional approaches in West Africa. First and foremost, Nigeria,
the largest economy in the subregion, has made steady progress in implementing
i t s reform program. In 2004 it demonstrated a clear break from a long history o f
uncontrolled boom and bust cycles caused by o i l price fluctuations. GDP i s
estimated to have grown at 6 percent; the fiscal surplus reached 10 percent o f
GDP on a cash basis; and inflation decelerated sharply to 10 percent. In addition,
Nigeria has agreed in principle to adopt the ECOWAS common external tariff,
with a maximum tariff o f 20 percent by 2008. This will represent a major
liberalization o f the economy-providing it i s implemented.

0

Second, the two regional bodies, the ECOWAS Secretariat and the U E M O A
Commission have reinforced their cooperation.8 They have produced a regional
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The U E M O A Commission has also
prepared a Regional Economic Program (REP). These two documents call for
enhanced regional integration to reduce poverty in the subregion, and provide a
strong basis for improving cooperation with the donor community. Toward these
ends, the PRSP and REP explicitly take up the Bank strategy’s central focus on
helping the countries become more competitive through liberalizing and
facilitating trade, lowering the investment cost of infrastructure services, and
improving the business environment.

Strategic Priorities
43.
For the Bank to strategically support integration in West Africa, i t s efforts must rest on
three “pillars” as outlined in the subRIAS and confirmed in the review:

Founded in 1975, ECOWAS includes 15 countries and has both an economic and a political mandate. In 2006 the
Heads o f State supported the establishment o f a Project Development and Implementation Unit (PDIU) in charge o f
coordinating implementation o f regional projects. The U E M O A was created in 1994 and includes eight countries, all
belonging to the CFA Franc zone. Following the devaluation o f the CFA Franc in 1994, emphasis has been put on
sound macroeconomic management. A customs union was established in 2000 with a common external tariff (CET).
ECOWAS and U E M O A have reinforced their cooperation in recent years. A memorandum o f understanding was
signed in 2004. A joint secretariat i s being established. The donors, including the World Bank, have strongly
encouraged closer cooperation between the two regional institutions. In December 1999, the Heads o f State meeting
decided that ECOWAS was to become a customs union by generalizing the U E M O A CET to all member countries
in 2002, and a monetary union b y 2003-04. Both deadlines have been extended. However, a CET based on the
U E M O A tariff has been approved in principle for final adoption by 2008, and some countries have already begun
implementation.
Other regional institutions include the West African Health Organization, which serves as a technical unit o f the
ECOWAS Secretariat, and the Comite‘ Inter-Etats de Lutte contre la Se‘cheresse (CILSS). The latter was created in
the wake o f the severe Sahelian drought in the early 1970s to pool resources to deal with a recurrent problem
affecting several countries in West Africa. Others institutions have been created to manage a time-bound program o f
activities concerning several countries, such as the onchocerciasis eradication program and the West African Power
Pool (WAPP); or to manage specific activities shared b y neighboring countries, such as the Senegal River Valley
Authority (OMVS) or the Niger Basin Authority ( M A ) .

110

0

Convergence of macroeconomic policies. Bank assistance would need t o be
provided in close collaboration with the IMF. It would help the regional
institutions, ECOWAS and U E M O A , carry out their mandates by refining the
methodologies, sharpening the approaches, and reinforcing monitoring
mechanisms. W h i l e essential for enhanced regional integration, most o f this work
would be delivered at the national level through country dialogue.

0

Integration of markets. An OURES, a single West African market open to
competitive entry and well integrated into the global economy, would comprise a
commercial policy for free goods markets, arrangements for efficient networks o f
infrastructure services, and a favorable environment for business and finance.
Making the customs union effective and welfare enhancing would involve (1)
rationalizing and applying the U E M O A tariff, (2) merging the UEMOA customs
union into a larger ECOWAS customs union, (3) continuing to reduce the level o f
tariffs and narrow their dispersion, (4) improving existing measures to facilitate
exports, and (5) focusing o n informal barriers to trade. The OURES would also
require:
-

In the infrastructure
sector, the high cost o f transport,
telecommunications, and energy services would need to be reduced by
expanding their market and scale o f operation and by establishing a more
competitively oriented regional regulatory framework. In road transport,
the objective i s to help countries (1) complete and maintain their portion
o f the West Africa interstate road network and (2) ensure that transport
services function effectively and competitively across borders. In air
transport, the priority i s to help the subregion implement i t s open-skies
objective and improve air safety and oversight.

-

In the telecommunications sector, the emergence o f a regional market,
rather than just common physical infrastructure projects, i s necessary. In
view o f the miniscule size o f most national markets. emergence o f a
regional market would involve the harmonization o f a number o f policies
and the establishment o f a common regional and regulatory agency over
time.

-

In the energy sector, it would be critical to support the ECOWAS
initiative to establish an interconnected electricity market, including (1)
physical integration o f national power grids and reform o f market policies
and regulatory arrangements, (2) piloting a cooperation model for the
functioning o f the integrated market, and (3) implementing a fully
functional market with the creation o f a regional regulatory capacity and
adherence to open access.

-

As for the business environment, actions in the areas o f financial sector
integration, taxation harmonization, private sector incentives, labor
markets, and legal framework and judicial systems would lead to
improvements. W h i l e the bulk o f i t s work in these areas would continue to
be country-based, the Bank could advance the regional dialogue o n
facilitating the free movement o f workers, particularly skilled ones.

111

-

Strengthening human and institutional capacities. The focus has primarily
been o n macroeconomic convergence, trade, cross-border infrastructure
services and enhancing the business environment. Limited support could
also be provided to a multicountry approach to higher education in fields
related, for instance, to business management. Coordination o f efforts to
share public goods and fight against negative cross-border externalities,
such as communicable diseases, also i s needed. Finally, continued Bank
support to the two regional institutions, in close cooperation with the EU,
would be essential.

Implementation Experience and Issues

44.
The main challenges to achieving the objectives o f the subRIAS for West Africa have
been related to implementation:
e

Macroeconomic convergence. Since the 1994 devaluation o f the C F A Franc,
U E M O A members have adopted 8 convergence criteria, of which 4 are
considered first-order (entailing sanctions in case o f noncompliance). The latter
are that (1) the basic fiscal balance should be positive; (2) the average annual
inflation rate should be lower than 3 percent; (3) the ratio o f internal and external
debt to GDP should not be higher than 70 percent; and (4) there should be n o
accumulation o f internal or external arrears. However, experience has shown little
compliance with these criteria. Four countries-Benin,
Burkina Faso, Mali, and
Senegal-have met at least four convergence criteria during the 1998-2003
period. The other four countries have been unable to meet most criteria. Because
o f weak revenue performance, all member countries have had difficulties
complying with the fiscal criteria.

Meanwhile, five o f the nonUEMOA members of ECOWAS (the Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Nigeria and Sierra Leone) have postponed plans to create a second
monetary zone to December 2009. Some observers believe these postponements
are well founded and that this group of countries i s not yet ready for a monetary
union.
e

Open market. Progress has been made in reducing tariffs and eliminating
additional taxes, but even in the U E M O A zone, there are s t i l l deviations from the
CET. In Benin, a number o f levies and surcharges o n specific products are s t i l l in
place. In several countries, a declining protection tax i s s t i l l implemented and a
cyclical import tax continues to be levied to give additional protection to selected
producers in agriculture and agro-industries. Perhaps most importantly, many
NTBs remain: rules o f origin that prohibit many manufactured goods,
inappropriate use o f standards, administrative delays and bribes at the border,
unofficial blockage o f food exports, and, o f course, the ubiquitous road blocks.

As for the nonUEMOA member countries o f ECOWAS, in 2000 they committed
themselves to establish a full-fledged customs union by applying the U E M O A
common external tariff by January 2002. However, the difficulties had not been
sufficiently analyzed. As a result, agreement was not reached until the end of

112

2005, with a transition period lasting until January 2008. This new CET will be
very difficult for Nigeria, which in 2005 s t i l l had many bans or prohibitive tariff
rates (150 percent). Nigerian bans have had a negative impact on trade from
Benin, Ghana, and Sierra Leone among others. Nigeria has committed itself to
removing these bans, but insisted on keeping a special 50 percent tariff for some
products until 2008.
Moreover, much remains to be done to facilitate exports, such as fewer delays at
customs, faster reimbursement o f the value-added tax (VAT), and the functioning
o f Export Processing Zones. The removal o f internal NTBs to trade, known as the
second liberalization agenda, also remains an elusive objective.
As for infrastructure services for a unified market, experience has varied from one
sector to another:

-

There has been significant progress in the energy sector, with the approval
o f two key projects in 2005: a US$50 million IDA partial risk guarantee
for the West Africa Gas Pipeline (WAGP); and the WAPP program, which
the Bank supported with a US$40 million credit to Ghana and Adaptable
Program Lending (APL) credits o f US$lOO million to Benin and Ghana.

-

Although little has been accomplished in the execution o f the
ECOWASLJEMOA Regional Transport Facilitation Program. there has
been good progress in road transport with the approval o f the ECOWAS
road master plan, To date, 3,777 km o f the 4,560-km-long coastal road
from Nouakchott to Lagos have been completed, and 3,894 km have been
built on the 4,460-km-long Dakar-to-Chad border road. However,
maintenance remains a problem; joint border posts and observatories have
yet to be established; and transport regulations have yet to be harmonized.
These issues are being addressed under the corridor approach promoted
b y the donor community.

-

In air transport, the Bank has supported the Yamoussoukro decision
calling for gradual liberalization o f air transport services in West and
Central Africa with 2 IDF grants totalling US$800,000 to review the
existing situation in member countries and identify the best technical and
regulatory options to be put in place. An action plan was approved in
Bamako in March 2001, and ECOWAS has established a secretariat to
oversee implementation o f the Bamako decision. However, little has been
done to adjust national regulations to a new regulatory and legal
framework or to implement the new regulations after their adoption by
member countries. O n security, a project i s under preparation for IDA

financing to help participating countries improve airport authorities’
compliance with international safety and security standards. An APL i s
being considered. The first beneficiaries would be Burkina Faso, Guinea,
and Mali. The other ECOWAS countries have been invited to j o i n the
program.

In 2002, U E M O A adopted a general competition law, the preparation o f
which was supported by the Bank and the Fund. The law set rules and
113

procedures related to cartels, abuses o f dominant position, state aid to
public enterprises, and transparency in financial relations between
governments on the one hand, and public enterprises and international or
foreign organizations on the other. The Bank also cofinanced with ADB,
through a regional IDF grant, a reform o f public procurement for U E M O A
members; provided support to OHADA, the regional organization o f
francophone countries for the harmonization o f business law; and
provided IDA support to private sector development projects in several
ECOWAS countries. Yet the business environment in West Africa
remains poor. The IFC’s 2006 Doing Business report ranked most o f the
11 ECOWAS countries for which data are available, at the bottom o f the
scale (Tables A4.7-A4.8). Six indicators are tracked for trading across
borders, and the conclusion to be drawn from the survey i s that most
countries in West Africa make it unnecessarily difficult for business to
engage in cross-border trade.
-

The Bank has supported the development and integration o f financial
markets through two projects. The first project, approved in October 2000,
was aimed at improving the payments system in the U E M O A monetary
zone. Most project activities have been completed, and the new payments
system i s working satisfactorily. Large delays in making payments within
U E M O A have been greatly reduced. The second project, approved in
February 2004, was to develop the capital markets o f the U E M O A zone
through BOAD, i t s development bank, and mobilize public and private
financing for the zone’s infrastructure development. A major project
component, the line o f credit to finance infrastructure projects, i s at an
early stage o f implementation.
Source: Doing Business 2006, IFC,

Institutional development. The Bank has supported institutional development in

agricultural policy, water resources management, and capacity building:
-

Recognizing the need to coordinate their agricultural policies, in 1999 the
governments o f West and Central Africa created the Agriculture Policy
Network (APN) to improve agricultural policies through enhanced
analyses and exchanges among policymakers. Through an IDF grant, the
Bank has increased APN’s institutional capacity, focusing on establishing
phytosanitary norms and promoting food quality.

-

A regional approach to water resources management i s essential to
increase the efficiency o f proposed investments and reduce conflicts
among states in West Africa. Through three GEF projects, the Bank has
helped strengthen the capacity o f three regional organizations responsible
for the sustainable land and water management o f the two large West
African rivers (Niger and Senegal) and the Lake Chad basin (of concern to
Niger and Nigeria). T w o follow-up projects are under preparation to help

114

the two river basin management organizations implement their mandates
and address major development issues in the basins.
-

In 2002, ECOWAS undertook a thorough review o f i t s missions and i t s
resources for implementing i t s mandates, and formulated a short-term
action plan for capacity building. The Bank has provided support t o this
program through an IDF grant to help ECOWAS implement the NEPAD
agenda by hiring a NEPAD coordinator in the ECOWAS Secretariat;
preparing a study to review the way in which regional integration and
NEPAD programs are being managed; organizing a workshop on
harmonization o f the telecommunications sector; facilitating coordination
meetings between ECOWAS and U E M O A ; and upgrading ECOWAS
telecommunications capabilities.

W h i l e ECOWAS has made good progress in areas in which both member
states and donors are interested, such as peace and security and
infrastructure, progress o n regional integration i s much harder because o f
weak political will on the part o f member countries. Donors are concerned
that ECOWAS has spent too much energy on firefighting, and not enough
on building a long-term strategic perspective.
RecommendationsLVextSteps

45.

Developments since the 2001 subRIAS for West Africa and implementation experience
to date point to eight recommendations:
a.

Focus Bank efforts on macroeconomic convergence, trade liberalization, business
environment, and cost o f services.

b.

Provide limited support to regional emergencies (locust, avian flu and
HIV/AIDS). However, in keeping with the subsidiarity principle, ensure that
regional projects do not substitute for projects at the national level (the H I V / A I D S
treatment project in the portfolio would seem to belong to the latter category).

c.

Revisit the current emphasis given to river basin management projects in view o f
the slow-moving pace o f ongoing GEF projects (the four projects concerned
absorb approximately 19 percent of resources in the work program for West
Africa).

d.

T o maintain the focus o f the Bank’s regional integration program and increase the
probability o f i t s impact, resist developing regional programs in the agriculture,
education, and health sectors. Regional programs in agricultural research are
probably best dealt with through the Consultative Group o n International
Agricultural Research (CGIAR). While regional approaches may make sense for
tertiary education and some communicable diseases, the CASs suggest that
countries are not prepared for increased regional coordination in the education
and health areas.

e.

Increase allocations t o AAA to address key policy and institutional reforms in the
primary focus area. M o r e analytical work i s required on intraregional trade and

115

investment climate issues. Such work should be carried out in close cooperation
with the IMF and regional institutions. Private-sector support should be elicited in
pushing the business environment agenda. CASs and other macroeconomic
documents should systematically report on macroeconomic convergence, trade
liberalization, and investment climate.

4.

f.

Reward countries for efforts to implement regional decisions. Regional
integration projects should be focused on those countries.

g.

Be proactive with the two growth poles in the region. The internal conflict in C8te
d’Ivoire has slowed down regional integration efforts in U E M O A . A return to
peace in C8te d’Ivoire through fair elections in late 2006 i s essential for
revitalizing the U E M O A zone. Nigeria also should play an important catalytic
role in the economic development o f the West Africa subregion, as acknowledged
in the 2005 Country Partnership Strategy. These two countries require special
attention.

h.

Help the regional institutions establish a division o f labor and a workable program
o f economic reforms in trade liberalization, macroeconomic convergence,
business environment improvement, and more efficient infrastructure services.

Southern Africa

Background and Strategic Objectives

46.
In April 1998, a “Southern Africa Strategy” paper presented to the Board laid the basis
for the Bank’s approach to regional integration. It argued that regional cooperation in Southern
Africa could benefit countries in five ways: (a) enhanced visibility to investors, (b) lower
production and marketing costs, (c) sharing and dissemination o f development lessons and more
rapid liberalization, (d) closer integration o f agricultural markets, and (e) better management of
transboundary resources. Key focus areas for the Bank Group’s support were closer integration
o f markets and trade facilitation, regional infrastructure development, and the liberalization o f
labor and capital flows. These findings and focus areas were subsequently included in “Toward a
Systematic Approach to Regional Integration,” presented to the Board on April 2, 2001. Key
lessons also were confirmed and reflected in the “Strategic Framework for IDA’SAssistance to
Africa: The Emerging Partnership Model” (World Bank Report 26217) in 2003 and the Africa
Action Plan in 2005.
47.
Although the “Southern Africa Strategy” paper was not a formal subRIAS as such,
strategic analysis o f the challenges and opportunities for supporting regional integration in the
subregion has been extensive. A comprehensive background review (“Regional Integration and
Cooperation in Southern Africa: Identifying Strategic Opportunities for World Bank Regional
Interventions”) finalized in June 2006 proposed an appropriate framework for an FY2008-10
Southern Africa subRIAS, now under discussion. At the same time, the Bank has intensified i t s
dialogue with the foremost regional integration organizations-SADC,
COMESA, and EAC.
Based largely on specific requests, the Bank has deepened i t s support in selected areas, including
regional projects such as the Southern African Power Market (APL1) in support o f the first phase
o f the Southern Africa Power Market Program. These processes have been informed by a series

116

o f institutional changes at the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and
rationalization o f i t s agenda. These two culminated in a “Regional Indicative Strategic
Development Plan” (RISDP), which has been translated into a series o f medium 5-year and 1year programs with appropriate quantification o f costs and detailed sequencing o f operations for
the first- period program.
Benefits, particularly static and dynamic gains from trade integration, are neither
48.
automatic nor necessarily large. They depend o n factors such as the depth and design o f a
regional arrangement, composition o f membership, and member countries’ levels o f
development, With t h i s caveat, the expected benefits from integration in Southern Africa include
traditional ones-such as trade gains, increased returns and competition, and investment-as
well as nontraditional ones-such as the force o f a commitment mechanism, insurance,
coordination and bargaining power, and security. SADC notably embraces a similarly broad
agenda. It includes an explicit development orientation; market integration; trade and investment
development, facilitation, and promotion; economy o f scale gains; additionality (that is, activities
should be undertaken only if they enhance SADC’s capacity and/or bring additional resources);
and variable geometry (that is, in light o f unequal and uneven development among member
states, there should be flexibility to accommodate special circumstances and particular
arrangements among member states).

49.
Based on close and sustained review o f Southern Africa’s geographic, political,
economic, and institutional particularities, the Bank’s specific objective is to assist the subregion
to achieve deep integration in trade-related matters and strong cooperation on critical crossborder issues. Achieving such an agenda w i l l require addressing a number o f challenges specific
to Southern Africa:
0

Southern Africa remains an unpredictable operating environment due to
overlapping and evolving regional and international agendas. The future shape
and speed o f regional integration within Southern Africa will be determined by a
combination o f internal and external factors. Internally, SADC and COMESA
have expressed their intentions to establish customs unions-COMESA in the
foreseeable future (initially scheduled for 2004) and SADC by 2010. Countries
that are members o f more than one arrangement will be required to choose among
them. It i s impractical and WTO-incompatible to claim membership o f different

customs unions.
0

Southern Africa constitutes a significant market in Sub-Saharan Africa, although
rather small internationally. Within Southern Africa, countries are heterogeneous
in the extreme, posing particular challenges for regional cooperation and
integration (Table A4.9). The combined regional population o f 234 million i s
unevenly distributed. In 2005 the average GNI per capita for the subregion (in

nominal dollars) was US$1,350. The difference between the highest (Mauritius)
and lowest (DRC) was nearly 40 times. Approximately 40 percent o f the
subregion’s population (90 million people) i s estimated to be living in extreme
poverty. The low level o f human development, compounded by a brain-drain to
the rest o f the world and skills migration to the southern part o f the region, i s a
serious structural problem. SADC countries (except for a few) appear to be

117

performing well in providing universal basic education. However, most (including
South Africa) are under-performing in providing quality secondary and tertiary
education. The latter i s potentially a serious structural weakness given the
increasing importance of skills in the globalized economy, in which knowledgeintensity i s crucial to enhance competitiveness.
0

In terms o f economic structure, the subregion seems to be struggling to diversify
i t s productive base. Progressive industrialization remains elusive for most
countries. Overall, economies in the region are largely undiversified, resulting in
a lack of complementarity, which limits the scope for merchandise trade, except
between South Africa and the rest of the region (Tables A4.10 and A4.11). The
economies are reasonably open, and given that most countries in the region are
heavily dependent o n exports of primary and semi-processed agricultural and
mineral commodities, the regional economy remains excessively vulnerable to
rainfall variations and commodity price fluctuations. Stabilization and adjustment
experiences have seen significant convergence in the broad policies that have
been pursued, although the outcomes o f such policies and programs vary
significantly, even widely in some instances, across countries. Agreements such
as the Multilateral Monetary Agreement (MMA) and S A C U are expanding
convergence among an inner core o f countries (Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia,
South Africa, and Swaziland).

e

South Africa’s relatively developed economy and dominance of the regional
market hold risks and opportunities for the rest of the region. D u e to i t s size and
economic linkages with the rest o f the economies in Southern Africa, South
Africa’s low growth levels are partly explaining l o w aggregate growth in
Southern Africa. Furthermore, South Africa’s pace o f economic reforms could
either accelerate or delay regional integration initiatives.’ There also i s the risk o f
economic polarization within the region. South Africa, and implicitly SACU,
could have an incentive to strengthen economic relations and cooperation with
developed countries and more dynamic markets, rather than being interested in
South-South regional cooperation with neighboring countries. lo
O n the positive
side, South Africa’s economic strength and institutional capacity can serve as a
powerful catalyst for regional integration and cooperation. South African
institutions (public and private) already are playing a strong capacity building role
in the region. Meanwhile, in the absence o f regional-level finance and investment
agreements, the country’s private sector and quasipublic institutions are de facto
integrating the region through outward foreign investment. Furthermore, South
Africa’s water and energy resource constraints are forces for closer cooperation
with i t s neighbors.

Cases in point are the structure and size o f its electricity sector and its impact on the establishment o f a competitive
power market; and the operating inefficiencies o f border and transport services, which are raising transaction costs
for the relevant landlocked countries.
lo
Over the past years, this lack of interest has manifested in a variety o f ways, such as a disconnect between high
political commitment and the lower level of priority accorded by the administration in the broad socioeconomic
agenda o f SADC. The latter is in contrast with South Africa’s political and administrative involvement in the
regional political and security agendas, which seem to be more closely aligned.

118

e

I n the wider regional economic space, insufficient regional infrastructure
linkages and operational and quality inefficiencies, no less due to policy,
legislative, and administrative constraints, are fragmenting markets and
hampering competitiveness and development. Transport costs and efficiency o f
the principal SADC transport corridors are key elements in achieving higher

economic growth and reducing poverty since they influence the effectiveness o f
not only intraregional, but also intercontinental trade, and therefore SADC’s
international competitiveness. Transport efficiency i s particularly important,
given that 6 o f the 12 mainland SADC countries are landlocked, while others
feature vast hinterlands, more often than not the location o f relatively major
industrial activity and population settlements. However, transport on the SADC
corridors i s known to be less efficient, and transport costs and tariffs are higher
than in many other regions o f the world. Similarly, on a subregional basis, the
penetration of the fixed telecommunications network remains l o w at a level o f
only one-third o f the world average, and the quality o f fixed-line services remains
generally poor. Restrictive policy and regulatory frameworks have resulted in a
failure to attract international investment, a shortage o f core infrastructure, and
insufficient region-wide interconnectivity and connectivity w i t h the rest o f the
world.
e

The mismatch between demand for and supply of natural resources-energy,
common pool resources such as transboundary conservation areas, and shared
marine systems-all point to the need for close cooperation among countries in
the region, as well as to the potential for trade in services. O n aggregate, the
subregion i s richly endowed with natural resources, l1but these resources are
unevenly distributed among countries. In the case o f biodiversity conservation
areas, which provide a unique comparative advantage in tourism development,
these resources often straddle national borders or are shared, such as water
courses. As for the subregion’s large and diverse energy resources,12 hydropower
capacity and natural gas reserves are far from optimally exploited. Furthermore,
South Africa’s reliance o n expensive (at least relative to hydro) and polluting
thermal power from domestic coal i s heavy. Thus, the scope for regional
cooperation and for optimizing the regional electricity system i s enormous. Trade

Approximately 39% o f the total surface area i s wildlife-rich protected areas (PAS) and communal lands. They
provide large blocks o f habitat in which large mammals; predators; and a plethora o f birds, endemic plants, and
other biodiversity thrive. Parts o f these PAS straddle national borders (transfrontier conservation areas). The
diversity o f ecosystems provides a unique comparative advantage to the region o f tourism development. The
subregion also possesses a vast and highly diversified mineral resource base. In fact, the subregion i s a major
reservoir of some o f the world’s most valuable precious and base metals, industrial minerals, and precious stones.
I2These include hydropower, concentrated mainly on the Zambezi and Congo Rivers, although there i s additional
potential in a number o f other countries. The Congo River’s huge potential for hydroelectric power, estimated to be
as high as 150,000 MW, could play an important role in providing power for the region, but less than 3% o f this
capacity i s actually exploited. The region has also an abundance o f coal (over 20% of the world’s recoverable
reserves), primarily located in Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, and
Zimbabwe. South Africa’s recoverable coal reserves are estimated at 55 billion short tons. In 2003 regional coal
production reached 269 million short tons (Mmst), o f which South Africa produced nearly 264 Mmst, while also
consuming the majority (97%) o f the region’s coal.

119

between South Africa and i t s energy-rich neighbors could be mutually beneficial,
providing cheaper electricity to the former and revenues to the latter.
0

Water is an unequally distributed and vulnerable resource in Southern Africa, a
situation compounded by the increasing overall climatic variability. Together

they are increasing the regional economic and development risks. There are two
dominant climate regimes in the subregion: the semi-arid and semi-humid in the
east and north, and the dry and the hyper-arid in the west and south, respectively.
Related to the differences in climate regimes, distribution o f population, and
differing levels o f development across the region, countries are experiencing large
imbalances between water availability and water usage. The southern states
already are reaching the limits o f water availability while the northern states are in
need o f development to counter-balance dry and wet years. These vulnerabilities
highlight the need for regional cooperation to promote future sharing o f water
resources. Mitigating the effects o f climatic variability i s hampered by insufficient
water storage infrastructure. In addition to other cooperation concerns, the
existence o f 15 transboundary waters brings into play complex water rights issues
that contribute to insecurity o f downstream uses.
0

Southern Africa is facing a huge threat to its development in having the highest
adult HIV/AIDS prevalence rate in the world. An estimated 14 m i l l i o n people
were HIV/AIDS infected, In 2003 prevalence rates among adults ranged f r o m 30
percent40 percent in Botswana and Swaziland to 0 percent-5 percent in the

Indian Ocean island countries and the DRC. Although estimates o f the
pandemic’s adverse economic and social impacts differ, H I V / A I D S i s manifesting
itself in various ways. A major way i s by having exacerbated the spread and
effects o f food insecurity in the subregion to a level at which it has turned into a
livelihoods crisis since the 2002-04 droughts. Although not quantified for SADC,
the intergenerational impact o f H I V / A I D S o n the quality o f human development
and consequent growth potential may be material.
0

Finally, internal political insecurity serves as both a driving force for and threat
to integration in the wider Eastern and Southern Africa economic space. Hence,
the inclusion o f peace and security in the mandates o f SADC, COMESA, IGAD,
and the EAC. Over the past few years, however, intra and inter-regional political
security have assumed increasing importance in the regional agendas o f RIAs in

the broader subregion as also reflected by the active institutionalization o f their
political, defense, and security mandates. Yet, despite the recent laudable
subregional peace-making and -keeping efforts, regional cooperation o n politics,
security, and defense has yet to result in significant “regional peace dividends” as
well as political convergence through a lock-in o f all countries into commitment
to democracy, respect for human rights, and “good governance” in general.
Strategic Priorities

50.
Given these specificities, the proposed framework for a Southern Africa subRIAS rests
on the following priorities. The region’s initial conditions and progress in regional cooperation
and integration suggest that the emphasis o f the Bank’s assistance needs to be on intensifying

120

intraregional cooperation to strengthen the economies o f the open regional arrangements and
thus facilitate their integration in the world economy. The priority themes identified as strategic
opportunities also are based o n the World Bank Group’s comparative strengths among the
International Cooperating Partners:
Promoting market integration by creating a conducive, competitive regional
market for finance and investment in Southern Africa.

-

Financial integration. Based on the recent Bank study on financial
integration in Southern Africa, the Bank could provide TA and advice on
additional aspects o f the regional financial architecture, such as the
creation o f homogenous, reliable, and instantaneously available sets o f
information; regional solutions to economies-of-scale-related problems;
and creation o f an effective dispute settlement mechanism.

-

Investment in Southern Africa. Based on a critical mass o f country
investment climate assessment information and regular Doing Business
information updates for countries in Southern Africa, together with SADC
regional institutions, the Bank i s undertaking further analytical work to
explore harmonization and cooperation in the core investment and
business environment areas among the countries in Southern Africa.

Accelerating regional cooperation to strengthen the “supply-side” or structural
prerequisites for a vibrant integrated market and encourage shared regional
growth and development, in which all countries would benefit from increased
competitiveness of the region. Support would focus on trade facilitation, transport,
energy, ICT, with linkages to skills development and HIV/AIDS issues linked to
trade and transport corridors.

-

Trade facilitation and transport. The Bank, with DfID, will be
undertaking analytical work to gain a better understanding o f the hard and
soft constraints in African transport corridors, including in the Southern
African subregion. In addition, in response to SADC’s trade facilitation
strategic priority, the Bank plans to support an investment and a technical
advisory project. The investment project w i l l help the governments o f
Mozambique, Malawi, and Zambia to develop the Nacala transport
corridor, aimed at enhancing customs integration and improve transit
flows in the subregion; efforts to combat HIVIAIDS also will be included.
In addition, the Bank may be a asked to be a financing partner in the
development o f the North-South and Dar-es-Salam trade and transport
corridors, identified in a March 2007 DfID prefeasibility study o f
Southern Africa’s Transport Corridors.

-

Energy. The main focus for the Bank would be to consolidate i t s ongoing
and envisaged lending operations for the identified SAPP connections,
while broadening i t s knowledge on the energy sector in Southern Africa
through E S W toward developing future regional operations. This E S W
w i l l have to take into account the specific needs o f the island economies,
which cannot benefit from the mainland power pools.

121

-

e

e

ICT. Past TA and policy advice translated into financial support by the
Bank and other development finance institutions (DFIs) to regional I C T
backbone developments through the Regional Communications
Infrastructure Program (RCIP) in FY07. Malawi, Mozambique, Rwanda,
and Tanzania are among the Southern African govemments that have
requested Bank support for the next phase o f RCIP.

Addressing some of the “vulnerabilities” peculiar to the region, particularly
increasing cooperation on natural resources through focusing on the Zambesi
River basin, and marine resources.
-

Water. Additional analytical work i s required o n the Zambezi basin to
develop a water development strategy both in support o f SADC and to
supplement Bank knowledge for potential future operations. The Zambezi
river basin has eight riparian states that would benefit directly f r o m a
river-basin irrigation plan and hydroelectric projects. These two would
would alleviate food insecurity in the subregion and South Africa’s energy
supply shortages, respectively.

-

Other natural resources. The respective RIAs accord priority to protection
and management o f transboundary resources, including marine resources.
One GEF grant i s being implemented, while another, o n a marine
highway, was approved by the Board in FY2007. The latter will benefit
the Southern African Indian Ocean island economies as well as Kenya,
Mozambique, South Africa, and Tanzania. An increasing number o f
Southern African countries link disaster reduction to their national poverty
reduction frameworks and have requested disaster recovery management
support from the GEF Global Fund for Disaster and Risk Reduction.

-

Climate change. In line with other regions, the Bank will support
analytical work o n climate change in Southern Africa.

Providing capacity building to the core regional institutions. Strengthening the
capacity o f existing RIAs i s crucial to achieve stronger cooperation among
countries across key sectors. Cooperation with South African institutions as
vehicles for capacity building initiatives over a wide spectrum o f issues should be
strengthened in future activities aimed to support SADC, SACU, COMESA, IOC,
and IGAD. Specific areas in which the Bank could support R I A S in capacity
building include knowledge-sharing partnerships between WBI and South African
institutions, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) to enable, better efficiency o f
the peer pressure/enforcement mechanisms. S A D C i s institutionalizing a peer
review or surveillance mechanism for macroeconomic convergence. Extension o f
this or other mechanisms would be required to cover other indicators o f trade,
finance, and investment integration as well as structural and institutional
dimensions o f cooperation. The M&E program o f support would be linked to
ongoing statistical capacity building support to SADC, the IDF for Institutional
Capacity Building to SADC, as well as to the work on monitoring and reporting
as part o f the aid-effectiveness initiative in SADC.

122

Recommendations and Next Steps

51.

Besides the guidelines outlined in I D A 1 4 and the AAP, discussions t o operationalize the
Bank’s strategy to support deep integration and stronger cooperation in Southern Africa have
been guided by four recommendations:

1.

Country work. As in other regions, the Bank’s regional integration approach in
Southern Africa will continue to be directed primarily at individual countries and
formulated through the CAS and PRSP processes. This i s particularly appropriate
in view o f the extreme diversity o f SADC member countries in every economic,
social, or political dimension. M o r e specifically, if SADC maintains as i t s priority
the formation o f a common market, raising the member countries to a common
minimal level o f macroeconomic stability and social cohesion becomes a clear
imperative.

2.

The Bank’s support to SADC should focus on extending and intensifying sectoral
cooperation issues together with a selective-rather than comprehensive-agenda
toward the long-tenn objective of deep integration. Analysis of the region’s initial
conditions suggests that the Bank’s assistance needs to focus o n intensifying
intraregional cooperation. This emphasis w i l l strengthen the regional economy
and thus facilitate i t s integration in the world economy in accordance with the
notion o f SADC as an open regional arrangement.

3.

Support for selected aspects of the common market agenda. Even though i t i s
recommended that the Bank emphasize sectoral cooperation, it also should not
ignore the long-term objective o f a SADC common market. Past and ongoing
dialogue with SADC authorities has focused on the three pillars o f deep
integration: (1) principally trade issues, but also the (2) financial sector, and less
so (3) macroeconomic policy convergence. Demand from RIAS continues to
pursue these lines o f activity. Therefore, the Bank should continue ongoing or
already planned work o n trade and financial integration issues, while selectively
responding to RIAs o n elements o f trade and financial integration.

4.

Strengthening existing SADC capacity is needed to achieve stronger cooperation
among countries across key sectors. Cooperation with South African institutions
as vehicles for capacity building initiatives over a wide spectrum o f issues has
worked well in the past. I t should be strengthened in future activities, particularly
since South Africa i s a willing partner in reaching out to the subregion and
beyond.

52.

Following the comprehensive review to propose an appropriate strategic framework for a
Southern Africa subRIAS, consultations are ongoing with the relevant RIAs and other
stakeholders, RIAS’ International Cooperating Partners, and the relevant sector and country
teams o n the content and modalities for Bank support to integration and cooperation in the
subregion. This has necessarily been an iterative process, given that on SADC’s side, i t s broad
priority areas s t i l l need to be translated into a consistent set o f regional-level programs, while
many o f i t s International Cooperating Partners, like the Bank, are either designing or redesigning
their support programs for the region. O n the Bank’s side, it i s clear that country regional

123

commitments, whether in protocols or multicountry agreements to implement protocols, have not
always found expression in CASs, PRSPs, or dialogue with the Bank; it i s expected that
discussions with the individual country teams will lead to a stronger focus o n the set o f regional
priorities to which the countries in Southern Africa have agreed. Critical issues and current and
future activities under discussion include:
Support for the deep integration agenda
-

Trade integration. Planned analytical work, supported through a trust
fund, i s aimed at assessing the progress made in integration in the
COMESA area, broadening the COMESA FTA, drawing up a roadmap to
a customs union, and sequencing o f regional integration and the EPA; as
well as analyzing the revenue implications o f further regional integration
and an EPA and designing appropriate responses. Analytical work planned
with SACU, given that i t i s a revenue-sharing mechanism rather than a
customs union in the general sense, would focus o n aspects o f deepening
SACU, S A C U enlargement and the impact o n the regional trade
architecture.
Another area for Bank support i s the extension o f value-chain analyses
that the Bank and others have already undertaken in several Southern
African countries. The potential payoffs in terms o f increased growth and
employment from harmonization and coordination o f policies and targeted
interventions affecting for example the textile to garments, automotive,
agro-industry and tourism value chains are very high.

-

Financial integration. Through an IDF grant to SADC, the Bank i s
currently providing support for strengthening o f public sector accounting
standards with as implementing agency the Eastern and Southern African
Association o f Accountants General (ESAAG). Another grant i s for
harmonization o f accounting and auditing frameworks and standards for
the private sector in the Eastern and Southern Africa region. A grant for
harmonization o f procurement systems has also been approved for
COMESA.
U p o n request from the S A D C Secretariat, the Bank has been undertaking a
study which could partially meet the need for an overarching regional
financial sector development strategy to inform and provide direction to
the subsectoral strategies already under implementation. This will need to
be coordinated with another study by the ADB o n the development o f
capital markets in SADC. (As o f June 2006, this study had not been
initiated yet.)

With regard to investment and the business environment in SADC, based
o n the ICAs and regular updates o f the Doing Business indicators for most
o f the countries in the region, the Bank i s well-placed to make a
contribution through a study aimed at identifying the needs and steps
required for harmonization in some o f the key components of the
investment climate.

124

The only lending initiative under the auspices o f COMESA has been for
the well-known Africa Trade Insurance (ATI) project, in 2001 as a joint
initiative between African states and the Bank to facilitate trade and
investment in Africa. ATI’s goal i s to reduce costs o f trade and investment
financing by providing risk insurance cover on political and commercial
risk. Going forward, AT1 will add a comprehensive risk insurance product
to insure the credit risk o f private sector companies in i t s member
countries to more effectively support trade transactions and restructure
current country security agreements into full capital subscriptions to
enhance i t s capital base.
a

a

Sectoral cooperation
-

Transport and trade facilitation. Apart from Africa-wide analytical work
which i s being undertaken, the Bank together with DfID and other donors
are planning joint analytical work to gain a better understanding o f the
current regional transport situation and with a view to develop a lending
operation in trade and transport facilitation.

-

Telecommunications. The Bank has currently limited dialogue with both
SADC and COMESA on I C T issues, except for the well-known planned
RCP/EASSy project, which would be to the benefit o f both COMESA
and SADC countries.

-

Energy. Over the past few years, the Bank has been preparing the
Southern Africa Power Market Development Project aimed at developing
an efficient regional power market through the Southern Africa Power
Pool, to supply stable electricity at lower prices in the SADC. This project
i s a multicountry APL to the amount o f $500 million, o f which $452
million i s IDA. SADC has also identified a large number o f priority
energy projects. Given that these ‘priorities’ are regarded as o f equal
importance, the Bank i s planning analytical work to gain a better
understanding o f the energy sector in Southern Africa, as well as with a
view to further operational activities.

-

Human resources development. The Bank was approached to support a
pilot project in regional collaboration, based on the priorities identified
through the SARUA policy dialogue in higher education. Such support
will depend on the availability o f trust funds and grants.

Common goods

-

Shared water resources. The GEF project on SADC Groundwater and

Drought Management, aimed at the development o f an SADC regional
strategic approach to support and enhance the capacity o f i t s member
states in the definition o f drought management policies, specifically in
relation to the role, availability, and supply o f potential groundwater
resources, i s ongoing.
The Bank also i s currently involved in discussions on the Zambezi Basin
Support Project to support the ongoing development o f the necessary legal
125

and institutional context for cooperative and joint investments in the river
basin. W h i l e the medium-term aim i s to engage in the financing o f joint
and/or cooperative investments in the Basin, there i s a need to engage in
initial activities which will highlight the incentives for joint development
and provide a clear indication o f costs o f noncollaborative unilateral
development. After consultation with SADC and water basin institutions,
the Bank expects to undertake initial E S W aimed at the identification o f
potential joint and cooperative investment projects in the Zambezi Basin.
This work, should agreement be reached with S A D C institutions, also will
be done in collaboration with other bilateral and multilateral development
partners.
-

0

Marine ecosystems. Through a GEF proposal, the Bank i s responding to
country requests from Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique, South Africa and
Madagascar for assistance in better managing the living resources and
habitat o f their shared marine ecosystems. The Southwest Indian Ocean
Fisheries Project (SWIOFP) i s seen as the first phase o f a long-term
commitment to sustainable management o f offshore marine fisheries in the
Western Indian Ocean. I t s objective i s to develop sufficient knowledge
and sufficient legal and institutional capacity to act on that knowledge to
manage the fishery in the 200-mile Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) o f
the participating countries to obtain maximum economic returns from this
resource, consistent with a management strategy that stresses
environmental sustainability and socially equitable distribution o f the
benefits o f exploitation. Another GEF project o n a marine highway in the
South Western Indian Ocean to preserve fragile ecosystems i s being
planned.

Common problems.

-

Food insecurity. The Bank has responded in various ways t o S A D C
requests for support. Ongoing work includes a PHRD grant for the Banksupported Multicountry Agricultural Productivity Program, which i s
expected to address some o f the constraints to improvement in agriculture
productivity, and analytical work on the use o f water for small-scale
agricultural irrigation schemes around the Zambezi River Basin. Together
with SADC, this work i s to be completed with the design o f a Basin
Irrigation Strategy, apart from that for the respective countries, during the
course o f FY2007.

-

Communicable diseases-HW/AIDS.
The Bank has had limited
involvement with S A D C on HIV/AIDS, except for i t s extensive
knowledge and administrative support for the S A D C Extraordinary
Summit on HIV/AIDS, and knowledge sharing initiatives b y CD1.
Preventing the transport corridors f r o m being channels o f transmission o f
HIV/AIDS i s probably the top priority in the framework o f regional
integration. Together with the S A D C Thematic Group o f International
Cooperating Partners, as well as the Pharmaceutical Working Group, the

126

Bank also plans to explore the potential for joint procurement of
pharmaceutical products.
0

Enhancing institutional capacity in central regional integration institutions.
Having responded with two grants to SADC to address weaknesses in mandate
and capacity, the Bank i s working with other donors on a comprehensive response
to SADC’s institutional capacity needs as well as to address SADC fiduciary,
monitoring and reporting and other requirements toward achieving the aid
effectiveness objectives as outlined in the New SADC-International Cooperating
Partnership Framework. The World Bank Institute also i s preparing to work with
South African institutions to support and scale up their capacity building
initiatives in Southern Africa and the rest o f Sub-Saharan as well as to build and
strengthen institutional networking in the region and beyond.

127

v)

B
cd

Y
v)

8

m

a

8
2

n

E

d

9

2r

Y

cr

0

e

*?

0

-E
Y

.-0a
8

h

C
0

.e
Y

cd

Y
B
8

c

M
.c

3

cd

0

i

m
3

Table A5.2: East Africa: Key Economic Indicator

GDP (USD million)
Average Annual GDP Growth 1994-2004
GNI Per Capita (Atlas method)
Average Annual GDP Per Capita Growth
1994-2004
Structure of the economy (% o f GDP)**
Agriculture
% Change 1994-2004

51.4
4.6

% Change 1994-2004
Services
% Change 1994-2004

-2.5
28.6
-2.1

0.66
0.3
90

I

15.6
1.6
460

I

1.8
9.1
220

-0.6

4

1

15.7
-17.6

40.5
-9.3

1

2.5
64.5
15.1

-1.6

I

I
I

1

I
I

I

10.9
5
330

I

6.8
6.4
270

2.5

1

44.8
-0.2

1

1.6
38.6
-1.3

I

0.3
38.1
9 1

I

3.5

132

35.76
4.48
274
1.56

I

32.2
-17.7

I

36.92
-8.4

I

7.3
46.6
10.4

I

1.84
43.28
6.22

I
I
I

Table A5.3: Exports from Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda, 2004

are1 clothing access

I

I
I
I

Table A5.4: Regional Trade Flows in East Africa, 1999-2004

% change
in total
trade
(%)

(%)

4

7.5
50.9

190
266

-12
31

(%)
228
180

721.2

805.3
38.1

70
235

63
64

4
105

[39.3]
[ 109.41

-7
39

-7
4

34

166.7
138.1

213
27

47
59

113
-20

132.5
359.3

137
42

22
63

93
-13

1151.3
695.8

83
49

50
59

22
-6

I-

Exports

4.1 1

Kenya
Exports

464.9

IrnDOrtS

145.4
125.6
Exports
Imports
All
Exports
Imports
Kenya's share
of E.A.
Exports

56
253.8

79.7
295.9

87.4
288

628.3
466.4

500.9
441.4

472.4
511.9

75

74

62

T
321.2

% change in
regional trade
as fraction of
total

368.1

70

Note: *Rwanda failed to report to UNCOMTRADE in 2004 so 2003 data were used for 2004 notionally.

133

-1

Table ASS: Proposed Core and NonCore activities: Regional Integration Assistance Strategy
for Central Africa, 2003
Domain
Core Activities

Infrastructure
Transport and trade
facilitation
Regional road l i n k s
Air safety and regulation

Trade Policies-Customs U n i o n
Phase I:
Corrective action plan
Phase 11: Customs union reform
Financial Sector
Banking sector monitoring
Microfinance development
Bills and bonds market
Institutional strengthening
Support to the Executive Secretariat
Monitoring programs

NonCore Activities

Human Resources
Regional H I V - A I D S

Macroeconomic
Monitoring policy convergence and
surveillance units work
Export volatility study

Infrastructure
Telecommunications Policy
Harmonization
Energy (Power) strategy

Business Environment
Legal and regulatory framework
Competitiveness observatory

Forestrymater
Supportto
COMJFACREIMP-I1
Lake Chad Basin

Financial Sector
BDEAC
Regional stock exchange

Human Resources
Higher education and
training
I

Contingent Activities

Long-term issues studies

Source: World Bank Report No. 25328,28.

134

Table A5.6: ECOWAS: Basic Indicators, 2003

Table A5.7: Number o f Procedures and Days Required to Start a Business, Register Property,
and Enforce Contracts in ECOWAS

135

Table A5.8: Number of Documents, Signatures, and Days for Cross Border Trade in ECOWAS

Table A4.9: Population, Income, and Land Area in SADC

136

m
m

I

T-

APPENDIX VI.
CAS REVIEW FY2000-FYOS
1.
This review includes all the Country Assistance Strategies (CAS), Interim Strategy Notes
(ISN), and Country Partnership Strategies (CPS) from F Y O O to FY08 (through December 2007)
available in the Bank’s IRIS system.’ The research encompasses the review of 66 documents ( 3 9
CASs, 24 ISNs, and 3 CPS), all o f which w i l l be referred to as “CASs” in the following lines and
tables and which can be divided by year as follows:

2.
Only 3 9 o f 47 Sub-Saharan African countries* could be included in the review, as no
CASs were available for 8 countries (Botswana, DRC, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Seychelles, South Africa, Swaziland, and Togo).
3.
The criteria to establish whether and to what extent regional integration issues and
considerations appear in the documents become more specific as the review goes deeper. We
begin by simply reviewing whether regional integration considerations are mentioned in the
documents. Second, we verify whether regional integration i s specifically mentioned in the
Bank’s strategy. Then we go a step further and see if the Bank’s lending programs also include
regional projects. Subsequently, we observe whether regional integration projects’ impacts are
reflected in the results matrix andlor in spillover effects. Last, we see whether regional
integration considerations also are reflected in other programmed activities. Table A6.1
summarizes the results o f the CAS review.
Table A6.1: Results: SSA CAS Review FY2000-FYOS

Note: *= T o Dec 2007.

Ey 08 until December 2007.
Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Comoros, Congo Republic of, CBte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Uganda, United Republic o f Tanzania,
Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
2

141

4.
The percentages in the table are relative to the number o f CASs reviewed in each o f the
four periods considered. They show that, even though regional integration considerations are
included in 65 percent o f CASs and regional projects are included in 48 percent of lending
programs, only 9 percent o f CASs reflects regional integration considerations in other
programmed activities. The 6 CASs included in this percentage are FY03 Malawi; FY04
Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, Mozambique; and FY05 Burkina Faso. However, looking at the
repetition of the documents over the years, clearly attention to the issue i s growing. Sixty-five
percent of CASs included regional projects in their lending programs in FY06-FY08, compared
with 25 percent in FYOO-FYO1.

142

APPENDIX VII. REGIONAL IMPLEMENTATIONPLAN FOR RIAS-INITIAL GUIDELINES ON PROCESSAND CONTENT'
A.

Country Groupings

1.
The regional implementation plans (RIPs) are expected to cover the following four
subregions:
e

0

e

e

B.

West Africa: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Cote d'Ivoire, Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra
Leone and Togo
Central Africa: Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Equatorial Guinea,
Gabon, Democratic Republic o f Congo and Republic o f Congo
East Africa: Burundi, Comoros, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Rwanda, Seychelles, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe
Southern Africa: Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Mauritius, Madagascar, Namibia,
South Africa and Swaziland.

Frequency, Roles, Responsibilitiesand Processes

2.
The implementation plans are expected to be prepared o n a two-year rolling basis, with
the first batch finalized in FYO9, the next batch in FY11, etc. The preparation o f RIPs should be
timed so that they can inform the budgethusiness planning process that is, be finalized in the 3rd
quarter o f the fiscal year. It i s proposed that the first batch o f regional implementation plans be
including as part o f the proposed mid-term implementation review o f RIAS, t o be discussed with
the Board in FY10.
3.
The Regional Integration Department will be responsible for initiating the RIPs and
developing these jointly with the concerned Country Departments. Country Directors or their
designate will be co-responsible for establishing and leading the team that will prepare their RIP.
Preparation o f each RIP will involve relevant departments in I F C and MIGA and will be
coordinated with the regional operational plans o f other partners, the ADB in particular.

4.
The process o f preparing a RIP w i l l be initiated with a Concept Note, which, upon
approval from the Director o f the Regional Integration Department and the relevant Country
Directors, will serve to launch the process. The RIP will be considered final following review
and approval by the respective Directors involved o f the fully elaborated regional plan, including
as regards arrangements for monitoring and evaluation.

5.
The Concept Note i s expected succinctly to set out: (i)
regional strategic objectives
the extent to which
among the group o f countries concerned (or subgroups among them); (ii)
these are formalized in existing regional strategic plans and national Poverty Reduction
regional priorities expressed in the CAS o f the concerned countries; (iv) the
Strategies; (iii)
tentative pipeline o f regional projects and knowledge activities responding t o these priorities; (v)
I t i s envisaged that these initial guidelines w i l l be revised and updated in view o f experiences gained as
implementation plans are actually prepared and executed.

143

opportunities to further leverage country programs through regional activities, and to create
additional regional public goods; (vi) views on the capacity needs o f the concerned REC and
other regional bodies in the areas o f focus o f the RIP, and how these needs can be addressed; (v)
the proposed lending envelope available for the subregion (for the two-year period); (vi) quality
challenges associated with the existing portfolio and how risks can be addressed; (vii) a proposed
monitoring and evaluation framework; (viii) staff and budget resources needed to prepare the
RIP; (vii) resources needed to implement the plan; and (ix) a timeframe for producing the RIP.

C.

Objective, Coverage and Content of Regional ImplementationPlans

6.
Objectives: The overarching aim o f each RIP will be to establish the Bank’s lending and
nonlending program o f activities in support regional integration for the subregion within the
parameters set out by RIAS strategic framework. In addition, the RIP will serve to ensure:
0

Subregional adaptation o f RIAS, to cast the strategy’s continent-wide strategic
framework more specifically within the political economy o f a neighborhood o f
countries; hence to identify and provide a priority ordering o f regional integration
priorities among the countries concerned. This will enable country teams to
coordinate CAS objectives and business plans in areas in which regional solutions
hold potential to strengthen outcomes at the national level, or which facilitate
creation o f important regional public goods not achievable through national action
alone.

0

That regional integration priorities and regional issues o f particular importance
are brought to the attention of the Bank’s country teams and national authorities,
and progressively reflected in CAS and Bank country programs.

0

By including the IFC and MIGA in the RIP team, that World Bank Group
collaboration and solutions are strengthened with a view to leverage assistance to
regional integration and regional programs.

0

That explicit emphasis i s given to: (i)developing strategic partnerships to
leverage RIAS in each subregion, including with MICs; and (ii)capacity
development o f regional policy bodies.

7.
Coverage and Content: The RIPSwill be brief and succinct (10-12 pages approximately)
and w i l l cover the following elements:

(i)

Background: Brief background on key developments, recent events in the
subregion o f relevance to regional integration and/or regional programs notably as
they concern economic integration, regional connectivity (transport, energy,
telecommunication, etc.), macroeconomic stability and financial integration as
well as developments in areas related to regional public goods, shared natural
resources, etc. A brief account o f main challenges facing the REC and other
regional bodies should also be provided.

(ii) Key Issues of Relevance to Regional IntegratiodPrograms: The RIP should
briefly discuss and present key challenges and opportunities for the regional
integration agenda in the subregion, regrouped with the three pillars and cross-

144

cutting theme o f RIAS (that is, regional infrastructure, institutional cooperation
for economic integration, coordinated interventions to provide regional public
goods, and regional strategic planning and connections with national development
plans, including regional bodies and RECs). For the identified issues, the RIP
should briefly discuss the extent to which the opportunities and challenges are
perceived by national or regional authorities (and identify which authorities),
whether any actions are being taken or envisaged, engagement o f other
development partners and donors, etc.

(iii) Proposed Bank Activity Program: Based on the foregoing discussion and taking
into account the tentative project & AAA pipeline, the RIP should present in
detail:
a.

Projects to be financed through topping-up for the Regional Program for
the ensuing two fiscal years (that is, for the first RIP, for F Y 1 0 - F Y l l ) ,
specifying funding commitments from the Regional Integration
Department and concerned Country Departments.

b.

AAA program for the period, providing details on main activities pieces
and with suggestions regarding financing.

c.

Implications for developing the regional aspect o f CAS and country
programs going forward, including how and in what specific adjustments
are needed in light o f the RIP

d.

Specific suggestions for collaboration with the IFC and MIGA and details
on how these will be turned into action.

8.
Results Framework: The RIP w i l l include a results based monitoring and evaluation
framework, which takes as point o f departure the draft framework developed for R I A S (and
presented in Appendix VZZZ ofRZAS). Each RIP will propose adjustments and refinements in view
o f the implementation plans themselves. Furthermore, the RIP will include plans progressively to
harmonize the monitoring and evaluation framework with those o f the concerned CAS, with the
objective o f full harmonization by the end o f the IDA 15 period.

145

i

i

. .

ci

i

i

-R 2a

e,

6

0

.

.

.

.

a

i

a

a

0

ri

?-i

0

Y

i

i

I

.

0

.

.

.

.

e

. .

0

.

.

