Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 20232-SK

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

January 8, 2001

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only
in the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be
disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
(Exchange Rate as of Noveimber30, 2000)
Currency Unit = Slovak Koruna (SK)
US$ - 49 75
SK = 0.021
GOVERNMENT'S FISCAL YEAR
January I to December 31
ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS
CEM
EBRD
EC
EFSAL
EIB
EMU
ERL
EU
ESW
FDI
FIAS
GDP
GEF
IBRD
ICR
IDF
IFC
IMF
IT
MIGA
NBS
NGO
NLS
NPF
OECD
PHRD
PPAIF
SAL
SBA
SME
SMP
TA
TDO
UNDP
USAID

Country Economic Memorandum
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Commission of the European Union
Enterprise and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan
European Investment Bank
European Monetary Union
Econornic Recovery Loan
European Union
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Services
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Fund
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Implementation Completion Report
Institutional Development Fund
Intemational Finance Corporation
Intemational Monetary Fund
Information Technology
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
National Bank of Slovakia
Non-Governmental Organization
Non-lending Services
National Property Fund
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Policy and Human Resources Development
Public/Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Structural Adjustment Loan
Social Benefits Administration Project
Small and Medium Size Enterprise
Staff Monitored Program
Technical Assistance
Total Debt Outstanding
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International Development

The World Bank Group Team
IBRD
IFC
Vice President: Johannes Linn
Vice President: Assaad Jabre
Country Director: Roger Grawe
Director: Edward Nassim
Task Manager: Laurens Hoppenbrouwer
Task Manager: Kutlay Ebiri

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SLOVAK REPUBLIC

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY..................................................................

i

I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND ..................................................................

1

Introduction ..................................................................
Political Developments..................................................................
Social Developments ..................................................................
Economic Developments..................................................................

1
2
3
5

II. THE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS...... 7
III. THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM..................................................................
Introduction .................................................................
Structural Reforms..................................................................
Environment.................................................................

8
8
9
13

IV. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY................................. 13
Review of the Past Assistance Program ..........................................
.......................
Current Activities .................................................................
The Role of Other Partners..................
The World Bank Group's Proposed Assistance Program ...........................................
The Assistance Program and Poverty Reduction ...............
............................
CAS Lending Scenarios and Triggers and Exposure ...........................................
V. RISKS ...........................................

13
14
14
16
20
20
23

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

TEXT TABLES

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators: 1994-2000
Table 2: Key Economic Indicators 1999-2005
Table 3: Lending Program FYOI-03

TEXT BOXES

Box 1: Social Exclusion and Poverty in Slovakia - The Roma
Box 2: Corruption in Slovakia - Survey Results
Box 3: Fiduciary Assessments in Slovakia
Box 4: Slovakia CAS: Selectivity of World Bank Support
Box 5: IFC Investment Priorities in Slovakia
Box 6: CAS Self-evaluation - Benchmarks

ANNEXES

Annex A2:
AnmexB2:
Annex B3:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B8:
Annex B9:
Annex BIO:
Annex B 11:

Slovak Republic at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program
Summary of Non-lending Services
Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Status of Bank Group Operations
CAS Country Program Matrix
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Consultations on the Country Assistance Strategy

Map

IBRD No. 27947R

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUJNTRYASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The first World Bank Group Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Slovak Republic' comes at
a time when the country is intensively pursuing its objective of accession to the EU. World Bank activity
had been limited in Slovakia during 1994-98 by a lack of receptivity to a program of Bank assistance on
the part of the Government at that time. A new Government took office in late 1998 against the
background of slowing economic growth, widening macroeconomic imbalances, lagging transition
reforms, concerns over governance, and a malaise in Slovakia's international relations. The new
authorities have established a solid track record of economic adjustment and broad-based reforms, and
have requested the Bank Group to support their efforts with an active program of technical and financial
assistance.
1.

The Government also faced daunting challenges on the social front. Employment growth did not
accompany the GDP expansion in the mid-1990s and unemployment has rernained high, at 17 percent on
average during 2000. The pension and health insurance systems are generating increasing deficits, a
number of human development indicators have deteriorated in recent years, and recent surveys indicate a
weakening sense of security and well-being, with over half of all respondents considering themselves
worse off than before 1989. The marginalized Roma minority and the long-term unemployed are among
the most vulnerable groups in Slovakia. The share of population living on US$2 a day, at about 5 percent
in 1996, is well above that of other Central European countries, although income distribution overall
remains relatively egalitarian, owing to an extensive social safety net. The particular situation of the
Roma, who by some estimates number close to 10 percent of the population, represents a core challenge
to poverty reduction and social justice. The recent economic slowdown and increasing levels of
unemployment now place social welfare issues high on the Government's agenda for action. The
Government is committed to accompany stabilization and reform with improvements in social protection,
to target social assistance better, and ensure that disadvantaged groups have adequate access to quality
education and health services.
ii.

iii.
Slovakia's economic perforrmance,as measured by GDP growth and inflation, was good in the first
years after independence, building on the structural transformation and economic liberalization that took
place in Czechoslovakia during 1989-92. The rapid growth that took place during 1994-97 (5-6 percent
p.a.) became increasingly unsustainable, however, in the absence of structural reforms. Macroeconomic
balances sharply worsened from 1996 as a result of rising levels of inefficient investments, reflecting poor
governance in the public and private sectors. In response to widening deficits, the National Bank of
Slovakia (NBS) tightened monetary policy. The resulting high interest rates caused debt-servicing
problems for the enterprise sector which contributed to a deterioration in the loan portfolio performance
of banks. At the same time, speculative attacks on the exchange rate in the wake of the Russia crisis in
1998 forced NBS to float the currency after a sizeable loss in reserves.
iv.
The Government moved quickly to take strong and convincing stabilization measures. These led
to a one-third reduction in the fiscal deficit to GDP ratio to 3.6 percent in 1999, and a near halving of the
I Hereafterreferredto as Slovakia.

ii

current account deficit to 5.5 percent of GDP, while real interest rates came down and international
reserves recovered. Fiscal adjustment was consolidated in 2000, and the current account deficit narrowed
further on strong export growth, with reserves rising to 4 months import coverage. In spite of a
slowdown in growth to about 2 percent p.a. in 1999 and 2000, financial markets have responded
favorably to the Government's policy measures. Confidence in the Government's commitment to
economic adjustment and reforms, and the EU decision in December 1999 to initiate accession
negotiations with Slovakia resulted in a decline in spreads from 1000 basis points (bp) during the Russia
crisis in 1998 to just over 150 bp in 2000.
v.
Economic prospects have received a boost with the recent accession to OECD membership and
two successive favorable Regular Reports from the EC, which have marked Slovakia's progress toward
the first rank of EU accession candidates. The Government and the EU have agreed on a set of mediumterm economic policies necessary to accelerate Slovakia's economic transformation, grounded in a
commitment to macroeconomic stability and structural reforms, Slovakia is increasingly integrated in a
network of intemational institutional arrangements which reinforce and lock-in the Government's
commitments.
vi.
The medium term macroeconomic scenario envisages continued fiscal consolidation and structural
reforms, with a gradual growth recovery, underpinned by strong export sales to the EU, offsetting weak
growth in domestic demand. Growth should accelerate in spite of lower investment levels, as structural
reforms bolster efficiency gains, improve governance, and increase FDI associated with privatization.
The medium-term scenario projects the primary fiscal balance to improve steadily and become positive by
2004. The overall fiscal deficit as a share of GDP is expected to remain unchanged in 2001, and then
decline to 2 percent or less beyond 2002, in spite of the significant fiscal impact (over 1 percent of GDP)
of the financial sector restructuring now underway. The current account should continue to improve
gradually, and following expected FDI, the external debt to GDP ratio declines and reserves continue to
strengthen. Overall, vulnerability to external shocks should decline significantly.
vii.
The Government's medium term policies aim at meeting requirements for EU membership.
Maintaining macroeconomic stability and advancing key governance and structural reforms are essential
to ensure competitiveness and re-ignite the growth necessary to reduce persistent unemployment and
underpin greater social inclusion. Structural reforms are most urgent in the enterprise and financial
sectors. Earlier privatizations were carried out in an environment of poor public and corporate
governance. As a result, enterprise losses steadily increased, further undermining the asset base of the
predominantly state-owned banks. Reforms were neglected in other areas as well, including utilities,
public administration, and social assistance and services. The significant measures already taken to
privatize the banks and implement a work-out strategy for loss-making and bankrupt enterprises will lay
the microeconomic foundations for restoring sustainable high growth. At the same time, Government has
begun to divest in the utilities sectors, starting with privatization of telecornmunications in mid-2000.
The establishment of more effective regulatory institutions supports these liberalization and privatization
plans. The authorities also realize that to complete the transformation agenda, corporate and public
governance must be improved. Significant legislative efforts have already resulted in a much stronger
bankruptcy law and improved commercial and tax codes.
viii. Key institutional weaknesses in the public sector include excessive centralism, a discredited legal
and judicial system and widespread administrative corruption. The current Government has devoted
special emphasis to combating corruption. A broad-based national survey carried out in 1999
documented the extent to which corruption affects all aspects of the economy. Individual citizens were
most affected in the social sectors, and all groups - citizens, entrepreneurs and civil servants - identified
corruption in the judicial system as a major problem. The Government has announced an anti-corruption
program with measures to improve information and transparency, reduce state intervention, and simplify

iii
the regulatory framework. It has also reduced public employment and initiated public sector reforms,
with focus on public finance management, decentralization, civil service reform and judicial reform.
ix.
Although aggregate social sector outcomes are still satisfactory in relation to Slovakia's income
level, there are serious threats to sustainability of these outcomes. Significant problems have emerged in
health finance and in the structure of health services. Education suffers from inefficient resource use and
unclear lines of responsibility. In both sectors, salaries have eroded and corruption is rife. The
sustainability of Slovakia's extensive system of social protection is also at risk. The Government's
agenda for public sector reform (including a review of public sector expenditures, an assessment of public
administrative functions, decentralization, and the anti-corruption program), will go a long way to address
the common elements of social sector reforms. In addition, the Government fully appreciates the need to
underpin broad public administration reforms with focused sector specific interventions.
x.
Building on an already active program of Bank Group advisory and technical support, the
Govermment has requested significant financial assistance particularly linked to structural reforms and
public sector capacity building. This opens a window of opportunity for the Bank Group to support
Slovakia in quickly advancing the ambitious structural reform agenda on which it has already embarked.
The European institutions are also stepping up their support to Slovakia, with concentration in selected
sectors and areas. The Bank's program would therefore complement the role of others, build on
partnerships and emphasize selectivity. This CAS focuses on helping Slovakia to complete reforms so as
to restore sustainable growth, advance the process of EU accession, and improve living conditions
especially among vulnerable groups. Three clusters of activities will contribute to these objectives: (i)
completing the transformation reforms, including privatization, in the banking, enterprise energy and
infrastructure sectors; (ii) strengthening governance and building more effective public institutions; and
(iii) improving social security and enhancing human development.
xi.
Initial support for structural reforms has focused on banking and enterprise reforms. Following on
a program of technical collaboration now well underway, and Government's initial implementation of the
comprehensive bank asset restructuring program as a precondition for privatization, a proposed Enterprise
and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (EFSAL in FY01) for about US$300 million would support the
Government's continuing reform efforts related to bank privatization, enterprise restructuring and
improved corporate governance including through a strengthened legal framework for bankruptcy and
foreclosure. The EFSAL would assist in meeting a portion of the significant fiscal cost of these reforms.
A labor market and social assistance assessment of the impact of the EFSAL has been completed. Its
findings are that an increase in unemployment will not be pronounced and that potential negative impacts
can be largely mitigated by existing social assistance programs. The assistance program would also help
prepare for utility privatization and market liberalization. The IFC program would also focus on the
financial sector, through participation in bank privatization transactions. IFC would consider
opportunities to invest in privatized utilities. Its program includes support for selected industrial
enterprises, and technical assistance to create an environment that is conducive to private business
development, in particular for attracting FDI, which is also a focus of planned MIGA activities. Total
IFC investments are expected to be in the order of US$100 million during FYO1-03. FIAS is providing
assistance to improve the business environment, including an assessment of administrative barriers to
FDI, while MIGA is supporting privatization marketing and attracting FDI, and expects increased demand
for guarantees as a result of the shift to a more open foreign investment regime.
xii.
Support to improve public governance has focused on the Government's anti-corruption program
and the design of a broad public sector reform program. Public procurement and financial accountability
assessments have already been completed. A proposed Public Finance Management and Judicial Reform
Loan (FY02) would finance training, technical assistance and information technology for both public
finance management and judicial reforms. In the social area, initial support focused on the emerging

iv
crisis in the social security system, and helping to strengthen management systems and institutions. A
social sectors policy and expenditures review, now underway, would provide the analytic underpinning
future social sector reforms, while ongoing labor markets and poverty analysis and a situation assessment
of the Roma population will contribute to an overall poverty reduction strategy. A proposed Social
Benefits Administration Project (FY01) would help improve and integrate pension and employment
information systems and prepare for pension reform. A second social sector operation (FY03) would
build on preparatory activities in health and the currently on-going sector analyses. IFC would also
consider investments in human development (private education and health) as well as in pension funds.
xiii. Poverty reduction objectives permeate all three clusters of the program. The poverty-related
analytic work is front-loaded so as to improve our as yet limited understanding of poverty in Slovakia and
ensure maximum operational impact given the limited time horizon for our likely involvement in
Slovakia. Restoring sustainable growth based on stronger microeconomic foundations following
structural reforms should lead to more rapid employment growth with improved labor market
performance. Public administration reform will increase voice and access for the poor focusing on areas
most susceptible to corruption. Planned social and human development interventions will strengthen the
sustainability of the safety net, and improve access to social services, specifically tackling the challenge
of social exclusion of the Roma minority.
xiv. In the base case scenario, lending would be USS415 million, with the EFSAI as the single
adjustment operation, and one investment operation per year. Maintaining the base case posits fiscal
outcomes in line with a sustainable macroeconomic framework as indicated by consistency with the IMF
Staff Monitored Program (SMP) that the Government requested and is currently preparing for
consideration by the IMF early in 2001 prior to the proposed Bank adjustment lending. The base case
also posits good progress in implementation capacity and institution building. Based on the
Government's current performance and commitment to reforms, the program is evolving beyond the base
case toward a high case scenario. This could lead to a lending program closer to US$765 million, with
the EFSAI followed by policy-based lending linked to utilities and infrastructure restructuring and
privatization, and to significant reforms in social service financing and delivery and/or social assistance,
e.g. comprehensive pension reform. 'I'he triggers for the shift to the higher level of support would
concentrate on structural reforms in these designated areas proceeding at the accelerated pace which the
Slovak authorities currently envisage. A low case scenario which would put lending on hold, would
respond to stalled reforms and worsening macroeconomic balances.
xv.
In both the base and high cases, adjustment lending would represent a large share of total lending,
and disbursements under adjustment operations would depend upon satisfactory macroeconomic
performance, as evidenced through the implementation of the IMF SMP, and satisfactory performance
thereafter. This composition and timing of Bank support reflects the Government's current agenda for
structural reforms and corresponds as well to the nature and timing of the likely fiscal costs associated
with these reforms. During the past two years Bank Group staff and Slovak counterparts have
collaborated closely on the analytic underpinnings of the programs which this CAS supports. The Bank
anticipates a continued period of intense involvement after which the need for Bank (Groupinvolvement
should rapidly attenuate as Slovakia regains the momentum and prospects comparable to its central
European neighbors.
xvi. The main operational risk is political. The governing coalition may not hold together if the
political costs of decisive reform become too high; the perception of political risks could also lead to
Government delays in adopting further reforms. These risks should not be discounted; but on balance the
recent opening for EU accession should guide policies and actions toward sustained reform. Other risks
include limited capacity to prepare and implement reforms; in response the Bank would re-phase or
rebalance the program, including reduced commitments as appropriate. Should external shocks lead to

v

worsening macroeconomic conditions, the Bank would consider stepping up the volume of planned
adjustment lending to support the Govemment's own corrective measures. Finally, it may take longer
than Government or its partners currently anticipate for Slovakia to comply with the requirements for EU
accession, or delayed implementation of the EU's own reform agenda could affect the broad accession
schedule. This could undermine the domestic commitment to reforms, feeding back to political
uncertainties. In such an event, the Bank would need to reassess it's own role as the Government would
not be able to achieve its principal strategic objective within the time frame it now envisages. While the
Bank's continued strong partnership with the EU should help mitigate this risk in part, an overall delay in
the accession process leading to a significant change in Slovakia's relationship with European institutions
would necessitate a reassessment of the Bank's overall program.

ProposedAgendafor BoardDiscussion
*

*
*

Does the proposed assistance program appropriately take into account the Bank's comparative
advantage, its global mandate, especially poverty reduction, and the role of others, in particular the
private sector and European institutions?
Is the program sufficiently selective, within the three key clusters that are proposed?
Is the range of assistance in terms of lending amounts, lending composition (mainly adjustment
lending), and non-lending services appropriate?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Introduction
1.
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Slovak Republic', is the first since Slovakia
became a member of the World Bank Group on January 1, 1993 and covers the period FYOI-03. It
presents both Bank and IFC programs in a unified framework. The CAS has been prepared in close
collaboration with the Slovak authorities, and also takes into account consultations with civil society in
Slovakia2 and key external partners, in particular the European Union (EU) and its institutions.
2.
Over the 1995-98 period, Bank activity in Slovakia was limited to implementation of a
telecommunications project (completed in 2000) and a Country Economic Memorandum3 (CEM)
published in 1998. This limited program reflected a lack of receptivity by the then Government to engage
the Bank in broader dialogue. During this period, economic growth was rapid (5-6 percent per annum
over 1994-97), although by 1996 macroeconomic balances had sharply deteriorated due to a rising level
of inefficient investments that reflected poor governance in both the public and private sectors. By 1998
it had become clear that the high growth levels of the mid-1990s were unsustainable due to little progress
in implementing structural reforms and that governance issues were undermining Slovakia's transition to
a market economy. Economic growth had slowed, already high unemployment levels were increasing,
and international relations had reached a low point. Thus, at a time when other Central European
countries were becoming strong candidates for accession to the EuTopeanUnion (EU), Slovakia entered a
period of economic uncertainty with its prospects for EIJ accession constrained both by a lack of
competitiveness and poor public and corporate governance.
3.
Parliamentary elections, which took place in September 1998, brought to power a broad-based
opposition coalition. The new government set out to reverse the policies of the past that threatened the
transition to a market economy and had impeded prospects for EU accession. It recognized the urgent
need to restore macroeconomic stability and to address the underlying governance and structural issues.
4.
Early on the new Government requested the Bank Group to assist with an active program of
technical and financial assistance to support far-reaching structural and governance reform. The request
also reflected the need to finance the up-front fiscal costs of the structural reform program that would
otherwise be too expensive for the Government to shoulder in the short-term. The Government envisaged
substantial fiscal support from the Bank over a relatively short period, which would underpin its
ambitious reform program and improve its access to sustainable private financing. To its credit, the
Government took strong actions already in 1998 and again in 1999 to restore macroeconomic stability,

' Hereafterreferredto as Slovakia.
A note on these consultationsand a summaryof NGOcommentsare presentedin AnnexB11. Subsequentto these
consultationsa draftof the full CASwas made availablepubliclyfor comrnments
andreactionson both the
Government'sandBank's websitesin Slovakiain both Slovakand Englishversions.
3 SlovakRepublic:A Strategyfor Growthand EuropeanIntegration
2

2
incurring up-front political costs. The Government has also established a strong track record in advancing
the structural reform agenda.
5.
In summary, at this stage in Slovakia's development, there is a clear opportunity for the Bank
Group to provide substantial technical and financial support, in a short time frame, to ensure a successful
transition to a market economy. The assistance strategy proposed for FY01-03 corresponds to the
Government's own development program with a particular focus on instruments to support improved
governance and structural reforms.
Political Developments
6.
In September 1998, Parliamentary elections resulted in a victory by a broad based coalition of
parties that had been in opposition. The new Government led by Prime Minister Mikulas Dzurinda
brought together the Slovak Democratic Coalition (SDK), itself a grouping of five parties, the main one of
which is the Christian Democratic Movement (KDH), and three other parties--Party of the Democratic
Left (SDL), Party for Civic Understanding (SOP), and the Hungarian Coalition Party (SMK). This
coalition, which spans a broad range of interests and ideologies, holds an approximate two-thirds majority
in Parliament. The Government has strong roots in the NGO sector which became an increasingly strong
and active force as the main forum of opposition to the previous Government led by Vladimir Meciar and
his Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (lIZDS). HZDS remained the single largest party in the ncw
Parliament, however. Direct Presidential elections in 1999 resulted in a second round victory for the
coalition candidate, Rudolf Schuster (of the SOP), then Mayor of Kosice (Slovakia's second city), over
for-mer Prime Minister Meciar. More recently, in November 2000, an HZDS sponsored referendum
calling for early elections fell dramatically short of the 50 percent voter turnout which would have
required Parliamentary consideration. This represented the third consecutive electoral defeat for
Mr. Meciar.
7.
The Government moved rapidly to rebuild ties to the international community, with a focus on the
EU, but including the OECD and other international institutions as well. It has systematically addressed
governance issues, including the discriminatory treatment of minorities (representing close to a fifth of
the population) which was an important factor in the EU's earlier exclusion of Slovakia from the group of
first round accession candidates. The stabilization and adjustment measures that the Government has
taken to counter the macroeconomic disequillibria and structural distortions that it inherited have
predictably eroded some popular support. The adjustment and reform challenges ahead are substantial
and there will likely be significant strains on the governing coalition as it seeks to maintain the required
consensus for the hard decisions that are needed to lock in sustainable growth. Over the past year, the
creation of split-off parties has weakened some coalition partners, but the parliamentary majority remains
in-tact. Following the November 2000 referendum result, prospects that the current coalition Government
will complete its full term have improved. The question remains whether the medium term benefits from
restoring the basis for sustainable high growth and accelerating the EU accession process will be apparent
to the voters by the time of the next elections due in 2002.
8.
TShepolitical divisions that have existed in Slovakia since before independence, and that continue
today, in part reflect different views on the role of the state in the context of the change from a command
economy to one based on market incentives. In Slovakia, the process of building a modern nation had
barely begun during the transformation that took place in Czechoslovakia after 1989. Although federal
states had been established prior to independence, with broad devolution of powers since 1990, the
process of building a Slovak state, and its institutions, was far from complete by the time of independence
in 1993. While the Government now explicitly recognizes this challenge and has begun to tackle it,
reorienting the role of the state, developing modern institutions, and improving administrative capacity
will pose significant challenges as Slovakia seeks to complete the transformation agenda and promote

3
compliance with the EU's acquis-comnmunautaire(which are the obligations of membership hereafter
referred to as the acquis).
Social Developments
9.
In addition to an incomplete transformation agenda and worsening macroeconomic conditions, the
Government faced daunting challenges on the social front. Employment growth did not accompany the
GDP expansion in the mid-1990s and unemployment increased following stabilization measures, reaching
17 percent on average in 2000. Furthermore, while levels of life expectancy, enrollment and other human
development indicators are in the middle of the range for Central Europe, a number of these have
deteriorated in recent years, in spite of adequate overall social expenditure levels. A major 1998 survey
indicated a weakening sense of social security and well being, with over half of all respondents
considering themselves worse off than before 1989. As the need for social assistance and protection
increases in response to stabilization and adjustment measures, the country's pension and health insurance
systems generate increasing deficits thereby endangering the sustainability and solidarity of the system.
The Govemment is committed to accompany stabilization and reform with improvements in social
protection, to target social assistance better, and ensure that disadvantaged groups have adequate access to
quality education and health services.
10. Poverty. Knowledge about the incidence and scope of poverty in Slovakia was very limited until
recently when initial findings of analytical work initiated by the Bank became available (paras 59 and 6263 describe the work program that the Bank has initiated to enhance understanding and knowledge of
poverty issues in Slovakia). The recent economic slowdown and increasing levels of unemployment now
place poverty issues high on the Govemment's agenda for action. Available data indicate that the Roma

households headed by unemployed persons are the most vulnerable groups in Slovakia. Moreover, there
are very sharp regional differences in unemployment and proportions of Roma population, with the
eastern part of the country consequently having a much higher incidence of poverty. Economic activity is
heavily concentrated in the western part of the country, particularly around the capital Bratislava.

The

poor state of the extensive public housing estates and district heating systems also represent additional
urgent social issues.

11. Analysis of poverty in Slovakia is constrained by the absence of representative household
consumption surveys.4 Initial analysis based on a 1996 micro-census income data indicates that those
living below US$2 a day represent about 5 percent of the population5 , which is significantly higher than
in other Central European countries, while those living below US$4 a day represent about II percent of
the population, a much lower share than in other Central European countries. Similarly, relative poverty
or income inequality, as measured e.g. by the share of households having incomes at less than 50 percent
of median equivalent income is also much lower than in comparator countries The existence of pockets
of deep absolute poverty alongside relatively low relative poverty reflects in large part Slovakia's system
of social transfers Which in effect "compensates" for inequalities in income resulting from differences in
education, labor market status, gender, location and other characteristics which often are associated with
poverty. In particular pensions have been particularly effective in containing poverty among the elderly.
The incidence of poverty may well have increased since 1996, with a slowing down of economic growth
and rising unemployment, in addition to narrowing the scope of some social assistance benefits as part of
on-going fiscal adjustment. The situation of the Roma, who by some estimates number as many as
The annualhouseholdsurveysampleunfortunatelycoversonly householdsheadedby employedpersonswhich
rendersit virtuallyuselessfor analysesof poverty.
5The
micro-censusdata themselvesindicatea rate of 2 6 percent,but it is likely that a significantnumber of poor
4

Roma living in isolated settlements were not covered. The initial analysis assumes, based on indirect indicators of
poverty status, that this component could represent as much as 25 percent of total estimated Roma population, in
addition to those covered by the micro-census.

4
500,000, or close to 10 percent of the population, represents a core challenge to poverty reduction and
social justice and cohesion in Slovakia (see Box 1). The Government is especially concerned that social
transfers represent a rising burden on the budget, so that while they are effective in promoting equity
objectives, they are not sustainable without more effective targeting. In addition, the high incidence of
public corruption is likely to affect the poor disproportionately, as analyses of corruption in other
transition economies has shown.
Box 1: Social Exclusionand Povertyin Slovakia--TheRoma
Roma ate believed to account for close to 10 percent of Slovakia's population, although census data indicate just 1.5 percent,
with the differcnces in magnitude reflecting possible undersampling of isolated Roma settlements and more generally, an
unwillingness to declare Roma ethnicity given official and unofficial discrimination The status and well being of Romnafamilies
has deteriorated since the collapse of communism in 1989 With little schooling, Roma workets were often among the first laid
off in restructuring and face particular barriers given the premia that market economies attach to skills and education. While
discrimination against minorities generally reached its peak in Slovakia during 1994-98 and increased support to minorities has
been an explicit policy of the current government, Roma students, workers, citizens and communitics nevertheless continue to
encounter widespread discrimination Roma students are disproportionately represcnted in special schools, Roma workers
represent a disproportionate share of Slovakia's unemployed, and Roma communities often receive little of the public services to
which they ate entitled The rate of unemployment among Roma far exceeds the national average of 20 percent, reaching close
to 100 percent in some parts of Eastern Slovakia. Similarly, average family size, at over 6 persons, is well above the national
average, increasing vulnerability and the acuteness of socioeconomic problems. Hlousing conditions in Romnasettlements are
often poor and Roma access to education and social services inferior to that of the rest of the population, e g only 3 percent of
children complete secondary education The situation of the Roma represents the single most important social equity and poverty
issue facing Slovakia now
The current Government has moved rapidly on the legislative front with respect to discrimination against minorities It has
established a special Roma Office under the responsibility of a Deputy Prime Minister for Human Rights, Minorities and
Regional Developnmentthat aims to focus and coordinate better the initiatives already underway by Government, many donors,
and NGOs to help improve the situation of Roma communities The Bank provided a grant from the IDF in FY00 to help
strengthen this office A special assessment of Roma households in FY01 would examine the extent and characteristics of
poveny and form the basis for helping Government develop an effective medium term strategy for integiation and social and
cconomic development of the Roma population It would also help identify how future Bank support could be best directed
towards reducing poverty, and increasing opportunities among Roma households

12. The Government clearly recognizes that, aside from the particular challenge presented by
vulnerable Roma households, strong, sustained economic growth is the best strategy for reducing poverty
in Slovakia. The structural reforms implemented now will only yield dividends in the medium term,
however. Therefore, Government poverty reduction efforts will focus on: (i) reforming social assistance
and protection programs to improve equity, efficiency and sustainability; (ii) implementing anticorruption initiatives to reduce the role of "informal" payments and bribery in granting access to health
and education services; and (iii) encouraging the development of small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
by simplifying administrative barriers and reducing corruption. The Government appreciates that special
efforts will be required to address poverty in Roma communities and has requested that the Bank program
include analytical and operational support in this area. Already the Bank has provided an Institutional
Development Fund (IDF) grant to the recently established Roma Office with the mandate to empower and
assist Roma communities. Currently the Bank is supporting a detailed situation assessment of Roma
households as an input to the poverty and labor market analysis underway in FY01 (paras 62-63 provide
more detail on the relation between Bank supported activities and poverty reduction).
13. Gender Issues. The UNDP's 1998 National Human Development Report for Slovakia notes that
the equality of men and women is guaranteed by the Constitution of the Slovak Republic and that there
are no laws in existence that can be regarded as discriminating against women. A relatively high level of
employment of women continues to prevail in Slovakia, with women accounting for about 46 percent of
the economically active population. Employed women have concentrated in traditional job categories,
however, including health service, finance and insurance, commerce and education. This issue has

5
intensified over the 1990-97 period and the percentage of women in health and education has now passed
80 percent. A related issue is the concentration of women in lower income categories than men.
According to government statistics, women receive about 79 percent of men's wages for the same work.
While current legislation promotes the principle of equal pay for equal work the Human Development
report suggests that amendments could facilitate better application of the law. A number of organizations,
associations and initiatives devoted to the concerns of women are in place in Slovakia; they focus on
work with children, violence against women and social care. These groups were represented in the CAS
consultations. The Bank's analytic work on poverty and labor markets (para 59) will explore genderlabor market linkages in greater depth.
Economic Developments
14. While transition for other Central European countries was initially marked by the collapse of
economic growth, Slovakia registered average annual GDP growth of 5-6 percent starting in the mid1990s and inflation declined to single digit levels from 1995 (see Table 1). However, the rapid growth
that took place during 1994-97 became increasingly unsustainable in the absence of structural reforms and
with low levels of direct foreign investment. Nor did this growth contribute to increased labor demand:
the unemployment rate remained consistently in double digits.
15. The output recovery that started in 1994 initially seemed sustainable, as it was based on exports and
took place in a context of low fiscal and current account deficits. The prospects of continued high growth
were underpinned by the highest investment ratio in Central Europe in the mid-1990s. Beginning in
1996, however, the current account shifted to a persistent deficit in excess of 10 percent of GDP, driven
by a dramatic increase in fixed investment ratios to nearly 40 percent of GDP. The sharp investment
expansion did not raise too much concern initially, as the expectation was that such large investment
outlays would increase output and export capacity further. However, over time it became clear that much
of the increase in investment was driven by perverse incentives, stemming from generous public
guarantees on foreign borrowings, extensive political interference in bank lending, and weak corporate
governance. Widespread reports of corruption and the growing volume of enterprise losses progressively
revealed the underlying distortions.
16. In an effort to offset increasingly lax fiscal policies and prevent the current account from
deteriorating even further, the National Bank of Slovakia (NBS) tightened monetary policy from 1996 to
1998. This contained the current account deficit at 10 percent of GDP, but at the cost of very high real
interest rates (in excess of 20 percent p.a.) and repeated periods of turbulence in the foreign exchange
market. The tight monetary policy was ultimately not able to sustain the exchange rate in the face of
speculative attacks in the wake of the Russia crisis, forcing the NBS to float the currency (koruna) in
October 1998 after a sizable loss in reserves. More important, high real interest rates made it increasingly
difficult for enterprises to service their debts. This contributed to a significant increase in the proportion
of non-performing assets in the loan portfolios of domestic banks, eventually endangering the viability of
the financial system.
17. The new Government moved quickly to take strong stabilization measures, particularly in May
1999 following renewed pressures on the koruna. Partly as a result of these stabilization measures, GDP
growth, which had already decelerated to just over 4 percent of GDP in 1998, fell to less than 2 percent in
1999 and remained at about the same level in 2000, with weak domestic demand offsetting strong export
growth. End-year inflation increased to about 14 percent in 1999 as a consequence of currency
devaluation and the (temporary) effects of the Government's stabilization package, which included
adjustments in administered prices, value added tax rates, and import tariffs (temporary surcharge).
However, the core inflation rate remained in single digits, reflecting fiscal adjustment. Towards the end
of 2000 the broad inflation rate had eased to about 9 percent.

6

18. The stabilization measures resulted in a reduction in the primaly fiscal deficit of nearly 2
percentagepoints during 1999 and a reduction in the overall deficit to 3.6 percent of GDP. Tmhe
Governmentalso tightenedfinancialdiscipline(e.g. halting the provision of new credit guarantees)and
began structuralreformsin the enterpriseand financialsectors. Thesereforms resultedin a shatp decline
in fixed investment,which together with the tightened fiscal stance contributedto a reduction in the
current account deficit to 5.5 percent of GDP in 1999, from 10 percent in 1998. For 2000, the overall
fiscal deficit is estimatedto remain about 3.5 percent of GDP (exclusiveof privatizationrevenuesand
called guarantees),with rising deficits in the social security funds,due to high unemploymentand poor
collections,offsettingdeficitreduction measures,includingfurtheradjustmentsin administeredpriccsin
early 2000. The estimatedcurrent account deficitnarrowedto below 3 percent of GDP based onistrong
exportgrowth. TheGovernmenthas also undertakena comprehensiveprogramof bankingand entcrprise
reforms which laid the ground for privatizationof the state banks and implementationof debt workout
strategies for enterprises(detailedbelow in paras 28-32). The improved policy mix and the structural
reformscontributedto a sharp reductionin real interestrates, a nominal appreciationof the koruna and a
recovery in foreign exchangereserves from their low in May 1999 to about 4 months of imports by
November2000.
Table 1: Key Economic Indicators, 1994-2000
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
Real Sector
Real GDP growth (perccnt p a.)

1999

2000 est.

49

67

62

62

41

19

18

CPI Inflation (period average,
percent p a )

13 4

99

58

61

67

10 6

1] 5

Exports/GDP (percent)
Fixed Investment/GDP (percent)

61 6
28 3

59 8
26 4

55 2
34 2

58.0
35 9

61 2
38 0

61.8
30 S

77 4
28 8

General Government l
Overall balance/GDP

-1 2

04

-I 3

-5 0

-4 8

-3 6

-3 5

Primary balance/GDP

24

26

08

-3 2

-2.5

-0 8

-0 7

Expenditures/GDP

45 1

45 7

46 6

47 7

44 9

44.8

41 4

Debt/GDP

25 0

22 8

27 4

29.7

30 4

31 4

31 8

External Accounts
Current account deficit/GDP
Foreign Direct Investment/GDP

46
16

2.1
11

-10 6
10

-9 6
04

-10 0
18

-5.5
36

-2 7
80

Gross external debt/GDP
32.0
30 9
38 8
Net external debt/GDP
29
10.0
I/ Foi 1998-2000,excludesptivatizationrevenuesand calledgualantees

48.4
16 6

55.9
27 4

53 4
31 1

54 1
22 5

19. Financial markets have responded favorably to the recent performance. After the May 1999
measures, spreads over the German bund rate came down from as much as 1000 basis points (bp) in 1998
to about 400 bp. With a good outcome for 1999 in terms of reductions in the fiscal and current account
deficits, confidence in Government's continued commitment to economic adjustment, and the EtJ
decision to start accession negotiations with Slovakia, spreads have rapidly come down further to just
over 200 bp on a new Euro5OOmillion 10-year issue placed in the first half of 2000, and about 150 bp at
end 2000.

7

II. THE EXTERNALENVIRONMENTAND MACROECONOMIC
PROSPECTS
20. As a small and open economy,with trade volumesrepresentingwell over 100 percent of GDP,
Slovakiaremainsvulnerableto trade related shocks. Today trade focuses on Europe, and manufactures
dominateexports. Because of the macroeconomicimbalancesthat evolved in the mid-1990sand rising
debt ratios, Slovakiahad also become increasinglyvulnerableto swings in capitalflows, with pressures
on the Slovak Koruna first in 1997, and again in late 1998 in the aftermath of the Russia crisis,
compoundedby domesticpolitical uncertaintyimmediatelyfollowingthe 1998 Parliamentaryelections.
These pressurescontinued until May 1999 as internationalinvestors initially lacked confidencein the
Government'sstabilizationefforts. The fiscal adjustmentpackageintroducedin May 1999demonstrated
the Government'scommitmentto structural reforms and improved prospects for initiating accession
negotiationswith the EU, setting the stage for more stable conditionsfrom the middle of 1999. In the
course of 2000 the overall macroeconomicsituation has improved further, capital inflows have put
upwardpressureon the exchangerate, negotiationswith the EU have been formallyinitiatedand Slovakia
becamea memberof OECD.
21. The mediumterm scenarioof the CAS envisagesa continuationof the fiscal consolidationprocess,
implementationof structural reforms that have been initiated in 1999, and steady process towards EU
accessionaroundthe middle of the decade. On this basis, the rate of growth is expected to recover to
higher levels,from 1.9 percent in 1999and 2000 to 3.5 percent by 2001 and to 5 percent by 2003 (see
Table 2). Strongexport growthto the EU would offset weak growthin domesticdemand. This outcome
is consistentwith levels of fixed investmentsprojectedat about 30 percent of GDP, given the efficiency
improvementsassociated with banking sector reforms, improved corporate govemance, and higher
foreigndirect investment(FDI), the latter linkedin part to the privatizationof banks and utilities. Higher
imports of investmentgoods and supplies associated with higher FDI flows, and the phase-out of the
importsurchargeare likely to lead to an increasein the current accountdeficit to over 4 percent of GDP
in 2001. However, external debt ratios should decline substantiallyas FDI flows should exceed the
currentaccountdeficit.
22. The Government's proposed budget for 2001 implies an overall fiscal deficit in the order of 5
percent of GDP. However, the budget is based on very conservativerevenue forecasts. The fiscal
projectionsin the base case scenarioare based on a more moderatedeclinein the revenuesto GDP ratio
and envisagemaintainingthe overall deficit in 2001 at about 3.5 percent of GDP. This neutral fiscal
stanceis warrantedto supportthe recoveryof domesticdemand,whichremainedweakerin 2000 than had
been envisaged. Even so, maintaininga roughlyneutral fiscal stance will imply a significantfiscal effort
as Governmentwill need to offset the eliminationof the import surcharge and the reduction in the
corporatetax rate (from 40 to 29 percent). The privatizationof the 3 largest banks and divestituresin the
energysector would result in significantprivatizationrevenues in 2001. The scenario assumesthat the
privatizationrevenueswill be used to retire debt, includingNational PropertyFund(NPF) bondsof about
3 percentof GDP. This debt reductionwould offset a significantportionof new bank restructuringbonds
(equivalentto about 11 percent of GDP) issued by the Governmentto replace guaranteeslinked to the
carve-outof bad loans from bank portfoliosduring 1999and 2000 prior to privatization(see paras 30 and
31).
23. The scenario envisages continued fiscal consolidationin the 2002 election year, with further
improvementsin the primary balance,which is expectedto become positiveby 2004. The overall fiscal
deficit,inclusive of interest on the bank restructuringbonds to be issued in 2001, would decline from
2003 onwardsto no more than 2 percent of GDP in the mediumterm. The achievementof steadymodest
reductions in the primary balance would depend in part on measuresto reverse recent trends of rising
deficits in the social insurance funds (pensionsand health in particular), and better targeting of social
assistanceprograms. The tightenedfiscal stance in the medium term, combinedwith low growthin unit

8
labor costs and enterprise restructuring are expected to contain domestic demand. This should allow for a
somewhat moderating monetary policy and lower real interest rates, and lead to further modest reductions
in the current account deficit towards more sustainable levels which could be financed from non-debt
capital inflows, especially FDI.
24. The recovety of growth in the scenario outlined above is similar to the lower end of the growth
prospects in the (Government'sown scenario, as reflected in the Government/EU Joint Assessment.6 At
the higher enld,that scenario envisages growth reaching 4.5 percent by as early as 2001, and 6.5 percent
by 2004, in response to the ambitious reform program that Government envisages. This pattern of growth
may well result from a strong economic program if other circumstances, including external conditions,
remain favorable. The projections presented above reflect a more conservative assessment of outcomes
and of lags between reforms and their impact on growth. Risks associated with these projections stem
from political uncertainties, capacity constraints in policy implementation, external shocks and the pace
of EIJ accession. These are discussed in Section V below.
Table 2: Key Economic Indicators 1999-2005
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
200(5
Actual
Estimate Projected Projected Projected Projected Projected
Real Sector
RealGDP
Exports of goods and services
limportsof goods and services
Private consumption
Inflation (GDP deflator)

19
36
-6 1
01
86

1.8
18.5
10 1
-2 0
69

(percentage change)
35
45
10 0
99
12.4
10 8
31
43
65
50
( percent of GDP)
30 0
30 5

Fixed Investment
30.8
28 8
General Government
Ovcrall balance"'
-3 6
-3 5
-3 5
Primary balance"
-0 8
-0 7
-I 0
Debt
31.4
318
313
External Accounts
Current account deticit
-5 5
-2.8
-4 2
Foreign Direct Investnient
3.6
80
17 0
o/w privatization related
19
29
14 0
o/w non-privatization related
16
52
30
Gross external debt
53 4
54 1
44 6
Net external debt 2
31 1
22 5
66
1/ Excludes privatization revenues and calledguaranitees
2/ Equal grossdebt less foreignassetsof the NBS andbankingsecto,

50
9.9
9.1
43
45

5(0
96
86
42
40

50
96
8.9
44
3.5

30 5

30 5

30.5

-3 0
-0 7
310

-2 5
-0 4
307

-2 0
01
30 1

-1 6
0.3
293

-3 7
5.0
20
30
40 7
38

-3 2
30
00
3.0
40 0
28

-2 9
30
00
30
39.3
18

-2 7
30
00
30
38 8
07

III. THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM
Introduction
25. The Government's set of medium term economic policies are elaborated in the Joint Assessment of
Medium Term Economic Priorities of the Slovak Republic, prepared in consultation with the EU and
agreed in February 2000. The driving objective of the joint assessment is the implementation of the
acquis and other criteria for EU membership. While progress in harmonizing specific laws to meet the
acquis will be important, the Joint Assessment emphasizes that maintaining macroeconomic stability and
advancing on key governance and structural reforms are essential to strengthen the competitiveness in the

6Joint Assessment of Medium Term Economic Policy Priorities of the Slovak Republic, February 29, 2000.

9
EU market that will underpin the convergence of Slovak incomes to EU levels. The specific elements of
the program are discussed in greater detail in paras 29-40 below, with the exception of plans for
macroeconomic stabilization discussed in Section II above.
26. Maintaining macroeconomic stabilization underpins this program and is critical to enhancing
prospects for accession to the EIJ. In terms of structural reforms, the document clearly gives priority to
banking privatization and enterprise restructuring, linked to the broader promotion of private sector
development, including increased FDI. The Government acknowledges that meeting this objective will
require improvement in the business environrnent, including a reduction in administrative complexity and
harmonization of legislation and institutions with those of more fully developed market economies. The
authorities recognize that reducing corruption is an essential step to improve the business environment.
Their program emphasizes the close link between public administration reforms, including anti-corruption
measures, and private sector development. Finally the Government's program recognizes that structural
reforms are also required in the social sectors. Actions to improve governance, including those supported
under anti-corruption and broader public sector reform programs, will also be necessary to assure the
efficient delivery of quality social services to the poor. Education reforms to enhance labor market
flexibility and improve productivity will help ensure continued competitiveness in the European market.
Reforms in health delivery and financing can begin the reorientation of Slovakia's health system to cope
better with the changing health profile of society while improving cost effectiveness. Finally, reform of
the social protection system will be geared to: (i) promote the transition from a benefit-based system to an
insurance-based system; (ii) complement the pay-as-you-go pension system with a multi-pillar system;
(iii) target social assistance better; (iv) address the incentive effects of social assistance on employment;
and (v) harmonize the instruments of the system in order to make it more efficient and cost-effective.
27. The Government's program is appropriately ambitious, considering the need to respond quickly to
the opportunities facing Slovakia. To its credit, the Government has committed to this program with
significant actions. As discussed above (paras 18-19) the macroeconomic stabilization package
introduced by the Government in May 1999 and consistently implemented since then has restored
economic stability. The Government has underscored its commitment through the preparation of an 1MF
Staff Monitored Program (SMP) which is currently underway. Based on discussions now well underway
between the Government and IMF, the SMP will be broadly consistent with the macro scenario described
in Section II.
28. The Government is also well into implementation of the structural reform agenda. Its anticorruption program was formulated with inputs and support from NGOs, the Bank and bilateral partners,
a partnership which continues into the implementation phase. The bank privatization and enterprise
restructuring process is fully underway. The Government has completed the carve out of classified assets
of the major state-owned banks and privatization advisors have been selected. The legal framework for
bank regulation and supervision has been strengthened. The workout agency for bad debts has been
created and legal reforms enacted, including amendments to the bankruptcy law. The Government has
successfully sold Slovak Telecoms. Gas, power and other utilities are next on the agenda. These
initiatives for financial and enterprise restructuring have benefited from technical and financial support
from many partners, including USAID, the EU, the British Know How Fund, and the World Bank.
Structural Reforms
29. Enterprise and Financial Sector Reform. Slovakia's structural reforms during the 1994-98
period were highly uneven and failed to produce the expected results. Enterpnrse privatization involving
primarily direct sales followed the mass coupon privatization that had already taken place in the former
Czechoslovakia. The private sector share of GDP reached 80 percent, but poor public and private
governance, fraught with corrupt practices vitiated this achievement. Inadequate capital market

10

regulation allowed extensive "tunneling" or stripping of assets by the very investment funds that should
have been promoting strong corporate governance in the interest of shareholders (the public). The second
round of privatization involved direct sales of enterprises at favorable prices to groups politically
connected to the Government then in power. Both privatization waves thus failed to produce the expected
gains in efficiency and competitiveness, and the financial condition of enterprises deteriorated. The
losses of Slovak enterprises increased from 6 percent of GDP in 1995 to 10 percent of GDP in 1998, by
which time the number of loss-makers exceeded the number of profit-makers.
30. The financial condition of enterprises deteriorated because of weak bankruptcy and foreclosure
laws and a weak legal/regulatory framework for corporate governance, in addition to extensive political
interference in the lending of domestic banks. This interference affected not only the three large Stateowned banks (accounting for half of total assets in the banking sector), but also a number of mediumsized banks in which the State retained some shares. As a result of these developments, by end-1999 the
stock of classified loans amounted to almost 30 percent of GDP. The lack of financial discipline also led
to a large stock of tax and inter-enterprise arrears that in 1999 exceeded 10 and 30 percent of GDP,
respectively. Failure to privatize banks and to create an environment for enterprise restructuring during
four key transition years were probably the most negative legacies of this period. However, reforms in
other key areas stalled as well. Nearly all utilities and infrastructure services remained in the public
sector and the development of a regulatory framework lagged. Fiscal risks also increased due to previous
Government guarantees for major investments, primarily in roads and energy, or to inefficient operations,
as in the power and railways sectors. Reformnsin public administration and social services, including
pensions, health, and social assistance were also neglected for most of the 1994-98 period. 'Ihis had a
negative impact on economic efficiency and welfare, and further exacerbated fiscal pressures.
3 1. The current Government began quickly to formulate a comprehensive program of bank and
enterprise reforms, including bank restructuring and privatization, debt workout, and legal reforms.
Implementation of the program has laid the microeconomic foundations to restore and sustain high
groNvth. The Government has already completed diagnostic audits of the major public banks, appointed
financial advisors, re-capitalized the banks, and completed a carve-out of classified assets for about
SKIOO billion, equivalent to 12 percent of GDP, following which the banks' capital asset ratio reached
the international standard of 8 percent. In the meantime, the banks' advisors are preparing the way for
sales to strategic investors. In conjunction, legislation has strengthened the banking and supervision laws
and reformnedthe bankruptcy law.
32. The number of enterprises recording losses in 1998 were as many as 20,000 out of a total of 36,000
non-financial enterprises. Of these about 200 enterprises account for about 60 percent of all losses. The
Govemment is currently assessing the extent to which the bad assets carved out from the banks are
concentrated in this group of enterprises as well. The scope and complexity of the debt workout and
enterprise restructuring program will depend in part on the outcome o:fthis assessment. At the same time,
Government intends to divest the assets currently held by the State through the NPF in enterprises that
were previously designated as strategic (about SK54 billion7 , or 6 percent of GDP).
33. In the utilities and infrastructure sectors, the Government envisages a sharply reduced role for the
state. In 2000, the Government successfully sold a majority stake in Slovak Telecoms. Privatization of
government holdings in the gas and oil sectors is currently under preparation with transactions anticipated
during 2001. In addition, the Government and utility companies are preparing for future power sector
liberalization in line with EU accession requirements. The Government intends first to unbundle and then
privatize major segments of the power sector, which is currently operated by a state monopoly. The
Government recognizes the need to establish strong regulatory institutions to support these actions. In
7These

representequityassets. At the same time the NPF has receivablesof SK14billionfiompast privatizations.

11

addition, while energy price adjustments have already taken place during 1999 and 2000, tariffs remain
relatively low and industrial and commercial customers heavily cross-subsidize residential customers.
Further tariff adjustments and re-balancing will help prepare for privatization. This will likely require
compensating measures to offset the impact on poor households. In those infrastructure sectors with a
continuing state role, such as roads and transport, the focus would switch from large public investments to
improving operations and maintenance, and increasing private sector participation, while identifying and
implenmentingonly high benefit-cost investment options (a continuing focus of Government dialogue with
various civil society and local government interests). Past motorway investments, often financed by
expensive commercial and short term loans, have crowded out resources for maintenance. The
Government's recent decision to incorporate the State Road Fund into the overall budget should increase
public accountability and improve allocation of resources within the sector. In the case of Slovak
Railways, which faces major deficits and has been a drain on the budget, Government is undertaking a
restructuring program with support from the European Investment Bank (EIB). Investment requirements
in transport to meet EU accession requirements are significant; but overall, financing for infrastructure
would increasingly come from private sources, including FDI, while continuing to draw on EffBand other
European institutions such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
34. Slovakia's financial sector and enterprise reforms, and the associated legal reforms, are significant
steps towards creating an overall environment that encourages efficient private sector investment and the
creation of new employment opportunities. Government has also moved on other fronts to encourage
private investment, including FDI, by reducing corporate tax rates, streamlining procedures, and
improving the regulatory and tax regimes, based in part on an analysis undertaken by FIAS in 1999.
There has already been a response, notably some major FDI transactions this year: but there continue to
be important constraints to the development of new private enterprises, particular small and medium scale
enterprises that offer the greatest prospects for employment generation. These include, among others,
administrative corruption, as indicated by the survey results discussed in para 36 below, access to long
term financing, and high payroll taxes as part of the existing social security system and other labor market
rigidities. Government is moving also to address these issues through its overall public administration
rcforms, the anti-corruption program, legal and judicial sector reforms and the restructuring and
privatization of banks, which, in conjunction with an easing of public sector borrowing requirements,
would improve overall availability of finance for the private sector. Labor market reforms will be
considered in the broader context of reforms in the social security and assistance regimes that
Government is now initiating. In addition, FIAS is supporting the Govemment in further streamlining
administrative requirements for new businesses and setting an appropriate regulatory environment.
35. Public Governance. Re-orienting the role of the state to support a market economy more
effectively remains a key challenge. The formal institutional framework is in place and checks-andbalance mechanisms do exist at all levels; but there is too little accountability by public officials and
administrative corruption is widespread. Furthermore, the planned move to decentralize many important
state responsibilities to local governments will create new challenges, particularly in social service
delivery. Initial analytical work supported by the Bank identified the key public sector weaknesses as: (i)
large contingent liabilities reflecting the common use of state guarantees by the previous Government; (ii)
the proliferation of extra-budgetary funds; (iii) excess employment in the public sector and lack of a legal
framework for civil service; (iv) lack of control of subsidies and transfers; and (v) a low level of
accountability.
36. Fighting corruption has been one of the key priorities of the new Government which fully
recognizes its impact on both public service delivery and private sector activity (see Box 2). A recently
announced "National Program to Fight Corruption", which is posted on the internet and has been debated
publicly, stresses the corroding effect of corruption on economic life and envisages: (i) freedom of
information legislation, with resources allocated for implementation; (ii) increasing transparency, e.g. in

12
monitoring state asset management, and reducing the scope for conflicts of interests for politicians and
public officials through asset disclosure; (iii) reducing state intervention in economic management; (iv)
simplifying the regulatory framework; and (v) increasing public awareness about corruption. This
program also includes preparation of concrete measures to improve public governance in the executive
and judicial branches of government, reform the management of courts, and introduce better financial
control and audit mechanisms. Parliament has already adopted a Freedom of Information Act and steps
are underway to improve public sector procurement.
Box2: Corruptionin Slovakia-SurveyResults
At the requestof the Government,the WorldBank,with USAIDco-financing,supportedthree surveyson corruptionin Slovakia,
withquestionnairesdesignedwith the help of TransparencyInternationaland pollingby a localNGO The surveys,in late 1999,
coveredovera 1000households,about400 enterprisesand a similarnumberof publicofficials,and containinformationon both
perceptionsof corruptionand actual experienceof bribingpublic officials,providingkey insightson the incidenceand cost of
corruption,the sectors that are most affected,and institutionalweaknesseswithin Government The findingswere prcsented
publiclyin February2000 and supportedthe design of the anti-corruptionprogramannounced
in March 2000 The surveys
confirmthat corruptionis widespreadand affectsall key sectorsof the economy Individualcitizens were most affected in the
social sectors,with 60 percent indicatinginformalpaymentsor bribes to obtain hospital servicesand betweena quarter and a
third of respondentsindicatingpayments for other medical servicesand access to higher education Customsand regulatory
bodiesthat issuelicensesand permitsare the publicentitiesin which corruptionmost affectsenterprises,with aboutone-thirdof
enterprisesreportingbribesto these offices All three groups of respondentsidentifiedthe judicial systcmas a major locusof
corruption,with enterprisesreporting frequentbribesto judges and citingslowcourts as well as slow executionofjustice as the
most importantobstaclesto doingbusiness,whilehouseholdsreportpayingfrequentbribes tojudgesand court personncl Courts
are perceivedto be inefficientand slow, withbribesnecessaryto speedthem up The institutionsperceivedto be the least coriupt
are the Presidency,the armedforces and local governments.

37. Social Sector Reforms. Although social sector outcomes are still satisfactory in relation to
Slovakia's income level, there are serious problems which threaten the sustainability of these outcomes.
Health care in Slovakia suffers from a number of weaknesses making it difficult to devise and implement
a coherent strategy for reform. Serious problems have emerged in health finance and in the structure of
health services. Inter-sectoral arrears are rapidly mounting. Eighty percent of all health insurance
contributors are in arrears to the health insurance companies. The state-owned enterprises are the worst
offenders; but the central government budget is also in arrears to the insurance companies for
contributions covering 3.2 million economically inactive citizens (out of a total population of 5.4 million).
As a result, insurance companies are in arrears to providers and providers are in arrears to suppliers. In
addition to health financing, equally serious problems are emerging in the provision of health care.
Health care workers, including doctors and nurses, are so seriously underpaid that they are now one of the
lowest paid groups in society; management capacity is severely limited and incentives to improve the
quality of health services and resource usage are weak. Education suffers from inadequate funding and
unclear lines of responsibility. In primary and secondary education, devolution of responsibility to the
county level, without commensurate transfer of funds, has made it difficult for poor counties to cope and
threatens education quality. Teachers' salaries are so eroded that entrants to the profession are drying up
and those who do now become teachers do so as a last resort and lack motivation. In both the health and
education sectors, corruption is rife. Social protection in Slovakia encompasses on-going programs of
unemployment insurance and social assistance and a pension system, all of which are in need of reform to
assure sustainability. The pension system has run a deficit in recent years due to ad hoc increases to
adjust benefits for inflation and reduced revenues resulting from payment arrears on the part of state
employers, increased unemployment and the growing informal sector. With rising unemployment, the
Employment Fund has been hard pressed to pay out unemployment insurance benefits. Expenditures on
social assistance are relatively high (surpassing 1 percent of GDP), but cover an unusually high
proportion of young people, probably at the expense of families.
38. Across the social sectors, the appropriate line ministries do grasp the magnitude and complexity of
the problems; but because of the common structural foundation of most of these problems, they are not

13
equippedto addressthem on their own. The Governmentfully appreciatesthe need to formulatebroad
structural reforms for the social sectors while building on detailed sector specific analyses. The
complexityof this challenge inevitablyimplies a medium term time frame for implementation,with
analyticand administrativecapacitybuildingnow underway.
Environment
39. The 1998CEMfor Slovakiareviewsthe status of the environmentand examinesthe implicationsof
EU accession for environmentalpolicy, including an estimate of investmentsrequired for compliance
with the EU guidelinesand directivesin this area. The reportnotes that the emissionof air pollutantshas
fallen substantiallysincethe late 1980sdue to both the contractionof particularindustriesand to emission
reduction measures. Ambient air qualityhas also improved. In addition, 86 percent of waste water is
currentlydischargedto treatmentplants, 87 percent of which have biologicaltreatmentand abouthalf of
all householdsare linked to sewer systems. Produced waste decreasedby close to 30 percent between
1992 and 1995, enabling a reduction in the number of landfill sites. Notwithstandingthese positive
developments,the remaining agenda is substantial particularly in a context of acceleratingeconomic
growth.
40. Complyingwith EU environmentallegislationinvolvesnot only legal harmonization,but also a
strategy that will allow Slovakia to meet EU standards rapidly and cost-effectively. The quality of
drinkingwater failsto meet EU standardsin many communities. This is not a matter of microbiological
contamination,which mightpose a seriousthreat to health. Rather,the problemis linked to the presence
of minerals and pollutants, arising from either the water source, or poorly maintained distribution
infrastructure. Slovakia will need significant investments to improve raw water quality, upgrade
treatmentfacilitiesand replaceparts of the waterdistributionsystem. Preliminaryestimatessuggestthat
overall environmentrequirementscould amount to around US$5-6 billion, includingUS$2.5billion for
investmentsin water,US$1.5-2.5for investmentsin air quality, and US$0.9billion in waste management.
This wouldimply annualexpendituresaroundUS$300milliondistributedover a period of 20 years. It is
expected that EU structural funds and support from EBRD, EIB and private sector investors will help
meet these investment requirements. In addition, policy makers will also need to strengthen
environmentalregulationsand enforcement.
IV. THE WORLDBANKGROUP'SASSISTANCESTRATEGY
Reviewof the Past AssistanceProgram
41. Following Slovakia's independencein 1993, the Bank began to prepare an active program of
assistance. The Bank released the third tranche of Slovakia'sone-thirdshare of a StructuralAdjustment
Loan (SAL)that had been extendedto Czechoslovakiaand approvedan EconomicRecoveryLoan (ERL)
for US$80 millionto support the initial phase of structuralreforms of the new Slovak Governmentand
short-tennfiscal adjustmentmeasures. The Bank also loaned US$55 millionto support investmentsand
institutionaldevelopmentin telecommunicationsand initiatedthe preparationof other investmentprojects
as well as an adjustmentoperation to support enterprise and financial sector restructuring and public
sectorreforms. However,electionsin 1994led to a Governmentwhich was not receptiveto WorldBank
advice. In any event,an assistanceprogramwouldhave been difficultto implementas the momentumfor
reform also stalled at this time. The main Bank activitiesduring 1994-98includedthe implementationof
the Telecommunicationsproject which washighly successfulin helpingto pave the way for privatization
of the sector,and the preparationof a comprehensiveCEM in FY98 that focussedon EU accessionissues.
The IFCprogramin Slovakiahas also beenrelativelylimitedwith US$80 millionapprovedfor 5 projects
through FY00, whereas the MultilateralInvestment GuaranteeAgency (MIGA) has to date provided 7
guaranteesfor US$67million.

14
Current Activities
42. ITheWorld Bank Group initially responded to the present Government's request for assistance with
an expanded program of policy advice and technical assistance. Initial collaboration focused on
enterprise and financial sector restructuring, and support to the Government's anti-corruption and public
sector reform program, and utilities privatization. As this program proceeded, the Governmcnt extended
its request to include financial support which now fonrs the base case of the CAS. The Bank's analytical
efforts have also expanded to include a review of poverty and labor markets, a situation assessment of
Roma households, a survey of the transport sector, and a social sector expenditure review. The frontloading of analytical work will continue under the CAS to support the Government's demand for prompt
and focused advice. flowever the Government also recognizes that selected lending operations can
effectively supplement this advice with concrete support to the implementation of the reform program.
This has led to preparatory work on a small number of investment and adjustment operations in addition
to the EFSAL and Social Benefits Administration Loan, both of which are well advanced.
43. The initial phase of the assistance program that has been underway since 1999 has also included
fiduciary assessments with respect to the procurement and financial management systems, anticipating
that such "due diligence" activities would be important not only as a basis for possible lending but that
they would also contribute relevant technical support for improving public and private sector governancc
more generally (see Box 3). A private sector accounting and auditing assessment (the first in the ECA
region) is underway for completion in early 2001, while a joint IMF/Bank Financial Sector Assessment
will take place in late 2001, once privatization of the state banks is well underway. Combined witli the
earlier CEM (FY98) and the on-going social sector expenditure review, the Slovakia program is well
positioned to benefit from a full set of "due diligence" assessments.
44. The current program also corresponds well to the relatively weaker areas of country economic
perfornance. In recent years, Slovakia has improved performance with respect to social policies and
economic management, while structural policies (in particular financial sector and banking, and
environmental policies) and public sector management (in particular iransparency, accountability and
corruption, and efficiency of fiscal revenues and expenditures) have continued to lag. T'he Government's
own policy agenda now also emphasizes these areas, thus strengthening the complementarity betwcen the
Bank's current ESW and operational program and the Government's resolve to address these weaknesscs.
Box 3: Fiduciary Assessments in Slovakia
In support of the G,overnment's anti-corruption program and considering the renewed prospects for Bank lending, the
Government and Bank agreed on the importancc of early fiduciary assessments The recenltly completed country Orocurement
assessment confirms the progress already made by the adoption in 1999 of new procuitement legislation compatible with EU
standards, while noting that a number of the procurement methods envisaged in the law could be improved further to ensure
transparency and competition Similarly, the establishment of an independent procurement office is a major step forward, but a
number of related functions require further strengthening, such as training of piocurement professionals and procurement
planning 'T'heseand further strengthening of the procurement law, are part of the proposed action plan under discussion with the
authorities The financial accountability assessment highlights that basic systems are in place and technical skills strong, but
notes a need for greater transparency and public accountability, while modernizing to bring local standards to international
norms, particularly in the contcxt of EU accession Current efforts to improve public and private governance overall need to be
complemented by improvements in accounting (to make it more flexible and responsible) and auditing (by external auditors)
Financial management risks are diminishing as a result of the public finance reforms underway, such as eliminating extrabudgetary Funds and limiting the use of state guarantees The greater transparency that will result from these and other reformis
in public expenditure management is expected to reduce the misuse of public funds and administrative conruption in general

The Role of Other Partners
45. 'T'heIMF supported macroeconomic stabilization in Slovakia with a 1994 Standby Agreement. 'I'he
Government that took office later that year let this program lapse in 1995. In 1998 as the new
Government began to implement its stabilization program, the dialogue with the INF again strengthened.

15

The authorities worked closely with the IMF in the design of fiscal policy and have maintained continuing
consultations on the medium-term macroeconomic framework. While the current success of stabilization
measures have lead the authorities to conclude that a Standby Program is not currently needed, the
Government has requested a one-year IMF Staff Monitored Program (SMP) for 2001-2002 to increase the
transparency and credibility of its commitment to maintaining macroeconomic stability. Agreement on
the program is expected early in 2001.
46. European institutions are stepping up their support to Slovakia as well. Most of their financial
support is earmarked for investments and related technical assistance in specific sectors--in particular
infrastructure, agriculture, rural development, and environment. This assistance would, generally, be
adequate to meet external financing needs in these sectors (within the Government's overall expenditure
and administrative constraints). With strong prospects for timely accession to the EU, the Government
expects that the European institutions will be the major source of official financing in Slovakia over the
coming years. Support from the EU itself could, in principle, exceed about EurolOO million (in grants)
annually8 . Ihe EIB expects its program to be about Euro 900 million over the 2000-2002 period, split
equally between public and private projects, largely concentrated in infrastructure (transport, energy,
telecommunications, water, sewerage and waste). The EBRD is also expanding its program in Slovakia9 ,
focusing on privatization, small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), strategic investors, and municipal
infrastructure. These European institutions will be the World Bank's main external partners in Slovakia,
and are the lead sources of official financing for the sectors on which their programs are focussed.
47. With sectoral investment programs well supported by others, the Bank's comparative advantage is
to help Slovakia complete its transformation reforms, improve public sector performance, and promote
human development. The Government also considers the Bank Group best placed to provide support in
these areas. Moreover, each of these areas is integrally linked to reducing poverty in Slovakia (paras 6263 summarize these linkages). The implementation of the Government's broad reform agenda is expected
to dominate the FY01-03 period of this CAS. Even in its areas of comparative advantage the Bank is
only one among many partners and as the Government proceeds with the implementation of its reform
agenda, the Bank will continue to maintain the effective external partnerships that have already been
established particularly with both multi- and bilateral donors. Coordination with other partners,
especially EU PHARE, will be key to ensuring that Slovakia's development needs are effectively met.
Beyond this CAS period, as Slovakia approaches EU accession, the role of the Bank will evolve toward
even more focussed and limited activities analogous to its partnership with those neighboring countries
currently in the first rank of EU accession candidates.
48. During the preparation of this CAS consultations were held with a variety of civil society groups
(as detailed in Annex BI 1), including NGOs, labor representatives, media and the private sector. Given
the clear indication of the priorities of a democratically elected Government itself with strong roots in the
NGO sector and the World Bank's relatively limited time and resource frame for Slovakia, consultations
focused primarily on confirming the relevance of these priorities and seeking advice on the
implementation of the proposed activities. However, as CAS preparation proceeded, the dialogue
between some civil groups and the Government, combined with consultations conducted in the course of
World Bank analytic work has led to an increased emphasis in the CAS on policy advice related to
investment options in the transport sector and tariff strategies for the energy sector. Continuing
consultation during the implementation of the CAS may well lead to similar adjustments as the World
Bank's involvement deepens in selected areas. The Government's commitment to openness and
FromEU Phare,particularlyfor technicalassistance,and pre-accessionprogramsfor environment,transport,
agricultureand ruraldevelopment(ISPAand SAPARD).
9 EIB's cumulativelendingto Slovakiasince 1993 is about Eurol.2 billion(approved,of whichEuro950million
signedand Euro700milliondisbursed),and EBRDhas providedEuro400rnillion.
8

16
consultation led to their posting a Slovak translation of an earlier draft of the CAS text on a Government
website in addition to the Bank's posting the English version on its own Slovak website.
Box4: Slovakia CAS: Selectivityof World Bank Support
The proposedassistanceprogramenvisagessignificantBank Group technicaland financialsupportto Slovakiaafter a limited
role in the past Since 1993total Bank Group assistancehas amountedto less than US$300miliion, of which about half was
from IBRDand half fiom IFC/MIGA The Europeaninstitutionswerethe mainsourceof officialsupport,withcommitmentsof
close to UJSS2billion Privatesourcesrepresentedthe bulkof overallfinancing,accountingfor about90 percent of totalexternal
debt of US$105 billion by end-1999 The CAS envisagesIBRD/IFCcommitmentsin the order of US$500millionfor the next
three years in the base case, and about US$850million in the high case The Euiopean institutionshave indicatedplans fol
commitmentsin the order of US$1.5 billion over the same peiiod Financing, includingFDI, from private sources at over
US$3.0billionper annumon averagewouldcontinueto representthe majorproportionof overallgrosscapital inflows
The BankGroup's operationalprogramfocuseson key areas that arc complementaryto other officialdonorsor lenders,including
the private sector (IFC), namely: financial and cnterprisesectot restructuring, transformation reforms in energy and
infrastiucture,public sector administrativereforms, includinganti-corruption,regulatoryand judicial leform,and human and
socialdevelopment,includingpovertyreduction The Bank's programwould supportindividualinvestmentsin public finance
managemenit,
juLdiciary
reform,the socialsectors,and, throughthe GlobalEnvironmentalFund (GEF),in environment Physical
investmentsin all other sectors- infrasttucture,energy, uiban and rural development,agriculture-are left to other official
sources, in particularthe Europeaninstitutions,and the private sector With respect to the overall structuralreforms, the
Governmentconsidersthe World Bank Group to be best placed to provide leadershipamong donors to its structuralrefornm
program,and this role is also acknowledgedby the EU, the key externalpartner The proposedpolicy-bascdlending- more
than three quartersof all lendingin both baseand high cases- buildson the technicalsupportthat the Bank is alieadyproviding
and wouldhelp the Governmentimplementits reformprogramas well as assist in financingthe fiscal cost of the reformsas they
are undertaken.

The World Bank Group's Proposed Assistance Program
49. TIheoverarching strategic objective for the proposed CAS is to put Slovakia on a path of rapid and
sustained growth that will promote convergence with its Western European neighbors and improve living
conditionisparticularly among the most vulnerable groups in the population. Specifically, the CAS would
entail three clusters of activities: (i) completing the transformation reforms to restore and sustain high
growth and stability; (ii) strengthening governance and institutions, to promote, inter alia, convergence
with the acquis and European practice; and (iii) improving social security, enhancing human
development, and meeting environmental standards.
Objective I. Completing the Tranisformnation
Reforms
50. To date Bank support has focused on helping the Government design a comprehensive program for
bank privatization, enterprise workouts and associated regulatory and legal reforms. As discussed in para
31 above, the Government has already implemented important components of the program, including the
carving-out of classified assets in preparation for bank privatization, and due diligence requirements
associated with the privatization process with the help of financial advisors. Majority sale of one of the
two largest banks, and minority sale of the other, and implementation of key elements of the governance
component of the program, are expected to be completed during the first quarter of 2001. Based on this
work undertaken over the past year or so, and the progress already made in implementation, the assistance
program includes a proposed Enterprise and Financial Sector Adjustment loan (EFSAL) in the order of
US$300 million (FY01). The EFSAL would be multi-tranched over the 2001-2002 period, with
benchmarks related both to progress in bank privatization, enterprise restructuring, and the framework for
external and internal corporate governance and the maintenance of a supporting macroeconomic
framework in conjunction with the SMP. It would provide about two-thirds of the estimated annual

17
interest payments on the bonds issued by Government to re-capitalize the state owned banks prior to
privatization (amounting to 1.1 percent of GDP p.a. during the first two years).'I
51. Preparation of the EFSAL already included technical support for measures to improve corporate
governance, such as bankruptcy reform and supervision of non-bank financial institutions. An IDF grant
to support bankruptcy reform, including judicial training, was approved in FY00. IFC's program would
also focus on the financial sector, in particular improving the quality and effectiveness of financial
intermediation. IFC's participation in the privatization of state-owned banks in conjunction with the
EFSAL is proceeding with a planned share of up to 12.5 percent in the equity of a major state owned
bank, in parallel with a similar participation by EBRD, both in support of full privatization to a strategic
investor later in 2001. IFC would also support smaller private financial institutions to become
competitive in local and regional markets, and promote the nascent housing finance market.
52. A labor market and social assistance assessment of the impact of the EFSAL (March 2000)
suggested some increase in unemployment could result from further enterprise restructuring under
EFSAL (as a result of the restructuring and privatization of banks and utilities, the workout of bad loans,
and the strengthening of bankruptcy legislation). The assessment noted, however, that mitigating
programs already in place in the Slovak Republic were effective in cushioning the social and poverty
impact of restructuring. These include: (i) the employment programs managed by the National Labor
Office, which include the unemployment insurance and active labor market programs; (ii) the social
assistance program administered by a network of regional welfare offices; (iii) social insurance programs
(pensions and short-termnbenefits) administered by the Social Insurance Agency; and (iv) the new
Guarantee Fund also administered by the National Labor Office. The Slovak Government has taken steps
over the years to streamline these programs, and the basic parameters of the unemployment insurance and
social assistance programs provide an appropriate safety net for the unemployed and a floor of protection
for the poor. However, both this assessment and the related ESW on labor markets and poverty identify
possible policy adjustments to cope better with increased workloads and fiscal stress in each of these
programs, and to improve incentives to promote job search and employment creation. Such policy
actions will also contribute to preventing the emergence of welfare dependency, and ensuing poverty
traps. T'here are also significant managerial issues that need to be addressed to deal with fraud and abuse
that has come about with the growth of the informal sector and the increased numbers of unemployment
insurance and social assistance beneficiaries. The Slovak Government has also taken steps to improve
labor market flexibility, although more could be done to encourage restructuring by reducing associated
labor costs.
53. In the event, it appears likely that the increase in unemployment will not be pronounced for a
number of reasons: first, the slowdown in growth has likely bottomed out with increases in labor demand
more likely; second, most of the redundant labor was probably already laid-off during 1999 and 2000 as
the Government's strong resolve to deal with the problem became apparent; third, as pressaged in the
EFSAL assessment, the Government's restructuring of active labor market programs toward low wage
public works has begun to bring down the registered unemployment rate; and finally a large share of the
classified debt, with which the EFSAL program will deal, relates to enterprises that have been extensively
tunneled and that probably have been reduced to a shell with all the debts but very few assets. In any
case, the Government is committed to maintain effective employment and social assistance programs and
to improve incentives and mechanisms for reintegration into the labor force at a reasonable cost. Related
World Bank ESW on Labor Markets and Poverty and the implementation of the Social Benefits
Administration Project (para. 59) will further support this effort during the implementation of the EFSAL
and beyond.
' The grossupfrontcost of bankrestructuringto Governmentis in the order of US$2billionon accountof the assets
carve-out,of whichonly a portionwould be recoveredfromthe sale of the banks and recoveryfrom creditors.

18

54. The remaining agenda for transformation reforms also includes infrastructure, in particular the
state-owned energy sector. The Public/Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPAIF) will provide
advice on the regulatory framework for public utilities. The Bank program would provide further
technical support for privatization and liberalization in the energy sector, which would promote
Slovakia's efforts to meet the requirements of the acquis in liberalizing energy markets. The impact of
long overdue price adjustments and design of compensatory, targeted subsidies could receive attention in
this context. IFC would consider opportunities to invest in privatized utilities, building on its experience
in infrastructure to play a pioneering role in transactions associated with privatization, and enhancing
credibility of the privatization process. A review of the transport sector is being completed and
subsequent discussions with Govemment may identify further reforms in administering the road and rail
networks and in investment evaluation criteria, taking into account, inter alia, the views of concerned
civil groups. Under a high case scenario, policy-based lending would support privatization of energy and
oil and gas companies following unbundling, other infrastructure management and policy reforms, as well
as the establishment of the associated regulatory framework.
55. Expanding opportunities for the poor in Slovakia means, first and foremost, creating new jobs
through a pattem of growth that combines increased private investment and exports, in particular by
smaller domestic firms and foreign investors. IFC's program (see Box 5) includes support for SMEs and
leasing, and selective restructuring of industrial enterprises. IFC advice will also focus on improving
corporate governance and supporting restructuring efforts thereby creating an environment conducive to
private business development, in particular FDI, which is also a focus of FIAS and MIGA activities.
FIAS is completing an assessment of barriers to investment, as a follow-up to its recent work on measures
to improve the legal, regulatory, and tax environment for FDI, while MIGA is supporting privatization
marketing and attracting FDI, and would provide guarantees as opportunities arise. IFC would work with
joint-ventures where foreign partners are less well known to help raise long term finance, and provide
long-term financing to first tier local firms investing in the Central European region. Based on business
prospects that are currently being considered, total IFC investments are expected to be in the order of
US$100 million during FYOI-03", with upward flexibility in case a significant number of investment
opportunities arise in connection with banking and utilities privatization.
56. While the Government will look primarily to the IMF for advice on maintaining a sound
macroeconomic framework (in the context of the SMP), the Bank would continue to monitor closely
macroeconomic developments which will support the proposed base and high case lending. The Bank
would particularly assist to strengthen public finance management in line with the request of the Ministry
of Finance.

Sector
Financial
Sector
Industrial
Sector
SocialSector

Box 5: IFCInvestmentPrioritiesin Slovakia
TransitionObjective
IFCOperation
Movemajorbanks out of state ownership,transfer Pre or post-privatizationinvestmentin supportof
of know-howand best practicefrom selected
privatizationof state-ownedbanks
strategicpartner,improvethe qualityand efficiency
of financialintermediationin Slovakia
Promotethe transformationand technological
Investmentsinjoint ventureswith significant
modernizationto sustainproductiveemployment developmentimpact
as a meansof alleviatingpoverty
Supportfor SMEs throughfinancialintermediaries
Createa sustainablepensioninsurancesystem
Investmentmna third pillarpensioninsurance
scheme
Promoteprivateinvestmentin health care and
educationto improvequalityand relievethe burden Catalyzeprivateinvestmentin educationand health
on publicfinance
care facilities

IFC's investments (for own account) were US$80 million during FY97-00.

19
Objective2: StrengtheningGovernanceandInstitutionis
57. Almost immediatelyafter the 1998elections,the Governmentrequestedsupportfrom the Bank in
initiating an anti-corruptionprogram. Thus far the Bank has worked with the authoritieson both a
diagnosticsurvey and in the initial formulationof a program, includingparticipatingwith other donors
and civil societyrepresentativesin a Governmentsteering committeeto guide the process. The initial
diagnostic work identified the followingpriorities:(i) preventinghigh-level corruption; (ii) reforming
public finance management; (iii) making service delivery more accountable, eliminating unofficial
payments;(iv) reformingthe legal and judicial systems;(v) strengtheningfinancialsector and corporate
governance;and (vi) promoting public transparencyand oversightby NGOs and the media. Several
Bank-supportedactivitiesalreadyaddressthese areasincludingfinancialsectorand corporategovernance,
legal training (under the IDF grant for bankruptcy reform), and technical assistance to the Finance
Ministry for better public finance management. Other work to help stem corruption and advance
transparencyand accountabilityincludesrecent Bank assessmentsof Slovakia's public procurementand
financialaccountabilityframeworks,preparedin anticipationof resumedBank lending.
58. In determiningjoint priorities, the Bank and the Governmenthave established arrangementsfor
regular coordination with the EU, a key contributor to public sector reform. Based on current
understandings,in the base case program Bank financial support would be provided primarily for
technicalassistanceand informnation
technologyfor public financemanagement,and judicial reform,with
a focuson improvingmanagementof courts.
Objective 3. ImnprovingSocial Security, Enhance HumnanDevelopmnenit,
anid Meeting Environmental
Standards
59. Bank support to the social sectors has focused first on the emerging crisis in the social security
system. The current social security system faces increasing deficits; 2 million workers supporting I
millionpensionersand 0.5 million unemployedrepresentsan unsustainablesituation. As a first step, a
proposedSocialBenefitsAdministrationProject (FY01) wouldhelp improvebasic informnation
systems,
and prepare for pension reforrn. A second area of emphasis is the ongoing, in-depth review of the
situationof Roma householdsand communitieswhich as discussedabove representthe most significant
challengeto povertyreduction in Slovakia. Third, the ongoingassessmentof poverty and labor markets
should contributeto better social assistance policies consistent with job growth, gender equity and
targeted support to the poorest households. Fourth, a social sectors expendituresand policy review
(FYOI) will provide a frameworkfor a strategy for reducing corruptionand increasingaccountability,
improvingaccessof vulnerablegroups,and increasingcost effectivenessin line with the evolvinghealth
and educationneedsof Slovakia.
60. The proposed social sector lending program (beyond the planned FY0I Social Benefits
AdministrationLoan)would dependprimarilyon the depth and pace of sectorreforms. In the base case,
the lending program would likely concentrate on a single sector (preparation of a possible future
operation in the health sector is underway) and include investments to improve access for Roma
householdsand other groups at risk. In the low case scenario,Bank analyticalsupport would continue
assuming a viable constituencyfor eventualreforms. In a high case scenario,the Bank could provide
additionalpolicy-basedlendingto supporta reformpackage which might includepension reforn, social
sector financingreform, and/or administrativerestructuringfor improved service delivery. The latter
could includeactionsin a numberof areas includingdecentralization,developmentand implementationof
regulations and incentives for private sector investment (e.g. in health delivery, private pensions,
vocationaltraining),governance(e.g. rationalizingstaff to improvesalariesand reduce genderinequities
in pay and positions,and tighteningoversightand accountability),or targeted efficiencyimprovements

20
(e.g. upgraded information systems, better and tightened criteria for social assistance, a higher education
strategy, revised health protocols emphasizing outpatient care).
61. World Bank support in the environment sector would be limited in view of the programs being
considered by others, in particular the European institutions. It would focus mainly on (ilobal
Environmental Facility (GEF) operations for industrial co-generation and geothermal projects which
would complement the support that the EU provides Slovakia to meet EU standards and requirements. In
response to Government interest and in the absence of alternative sources of funds, an IDF grant is under
consideration to help promote capacity to implement cultural heritage and landscape protection linked to
the realization of Slovakia's eco-tourism potential.
The Assistance Program and Poverty Reduction
62. Poverty reduction priorities permeate all three clusters of the proposed assistance program. The
World Bank's general knowledge and understanding of poverty issues during transition has increased in
part based on the work that was prepared for the Prague 2000 meeting. Specifically for Slovakia, several
key activities contributing to poverty-related analysis began already in FY00, for completion in FY0 1, so
that they can contribute as soon as possible to the design of Government programs, including related
support from the World Bank and other partners. The preparation and appraisal of all policy-based
lending would include an assessment of the operation's poverty impact; if adverse impact is identified, the
operation would also include measures for amelioration.
63. Restoring sustainable and rapid growth is the basis for reducing unemployment and poverty
generally. To assure that growth is also equitable, banking, enterprise, corporate governance and
regulatory reforms would address key microeconomic constraints to more labor-intensive growth, as
would IFC and MIGA support for increased foreign direct investment in Slovakia. Anti-corruption
efforts, public sector administration, judicial, and other governance reforms would not only help improve
the environment for sustainable growth, but would also increase access to public services and open the
way toward greater empowermnentof vulnerable groups. The design of Bank support for social and
human development would have a strong poverty focus especially in terms of more equitable access.
Education and labor policy reforms also support employment growth and gender equity. More direct
social protection interventions may be needed to address poverty issues, including those resulting from
social exclusion. Government social programs (social assistance, health, education) are adequately
funded in the aggregate, and indeed particular outlays for social assistance and health could exceed
sustainable levels. Therefore, better targeting of social expenditures, complemented by financing reforms
in the pension, health and education sectors would be a priority area for support. Progress towards
achieving the poverty objectives of the assistance program would be monitored on a regular schedule.
Monitoring will use benchmarks identified in the course of the analytic work now underway and
discussed and agreed with Government and stakeholders.
CAS Lending Scenarios and Triggers and Exposure
64. Base Case. The base case scenario posits: (i) satisfactory macroeconomic performance, in
particular maintaining fiscal outcomes in line with further reducing the primary deficit and containing the
Government debt to GDP ratio along the lines of the medium tern scenario presented above and as
indicated by the INMFSMP now being finalized; (ii) good progress in utilizing the analysis and technical
assistance from the World Bank in the formulation of an agenda for structural reforms, and (iii)
substantial progress in financial sector and enterprise restructuring (see Table 3 for a more detailed
description of performnancetriggers). The EFSAL would be part of the base case. In the base scenario,
there would be no policy-based lending after the EFSAL, largely due to the expectation that the
Government would need an extended time frame to formulate, implement, and/or build consensus for
completing the transformation agenda and extending reforms to the social sectors. Total Bank lending

21
during the CAS period would be in the order of US$415 million, with one investment/technical assistance
operation each in FY02 and FY03 (supporting public sector finance management and judicial reform and
social sector investment respectively). The Social Benefits Administration Project would be implemented
under all scenarios.
65. High Case. Taking into account the Government's track record to date and intentions for the
coming years, the Bank's program is evolving toward a high case scenario. Under this scenario, all of the
performance criteria of the base case would apply. In addition, Government would need to demonstrate
rapid implementation of structural reforms incorporating the following benchmarks: compliance with the
first and second tranche conditions of the EFSAL; substantial reform and privatization in utilities and
infrastructure sectors, including establishment of the utilities regulatory agency; implementation of public
administration reforms, including the anti-corruption program, and implementation of steps to ensure
sustainability of the pension system and health insurance. The high case lending program would include
a Utilities and Infrastructure Adjustment Loan in FY02 and a Social Sectors and Social Security
Adjustment Loan in FY03. In this scenario, lending could total about US$765 million, of which the three
policy-based operations would account for US$650 million. Progress against the triggers for the high case
would be assessed by late 2001, taking into account implementation experience under the EFSAL and the
IMF's SMP.
66. Low Case. Finally, the low case would involve a scenario in which reforms stall and
macroeconomic balances deteriorate for reasons other than significant external shocks. In view of
progress already achieved with respect to macroeconomic stability and enterprise and financial sector
reforms, low probability is attached to this case. In this scenario there would be no further lending, and
non-lending activities would be limited to selected areas where receptivity for Bank advice would still
warrant such support. Given the timing and phasing of lending in the base case program, lending
commitments in the low scenario over the FYO1-03 would include at least UIS$35million for the Social
Benefits Administration Project.
67. Table 3 below provides a comparison of proposed lending under the various scenarios, and the
triggers for each. In both the base and high cases, policy-based lending would represent a very large
share of total lending (about 70 percent and 90 percent respectively), with commitments concentrated in
the first half of the CAS period. This reflects the demonstrated commitment of the authorities to move
ahead quickly with structural reforms over a broad front, in order to restore rapid growth and accelerate
accession to the EU. It also corresponds with the timing of the fiscal costs associated with these reforms,
particularly those related to financial sector restructuring which will be significant in the early stages.
The program focused strategy also takes into account that specific investments across a wide range of
sectors will attract support from the European institutions, pushing the limits of preparation and
implementation capacity in the public sector. In addition, it acknowledges that the Government intends to
minimize off-budget expenditure programs by Ministries and public institutions, in part to ensure that
overall fiscal targets will be achieved. Disbursements under the EFSAL would be multi-tranched to mesh
with periodic assessments of Government's macroeconomic program under the SMP as well as agreed
enterprise and financial sector reform benchmarks. Disbursements under further adjustment operations in
the high case would be tranched in line with the design of the programs they support, the sequence of
reforms, and fiscal needs.

22

Table 3: Lendine Pro ramFVAI-03
AUS$

Million)
FY
01
01
02
02
03

High
Base
Low*"
Social Benefits Administration
35
35
35
EFSAL
300*
300*
Public Finance Management and Judicial Reform
30
30
Utilities and Infrastiucture Adjustment
150*
Social Sectors Investment
50
50
Social Sectors / Social Security Adjustment
03
200*
765
415
35
Total
* Adjustment/policy-based lending
650
300
0
** Low case would include continued disbursements of other, satisfactorily
implemented base case investment operations approved before low case is
thiggered
_d
Base Case Triggers
Successful stabilization/sustainable macroeconomic environmcnt***
*
Macroeconomic adjustment, as indicated by SMP implementation, on track
*
Fiscal deficit in 2001 not to exceed 2000 level, and decline by 0 5 pcrcent of GDP in 2002 and 2003
*
No increase in Government/NPF debt to GDP ratio in 2001 and reduction in debt to GDP ratio during 2002-03
Good progress in implementation/building institutions
*
Acceptable financial managcment arrangements in place for Bank lending
*
Adoption of procurement law in accordance with EU standards, and establishment of procurement agency
* Macroeconomic targets and triggers would reflect updated targets as indicated by the SMP.
High Case Triggers
Full implementation of base case triggers
Rapid implementation of structural reforms
*
Government gas sector holdings offered for sale, divestment of Government oil sector holding prepared
*
Adoption of power sector restructuring program to prepare for privatization
*
Government (cabinct) decision to implement health financing and pension reform
*
Satisfactory anti-corruption action plan under implementation, including measures to ensure transparent
privatization processes and health and education financing reforms to reduce/eliminate informal payments and
bribes
Low Case Triggers
Stalled reforms and worsening macroeconomic performance
*
SMP not implemented, rising fiscal deficits and debt to GDP ratios
e
Structural reform stalled in financial/enterprise sectors - EFSAL off track
Poor implementation
*
Poor implementation of Bank funded programs

68.

Exposure. The proposed lending levels, particularly in the high case, would result in a rapid
increase in Bank exposure from the very low current level of about US$200 million but would not raise
issues with respect to exposure ratios. Moreover, the ongoing fiscal adjustment and structural reforms
and the improved prospects for EU accession and foreign direct investment in Slovakia suggest that
creditworthiness should improve markedly over the next years. The Bank's share in total debt scrvice,
now just over 2 percent, would peak around 2010 at about 3 percent and 4 percent, in the base and high
cases respectively, and decline rapidly thereafter. The Bank's share in public debt service would be at
about double those levels. Nominal exposure would peak at about US$475 million, or 5 percent of total
debt outstanding (TDO) by 2003-2004 in the base case and at about US$725 million in the hligh case.
The latter would represent just over 6.5 percent of TDO (and about 13 percent of public external debt),
and this ratio would also decline rapidly as performance in line with the high case triggers would
contribute to rapidly achieving the EU accession objectives and access to financial markets at competitive
spreads, and thus rapidly diminished Bank lending.

23
69. Self-evaluation. Overall success in CAS implementation would be assessed on the basis of: (i)
steady improvements in living conditions based on a recovery of sustainable growth driven by a strong
private sector, with reduced unemployment, strengthened social security, particularly for the most
vulnerable, and enhanced opportunities for excluded groups; (ii) continued progress in meeting the overall
requirements of the EU's acquis. Selected benchmarks for self-evaluation of the three program objectives
are presented in Box 6 below.
Box 6: CASSelf-evaluation- Benchmarks
CASObjective
Benchmarks
Completingthe transformationreforms,restoring
* Completionof bank privatizationby 2002
highgrowthand maintainingeconomicstability
a Establishmentof legalframeworkfor bankruptcyto
facilitateenterprisedebt workoutsby 2001
Strengtheninggovernanceand institutions
Implementation
of an anti-corruptionactionplan in 2001
Incorporationof extra-budgetaryfundsand
establishmentof a unifiedtreasurysystemthroughthe
2002 budgetsubmittedto the Parliament
Improvingsocialsecurity,enhancinghuman
* Presentationof pensionieformto Parliamentin 2002
development,meetingenvironmentalstandards
a Developmentof indicatorsand instrumentsfor
monitoringwelfareof Romaby 2002
a Successfulimplementationof pilot activitiesto improve
Romahealthand educationby 2003

V. RISKS
70. Risks associated with the Slovak Government's stabilization and reform program and the proposed
World Bank support to that program have both internal and external dimensions. The main internal risks
relate to Slovakia's political economy: the diverse and potentially fragmented governing coalition may
not hold together as the Government moves decisively to implement the further adjustments and reforms
that underpin the program, or in the obverse situation, the Government might itself delay further
adjustments and reforms based on insufficient political support and a desire to maintain the political
balance in the coalition even at the cost of reform. To the extent that benefits from the reforms are
delayed or not widely felt, this dilemma could be exacerbated. In either case the implementation of the
program would suffer, undermining the basis for World Bank support as envisaged in the base scenario.
Parliamentary elections, which will be held before the end of the CAS period, will introduce an element
of political uncertainty. On balance, it is expected that the recent OECD accession and momentum for
first round EU accession will guide the policies and actions of both current and future Governments in
directions that are conducive to sustained reform. In recent months, the main opposition party has also
expressed its commitment to pursuing EU accession. To further mitigate these risks, the Bank would
work with Government and other stakeholders during the implementation of the CAS to develop a broad
understanding of the program, its rationale and impact. This dialogue should not only promote reforms
but also ensure that Bank Group inputs appropriately reflect changing circumstances in terms of both
sequencing and content of reforms.
71. Another internal risk relates to domestic capacity. Implementing all the reforms envisaged in the
high case within a short time frame may tax the capacity of the Government and the public sector at large.
If this risk materializes, the program would revert to a slower pace and/or a lesser scale than in the
proposed high case scenario. At the same time, it is likely that with active support during the preparation
phase, Government and public sector capacity will respond, as experience with the financial sector and
enterprise reforms has shown.
72. There are also external risks facing Slovakia's program and the CAS. Should external shocks lead
to worsening macroeconomic conditions, the Bank would consider stepping up the volume of planned
adjustment lending to support the Government's own corrective measures. Conversely in the absence of

24
appropriate corrective measures, the Bank would suspend further adjustment support. A communications
strategy to increase awareness of the links between Slovakia's development prospects and sustained
macro-stabilization could help ensure sustained implementation of the reform program should
unfavorable external shocks materialize.
73. Finally, given the importance of EU accession in driving the formulation and implementation of
reforms, unforeseen or substantial delays in the process could significantly undermine Slovakia's
program. These could occur due to the complexity of accession involving so many countries or indeed
due to delays in the EU's own readiness to take on a significant number of new members. This could
feedback negatively to the domestic commitment to reforms. In such event, the Bank would need to
reassess its role as the Government would not be able to achieve its own principal strategic objective
within the time frame that they currently envisage. Continued strong partnership with the EU to ensure
responsiveness of Bank support as the accession process evolves would mitigate this risk, but if delays
were to lead to a significant change in Slovakia's relationship with European institutions, the Bank would
reassess the program in consultation with Government and key partners.
74. Although the risks to the proposed strategy are non-negligible, the potential benefits within and
beyond the time frame for probable World Bank Group collaboration with Slovakia are substantial. The
partnership that has evolved with the authorities during the formulation of the CAS and the initial phases
of support, particularly the EiFSAL preparation, has demonstrated a high degree of engagement and
commitment that clearly enhances the probability of success and confirms the impressive progress thus
far.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Sven Sandstr6m

Washington, D.C.
January 8, 2001

Peter Woicke

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Slovak Republic at a glance
POVERTYandSOCIAL

Slovak
Republic

Europe&
Central
Asla

54
3.590
19A4

475
2,150
1,022

1999
Population,mid-year(millions)
GNPper capita(AtMismethod.US$)
GNP(Atiasmethod,US$billions)

UppermiddleIncome

9/12/00

DevelopmentdiamondLifeexpectancy

573
4,900
2,811

Averageannualgrowth,1993-S9

enrollment

capita

Mostrecent estimate(latestyearavallable,1993-99)
Poverty(% of populationbelownationalpovertyline)
Urbanpopulation(% of totalpopulation)
Life expectancyat birth (years)
Infant mortality(per 1,000five births)
Childmalnutrition(% of childrenunderS)
Accessto improvedwatersource(% of population)
Iliteeacy(Y%
of populationage 15+)
Gross primaryenrollment (% ofschool-agepopulation)
Male
Female

57
73
9

102
102

102

67
69
22
8
3
100
101
99

76
70
27
7
78
10
109

Accessto safe water

-

SlovakRepublic
group
Upper-middle-income

|
__

KEYECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS
1979
GDP (USSbillions)
Gross domesticinvestment/GOP
Exportsof gooCsand services/GDP
Grossdomesticsavings/GDP
Grossnationalsavings/GDP
Currentaccountbalance/GDP
Interestpayments/GDP
TotaldebUGDP
Total debt service/exports
Presentvalue of debt/GDP
Presen'value of debt/exports

1989

1998

1999

17 8
31 8
28 8
28.5

20 4
394
63 7
28 2
29 3

188
33.8
64.8
28 7
28 0

-10 4
26
58 5
13 9
44 9
68 0

.5.7
23
55 6
13 6

06
10 3

Economicratios'
Trade

Ie
n
Investment

Domestic
Savings

Indebtedness
197W9
(averageannuajlgrowth)
GOP
GNPper capita
Exportsofgoodsand services

27
22

1989-99

1999-03

1998

1999

09
06
113

44
41
10 8

19
10
70

39

1979

1989

1998

1999

94
5 5
32 2

44
3156
23 2
64 0

49 9
21 6
32 1

50 6
21 2
74 8

51 1
20 2
69 9

2D I

1998

1999

Growthof exportsandimports 1%)

SiovakRepublic
Upper-middle-incomegroup

.

92

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Privateconsumption
Generalgovernmentconsumption
Importsof goodsand services

1979-89 1989-99
(averageannualgrowth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Privateconsumption
Generalgovernmentconsumption
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsof goodsand services
Gross nationalproduct

27

Growthof Investmentand GDP(%)
30
40
20


I

-16
-6 6

-10
-0 3

30
2a.

76

75

is-

-11
13
24
83
08

50
35
34
96
42

05
03
-13 7
-2 5
11

N

ss

'

ot

98

97

GDP

-GDI

a
95

9

96

97 93

.10
Exports -ImpsOns

Note 1999 data are preliminaryestimates
average If data are missing,the diamondwill
* The diamondsshowfour key indicatorsin the country(in bold) comparedwith its income-group
be incomplete

AnnexA2
Page2 of 2

Slovak Republic
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE

Domestic
prices

1979
11

(% change)
Consumerprices
Implicit GDP deflator

1989

1998

1999

28

67
51

10 6
66

.

42 4
16
-5.0

431
34
-3 6

1998

1999

10,667

10,197

8,535
12,959
686
1,419

8,130
11,300
597
1,301

rInflaiton
(%)

30
2C

finance
Government
(%of GDP,includescurrentgrants)

.,

o

Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

_

94

95

-

97

95

GDPdeflator

-0

98

99

CPI

TRADE
1979

1989

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
na
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goodso

Export and Import levels (US$mill)
so,000

1,0009
5,999|

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Termsof trade (1995=100)

94

93

95

96

r Exports

97
99
srmports

99

BALANCEof PAYMENTS
1979

1989

1998

Current accountbalanceto GDP(%)

1999
l

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods andIservices
Resourcebalance

13,015
15,348
-2,333

12,191
13,145
-954

i

-157

-302

94

367

173

Current account balance

-2,124

-1,083

-

Financingitems (net)
Changes in net reserves

1,641
483

1,550
-467

-12

15 1

2,923
35 2

3,283
41 4

1989

1998

1999

1,827
0
0

11,903
239
0

10,517
219
0

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

505
0
0

1,867
31
0

1,988
34
0

Compositionof net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

-13
-28

Netincome
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locaUUS$)

95

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
1979
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principalrepayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
DevelopmentEconomics

of 1998debt (US$mill)
Composition
239

189
4605

52

0
0
0
0
0
0

.

387
0

701
624

0
15
17
-2
14
-16

0
3
20
-17
14
-31

6869 52

A-IBRD
B-IDA
C -IMF

E - Bilateral
D-Othermultilateral F - Private
G -Short-term

9/12/00

Annex 82

Slovak Republic
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of date 12/4/2000

Indicator

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Portfolio
Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d0
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

MemorandumItem
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e

0

6
0
0
0

1
7
0
0
0

1
4
0
0

5
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0

0

0

0

24.76

50.03

54.3

28 2

0

no

no
63.0
63.0

no
40 0
40.0

no
68.0
68.0

no
n/a
n/a

-

.0

Since FY80 Last Five FYs
1
80
0
0

0
0
0
0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year. Investment projects only.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

Slovak Republic- BankGroupProgramSummary

IBRDIIDABase-CaseLendingProgramFY 2001-2003
StrategicRewardsb
(H/M/L)

Implementationb
Risks (HIMIL)

35 0

M

M

EFSAL

300 0

H

M

TOTAL FY01

335.0

PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT AND

30.0

M

M

H

M

Fiscalyear

Project

US$(M)

2001

SOCIAL BENEFITS ADMINISTRATION

2002

JUDICIAL REFORM

2003

TOTAL FY02

30.0

SOCIAL SECTORS INVESTMENT

500

TOTAL FY03

50.0

TOTAL FY01-03

415.0

a. Thistable presentsthe proposedprogramfor the nextthreefiscalyears.
b. Foreach project,indicatewhetherthe strategicrewardsand implementationrisks are expectedto be high (H), moderate
(M),or low (L).
Templatecreatedon 12/18/00.

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Slovak Republic - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-2000
IFC approvals (US$m)

1997

1998

1999

2000

0.00

0.00 62.28 23.24

Sector (%)
CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMS
FINANCIAL SERVICES
INFRASTRUCTURE
MANUFACTURING
TIMBER, PULP & PAPER

Total

50

4
48
48

50
100

0

100

100

100

100

68

48
25
52
0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m) "1
1/ Cumulative

32
0

0

100

100

125

44.45 43.57 66.68 67.06

Annex B4

Slovak Republic- Summaryof NonlendingServices
Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audiencea

Objective b

Completed
IDF Institutional Support
for Roma Office /c
IDF Bankruptcy Reform /c
Anti-Corruption Diagnosis
INFODEV Grant for Y2K Strategy /c
GEF Grassland Conservation
Transport Sector Review
Procurement Assessment
Financial Accountability Assessment
Priv Particip. in Infrastr. (PPIAF) /c

00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00

278.30
396.40
101.50
300.00
20 00
57.19
20.00
20.00
75.00

G/D
G/D
G/PD/B
G
G
G/B
G/B
G/B
G/D

01
01
01
01

156.00
156.00
137.00
104.00

GIB
G/B/D
G/B/D
G/B/D

KG/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PD/PS

250.00

G/D

KG/PS

102.00
81.00
60.00
50 00
152.00
180.00
170 00
140.00
100.00
100.00

G/B
G
G/D
G/B
G
G/B/D
G/B
G/B
G/B/D
G/D

KG/PD/PS
PS
KG/PS
KG/PD
PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PD/PS
PS

KG/PS
PS
KG/PD/PS

PS
PS
KG
KG/PS
KG/PS
PD/PS

Underway
Social Sectors Expenditures Review
Public Sector Policy and Management
Poverty and Labor
Roma Assesment
Planned
IDF Env. Mgmt.and Cultural Heritage Id
02
Utilities/Infrastructure Liberalization and
Privatization
02
GEF Industrial Co-generation
02
Social Housing and District Heating
02
Education Sector
02
GEF Geothermal
02
Public Sector Policy and Mgmt. TA
03
Social Sectors Expenditures TA
03
Pension Reform
03
Roma TA
03
Environmental Assessment (EU acc)
03
Studies (currently unidentified)
-to complete transformation of reforms
03
-to strengthen governance & institutions
03
-to improve social security, enhance
human resources & meet
environmental standards
03
a. Government,donor, Bank,public dissemination.
b. Knowledgegeneration,publicdebate,problem-solving.
c Approvedin FYOO
- Cost representsamountof the Grant
d Subjectto availabilityof IDF Funds

85.00
60 00

100.00

Annex B5

Slovak Republic Social Indicators
Sameregion/incomegroup

Latestsingleyear

1970-75
POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

47
09
46 3
26

1980-85
5
0
54
2

2
8
2
3

1992-97

Europe & Upper-middleIncome
Central Asia

54
0 2
59 7
14

474 0
0 1
67 0
17

574 0
13
73 8
25

3,680

2,310

4,540
117

40
54
88

30
48
79

92
93
92

94

98
98

91
89

92
82

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNP per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food prce index (1995=100)

34

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to safe water
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rurat
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrtion (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5 (perthousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)
1999 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

110
19 5
11 9
31 4

61
49

70
67
74

71
67
75

73
69
77

69
64
73

70
67
73

25
29

16
23

9
13

23
30

30
38

226
105

208
90
8

287
122

193
116

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Slovak Republic - Key Economic Indicators

Inidicator

Actual
W997 1998

1996

Estimate
2000

1999

Projected
2002
2003

2001

2004

Nationalaccounts
(as% of GDP)
Gr-oss doomesticproducta

100

100

100

100

5

5

4

4

Industry

37

34

32

32

Services

59

62

64

64

'ITotalConsutm1ption
Gross domestic fixed inivestment
Govemment investment
Private investmenit
(incLiudesincrease in stocks)

74
34

73
36

75
38

Exports (GNFS)b
lmports (GNFS)

55
67

58
68

Gross dontestic savings

26

Gross national savings'

AgricultuIc

Memo

100

100

100

100

100

73
31

71
29
4
26

71
30
3
29

71
31
4
30

70
31
4
29

69
31
4
29

61
72

62
67

77
79

81
85

83
87

85
88

88
90

27

25

27

29

29

29

30

3]

26

27

26

26

28

28

29

30

30

19772

20410

21308

19712

19260

20612

22616

2481(6

27099

3870

3770

3920

3890

4030

4410

4810

4 1
7

19
08

1.8
05

35
34

45
5 1

50
4.9

50
49

39
51
57

18
-2 3
-0 3

17
-3.7
-3 3

34
33
30

44
43
40

49
39
39

4.9
35
37

12191
10197
13145
11300
-954
173
-1083

14916
12677
15245
13449
-329
140
-543

16725
14419
17441
15519
-716
120
-865

18801
16379
19599
17494
-798
210
-842

21180
18598
21914
19607
-734
244
-785

701
873

1550
434
-23

3500
-854
165

1130
240
-38

744
913
-110

813
922
-98
1020

anrhduoriJemrs

Gross donmesticproduct
(US$ million at current pnces)
GNPpcrcapita(USS,
Atlas method)

..

Real annual growth tates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
6.2
Gtoss Domestic Incomile
22

62
54

Real annual per capita growth iates (%, calculated from 1995prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
60
5.4
Iotal consuimption
11 3
42
Private consumption
78
47
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
McrchiandiseFOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Mcrchandise lOB
Rcsourcebalance
Net current transfers
C'urrent accouint balance

10899
8831
13155
11124
-2256
203
-2068

11810
9639
13816
11720
-2006
175
-1952

13015
1072(0
15348
13074
-2333
367
-2124

199
965

84
1955

387
3141

278

1023

Other capital (ner,iici eTors& omnrtissions)

1152

12

-1887

-24

300

0

0

0

0

Cliange in reservesd

-247

-')8

483

-467

-1741

-1781

-529

-873

-937

-11 4

-9 8

-11 0

-4 8

-1 7

-3 5

-3 5

-3 0

-2 2

Net private foreign direct itivestment
[ong-term loans (net)
Official
Private

.

457

.

-1019

23795
21043
24398
21881
-603
255
-798

Memnorandumn i1eirs

Resorrrcc balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures

Merchadlise imports (CIF)

(Contintuzed)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Slovak Republic - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

1996

Actual
1997
1998

1999

Estimate
2000

Projected
2002
2003

2001

2004

Public finance (as %/,of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
Currenit expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-)
Capital expenditute and Net Lending
Foreign financinig

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
GrowthofM2(%)
Private sector credit growth /
total ciedit growth (%)

45 3
40.9
44
57

42 8
40 3
24
74

40 5
390
15
63

41 2
37 9
32
6.7

37.9
37 2
07
33
24

35 6
35 4
03
27

35 9
35 1
08
33

36 0
34 6
t4
39

35 9
33.7
22
4.2

688

66 1

63 0

646

65 8

621

613

61 3

613

167

88

42

11 4

108

4 1

84

97

92

58
45

61
66

67
51

106
6.6

92
69

66
65

3.9
50

44
45

40
40

Price indices( YR95=100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (USS/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Coonsumerprice iidex (%change)
GDPdeflatot (%change)

a GDP at maiket prices
b "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services"
c includes net unrcquLitedtiansfers excluding official capital giants
d Includes use of IMF tesources
e Conlsolidated central govemment
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units " An increasc in US$/LCU denotes appreciation

AnnexB7

Slovak Republic - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Totaldebtoutstandingand

1996

Actual
1997
1998

Estimate
2000

1999

Projected
2002
2003

2001

2004

7661

9768

11902

10517

10421

9186

9216

9925

10641

Net disbursements (US$m)a

1977

2345

1787

-1350

-96

-1235

30

708

717

Total debt service (TDS)

1537

1631

1934

1988

1747

2352

2406

2949

2982

disbursed (TDO) (US$rn)a

(US$m)3

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)

TDO/XGSb

68 9

806

88.5

84 4

69 0

53 8

47 9

45 8

43 8

TDO/GDP

38 7

47.9

55 9

53.4

54 1

44 6

40 7

40 0

39.3

TDS/XGS

13 8

13 4

14 4

16 0

11 6

13 8

12 5

13 6

12 3

52

58

8.0

36

36

..

182

19.6

23 2

86

77

Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred cieditor DS/public

.

DS (%)
IBRD DSIXGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)

02
250

03
227

02
239

03
219

0.3
196

03
400

0.3
463

03
461

02
465

Of whichpresentvalue of
guarantees(US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

..

.

IDA TDO (US$m)

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Loans

0

0

0

2

31

34

62

80

80

Equity and quasi-equity /c

0

0

0

0

50

50

50

50

50

IFC (US$m)

MIGA
MIGA guarantees(US$m)

a Includespublic and publicly guaranteeddebt,privatenonguaranteed,use of IMFcredits.andnet shortterm capital
b "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including woskers' remittances

c Includesequityand quasi-equitytypesof bothloan and equity instruments

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Slovak Republic - IFC Portfolio
Slovak Republic
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 9130/00
(In US Dollars Millions)
Held
FY Approval Company
1999 BACASR
1998/00
SEF Scame Tatra
1999 SEF West Exp-lmp
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
30
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 33
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.85
0
0
0 1.85
0
0
0
33.18

0

0

0

Approvals Pending Commitment
2000 Ruzomberok
2000 Ruzomberok BLINC
Total Pending Commnitment.

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

0

1 85

0

0

0

Annex B8
Page 20f2

Slovak Republic - Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

Difference Between

Last PSR
Supervision Rating b/
Ipeetto
Dvlpet
Implementation
Development
Progress
Objectives

Board
Date
Fiscal
Year

Active Projects

There are no projects under implementation.

Closed Proiects

Total"

280.43
78.51
201.92
0.00

280.43
78.51
201.92
0.00

0.00

0.00

Total Disbursed (IBRD and IDA):
of which has been repaid:
Total Now held by IBRD and IDA:
Amount sold:
Total Undisbursed:

a. Intended disbursements
b. As of October 31, 2000

to date minus actual disbursements

to date as projected at appraisal.

Expected and Actual
Disbursementsa

Original Amount in US$ Millions
IBRD

IDA

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

Frm Rev'd

Annex B9

Page1 of 3

SLOVAK REPUBLIC
CAS COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX (BASE CASE)
CAS objective

Performance benchmarks

Government strategy/action

Diagnosis

I

____________________________________________

J

Bank GrozupInstruments

~~~Bank

II'C/A'fIGA

Complete Transformation Reforns, Restore High Growth, and Maintain Economic Stability
Complete transformation
reforms

Rcstore high growth

Lendina

State banks being restructured and capitalized,
with carving out of bad loan portfolio prior to

All state banks pnvatized by
2002
debt workout
EnterprisedetwrotFinancial
underway
Bankruptcy law reformed (2001)

Most utilities remain in public domain

full pnvatization

and fast track arangements

PoEquty

Inadequate legal framework to support efficient
enterpnse and banking system, including absence of
functioning bankruptcy system, and poor corporate
govemance
governance

Major stake of telecommunications company
pnvatized in 2000. revised telecommunications
law adopted.
Govemment preparing reforms energy sector and

established (2001)

Telecom Project (ICR
FYO1)

Inadequate financial sector supervision
Investment/GDP ratio high, but investments
inefficient in the absence of reforms, with low levels
of FDI.

establishment of regulatory institutions for
utilities that are to be liberalized or privatized.
Govemment preparing transformation reforms in
banking and enterprise sectors and in utilities

GDP growth has decelerated to 4% in 1998 and less
than 2% in 1999and 2000.

that that will improve overall efficencyIDF(approved
investment.

High and rising unemployment (to close to 20% mit
2000). decline in wages/GDP ratio, and increasing
poverty

Government seeking increased foreign direct
investment
Govemment program to improve corporate

i
Sh
from 1994-99 levels by 2001

FDI constrained by administrative bamers
Regulatory framewvorknot conducive to SME
development development

govemance and public sector govemance

Recovery of GDP growth to 4.5%

lending (ongoing)

by 2002, with unemployment
down to 15%

Line of credit to SME
via local intermedianes

Non-transparent and politicized privatization of
cnterpnses, with enterprise sector generated large
losses and put pressure on banking system.

Comprehensive program of banking and
entcrprise restructuring underway with Bank. EU
and USAID support

Major banks remained in state hands and were
increasinglyilliquid and on the way to insolvency

remove
program
Goverment action
improve
bamers
to FDItoand
~~~~~~~~administrative

Enterpnses and
SectorAdj.
Loan--EFSAL (FY01)

companyprivatized (2001)

Gas
EFSAL
(SPN FY01,
power sector unbundled
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~and
ICR FY02)
(2002)
Regulatory body created (2002)
bh

Fiscal deficit 6% of GDP and current account deficilt
of 10% in 1998 with nsingdebt to GDPratio
Currency depreciation, rsing inflation, and loss of
reserves in 1998.
Social secunty and assistance systems have rising
deficits. Pensions and health systems are financially
unsustainable
Govemment guarantees and contingent liabilities
(National Property Fund and others) are latent threat
to stability

Fiscal deficit reduction in 1999 and
consolidation in 2000and 2001. Furtherdeficit
reduction in medium term, particularly through
reduction in expenditures/GDP ratio, and debt
reduction through pnvatization
Measures to improve collections and strengthen
social benefits administration system.
Govemment preparing for pension reform (based
on Polish model) and for health insurance reform

and loan support
to specific projects in
pnvatized infrastructure
sectors
Policy advice on a

NLS/O
Bankruptcy Reformm
FY)
Macroeconomic/Debt
/Fiscal/ Monitonng
(FYOI-03)

Funding ofoint venture
inflow.
Restructunng support to
individual comrpanies
TA on bamers for SME

Technical assistance to
SMEs

regulatory framework for SMEs.

Maintain economic stability

Participation in tbe
prrvatizationof selected
state-owned banks

Fiscal deficit down to 3% by
2002. and external debt to GDP
ratio to 40%, with inflation at
single digit level
Establish unified collection
(2001)
Drafl pension law presented to
Parliament (2002)
Plan for health insurance reform
(2001)

Utilities/
Infrastructure
Liberalization and
Pnvatization (FYOI)
PoverEuiand Labor
Markets (FY0)I

MIGA support for
pnvatization marketing
and TA for attracting
FDI.

Annex B9

Pane2 of 3

____________________________________
_________________________

Development objective

Diagnosis

Government strateD/action

Performance benchmarks

BankGroupstruments
Bank
IPIII

|

IFC/MIGA

Improve governance and the institutional framework
Improve governance

Widespread corruption in public sector
Poor public sector service delivery

Govemment is formulating broad based anticorruption program, based in part on results of
survey carried out with support of Bank and
USAID

Poor financial management
Public finance refonns being prepared
Public sector oversized with high general government
expenditures to GDP ratio and overemployment, and
utilities and most banks still in public hans
Excessive centralization of govemment functions
Improve the institutional
framework

Inadequate regulatory framework to support pnvate
sector, in particular SMEs
FDI constrained by administrative bamers
Lack of regulatory framework to support utilities
pnvatization and liberalization

Judicial reform being prepared
Public administration reform program being
prepared
Performance audits to be camed out in 2000/1
Govemment engaging NGOs in oversight of
public procurement and pnvatization
Govemment reviewing licensing procedures and
administration preparing company registry and
other regulatory reform
Public sector employment retrenchment as part
of fiscal adjustment.
Fiscal decentralization being prepared, with
program to decentralize service delivery
Preparing establishment of regulatory body or
bodies for utlities

Action plan and specific anticorruption measures adopted and
taken duTing 2000 and 2001.
Abolishment of extra-budgetary
funds (2001), establishment of
treasury and debt management
systems (2002), adoption of
medium-term expenditure
framework (2002)
Adoption of public
administration refomi program by
Cabinet (2001).
Public sector employment
reduction as part of fiscal
adjustmnent
Gradual reduction tn ratio of
general govemment expenditures
to GDP

Lending
Public Finance
Management and
Judicial Reform Loan
--PFMJR (FY02)
Portfolio
PFMJR
NLS/Other
Public Sector
Management

FIAS study of
Administrative Bamers
to Investment

Annex B9
Page 3 of 3
Development objective

I__________________I________________

Bank Group instruments

Perfonnance benchmarks

Govenmnientstrategy/action

Diagnosis

I

Bnnk

___________________

IFC/MIGA

Improve social protection. upgrade human resources, and meet environmental standards
Improve social protecton

Increasing poverty associated with nsing
unemployment and limited social assistance, and
socialexclusion,.a
Social benefits systems generate large deficits and fail
to cover social assistance needs.
Poor socto-economic conditions of Romas

Upgradehumanresources

Govemment preparing pension reforms (in early
stages)
eie
npicpet
nf
Govemment has decided m prnciple to unify
social benefits contribution collections and is
prepanng plans to improve administration
Govemment has established special office at
Deputy PM level to focus on Roma support

Poor management and low efficcency of education
feuainassessment
maaeetadlwefcec
Govemmcnt intends to undertake sector refornms
sector. Oversupply of teachers. Limited cost recovery
in health and education, but preparation has just
and no higher education financing schemes
Education management heavily centralized

begun, and Bank support through AAA program
requestedto help define strategies.

Educason system not responsive to labor market
Health insurancesystems generates large deficits

Developmentof educationsector
strategyand plan by 2001
Action plan for standardized national
for school leaversand
lower grades by 2001
Pla
balance public resources and
cost sharing opons by 2002 halndhart
cotsaighpiney202S
Plan to better regulate expenditures
and incentivesfor cost containment
by 2002.

Oversupply of hospital beds and doctors

Proposals for comprehensive health

Poor management and lack of accountability in health
service provision.

care reform by 2002

Access of rural areas and poor to education system
and health services (in particular Romas) Is limited

Meet the environmental
standards

These have to be developed by
Government, with Bank analytical
NLS thiatis
support
in or
theplanned.
context of
Some
underway
indicative benchmarks are:

Lending
Social
Benefit
Administration
(SBA) Loan
(FY01)
Social Sectors
Scos
-surance
SSL(FY03)
Portfoliocmpn
SBA Loan
SS Loan
onandthart-p
GEFs
NLS/Other
IDf for Roma
f

(appoved

Plans foTdownsizing human and
physical infrastructurein health by
2002

Roma Review
(FYO1)and TA
(FY02103)
GEF Grant
IndustnalCo-

High incidenceof informnalpaymentsfor healthand
education

Govemmenitplanning decentralizationof
selected services

Evaluation showing improved healeh
and education access/indicators of

generation(FY02)
GEf Grant

Poor condition of social housing estates and distnct
heating

Government has announced anti-corruption
programand preparing detailedaction program

Romas by 2002
Specific actions under
implementation by 2001 with respect
to social sectors

GeothermalProject
(FY02)
SocialSectors
Expenditures
Review (FY0 1)
P
and Lal

Legal framework not in line with EU accession
requirements.

Markets(FY01)
SocialSectorsTA
(FY02/03)
PensionReform
(FY02)
SocialHousingand
DistrictHeating
(FY02)
Environmental
Assessment/EU
Accession(FYO2)

Policy advice on
private persion
system
pillar) (3d
Equity
investmentin
pcsoona
me
company
Participate in
restructunng,
s oan
and
education related
enterprses i the

Annex B10

Slovak Republic - CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Network area

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction

Country
performance'

good

Economic policy

good

Public sector

fair

Gender

good

Human Development Department
Education &
Health, nutrition & population
Social protection
Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development
Environment
Social development

good
good
good

fair
fair
poor

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
fair
Financial sector
fair
Private sector
fair
Energy & mining
Infrastructure

fair

Major issue'

Country
pnorityc

M
social exclusion
unemployment
fiscal sustainablilty H
privatization
H
corruption
centralization
L
labor force
particiption

Bank
priorityC

Reconciliation of
country and Bank
pnorities d

H

Major CAS focus e/

M

IMF in lead

H
L

M
good outcomes
M
low efficiency
excess capacity
fiscal sustainability M
targeting

H
H

Major CAS focus e/
Major CAS focus e/

H

Major CAS focus e/

M

L

M
H

L
H

European
Institutions
in Lead

H
viablity
H
governance
M
excess capacity
privatization
poor management M

H
H
M

rural areas underserviced
legal framework
social exclusion
of Roma

M

European
Institutions
in Investment Lead

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair,' or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty:" for education, "female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution').
c. To indicate prnority,use 'low," "moderate," or 'high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.
el Major CAS focus agreed with Government, AAA program agreed, and dialogue underway

Templatecreatedon 12i18/0(

Annex B11
Page 1 of 2
Slovak Republic: Consultationson the Country Assistance Strategy
In the course of preparing the CAS regular consultations took place with the authorities of the
Slovak Republic and the "third sector" community of Slovakia. The current governing coalition in
Slovakia represents a wide range of ideologies and views within Slovakian society and has strong
representation from "third-sector" organizations who played a strong role in the opposition to communism
until its fall in the late 1980s and more recently to the previous Government. The Government's coalition
is supported by a two-thirds majority in Parliament and opposing parties, in Government during the
preceding four years, showed little interest in a dialogue with the World Bank. During the previous
Government's reign, the NGO sector in Slovakia became increasingly stronger and a focal point of
democratic opposition as the role of Parliament and the press was constrained
After an extended period of very limited Bank Group activity, we considered that the use of the
client survey instrument as part of CAS preparation would be of limited value given the overall lack of
knowledge about the Bank and the absence of Bank-supported activities. We would use this instrument
once an active assistance program is underway. Collaboration with NGOs in the initial technical work in
Slovakia in the course of 1999 and 2000, in particular on public sector reform, was followed by a series of
consultations with civil society organizations on the CAS These consultations took place relatively late in
the process of preparing the CAS, once the overall strategic foci had been agieed with Government and
consultations with key external partners had confirmed the broad parameters for selectivity that had been
discussed with the Government. Given the relatively limited amount of analytical work undertaken prior to
the CAS, the meetings with civil society -- including NGOs, academic rescaich organizations and trade
union organizations -- became increasingly important as an opportunity for the Bank Group to learn and
listen and accordingly adjust the CAS, and, more importantly, to reflect their insights and inputs in the
design of specific future assistance programs and piojects.
In the absence of a Bank presence in Slovakia, organization of the first major CAS meeting was
organized by the Slovak Academic Information Agency--Service Center for the Third Sector (SAIASCTS), member of Slovakia's Gremium of the Third Sector (G3S)l, and a main umbrella organization for
NGOs in Slovakia. Over a hundred civil society organizations (out of several thousands operating in
Slovakia) wete invited, and about two-thirds attended, representing a broad range of sectors and interests
and areas of the country. Some of those invited were umbrella organizations who themselves represented
dozens of NGOs An extensive summary of a draft CAS document provided the basis for the discussions at
this first meeting in February 2000 A subsequent meeting in March focused in more detail on key issues
with respect to the major themes of the CAS as it had evolved by that time.
A number of NGOs, both from Slovakia and elsewhere, organized the preparation of a document
"Comments and requests of NGOs in Slovakia related to the CAS of the World Bank" This offered a
broad range of suggestions with respect to a number of the proposed programs, as well as on sectors in
which no Bank support is envisaged (see Annex BI1, page 2). A number of the NGOs expressed
dissatisfaction with the CAS consultation process and queried whether the strategy as proposed would
translate in tesults on the ground, in particular as regards poverty reduction and social development. Other
NGOs expressed the view that in the Slovak context the overall focus on completing transformation
reforms, undertaking major public sector reforms, and support for human and social development were the
appropiiate instruments to improve living standards and social equity During the discussions we stressed
that a CAS represented an overall framework for Bank Group assistance prepared in consultation with the
client country, in particular its Government, and that the initial consultations provided the basis for
continued close collaboration with NGOs and other groups of civil society in the context of the specific
programs and projects that would be undertaken over the next three years

' G3S was awarded the Prize of the EU and the USA for Democracy and Civil Society in 1998.

Annex B1l
Page 2 of 2
"Commentsand requests of NGOs in Slovakia related to the CAS of the World Bank"
The above document was compiled during February-March, 2000 by the Centet for Environmental
Advocacy (CEPA) and Friends of the Earth (FOE) of Slovakia, as a supplement to the consultation process.
A brief overview of the wiitten contributions and selected key points, attributed to the NGOs making the
specific contribution, are sumnmarizedas follows


CEPA and FOE considered the consultation process to have been inadequate.

*

CEPA, FOE and the US Bread for the World Institute queried the link between the proposed strategy
and results on the ground, in particular poverty reduction, and suggested that progress in poverty
reduction rather than with respect to structural reforms should be the benchmark, and that the poverty
focus should reflect new thinking as per the forthcoming WDR. They expressed concern about the
impact of the strategy on reducing unemployment, about the social impact of structural reforms to be
supported by the Bank program, and by the extent, pace and sequencing of privatization and
liberalization.

*

The World Conservation Union suggested that the CAS should be a strategy for sustainable
development and recommnendedthat key indicators used by the Bank should be enhanced to cover
environmentalindicators.

*

CEPA and FOE suggested a number of guidelines for structural reform to help meet the overall
objective of reducing poverty. It noted that some reviews indicated that Bank SALs and SECALs had
not generally contributed to this objective.

*

The Sustainable Development Society, Greenpeace and CEE Bankwatch Network presented an
overview of issues in the energy sector in Slovakia, and recommended that the Bank to involve NGOs
and local consultants in its energy sector work, focus on renewable resource projects and encourage
energy savings and efficiency, and develop a regional energy strategy

*

The Center for Support of Local Activism and FOE provided an overview of water nmanagement
issues
in Slovakia and recommnendationsas to the priorities that the Bank should support in this sector.

*

The Forest Protection Group and FOE provided an overview of key issues in the forestry sector and
reconunendations with respect to priorities

*

FOE provided an oveiview of key issues in waste management and recommendations with respect to
priorities

*

Citizens for Improved Transport and Free Alternative provided a comprehensive overview of the
transport sector and key issues, with respect to road, public, rail, bus, and air transport It reconmnends
that Bank support should aim at supporting ecologically, economically, and socially acceptable
methods of transport

*

The Integra Foundation provided an overview of problems faced by SMEs and recommendations for
financial sector support.

*

Civil Association's contribution on rural development highlights human resources as a main factor in
rural problems (low level and quality of education). It also notes the biases against rural development,
and the lack of capital. It recommends an increased regional focus with respect to human resources
development and physical and social infrastructure.

*

Pro Family and Community of Women's Interest note the incidence of violence, including physical
and social, and the inequality of incomes and wages, as well as the higher incidence of unemployment
among women. They recommend increased education, legal changes and support programs for
women

MAP SECTION

IBRD
E-~27947R

.|

sTHLANI~
>

BELARuS

PoLAND

GERMANY

.

L KRANE

CZECH

<

POLAND
AJSTRIA

CZECH

HUNGARY
o
,<

ETALY

T K,

-IA

r-

K

17

REGIO

'53ETERS

N

BO

U

N

DARIE

5

3~~~~~~~7

I.-'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~N
-

h.

I N- 5

)~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

MAIN

ROADANI

ALOD

KII YRC

AUSTRIA

SLOVAK,.S.GL

C 25

rkobonires
T

FGp ?'J.

Cs.e',,
Feo5sgnoTp,W,r,dBo%
RR.

cob-s

llommstcnsalzLraues]

showr~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
,k0

Cor

n

15

5

H5

oG-

M E5~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~StILETRCKRALRAD

LjmETERSmpJ

TON

sO~~~~~~~~~~~0

40

TRACUBLICRO

-

INTERNATONALBO.UDARIE5
RAILROADS
TRACK
BIDUNDA.idBES
REGION DOUBLE

RIVER5

