d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 67224-KE

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

AND

THE MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA

April 5, 2012

Eastern Africa Country Cluster 2 (AFCE2)
Africa Region

The International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department

The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution an 
d may be used by recipients onl y in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

US$1.00 = 85 Ksh (as of March 2012)

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR

July 1-June 30

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
AfDB 
AIDS 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
African Development Bank 
Acquired Immunodeficiency 
Syndrome 
AusAID Australian Agency for International 
Development 
CDD 
Community Driven Development 
CPS 
Country Partnership Strategy 
CSO 
Civil Society Organization 
DANIDA Danish Agency for International 
Development 
Development Partner 
Coordination Group 
Development Policy Loan 
East African Community 
Ethics and Anti-Corruption 
Commission 
Education Management 
Information System 
Energy Sector Recovery Project 
European Union 
Governance and Anti-Corruption 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environment Facility 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
Internal Audit Department 
International Criminal Court 
Information and Communication 
Technology 
International Development 
Association 
International Finance Corporation 
Integrated Financial Management 

ESRP 
EU 
GAC 
GDP 
GEF 
HIV 
IAD 
ICC 
ICT 

IFC 
IFMIS 

DCG 

DPL 
EAC 
EACC 

EMIS 

IDA 

System
INT 
Institutional Integrity Department
IPP 
Independent Power Producers
KACC Kenya Anti-Corruption
Commission
KEMS Kenya Medical Supply Agency
KESSP Kenya Education Sector Support
Project
KJAS Kenya Joint Assistance Strategy
KPLC Kenya Power and Lighting
Company
MDG Millennium Development Goals
MIC 
Middle Income Country
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
MSMEs Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises
NCPB National Cereals and Produce
Board
NGO 
Non-Governmental Organization
OVC 
Orphans and Vulnerable Children
PforR 
Program For Results
PFM 
Public Finance Management
PPP 
Public-Private Partnerships
PRG 
Partial Risk Guarantee
SWAp 
Sector Wide Approach
TOWA Total War against HIV and AIDS
USAID United States Agency for
International Development
WBI 
World Bank Institute
WBG World Bank Group
WSP Water and Sanitation Program

Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Team Leader 

IDA 
Obiageli K. Ezekwesili 
Johannes Zutt 
Johannes Widmann 

IFC 
Thierry Tanoh 
Jean Philippe Prosper 
Aida Kimemia 

MIGA
Michel Wormser
Ravi Vish
Conor Healy

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary..........................................................
I. Introduction 
..............................................................
II. Country Context..........................................................1
A. 
Economic Context...................................................1
B. 
Political Context.....................................................2

1

III. Progress toward CPS Outcomes and Emerging Challenges 
.................. 
..........
4
A. 
Progress on CPS Objective 1: Unleashing Kenya's Growth Potential ......................
5
B. 
Progress on CPS Objective 2: Addressing Inequality and Social Exclusion 
.
............ 7
C. 
Progress on CPS Objective 3: Managing Resource Constraints and Environmental
Challenges 
......................................................... 
Progress on Governance 
....................
Progress on Gender........................................... 

D. 
E. 

8
8..........................8
........ 10

IV. Adjustments to the CPS and Lessons Learned in Implementation 
A. 
Lessons Learned .................................................... 
CPS Program Adjustments 
B. 
C. 
Implementation Progress 
D. 
Changes to the Results Framework 

....................
..................................... 
.............................. 

.................. 

10
10
................
11
11.... 
......... 13
......... 15

V. Risks.................................................................... 

15

Table 1: Progress on CPS Outcomes 

............

4..................................4

Annex 1: Updated Results Framework for the Kenya CPS FYI 0-FY13 
.......................
Annex 2: Updated and Revised CPS Outcomes 
............................... 
Annex 3: Ongoing and Proposed Knowledge Program 
.............................. 
Annex 4: Planned versus Actual Lending Program and Pipeline............................27
Annex 5: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management......................28
Annex 6: IDA Operations Portfolio....................................................29
Annex 7: Kenya Regional Portfolio ............................. 
Annex 8: Kenya Trust Fund Portfolio.................................................31
Annex 9: Kenya IFC Portfolio ...............................................................
Annex 10: Kenya at a Glance.................................................... 

.........
..... 

.................. 30

17
25
26

32
33

Map of Kenya No. IBRD 33426

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA

Executive Summary
i. 
This Progress Report shows that the FY1O-13 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
for Kenya remains relevant and that progress has been made in achieving its objectives.
The CPS, dated March 23, 2010, departed from previous strategies in (i) articulating a longer-
term (10-20 year) strategic outlook, (ii) attempting to identify national solutions for national
development problems, (iii) aiming to shift Bank engagement away from project lending toward a
programmatic approach, combining knowledge and financing in core areas such as energy, roads,
water and urban development, and (iv) aiming to support Kenya's achievement of Middle Income
Country (MIC) status.

ii. 
Several key changes have occurred in Kenya since the Board discussed the CPS in
April 2010. A new Constitution was adopted in 2010, introducing the largest governance
reforms since independence as well as an ambitious program of devolution. In addition, several
structural trends have become more pronounced. These include sustained high growth in East
Africa, enabling sustained poverty reduction and a broadening of the middle class, but also
shining a spotlight on Nairobi as a regional hub and Mombasa as a natural (but underperforming)
transport hub. Kenya is also a good example of the new aid architecture: as Kenya grows,
traditional donors are less important, new donors are becoming more important, and a high degree
of fragmentation and volatility continues to hinder aid effectiveness.

iii. 
While the risks identified in the CPS have grown larger, the opportunities have as
well. Devolution provides an opportunity to rectify the unequal distribution of investments and
services across Kenya, but also brings the risk that poor regions with lower capacity will fall
further behind. The new Constitution brings unprecedented opportunities to improve
governance, including through increased transparency (e.g., the open data portal and public
vetting of government officials, including in the judiciary), but also increases the risk of elite
capture (e.g., through decentralizing corruption to the new county governments). Finally,
elections (due by March 15, 2012) involve the risk of electoral violence, which has sullied many
of Kenya's polls in the past, but also provide an opportunity to overcome a legacy of election-
related violence, to bring an end to its extra-constitutional coalition government, and to make a
fresh political start.

iv. 
The World Bank Group (WBG) will continue to help advance governance reforms in
Kenya, using its combined strengths as a convener, knowledge provider, and significant
financier. In line with the Bank's Strategy for Africa, it will focus on three key areas: (i)
fostering partnerships, (ii) providing knowledge, and (iii) leveraging finance. In terms of
partnerships and knowledge, Kenya's high literacy, social vibrancy and emerging middle class
provide additional opportunities to expand the Bank's knowledge program and engage actively
with a broad range of stakeholders, including through social media. While the current lending
program remains heavily focused on investment lending in key growth sectors such as transport,
energy, water and urban development, a shift to development policy lending and program-for-
results (PforR) financing-in the right circumstances-would provide more natural new
instruments to help advance governance reforms and leverage the Bank's limited resources.

i

I. Introduction
1. 
This Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report (CPS PR) assesses the
implementation of the World Bank's FY10-13 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for
Kenya. The CPS intends to make a catalytic contribution to Kenya's continuing transformation
to a middle-income country (MIC). Over the CPS period, the World Bank Group (WBG) aims
to contribute to achieving more inclusive growth by supporting activities aiming to (i) unleash
Kenya's growth potential; (ii) reduce inequality and social exclusion; and (iii) address resource
constraints and environmental challenges. Within these objectives, the CPS is supporting eight
outcomes and seven sub-outcomes. This CPS PR describes changes in the country context,
progress toward CPS outcomes, and remaining challenges, and it also adjusts the Bank's
program and updates the risk framework.

II. Country Context

A. 
Economic Context
2. 
Kenya started the CPS period by rebounding from economic difficulties in 2008-09
and registering strong growth. In 2010, growth reached 5.6 percent of GDP. This was a large
improvement over 1.7 percent in 2008 and 2.5 percent in 2009, when growth was hampered by
violence following the December 2007 elections, higher international food and fuel prices, the
global financial crisis, and four consecutive rain failures, resulting in widespread drought.
Growth in 2010, by contrast, benefited from a strong recovery in agriculture, helped by good
rains, and a rebound in the industrial and services sectors.

3. 
But the country had to navigate another economic storm in 2011. Inflation increased
substantially, reaching about 19 percent for 2011 (from 3 percent at end-2010). The depreciating
shilling reached an all-time low of 107 to the US dollar in October 2011, before recovering to
about 85 by year-end, after the central bank sharply tightened monetary policy. High inflation
was sparked by higher import prices-initially for food and fuel-which in turn weakened the
shilling and put further pressure on prices. Because of the shilling depreciation, import prices
continued to rise even after global food and fuel prices had started to retreat. (In Kenya, food
prices have been well above global prices-and higher than in other African countries-due to a
government policy of maintaining high maize producer prices). Despite these challenges, Kenya
still grew at more than 4.0 percent in 2011. This was lower than in 2010, but still higher than
during the 2008-09 crisis, and higher than the average growth rate for 2000-2010. This growth
was driven primarily by good performance in the services sector and tourism. Agriculture also
performed better than expected, despite a severe drought in the middle of the year, and the short
rains promised a strong harvest for end-2011 and early 2012.

4. 
Recent shocks have provided fresh impetus to fiscal consolidation, which started in
FY2011/12. Initially, the Government planned to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio from 48.8
percent in 2010/2011 to 46.7 percent by 2013/2014, but recent shocks and the need to reduce
domestic demand have called for a more aggressive consolidation, targeting 44.6 percent by
2013/14. This is to be achieved through spending cuts in the medium term and improve the
primary deficit from -2.7 percent to -2.2 percent of GDP. If the envisaged consolidation takes
place, it will rebuild fiscal policy buffers back to pre-crisis levels. That said, fiscal consolidation

1

will be more difficult in light of emerging pressures, including the implementation of the new
Constitution and the upcoming elections.

5. 
Kenya's medium-term growth prospects are mixed and, while Kenya could still be
on the cusp of entering a period of sustained growth, there are substantial risks going
forward. For 2012, assuming a favorable external environment, restoration of macroeconomic
stability, stabilization in Somalia and a peaceful run-up to the next general elections followed by
a peaceful transition of power, Kenya could grow at 5.0 percent. But if these optimistic
assumptions are not met, growth could be as low as 3.1 percent. The risks are significant that
either (i) national elections bring a period of economic uncertainty or (ii) the economic crisis in
the Euro zone deepens. Even on the optimistic scenario, growth would remain substantially
lower than the 10 percent rate anticipated under the Kenya's Vision 2030 development strategy.
Even so, Kenya could still reach MIC status of US$1,000 GDP per capita by 2020, provided that
growth accelerates to an average of 6 percent over the remaining period.

6. 
Deep structural problems are the key impediment to growth and continue to call for
WBG support over the rest of the CPS period and beyond. As the Government in 2011
struggled to respond to renewed external pressures, but without the significant fiscal buffer that
had existed in 2008-09, the economy became increasingly imbalanced, with the current account
deficit in 2011 exceeding 10 percent of GDP. Kenya's overall export performance remains
disappointing, due to a number of factors, including inefficiencies at the port of Mombasa, an
inadequate and expensive supply of energy, underdeveloped transport networks, limited reform
of business regulations, and a lack of decisive action to curb corruption. This makes Kenya too
expensive for many international investors, especially in manufacturing, despite lower labor
costs than in emerging Asia. While Kenya is globally competitive in a number of sectors-
especially tea, tourism and horticulture-it has not sufficiently ventured into new products, such
as textiles (beyond the African Growth and Opportunities Act) and chemicals (where some
potential exists). In addition, Kenya is struggling to manage a structural shift from a
predominantly rural to an increasingly urban economy, and the need to protect cities as growth
poles during devolution. A more welcoming business environment, improved infrastructure
(including a modernized port as Mombasa), and strong action to curb corruption would help
Kenya to re-start its export engine and establish a deeper industrial base. On the positive side,
Kenya is already diversifying its export markets away from Europe and towards Asia and Africa:
today more than 45 percent of Kenya's trade is with other African countries, and trade with Asia
is rising exponentially. This positive development can also be more fully exploited.

B. 
Political Context
7. 
The next year will define the next decade for Kenya, as the country will undergo
several changes that provide important opportunities for political renewal. First, the new
Constitution has provided Kenya with a roadmap to a more inclusive and equitable future. It
introduces the most far-reaching institutional reforms in Kenya's history, and its impact is
already being felt (e.g., in the televised vetting processes used to appoint a new Chief Justice and
Deputy Chief Justice, and the large amounts of budgetary and other government data made
available online in Kenya's open data initiative). Second, a key test of Kenya's growing
maturity will be how the Government and the country manage the next elections, which should
take place by March 15, 2013. These elections will be the first since the violent 2007 elections,
and they will be unusually complicated, as voters will be voting not only for the president and

2

members of parliament, but also for senator, county governor, county assembly member, and
female representative. Third, these challenges will need to be addressed in a context of growing
economic uncertainty. High food and fuel prices, drought in the Horn of Africa, and the euro
crisis have weakened Kenya's external position, which was already fragile given its large current
account deficit. Going forward, the Government will need to contain macroeconomic pressures
by maintaining a tight monetary stance and exercising fiscal prudence. To manage these
challenges, Kenya's policy makers will need to display skill and steadfast leadership. Kenyans
have high expectations for the next elections and their leaders will need to move forward with
high-quality planning and execution to ensure that these expectations are not disappointed.

8. 
The approval of the new Constitution was a watershed moment in Kenya's post-
independence history. It was approved in a public referendum by 67 percent of the voters. Key
changes that it introduced include subjecting the presidency to more checks and balances;
increasing the independence of the judiciary; strengthening parliamentary oversight over the
executive; devolving government to 47 elected county governments to create a better center-
region balance; and protecting the rights of women, marginalized groups, and the disabled
through an ambitious bill of rights. The Government and its international partners are now
focusing on the large legislative agenda that must be completed to implement these reforms, and
successful implementation of the new Constitution is likely to be the single most critical factor in
determining Kenya's development prospects. It may also trigger significant changes in the
Bank's engagement in Kenya.

9. 
While the new Constitution offers avenues for improving and building credible
institutions, vested interests remain strong and impunity continues to pose the biggest
governance challenge. In June 2011, in line with the constitution, the Government established a
new Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) to replace the Kenya Anti-Corruption
Commission (KACC), which ceased to exist. While the EACC as a constitutional body has a
stronger legal foundation than the KACC and so could be more powerful in the long term, there
have already been serious attempts to undermine its effectiveness. Also in line with the new
Constitution, the Government appointed a new Chief Justice, Attorney General, and Director of
Public Prosecution, but there has still been no successful prosecution of any politically-
connected individual for corruption or involvement in post-election violence. Issues of fraud and
corruption remain daily fare, and much more needs to be done to control them. Improving
governance and in particular strengthening fiduciary oversight and integrity mechanisms will
therefore continue to be critical challenges for the Government and across the Bank's portfolio.

10. 
Kenya's devolution program is one of the most ambitious in the world, transferring
a substantial amount of power and resources to an entirely new level of government and
carrying the promise of a more equitable model of development. Rather than giving political
autonomy to administrative units that are already in place, Kenya in one go will replace eight
provinces and 280+ districts with forty-seven new counties. This devolution is intended to
rectify the unequal distribution across the country of investments and services that, historically,
has been concentrated spatially to the benefit of some regions at the expense of others. Although
the transition into a devolved state can continue for up to three years after the next elections,
much analytical and technical work is already underway to understand the implications of
devolution for the Government and for the Bank's portfolio.

3

11. 
For devolution to work, several challenges will need to be addressed. One is ensuring
that the devolution of functions from central to local levels will not result in deterioration in
service delivery. While the national government will remain responsible for policy, oversight
and some service delivery, county governments will be responsible for a range of service
delivery functions in the health, agriculture, transport and water sectors. There is a real risk that
the poorer and more remote counties that hope to gain the most from devolution will in fact lose
the most, at least in the short term, because regions that have been historically left out are
precisely the ones least able seamlessly to take over service delivery obligations. Moreover,
while the Constitution mandates that at least 15 percent of national revenue be transferred to
counties, this is unlikely to be enough to finance all devolved functions. Ensuring appropriate
financing-including possibly through conditional block grants-will be critical to avoiding
additional fiscal stress and ensuring that service delivery standards are maintained.

III. Progress toward CPS Outcomes and Emerging Challenges
12. 
Kenya's progress toward CPS outcomes has been largely positive, but important
challenges remain. The following section describes how Kenya's new realities affect the
Bank's program under each CPS outcome. Table 1 provides an overview of progress on each
outcome. A more detailed assessment of progress is provided in Annex 1.

Table 1: Progress on CPS Outcomes

CPS outcome 1.1: Improved business environment and competitiveness

CPS outcome 1.2: Improved core infrastructure, with deeper regional integration

CPS sub-outcome 1. 2a: Transport

CPS sub-outcome 1.2b: Energy

CPS sub-outcome 1.2c: Water

CPS sub-outcome 1.2d: Information and communication technology

I CPS outcome 1.3: Enhanced agricultural productivity, with a focus on food security

CPS outcome 1.4: Strengthening public sector management and improving sub-
national governance, especially in urban areas
CPS outcome 2.1: Better access to health care, education, and basic infrastructure
services

CPS sub-outcome 2.1a: Better access to health care

CPS sub-outcome 2.1b: Better access to education

CPS sub-outcome 2.1c: Better access to basic infrastructure services

CPS outcome 2.2: Establishing comprehensive scalable social protection mechanisms

CPS outcome 3.1: Improved management of key natural resources

CPS outcome 3.2: Adapting to climate change

4

A. 
Progress on CPS Objective 1: Unleashing Kenya's Growth Potential
13. 
The CPS outcomes under the first objective are: (i) improving Kenya's business
environment and competitiveness; (ii) improving core infrastructure, especially in roads,
electricity, and water supply, with a view to deepening regional integration; (iii) enhancing
agricultural productivity, with a special focus on food security; and (iv) strengthening public
sector management and improving sub-national governance, especially in urban areas.

14. 
Overall progress on improving Kenya's business environment has been mixed, and
challenges remain to improve its competitiveness. Even though Kenya implemented reforms
in areas covered by the Doing Business and Global Competitiveness surveys, its Doing Business
ranking fell over 2009-2011 due to faster progress by other countries. While this CPS outcome
takes a narrow focus on the regulatory environment, the Bank's program takes a broader
perspective, including particularly on the need to establish more private-public partnerships
(PPPs) and increase access to finance. Key challenges going forward include improving the
lending environment, improving exports (particularly for manufacturing), and attracting foreign
direct investment (which remains below expected levels for Kenya).

15. 
Progress in the transport sector has been mixed, and challenges remain to deepen
regional integration. Kenya has an extensive road network, but only 11 percent of roads are in
good condition. The time to move a container through the port or to travel from Mombasa to
Uganda has improved, but at a slower pace than expected. With strong growth in East Africa,
constraints in the port are an increasing impediment to trade and investment; hence increasing
the port's capacity and operational efficiency are critically important. The need to attract private
investors into transport infrastructure also remains an important objective, and to this end the
capacity of the construction industry to deliver and maintain capital projects needs further
improvement. While the transport sector has generally succeeded in institutional reform, its
capacity to deliver services remains limited and it also needs to adjust to devolution.

16. 
There has been good progress in the energy sector, but attracting private
investments to meet the country's energy needs remains a challenge. The number of
electricity connections has risen significantly, but transmission and distribution losses remain
higher than expected. IDA is anchoring an expansion of geothermal generation at Olkaria, and
an innovative combination of IDA, IFC, and MIGA credits and guarantees is supporting
Independent Power Producers (IPPs) in thermal, geothermal and wind generation. Even so,
Kenya will need more investment in generation capacity to keep pace with its growth, and it will
also need to shift generation capacity over time from drought-sensitive hydropower and fuel
price-sensitive thermal options to greener technologies. The key challenge going forward is to
attract more private investment, and this will require identifying more long-term financing for
energy projects in Kenya. In addition, there is a need to understand better the volatility of oil and
gas prices, which continue to have a negative impact.

17. 
Good progress has also been made on improving access to water, but shifting water
service delivery modalities so that they accommodate devolution will be a challenge. Over
the short term, critical legislation, including a draft bill for the National Land Commission, needs
to be reviewed to ensure consistency and harmony across laws during the institutional
transformation of the water sector. Important analytical work has been done to inform this

5

process and to identify investment needs to meet current and future demand-for households,
industry and agriculture. As with transport and energy, enlarging access to private-sector
financing will be critical to satisfying Kenya's growing needs for water production, storage and
delivery. Investing in private water infrastructure remains particularly difficult in poorer urban
areas, given their high degree of informality.

18. 
Good progress was achieved in the information and communications sector,
including a fast expansion of access and the deployment of one of the first government open
data portals in Africa. Access to internet services rose dramatically, from 1.3 million
subscribers in 2007 to 14.3 million (37 percent of the population) by 2011. In addition, 80
percent of Kenyan adults own a mobile phone and another 10 percent regularly borrow one; and
calling rates have dropped sharply, making Kenya's communication costs among the lowest
worldwide. In July 2011, Kenya also launched its open data portal, which provides free access
to large digital datasets online. The government is now developing a plan to institutionalize the
portal through enabling policy reforms (including access to information legislation), expand
datasets and usability, and conduct sustained outreach with data users and the public.

19. 
Agriculture productivity has declined, and so enhancing productivity and also food
security remains a key objective. Kenya continues to suffer from a structural food deficit.
Hence food prices, particularly for maize, are usually high. Reforms, both to improve food
productivity and enhance domestic and regional marketing systems, are urgently needed to
unleash the sector's potential and to attract private sector investments and participation. The
Bank has tried to persuade the government to abandon its high maize price policy, to permit
maize imports to enter the country duty free and to reform the National Cereals and Produce
Board (which has been prone to corruption) but with limited success. Furthermore, climate
variability and change are increasingly affecting agricultural productivity and food security, as
evidenced by numerous droughts in recent years: an EU-UN-WBG drought impact assessment
completed in January 2012 found that damages and losses to the Kenyan economy resulting from
drought over 2008-11 totaled a cumulative US$12 billion, with 72 percent occurring in livestock
and 13 percent in agriculture. Thus climate-smart agriculture remains a priority.

20. 
Progress towards strengthening public sector management and improving sub-
national governance, especially in urban areas, has been slow, though the new Constitution
has increased the urgency of this effort. Among other things, the new Constitution provides
the basis to overhaul the institutional and legal framework for public financial management
(PFM). As 15 percent of national revenues are to be transferred to the counties, the rest of the
CPS period will be dominated by the need to introduce prudent fiscal management practices in
county governments, while further strengthening central fiscal management practices. There
have generally been improvements over the past two years, including strengthening audit and
other oversight capacities, and rolling out Fixed Assets, Cash Management and Accounts
Receivable of Integrated Financial Management System (IFMIS) across central ministries.
Nevertheless, PFM remains weak and issues remain, such as weak financial reporting, an
ineffective internal control framework, and an audit backlog with regard to local authorities.

6

B. 
Progress on CPS Objective 2: Addressing Inequality and Social Exclusion
21. 
CPS outcomes under the second objective are: (i) improving access to health care,
education, and basic infrastructure services; and (ii) establishing comprehensive scalable social
protection mechanisms.

22. 
There has been encouraging progress in the health sector, based on the
implementation of enhanced governance mechanisms, which needs to be sustained. During
FY10-1 1, over 25.3 million people directly benefited from activities under the health SWAp;
about one million children were fully immunized in their first year. A joint donor-government
fiduciary review suggests that grants and essential medicines are also reaching health facilities as
intended. This progress comes after a long period of limited success, due to governance issues,
and so the Bank's engagement remains focused on addressing corruption risks. Other forward-
looking challenges include strengthening M&E and improving record-keeping at health facilities.
Under the constitution, the delivery of health services will be devolved to county governments-
a process that needs to be managed carefully to ensure that service delivery is not impeded.

23. While education indicators have improved, governance issues ended a donor
program supporting the government, providing important lessons for future engagement in
the sector. Data from the Ministry of Education showed improvements in key indicators, but
due to emerging evidence of corruption (uncovered by the government's Internal Audit
Department (IAD) with Bank support), IDA support was effectively ended in July 2009, about
17 months before credit closure. Post-election violence and lack of quality monitoring data also
negatively affected implementation. Partly as a result, overall progress in the sector was
unsatisfactory and significant risks exist with respect to: (i) achieving the education MDGs; (ii)
improving sector capacity, especially for collecting and analyzing data; (iii) increasing access to
secondary school; and (iv) improving the school-to-work transition. Among the greatest
challenges in the sector now are inadequate oversight and accountability systems.

24. 
Overall progress on urban infrastructure development was slow, and devolution will
pose a key challenge, as new counties will be in charge of urban service delivery. While the
constitution strengthens claims of citizens for access to basic urban services, including adequate
housing and water and sanitation, it also shifts the management of urban revenues and services
from stand-alone national bodies to the new counties. A 2011 urban areas and cities act, to
become effective after the elections, provides for classification, governance and management of
urban areas-but the constitution does not recognize urban governments as such. Instead, the
counties will need to create urban governments as their delegated agencies-a process that the
Bank is supporting and that will also affect the implementation of Bank projects in ways that are
still under assessment.

25. 
There has been some progress in providing social protection to vulnerable groups,
but a key challenge remains to establish a more integrated social protection system. The
Bank's support to youth employment suffered from weaknesses in the financial management of a
public works component originally envisaged to be implemented through six line ministries in
eight districts. This complicated implementation mechanism made it difficult to ensure a
sufficient span of control over all sub-project activities, and so the component was cancelled. By
contrast, there has been good progress in providing cash transfers to orphans and vulnerable

7

children. The government's overriding challenge now is to defragment social protection and
provide a more strategic, holistic and consolidate approach, including for post-disaster relief.

C. 
Progress on CPS Objective 3:
Managing Resource Constraints and Environmental Challenges
26. 
CPS outcomes under the third objective are: (i) improving management of key natural
resources; and (ii) adapting to climate change.

27. 
Progress on improving the management of natural resources has been mixed, and
further progress will be linked to finding a long-term solution to pressing land-use issues.
Forest areas managed according to approved plans have increased in number, but more slowly
than expected. In addition, establishment of a national drought contingency fund and drought
management system was stalled due to integrity issues in the Arid Lands Project, which
supported these efforts, though the government established a Drought Management Authority in
2011 on its own. Going forward, livelihood investments will be linked to the devolution agenda
and the Bank's dialogue on a country-wide program to provide support to marginalized areas.
This will help both to leverage support for sustainable natural resource management and to guide
and encourage government use of community-driven development (CDD) approaches.

28. 
Progress on specific indicators for climate change adaptation has been slow, but
climate change as a key issue has been increasingly mainstreamed across the portfolio. In
particular, the Bank is helping to improve forest and water management; to diversify the sources
of energy towards renewables; and to improve readiness and response in cases of climate-
induced emergencies. For example, IDA in response to the 2011 drought has programmed
resources from the Crisis Response Window in agriculture (helping farmers to adopt better crop
technologies and pastoralists to diversify livelihoods), health (enhancing surveillance, drug and
medical supplies, and treatment of malnutrition), water resources (expanding water supply and
storage facilities), social protection (strengthening safety nets), energy (developing generation
alternatives to hydropower) and disaster risk reduction. The effort to introduce bus rapid
transport and commuter rail, particularly in Nairobi, is also intended to reduce carbon emissions.

D. 
Progress on Governance
29. 
A renewed faith in Kenya's democracy provides Kenyans with unprecedented
opportunities and major challenges going forward. Kenya today features a vibrant multi-
party democracy, a very vocal media and high levels of transparency but, paradoxically, low
levels of accountability and high levels of corruption. Recent developments, including
reconciliation after the 2007 elections as well as the adoption of a new Constitution, are helping
to improve openness and increase citizens' voice, strengthen the role of the judiciary, achieve
legal reforms, improve service delivery, attain a more equitable distribution of resources, and
strengthen political good will. The challenges going forward are therefore to (i) protect the new
openness (e.g. sustain the open data initiative, improve data quality and provide whistle blower
protection), (ii) manage citizen expectations in a politically-challenging environment (e.g.
around the upcoming elections, the war with al Shaabab and the legal processes of the
International Criminal Court), (iii) fight impunity and disregard for the rule of law, and (iv) keep
devolution from resulting in elite capture (e.g. the decentralization of corruption) while
strengthening the capacity for its implementation (e.g. improve public finances and procurement,
absorption capacity and transparency and accountability at the local level).

8

30. 
To help the government seize these opportunities and address the challenges, the
Bank will continue to focus on governance as a cross-cutting and prime objective of its
strategy. The Africa Region's strategy identifies governance and public sector capacity as its
foundation and notes that governance and leadership constitute the main challenges underlying
Africa's development. This is especially true in Kenya, and the Bank's strategy will continue to
have a strong governance focus. In order to better underline this focus, the Bank identified three
key areas that best highlight the Bank's contribution to this important agenda: (i) increased
public confidence in the judiciary, (ii) improved openness and accountability, and (iii)
meaningful devolution. Future Bank efforts will broadly focus in these areas, which will provide
useful building blocks for the next CPS.

31. 
During the first half of the CPS period, the Bank addressed serious governance
issues in its portfolio, through firm implementation of the GAC agenda. In September 2009,
the government's Internal Audit Department (IAD) concluded a forensic audit of the Kenya
Education Sector Support Project (KESSP) and the Western Kenya CDD project, finding
substantial questionable spending, and possible fraud and corruption, under each project.
Disbursements were immediately suspended and work undertaken to determine what caused the
integrity failures, whether systemic issues contributed, and how such systemic issues could best
be addressed. Throughout this period, the Bank's Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) conducted
and finalized a forensic audit of phase two of the Arid Lands Management Project, presenting its
findings to the government in April 2011. In this case, project disbursements were informally
suspended in July 2010, based on a verbal communication of INT's initial findings, and work is
now underway to understand fully the implications of INT's report. KESSP and Arid Lands both
closed in December 2010, as scheduled, without resuming disbursements, but Western Kenya
CDD is slowly resuming operations, after a 16-month suspension, with (inter alia) a new
professionally-recruited project implementation unit.

32. 
Over FY11-12, the Bank incorporated key lessons from IAD audits and INT
investigations and issued new guidance on projects with decentralized expenditures. Of the
entire Bank portfolio of about US$2.2 billion, US$2 billion involve centralized expenditures
(where the Bank directly supervises procurement, financial management, compliance, and value-
for-money, dealing mostly with large-scale contracts). For such projects, anti-corruption efforts
have focused on improving procurement, including by eliminating pre-qualification (to reduce
opportunities for cartel behavior) and by undertaking independent reviews of procurement
processes in parallel to government processes to ensure that there is compliance with all
requirements. These and other measures appear to have resulted in some success, as bids for
road contracts (for example) now number seven to nine per contract (as opposed to two or three
previously), include companies of many nationalities and regions (as opposed to one region or
nationality in some cases), and result in some bids below engineers' estimates (as opposed to
bids five or more percent above). More recently, the Bank's anti-corruption efforts have
focused on the US$200 million in portfolio activities involving decentralized expenditures
(namely, small expenditures at local level involving myriad spending agencies), where the Bank
relies on intermediaries to supervise procurement, financial management, compliance and value-
for-money. In response to these risks, the Bank is enhancing project design and implementation
support in ways further detailed below (see paragraph 40).

9

E. 
Progress on Gender
33. 
Another cross-cutting issue is gender, and the Bank continues to support the
integration of gender concerns in design, implementation, and M&E across its portfolio.
Inter alia, the Bank has helped the government to establish gender-related targets in government
Performance Contracts; to gather gender-disaggregated data on water and sanitation, household
energy, and climate management through surveying 4,100 men and women under a Bank-
supported agriculture project; and to remove gender-related obstacles to access to safe water
(e.g., by eliminating the need to supply a title deed as collateral for a water connection, reducing
connection fees, and amortizing meter repayment). Based on survey and other work, Gender
Policy Notes are now being developed at the sectoral level, aiming to expand women's access to
water, sanitation services, modern energy, and opportunities in agriculture. IDA has also
facilitated South-South exchanges to strengthen Kenya's capacity to diagnose policy options and
challenges for gender mainstreaming.

IV. Adjustments to the CPS and Lessons Learned in Implementation
34. 
The overall objectives of the CPS remain valid and relevant. The following section
provides a brief reflection on the lessons learned in implementation thus far, outlines some
adjustments to the Bank's program in light of the new realities on the ground, and introduces a
few changes to the results framework to improve its realism. Any changes to the original CPS
reflect a deepening of the Bank's strategic directions rather than a new course direction.

A. 
Lessons Learned
35. 
Lessons have been in four areas, prompting some program adjustments. These
include: (i) the devolution agenda, (ii) the use of new Bank lending instruments, (iii) knowledge,
partnerships and leveraging of finance (in line with the World Bank strategy for Africa), and (iv)
governance. Regarding devolution, it is now clear that it will affect a range of sectors, including
water (where new institutional arrangements could lead to inefficiencies in the use of scarce
resources), agriculture (where it offers the chance for better service delivery and enhanced
productivity), health (where it will require building capacity at the county level to manage the
transition and sustain the focus on the health MDGs), and urban (where the management of
urban revenues and services will shift from standalone entities to the new counties). Regarding
instruments, experience shows that an exclusive use of sector investment loans is limiting the
Bank's ability to support government efforts to achieve specified reforms. In particular, the
consolidation of social protection efforts could best be supported through the new PforR
instrument, and various government-wide PFM and private sector development (PSD) efforts
could best be supported by development policy lending. In this context, the opportunity to use
these instruments will continue to be explored during the remaining CPS period. Regarding
leveraging of financing, facilitation of public-private partnerships (PPP) beyond the relatively
well-covered energy sector is increasingly important to support private investments, and
partnerships with civil society and the media need to be strengthened to close the gap between
transparency and accountability. Regarding governance, it will continue to pose the biggest
challenge for the Bank's program in Kenya. The focus going forward will be to support the
strengthening of key national and county institutions to deal with governance challenges and to
address GAC challenges within the Bank's portfolio, through strengthening reporting and
monitoring systems and an enhanced emphasis on social accountability. In addition to these
adjustments, as Kenya starts to reach MIC status and its dependency on aid falls further (from a

10

current 10% of the budget), the Bank will have to step up its efforts as a knowledge provider
even more.

B. 
CPS Program Adjustments
36. While the exact form of devolution will be determined after the elections, the Bank
is already adjusting to its potential impact. With AusAID support, the Bank has been running
a large analytical and technical program to provide policy and institutional reform advice to the
government to help manage the complex transition from its current centralized to a more
decentralized structure. The four aspects of devolution that will impact development
programming in Kenya are (i) functional assignments, (ii) inter-governmental fiscal relations,
(iii) civil servant assignments, and (iv) accountability mechanisms. The decentralization of some
currently centralized functions will impact a number of Bank operations, including particularly
urban development projects, which will have to reorient activities selectively from national to
local (county-level) structures. To accommodate these changes, project preparation or
implementation already involves close attention to the possibility of institutional transition, with
a view to ensuring that appropriate capacity is built into whatever local structures finally emerge.
With at least 15 percent of national revenues to be transferred to the new county governments,
the Bank is also working hard to ensure that devolved functions are appropriately financed, that
intergovernmental fiscal relations are appropriate (and in particular that devolved functions are
adequately financed, possibly with conditional grants), and that new structures do not create
distortions. In addition, the Bank's social development and PFM teams are refocusing their
activities to enable them to provide hands-on support to introduce appropriate accountability
measures in county governments.

37. 
Given Kenya's far-reaching governance reforms, the Bank will explore the use of
instruments that are better suited to support this agenda. The current Bank portfolio entirely
involves sector investment lending. A planned PforR operation in social protection will
introduce a focus on results-based lending, and help to reduce fragmentation within the sector.
To this end, IDA has helped to articulate a social protection policy on the national level and is
now working towards consolidating existing programs onto a single registry, using biometric
identification, a private payment provider, and consolidated management information and M&E
systems, so that the government is better able to provide support to vulnerable populations, even
at times of emergency. Despite government achievement of most prior actions related to a
planned development policy loan (DPL)-which the Bank saw as the most effective vehicle for
supporting key PFM and private sector development reforms-issues unrelated to the project
have stalled presentation of the loan (see below). Even so, a properly-structured DPL series
remains the best way to achieve development effectiveness, for the following reasons:
* Support to governance reforms. A DPL is ideally suited to helping to implement the
constitution, which involves the most sustained governance reform in Kenya's history.
* Leverage. As aid remains relatively flat and Kenya's budget continues to grow, a DPL
series would help to focus donors and the relevant parts of government on an articulated
multi-year policy and institutional reform program, particularly in complex areas
requiring multi-agency/ministry cooperation over a sustained multi-year period.
* Lower fiduciary risks. Kenya's CPIA rating of 3.8 is better than the rating for most
countries receiving budget support, and a commitment to open data provides new
opportunities to reduce leakage and improve service delivery.

11

* Complementary IMF program. Since 2011, the IMF has supported a substantial and
successful policy-based operation, which includes governance reforms (such as the
introduction of a Treasury single account); a complementary IDA program, focused on
social and structural reforms, would enhance the transformative impact of that program.

38. 
In line with the World Bank strategy for Africa, the Bank's strategy for Kenya will
enhance its focus in three key areas: (i) knowledge, (ii) partnerships and (iii) leveraging of
finance. Given that Kenya aims to reach MIC status by 2020 and that it is becoming less and
less an aid-dependant country, the Bank's enhanced focus on being a knowledge provider rather
than a traditional project financier will increasingly take center-stage. The highly-successful
launch (in 2009) of the bi-annual Kenya Economic Updates, which have helped the Bank to
frame debate on Kenya's economic reform agenda, will provide a model for disseminating
upcoming poverty work and flagship sectoral work (most recently, in water, education and social
protection). As IDA (and more generally donor) financing continues to become a smaller part of
Kenya's overall development financing, and Kenya seeks to learn the lessons of experience from
developing countries that are slightly ahead of it, the focus on applying global development
experience to local development problems will grow. Partnerships will also be crucial for the
Bank to remain relevant in Kenya. This includes: partnerships with other donors to achieve
scale; partnerships with the private sector to leverage more private sector financing, especially
for infrastructure; and partnerships with the media and civil society to continue to improve
governance and accountability. Leveraging additional sources of finance will also be of
importance in the WBG's work, as Kenya's financing needs, as a MIC, will be far beyond the
ability of the WBG, even in conjunction with other donor partners, to finance. Recent successes
point a way forward: for example, the combination of IFC investments and IDA and MIGA
guarantees is enabling Independent Power Projects to achieve financial closure on investments
that will bring up to 600MW of new power to the grid. But challenges remain, as shown by the
failure of a six-year WBG effort to support a private consortium to solve Nairobi's downtown
traffic congestion (in that case the WBG withdrew in January 2010 due to integrity concerns
about one of the private investors). Even so, the WBG and the government recognize that public
private partnerships (PPPs)-in energy, transport and water as well as other sectors-will be
needed to achieve Kenya's development goals, and the Bank remains committed to helping to
identify "bankable" deals.

39. 
Partnerships with other development partners remain important to the WBG in
Kenya. The Development Partner Coordination Group (DCG) involves a monthly meeting of
heads of mission and agencies and is currently chaired jointly by the World Bank Country
Director and the Swedish Ambassador. Regular attendees include all of the traditional bilateral
agencies, as well as the Bank, the IMF, AfDB, the EU, and the UN; non-traditional donors
(Brazil, China, and India) have also been invited, but attend irregularly. DCG discussions focus
on high-level issues, including (over the past few years) Kenya's economic prospects as well as
its political challenges, which will receive more attention in the run-up to the next elections. The
Aid Effectiveness Group (AEG) is the key mechanism for donor-government coordination at the
technical level: it is co-chaired by the Ministry of Finance, and typically involves deputy heads
of mission. Starting in June 2009, the Bank also tried to establish a regularly-scheduled
Development Partnership Forum (DPF) that would bring together government leaders as well as
ambassadors and heads of development agencies to discuss the overall government program as

12

well as key priorities for joint donor-government implementation in the coming 6-12 months.
The DPF met in November 2009, June and November 2010, and in a technical "pre"-DPF
meeting in June 2011, but the Government cancelled the November 2011 meeting for internal
reasons. The next meeting is now expected to take place in May or June 2012.

40. 
Implementation of the GAC agenda will have to be further enhanced, building on
lessons learned (both negative and positive). Integrity issues in some of the Bank's projects
have pushed the Bank to develop new approaches to project design and implementation support.
Given that corruption risks appear currently to be concentrated on the small portion of the
portfolio with decentralized expenditures, a Kenya Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC)
committee has been established within the Bank team to monitor ongoing and planned operations
for effective anti-corruption measures. In light particularly of the IDA findings on KESSP and
the Western Kenya CDD project and the INT findings on Arid Lands, IDA projects with
decentralized expenditures are now placing enhanced attention on: (i) improved project record-
keeping; (ii) improved management information systems and reporting; (iii) enhanced
supervision, including randomized site visits and geo-mapping; (iv) continual third-party
monitoring, involving qualified fiduciary agencies in selective cases; (v) stronger social
accountability, with more effective information disclosure as well as complaints and grievance
handling mechanisms; (vi) reduction or elimination of expenditure categories that are highly
prone to abuse; and (vii) recruitment of project staff, where needed, through professional
agencies that will control for inappropriate associations. Even though these efforts will
undoubtedly help to guard the Bank's monies, the ultimate objective remains to strengthen
country governance systems and make sure corruption risks are reduced with respect to
government's own expenditures. To that end, the government's Internal Audit Department (with
INT support) will conduct from April an expanded forensic audit of the Arid Lands project,
though coverage may not be complete due to the high levels of insecurity in north-eastern Kenya
resulting from clan-fighting, Somali refugee movements, and the presence of al Shabaab. In
addition, at the Treasury's request, IDA is working with MoF to devise a new government policy
on decentralized expenditures, incorporating lessons from experience with the Bank portfolio.

C. 
Implementation Progress
41. 
As planned, implementation of the CPS brought a new way of doing business to the
Bank's engagement in Kenya. Over the last three years, average project size increased from
about US$50 million to US$115 million, excluding regional projects, and it is still increasing. In
addition, average disbursements increased from about US$65 million per year over FYO2-07 to
US$241 million in FY11. A strong effort has also been made to take a more programmatic and
longer-term approach. Recognizing that Kenya's key development challenges will take decades
of concerted effort to address fully, lending and financing are now focusing increasingly on
identifying, initiating and implementing programs on a national transformative scale, to be
implemented over 10 or more years. To this end, projects are being prepared in key sectors
(energy, transport, water, urban and social protection) in parallel, with earlier projects supporting
the preparatory work (e.g., analysis, feasibility studies, design work) needed to enable later
projects to get a quick start. As of June 2011, the indicative IDA16 envelope for Kenya is
SDR1,144 million, including a final FY12 allocation of SDR397.6 million. Subsequently, an
additional $90 million of Crisis Response Window funding was approved, indicatively, to
support drought-mitigation activities in light of the Horn of Africa drought in 2011.

13

42. While a few planned IDA projects were cancelled, most are on track, albeit with
some delays. Planned projects that were not delivered include the third phase of Arid Lands and
a second phase of the Education Sector Support Project: in both cases, these successor projects
were cancelled due to integrity issues in their predecessors. In addition, an FY11 effort to
prepare a DPL was only partially successful: while the prior actions were mostly completed,
some donors expressed unwillingness to support the DPL until they were satisfied that the ICC
prosecutions, implementation of the Constitution, and free, fair and peaceful elections were on
track or, in the case elections, completed. Annex 3 shows the planned and the actual lending
program, as well as the proposed lending program for the remainder of the CPS period.

43. 
A further consolidation of the current program is underway, both for knowledge
and for lending. Program selectivity will take into account lessons learned thus far in CPS
implementation, with a strong focus on: (i) achieving development solutions in areas where
knowledge or lending will take place; (ii) engaging with relevant issues where the Bank has the
capacity to provide value; (iii) responding to Government demand and commitment; (iv)
achieving complementarity to other aspects of the program; and (v) enhancing partnerships with
other development partners, civil society, and private sector.

44. 
The current IDA portfolio has 21 projects with net commitments of US$2.4 billion
and seven regional projects with net commitments of US$386 million. The undisbursed
balance as of March 2012 was about US$1.67 billion. Key sectors include: transport (33
percent), energy (21 percent), water and urban (15 percent), and health (13 percent). There are
two problem projects. Kenya's portfolio performance is reasonable, with key performance
indicators above AFR and Bank-wide averages, though lagging disbursements are an issue.
With new commitments averaging US$540 million per year, the portfolio grew by U$ 1.1 billion
over FY10- 11, with large new investments in the energy, roads, and urban sectors. There are 64
active Trust Funds (TF), with a total commitment of about US$81 million. This is a relatively
small TF portfolio for a country the size of Kenya, but further analysis is required to reduce
fragmentation in Bank-executed TFs and to ensure that recipient-executed TFs are aligned with
CPS objectives. The average TF disbursement rate is about 50 percent. The current IDA,
regional and TF portfolios are presented in more detail in Annex 5, 6 and 7.

45. 
In FY11, IFC committed US$172 million, up from US$60 million the previous year.
New commitments in FY12 are expected to increase substantially to more than US$400 million,
mainly in finance and infrastructure. This includes, as noted above, the first of the jointly
supported IPPs plus IFC support alongside IDA to KPLC, the power distribution company, a
restructuring of the Rift Valley Railways, bringing in a new operator and new capital, and
support to Kenya Airways in their route and fleet expansion. In the financial sector IFC
supported a number of banks, including $100 million to Equity Bank, oriented primarily to low-
income consumers and micro/small businesses. The IFC Kenya portfolio is presented in more
detail in Annex 9.

46. 
The World Bank Institute (WBI) maintains a large and robust program in the
region and much of that work focuses on efforts in Kenya supporting capacity development
and governance. As the program in the region develops, WBI is building on synergies with the
IDA program to support Open Budget Data, improved transparency in PFM, Mapping for

14

Results, and increased social accountability through programs with the media, civil society and
parliaments. Given the large lending effort, WBI work also complements ongoing activities in
support of climate change, urban development, public private partnerships and improvements in
health sector delivery.

D. 
Changes to the Results Framework
47. While the CPS results framework remains robust, a few changes are being
introduced to improve its realism. (i) Three (out of 30) CPS outcome indicators are being
replaced with new indicators that better capture the Bank's contribution to CPS outcomes. This
does not constitute a major change, especially since most new indicators are derived from the
same projects as the previous indicators. (ii) CPS pillar 2, reducing inequality and social
exclusion, is being merged with pillar 3, managing resource constraints and environmental
challenges. Together they now comprise a new CPS pillar 2, reducing inequality and
strengthening resilience. This change improves the alignment of the CPS with the Africa
Region's strategy, which was finalized one year after the CPS. Specifically, it improves
alignment of the new pillar 2 of the CPS with pillar 2 of the Africa Strategy, vulnerability and
resilience, which addresses macroeconomic and idiosyncratic shocks such as natural disasters,
disease, food shortages, conflict, political violence, and climate change. (iii) Another "change"
includes the addition of a governance "pillar" to the results framework. Governance was already
identified as a cross-cutting objective in the CPS, but it was felt that highlighting it within the
results framework would enhance its prominence. (iv) A specific CPS outcome on climate
change was dropped, as it was mainly associated with a project (Arid Lands) that was delayed
due to corruption issues in the predecessor operation. That said, climate-sensitive indicators
have instead been added across the results framework to better capture its multi-sectoral nature.
Annex 2 describes changes to the CPS results framework in more detail.

V. Risks
48. While the risks already identified in the CPS remain relevant, the manifestation of
those risks and therefore their impact on the Bank's program have changed. For example,
while the CPS identified the risks to global economic shocks, Kenya has shown more
vulnerability than anticipated and in 2011 the Bank's policy dialogue had unexpectedly to focus
on the basic need to maintain macroeconomic stability. Another external shock already
identified in the CPS was the country's vulnerability to droughts. A recent drought impact
assessment found that drought-related damages and losses cost the economy a cumulative US$12
billion over 2008-11. The Bank embraced those findings while working on drought management
measures through various sector projects and within its policy dialogue. While the CPS also
emphasized security issues, the Kenyan army's incursion into Somalia in 2011 and its pending
merger with the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) further impacts Bank
engagement in areas infiltrated by al Shaabab. The CPS also acknowledged that the program
will be subject to fiduciary risks, and this continues to be the case. The program is now able to
build on INT and IAD findings to implement anti-corruption measures across the portfolio,
which should help to mitigate those risks.

49. 
The upcoming elections pose the potential risk of violence, though the Kenyan
political system has matured significantly since the violent aftermath of the December 2007
elections. The ICC prosecution of four high-level government officials charged with committing

15

crimes against humanity during the post-election violence of 2007-08 has sent a strong message
that the incitation of violence will attract repercussions. The Government has also passed new
hate speech laws and prosecuted violators of that law. Moreover, the August 2010 referendum
on the new Constitution, conducted by a newly-constituted independent electoral commission,
was conducted peacefully and professionally. At the same time, security forces have been
retrained, and stakeholders in Kenya are making concerted efforts to thwart incipient activity that
could lead to widespread violence. Even so, the possibility that such violence will occur at the
time of the elections remains high, as most elections in Kenya in the era of multiparty democracy
have involved some violence. If violence occurs, it is likely negatively to affect project
implementation, as in 2007-08, when various Bank-supported activities had to come to a halt in
the violence-affected areas.

50. 
The change in government that must occur through the next elections also brings
some risk of policy reversals. Although Kenya's largest political parties and likely presidential
frontrunners agree on the broad development agenda, as set out in Vision 2030 and supported by
the CPS, the risk of policy reversal remains. In particular, fiscal pressure and weak economic
growth could strengthen the political clout of parliamentarians and other stakeholders who have
continued to lobby for distortionary policy measures, such as introducing price controls on fuel,
maize and other basic commodities, or capping the interest rates charged by banks. If such
measures were to be enacted by parliament (as has happened even in the current administration),
and the executive did not continue to demonstrate the policy restraint that has served Kenya so
well over the last decade, macroeconomic management and subsequently growth could decline
sharply, erasing many of the gains of the past. The same is true for areas in which the country
made unexpected recent progress, such as the open data initiative and strengthened audit
capacity: recent gains have been dramatic, but are not yet deeply entrenched and so could be
relatively easily reversed. To mitigate these risks, the Bank will continue to work closely with
like-minded officials in the central bank and the Ministry of Finance and also continue to focus
analytical work (including just-in-time pieces as well as the biannual Kenya Economic Update)
highlighting positive and negative developments as well as key emerging risks.

16

Private Sector 
Development 
MTP Objective: A 
vibrant and globally
competitive financial 
comettie 
inncal 
sector driving high levels 
of savings and Kenya's 
investment need 
* Drive increases in 
efficiency and depth 
through selected 
reforms 
* Broaden access to 
financial services, 
including formalizing 
informal finance and 
extend access to 
microfinance 
* Deepen capital markets 
by raising institutional 
capital and expanding 
bond and equity markets 
* Improve the business 
environment in critical 
areas, such as licensing 
and security 
* Implement efficiency- 
enhancing reforms in 
the sector. 

CPS Outcome: Improved business 
environment and competitiveness 

Kenya' Doing Business ranking 

improves. Baseline (2009) 95, Target 
(2013) 78. Source. Doing Business. Off 

Track. [109 (June 2011)] 

Access tofinance increases Baseline 

(2009): 40.5%, Target (2013) 55% 
Source: Biennial FinAccess surveys. 
Some Progress. [FinAccess survey will 
be updated in FY13. Proxyindicators 
that show progress are: Number of 
deposit accounts has increased from 
2.55m in 2005 to 14.7 million at end of 
August 2011 (including deposit taking 
MFIs); branch network increased from 
534 in 2005 to 1,113 end of August 
2011, with sharper increase in rural areas 
(152%); 7,828 agents approved as of end 
August 2010.] 

e 

Vision 2030 Objectives 
and Key Indicators
CPS Pillar 1: Unleashing Kenya's Growth Potential

Annex 1: Updated Results Framework for the Kenya CPS FY1O-FY13
CPS Progress Report Status 
CPS Milestones and Status 

WBG Program

Time to issue and register construction Ongoing: FLSTAP (closes March 2013),
permitsfalls. Baseline (2009): 120 
MSME (closes June 2012), Kenya
days, Target (2013): 90 days in pilot 
Investment Climate Program (Regulatory

Outstanding issues in corporate bond 
market increase. Baseline (2009): <1% 
of GDP, target (2013): 3% of GDP. 
Source: Capital Markets Authority data. 
Good Progress. [2.8% in 2012] 
Volume ofBank support institutional 

municipalities. Source: DB surveys. 
No Progress. [125 days (June 2011)] 
Reform, Special Economic Zone, Sub-
national Doing Business), AMSME,
Time to registerproperty drops. 
Municipal Program, WIN and ESMID.
Baseline (2009): 64 days, Target (2013): Pipeline: Nairobi Metro Services Project
45 days. Source: DB surveys. No 
(FY12), Kenya Infrastructure
Progress. [64 (June 2011)] 
Finance/PPP APL (FY13), Kenya
Subnational Investment Climate
Program, IFC investment and advisory
services for financial intermediaries and
MFIs, Credit Reference Bureau Program
(FY10-13), Regional DPO on regional
integration (trade), Growth Poles Project
(FY14)
AAA: Kenya Economic Update (FY10-
development-microfinance rises 
14), PER ( 1St done in FY10, 2 nd for
(amount). Baseline (June 2009): 
FY12), Governance ESW, Growth
US$491,319, target (June 2012): 
Diagnostic Notes, FSAP update 2010,
US$5,750,000. Source: MSME Project 
Post-FSAP update (mortgage market,
data. Good Progress. [US$3.9 million] 
spreads analysis; access to finance,
9 Increasedformalization offinancial 
FY10-12), Tourism: Polishing the jewel
sector institutions Baseline (2008): 
(FY10), FPD Policy notes (FY10- 1),
SACCOs licensed: none; Deposit Taking Insolvency and Creditor Rights ROSC
Microfinance (DTMs) Institutions: none; 
(FY12), Doing Business Report (FY11-
Good Progress. SACCOs: [83 licensed 
14), Integrated Growth Poles/competitive
issued] DTMs [6 licensed] 
partnership initiative (FY11),
Credit Information Bureaux licensed and Manufacturing exports analytics (FY1),
Subnational Doing Business (nt done in
operational for banks and extended to 
FY 10, 2 nd for FY12), Kenya Investment
Climate Program (FY1-13), Investment
MTDs and SACCOs; positive 
information collected. Good Progress [2 Climate Assessment (FY13).
bureaux licensed; 950,000 credit reports Regional: Regional Tourism ESW
accessed -only negative information and 
(FY1), Regional Study on SME
for banks. Focus on positive information Financing (FY13).
and extending coverage to SACCOs and
MTDs included in Finance Bill 2012,
pending implementation]

17

CPS Progress Report Status 

ondiCtio resGo

CPS Outcome: Improved core
infrastructure, with deeper regional
integration

Vision 2030 Objectives 
and Key Indicators
Infrastructure
MTP Objective: 
Deploying world class 
infrastructure facilities 
and services
Transport: 
Transport: 
* Strengthen the 
Northern Corridor road in Kenya in 
institutional and 
fair or good condition rises 
regulatory framework 
(percentage). Baseline (2009): 54%, 
for infrastructure 
target (2013): 80%. Source: University 
development 
of Nairobi Enterprises and Services 
* Raise efficiency and 
data. Good Progress. [70% 
quality of transport 
(December 2010)] 
infrastructure and 
andservices,rpored 
servicesthe 
port ofMombasa to Malaba
* Enhance private(border 
of Uganda) falls. Baseline 
participation in the 
(2009): annual average 18 hours, target 
provision of 
(2013) 12 hours, Source: University of 
infrastructure facilities 
Nir*obte 
prisesTandrers 
data 

CPS Milestones and Status 

WBG Program

Transport: 
Roads rehabilitated and consfructed 
(km). Good Progress. [Over 200 k 

rehabilitten 

i uaoje 

Security arrangements at the port of 
Mombasa put into place and the one- 
stop-shop operational. Source: East 

Ongoing:
Transport Sector Support Project (FY11),
Northern Corridor Transport
Improvement Project (FY04, FY09), East
Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation
Project (Regional FY06), Kenya
Investment Climate Program (Trade
Facilitation), Rift Valley Railways (IFC
Portfolio).

Facilitation Project reports. Good 
Progress. [Implementation of 
integrated security system at port of 
Mombasa ongoing, including training 
of all staff on security matters.] 

Pipeline:
National Urban Transport Improvement
(FY13), East Africa Regional Transport
Links Project (Regional FY13); IFC
support for Kenya Airways (FY 12)

Proposed new AAA: Construction

Study (FY13), or

Devolution on Road Development
(FY14)

Annualfreight carried by Kenya- 

Progress/Achieved. [9 hours 
Ugadarofailwa rises. BaselinebyUTrnptainSciy
Directflights between Nairobi and the 
Mombasa-Timboroa (750km of about 
United States in operation. Source:
920 ki) (June 2011)] 
SDervice 
data on airlines schedules available on 
the internet. Slow Progress. [Jomo 
Kenyatta International Airport cleared 
AdiSTranfor decfits
widerofec uity rk

(2009): 1.56 million tons, target (2013) 
more than 2.3 million tons. Source: 
Univestrasity 
Kenya Railway Corporation/RiftUStKey,btwdrsciyrsk
Valley Railways. Currently n/a. 
continue to prohibit actual flights.]
[Team will need to provide data 
*National Constfruction Authority
update.] 
established andfunctional. Source:
Northern Corridor project reports.
r Time of cross-border trade declines 
e 
e 
dAchieved. 
[Bill passed by Parliament
bnnaine (2 g 
days t Keport a 
and signed into law by the President.]

container Target (2013): 21 days to 
export a container, 20 days to import a 
container. Source: Doing Business 
surveys). Some Progress. [26 days for 
export; 24 days for import (June 
2011)] 

Kenya-Uganda railway concession
functioning Source: East African Trade
and Transport Facilitation Project
reports. Some Progress. [Concession
restructured, with efforts underway to
recapitalize railway and
professionalize management.]
18

Vision 2030 Objectives 
and Key Indicators

Energy: 

" Rural electrification 

CPS Progress Report Status 

CPS Milestones and Status 

Energy: 

Energy: 

WBG Program
Ongoing: Electricity Expansion Project
(FY0, FY09), Ligtin Afr (TA)

* Number of electricity connections rises. 9 Transmission lines constructed or 
Baseline (June 2009): 1,267,198 
rehabilitated under the Electricity
connections, target (June 2013): 
Expansion Project. Baseline (2010): 0, 
additional 30,000 (Electricity Expansion 
target (2013): 40 km. Source: Project 
Project) and 250,000 (Energy Sector 
reports. Some Progress. [Bidding
Recovery Project). Source: KPLC 
documents for transmission lines 
Pipein PR 
Sco Power
Reports/Project data. Good Progress 
prepared, supervisory consultant hired, GeneratinePR (FY12), La 
turka
[350,000 households under the ESRP 
construction expected to begin Feb 
Indroject (FY12), Kenetiopi
Septmber201] 202.]KPLC 
and IPPs (FY12-13), Scaling-up
" Transmission and distribution losses 
* Distribution lines (66kV 33 kV 
ot 
e 
kV) 
Renewable Energy Project (FY13), IPPs
decline. Baseline (June 2009): 16.3% of 
constructed or rehabilitated under the 
MEGA.
energy purchased, target (2013): 15.2%. 
Energy Sector Recovery Project and 
constructtoneastettodofowhichnare
New: Power Development (FY 15)
Source: KPLC Reports. Slow Progress. 
Electricity Expansion Project. Baseline
[16.2% in September 2011] 

(FY09), IFC Tsavo Power Portfolio
Project, IPPS MEGA.

(Dec. 31, 2009): 515, target (2013): 
1,775 km. Source: Projects' reports. 
r 
September 

Good Progress. [1,200km 

Ongoing AAA:TA portfolio to
strengthen the capacity of sector entities
for improved sector regulation, planning,

Propon

Five new Independent Power Projects 

wind/geothermal-reachedfinancia 
closure. [New Indicator] 009): 16.3% o

2011] 

Water and sanitation: 

" Upgrade water supply 
sytm nal 
ra 
coverage,(IPta 
areas and 
augment/expand rural 
water supplies 
Expand sewage 

Water: 
9 Number ofpeople in project area with 
ccs oiprvdwtrsore 
pereagetw of peplh ith acces
ssmialaenOutput-Based 
(baseline (June 2009): 8 million, target 
(2012) 9.5 million. Source: Water 
Regulation Information System, with 
data reported in the WaSSIP reports). 
*oFvewGood Progress. [However, project ISR 
rahsercan 
ber of people.withaccess 

Percentage increased from 27% to 50% 
in 2007-2011.] 

9 Percentage ofpeople in project area 
with access to adequate sewerage 
services or safe sanitation rises 
(baseline (2007): 10%, target (2012): 
30%. Source: with data reported in the 
WaSSIP reports). Good Progress. [20% 
in March 2011] 

Ongoing: IDA: Water and Sanitation
*Transfer of water and sanitation assets Services Improvement Project (WaSSIP;
rm iityan 
oa utoiist 
FY08), WSP Global Partnership on
Aid (GPOBA): Kenya
the water services boards completed. Microfinance for Water Project
Source: WaSSIP reports. Some 
Pipeline: IDA: WaSSIP AF (FY12),
Progress. [Technical work completed] WSP/GPOBA: Nairobi Sanitation
Number ofnewpiped household water 
(FY12), Water Development and Climate
connections that are resultingfrom the Resilience Project (FY13); WSP,IFC,
project intervention (baseline (2010): 0, 
IDA: Embu and Malindi water services
Target (mid-2013): 42,300. Source: 
providers gain access to commercial
Water and Sanitation Project data. Good finance for expanded supply (FY12),
Progress. [36,388 new piped household WSP finance facility for urban water
connections that are resulting from the 
service providers (FY 13); Nairobi Urban
project interventions in 2011.] 
Sanitation project (FY13)
9 muto aktiac 
cesdto 
AAA: Enhancing Women's Participation
exaont ofwarket finaneacessed 
in Water Governance structures; TA for
epand wrat Supr p se:ries rep US 
Commercial Finance Facility for Urban
and rurl, are B20m12) US$ 
Water Supply (WSP, FY12)
1million. Targenito01). S$

19

CPS Progress Report Status 

Vision 2030 Objectives 
and Key Indicators
Information and 
ICT 
Communication 
Access to Internet services rises 
Technology 
(number of subscribers). Baseline 
* Lay under-sea fiberJue21.GoPrgs!Acivd
"Lyudrsafbr(2007): 1.25 million, target: 3 million. 
otccbeSource: 
Kenya data. Achieved. [14.3
Communications Commission 
optic cableof 
* Offer government 
million subscribers; 36.7% of the 
services online, 
population with Internet access 
(December 2010)]
CPS Outcome: Enhanced agricultural 
productivity, with a focus on food 
security 

Ai!riculture 
MTP Objective: 
Innovative, 
commercially-oriented, 
seraceronine 
competitive, and modern 
agricultural sector 
" Increase productivity 
ASAL development, 

9 Average yields of selected agicultural 
prdcsi 
pouat 
mlhlefrigSuc:KPPrprs 
ih-Iteme adedossamr'acsst 
systems in project area rise. Baseline 
(2009): maize yields increase by annual 
average of 3%; target (2013): 5%. 
( 
Source: KAPAP-specific surveys 
esupportedfinancial 
project). No update available. 
[KAPAP Impact Assessment and 
Baseline survey ongoing, June results 
expected.] 
Earningsfrom small holder 
agricultural activities in project area 
rise. Baseline (2009): net annual 
income: male Ksh 128,270, female Ksh 
98,748, target (2013): male 20% 
increase, female: 25% increase, 
Source: KAPAP-specific surveys. No 
update available. [KAPAP Impact 
Assessment and Baseline survey 
ongoing, June results expected.] 

CPS Milestones and Status 

WBG Program

une 
cable coped Arget: 
[hecalsometd]Economic 
[hecalsometd](IFC 

Ongoing:
Regional Communications Infrastructure
Project/KTCIP; IFC KMIP (IFC Special
Zone Project); EASSy Cable
Portfolio project).

Pipeline:
KTCIP AF (FY12)

*Harmonized agricultural sector 
Ongoing:
development strategy and 
KAPAP (FY09); WKCDD; GEF Kenya
implementation framework completed 
adaptation to climate change in the Arid
and strategy being implemented. 
Lands NRMP (FY07), East Africa
on rmIC 
odAgricultural 
KPipl 
(FY12
Productivity (Regional
Progress/Achieved. [ASDS approved 
FY09); IFC Project, GEF-Western Indian
Ocean Marine Highway Dev and Coastal
by sector ministries and Cabinet in 
and Marine Contamination Prevention.
Nov 2010; implementation begun.] 
Pipeline:
Agriculture Drought Recovery (FY13),
Regional Pastoral Project (FY13), IFC
investment in horticulture and tea sector
and advisory services for the coffee
sector (FYi 11-13)

AAA:
Land TA (FY08-10), Agriculture Policy
Review, ESW-Rural gender methodology
and baseline data (co-financed by the
Gender Action Plan), Western Indian
Ocean Fisheries TA.

institutions rises 
(number of farmers), (baseline (2009): 
0. Source: IFC project reports). Some 
Progress. [i advanced negotiations 
with KCB and early negotiations with 
Equity Bank for $200 million of
financing (in aggregate).] 
Agribusinesses access to loansfrom 
IFC-supported projects (three) or 
through wholesale fundingJfacility 
rises. Baseline (2009): 0. IFC project 
reports). Some Progress. [Launched 
an advisory services project to support
coffee farmers improve yields and
coffee husbandry through a partnership

with ECOM a global commodities
trading company. Target is to reach
15,000 farmers in 3 years.]

20

CPS Progress Report Status 

Vision 2030 Objectives 
and Key Indicators
CPS Pillar 2: Reducing Inequality and Strengthening Resilience
Social and 
CPS Outcome: Better access to health
Infrastructure Services 
care, education, and basic
infrastructure services

CPS Milestones and Status 

WBG Program

Health 

9 Facilities (level 2-3) receiving drugs 

Ongoing:

Health Swap (FY10) and Additional

Health 
Vision 2030 Objective: 
Equitablehealth, 
healthcare system of the 
highest possible quality 

* Provide a functional, 
efficient and sustainable 
health infrastructure 
networkovrhlofte(1.milo)we
netwrk 

* Reduce health 
inequalities and reverse 
downward trends, 

nutrition, orpopulation services 
rises. Baseline (2009): 0, target (2013): 
(18,300,000). Source: Health SWAp 
reports. Good Progress. [During FY10- 
11, over 25.3 million individuals 
directly benefited from the project and 
verhal ofthem(142 mllin) ere 
females.] 
9 Eligible children under-one yearfully 
immunized nationwide (totals). Baseline 
(2010): 1.2 million, Target (2013): 13 
million. Source: Health SWAp data. 
(21):Hmamasuceleselt.]uy(F1)
Good Progress. [5.8 million in 2011.] 

9HSSF facilities meeting core financial 
management requirements rise, 
(percent) Baseline (2010): 0%, Target 
directy50%. Source: Health Sector 
Services Fund. Good Progress. [20% 
in 2011.] 

Proportion ofyouth aged 1524 
reporting condom use in the last sexual 
encounter with a non-regular partner 
(of those reporting sexual intercourse 
mnth agno neme partner it 
witha nnreglarartnr i thelas 12 
Mont) Baseline (20103): F=%, 
M=7% 
e (2013) Fata. 
T): 
Serice 
u. G 
Progress 
ood 
Good Progres [n 
2011.] 
*various 

. d% 

mediine JF Healt 

frcanitiat

Pipeline:

Health Laboratory Networking Project
(FY10); Total War Against H1V/AIDS

Target (2013) 20% increase from
baseline. Source: Health SWAp data. 
Good Progress. [Procurement, s 
l 
accountability pilots and supervision 
visits underway.]
Health personnel receiving training in 
financial management and procurement New: Medicine Regulatory Harmonization
(number). Baseline (2010): 0, target 
(FY12), Additional Financing for disease
(2013): 2,000. Source: Health SWAp 
control programs to meet Global Fund
data. Good ProgressAchieved. 
[4,648 
shortfalls (FY3)
staff in 265 districts and 664 health
centers received training in planning and AAA:
financial management of Health Sector Health PER (FY1), Health Financing
Services Fund. Training for dispensary 
(FY12) (IFCQ
staff almost completed in 4 provinces 
Proposed new AAA: Devolution Access
to Service Delivery (FYI3/14), Health
and ongoing in 4 others.] 
Number ofpeople benefitingfrom health Service Delivery Indicators (FY3),
services from 30 IFC-supported pri vote Multi-secorcutriin AessmenStud 
(FY123),
healthcare companies rises. BaselineBaseline
(2009): 0. Source: IFC project reports.
Some Progress. [Limited information,
but preliminary survey underway;
strategy to be developed to measure
progress over next year. Through two
healthcare private equity vehicles
(EVHA and IFHA), IFC has financed
two healthcare companies in Kenya,
namely Nairobi Women's Hospital and
AAR. Another three institutions are at
stages of the due diligence
process and financing should be in place
in the coming months.]

21

[83% inu2009 

BaPriar(2completion%ratere (ecn). 
Baselin (2008):*ter, tae(02 
adet 
in 
% Nortease: baeinesryo 
,at5. 
ore: Mint09] 
Euain ood Pors 
2009; Nothas 
]e 
" Primary to secondary education 
transition rate rises (percent). Baseline 
(2008) 60%, target (2012), 75%. 
Source: Ministry of Education. Good 
Progress. [66.9% in 2009] 

education gross enrollment 

Uniersit 
trantrie (aeres). 
(aecine (0b: 
306%, tar get ) 5 (0r1e), 75ub 

Net enrollment rate in primary 
education rises (disaggregated by 
gender). Baseline (2006): 83% 2006, 
target: 95%. Source: Ministry of 
Education. Good Progress. [92.9% in 

horty. f 
.
[IneriP report Go 
o 
rogress. 
ig 
[inte uity 
fnctio 
,lli 

to 

9 Sector governance and management 
strengthened. Source: KESSP 
Governance and Anti-Corruption and 
Risk Policy Management Action Plan. 
Slow/No Progress. [Process underway 
but very difficult dialogue due to 

sector.]

Pipeline: Global Partnership for
Education (TF)
New: Education SWAp, including ECD
follow-up (FY 3/14)
AAA: Education PER (FY10), Education
PETS and Service Delivery Indicators
(FY12), System Assessment

Benchmarking for Results (SABER): Earl
Childhood (FY12), School Health and
Nutrition (FY 12); Teacher Performance
and Student Learing (FY12), Realizing
the Youth Dividend (FY12), Innovative
Financing for Higher Education (FY12)
Proposed New AAA: Measuring Skills
and Knowledge for Greater Growth and
Competitiveness (FY13), Integrated
Education Data Management (FY13),
Teachers (FY13).

CPS Progress Report Status 

CPS Milestones and Status 

WBG Program

Vision 2030 Objectives 
and Key Indicators
Education 
MTP Objective: Improve Education 
access and equity to 
education at all levels 

tranis erllent and5%, 
transitionrt3 

* Improve quality of 
education at all levels. 

Ministry of Education. Good Progress 
[4% in 2009.]. 
inc2009]
Slum upgrading 

*Urban 

Slum Up!radini! 
MTP Objective: 
slum residents who gain access 
Adequate and decent 
to improved infrastructure services 
housing in a sustainable 
under the Informal Settlements 
environment 
Improvement Project (number 
vulnrabe goup, 
ad a 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
aftr itershi copleionrissCRskholc 
the 
gender). Baseline: 0, Target: 100,000. 
development and access 
Source: project surveys. Data not 
to affordable and 
available. [Project effective since 
adequate housing 
June 2011.] 
CPS Outcome: Establishing 
comprehensive scalable social 
protection mechanisms 

Vulnerable Groups 
MTP Objective: Gender 
equity in power and 
resource distribution, 
improved livelihoods for 

9 Interns employed or self-employed 
immediately after internship, and a year 

responsible, globally 
competitive and 
prosperous youth 
Increase opportunity 

(percent, to be disaggregated by 
gender). Baseline (2010): 0, Target: 
35% (2013). Source: Project-specific 
surveys. Some Progress. [The first 
internship cycle is still in progress 

*Citywide 

Ongoing: Slum Upgrading/Informal
slum upgrading initiatives 
Settlements Improvement (FY1 1); Pro-
commence infive cities. Source: 
poor component of WASSIP, FIRST
Kenya Informal Settlement 
Shelter Afrique, ESMID, FLSTAP.
Improvement Project reports. Data not Pipeline: Nairobi Metropolitan Services
available. [Project effective since 
eFacilitate 
Transfemret reptiosPa.
Project (FY12).
June 30, 2011.] 
AAA: FPD Dialogue, FSAP update/part
2-housing finance (FY 1/ 12).
Proposed new AAA: Demography of
Urban Slums
Ongoing:
and Vulnerable Children Cash
apIterated s caia 
t prot elction 
lc 
Transfer Project (FY09), Youth
arned. cabie:tan relate 
Empowerment (FY 10).
plCa 
nde 
h 
immentatio Sorc 
fer 
Pipeline:
lGood Progress. [Cabinet Memorandum 
Integrated Social Protection Program
signed by the Minister. Revised draft 
(FY13)
strategy to be sent to Cabinet in March.] AAA:
Social Protection Sector Review (FY12),
Establishment of a single registry to 
Building Social Protection Systems in
cover key cash transfer programs. [New Kenya (RSR grant for advisory activities)

nOrphans 

22

(October 2011).] 
* Beneficiary households receiving
predictable cash transfers rises under
the Cash Transfer for OVC (number).
Baseline (2009): 0, target (end- 2013):
50,000. Source: OVC Project specific
surveys. Good Progress. [149,260
(April 2011)]
CPS Outcome: Improved management 
of key natural resources 

ofrssmngdacrigt 
approved plans rises. Baseline (end 
2009): 21,000 hectares, target (2013): 
300,000 hectares. Source: NRM 
Project surveys. Good Progress. 
[141,000 has in 2011] 

Vision 2030 Objectives 
and Key Indicators

* Provide financial 
support to all vulnerable 
groups. 

Environment 
MTP Objective: 
Enhancing access to 
clean, secure, and 
susanabl 
sevirnmet 
sustainable environment, 
water and sanitation 

availability and 
establish a monitoring 
program for water 

* Improve water storage 
capacity 
* Conserve strategic 
natural resources in a 
sustainable manner 
without compromising 
economic growth 

* Map ASAL and high 
risk disaster zones. 

0some 

CPS Governance Pillar (Cross-Cutting)
New CPS Governance Outcomes
Public Sector 
CPS Outcome: Improved 
Governance 
Transparency and Accountability 
MTP Objective: A 
citizen-focused and 
results-oriented 
institution 
SPromote transparency, 

*Financial statements prepared on time 
in accordance with acceptable 
accounting standards through IFMIS 
(central government) and LAIFOMS 
(local government). Central baseline 

CPS Progress Report Status 

CPS Milestones and Status 

WBG Program

milestone.] 

FY11-13).

National Drought Contingency Fund 

esshenisur 
fund 
ueseegnis 
ore 
rd 
Lands 2 project reports. Not achieved. 
[Project was cancelled due to 
corruption charges in predecessor 
project.]
Drought management system in place 
and functioning at the district and 
national level. Source: Arid Lands 2 

Ongoing:
GEF Adaptation to Climate Change in
Arid Lands, WKCDD (FY07), Natural
RsucsMngmn 
rjc F0)
Laeoria 
nviromentaloet F0)
ManemetPa nv 
renal
Casalement P 
Rojec 
FY1)

Pipeline:
Water Development and Climate
Resilience Project (FY13); IFC

project reports. Not achieved. [Project 
was cancelled due to corruption 

engagement with Lake Naivasha
watershed stakeholders (FY12-13)

charges in predecessor project.]
Early flood warning system established
and functioning in Western Kenya 
(gender disaggregated data included)
addresransparencies.mmunica:ions
[New Indicator]
Draft Basin-wide water andfisheries

management agreementprepared.
201):nernlauit.]rouemn
Baseline (2009): 0, target (2013): 100.
Source: Lake Victoria Environment
Management 2 Project surveys.
No/Slow Progress. [no progress, but

activities underway]

Annual procurement audits indicate 
d 
improvement in compliance with 
procurement regulations. Baseline 
(2005): procurement not covered as a
fou 
rafritra 
ui,tre 
edInfrastructure Project (KTCIP) (FY08),
focus1are 
internal audit, 
r 
tretend FLSTAP (closes March 2013), GPF (TF),
STATCAP

Ongoing: Institutional Reform and
Capacity Building project (FY06);
Municipal Program (FY 10),

23

Vision 2030 Objectives 
and Key Indicators
accountability, 
participation, and the 
rule of law. 

CPS Progress Report Status 

CPS Milestones and Status 

WBG Program

(2005): 0. Source: Institutional 
Reform Capacity Building Project 
reports. Municipal baseline (2009): 0 
Target (2013): 6. Source: Municipal 
Program reports). Central: Not 
Achieved. [Purchasing, Accounts 
Payable and General Ledger financial 
reporting not yet undertaken using 
IFMIS. Other modules of IFMIS have 
not been operationalized.]; Municipal: 
Data not available. 
* PEFA scores ofA/B rise. Baseline 

(2008): 12 of 28, target (2013): 15 of 
28. Source: Biennial PEFA surveys). 
Data not available. [There was no 
PEFA in 2010.] 
* External audit reports prepared and 
published in a timely fashion in 
accordance with Public Audit Act 

2003. Partially Achieved. [Audit is
being carried out and in compliance
with the Kenya National Audit Office
(KNAO) Act, 2003. Audit
Committees established, but not all
functioning and local government
authorities audit reports are in arrears.]

carried out in 90% of ministries. 
Pipeline: Nairobi Metropolitan Services
Source: Inst. Reform Capacity Building Project (FY12), KTCIP AF (FY12)
Project reports). Partially Achieved. 
New: Governance Partnerships Facility
[Guidelines for annual procurement 
(TF) support to supply-side (PFM and
audits developed and regulations in 
PSR) and demand-side (information
place, but implementation and 
dissemination and accountability system)
compliance are weak.] 
reforms
Muiplti 
have prioritized capital Ongoing AAA: Country Procurement
Assessment Review, Insolvency and
Creditor Rights ROSC (FY12), Policy
Notes (M&E Assessment, Social
Accountability), PEFA (FY12/13)
Proposed new AAA: Governance
Assessment, Portfolio Review of
Decentralization, Access to Information
and Data, FM related TA and AAA,
Accounting and Auditing, Sector FM
assessments, Procurement reforms,
Enhanced Capacity for CSOs and Media

plans 
line 
t 
o re 
Municipal Program reports. Dt not 

24

Annex 2: Updated and Revised CPS Outcomes

| Updated and Revised Indicators/Outcomes
Original CPS Indicators 
CPS Outcome: Improved core infrastructure, with deeper regional integration.

Energy
* Five new Independent Power Projects (IPP), at least 
two of which are green, reached financial closure. 

* New Indicator. Indicator captures new operations and
focus on IPPs, including climate-change sensitivity.

Water
* Area under irrigation in project area rises. Baseline 
(2007): 270 ha. Target (mid-2013): 3,500 ha 

* Replaced. Indicator is not aligned with main sector
focus. Under the NRM project, there has been good
progress under this indicator, with works contracts for
two major irrigation investments in advanced stages.
* Amount of market finance accessed to expand water 
* New Indicator. This milestone directly supports the
supply services in urban and rural areas. Baseline 
increased access outcome indicator, as the money is for
(2012) US$1.3 million. Target (2013) US$6 million. 
infrastructure investments.
CPS Outcome: Better access to health care, education, and basic infrastructure

* Replaced. Indicator does not reflect well the Bank's
program. In addition, supply of essential drugs under
the project has not yet started.

Health
* Health facilities (level 2-3) without tracer drugs for 
more than two weeks declines (%). Baseline: 23%. 
Target (2013): 5%. Source: KEMSA Navison data, 
presented in the Health SWAp Reports.
* Proportion of youth aged 15-24 reporting condom use * New Indicator. To reflect part of program focus.
in last sexual encounter with a non-regular partner
(of those reporting sexual intercourse with a
nonregular partner in last 12 months). Baseline
(2003): F=24%, M=47%. Target (2013) F=55%,
M=75%. Sources: TOWA project data. Good
Progress

CPS Outcome: Improved management of key natural resources
Replaced. No to slow Progress. Indicator was replaced
* Cumulative percentage reduction in untreated 
effluent disposed by targeted municipalities into 
by indicator that allows for better measurement of
three hotspots ofLake Victoria (%). Baseline 
progress.
(2009): 0%. Target (2013): 10%. Source: Lake
Victoria Environment Management 2 Project
surveys.
* Regional standards for industrial and effluent 
discharges into Lake Victoria ready for adoption. 
Baseline (2009): n/a. Target: standards adopted.
CPS Outcome: Adapting to climate change.
* CPS outcome indicator not measured. 
* CPS outcome dropped. Climate-sensitive indicators
continue to be measured (and have been added) across
results framework to better capture multi-sectorality.
CPS Governance Pillar (Cross-Cutting)
The CPS identified governance as a cross-cutting area. The CPS Progress Report suggests adding governance as a
cross-cutting pillar to the CPS results frameworks. The CPS outcome on strengthening public sector management
(previous under the CPS pillar 1: Unleashing Kenya's Growth Potential) is being changed into Improved
Transparency and Accountability.
SCPS outcome on strengthening public sector 
management and improving sub-national govemnance 

*Reformulated CPS Outcome: Improved Transparency
and Accountability.

New Indicator. Better indicator to capture project
progress.

25

Annex 3: Ongoing and Proposed Knowledge Program

CPS Pillar 1: Unleashing Kenya's Growth Potential
Continued/Ongoing
* Kenya Economic Updates (FY10-14)
* 
PER (FY12)
* 
Post-FSAP update (FY10-12)
* 
Insolvency and Creditor Risks ROSC (FY12)
* 
Subnational Doing Business (FY12)
* 
Investment Climate Program (FY10- 14) and Assessment (FY13)
* TA energy sector (capacity strengthening) FY10-14
New
* 
Port Development Study (FY13)
* Oil and Gas Study (FY13)
CPS Pillar 2: Reducing Inequality and Strengthening Resilience
Continued/Ongoing
IFC health financing TA (FY12)
* 
* Multi-sector nutrition assessment (FY12)
* Education PETS and Service Delivery Indicators (FY12)
* 
School Health and Nutrition (FY12)
* Realizing the Youth Dividend (FY12)
* 
Innovative Financing for Higher Education (FY12)
* 
Social Protection Sector Review (FY12)
* Building Social Protection Systems in Kenya (RSR grant for advisory activities) FY11-13
New
* 
Poverty Updates (FY13/14)
* Devolution Access to Service Delivery (FY13/14)
* Health Service Delivery Indicators (FY13)
* Human Resources in Health Study (FY13)
* Measuring Skills and Knowledge for Greater Growth and Competitiveness (FY13)
* 
Integrated Education Data Management (FY13)
* Teacher Performance and Student Learning (FY13)
CPS Governance "Pillar"
Continued/Ongoing
* Decentralization Report
* 
Procurement Assessment Review (FY12)
* 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA; FY12/13)
New
* Access to Information and Data (FY13/14)
* County Systems Assessment (FY13)
* 
Judicial Performance (F 13/14)

26

Annex 4: Planned versus Actual Lending Program and Pipeline

Currents tatus of CPS IDA pipeline (as dkscrilbd in CPS Annex 2)
CPS Program 
Planned Planned 
Comment 
(LSS) 
year 

FY 
dklivred 

Amount (U Sm
IDA 
CRW*

2010 

Electricity Expansion 
Municipal Program 

30.0 
100.0 

FY10 Amount lowered by $20m 
FY10 Delivered as planned 

30.0 

-

100.0 

-

Youth Empowerment 

60.0 

FY10 Delivered as planned 

60.0 

-

Health SWAp 
Subtotal 
2011 Coastal Development 
Nairobi Urban Toll Road (NUTR) 

100.0 FY 11+ Advanced to FY10 
610.0 
35.0 
180.0 

157.0 
647.0 
35.0 
300.0 

-

-

FY10 Delivered FYI1 
FYI 1+ Toll road cancelled, due to integrity 

-

-

issues conceming concessionaire, but
other components supported in
substituted Transport Sector Support

project
100.0 FYll+ Renamed Informal Settlements 

SlumUpgrading 

100.0 

-

Improvement; delivered as planned

TOWA additional financing 
Subtotal 

n/a 
315.0 

FYO7 AF to fll GFATM gap 

55.0 
490.0 

-

-

2012 Health SWAp AF 
Private Sector Power Generation (PRG) 

n/a 
40.0 

n/a 
FY12 

AF to address drought emergency 
Partial risk guarantees 

-

57.0
-

41.5 

Subtotal 

41.5 

57.0

Note: Status of pipl ine projects apparing in Annex 2 of April: 010 CPS but not yet delivred

2012+ Nairobi Metropolitan Services 
PPP Infrastructure Finance 

100.0 FY 11+ On track for 12 delivery 
100.0 FYI 1+ On track for FY13 delivery 

300.0 
100.0 

-

-

Water Resources Development 

DO.0 FYll + On track for FY13 delivery; renamed 
Water Security and Climate Resilience
FYll + Prior actions completed, but project not 
presented due to country circumstances
Cancelled, due to corruption findings in 
predecessor project

400.0 

-

Development Policy Operation 

100.0 

-

-

Arid Lands Resource Management 3 

100.0 

FYI1+ 

-

-

KESSP2 

DO.0 FYlI+ Cancelled, due to corruption findings in 

-

-

predecessor project

Proposed pileline or remainder ofCPS period

IFY 
deliwred 

CPS Program 

Planned Planned 
amount 
year 

Comment 

Proposedanount
IDA 
CRW

2012 Water and Sanitation ImprovementAF 
Nairobi Metropolitan Services 

300.0 
300.0 

FY12 
FY12 

Includes response to 2011 drought 
Third project in urban series 

280.0 
300.0 

20.0

-

KCTIPAF 

39.0 

FY12 

Includes $14mlDA realocation 

55.0 

-

Northern Corridor TransportAF 

43.0 

FY12 

IDA reallocation of cancelled funds 

43.0 

-

Ethiopia-Kenya Interconnector (regional 

131.0 FY12/13 

153.0 

-

project)

Subtotal (including approwd and regional projects) 
2013+ Water Security and Climate Resilience 
250.0 

872.5 
250.0 

77.0
-

FY13 

On track 

Pastoral Livelihoods Recovery and 
Resilience (regional project) 
PPP Infrastructure Finance 

25.0 

FY13 

Part of'regional response to 2011 Horn of 
Africa drought
100.0 FY13+ 
Subject to PPP pipeline development 
100.0 FY13+ Revives project postponed in FY09 

25.0 

-

100.0 
100.0 

-

Judicial Performance Improvement 

-

Integrated Social Protection Program 

200.0 FY13+ Will incorporate CT-OVC project 

200.0 

-

Scaling-up Renewable Energy 
Lake Turkana Wind Project (PRG) 

130.0 FY13+ 
20.0 
FY13 

Supported by $50m SREP TF resources 
Partial risk guarantee 

130.0 
20.0 

-

-

Nairobi Urban Transport APL 

20.0 FY12/13 Will address issues not addressed when 
NUTR was cancelled

200.0 

-

Subtotal 
* IDA Crisis Response Window

1,025.0 

-

27

Annex 5: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 3/20/2012

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012

16 
3.3 
6.3 
5.6 
25.0 
10.1 
20.0 

19 
3.3 
10.5 
8.2 
15.8 
11.6 
18.9 

21 
3.5 
4.8 
3.7 
9.5 
6.6 
11.9 

20
3.8
10.0
6.1
20.0
9.8
9.0

Memorandum 
Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
105 
3
3,628.8 
90.1
58.1 
33.3
52.1 
39.9

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

28

Annex 6: IDA Operations Portfolio

Operations Portfolio (IBRDIIDA and Grants)
As Of Date 3120/2012

Closed Projects 

134

IBRD/IDA*
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

733.91
0.00
539.83
686.60
1,273.74
686.60

1,650.24
1.25
1,651.49

Active Projects 

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Disbursements

Project ID 

Project Name 

Development 
Objectives 

Implementation 
Progress

Fiscal Year 

IDA GRANT 

Undisb. 

Orig. 

Frm Rev'd

P083250 
P091979 
P111545 
P094692 
P103037 
P083131 
P108845 
P088600 
P074091 
P113542 
P066488 
P085414 
P082615 
P095050 
P081712 
P074106 
P096367 
P111546 
P124109 
P109683 
P085007 

Financial & Legal Sec TA 
KE- Adaptation Climate Change (KACCAL) 
KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) 
KE-Coastal CD SIL (FY08) 
KE-Electricity SIL (2010) 
KE-Energy Sec Recovery PrJ (FY05) 
KE-FMSCEDP (Coastal CD) GEF (FISH) 
KE-GEF Ag prd & Sust. Land Mgmt(KAPSLMP) 
KE-Health SWAP (FY10) 
KE-Informal Settlements Impro\ement Proj 
KE-Municipal Program (FY10) 
KE-Natl STATCAP Dev 
KE-Northern Corridor Tmsprt SIL (FY04) 
KE-NRM SIL (FY07) 
KE-Tot War Against HIV/AIDS-TOWA (FY07 
KE-W Kenya CDD/Flood Mitigation (FY07) 
KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) 
KE-Youth Empowerment Project (FY10) 
KE:Transport Sector Support Project 
Kenya Agric Productivity & Agribusiness 
MSME Competitiveness 

S 
# 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
MS 
S 
S 
MS 
S 
S 
MS 
S 
MU 
S 
MU 
S 
MS 
MS 

S 
# 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
MS 
S 
S 
MS 
S 
MS 
MS 
S 
MS 
S 
MU 
S 
MS 
MS 

2005 
2010 
2009 
2011 
2010 
2005 
2011 
2011 
2010 
2011 
2010 
2007 
2004 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2008 
2010 
2011 
2009 
2005 

' 
' 
r 

' 
r 
' 
r 
' 
r 
' 
' 
r 
' 
r 
V 
r 
' 
' 

45.5

5.0 
10.0 

18 

50 
35 
330 
160 

156.8 
100 
100 
20.5 
460 
68.5 
135 
86 
150 
60 
300 
82 
22 

11.7 

24.2 
35.0
323.8 
61.2 
4.6
8.1
125.7 
103.6
93.8 
12.1 
263.0 
38.0 
43.0 
71.4 
37.3 
46.9 
292.1
60.7 
6.4 

Overall Result 

2333.8 

60.5 

1,662.9 

10.9 

(3.0)

24.5
(25.7) 

(7.4)

11.9
10.7
(12.3) 
15.8 
18.6
27.4
31.5
12.4

22.2
5.1 

133.2 

0.6

5.8

153.7
27.4

4.7

192.2

29

Annex 7: Kenya Regional Portfolio

~ 

C., J 

jC 

-

1! 

EE

P112688 Eastern Africa Agricultural Productivity 
PO72202 3A-GEF SWIO Fisheries SIL (FY07) 
P100406 3A-Lake Victoria Phase II AP 1 (FY09) 
P1 12456 Regional Trade Facilitation Project II 
P111556 3A-East Afr Publ HIth Laborat Net (FY10) 
P079734 3A-EAfr Trade & Transp Facil (FY06) 
PO94103 3A-Teleconrnunications AF (FY07) 

AFTAR 
LEGESSE 6/11/2009 
AFTEN VINCENT 6/28/2007 
AFTEN BRAGA 
3/3/2009 
AFTFW 
VIS 
6/14/2011 
AFTHE SCHNEIDMAN 5/25/2010 
AFTTR WAITHAKA 
1/24/2006 
TWICT 
NETO 
3/29/2007 

7/22/2009 2/16/2010 
# 
2/27/2015 
2.4 
10/9/2007 
10/9/2007 
3/17/2011 11/30/2011 
4.3 
5/8/2009 
7/30/2009 
# 
6/30/2013 MS MU 2.7 
# 
# 
# 
4/30/2017 # # 0.4 
6/22/2010 
9/7/2010 
# 
3/30/2016 S S 1.4 
3/6/2006 
6/5/2006 
12/8/2008 9/30/2014 
5.8 
5/22/2007 8/21/2007 1/10/201112/31/2013 
4.6 

30.0
12.0
30.0 
25.0
23.5
150.6
114.4 
385.520

1

1

Grand Total 

2,779.8

30

Annex 8: Kenya Trust Fund Portfolio

TF09821 

IDF Grant for Building Capacity of Diaspora Affairs Directorate in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
TF01135 Capacity Building for Agricultural Carbon Project Development 
TF09561 Gender Action Plan (GAP) 2009 
TF09569 EUFCRRF Kenya 
TF09880 Readiness mechanisms for climate smart agriculture 
TF09161 GEF FSP-KENYAAGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY AND SUSTAINABLE LAND MANAGEMENT 
TF09646 Enhancing Agricultural Productivity Project 

TFO9857 W1-The Empirics of Governance 

TF09666 

TF01091 KENYA: Assessment of Geothermal Development Company (GDC) for Enhanced Access to 
TF09670 GPOBA (W1): Kenya Electricity Expansion 
TF09887 Kenya SREP investment plan preparation 
TF09916 GPOBA (W3 Prep): Kenya Electricity Expansion Project 
IKE- Rural Biodiesel project 
TFO09352 Support to Community Based Farm Forestry Enterprises in Semi-Arid Areas in Kenya (Bank- 
TF09308 GEF MSP: KENYA GRANT FOR WILDLIFE CONSERVATION LEASING DEMONSTRATION 
TF09352 Support to Community Based Farm Forestry Enterprises in Semi-Arid Areas in Kenya 
TF09757 Kenya Coastal Development Project 

TFO9950 PPIAF Kenya Infrastructure Finance/PPP project 
TF01006 Kenya: #10160 Strengthening Accounting & Auditing Legal Framework 
TFO9041 CAPACITY BUILDING OF RURAL TRADIflONAL HERBALISTS- BANK-EXECUTED 
TFO9840 Pro-Poor Healthcare Supply Chains in Kenya 
TFO9884 JKenya HRBF K&L Grant 

TF09049 CAPACITY BUILDING OF RURAL TRADITIONAL HERBALISTS 
TF01126 BNPP-Growth & Equity: Welfare and Services Monitoring via Mobile Phone Surveys 
TF09729 Kenya PER Gender Project 
TF09482 W2-STRENGTHENING GOVERNANCE, TRANSPARENCY, AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN KENYA 
TF09653 Support to the Government of Kenya for Social Protection Programming - Preparation and 
TF09727 CT-OVC Program Enhanced Supervision 
TF09727 CT-OVC Program Program Management 
TF09727 CT-OVC Program Trust Fund Administration 
TF09730 Support to the Government of Kenya for Social Protection Programming 
TF09702 Support to the Kenya Youth Empowerment Project 
TF09727 Cash Transfer for Orphans and Vulnerable Children 
TF09730 Republic of Kenya: Support to the Kenya Youth Empowerment Project 
TF01095 Kenya Urban Knowledge and Implementation Program 
TF07161 Kenya Municipal Project 
TF09934 Cities Alliance - Kenya Baseline State of the City Surveys 
TF09874 Kenya - Water Resources Assessment 
TF09916 PPIAF: PPP Options for the Management and Development of Irrigation Infrastructure 
TF09039 TTR - CGAP/GATES TECH PROGRAM EQUITY BANK 
TFO09415 KCP II - KENYA-YOUTH FRIENDLY SVCS ON VOL.COUNSELLING AND TESTING 
TF05757 Kenya Olkaria II Geothermal Expansion Project 
TF01072 Kenya Climate Innovation Center 
TF09834 Mobile Apps thru Social Networking in Africa - Kenya 
TF09670 GPOBA (W1): Kenya Energy Expansion 
TF09859 Sharing results from GAP-funded activities on gender and agriculture in Kenya 
TF01092 StAR - Kenya Country Engagement 
WSP TRUST FUNDS
TF01009 GPOBA (W3 SPN): Mcrofinance for Small Piped Water Schemes - Kenya 
TF01009 GPOBA (W3 SPN): Micro-finance for Small Piped Water Schemes - Kenya 
TF01009 GPOBA (W3 SPN): Micro-finance for Small Piped Water Schemes - Kenya 
TF09579 GPOBA W3 - EU Cont - Kenya Comm. Water Supervision 
TF09782 GPOBA (W1): Kenya OBA Finance Facility 
TF05761 GPOBA KENYA COMMUNITY WATER 
TF05761 GPOBA KENYA COMMUNITY WATER 
TF09339 GPOBAW3 - EU Grant to Kenya Community Water 
Total 

31

P121227 
P121368 
P109683 
P109683 
P129610 
PO88600 
P109683 

P124003 

P129204 
P121332 
P125539 
P125388 
P120038 
P95050 
P083172 
PO95050 
P108845 

P121019 
P126674 1 
PO74091 

PO74091 
PO74091 

P074091 
P118865 
P096288 
P117536 
P121504 
P111545 
P111545 
P111545 
P121594 
P111546 
P111545 
P111546 
P113542 
P066488 
P125526 
P118665 
P125826 
P102064 
P116605 
P103458 
P128680 
P122163 
P121330 
P121024 
P128633 

P104075 
P104075 
P104075 
P104075 
P123640 
P104075 
P104075 
P104075 

500.00 
200.00 
120.00 
0.00 
150.00 
108.69 
189.96 
58.57 
970.00 
77.50 
10,000.00 1,870.04 

24,226.23 5,251.23 

200.00 
0.00 
149.92 

300.00
30.00
0.08
1.15

192.76 
87.05 
214.25
1,870.04 8,129.96
25,407.32 
236.47

820.00 

46.75 
181.00 
164.35 
183.77 
135.74 
56.50 
727.27 
1,936.38 
5,000.00 

124.24 
106.25 
59.88 
50.00 
125.00 

85.80 

2.75 
31.91 
63.01 

-6.46 
39.69 
5.50 
124.15 
292.81 
258.54 

7.38 
0.00 
10.66 
31.73 
11.01 

1,218.88 
167.51 
675.00 
0.00 
50.00 
17.00 
350.00 
39.01 
145.00 
53.88 
100.80 
14.53 
43.08 
8.13 
64.61 
0.00 
1,150.00 
147.27 
1,000.00 
0.00 
9,424.75 3,180.02 
500.00 
95.62 
1,401.27 
66.96 
0.00 
0.00 
400.00 
0.00 
123.60 
1.05 
113.50 
52.97 
1,340.00 
340.00 
100.00 
8.90 
6,137.50 
0.00 
487.90 
147.03 
35.00 
0.00 
226.00 
4.30 
82.75 
62.71 
100.00 
0.00 

99.65 

5.61

2.75 
145.75 
159.91 
0.00 
107.55 
10.49 

44.00
35.25
0.32
183.77
28.19
46.01
588.49 
138.78
886.38 1,049.9
258.54 4,741.46

7.38 
0.00 
50.68 
44.26 
29.88 

86.861
71.25
6.70
0.79
4.0

617.87 
601.01
0.00 
350.00
50.00 
0.00
285.42 
1.62
128.15 
3.05
97.62 
3.18
8.13 
34.95
0.00 
64.61
287.76 
806.12
400.00 
600.00
9,381.79 
42.96
448.02 
51.98
66.96 
877.46
0.00 4,840.15
0.00 
60.00
82.69 
26.68
52.97 
10.78
1,000.00 
340.00
73.21 
26.79
22.50
253.43 
147.03 
291.36
20.00 
15.00
42.72 
183.28
66.39 
7.51
0.00 
100.00

37.51 
44.77 
28.81 
112.97 
240.10 
383.77 
383.77 
1,773,64 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
172.83 
30.83 
77.03 
135.56 

74148.30 1 

0.00 
37.51
0.00 
44.77
0.00 
28.81
0.00 
112.97
207.08 
11.12
284.65 
99.12
329.85 
53.92
135,56 
709.84
44766 10125,813.96

Annex 9: Kenya IFC Portfolio

Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 212912012
(In USD Millions)

FYApproval 

Company 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity 

*GTIRM 

Partici 

pant 

Loan 

Equit 

**Quasi 
Equity 

*GTIRM 

Partici

pant

Committed 

Disbursed Outstanding

2006 
0 
2004 
2010 
0 
7/8/1982 
2010 
0 
0 
0 
1996/99/09 
2011 
2006 
2005 
2005 
0 
2007 
2000 

Abe-kenya 
Boa - kenya 
Bp kenya 
Braeburn 
Cfc stanbic 
Dtb kenya 
Ecobank kenya 
Ips(k)-allpack 
lps(k)-frigoken 
lps(k)-prem food 
K-rep bank 
Kcb 
Kingdom hotel 
Kongoni 
Magadi soda co. 
Premier gas 
Rir 
Tsavo power 

6 
0 
0 
4 
0 
30 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
100 
9 
0.34 
0 
0 
22 
1.37 

0.48 
0 
5 
0 
0 
4.45 
0 
0.36 
0.06 
0.11 
3.65 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0.83 

0 
8 
0 
0 
10 
15 
12.5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
17.46 
0.13 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.57 
0 
0 
0 

Total Portfolio: 

172.71 

16.94 

63.09 

0.57 

Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2.14 

2.14 

0 
0 
0 
2 
0 
30 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
100 
9 
0.34 
0 
0 
6.59 
1.37 

0.48 
0 
3.58 
0 
0 
4.45 
0 
0.36 
0.06 
0.11 
1.4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.83 

0 
8 
0 
0 
10 
15 
12.5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
17.46 
0.13 

149.3 

11.27 

63.09 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.57 
0 
0 
0 

0.57 

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2.14

2.14

32

Annex 10: Kenya at a Glance

Kenya at a glance 

2/25/11

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Low-
income 

Kenya 

Developmentdiamond*

11009
Population,mid-year(millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GN I (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

39.8 
760 
30.3 

840 
1,126 
946 

846

Life expectancy

433

Average annual growth, 2003-09
Population (%) 
Laborforce (%) 
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 2003-09) 
Poverty (%ofpopulation belownationalpovertyline) 
Urban population (%of totalpopulation) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (%of children under5) 
Access to an improved water source (%of population) 
Literacy (%ofpopulation age 15+) 
Gross primaryenrollment (%of school-age population) 
Male 

2.6 
2.8 

2.5 
2.9 

2.2
2.6 

GNI 

Gross

per 

I 

primary

capita 

enrollment

47 
22 
54 
55 
17 
59 
87 

.. 

..

37 
52 
81 
25 
60 
62 
100 
105 

29
57
76
28 
64
66

Access to improved water source

112 
113 

104

107 

Kenya -

Low-income grotp

Female 

110 

95 

100

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
' 
1989 
1999 
8.3 
12.9 
24.9 
15.5 
23.0 
20.8 
17.8 
9.0 
18.0 
12.0 
-6.8 
3.4 
71.2 
36.9 

2008 ' 
30.0 
20.3 
27.6 
6.1 
13.9 
-4A 
0A 
24.7 
5.1 

2009 
29.4
20.9
25.2 
7.8
154 
-5.5
0.4 
27.2 
4A

Economicratios*

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross capital formation/GDP 
Exportsofgoodsandservices/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

Trade

T

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Totaldebtservice/exports 

-3.5 
1.3 
50.2 
25.5 

Domestic 
savings 

Capital
formation

Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/exports 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

19.4
65.4

Indebtedness

1989-99 1999-09 

2008 ' 

2009 2009-13

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 

2.2 
-0.9 

4.1 
1.4 

1.6 
-1.1 

2.6 
-0.1 

4.9

Kenya -

Low-incomegroup

Exportsofgoodsandservices 

2.3 

6.3 

7.5 

-7.0 

5.9

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

o 

1989 

1999 

2008 

2009 

Growth of capital and GDP(%)
20
15

(%lofGDP)

Agriculture 
Industry 

30.2 
19.0 

32.4 
15.8 

21.0 
15.1 

22.6 
15.3 

Manufacturing 

11.7 

11.4 

8.9 

8.7 

10
5

Services 

50.8 

50.8 

63.9 

62.1 

Householdfinalconsumptionexpenditure 

64.2 

75.3 

77.2 

75.9 

04 

05 

06 

07 

08 

09

General gov't final consumption expenditure 
Importsofgoodsandservices 

18.1 
30.1 

15.8 
27A 

16.7 
41.8 

16.3 
38.3

GCF 

* GDP

(average annual growth) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
M anufacturing 
Services 

1989-99 1999-09 
1.5 
2.3 
1.6 
4.5 
1.9 
3.9 
3.4 
4.1 

2008 ' 
-4.3 
4.6 
3.5 
2.7 

2009 
-2.4 
3.6 
2.0 
4.2 

Growth ofexportsandimports(%)
20

5

5
0

-5 

04 

05 

06 

07 

08 

0

Householdfinalconsumption expenditure 
General gov't final consumption expenditure 
Gross capital formation 

3.4 
8.1 
4.2 

4.3 

-0.7 

3.7 

-lo

2.1 
8A 

2.3 
11.1 

5.5
3.8 

Exports 

Imports

Importsofgoodsandservices 

9.6 

7.7 

6.6 

-0.2

Note: 2009 data are preliminaryestimates.
This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.
*The diamonds showfour key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond wil
be incomplete.

33

Kenya

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

D 

1989 

1999 

2008 ' 

2009 

Inflation (%)
30

Domestic prices
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

13.8 
9.8 

5.7 
4.2 

25.1 
11.9 

1.9 
6.7 

2

15

10

Government finance 
(%of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

5
o 

I
05 

25.6 
2.5 
-3.6 

21.7 
3.9 
13.4 

22.8 
-0.4 
-5.0 

23.9 
1.0
-8.4 

04 

06 

07 

08 

09

GDP defitor 

CP

TRADE

(US$ millions) 
Total exports (fob) 
Petroleum 
Coffee 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

I 

1989 
913 
42 
153 
194 
1,780 
51 
343 
593 

1999 
1,755 
138 
172 
420 
2,895 
156 
527 
680 

2008 ' 

2009 

Exportandimportlevels(US$ mill.)

5,040 
117 
155 
625 
11497 
617 
2,987 
3,063 

4,502 
95
202
526 
10,297
567 
2,006
3,065 

15,000

10,000

5,000

0

03 

04 

05 

06 

07 

08 

09

Export price index (2000=100) 
Import price index(2000=00) 
Terms of trade (2000=100) 

25 
27 
94 

93 
90 
103 

166 
181 
92 

178
182 
98

ClExports 

Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

r 

1989 
1,905 
2,492 
-586 

1999 
2,687 
3,528 
-842 

2008 P 2009 
8,291 
7,413 
12,563 
11,253 
-4,272 
-3,840 

CurrentaccountbalancetoGDP(%)
4
2

2

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-244 
267 

-173 
564 

-46 
2,995 

-65 
2,297 

0 
-2

03 

05 

06 

0 

0

Current account balance 

-563 
623 
-60 

-450 
51B 
-68 

-1323 
844 
479 

-1,608 
2,072 
-464

4

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

-

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, localVUS$) 

341 
20.6 

791 
70.3 

2,928 
69.2 

3,127
77.4

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

r 

1989 
5,889 
889 
893 

1999 
6,475 
91 
2,220 

2008 ' 
7,427 
0 
3,050 

2009 
8,005
0
3,156 

Compositionof2009debt(US$mill.)

G: 1,011

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

709 
150 
8 

693 
70 
39 

408 
0 
99 

382 
0

F: 352

D4 

B: 3,156

Com po sition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment (net inflows) 
Portfolio equity (net inflows) 

379 
385 
161 
62 
0 

196 
-126 
-68 
52 
2 

1,099 
48 
-8 
96 
5 

1,270
203 
24
141
3 

E: 2,330

C: 451

D: 705

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

392 
244 
79 
165 
79 
86 

0 
78 
82 
-3 
28 
-31 

150 
178 
75 

525
164 
81 
83 
22
61

A- IBRD 
B - IDA 
C - IMF 

E- Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

D - Other multilateral 

14 

24 
79 

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database. 

2/25/11

IBRD 33426R2

KENYA

o 

CITIES AND TOWNS 

MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

e 

DISTRICT CAPITALS* 
NATIONAL CAPITAL 

 

RIVERS 

-

-

34E 

) 36 

38E 

40E 

2E

SOUTH SUDAN 

, 

TOMurle

TO 

Korungu
Karun 

E T H l O P l A

Loki.kio 

4N 

J 

h liTo. 

4N

Desert 

To 

Ronu Mand 

""

.*' 

-__ 

.

Kakuna

Lake 

%I---

Turkana 

NorthHorr 

SeMandera

Turkana 

Lda

Marsabit

Buna 

E|Wak

UGANLDA 

Lokichar 

South Horr

Marsabit 

Tarbaj

2N 

Kongatet

Wes Pokot 

Wfair

c,Samburu 

4k

 SOMALIA

To f, TransNzo 
lg 
Mbole 
Kitale 
Marweo 

Maralal 

BeshaPa

Kapedo
M Uusin t Barn, 

NaArcher's 

E 

0 

Gas

Bungom( 

Post 

' Garba

TKGish 
Kpala 

Tul.

usia 

Eld,e 

Mangat

KKak kmg 

'akp 

siolo, 

Mbalarmbala 

''4  

TO

0adiNahpu 

anTi Mn)eru 

Kismay

acltakos-- 
MTaaRvo 
KMy.e

-

---

iIN5,DIAN
 
kiMohnd 

Kosumu 
KThichoNyndrod'TharakaNitdi
Kirinjyaig( E bu 

Ham Ba K ercho 

NakNkr 

Nyn 

Garissa Grss

N mIJIfra 

Gi9iEmb

I.C < Kisfl 

SiNet 

Mrn

Klmigone 

'M\ 

eTt 

T

WctorbsTo. Narok 
|gonlrren 

arok 

TO

itraMusma 

N 

Aerobi ch 

tui Kitui 

Noanger

achako 71> i Tona River-p-.--

eKonzo

akuens 

B0ohei

25 

do7 

Ikutha 

t 

Lamod 

2S

eOnero

Kibwez C>& 

GaeLaou

-

--.

o. 

T sa ogjf

ruTsav 

sa 

Galana

Toi 
Mshi

Mahindi 

INDIAN

KENYA 

MaTANZANIA 
T vee 

on OCEAN

Taita/Tave 

. Prk

i This map was producd b
the Map Design Unit ofTh 4S
om asa 
. o asaworld Bank. The boundanes,
colors, denommaotions and
ny other mnformaion shown

.1110Y 

2011

IKwale 

.

Kwale 

0 

40 

80 

120 

160 

200 Kilometers 

.

| 

| 

| 

| | 

| 

onhis map do not iimply, o

0 

40 

80 

120 Miles 

Shimoni 

n fity
boundaries. /s

D.~o any... endorsemn-t or

3436 

38E 

40 E 

JULY 2011



