Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 72906-ID

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

AND

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA

FOR THE PERIOD FY13 - 15

December 13, 2012

Indonesia Country Management Unit, World Bank
East Asia and Pacific Region

The International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific Region

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Last Country Partnership Strategy: September 11, 2008 (Report No. 44845-IND)

CURRENCY EQUIVALENT (as of November 1, 2012)
Currency Unit: Rupiah (Rp)
US$1.00 = Rp 9,628

Fiscal Year
(January 1 to December 31)

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
ADB 
AfD 
AFEP 
AGO 
APEC 
ASEAN 
AusAID 
BAPPENAS 
BEC 
BERMUTU 

BII 
BKPM 
BNPB 
BOS 

BOS-KITA 

BPBD 
BPJS 

BPK 

BTPN 

Cat-DDO 
CCT 
CDD 
CIDA 

COP 
COREMAP 

COSO 
CPS 
DAK 
DBM 
DGH 
DPL 
DPL-DDO 
DRM 
EC 
EITI 

ESW 
EU 
FCPF 
FDI 
FIP 

Analytic and Advisory Activities 
Asian Development Bank 
Agence Francaise de Developpement 
Aceh Forest and Environment Project 
Attorney General's Office 
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Australian Aid Agency 
State Ministry of Development Planning 
Basic Education Capacity Trust Fund 
Better Education through Reformed 
Management and Universal Teacher 
Upgrading Project 

Bank Internasional Indonesia 

Investment Coordinating Board 
National Disaster Management Agency 
Government's School Operational 
Assistance 
Knowledge Improvement for 
Transparency and Accountability Project 
Local Disaster Management Agencies 
National Social Security Administrators 
Law 
Supreme Audit Institution 

Bank Tabungan Pensiunan Nasional Thk 

Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option 
Conditional Cash Transfer 
Community Driven Development 
Canadian International Development 
Agency 
Conference of the Parties 
Coral Reef Rehabilitation and 
Management Project 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Special Allocation Fund 
Double Burden of Malnutrition 
Directorate General of Highways 
Development Policy Loan 
Deferred Drawdown Option 
Disaster Risk Management 
European Commission 
Extractive Industries Transparency 
Initiative 
Economic and Sector Work 
European Union 
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Forest Investment Program 

FIRM 

FREDDI 
FSAP 
FY 
G20 

GDP 
GEF 
GFDRR 

GFMRAP 

GIZ 

GPOBA 
GPSA 

GTI 
HIV/AIDS 

HPEQ 
HRH 
IBBS 
IBRD 

ICT 

IFC 
IFF 
IMDFF-DR 

INSTANSI 

ISSDP 

IT 
IWSFF 

JBIC 
JICA 
JICT 
JUFMP 
KfW 
KPK 
KUR 
LG 
LGCD 

LPNK 

Financial Sector and Investment Climate
Reform and Modernization
Fund for REDD in Indonesia
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Group of Twenty Financial Ministries
and Central Bank Governors
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction
and Recovery
Government Financial Management and
Revenue Administration Project

(German Aid Agency)

Global Partnership on Output-based Aid
Global Partnership for Social
Accountability
Global Tiger Initiative
Human immunodeficiency virus infection
/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
Health Professional Education Quality
Health Human resources
Integrated Bio-Behavioral Survey
International Bank for Reconstruction

and Development

Information and Communication
Technology
International Finance Corporation
Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Facility
Multi Donor Funding Facility for
Disaster Recovery
Institutional, Tax Administration, Social
and Investment DPL
Indonesia Sanitation Sector Development
Program
Information Technology
Indonesian Water and Sanitation
Financing Facility
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Jakarta International Container Terminal
Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation Project
(German Development Bank)
Anti-Corruption Commission
Kredit Usaha Rakyat
Local Government
Local Government Capacity
Development
Public Research Institutes

1

M&E 
MCC 
MDFTIC 

MDG 
MEMR 

MIGA 

MIS 
MoF 
MoH 
MoHA 
MoLHR 
MP3EI 

MSME 
MTEF 
NGO 
NZ 
OECD 

OGP 
OJK 

PAMSIMAS 
PBB 
PDAM 

PDNA 
PEACH 

PER 
PERISAI 

PFM 
PINTAR 

PLN 

PNPM 

PPIAF 

PPP 
PT 
R&D 
RAPP 
REDD+ 

REKOMPAK 

Monitoring & Evaluation 
Millennium Challenge Corporation 
Multi Donor Facility for Trade and 
Investment Climate 
Millennium Development Goals 
Ministry of Energy and Mineral. 
Resources 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency 
Management Information System 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Health 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
Ministry of Law and Human Rights 
Master Plan for "Acceleration and 
Expansion of Indonesia's Economic 
Development 2011-2025" 
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
Mid Term Expenditure Framework 
Non-Governmental Organization 
New Zealand 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development 
Open Government Partnership 
Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (Indonesia 
Financial Services Authority) 
Rural Water and Sanitation Program 
Performance-based Budgeting 
Perusahaan Daerah Air Minum (Local 
Water Utility) 
Post-Disaster Needs Assessment 
Public Expenditure Analysis and 
Capacity Harmonization 
Public Expenditure Review 
Program for Economic Resilience, 
Investment and Social Assistance in 
Indonesia 
Public Financial Management 
Project for Indonesian Tax 
Administration Reform 
Perusahaan Listrik Negara (State-Owned 
Electricity Utility) 
National Program for Community 
Empowerment 
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory 
Facility 
Public-Private Partnership 
Perseroan Terbatas (Limited Company) 
Research and Development 
Road Asset Preservation Project 
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation 
and Forest Degradation 
Community-based housing and
settlement reconstruction program

RIA 
RISET 

RPJMN 
SBL 
SBY 
SECO 

SJSN 
SMART-D 

SME 
SNDB 
SOE 
SPADA 
SPAN 
SPIRIT 

STATCAP- 
CERDAS 

STBM 

SUN 
TA 
TF 
TSA 
TSSM 

UHC 
UK 
UKP4 
UNAIDS 

UNDP 
UNICEF 
USA 
USAID 

USDRP 

UWSSP 

VGF 
WBG 
WBI 
WDR 
WHO 
WINRIP 

WSP 

Regulatory Impact Assessment
Research and Innovation in Science
&Technology Project
Medium-Term Development Plan
Single Borrower Limit
President S.B. Yudhoyono
Swiss State Secretariat for Economic
Affairs
National Social Security System Law
Sustainable Management of Agricultural
Research and Technology Dissemination
Project
Small- Medium Sized Enterprise
Sub National Doing Business Survey
State-owned enterprises
Support for Disadvantaged Areas
Automated budget and treasury system
Scholarship Program for Strengthening
Reforming Institutions Project
Statistical Capacity Building
- Change and Reform for the
Development of Statistics
Community-Led Total Sanitation
Strategy
Scaling Up Nutrition
Technical Assistance
Trust Fund
Treasury Single Account
Total Sanitation and Sanitation
Marketing
Universal Health Coverage
United Kingdom
Presidential Delivery Unit
Joint United Nations Program on HIV
and AIDS
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children's Fund
United States of America
United States Agency for International
Development
Urban Sector Development and Reform
Project
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation
Project
Viability Gap Funding
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Development Report
World Health Organization
Western Indonesia National Road
Improvement Project
Water and Sanitation Program

Vice President: 

Country Director: 

IDA/IBRD 

Pamela Cox 

Stefan G. Koeberle 

IFC 

Karin Finkelston 

Sergio Pimenta 

MIGA

Michel Wormser

Kevin Lu

Country Manager/TTL: 

Mark V. Hagerstorm 

Sarvesh Suri/Catherine Sarah Martin 

Paul Barbour

ii

FY2013 - 2015 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR INDONESIA

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION 

............... 1

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES 

.................................................

1

2

6

I. 

II. 

V. 

III. 
THE GOVERNMENT'S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
IV. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND POLITICAL CONTEXT 
Current Economic Performance and Outlook ...................................
The Political Context ....................................................

...............................

.. 

............. 3

3
5

.

..........

....................... 

THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 
PRO-GROWTH - Promoting Prosperity 
........................... 
.......... 10
Connectivity 
...................................................... 
10
Competitiveness 
....................
....................
11
11........ 
Financial Sector .......... 
....................................... 
13
Infrastructure 
...................................................... 
15
.................................................. 
18
Local Government 
Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management 
....................................... 
19
Strengthening the Public Sector 
.............................. 
..........
20
PRO-JOBS - Enhancing Skills and Technology, and Improving Social Protection...........21
........................................................
22
Education 
Social Insurance ....................................................... 
24
PRO-POOR - Promoting Communities, Protecting the Vulnerable and Improving Health
Outcomes 
...........................................................
25
Targeting Poverty............................................ 
.......
25
Community Development 
...................................... 
...... 26
Food Security and Rural Development 
............................. 
......
28
Improving Health Outcomes 
.................................... 
...... 30
PRO-GREEN - Ensuring Sustainable Development and Improving Disaster Resilience......32
Green Growth 
.....................................................
33
Improving Disaster Resilience.........................................35
CROSS-CUTTING ENGAGEMENTS - Gender and Governance ...................
Gender..........................................................36
Governance and Anti-Corruption. 
............................... 

........

37

36

VI. DELIVERING THE WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM 

....................

38

Financing 
............................................................
38
Collaboration with Development Partners 
....................................
39
....................... 
........ 40
Portfolio Management................ 
.
Sharing Global Development Solutions........................................41
Results Management Framework 
..........................................
Managing for Risks ...........................................................

41
41

iii

Attachments:

Annex 1: Indonesia CPS FY13-15 Results Matrix 
43
Annex 2: Indonesia: CPS (FY09-12) Completion Report .......................... 
60
Annex 3: Economic Outlook ................ 
.
....................... 
........ 1 04
Annex 4: Gender Equity ...................................................... 
114
Annex 5: Governance and Anti-Corruption 
................................... 
..... 1 21
Annex 6: Portfolio Performance 
..................................................... 
126
Annex 7: Trust Funds........................................................... 
128
Annex 8: CPS Consultations 
132
Standard: CPS Annexes ...................................................... 
134

................................................... 

.................................... 

List of Figures

Figure 1: Alignment of Engagement Areas 

.............

............... 9
9............ 

List of Table

Table 1: Baseline Macroeconomic Outlook 

................................ 

..........

4

List of Boxes

.............................. 
........................

Box 1: Ins and Outs FY13-15...................................................9
Box 2: Connectivity Results, Instruments and Partners 
................................
11
Box 3: Competitiveness Results, Instruments and Partners 
13
Box 4: Financial Sector Results, Instruments and Partners 
14
Box 5: Infrastructure Results, Instruments and Partners 
................................ 
17
Box 6: Local Government Results, Instruments and Partners 
...................... 
...... 19
Box 7: Macro and Fiscal Results, Instruments and Partners 
.......................
20
Box 8: Public Sector Results, Instruments and Partners 
................................
21
Box 9: Education Results, Instruments and Partners 
............................ 
......
23
Box 10: Social Insurance Results, Instruments and Partners 
.............................
25
Box 11: Poverty Targeting Results, Instruments and Partners 
.............................. 
26
Box 12: Community Development Results, Instruments and Partners 
................. 
..... 28
Box 13: Food Security and Rural Development Results, Instruments and Partners 
.. 
............ 29
Box 14: Improving Health Results, Instruments and Partners 
....................... 
..... 32
Box 15: A New Partnership to Support Green Growth 
....................................
33
Box 16: Green Growth Results, Instruments and Partners 
........................
34
Box 17: Disaster Resilience Results, Instruments and Partners 
..............................
36
Box 18: Trust Funds: A Platform for Results and Innovation 
...............................
40

iv

I. 

INTRODUCTION

1. 
The Joint IBRD/IFC/MIGA Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) with Indonesia for
FY13-15 bridges the final two years of the administration of President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono (SBY). Since 2004, Indonesia emerged as a vibrant and stable democracy and as a self-
assured middle-income economy with a fast-growing private sector, and global and regional
influence. Building on six decades of partnership, the World Bank Group's engagement with
Indonesia continues to move forward on the path developed by the previous CPS FY09-12,
supporting Indonesia's development agenda by enabling local capacity to implement and deliver and
by strengthening economic competitiveness of the private sector. The CPS is aligned with the
country's Master Plan for "Acceleration and Expansion of Indonesia's Economic Development 2011-
2025", which seeks to accelerate development through a pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-poor and pro-
green strategy. The Government will take a strong position not only as the regulator, but also as the
facilitator and function as "a catalyst for growth" for the private sector. The CPS takes into account
changing global and domestic market conditions and the lessons learned from the assessment of the
CPS for FY09-12, in consultation with the Government of Indonesia (Gol), private sector, civil
society, development partners and other major stakeholders.

II. 

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

2. 
Indonesia's strong economic growth has supported gains in poverty reduction and
contributed to a growing middle class. The country has successfully emerged from the severe
economic turmoil of the 1998 Asian Financial Crisis, and the difficult political transition from
authoritarianism to democracy. Indonesia's development has made remarkable progress in lifting
millions of people out of poverty and in improving social indicators. Prudent economic management
has resulted in low budget deficits, a much reduced public debt-to-GDP ratio, and manageable
inflation. The past decade has also seen a robust economic growth even through the more recent
global financial crisis. In addition, Indonesia has benefited from a boom in commodity exports,
increasing investor confidence and substantial capital inflows, as well as a strong demographic
dividend. Rapid urbanization has also contributed by shifting demand patterns towards consumer
durables and services. Output growth has averaged 5.5 percent per year during 2002 to 2011, on the
back of strong domestic consumption and generally sustainable external surpluses. Although
financial markets remain vulnerable to changes in international investor sentiment, imbalances
declined rapidly as corporate and financial sector balance sheets were repaired. Revenue growth,
combined with restrained expenditures, has contributed to low fiscal deficits.

3. 
At the same time, development challenges and weak institutional capacity and other
constraints need to be addressed in order for Indonesia to reach its full potential. Building the
capacity of Indonesia's institutions to effectively formulate and implement public policy and
programs remains a significant task. Despite sustained economic growth and poverty reduction,
Indonesia still has a large poor population (30 million live below the national poverty line, which is
just below PPP$1.25 a day) and the pace of poverty reduction is slowing. An additional 65 million
people live above the poverty line but are highly vulnerable to falling back into poverty, and
inequality is growing. Although poverty rates of female-headed households (FHH) remain lower
than male-headed households (MHH), the former remain more remain more vulnerable to shocks.
Human development indicators, job creation and infrastructure investment lag behind the needs of an
increasingly urbanized, young population. Public service delivery needs to be strengthened through
improved coordination and greater transparency. The private sector needs to also be able to operate
in a transparent, rules based environment, with fair competition and adequate access to capital.
Substantial 
increases 
in education expenditures have not yet translated 
into commensurate

1

improvements in the quality of education necessary to supplying the mix of skills required by a
growing economy. Cities are hard pressed to keep up with rapid urbanization, and pronounced
regional differences remain. Public investment is lagging behind its historical levels and a severe
lack of infrastructure will increasingly hold Indonesia back from reaching its potential in terms of
economic growth and prosperity. Fuel subsidies absorb much of the budget that would otherwise be
available for infrastructure and social protection. Private sector participation in important sectors
such as infrastructure, logistics, healthcare and education services, amongst others, need to be scaled
up, and improving regulations for small and medium enterprises could lead to additional job growth.
Deforestation, flooding and other environmental concerns have highlighted the importance of
adapting and mitigating to climate change and managing natural resources in a sustainable manner.
Increasingly, Indonesian society and a free press are demanding stronger accountability in
institutions, better governance in businesses and are not tolerating corruption.

III. 

THE GOVERNMENT'S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

4. 

A series of five-year development plans have provided the framework for reinforcing
economic stability and initiating structural reforms. Within the first five years after the 1998
crisis, both economic and political stability were largely in place. When President Yudhoyono came
to power in late 2004, plans for macroeconomic and fiscal consolidation and a series of structural
reforms to restore confidence in the Indonesian economy were included into the National Long-Term
Development Plan for 2005-2025. 
In SBY's second term, the Government adopted Indonesia's
Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMN) 2010-2014, with responsibility for monitoring progress
assigned to the newly established Presidential Delivery Unit (UKP4). With the target of increasing
economic growth to 7 percent and reducing the poverty rate to 8-10 percent by 2014, the RPJMN
highlights the need for growth with equity and a range of cross-cutting policies to ensure that
development is both sustainable and inclusive. The RPJMN gives a special emphasis to increasing
investments 
in infrastructure and strengthening the poverty agenda. Further, it commits the
Government to a more equitable and inclusive development for, among others, women and children.
The Ministry of Women Empowerment and Child Protection embodies this commitment.

5. 
A new Master Plan for Economic Development seeks to accelerate growth and increase
equity with a goal of becoming one of the 10 largest economics in the world by 2025. In May

2011, Gol launched the Master Plan for "Acceleration and Expansion of Indonesia's Economic
Development 2011-2025" (MP3EI) based on three strategies: (i) fostering centers of growth in each
major island group by developing leading resource-based industrial clusters; (ii) building synergies
between those centers of growth, including international connectivity for trade and tourism; and (iii),
complementing connectivity by improving human resources capabilities and increasing investments
in research and development. Under the plan, business enterprises have a central role in economic
development, particularly 
in generating 
investments, creating employment opportunities and
fostering innovation. The Government is responsible for creating conducive macro-economic and
regulatory conditions for the acceleration and expansion of investments.

6. 
The Government's approach to economic policy is based on its four strategic objectives
of pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-poor and pro-green development. Equity remains a basic principle
for balancing economic growth and development amongst large cities and smaller cities and more
isolated parts of the country to deliver more even economic development in collaboration with the
private sector and job creation across the country. It also includes a focus on reaching Indonesia's
poorest. The Government concentrates on thirteen programs, which include education, health,
poverty reduction, employment creation, infrastructure development, food security, energy, good
governance, electoral reform, anti-corruption enforcement, inclusive and equitable development,

2

climate change and environmental protection, and cultural development. Collaboration with the
private sector to complement Government's efforts through investments, job creation and innovation
is prioritized. Reducing reliance on external finance and maintaining a low debt to GDP ratio is also
a key priority of President SBY's administration. In some, but not all of these areas, the Government
has sought assistance from the Bank Group as discussed in the sections below.

IV. 

RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND POLITICAL CONTEXT

Current Economic Performance and Outlook

7. 

Indonesia managed to weather the global economic downturn of 2008-09 and regain its
growth momentum. GDP growth declined from 6 percent in 2008 to 4.6 percent in 2009, but
subsequently recovered to 6.1 percent in 2010 and 6.5 percent in 2011. The social impact of the
global crisis was also limited in Indonesia. There were few reports of layoffs, poverty and
unemployment rates continued to decline and household spending was maintained in an environment
of low inflation. This relatively robust performance was supported by solid public finances, healthy
financial sector balance sheets and the strong of domestic demand. Indonesia's exports, focused on
commodities, benefited from international commodity price increases and strong demand for raw
materials from China and other emerging economies. Policymakers also took proactive measures
during the crisis, including a fiscal stimulus package, supportive monetary policy and a significant
contingent support package from development partners whilst managing to bring in a fiscal deficit
that was below target in 2009-2011. Along with strong GDP growth, this contributed to a decrease
in government debt to below 25 percent of GDP, healthy leveraging of the private sector balance
sheets and sovereign ratings that are back to investment grade for the first time since 1997. At the
same time, these improvements in creditworthiness, along with high relative yields and encouraging
long-term prospects, have contributed to strong portfolio inflows, which could expose the economy
to sudden reversals the face of continued global economic uncertainty.

8. 
Recent economic performance has continued to be robust, though there are signs of
spillovers from the deterioration in the global economy and financial markets. In recent months
the weakening 
in external demand and commodity prices has contributed to a narrowing of
Indonesia's trade surplus. While financial market spillovers have been relatively muted, the weak
global outlook and possible financial market turbulence present continued downside risks around the
projected growth of 6.1 percent in 2012. Although Indonesia's solid fiscal position, its relatively
limited direct trade exposure to the EU, and strong domestic drivers of growth make it relatively
well-placed to handle a turbulent global economy, its reliance on commodities is a source of
vulnerability. A downside scenario with a severe freezing-up of international finance, curtailed
growth in China and declining commodity prices could slow growth to around 4 percent of GDP.

9. 
Over the medium term, effective coordination, policy implementation and investment
climate reforms are needed if growth is to accelerate to 7 percent or more and if improvements
in social outcomes are to continue. For increases in fiscal expenditures to lead to improvements in
public services, Indonesia will need more effective and accountable institutions that can translate
available resources into better development outcomes. The country will need to prioritize private
sector-led competitive, innovative and sustainable growth. This will be particularly important as
Indonesia focuses on its tremendous need for infrastructure, financial inclusion, better education,
greater social protection and universal health coverage. Improvements in the investment climate,
including regulatory consistency and certainty, are also necessary for employment creation and to
sustaining high rates of foreign direct investment.

3

10. World Bank analysis shows that in a baseline scenario of international financial market
fragility combined with relatively weak external, but continued solid, domestic demand, growth
of 6.1 percent is forecast for 2012, moving up to 6.3 percent in 2013. The underlying macro
assumptions for this baseline include a continued weakness in external demand with overall
international commodity prices also projected to moderate.

Table 1: Baseline Macroeconomic Outlook

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 (p) 

2013 (p) 

2014 (p)

Growth
Real GDP (% change) 
Real investment (% change) 
Real private consumption (% change) 
Real exports (% change) 
Real imports (% change) 
Current account balance (% of GDP) 
Fiscal variables
Central government balance (% of GDP) 1 
Central government debt (% of GDP) 
Prices

GDP deflator (% change) 2  

CPI inflation (%)2 

4.6 
3.3 
6.2 
-9.7 
-15.0 
1.9 

-1.6 
28.4 

8.3 

4.8 

6.2 
8.5 
4.6 
15.3 
17.3 
0.7 

-0.7 
26.1 

8.1 

5.1 

6.5 
8.8 
4.7 
13.6 
13.3 
0.2 

-1.1 
24.3 

8.4 

5.4 

6.1 
12.3 
5.0 
2.8 
7.1 
-2.3 

-2.2 
23.0 

6.5 

4.4 

6.3 
11.2 
5.1 
5.7 
4.7 
-1.6 

-1.6 
21.2 

7.9 

5.1 

6.6
10.5
4.9
11.0
11.8
-1.7

-1.4
19.5

8.7

5.0

Note: 12011 is actual audited, 2012 is revised Budget deficit and deficit from 2013 to 2014 is based on
Government 2013 Budget Financial Note. 2 Period averages

11. 
Under more adverse but plausible scenarios, growth in 2013 could decline to around 4
percent of GDP, the lowest in a decade. Taking the above downside risks into account, different

scenarios can be considered to simulate the impact of external shocks on Indonesia's economy (see
Table below). The main impact would be felt in 2013 given the strong performance in 2012 to date.
Under a scenario similar to 2009 which assumes a greater growth slowdown due to the real impact of
the financial crisis and credit tightness, as well as a moderate decline in commodity prices, GDP
growth is cut to 4.7 percent in 2013 (down 1.7 percentage points on the baseline scenario), reflecting
lower investment and exports. If a financial crisis precipitates, or accompanies, coupled with a
significant growth slowdown in emerging economies as well as a sharp drop in global commodity
prices, growth could fall even further in 2012, down to just under 4 percent.

12. 

The outlook for China is of particular importance for Indonesia. China is an important

direct trading partner (with a weight in Indonesia's exports of 11 percent in 2011) but the second
round effects on Indonesia of a slowdown in China via global and regional trading partner growth
would also be important. The baseline growth projection incorporates an assumed growth rate for
China of around 8 percent, in line with the June 2012 GEP projections. Moving China's growth down
to 7 percent would directly cut Indonesia's major trading partner growth by 0.17 pp (given a weight
in Indonesia's exports of 11 percent in 2011). The second round effects via global and regional
trading partner growth would also be important. However, the real concern with a relatively marked
slowdown in growth would be if China's growth leads to a sharp fall in global commodity prices,
particularly coal and minerals that form a sizeable share of Indonesia's exports. For example, the June
2011 IMF report on China Spillovers estimated that a 3 percent reduction in the growth rate of
China's industrial output (1 standard deviation, or 1 percent of GDP) would result in international

4

price declines of 6 percent for oil and base metals; while the impact on other commodities is low. If
significant commodity price declines were sustained then this would spill over to domestic
consumption and investment, as household incomes and corporate investment, and fiscal revenues
would also decline.

13. 
Growth could also move substantially lower if the impact of adverse external shocks is
amplified domestically. Growth would still be above 4 percent in the international scenarios
discussed in the previous paragraphs. This is similar to that seen in 2009, when growth dropped
during the height of the global financial crisis but remained at 4.6 percent. However, it is important
to note that these GDP projections combine the external scenarios with moderations in the underlying
domestic drivers of growth, i.e. private consumption and investment. In the event that there was a
major dislocation to these drivers, for example due to domestic policy miss-steps or problems in the
domestic financial sector, then the downside risks to growth could be much greater.

Poverty

14. 
Despite strong economic growth and falling poverty in the last decade, inequality is
rising and many households continue to live on the edge of poverty. Indonesia's poverty rate,
measured at the national poverty line, fell from 16.6 percent in March 2007 to 12.0 percent in March
2012, with little difference between male-headed and female-headed households. The 0.5 percentage
point decline since March 2011 is the lowest drop in ten years, which reflects the slowing rate of
poverty reduction and the increasing challenges of lifting the remaining poor out of poverty. With
rapid urbanization, poverty will also become increasingly more urban. Despite the country's positive
progress in reducing poverty, vulnerability remains high. Nearly 40 percent of Indonesians live on
1.5 times poverty-line expenditure (or less) and are highly vulnerable to shocks that can push them
back below the poverty line. The gap between the poor and non-poor is also widening. The Gini
coefficient has increased from 0.32 in 1999 to approximately 0.41 in 2011. Regional disparities also
persist; eastern Indonesia lags behind other parts of the country.

15. 
The reduction in poverty rate could have been faster if there were sufficient
opportunities for poor workers to move into better jobs in the formal and non-agricultural
sectors. The Bank recently completed the Indonesia Jobs Report, a comprehensive overview of the
labor market over the past 20 years. While overall formal employment grew at 1.2 percentage points
per year from 2003 until 2007, formal employment for the poor increased by only 0.8 percentage
points and remained roughly constant for the near-poor during that period. Going forward, reducing
poverty and vulnerability will hinge on the pace of employment growth for the poor. The
Government is also increasingly concerned about the rise in inequality. The Bank will work with the
Gol in analyzing the factors behind the rising inequality. Preliminary analysis of the data shows a
sharp contrast between the situation of skilled and highly skilled workers, who have seen a rapid
increase in wages over the last decade, with that of the unskilled, working largely in informal sectors
with little job security and slow wage growth. The analysis will examine the growth rate of economic
sectors with different skill-intensity. A structural transformation often entails some inequality along
the skill spectrum since different sectors with different skill-intensity grow a different pace.

The Political Context

16. 
As a result of a decade of political and institutional reforms, Indonesia is a vibrant
multi-party and decentralized democracy. At the same time, the current environment - dominated
by uncertainty over pending election outcomes, 
tensions amongst the legislative, judicial and
executive branches of central government and a lack of clarity about decentralization - makes it more

5

difficult for Government to make tough policy choices and implement the changes necessary for
better service delivery in the run-up to the 2014 elections.

17. 
Over the medium term, Indonesia is expected to continue along a stable political path
with a consensus-based approach to reform and pragmatic economic management. Although
political positioning is expected to dominate in 2013 and the first half of 2014with no major
ideological differences among the dominant political parties and potential presidential candidates, the
election will likely be determined by candidates who appeal most to an increasingly demanding
electorate seeking to sustain political stability and to keep corruption at bay.

V. 

THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

18. 
The partnership between Indonesia and the World Bank Group has evolved over six
decades to become one of our most significant in terms of lending, knowledge services and
implementation support. With a portfolio of 44 operations, US$1.4 billion 
in trust funds
commitments and a strong analytical and advisory program for the World Bank, and a committed
portfolio of US$1.2 billion and an innovative advisory services program totaling US$23-25 million
of annual expenditure for IFC, the Bank Group remains the largest provider of development finance
and advice for Indonesia. The engagement is supported by the Bank Group's largest country office
and a decentralized structure recently strengthened by additional sector management associated with
span-of-control improvements. The depth of the engagement comes not only from more typical Bank
lending, IFC financing and knowledge services but also from an unusually intensive advisory and
implementation support made possible by third-party financing.

19. 
At the same time, Indonesia has provided both a testing ground and inspiration for a
range of innovations that have shaped the World Bank. These notable 'firsts' include hosting one
of the first decentralized offices, bringing 
into focus 
the need 
to systematically address
environmental and social impacts of projects, ground-breaking initiatives in community-driven
development, first-ever advisory services project for IFC, sustainable palm oil and forestry advisory
services initiatives and provision of short and longer-term disaster response. Increasingly, Indonesia
is not only receiving assistance, but is helping other members of the Bank Group by sharing its
experience and becoming a leader amongst emerging middle 
income countries. Notable is
Indonesia's leadership in calling for green development and in disaster management and recovery.

20. 
To remain relevant and responsive to the needs of Indonesia, the Bank Group will
continue to call on a broad range of instruments and knowledge services to respond to the
challenges of each of the areas in which we engage. In many cases, this means approaching each
engagement area in a programmatic way that often cuts across the Bank's traditional sectors and is in
close cooperation with IFC and MIGA. Over the CPS period and beyond, the Bank Group will
continue to take a medium- to long-term view of its engagements that will provide continuity across
different political administrations. This long-term approach allows flexibility to respond to emerging
demands drawing on the relevant financing and knowledge services. The Government has indicated
its preference for an increasing shift in the overall balance of services toward knowledge and
convening. For financing services, the Government is looking for an increasing focus on both
infrastructure and poverty reduction programs.

21. 
The partnership is focused on engagement areas where the Bank Group is likely to
provide the most value added in support of Indonesian development priorities. The WBG
engagement is systematically tested against the following criteria to ensure relevance: 
(i) an
important development priority, (ii) based on demand for the Bank Group's support from
government, the private sector and civil society, ideally with a strong champion, (iii) is an area where

6

the WBG has comparative advantage and, (iv) offers the prospect of tangible development results
over time. Where these criteria are not met, the WBG will limit its support (as the Bank did in health
and agriculture and IFC limited corporate financing to top-tier corporates in recent years), recalibrate
its efforts (in 
this CPS period, focus will shift from reforming 
the policy framework for
decentralization to service delivery by local governments) or exit. Where results have been achieved,
the WBG will wind down its engagement (for example, closing the Aceh office upon completion of
the disaster response. Meanwhile, we are responding to meaningful client demand for policy and
institutional reforms (such as social insurance, financial sector regulation, infrastructure and financial
inclusion). Experience suggests this pragmatic approach as an effective way to provide steady,
predictable support in key development areas while remaining open to emerging priorities and
exploring new ideas.

22. 
The CPS takes into account lessons learned from the Bank's past engagement, including
the CPS Completion Report for FYO9-12 (Annex 2). These lessons include:

* Effectively supporting an increasingly confident middle-income country requires fully aligning
Bank support with Indonesia's development program and the country-led and owned policy
agenda. This has solidified the Bank Group's status as the development agency of choice and put
the Bank in a position to be responsive to Indonesia's immediate needs, and to inform the debate
on emerging policy issues. Full alignment, in turn, has positive spillover effects for aligning
other donor programs behind the country-led agenda in their collaboration with the Bank. This
has allowed the Bank to deepen its engagements across key development priorities.

* Programmatic development policy lending support provides important cross-cutting convening
services for step-by-step 
incremental reforms. As institutional reform efforts deepen at the
sectoral level, effectiveness of implementation support is further enhanced by drilling down
through discrete projects.

* Sustained engagement over several years encourages an evidence-based approach that allows
to carefully recalibrate the scope and design of programs as needed. A good example is the
Bank's support for Indonesia's significant community-driven development program, with
demonstrable well-researched impact on the ground. Its country-wide expansion offers important
potential for using social capital as a platform for addressing health and education, inclusion and
environmental concerns, while requiring increased attention to governance and management, in
order to improve impact and reduce operational and reputational risks.

* Knowledge services take an increasingly important role and Indonesia seeks to share both its
best practices and lessons learned in development experiences, particularly with other middle-
income countries. In important areas with diminished need for external financing, diffused
leadership or poor coordination, the Bank's knowledge and convening services can encourage a
policy debate with a view to forging a consensus (e.g. on private-public partnerships), contribute
to effective implementation (e.g. in education) and help with the coordination among government
agencies (e.g. in infrastructure development). Indonesia recently contributed US$1.5 million to
the Bank's South-South Knowledge Exchange facility.

* As Indonesia's private sector continues to develop in a vibrant, fast-growing middle-income
economy, IFC's approach in financing and advisory services is becoming more focused in
selected priority sectors, such as in infrastructure, financial inclusion, climate change
mitigation and agribusiness. Going forward, IFC will continue 
to support projects and
interventions that involve significant demonstration impact, i.e. they are innovative and serve as
examples to enable the private sector investors and other stakeholders to crowd in. This enhances
the development impact from IFC's services in Indonesia's large and growing economy.

7

23. 
The Country Partnership Strategy aims to enhance Indonesia's domestic capacity for
reducing poverty and boosting equitable and sustainable prosperity. Its main thrust is to help
public institutions implement and deliver, and to partner with the private sector for sustainable
economic and job growth. The Bank Group's approach in Indonesia is to (i) closely align with the
Government's own development strategies, policy objectives and priority programs; (ii) strengthen
and increasingly rely on Indonesia's own systems and procedures such as those for procurement and
financial management; while (iii) continuing to put a strong emphasis on fiduciary oversight, tangible
development results and technical excellence; and (iv) continuing 
to 
implement 
innovative,
demonstrational and sustainable private sector projects. It seeks to retain its relevance as a provider
of development solutions for an emerging Indonesia by sharing global knowledge, providing
innovative financial services and offering the platform of the Bank's convening services. The CPS
continues to move forward on the path developed by the previous partnership, the FYO9-12 CPS by
partnering on investing in institutions in order to enhance governance, through its focus on open and
efficient government, accountable service delivery, clear checks and balances; and fostering a
conducive environment and supporting sustainable private sector enterprises. Gender equality is also
another key aspect of the CPS in line with the Bank's corporate commitment for 100 percent gender-
informed activities in EAP. Bridging the remaining years of the current administration, this CPS
focuses on the implementation of the FY13-15 program until early 2015, when a newly elected
government and a new five-year plan will be inaugurated.

24. 
The Bank Group Partnership is aligned with the Government's development priorities
in their pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-poor and pro-environment focus. Figure 1 indicates the key
engagement areas where Bank Group support is expected to contribute to tangible development
outcomes and make a difference in the lives of Indonesians. Cross-cutting themes include gender
equity, as well as governance and anti-corruption. Together, these engagement areas aim to support
government efforts in addressing Indonesia's key development challenges in collaboration with the
private sector including (i) boosting growth and job creation by facilitating the supply response to the
dramatic change in demand that a rising middle class and urbanization bring (pro-growth and pro-
jobs agenda); (ii) accelerating the pace of poverty reduction and provide greater economic security
for the vulnerable so that they can share the benefits of growing prosperity (pro-poor and pro-jobs
agenda) and (iii) enhancing sustainability in natural resource management (pro-green agenda). 
In
meeting the country's priorities, the Bank's approach in Indonesia is to put together cross-sectoral
teams in the field to bring best quality knowledge and implementation support. Our engagements are
supported by a wide range of instruments and financing sources. In addition to more conventional
Bank instruments, the Indonesia "business model" is based heavily on being a platform for the
delivery of third party financing. This includes multi-donor and bilateral donor trust funds and
programmatic and project specific financing and support facilities. By providing a platform for
financing from other donors, the Bank Group is able to help deliver an array of innovative solutions
and to pilot new ideas in development that would not be possible using only Bank instruments.

8

25. 

Overall, the breadth and depth of the Bank's ongoing engagement is maintained, but

with several shifts in emphasis. Box I summarizes the areas where the selectivity criteria set out
above have led to changes in the CPS Program.

Box 1: Ins and Outs FY13-15

With a strong team on the ground, a long partnership with the Government and donors, the Bank's approach
in Indonesia is to selectively take on new engagements and exit existing ones as needs or priorities change.
Some examples include the following:

* Disaster response to the 2004 tsunami in Aceh/Nias as well as to the 2006 earThquake and 2010 volcano

emuption in Java will be successfully completed in December 2012, and the Bank's office in Aceh will be closed.
The Decentralization Support Facility (DSF) has closed and new support in this area more narrowly focuses on
supporting incentives and capacity far local and metropolitan governments.
Food security has surfaced as a strong government priority, which involves a reactivation of rural development,
where the Bank will continually support the Government to pay particular attention to women considering that
the majority of female labor force (38 percent) remain in agriculture and Indonesia's gender wage gap in this
sector remain among the largest in the region.

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 

IFC seeks to scale up 
its interventions in the areas of infrastructure development, financial inclusion,
agribusiness and food security, job creation and supportng competitive manufacturing enterprises; in line with
the Government's request and private sector needs.
The policy dialogue in health has intensified, with a particular focus on addressing early childhood nutrition.
The government has decided to no longer draw on Bank financing for basic education after the successful
launch of the BOS program, but continues to seek Bank support to improve the quality of spending and to
program grants from the private sector to address pressing needs in the most deprived areas.
The Bank is also exiting lending for climate change as Gol prefers to seek grant funding, but demand for our
knowledge services has intensified
* 
Private sector development and trade have been combined under the theme of competitiveness
* Connectivity, recognized as a new theme of the Master Plan, is being supported by a first DPL

* 

Figure 1: Alignment of Engagement Areas

Finncsie' 

reclorh 

m

a P m r

9

PRO-GRO WTH - Promoting Prosperity

26. 
The target of the Government during the FY13-15 period is to increase economic
growth to the 7 percent range over the medium term. The strategy entails maintaining macro
stability and fiscal discipline, while enhancing the governance and quality of spending, promoting
connectivity, improving the investment climate and greater access to finance, and improving
infrastructure 
including 
through focusing external borrowing on 
infrastructure and energy
investment. The challenges of upping the medium-term rate of growth from the recent 5.5 percent
average for 2002-2011 cannot be underestimated in the face of continuing global uncertainties,
domestic political constraints and institutional capacity limitations. Moreover, the relatively good
performance during the current crisis may have inured a broader sense in Indonesia of, if not
complacency, at least a lack of urgency. The costs of not doing so, however, could be high in not
taking advantage of the favorable situation that Indonesia has been facing vis-a-vis commodity prices
and the current demographic dividend, rapid urbanization and shifting demand patterns. Put starkly,
over the course of the next decade maintaining the current 5.5 percent growth implies a 2025 GPD
per capita of US$6,525, whereas an increase to 7 percent over the same period would translate into
GPD per capita of US$9,057.

27. 
Pro-Growth Results. For this theme, the WBG expects to support development results that
will, 
increase connectivity and logistics performance, 
improve the regulatory environment for
competition and 
innovation, maintain financial sector stability while enhancing access and
increasing the quantity and efficiency of investment in infrastructure and improve the quality of
public spending and financial management at the national and local levels.

Connectivity

28. 
Indonesia's Master Plan sets out its longer term approach to becoming an industrialized
economy, and broaden growth through connectivity, human resource improvements and
technology. Poor national connectivity is identified as one of the major impediments for growth and
undermining Indonesia's economic competitiveness, hampering the economic integration among the
islands of the archipelago, and reducing access to international markets. For example, Indonesia
ranks 7 5 th on the World Bank's Logistics Performance Index, well behind ASEAN competitors such
as Singapore (2 nd), Malaysia ( 2 9 th), Thailand ( 3 5th) Philippines ( 4 4 th) and Vietnam ( 5 9 th). The price
of a bag of cement in certain parts of Papua is 20 times that in Java. In Java, oranges from China are
cheaper than oranges from Kalimantan. High domestic transport costs are the main reason. In some
export sectors, such as cocoa, rubber and coffee, more than 40 percent of total logistics and transport
costs come from pre-shipment and inland transportation expenses before international shipment.

29. 
In addition to being crucial for growth, empirical studies show that connectivity has a
strong positive impact on women through a number of channels. These include (i) facilitating
access to health and education facilities, as well as expanding economic opportunities for women and
(ii) reducing women's workload and time for performing their activities in both the public and
domestic spheres.

30. 
The WBG has been playing an important role in helping the Gol to focus on enhancing
connectivity to accelerate growth and improve equity. Bank analytic work identified priorities
with a focus on intra-island, inter-island and international connectivity issues (Connecting Indonesia:
A Framework for Action). The Bank has also provided extensive support for the connectivity
framework using the WDR 2009 on Reshaping Economic Geography and to identify a detailed plan
of action. On logistics, the Bank has provided analytic, advisory and convening services, including
hosting a series of influential roundtables with stakeholders.

10

31. 
Through development policy operations and knowledge services the Bank expects to
support development results that will enhance Indonesia's logistics performance, improve
access to broadband and reduce costs for exporting and importing. The key to addressing
connectivity challenges lies in policy coordination and implementation across multiple levels of
government and consultation with the private sector. Support from the Bank will include a series of
proposed Connectivity DPLs with co-financing from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). There are discussions, as well, for possible Bank
investments in specific corridor development.

32. 

Public investment and improved investment climate is expected to pave the way for
private sector participation. Over the next 15 years, the Master Plan envisages investments of
about US$468 billion. Private sector investment is a key driver and expected to deliver 51 percent of
this total. State-owned enterprises (SOE) would contribute 18 percent with various levels of
Government providing much of the remainder. The contribution of private investment so far has been
limited and Gol is aware that regulatory reforms and improvement of the investment climate are
necessary to attract private participation. The WBG is ready to assist Gol in this endeavor. As
international trade finance has shrunk in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, IFC is stepping in
to provide trade finance for agro-commodity exports from Indonesia. Another role IFC is playing is
to support Indonesian private sector businesses competing 
in global markets, as they set up
manufacturing plants in other emerging markets.

Box 2: Connectivity Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Growth Connectivity Development Results: Enhance Indonesia's logistics performance, improve access
to broadband and reduce costs for exporting and importing.
Financing/Grants 
Knowledge and Convening 
Ongoing: 
Logistics and trade facilitation 
IFC investments in Jakarta 
Policy notes on logistics, regulatory reform, and 
International Container 
managing openness 
Terminal and Wintermar 
Knowledge sharing through workshops and field visits; 
Proposed: 
engage local think-tanks, universities and private sector 
Connectivity DPLs 1-111 
organizations to participate in policy dialogue 
Under Discussion: 
Public Expenditure Reviews of the Road and Rail Sectors.
Corridor 5 Investment
IFC investments to support
logistics sector

Development
Partners
ADB, AUSAID,
Japan (JICA), The
Netherlands,
Switzerland (SECO),
USAID

Competitiveness

Private sector-led growth is vital to Indonesia's competitiveness to create jobs for a

33. 
growing population, to address the rural-urban income gap and to provide sustainable
infrastructure services for an increasingly urbanized society. Indonesia's objective is to enhance
the environment for private sector development and to foster accelerated growth and poverty
reduction, while mitigating climate change impacts. While the prospects for investing in Indonesia

are quite promising, given 
its significant population and natural resources; poor government
coordination, uncertainty about the legal and Judicial frameworks, infrastructure constraints, and

unclear investment policies, regulations, and procedures continue to drag on the investment climate.

Pre

34. 
The World Bank Group supports development results that will improve the policy
framework, regulatory environment, and coordinated 
interventions 
for productivity,
competition and innovation through development policy operations, knowledge services and
IFC advisory services. Building on synergies between the IFC and the Bank, partnerships have been
established with key institutions that shape the investment climate. The Multi Donor Facility for
Trade and Investment Climate (MDFTIC) supports institutional capacity-building in collaboration
with the governments of the Netherlands, New Zealand, Switzerland and Australia. Additional
support is being provided by the IFC on improving the capacity of local government to support
business operations through its Business Entry Regulatory Reform Program. Competitiveness is also
expected to be enhanced through additional engagements to support and strengthen the financial
sector.

35. 
The export of goods represents 22 percent of nominal GDP, and trade represents a
significant part of the Indonesian economy. Excluding oil and gas exports, more than 70 percent
of Indonesia's exports are natural resources and manufacturing products. Within Indonesia's
manufacturing exports, almost half of that are natural resource-based manufacturing products, such
as palm oil, processed rubber, and processed minerals. Although markets in EU and United States
remain important, Indonesia is increasingly trading with emerging markets and countries in the
region such as China, India, Malaysia, and South Korea. Such diversity has helped to buffer the
sector during the current global economic downturn.

36. 
Indonesia has been reforming its trade policies to make them more effective and
responsive in promoting growth and competitiveness. Significant reform has taken place in
improving trade facilitation and promoting more inclusive and evidence-based trade policy making.
As a member of ASEAN and the G20 process, it has been embracing openness to trade and
investment, and greater integration with the global economy. 
Indonesia took a bold step in
harmonizing the structure of its import tariff and the current average import tariff is one of the lowest
among emerging economies; simple average tariff is about 5 percent. It is also developing a process
to increase transparency in reviewing non-tariff measures that affect trade flows. There has also been
progress in improving customs clearance and transparency through the National Single Window.

37. 
Recent government efforts to move domestic companies up the value chain through
trade policy measures have raised concerns. These include, for example, restrictions on imported
horticulture products, a ban on rattan exports and an export tax and new divestment regulations in the
mining sector. Restrictive policies involving non-tariff barriers may be less effective than more
upstream incentives for greater corporate competitiveness, and could also risk being perceived as
serving entrenched domestic interests, undermining the investment climate and weakening investor
confidence in the predictability of policy making in a fragile global economic environment.

38. 
Bank Group support includes knowledge services for improved capacity of trade policy,
including managing price volatility of food imports, and IFC trade finance to support
commodity exports. Of particular note would be the on-going support to advance on food security
with knowledge services to improve the technical capacity to monitor food price data and to develop
market based instruments to manage risks from food price shocks (discussed below). IFC is focusing
on increasing international trade and connectivity through the private sector, which is especially
important due to the recent global financial crisis as a result of which global trade flows and
investments were significantly reduced. As the international trade finance has shrunk with the global
financial crisis, IFC is stepping in to provide trade finance for commodity exports from Indonesia.

12

Box 3: Competitiveness Results, Instruments an Partners

Pro-Growth Competitiveness Development Results: Improve the policy framework, regulatory environment,
and coordinated interventions for productivity, competition and innovation.
Financing/Grants 
Knowledge and Convening 
Development
Proposed: 
Support to improve the investment regulatory environment 
Partners
Connectivity DPLs 1-111 
IFC Advisory Services - Investment Climate Program (sub- AusAID, Canada
national Doing Business; corporate governance; financial 
(CIDA), Finland, The
infrastructure) , Green Banking, capital markets 
Netherlands, New
development) Innovation, Investment Generation 
Zealand, SECO,
Technology, and Entrepreneurship 
USAID

Financial Sector

39. 
The Government's focus on maintaining and strengthening the stability of the financial
system of the last decade has had demonstrable success. 
Indonesia's financial sector has suffered

relatively minor effects from the on-going crisis and financial market volatility. However,
Indonesia's financial sector requires continued deepening, widening, and efficiency, in order to
remain supportive of competitiveness and growth goals. The amount of long-term financing for
corporations, infrastructure and SMEs remains very limited. In addition, less than 50 percent of the
population has access to formal financial services.

40. 

Indonesia's financial sector is small relative to emerging market peers. Assets were

below 70 percent of GDP in 2011. In part, this reflects the severity of the Asian crisis, when well
over half of banking assets and loans were written off. Since that time, the financial sector has been
slow to develop, and continues to be heavily dominated by a few large banks, which account for
roughly 80 percent of financial system assets. Domestic credit to the private sector is improving,
albeit slowly, from 25 percent in 2006 to 28.8 percent in 2011. The mortgage debt outstanding to
GDP in Indonesia stands at less than 2 percent of GDP, well below more developed markets such as
South Korea (36 percent) and South Africa (47 percent). The non-bank financial sector is small.
Stock market capitalization, though increasing, remains low, at around 48 percent of GDP. At the
same time, new technologies such as mobile telephony, and internet, can enable significant
expansion of access to finance especially in the rural areas of the country.

41. 

The Bank Group engagement supports development results that will maintain financial

sector stability, deepen financial markets, and enhance access. Prompted by the global financial

crisis, development outcomes in support of strengthening the financial sector have benefited from
Bank support through the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), including implementation
of a crisis management protocol and capacity building. The proposed Financial Sector and
Investment Climate Reform and Modernization DPL (FIRM) would focus on enhancing institutional
and structural reforms specific to the financial and private sectors. Financial sector reforms would
include strengthened financial reporting and auditing standards and practices in alignment with
global benchmarks. Through a WBG operation, including an IBRD loan and IFC equity, the
Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Facility (IFF) is expected to increase the availability of financing
for infrastructure. IFC is further designing an advisory services program focusing on capital markets
development for infrastructure finance. In addition, working with the Ministry of Trade (MoT), IFC
helped to develop regulations, policies and procedures for a national warehouse receipts system. IFC
is considering projects to strengthen and deepen capital markets, both for equity and debt.

42. 

Both IFC and the Bank, through multi-sectoral engagements, are supporting the

Government's strong emphasis on financial inclusion. For an economy that relies heavily on
micro and small enterprises, to expanding financing alternatives to the most vulnerable segments of

13

the underserved population in Indonesia including women, rural clients, and the very poor is a key
priority. A study on Access to Finance has supported the development of financial services for
migrant workers, mostly women, both through pilots and more broadly in spreading awareness of
financial inclusion and underling Indonesia's advocacy in the G20 agenda. WBG support for
restructuring revolving loan funds used mainly by women to fund micro-enterprises also contributes
to gender equity. In addition, IFC committed a US$75 million gender facility and provided advisory
services to Danamon and Bank Internasional Indonesia (BIJ) to facilitate access by women to
finance their SMEs. Other interventions include supporting financial literacy.

43. 
IFC is seeking to significantly expand access to finance through a series of investment
and advisory services. 
IFC's financial market program focuses on: (i) building the capacity of
financial institutions, especially the mid-size banks, to better serve micro, small and medium
enterprises and low-income households; (ii) supporting top tier banks with significant reach potential
to adopt innovative products to better serve key segments such as MSME and mid to low income
individuals, and to expand mortgage finance for affordable housing; (iii) promoting sustainable
lending with a strong emphasis on climate-change and women-owned businesses; and (iv)
strengthening the Indonesian financial system. 
IFC's focus, amongst other priorities, includes
promoting good Corporate Governance and Environmental and Social Standards. Accordingly, IFC
extended debt facilities and advisory services to banks with strong distribution capacity in the MSME
sector such as BIL IFC also assists PT Bank Tabungan Pensiunan Nasional Tbk (BTPN) through
equity and debt facilities to support its expansion in microfinance sector and advisory services in
AgriFinance. IFC also continues to support Bank Andara, the Indonesian microfinance wholesale
bank, by providing advisory services and capital support to be used in the expansion of the bank's
distribution capacity and to increase its leverage capacity to finance its loan expansion.

44. 
Through its advisory services, IFC is further developing programs focusing on banks
and non-bank financial institutions' capacity in providing innovative finance products and
services for the micro and largely unbanked segment, such as housing microfinance, micro
insurance, and retail payments. IFC is helping financial institutions to expand services to under-

banked market segments, such as to SME's undertaking sustainable energy investments and to poor

marginal farmers. A research project with Bank Sinar Harapan Bali is piloting a sustainable business
model for mobile banking system, which could benefit unbanked populations in rural areas. Finally,
IFC assisted a leading bank to develop a loan product for women entrepreneurs that was launched on
December 22, 2011-Indonesia's Mother's Day.

Box 4: Financial Sector Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Growth Financial Sector Development Results: Maintain financial sector stability, deepen financial
markets, and enhance access.
Financing/Grants 
Ongoing: 
11FF 
IFG 
IFC investments in banks 
and NBFIs 
Proposed: 
FIRM DPL 
IFC investments in the 
insurance sector 
Under Discussion: 

Knowledge and Convening 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
Micro-insurance Marketplace 
Review of SME Credit Program (KUR) 
TA for Deposit Insurance Corporation 
Crisis Binder Workshop 
Improving Access to Financial Services in Indonesia 
Support to Financial Sector Authority (OJK)
Crisis Management Protocols
Saving and Loan Cooperatives
SME Access to Islamic Finance

Development
Partners
AusAID, CIDA,
Finland, The
Netherlands, New
Zealand, SECO,
USAID

IFC sustainable energy 

finance products 

TA for Secretariat of Financial System Stability Forum,

IFC Advisory Services.

14

Infrastructure

45. Weak infrastructure development 
is not only undermining Indonesia's economic
growth, but also negatively affects efforts to enhance equity and reduce poverty. While the
Government is committed to reducing its debt to GDP ratio, its priority for borrowing remains
focused on infrastructure and energy development. Infrastructure investment fell sharply after the
Asian financial crisis and has only partially recovered. The low level of investment is attributed to
the Gol's focus on fiscal consolidation and reducing public debt, as well as the decline in
infrastructure spending by the private sector and SOEs. A variety of issues make it difficult to
reverse this trend. Low tariff levels discourage private investment in power and water. Land
acquisition has impeded major public infrastructure projects in the past. Finally, coordination
difficulties for projects that cut across jurisdictions or involve a number of central and sub-national
actors often prevent viable infrastructure projects from coming to fruition.

46. 
The Gol is committed to reigniting investment in infrastructure, by increasing public
investment and promoting private sector participation through Public-Private Partnerships
(PPPs). The recently approved Land Acquisition Law 
is expected 
to help facilitate public
investment. Infrastructure laws have been changed, dismantling public monopolies and opening up to
private market investors. To improve the use of PPPs, the MoF is now the single provider of
guarantees and is considering a viability gap funding (VGF) instrument that would provide capital
grants to infrastructure PPPs that are economically viable but financially marginal.

47. 

The Bank Group will focus its support on development results that will increase the
quantity and quality of national roads, reduce power infrastructure bottlenecks and increase
private investment in infrastructure through PPPs. The Bank Group is expected to continue with
its support for public investment in infrastructure with a focus on energy, transport, water supply and
sanitation, as well as solid waste, and efforts to enhance the use of PPPs. 1 The recently approved
Infrastructure Guarantee Project (IGP) helped establish a fiscally sound, credible and transparent
guarantee framework to support PPP transactions. The Bank is helping to set up a viability gap
funding (VGF) mechanism and supporting Gol's efforts at better planning, structuring and
procurement of PPPs. IFC is advising the Government on structuring and bidding PPP projects,
supporting the private sector with financing and advisory services, including as transaction advisor
for the Central Java Power Project to improve access to electricity for 7.5 million people. MIGA, as
well, is exploring ways to work with IGP.

48. 
Indonesia is endowed with substantial energy resources that include both fossil fuels
and renewable energy resources, including the largest geothermal reserves in the world.
Domestic consumption of petroleum products has been heavily subsidized, promoting 
the
development of power generation based on diesel and other petroleum-based fuels. Indonesia has
been a net importer of oil since 2003 and has been unable to reduce its dependence on petroleum-
based fuels, with a fast growing demand and with half of gas production currently exported.

49. 

Creating and maintaining an attractive investment climate for investment in energy
infrastructure is a key challenge facing the Government in light of fast growing domestic
demand and the declining production from maturing oil and gas fields. This requires
rationalization of energy tariffs and the refocusing of energy subsidies. Mitigating local and global
impacts of emissions from burning fossil fuels is a major challenge, as rapid urbanization and rising

1 Support for infrastructure investment in water supply and sanitation, as well as small scale local infrastructure
through community driven development programs, is discussed under the Pro-Poor theme.

15

income continue to push up demand. While the use of coal and fossil fuels is bound to increase, the
rate and impact on the environment could be moderated by scaling-up renewable energy production
and applying advanced low-carbon technologies. This would also improve energy security and help
shift the economy to a more productive and sustainable path. At the same time, 80 million people
lack access to electricity and every second household still depends on solid fuels for cooking.

50. 
To stimulate investment in energy, the Gol is improving the regulatory framework and
strengthening the enforcement of existing regulations. The recently enacted legislation provides a
renewed legal framework for the energy sector, with an emphasis on economic sustainability, energy
security, and environmental conservation. The Government's ongoing expansion targets 60 percent
from renewable resources. The WBG has an important engagement to support efforts to improve
power system infrastructure to meet demand, enhance reliability and quality, scale up renewable
energy and natural gas, increase access to modern energy, and improve energy efficiency. This
includes 
the on-going Power Transmission Project, a proposed follow up Second Power
Transmission Development Project, and the Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Project. Potential
future operations under discussion include additional pumped storage and medium-sized hydropower
generation, renewable energy for electrification of outer islands, and energy efficiency.

51. 
Synergies between the Bank and the IFC will support scaling up of renewable energy,
particularly geothermal. The Bank recently approved the Geothermal Clean Energy Project and a
follow up operation is under discussion. IFC focuses on increasing private sector participation in
renewable energy with advisory services, financing and equity. IFC has assessed 17 geothermal sites
for possible tendering as to their development impact and likelihood of successful implementation.
Moreover, it has provided equity investment in Medco Power Indonesia to own and operate a series
of gas and hydroelectricity projects, and other equity and loan investments are being considered.
MIGA can also provide guarantees on non-commercial risks to support renewable power.

52. 
Roads are the predominant mode of transport in Indonesia and account for about 70
percent of freight ton-km and 82 percent of passenger km. The vehicle fleet has doubled in the
past five years and is expected to grow at 10 percent per year over the next decade. Road travel
speeds remain low, on the order of 40 km/hr on the national road network. Only 714 km of toll roads
are in place, mainly in urban areas. While new construction has lagged, the quality of national roads
has improved with 86 percent now in good/fair condition. Sub-national roads face the opposite
dilemma - while 100,000 km of roads were added between 2001 and 2009, 57 percent are now
deemed to be in bad/poor condition. Road safety on Indonesia's chronically over-crowded roads is
poor and getting worse, with some 50 deaths being recorded every day.

53. 
The Bank Group would continue playing a role in supporting priority projects on
selected regional corridors, where upgrading national roads requires a comprehensive
approach to road renewal. Two road projects are currently under implementation, the Strategic
Roads Improvement Project and the Western Indonesia National Road Improvement Project
(WINRIP). The proposed Road Asset Preservation Project (RAPP) would support improvements in
the execution, effectiveness and delivery of outputs, while strengthening the framework for
improving the quality of expenditures using results-based disbursements. IFC supports the private
financing of toll roads by offering long-term capital and sharing best practice. As well, MIGA has
global experience of supporting private investment into toll roads, which could be usefully applied.

16

Box 5: Infrastructure Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Growth Infrastructure Development Results: Increase the quantity and efficiency of national and sub-
national government spending on infrastructure, and increase private investment in infrastructure.
Financing/Grants 
Knowledge and Convening 
Development

Partners

ADB, AfD, AusAID,
Germany (KfW),
JICA

Assessment of Road Construction 

Industry 
Roads and Railways PERs 
Regionalization and Urban Development 
Review
Advisory services on electricity and fuel
subsidies, and on regulatory framework
for electricity sector
IFC PPP advisory services.
PPP Framework and Policy TA
Viability Gap Financing TA
Low-income Housing Policy and Finance
IFC advisory services for selecting
geothermal energy projects as potential
PPP candidates.
IFC advisory services for PPP projects,
(Umbulan Water, Central Java).

Ongoing: 

Strategic Road Infrastructure 
Western Indonesia Roads 
Power Transmission I 
Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage 
Geothermal Clean Energy Investment 
Infrastructure Guarantee Fund 
Infrastructure Finance Facility 
IFC investments in Jakarta International 
Container Terminal, Wintermar, Medco 
Power, Salamander Energy, and Saratoga 11 
Proposed: 
Power Transmission 11 
Road Asset Preservation 
Connectivity DPL 1-111 
IFC investments in telecom and hydro 
Under Discussion: 
Renewable Energy for Electrification
Medium Hydropower
Energy Efficiency
Mantenggeng Pumped Storage
Geothermal 11

IFC investments in geothermal energys

17

Local Government

54. 

Public service delivery and public sector capacity at the subnational level remain major

challenges. With the 'big-bang' decentralization of 2001, Indonesia went from being one of the
most centralized countries in the world to one of the most decentralized; but the transition is far from
complete. Overlapping responsibilities without a coordinated decentralization framework undermine
effective service delivery, and sub-national government accountability and transparency mechanisms
are weak. Unlike most decentralized countries, Indonesia has not transferred significant revenue
power to local governments, distorting incentives and creating an unhealthy dependence on transfers.
Meanwhile, many local governments misuse the revenue-raising authority they do have constraining
business development, growth and job creation. Transfers provide the bulk of financing, but they are
rarely used to as a strategic instrument to improve local government performance.

55. 

Indonesia is in the midst of a structural transition towards higher levels of urbanization.

It is already more urban than rural and continues to experience very rapid urban growth. Several of
Indonesia's major cities are becoming metropolitan centers, with populations of five or more million,
but infrastructure services are lagging with increasing economic, social and environmental costs.
Large metropolitan agglomerations act as drivers of economic growth and job creation but are also
increasingly experiencing increased congestion, pollution and inequalities in access to quality basic
services and housing. Medium-sized cities are growing the fastest and require enhanced institutional
capacity and infrastructure investment in order to manage the urban transition.

56. 
The Bank supports development results that will promote improved fiduciary, social
and environmental management and technical performance of selected local governments in
the delivery of basic services, and enhance the capacity of local institutions to monitor and

assess 
subnational public 
expenditures. The Bank-financed Local Government and
Decentralization Project (DAK) works with Gol's targeted transfers with an initial emphasis on
improved accountability and reporting on grants to infrastructure for pilot local governments. A
follow up operation is proposed, which would pilot the Bank's P4R instrument. Knowledge services
include the Public Expenditure Analysis and Capacity Harmonization (PEACH) program, which
carries out public expenditure reviews at the local level. PERs have been completed in ten provinces
working closely with local academic institutions and stakeholders to improve policy and analytical
capacity. PEACH has incorporated gender analysis in its PERs, identifying key gender issues to
which local government need to pay attention. The Bank is likely to continue selectively supporting
provincial governments in knowledge exchange and capacity building, as well as conflict monitoring
as needed, including in fragile regions, such as Aceh and Papua. The foundation laws on sub-
national government including on the division of responsibility, on transfers, on electoral systems
and the role of villages are under consideration, which provide an opportunity to address the
incentives and financing potential and modes to support effective local governments.

57. 

Urban development is an emerging area of Bank support with several efforts already

underway. The Urban Sector Development and Reform Project (USDRP) aims at changing
governance behavior by targeting reform minded local governments and encouraging increased
accountability through citizen's participation. At the neighborhood level, further Bank financing
services are expected to be provided through the proposed Fourth National Program for Community
Empowerment in Urban Areas, (PNPM Urban IV). The on-going Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation
Project (JUFMP) seeks to support improved urban drainage and flood control systems, and the
longer term sustainability of flood management facilities in Jakarta. As the initial foray into directly
supporting major urban infrastructure, the Bank is exploring for larger urban areas the possibility of
on-lending for complex infrastructure that require convening and advisory services, as well as

18

financial support. Mid-sized cities, on the other hand, would likely be good candidates to reach
under wholesale arrangements. 
In addition, IFC fosters improvements with less cumbersome
procedures for business start-ups and licensing through the Sub National Doing Business Survey
(SNDB), with over 20 cities now participating.

Box 6: Local Government Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Growth Local Government Development Results: Improved fiduciary, social and environmental
management and technical performance of selected local governments in the delivery of basic services, and
enhance the capacity of local institutions to monitor and assess subnational public expenditures.
Financing/Grants 
Knowledge and Convening 
Development
Ongoing: 
PEACH Public Expenditure Analysis 
Partners
DAK I 
PEACH PFM Technical Assistance and Capacity Building 
ADB, AfD, AusAID,
USDRP 
Sulawesi Development Diagnostic Report 
CIDA, JICA
JUFMP 
SNDB
PNPM Urban III 
ECO2 Cities TA and Land Market Assessment
Proposed: 
Housing Market Segmentation TA.
DAK 11 
IFC advisory services for Sub-national Doing Business
PNPM Urban IV 
reforms
Under Discussion:
Metropolitan and Urban
Development

Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management

58. 
Fundamental for increasing the level of economic growth is to maintain fiscal discipline
and bolster market confidence in the face of continuing global uncertainty, and provide for
mitigating measures in the event of an external shock. Macroeconomic stability from strong

fundamentals and fiscal management crisis has underpinned the recovery and sustained growth over
the past decade. More recently, macro management and fiscal discipline have helped Indonesia
weather the ongoing global financial crisis. At the onset of the crisis to provide confidence to
financial markets, the World Bank, in collaboration with the Governments of Australia and Japan and
the Asian Development Bank, provided a US$5.5 billion program of contingency financing under the
Public Expenditure Support Facility DPL-DDO (FY09, US$2 billion) to support confidence-boosting
measures and social mitigation programs, which closed in December 2010. Subsequently, with the
increased risks stemming from the Eurozone crisis, a follow-up program with the same development
partners of US$5.5 billion put together under the PERISAI (Program for Economic Resilience,
Investment and Social Assistance in Indonesia) DPL-DDO (FY11, US$2 billion).

59. 

Sustaining growth and maintaining macro stability requires quality, evidence-based

macro and fiscal policy making. Despite Indonesia's strong economic performance, significant
challenges in fiscal and macro policy remain, for example, in terms of the allocation of spending
(with subsidies accounting for almost one quarter of central government spending in the proposed
2013 Budget) and its efficiency. The Bank will continue to support Indonesia in enhancing the
Government's ability to do sound macro and fiscal policy analysis and formulation through the
Support for Enhanced Macro Economic and Fiscal Policy Analysis institutional (SEMEFPA)
strengthening program; the Analytical and Capacity Support to Improve Expenditure and Revenue
Policy program, which includes public expenditure review (PER) analysis; and the Resource
Revenues Policy and Administration technical assistance.

19

60. 
A Development Policy Review (DPR), being prepared concurrently with the CPS, will
provide an analytical underpinning of the program and its overall coherence. The DPR has
identified near term risks and the key long-term global, regional and domestic trends that will affect
Indonesia, the key challenges and opportunities they bring and the policy options to address them.
The DPR will provide an analytical underpinning for the Government's new five-year development
plan and serve as a basis for dialogue with the incoming new government in 2014. It will identify
near term risks and the key long-term global, regional and domestic trends that will affect Indonesia,
key challenges and opportunities they bring and policy options to address them.

61. 
The Bank contributes to development results that will support Indonesia in securing
financing that will maintain critical public expenditures in the event of tightening in financing
conditions, and improve the analytical framework in support of quality in public spending. 
In
addition to the PERISAI DPL-DDO, and the aforementioned knowledge services, the proposed
Institutional, Tax Administration, Social and Investment (INSTANSI) DPL with parallel financing
from Japan and the ADB will support improved budget allocation for critical social and infrastructure
investments, enhanced revenue policy and public financial management in general.

Box 7: Macro and Fiscal Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Growth Macro and Fiscal Development Results: Enhanced Government ability to meet its financing
needs and maintain critical public expenditures, and use monitoring and evaluation to inform budget
allocation.
Financing/Grants 
Ongoing: 
PERISAI DPL DDO 
Proposed: 
INSTANSI DPLs 1-111 

Development
Partners
ADB, Australia
(Treasury, AusAID)
Japan (JBIC)

Knowledge and Convening 

SEMEFPA 
DPR 
Analytical and Capacity Support to Improve 
Expenditure and Revenue Policy 
Initiative for Public Expenditure Analysis policymaker
forum.
Indonesia Economic Quarterly report (including
convening related quarterly Development Partner

Strengthening the Public Sector

Discussion and public launch)

62. 
Institution building to enhance public sector performance has been a keystone of the
current administration. The achievements in strengthening public financial management over
the relatively short reform period have been remarkable. The most notable ones include an
automated budget and treasury system; 
implementation of a Treasury Single Account; 
the
establishment of cash forecasting capacity in the Treasury; the development of accounting standards
to provide for accrual accounting; an appraisal of government assets and the introduction of an asset
management information system; the establishment of a new procurement agency; adoption of the
COSO control framework and strengthening of external audit; strengthening of monitoring and
evaluation systems; and early stages of a medium 
term expenditure framework and 
initial
introduction of performance-based budgeting. While progress has been made, a number of
challenges remain. Among others, policy orientation in budget formulation and execution need to be
strengthened. The underlying business processes at spending agencies need to be reengineered. The
regulatory framework and implementation of e-Government procurement, including the development
of a permanent procurement management function in implementing agencies, is incomplete. Relevant
and reliable financial reporting needs to be strengthened along with human resources for accounting
and reporting. The implementation of COSO control framework needs to be accelerated, 
internal
audit function strengthened, and the supreme audit institution (BPK) needs to strengthen the impact

20

on its audit findings and linkages with the legislature. 
Finally, monitoring and evaluation needs to
move toward an integrated system as the basis for implementing performance based budgeting.

63. 
The Bank's engagement approach to strengthen the public sector continues to support
development results that will sstrengthen the public sector by enhancing public financial
management. The Bank supports efforts by the Ministry of Finance 
to strengthen 
its tax
administration and broaden its revenue base including non-tax revenue from mineral resources. The
proposed INSTANSI DPLs will reinforce and broaden ownership and commitment towards the
achievement of reform milestones. Project lending provides technical support and financing through
the ongoing Government Financial Management and Revenue Administration Project (GFMRAP),
the Project for Indonesian Tax Administration Reform (PINTAR), the Scholarships Program for
Strengthening Reforming Institutions Project (SPIRIT, and the Strengthening Indonesia Statistic
Project (STA TCAP-CERDAS). The Public Financial Management - Multi Donor Trust Fund also
supports critical activities, bringing together key development partners, including the European
Commission, 
the Netherlands and Switzerland.

Box 8: Public Sector Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Growth Public Sector Development Results: Strengthen the public sector by enhancing public financial
management.

Financing/Grants 

Ongoing: 
GFMRAP 
PINTAR 
SPIRIT 
STATCAP-CERDAS 
Proposed:

IN STAN SI DPLs 1-111

Knowledge and Convening 
Public Financial Management (PFM) 
TRE/CFRCR advice on exposure 
management, hedging products and 
risk insurance, and asset/liability 
management

Development
Partners
European
Commission (EC),
Netherlands, SECO

PRO-JOBS - Enhancing Skills and Technology, and Improving Social Protection

64. 
The Indonesian economy must create more and better jobs. This will require increased
efforts to elevate the rate of economic growth, including improved quality in public spending,
enhanced private sector investment and increased infrastructure. The share of the population of
"productive" age relative to older people is large in Indonesia, and will remain so for the next 15
years. This demographic dividend presents a window of opportunity for high productivity growth as
long as youth are equipped with the right skills and presented with the right opportunities. Despite a
decade of robust growth, employment opportunities for higher quality jobs remains insufficient for
an increasingly urbanized, young population; undermining the ability of growth to contribute to
contain rising inequality. One reason is that the movement of workers out of agriculture and low-end
services stalled after the Asia crisis because Indonesia's manufacturing sector never fully recovered.
Bank analytic work suggests that the decline of traditional manufacturing is not inevitable and points
to two major sources of driving a potential revival: (i) a large labor force and growing wage gap
relative to China and other producers; and (ii) the potential for market access of production-scale
economies based on Indonesia's large and growing domestic market and the increasingly integrated
regional market. 
In addition, while there is a substantially growth of women entering the labor
market than men over the past seven years, women continue to face lower participation and higher
unemployment rates, and are mostly self-employed and unpaid family workers, as well as migrant
workers. A key element of the strategy is to enhance the education and skills of the labor force,
which will require improving the management of the education system and, including equality of
opportunity through improved access to education of the poor. 
It will also require fostering the

21

growth in R&D institutions by helping to develop an enabling policy environment. In addition, to
facilitate labor market flexibility and provide for good jobs, the Bank will support the Government's
focus on improving social insurance.

65. 
Pro-Jobs Results. For this theme, the WBG expects to support development results that will
improve the overall governance and management of the education system to improve the education
quality and performance of teachers, enhance human resource capacity in R&D, and facilitate the
institutional transformation required to implementation reform of social insurance. Going forward
Bank support would be through knowledge services. 
IFC is working to support manufacturing
companies that generate good quality jobs directly, as well as help to develop SMEs through supply
chain linkages. IFC's engagement towards providing access to finance for micro, small and medium
enterprises are also geared towards job creation.

Education

66. 
Despite significant improvements in a number of education and health indicators in
recent years, Indonesia still lags behind other countries in the region. 
Indonesia's Human
Development Index rank is still low (124 out of 187 countries), slightly above Vietnam but below
Thailand and Malaysia. Indonesia is on track with many of the Millennium Development Goals
related to human development, especially on education. Access to early childhood education is
expanding rapidly, but still only 47 percent for 4-6 year olds are enrolled which is of particular
importance for lower income children. Access to primary education is nearly universal and literacy
rates are close to 100 percent, while gender equity in enrolment in basic education has been reached.

67. 
Indonesia has made a clear commitment to education. A constitutional mandate to
allocate at least 20 percent of the total government budget to education has led to a more than
doubling of spending in real terms since 2002. The biggest payoff for this increase has been
access and equity, but access to early childhood education, senior secondary and above still remains
low particularly for the poor. Progress in access and equity has been very fast. The share of 15 year
olds from the poorest consumption quintile that are still enrolled in school increased from 60 to 80
percent between 2006 and 2010, but then drops dramatically. In higher education, total participation
has increased from 12 percent in 2000 to 26 percent, yet less than 4 percent of 19-22 year olds from
the poorest 40 percent enter higher education. Gender disparities are not a problem in terms of
access, though boys tend to drop out of all levels of education more than girls.

68. 
Along with the need to continue improving equity, a major challenge remains in the
quality and relevance of education. Learning outcomes and the share of top performers remain very
low by international standards. Poor allocation of resources is an important part of problem. The
Bank's recent Education Public Expenditure Review notes that most of the additional resources for
basic education went toward teacher hiring and certification allowances. The resulting student
teacher ratios are low by international standards and well below levels necessary for a good quality
education. Moreover, distribution of the teaching force is highly inefficient and inequitable. At the
same time, public funding for post basic education is constrained and poorly spent. There are few
incentives for efficient spending and human resource management 
is limited by civil service
considerations.

69. 
The Bank's engagement aims to support development results that will improve the
performance of teachers and the human resource capacity in R&D. The Bank has been closely
supportive of the improvements in access, equity and quality through financing and knowledge
services. The Bank is providing knowledge services for the Gol's program to improve incentives for
teacher quality, including monitoring 
the impact and the ongoing Better Education Through

22

Reformed Management and Universal Teacher Upgrading Project (BERMUTU) 
support
implementation. The Dutch and the EC, among a number of others have played an important role in
supporting education. The BOS-KITA Project helps to finance the Government's School Operational
Assistance (BOS) program that empowers school managers and local communities through a school-
based management approach covering some 42.5 million students. The Basic Education Capacity
Trust Fund (BEC-TF) supports local government school grant programs. For higher education, the
ongoing Higher Education Project (IMHERE) and knowledge services will continue to focus on
helping the Gol in creating an enabling environment and effective support mechanisms for the
improvement of the quality, relevance, efficiency, and equity.

70. With the Gol indicating a preference not to seek further external financing for
education, the Bank's engagement will continue to provide support through knowledge service,
ongoing operations and linking with other Bank activities. For example, the Early Childhood
Education and Development Project (ECED), which targets poorer communities through an
innovative community managed scheme, would seek to strengthen linkages with the National
Community Development Program (PNPM), also financed by the Bank, to enhance activities focused
on the poor and vulnerable, including HIV-AIDS prevention, nutrition and sanitation. Knowledge
services will continue to be a key component of Bank support. Results from rigorous impact
evaluations of teacher certification and ECED provision have and will continue 
to inform
government policy.

71. 
Research outputs remain low compared to other countries in the region. The overall
resources devoted to research and development (R&D) in Indonesia are insufficient, and high-
level human capital to supply needed skills for new jobs is scarce. Indonesia's overall public
budget allocation to R&D is very low, estimated at only 0.05 percent of GDP, much lower than other
countries in the region. At the public research institutes, less than 5 percent of staff holds a Ph.D.
degree, and only 15 percent hold Masters degrees. Public research institutions currently conduct 96
percent of R&D and their low performance is a key bottleneck to an efficient innovation system.
Increasing public spending on R&D is not enough to guarantee success, public spending should be
used to leverage private investment.

72. 
The Bank seeks to support an enabling policy environment, and to improve the
performance of public institutions and enhance human resource capacity. It provides advice to
improve the public R&D institutes' performance and STI human resource capacity, including
technical assistance for policy reforms to reduce fragmentation and increase competitive funding for
research. The Bank 
is already involved 
in supporting expansion of necessary research and
development with the recently approved Sustainable Management of Agricultural Research and
Technology Dissemination Project (SMARTD), and the proposed Research and Innovation in Science
& Technology Project (RISET) would support improvements in human resource capacity. A result
framework with gender sensitive indicators has been developedfor SMARTD to capture and address
the aforementioned gender streaming.

Box 9: Education Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Jobs Education Development Results: Improve the education quality and performance of teachers, and
the improve the human resource capacity in R&D.
Financing/Grants 
Knowledge and Convening 
Ongoing: 
Teacher certification impact evaluations. 

Development
Partners

BOS-KITA 11 

BERMUTU 
IMHERE 

The Role of Politics and Evidenced Based Policy 

Making: The Case of Teacher Reform in Indonesia 
Education PER

AusAID, The

Netherlands, USAID

23

SMARTD 
IFC investment in Bonavista 
School 
Proposed: 
RISET 
Under Discussion: 
Skills Training for Economic 
Transformation 
IFC investments in private 

sector education providers 

SocialGInsurance

Indonesian School Grants Program Review
Local Governance Capacity Assessment
Video Study
Projections and assessment of future skills demand
Higher education studies on funding modalities
Higher education and labor market linkages
Infrastructure assessment
Accreditation and access to higher education
TA on skills development fund

TA on 2015 five year development plan.

Public Financing of Indonesias Knowledge Sector

Building Innovation Capacity in Clean Energy

73. 

A strong system of social protection, particularly social insurance, is an essential part of

any efforts to improve labor market flexibility and improve the quality of jobs. The current

system of social protection is fragmented and coverage is limited to the poor, civil servants, the
military and about 25 percent of formal sector workers. Each segment has different benefits and a
different administrator, and the system of supervision and enforcement is a challenge. As a result,
only 12 percent of the population has access to pensions, only 60 percent of the population has health
insurance coverage, and benefits can be lost when changing employment.

74. 
The government's objective is to institute a comprehensive national system of social
insurance covering all Indonesians through the National Social Security System Law (SJSN)
and the law on National Social Security Administrators (BPJS). The SJSN law was enacted in

2004, but there was limited implementation progress until recently. The government's stated goal is
to establish a uniform health insurance program by 2014 and to cover all Indonesian workers in both

the formal and informal sectors by 2019. Similarly, the government plans to establish programs for
pensions, old age savings, death benefits and worker accident by mid-2015 and expand coverage to

all Indonesians by 2019. The key to success will be program affordability, fiscal sustainability,

efficient administration of social 
insurance programs, proper governance procedures to assure
program assets are properly and transparently managed in the best interests of participants, and

analysis to assure that women, the disabled and other vulnerable groups are adequately protected.

75. 

The Bank would engage in activities to support the conversion of the existing social
insurance administrators 
into not-for-profit 
institutions and expand 
coverage 
and
contributions. Social insurance is emerging as an important area of engagement for the Bank. In

response to government demand, we will share best international practice to facilitate proper design
and financing of the social insurance programs and the institutional transformation required for this
ambitious reform effort. The Bank is working closely with development partners to provide extensive
analytic work to assist with implementation of the universal health care program and the four other
social security programs, particularly for the pension and old-age savings programs. This will
build on the Bank's strength and comparative advantage in pensions and implementation and in
the four non-health social security programs, particularly for the pension and old-age savings

programs, working closely with development partners. This will build on the Bank's strength and

comparative 
advantage 
in 
institutional change management, particularly 
in 
the areas of
organizational structure, human resources and IT systems. The Bank also will continue to support
the design and implementation a of reformed civil service pension scheme. AusAID, the German
International Aid Agency (GIZ), ADB and the World Health Organization (WHO) are providing
primary support for implementing the universal health care program. The Bank is leading on

implementation of the pension and old age savings programs with support from AusAID, ILO and

24

GIZ. There are also cross-cutting administrative 
issues where 
the Bank can assist, such as
contribution collection and unique identification numbers for the SJSN system.

Box 10: Social Insurance Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Jobs Social Insurance Development Results: Conversion of the existing social insurance administrators
into not-for-profit institutions and expand coverage and contributions.
Knowledge and Convening 
Pension and old age savings roadmap. 
Transformation of Jamsostek
Membership expansion, improved contribution collection and
development of ID system for SJSN programs

Development Partners
ADB, AusAID, GIZ, ILO

PRO-POOR - Promoting Communities, Protecting the Vulnerable and Improving Health
Outcomes

76. 
The Government is committed to accelerating the pace of poverty reduction and
increasing economic security for the large vulnerable population that is at risk of falling into

poverty. Policy reform efforts are aimed at improving the effectiveness of poverty reduction
programs. The country is also focusing on addressing the problems associated with high levels of
vulnerability by improving and extending safety nets. At the same time, rising inequality is an
emerging concern and the Government is exploring what strategies can support the greater sharing of
economic growth with the poor and vulnerable. Working with the Government to ensure continued
progress towards poverty reduction goals, and achieving equity and inclusiveness across regions,
remains a top priority for the World Bank Group and is linked to a number of other engagement
areas.

77. 
The Pro-Poor Results. The WBG expects to support development results that would
enhance response to shocks, promote the national targeting system to better reach poor and
vulnerable households, enhance the design and performance of the Government's household-targeted
and community development programs, promote revitalization of the agriculture, improve health and
nutrition outcomes, particularly of the poor, by supporting improved access to quality health care,
including maternal and child health services, and enhanced HIV/AIDS surveillance, as well as
increased access to safe water and sanitation.

Targeting Poverty

78. 
The Bank has supported overall poverty strategy and strengthening central institutions
with the establishment of the National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction.

Oversight and coordination of poverty reduction policies and programs has now been elevated to a
cabinet-level team headed by the Vice-President. With the team, the Bank has collaborated on a
reform agenda focusing on the programs that fall under the Government's on-going three-pronged
approach to poverty reduction: household-based, community-driven and employment generating
programs. Household-based social assistance programs play an important role in the strategy to
reduce poverty. 
In 2012 the Bank released Protecting Poor and Vulnerable Households in
Indonesia, a comprehensive household social assistance expenditure and program review, to provide
an evidence base for program and policy reforms.

25

79. 
The Bank supports development results that will enhance local capacity for detecting
and responding to shocks that threaten vulnerable households, increase the number of poverty
programs using the national registry of poor and vulnerable households and increase
participation of children from poor families in early childhood education and development
programs. 
These results will be supported by the INSTANSI DPLs and knowledge services,
involving a multi donor trust fund initially supported by AusAID to support evidence-based poverty
reduction policies and programs, as well as to build the analytical capacity of local universities and
think tanks for research and assessing poverty-related issues. This is being achieved by: (i) providing
poverty analytics and building analytical capacity to inform poverty and social protection policies,
programs and strategies; (ii) supporting the Government 
in the design, implementation and
evaluation of key poverty and social protection programs; and (iii) improving the quality and
accessibility of data needed for poverty analysis and policymaking.

80. 
Support will pay particular attention to gender issues, with an aim to improve women's
access to poverty reduction and social protection programs, improve access to quality jobs, and
improve protection for female workers including international migrant workers. Globally, the
World Bank has been placing greater focus on issues related to gender that includes the preparation
of a World Development Report on gender. This program will access global knowledge in this area
to identify ways to improve gender equity in Indonesia.

Box 11: Poverty Targeting Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Poor Poverty Targeting Development Results: Enhanced capacity for detecting and responding to shocks
that threaten vulnerable households, and increase the number of poverty programs using the national
registry of poor and vulnerable households.
Financing/Grants 

Knowledge and Convening 

Development Partners

Ongoing: 
STATCAP-CERDAS 
Early Childhood Education & 

Household shock monitoring and response 
Integration of poverty reduction programs 
Social assistance reform

AusAID, The
Netherlands

Development (ECED) 
Proposed: 
INSTANSI DPL 

Urban Poverty Review
ECED - implications for policy and practice from
Indonesia
ECED impact evaluation

Community Development

81. 
The Bank is particularly active in supporting the community-level efforts at poverty
reduction through its support to Indonesia's flagship National Community Empowerment
Program (PNPM-Mandiri) -
the world's largest CDD program. The core PNPM Mandiri
program now covers 65,000 villages with an annual budget of almost US$1.7 billion. PNPM's
overall objective is to improve governance and reduce poverty by promoting community decision
making in development planning and management. Its core idea is that given adequate information
and some technical assistance to improve designs, communities will negotiate a range of cost-
effective, economically useful investments that will raise local productivity and benefit the poor. To
translate this idea into an operational project, PNPM funds are used to support: (a) building
community capacity for the formation and institutionalization of elected representative organizations
that are accountable 
to communities; 
(b) provision of grants 
to communities directly and
transparently to finance an open menu of poverty alleviation activities; and (c) enhancing the
capacity of central government and local governments to partner with community organizations. The
program continues to perform well despite some of the implementation challenges that the program
has faced in its speedy scale up to national coverage in 2008. 
It is noteworthy that PNPM has a clear

26

gender strategy and action plan which, among others, aims at ensuring a gender balance in decision
making processes.

82. 
Several peer-reviewed quantitative assessments have demonstrated significant impact in
terms of effective, attributable poverty reduction. The main findings confirm that: (a) benefits are
heavily skewed to the poor: the two lowest quintiles of the participating population receive the
largest share of project benefits; (b) benefits are significant: household expenditures among the poor
increased by an average of 11% as a result of project investments, benefitting approximately 45
million poor people; (c) benefits are sustained; physical assessments of PNPM (KDP) built
infrastructure found that 85% of the infrastructure built by communities was in good to very good
condition five years after its completion. Impact simulations found that after three years the majority
of benefits came from increased economic activity attributable to the investments made by the
program, not from project grants; (d) benefits are shared: labor composition in PNPM programs
averages 40-70 percent, which is on the high end of global measurements. PNPM created over 20
million person-days of paid employment.

83. 
The massive scaling-up of PNPM presents major institutional challenges 
for the
implementing agency. Hands-on implementation support to Gol has helped mitigate governance and
fiduciary risks, and build more robust management systems. 
Still, continuous attention to
transparency, the quality of project management and strong fiduciary oversight is required. A
comprehensive reform program is being implemented to strengthen the program's institutional
arrangements.

84. 
The Bank will support development results to improve local governance, participation,
particularly by women, increased access to health and education services. The Government is in
the final stages of a wide ranging consultation process to articulate the roadmap for PNPM with the
goal of integrating the operating principles of PNPM into regular government operations. Special
efforts will go to capacity building of national institutions, so that these institutions can fully take
over the functions that are currently done by the PNPM Support Facility.

85. 
In addition to investment lending, the Bank supports Indonesia's community based
poverty program by managing a multi donor support facility that provides technical assistance
and strategic inputs to PNPM. The support facility focuses on improving the quality of the delivery
of PNPM as well as supporting a number of innovative pilot operations including:

PNPM-Generasi is a community-based CCT program that uses performance -based block grants
to increase community utilization of basic health and education services and promote closer
interaction between community groups and front-line service providers.

PNPM Green supports financing green sub-projects and is moving towards incentivizing results
and addressing the overall village development process, placing particular importance on
participative natural resource mapping, and planning local green growth strategies.

Local Government Capacity Development pilots social accountability processes and tools to
improve local government responsiveness in community-level service delivery.

PNPM Peduli: Gol has launched the PNPM-Peduli program to further operationalize social
inclusion principles by working directly through CSOs for outreach and service delivery.

86. 
In addition to these pilot operations, the PNPM Support Facility supports a robust
program of analytical work to measure impact and provide the Government with evidence-
based policy advice. An increasing part of the analytical work is implemented through national

27

institutions, thus building their capacity and fostering the long term sustainability of the social
development agenda in Indonesia.

Box 12: Community Development Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Poor Community Development Results: Improved local-level governance, greater participation by
women, increased access to health and education, and participation in early childhood education and
development
Financing/Grants 
Ongoing: 
PNPM Rural III 
PNPM Urban III 
Proposed: 
PNPM Rural IV 
PNPM Urban IV 
Under Discussion: 
PNPM Rural V 
PNPM Urban V 

Knowledge and Convening 
PNPM Rural Economic Impact 
Village Infrastructure Census; Incidence of 
Benefits of Households Local Level 
Institutions III Community Management 
Revolving Loan Fund Study; Governance 
Review
Integrated MIS for PNPM
TA to Aceh Local Government
Papua Analytical Works
PNPM Rural Sentinel Villages
Urban Poverty Review

Development Partners
ADB, AusAID, Canada,
Denmark, EC, Islamic
Development Bank, JICA,
The Netherlands, UK,
USAID

Food Security and RuralDevelopment

87. 
The Government is increasingly concerned with food security and the negative impact
of the price volatility of foodstuffs on overall poverty. Because over three-quarters of the poor are

net food consumers, food price hikes have a disproportionately large impact on the poorest people in
Indonesia. It is estimated that a 10% increase in the price of rice leads to a 1.3% increase in the
poverty rate. Rural poverty and unemployment are also critical issues facing Indonesia. Around
50% of the country's population live in rural areas and depend mainly or exclusively on the
agricultural sector for their livelihood.

88. While agricultural development was a major contributor to Indonesia's economic and
social performance from the late 1960s through the 1990s, it has been in decline for the past

fifteen years. Investment in agriculture has so far not been enough to promote productivity growth
and a significant factor in the decline in the performance of the agricultural sector is the decrease in
the amount and quality of public investment, as demonstrated in the Bank's recent Agricultural
Public Expenditure Review. Despite its rich agro-ecological endowments, Indonesia imports fruits
and vegetables from neighboring countries, mainly because of quality and consistency problems with
its own produce, but also because of the lack of competition in commodity trade.

89. 
The Bank is expected to support development results that will access by smallholders to
client and market-oriented extension and marketing services, and enhance water security for

irrigation. Dialogue on food security has helped to bring into focus the need to revitalize agriculture
and greater Bank engagement. During the previous CPS, lack of Government commitment and
championing of reform in the sector had led to a reduced role for the Bank, as compared to earlier
periods.

90. 

In collaboration with other donors, Bank support for the Government's food security

concerns include knowledge services. The Bank, with the support of development partners,
facilitated policy dialogue aimed at improving rice import mechanisms to reduce price volatility in
the domestic market. The Bank supported the Government in establishing a platform to strengthen
policy coordination to address food security challenges in an integrated way, which includes (i)
revitalizing agriculture productivity, (ii) managing domestic price volatility and (iii) protecting the

28

poor and vulnerable. A technical assistance program funded with a grant from the Global Food
Crisis Response Program (GFRP) is assisting the Gol to identify future policy directions to enable it
to achieve the goals related to food security. Furthermore, technical assistance funded from the
Multi-Donor Fund for Trade and Industry (MDFTIC) is assisting the Ministry of Trade in designing
action plans aimed at strengthening the competitiveness, sustainability, and value addition of the
cocoa, coffee, and tea value chains and their strategic positioning in international market.

91. 
The Bank is helping Indonesia implement institutional reforms in the agricultural
sector research and extension system to develop a demand-driven, market oriented agricultural
services system, particularly for small farmers. The on-going Farmer Empowerment through

Agricultural Technology and Information Project (FEA TI) helps efforts at improving the delivery of
support services to farmers. 
Complementing FEATI with a focus on research is the recently
approved Sustainable Management of Agricultural Research and Technology Dissemination Project
(SMART-D), which would strengthen the capacity to develop and disseminate best practice
technologies for improved agricultural productivity, profitability and sustainability to conduct
agricultural research, where Indonesia lags far behind most competitors. Most of the project's
expected beneficiaries are women. In the previous SMART-D, more than 60 percent of those trained
were women.

92. 
The Bank in collaboration with other donors is supporting Indonesia to enhance water
security for agriculture through institutional reforms, improvements in infrastructure and
modernization of irrigation management. The Bank financed Water Resources and Irrigation
Sector Program (WISMP) supports the Government in the implementation of its reform agenda
providing more stakeholder participation and accountability in the management of water resources
and irrigation. These activities are supported by new multi-stakeholder governance platforms, water
user associations and improvement of facilities and infrastructure 
to enhance water security,
agricultural productivity, and the value chain. Through the Dam Operation Improvement and Safety
Program (DOISP) the effectiveness of water availability and use in the reservoirs is improved
reducing the risks and adapting to climate change enabling more reliable supplies also for agriculture
by improving safety and operational standards and by enhancing sustainable catchment management
practices. A strategic dialogue with the government is ongoing and aims at the development of an
Irrigation Policy for 2014-2025 in the context of water security for food security, anticipating the
rapid transformations in the economy, the increasing competition for natural resources (esp. land and
water), and the upcoming transition from subsistence smallholder agriculture to viable commercial
farming.

93. 
IFC is engaging in the agribusiness sector to empower and strengthen communities,
especially the poor and marginal farmers. IFC has begun working with private sector financial
institutions to support their expansion to rural/agriculture lending, as well as continuing work with
off-takers seeking to develop stronger links to smallholders and increase the sustainability of their
small holder suppliers for some important agricultural commodities like coffee, cocoa and rubber.
Similarly, in the palm-oil industry, IFC is seeking to develop a smallholder financing scheme with
access to technical advice and materials, and to increase benefit sharing between communities and oil
palm plantations. 
In the coffee industry, IFC is providing training to marginal farmers to improve
their yields and business practices. IFC is also seeking opportunities to provide long-term financing
to those committed to strengthening their environmental and social standards and practices.

Box 13: Food Security and Rural Development Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Poor Development Food Security and Rural Development Results: Increase access by smallholders to
client and market-oriented extension and marketing services, and enhance water security for irrigation.

29

Financing/Grants 

Knowledge and Convening 

Ongoing: 

FEATI 
SMARTD 
WISMP 11 
DOISP 
IFC investments in private sector 
agribusiness companies (the Wings Group, 
Ecogreen) 

TA on Food Security 

TAon Beverage Crops 
Irrigation Management Modernization 
Training on risk management
Study on Rural Connectivity (Connecting
poor and disadvantaged areas to improve
food security and rural incomes)
IFC advisory services for agribusiness 

ImproKveg 

Outcomes

aneadth 

Development

Partners

ADB, AusAID, FAO,
SECO

__________

94. 

Indonesia has been successful in improving access to health care and made significant

progress on several key population health outcomes over the past few decades, but the poor in
particular suffer from persistent maternal mortality, chronic malnutrition rates, rising HIV
infections and inequitable access to quality services. Indonesia's maternal mortality ratio (MMR)

was recently estimated to be 220 per 100,000 live births, higher than that of India and Vietnam,
despite relatively high rates of antenatal care and skilled birth attendance in the country, and short of

the MDG target of 102 maternal deaths by 2015. While Indonesia is on-track to attaining the

nutrition-related MDG relating to reducing the prevalence of underweight among children less than
five, however 36 percent of Indonesian children are shorter than the standard height for their age and

an estimated that 42 percent of rural households have stunted children. Indonesia is not on track for
the HIV-related MDG. Women account for 25 percent of HIV cases and in the provinces of Papua

and West Papua the virus has become generalized. Public spending on health is only 1.3 percent of
GDP in Indonesia, in stark contrast to Thailand (2.9 percent) and, China (2.7 percent). The ratio of
doctors is 0.2 per 1000, one of the lowest in the region and much worse in rural and remote areas.

95. 
The Gol has made a significant leap forward in committing to improve access to quality
health services for all by achieving universal health coverage (UHC). Household health

insurance population coverage rates have increased in the past decade but about 40 percent of the

population still remains without any coverage and, at 40 percent of total health spending, out-of-
pocket 
spending remains high. Almost 2.3 million of Indonesian households currently fall into
poverty annually due to catastrophic health spending.

96. 

In support of the Government's goals, the Bank expects to help achieve development

results to strengthen policies governing the education of health professionals and increase
access to safe water and sanitation. 

The Bank's health engagement would increasingly link

knowledge services with activities in other engagement areas, including education (ECED), and

community development (stunting). In the latter, for example the Bank is helping Gol to prepare a
new Community-Based Health and Nutrition to Reduce Stunting Project, in support of its key

commitment to the global Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) movement, with grant financing from the

Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) totaling US131.5million. Significant knowledge support

would also be provided in association with social insurance reform, where studies would be
undertaken 
to support readiness, with supply side assessments, 
including human resource
availability. Improving the quality and availability of health professions would continue 
to be
pursued through the Bank's Health Professional Education Quality Project (HPEQ), which
strengthens quality assurance policies governing medical education. The Bank would continue
providing support for strengthening national HIV policies and program development, including
analytical work on epiderniologic and economic aspects of HIV. The Health Professional Education
Quality Project targeted, among others, improving the quality of midwives and other health care

providers 

to contribute progress 

in achieving key health outcomes. The same applies to the

30

Community-based Health and Nutrition to Reduce Stunting Project that aims to improve maternal
health services in a longer term. IFC's engagement with private sector companies in processed foods
sector seeks to achieve better nutritional health for middle and lower income households.

97. 
Access to safe water and sanitation is a major factor in the health and overall welfare of
Indonesians. Access to safe water has stagnated since 2001 at less than half the population.
Combined with poor sanitation this has been estimated to result in an annual expenditure of US$ 6.3
billion in health care costs, lost productivity, premature deaths, water resource and fishery losses,
declining land values and tourism losses. Together with rapid urbanization, the lack of investment
has resulted in an actual decline in urban coverage from 60 percent to about 50 percent by 2009.
Access to sanitary facilities is around 54 percent, significantly lower than other countries in the
region, such as the Philippines and Vietnam. Open defecation is still practiced by more than 60
million Indonesians. Sewerage coverage is minimal, with only 2 percent of urban areas having
access to centralized systems. Of the solid waste generated by Indonesia's urban population of 110
million, only about 40 percent end up in landfills, many of which are open dumps. 
In rural areas,
while the number of community-managed piped water schemes has grown steadily, they cover less
than 20 percent of the population and formal solid waste collection systems are virtually non-
existent.

98. 
The WBG expects to support development results that would increase the coverage of
water and sanitation in both urban and rural areas. The on-going engagement includes a number
of activities to support sector initiatives. The Bank finances the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation
Project (UWSSP), which assists three local governments and water utilities (PDAM) to improve and
expand coverage of water supply services for more than 90,000 households. IFC is supporting Gol
on the tender of the Umbulan Water Project, which would provide water of good quality to about 3
million people in East Java, by mobilizing US$100 million in private investment. Trust-funded
activities, such as the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), provide support for institutional
development activities to strengthen national policies, as well as local capacities. 
The Global
Partnership on Output-based Aid (GPOBA) pilot projects in Jakarta and Surabaya to connect the
urban poor to water and sanitation services have been scaled up with funding from other donors,
resulting in more than 70,000 connections for poor households in 35 cities. The Indonesia Sanitation
Sector Development Program (ISSDP), implemented in six pilot cities under the WSP, initiated the
development of the National Sanitation Acceleration Development Program.

99. 
To facilitate improved rural water supply and sanitation services, the Bank has
financed the flagship Rural Water and Sanitation Program (PAMSIMAS), which is currently
operating in 5,000 villages and using donor funds to expand coverage to more villages in the
eastern part of Indonesia. By 2015, this program is expected to provide some 7 million rural
Indonesians with piped water supply and some 3.4 million with improved on-site sanitation. 
In
addition, the trust-funded Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing (TSSM) project in East Java,
implemented by WSP focuses on the provision of technical assistance to 29 district governments to
support their investing in sanitation. Through this project, a total of 1.4 million people have gained
access to improved sanitation. Most of the aforementioned programs are gender-informed and
equipped with gender action plan, as well as a strategy and/or results framework with sex-
disaggregated indicators wherever relevant.

100. 
The WBG continues to supporting Gol initiatives shifting to a more integrated and
programmatic approach in the sector toward water supply and sanitation, solid waste
management and urban drainage and flood control. For urban areas, the Bank has begun to
engage with the Gol on the possible development of an Indonesian Water and Sanitation Financing

31

Facility (IWSFF) with capacity building, technical assistance and investment windows targeted at a
large number of PDAMs. At the same time, the Bank will continue to consider supporting specific
projects in water supply and sanitation, where approaches are novel and TA-intensive (as under the
proposed Lampung PPP transaction) or large and technically complex. 
Similarly, the Bank has
begun to engage with the Gol on the possible development of a national solid waste investment
program. 
IFC remains open to assisting Gol with transaction advisory services for projects
mobilizing private sector resources, and would consider providing the needed long-term financing to
sustainable private sector operations. MIGA remains open to supporting private investment into this
sector.

Box 14: Improving Health Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Poor Improving Health Outcomes Development Results: Strengthen policies governing the education of
health professionals and increase access to safe water and sanitation.
Financing/Grants 
Knowledge 
Policy dialogue and analysis on 
universal health coverage (UHC) 

Development
Partners
AusAID,The
Netherlands,
Singapore Cooperation
Enterpnse (SCE),
UNAIDS, UNICEF,
USAID/MCC, WHO

Ongoing: 
Health Professionals Education Quality 
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 
Projects (PAMSIMAS I and II) Aceh 
Community Settlement Reconstruction 
project 
Water and Sanitation Program; WASAP 
Urban Water Supply & Sanitation 
Grant Facility for Water Management 
Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation 
Jakarta Water OBA project, Surabaya 
Water OBA project 
Proposed: 
PAMSIMAS (AF) 
Solid Waste Improvement in Regional 
and Metropolitan Cities 
Under Discussion: 
Water and Sanitation Financing Facility
IFC investments in private sector
healthcare companies
IFC investments in water and sanitation

Suppl 

se 

a blt anure 

a 

HIV/AIDS Survey 
HIV/AIDS Economic Analysis 
Double Burden of Malnutrition
Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing
Urban Wastewater Management TA
Water and Sanitation Financing Program
Political Economy of Water Tariffs
Structure Assessment for Water Financing
Facility
Lampung Water Project TA
IFC advisory services for Umbulan Water
project

companiesversalhealthcoverage(UH

PRO-GREEN - Ensuring Sustainable Development and Improving Disaster Resilience

101. 

Indonesia is well endowed with natural wealth and beauty and is a global epicenter of

terrestrial and marine biodiversity. However, this natural wealth is under threat from
deforestation, inefficient fossil fuel use, unsustainable marine practices, air and water pollution,
and smoke-haze from forest and peat fires. Forest biodiversity is also threatened by wildlife crime,

with a number of iconic species such as tigers and orangutans becoming endangered. At the same
time, timber, pulp, and palm oil enterprises contribute billions of dollars annually in economic
benefits, creating opportunities and employment, though only some of this is sustainable. This
illustrates the complex development choices needed to shift to a more sustainable forest management

path. Climate finance and biodiversity premiums offer some potential to channel more resources

toward conservation and biodiversity protection. However, 
turning 
these potentials 
into
improvements on the ground remains a challenge in terms of policy, governance and implementation.

32

102. 
Pro-Green Results. WBG engagement is expected to support development results that
include enabling the implementation of Indonesia's REDD+ Strategy, protection for coral and marine
resources, and scaling up disaster and climate risk reduction and adaptation measures. Support
would be provided through knowledge services and mainly grant financing, along with IFC
investments.

Green Growth

103. Climate change is recognized as a key threat to Indonesia's development, especially for
the poor who are also disproportionately affected. 
Indonesia is highly vulnerable to climate
change impacts - sea level rise, changing weather patterns, and increased uncertainty. At the same
time, Indonesia's greenhouse gas emissions are globally significant. Land use change, forestry as
well as peat conversion, and fires are the main sources of emissions, contributing more than two-
thirds of the total volume of emissions in an average year.

104. 
The Master Plan for long term economic development is now a focal point for how
"green growth" fits into sustainable development needs. However, the scope of the challenge is
large and success will require action across legal mandates and economic interests from forestry,
agriculture, mining, land use and local governments. Choices with long term benefits will still have
short term costs that have to be borne. Champions inside and outside of government will need strong
economic, social and environmental rationales for the policies they propose.

105. 
Since hosting COP 13 in Bali, Indonesia has given priority to climate change actions,
with a commitment to reduce emissions by 26 percent by 2020. Gol has published national action
plans and formed a cabinet level National Council on Climate Change. Indonesia is taking advantage
of numerous international climate finance options, but stills needs to integrate these opportunities
into the development agenda. Indonesia has agreed with Norway on a US$1 billion dollar
performance-based, policy-linked initiative for accelerating action on REDD+. Australia, UK, Japan,
USA, Germany and other development partners are contributing additional hundreds of millions of
dollars.

106. WBG engagement is expected to support development results that will help implement
Indonesia's REDD+ strategy and enhance protection for coral and marine resources. Bank
technical assistance has been requested to help design the institutional architecture and financing
mechanisms for implementing for REDD+, as well as helping Indonesia to prepare for larger climate
finance flows. By FY15 it is expected that a REDD+ Support Facility will be in place with the Bank
serving as the advisor, rather than its traditional role as trust fund manager. The Bank would also be
ready to implement performance-based or carbon-based payments under the FCPF Carbon Fund, the
Norway Phase 3 funding, or through bilateral partnerships. 
IFC has been supporting sustainable
forestry practices through advisory services. 
In one such project, IFC will assist a private sector
company in Kalimantan to conduct forest carbon assessment, to allow the company to further build
potential REDD+ revenue streams from its sustainable forestry operations. IFC has provided funding
to Bio-Carbon, an equity fund established to acquire and expand sustainable forestry operations.

Box 15: A New Partnership to Support Green Growth

In an innovative knowledge partnership, the Bank is providing advice and analytical support to the Government of
Indonesia 
to help it establish and manage a US$1 billion fund for REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation). Indonesia is currently the 3 d biggest producer of greenhouse gases in the
world, with most emissions coming from deforestation. A new REDD+ Agency and a Fund for REDD+ in
Indonesia will support Gol to channel resources to activities consistent with the 2012 National Strategy to cut
emissions. Norway has pledged US$1 billion under a phased program linked to the Government's ability to

33

govern and distribute REDD resources. The Global Forest Carbon Partnership Facility and the Forest Investment
Program, along with Switzerland, are also supporting this approach.

This REDD+ advisory support is a good example of a potentially new role for the Bank in assisting middle income
countries by providing knowledge and expertise based on global best practice. 
It is also a departure from earlier
patterns of trust fund management where the Bank rather than a Government entity acted as trustee. This model, if
successful, could represent an approach for many countries that are willing and institutionally able to build local
institutions to deliver on climate finance. To deliver on its advisory role, the Bank has assembled a cross-sectoral
"virtual team" to bring global knowledge and expertise on international best practices as well as institutional and
technical arrangements to help build an Indonesia owned financing instrument for REDD+. This approach helps
give confidence to both Government and donors that the funds will be well used.

107. 
The move toward green economy thinking creates a strategic opportunity to develop
and deliver more integrated policy advice, technical assistance, and capacity building to key

government agencies. Integrating climate efforts into national development plans and budgets will
anchor these policies and approaches into central and local governance responsibilities for the long
term. The Government of Indonesia has requested the Bank's assistance to develop a Green
Development Support Facility to provide technical assistance and analysis on policy issues and
financing needs toward a broader green economic development initiative. For its part, IFC plays a
catalytic role in private sector engagement in climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts
through its analytical and advisory work. It is seeking investments in geothermal and energy
efficiency projects, including mobilizing financing support for such projects; helping to improve
environmental and social outcomes in as oil palm; and promoting sustainable forestry practices to
enable Indonesia to participate in global carbon markets. IFC is providing advisory services and
financing to develop sustainable energy finance projects in the SME sector. It is working with large
cities, to introduce Green building codes that mandate the private sector to build more energy and
water efficient buildings. The first such code was issued by the Governor of Jakarta in April 2010.
WBI supports capacity building on carbon markets and gas flaring.

108. 

Conserving biodiversity is also part of the pro-green agenda where the Bank has

several strategic investments. Co-financing from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) is
expected to support the ongoing program for coral reef rehabilitation and management (COREMAP),
a 15-year commitment to stewardship and promoting governance at village, district and national
levels. The Aceh Forest and Environment Project (AFEP), nearing completion, supported the largest
contiguous forest area in Sumatra. Further engagement would support the Gol and NGO partners to
access grants or low-cost financing for conservation and environmental activities, 
including
development of a GEF-financed biodiversity project for protecting habitat and tigers in Sumatra.

Box 16: Green Growth Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Green Development Results: Implementing of Indonesia's REDD+ strategy and improving protection for
coral and marine resources.
Financing/Grants 
Ongoing: 
HCFC Phase Out Project (Montreal 
Protocol) 
Geothermal Investment (GEF) 
Halmahera Conservation 
COREMAP II (GEF) 
IFC investment in Medco Power 
Proposed: 
Chiller Energy Efficiency (GEF) 

Knowledge 
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF), Forest 
Investment Program (FIP) 
Indonesia Forest and Climate Trust Fund, 
TA for REDD/FREDDI 
AAA on Benefit Sharing 
Drivers of Deforestation TA 
Green Growth Support Facility 
DP Partnership for Market Readiness
Carbon Finance

Development
Partners
AusAID, AfD, CIDA,
Denmark, Germany
(GIZ), Finland, JICA,
The Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway,
SECO, USAID

COREMAP III (GEF) 

IIFC advisory services for sustainable palm oil andI

34

Sumatran Biodiversity (GEF) 
Under Discussion: 
IFC investments in geothermal and 
hydroelectricity sectors 

forestry
IFC advisory services in Green Banking, Green
Buildings Code, and Sustainable Energy Finance
as well as in geothermal energy sector.

Improving Disaster Resilience

109. 
Indonesia is located in one of the world's most natural disaster prone areas. According
to data from the National Disaster Management Agency (BNPB), over the last 30 years, there

have been, on average, 289 significant natural disasters per year, with an average annual death
toll of 8,000 people. Gol spends on average between US$ 300-500 million annually on post disaster
reconstruction, with spending for major disasters of up to 6.4 percent of GDP. Following the Indian
Ocean tsunami, the Gol allocated more than US$7 billion for reconstruction in Aceh and Nias. Close
to US$2 billion was spent following the eruption of Mount Merapi in Yogyakarta.

110. 

Since the devastation caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami, the Gol has made

significant advances in preparing for potential future natural disasters. A comprehensive
approach to Disaster Risk Management (DRM) including prevention and preparation, emergency
response and post disaster recovery was introduced. Yet Indonesia faces a number of challenges.
Among these are insufficient investments in prevention and risk reduction, including a lack of
systems to identify risks and manage reconstruction. In addition, BNPB lacks the confidence of line
agencies to coordinate and local DRM institutions are unproven. A recent study by the Bank
indicates that there is sufficient fiscal capacity and a favorable legal framework for an adequate DRM
system, but implementing regulations and upgrading operational capacities remain outstanding.
There is ample room for improvement in Gol's efforts to addressing the differentiated impact of
disaster on men and women, girls and boys. Going forward, the Bank will continue to support the
Government by facilitating the adoption of disaster risk management approaches that have shown a
demonstrable effect on women including through their inclusion in decision making processes.

111. 
Development results to be supported by the Bank will include efforts to identify and
scale up disaster and climate risk reduction and adaptation measures, 
including

institutionalizing community-based 
settlement reconstruction. 
The basis for the Bank's
involvement in the development of Indonesia's DRM systems resides in its ability to leverage
existing engagements and financing instruments and its access to international best practices that will
serve as the foundation to support the building of a disaster and climate resilient Indonesia. With
support from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), the Bank provides
technical assistance for risk identification, integrating risk reduction in investment projects, and
identifying options for catastrophic risk financing. Disaster contingent components have already
been included in several Bank-financed projects. The Bank is also supporting a standing mechanism
for multi-donor support in post disaster recovery through a trust fund with an initial contribution of
NZ$2 million in funding from the New Zealand Government. This could represent a major shift
from a focus on recovery to an approach focused on preparedness. There has also been some
discussion on the use of contingent financing instruments such as the Catastrophe Deferred
Drawdown Option (Cat-DDO). In parallel, existing Bank engagements in settlement rehabilitation,
infrastructure and education and health that form the core of reactive investment will be further
targeted to fully integrate disaster resilience measures. The Bank has also conducted a gender and
DRM rapid assessment in PNPM Urban, which will inform initiatives under this CPS. During the
last few years, IFC supported projects such as Aceh Shrimp Project and Investment Climate Reforms
advisory. It will continue to develop projects towards reconstruction from the Tsunami disaster.

35

Box 17: Disaster Resilience Results, Instruments and Partners

Pro-Green Disaster Resilience Development Results: Identify and scale up disaster and climate risk
reduction and adaptation measures, including institutionalizing community-based settlement reconstruction.
Financing/Grants 
Knowledge and Convening 
Development

Ongoing: 

Multi Donor Fund for Aceh and Nias 
Java Reconstruction Fund 
PNPM support of disaster recovery in 
Aceh/Nias, Yogyakarta and Central Java 
Under Discussion: 

CAT DDO 

GFDRR National Risk Assessment 

Partners

Indonesia Disaster Risk Financing Capacity AusAID, JICA, New
Building module on Post Disaster Needs 
Zealand
Assessment and Post Disaster Recover.
IFC advisory services for launching Global
Index Insurance products

_____________

CROSS-CUTTING ENGAGEMENTS - Gender and Governance

Gender

112. Gender is a key cross-cutting theme in the strategic framework of the CPS. The
approach to gender in the CPS is informed by a series of recently completed initiatives. These

include the Bank's internal stock taking of gender-related activities and discussion of how it could

address gender issues more effectively (note on "Gender mainstreamning in the World Bank Group in

Indonesia") and the Country Gender Strategy and associated Action Plan and Result Framework
developed to coincide with this CPS (see Annex 4). Using the DR analytical framework (focused

on endowment, opportunity and voice and agency), the stock taking exercise has shown that at the
national level, the regulatory and planning framework recognizes gender equality as a national
priority. As mentioned above, gender is well mainstreaned in the Government Central Planning (the
Five year Plans); Indonesia has a Ministry of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection to
coordinate mainstreaming efforts across government and provide support to implementing agencies;
and the Ministry of Finance has adopted best practice legislations such as requiring that budget
requests from technical Ministries be drafted with a gender lens. At the same time, implementation
has been weak in part because gender-disaggregated data and analysis have not been available.
Furthermore, at the sub-national level, attention to gender equality is uneven and implementation is
often undermined by weak execution and reporting capacities.

113. 

Despite tangible progress, persistent gender disparities remain. Gender parity in

enrollment rates has been achieved at all levels of education but persistent gender disparities remain
but with evidence of gender streaming. As noted, maternal mortality rates remain relatively high for
Indonesia's income level and women's voice in the public domain remains relatively weak; while
Indonesia's female labor force participation rate increased from around 45 percent in 1980 to about
55 percent in 2008, it still remained below the 70 percent average for the region; although there is no
difference between men and women's consumption based poverty rates and poverty rates amongst
female-headed households are lower than male-headed households, 
the overall pace of poverty
reduction is slower for female-headed households.

114. Women still earn less than men in all sectors, are more likely to work in the informal
sector and constitute the majority of unskilled migrant laborers. Gender gaps in wages in the

service, industry and agriculture sectors in Indonesia are among the largest in the region. The
important socioeconomic variations in Indonesia are that urban educated women have higher returns
than men with the same education, while less-educated women at the bottom end of the wage
distribution face the biggest wage gap. Enterprise surveys also suggest that, within the same firms,
women are more likely than men to be temporary workers. While female-owned and managed
enterprises tend to be less capitalized and operate in less remunerative sectors. Further, Indonesian

36

women are disproportionally more excluded from formal financial services than men. The World
Bank Access to Finance Survey 2010 and Migrant Worker Survey found that women are less likely to
borrow, and when they do so, they are more likely to borrow informally. Women are also less likely
to enroll in life insurance, asset insurance or private health insurance than men.

115. 
The World Bank Group has been working actively with the Government on programs
to help remove barriers to gender equality. 
Key activities include (i) consultations with
development partners, NGOs, academia, policy institutes and government around gender equality
and how best the World Bank might contribute; (ii) collaboration with other development partners in
producing set of policy briefs, which collectively provide a country gender assessment; (iii)
development of the relationship with Ministry of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection; (iv)
hosting of a 2012 WDR consultation event and completing Indonesia's case study; (v) stock taking
of gender-related activities across the country program and (vi) drafting the country gender strategy.

Governance and Anti-Corruption

116. Over the past decade, the Indonesian government has made strides toward improved
public accountability. Governance and anti-corruption reforms have featured in the programs of
successive governments. Freedom of the press has been enhanced; authority was devolved to the
regions; checks and balances between the executive, 
legislative and judicial branches were
strengthened; the role of security forces was redefined; direct elections for President and for regional
heads were mandated; and an institutional framework, including the creation of Anti-Corruption
Commission (KPK) was developed. Civil society played an important role in driving these changes.
Indonesia has also seen the enactment of fiscal laws and the rearrangement of key economic
ministries, many with WBG support, designed to improve budget and financial management systems
(including public procurement, business regulation, auditing, and monitoring and evaluation).
Nevertheless old problems remain. Central government institutions struggle to coordinate effectively,
bureaucratic incentives are misaligned and capacity lags. In the private sector existing players retain
market power and use it to influence political processes. In addition, new challenges are increasing;
money politics is on the increase, decentralization has increased coordination issues and reforms in
the judiciary, the police and the attorney general's office (AGO) have been slow.

117. 
The governance and anti-corruption approach in the Country Partnership Strategy is
led by the Indonesia Governance and Anti-Corruption (IGAC) Team, composed of engagement
leaders from all the sectors and the Indonesia GAC secretariat. The IGAC team will be
responsible for developing and guiding a strategic approach that effectively integrates governance in
the work of the WBG in Indonesia.

118. 
International accountability mechanisms are becoming an increasing 
factor 
in
Indonesia's governance. Leadership of the Open Governance Partnership, adoption of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), Reducing Emissions through Deforestation and
Degradation (REDD+), as well as the UN convention against Corruption (UNCAC) represent
significant steps in increasing the transparency of the Gol's commitment to good governance and an
increased focus on monitoring. The World Bank will support these efforts as part of our governance
engagement since they provide much needed support for local institutions and communities.

119. 
The country governance program is organized around four pillars 1) increasing
transparency and efficiency in public financial management, 2) increasing the efficiency of
public service delivery, 3) strengthening checks and balances, and 4) promoting open,
transparent competition. This cross cutting focus will be used to improve coordination and provide
strategic focus. In the public financial management the focus is on effective and transparent budget

37

and tax systems (SPIRIT, SPAN, PINTAR). The engagements around improved public service deliver
focus on improved systems (including procurement) and citizen feedback mechanisms (DAK, PNPM,
BOS). In the checks and balances area the GAC team is partnering with Indonesian institutions
leading the fight against corruption (e.g. the KPK) and engaging with CSOs to reinforce these efforts.
To promote open and transparent competition the Bank is focused on resources, including through
EITI and REDD+, support for regulatory framework and reforms in the financial sector.

120. 
The Bank's governance approach will build on the Indonesian Government's Open
Government Partnership (OGP). The OGP should serve as a powerful governance tool to promote
transparency, increase civic participation, improve service delivery, reduce corruption, and harness
new technologies to make government more open, effective, and accountable. 
In September 2012
Indonesia became co-chair of this initiative. The Bank's engagements on PFM and improved
statistics are designed around data as a public good, while community driven development, sub-
national development, health, education, water and sanitation, have substantial social accountability
elements. The Bank will leverage the ongoing engagement to create a space for citizen participation
through the recently announced Global Partnership for Social Accountability (GPSA).

121. 
IFC is promoting enhanced standards of governance in the private sector operations in
the country. Toward this goal, IFC launched a new corporate governance advisory services
initiative in Indonesia in 2012. The strategy will be to work with regulatory agencies to establish
model corporate governance practices, to work with selected private sector companies to enhance
their performance, as well as to host events to highlight enhanced corporate governance practices.

122. 
To safeguard against the risk of corruption in the Bank's own operations, anti-
corruption action plans are required. First introduced in 2005, ACAPs are mandatory in project
design and implementation. By the end of 2011, the ACAPs traditional components (access to
information, mitigation of collusion, mitigation of fraud, participation of external parties in oversight,
grievance handling, and sanction/remedies), are gradually evolving. 
In particular increasing
emphasis is being placed on improved reporting and oversight; improved public complaint handling
with Bank program efforts serving as the basis for ministerial initiatives (i.e. beyond the project).

VI. 

DELIVERING THE WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM

123. 
This CPS is a continuation of the World Bank's long-term engagement in Indonesia's
development. It is focused around and consistent with the Government's agenda. The Indonesia
program is organized around a set of engagement areas and delivered through a mix of lending and
knowledge products often supported by close collaboration with development partners.

Financing

124. 
IBRD financing services are expected for priority public programs averaging up to
US$1.1 billion annually over the CPS period, subject to macroeconomic performance,
momentum on key reforms and the quality of program implementation, and IBRD's lending
capacity. Lending would continue to decline as a share of Indonesia's GDP and its overall financing
requirements. Actual lending amounts in any particular year would be determined by borrower
demand and can vary depending on overall exposure, but would remain below the single borrower
limit. The overall exposure would be determined not only by the level of lending (commitments) but
also by the speed of disbursements, choices regarding exposure management, decisions on the
possible extension of contingent financing provided by the US$2 billion PER1SAI DPL DDO, and
possible adjustments to lending volumes of proposed policy-based operations without affecting the
integrity and objectives of the CPS.

38

125. 
IFC is expected to continue its strategy of helping Indonesia reduce the impact of
climate change, create high quality jobs, increase rural incomes and promote sustainable
urbanization. This includes programs to expand access to financial services for the underserved
population, establish resource efficient and globally competitive manufacturing, increase access to
infrastructure, particularly in frontier areas, strengthen commodity-based supply chains, such as
agribusiness and forestry, and improve investment climate. In these areas, IFC will seek investments
of US$300-500 million per year, with advisory services of about US$23-$25million annually. IFC
Advisory services for PPP transactions will continue to provide support as needed.

126. MIGA has begun to increase its activities in support of Indonesia. MIGA's approach to
operations in Indonesia would be consistent with its global strategy focus, which focuses on conflict
affected and fragile economies; South-South transactions; IDA countries; complex infrastructure and
extractive industries projects. There are currently two active projects in Indonesia, with guarantees
totaling US$257 million, in the power and mining sectors. Its Weda Bay Nickel operation supports a
complex extractive 
investment 
that carefully addresses social and environmental concerns.
Moreover, it is an innovative effort to engage mining operations upstream during the exploration
phase to better promote social benefits and environmental safeguards.

Collaboration with Development Partners

127. 
The Bank's engagement 
is augmented by strong collaboration with development
partners. Delivering results in a country as large and diverse as Indonesia requires working with a
broad range of multilateral and bi-lateral donors, as well as NGOs. This includes co-financing of
investment and policy lending, including active participation in policy dialogue, as well as donor-
funded grant programs that run alongside Bank financed operations. Indeed, this collaboration has
strengthened the Bank's engagements across the CPS. Most DPLs are co-financed, as are several
operations and a large number of ESW and TA are supported by grants. As a critical component of
the CPS business model, strategic use of trust funds increase the reach of CPS objectives particularly
as most of these funds are multi-year and thus provide, at times, a more stable source of financing
than the Bank's own budget. These collaborations are different across the engagement areas and
depend on the nature of the donor relationship and needs of Government. Moreover, the Bank
remains pledged to the Jakarta Commitments, which provide a set of country-specific principles to
enhance alignment of financial and advisory support in line with the Paris Declaration.

39

Box 18: Trust Funds: A Platform for Results and Innovation

A hallmark of the Indonesia program is the extent to which financing for programs, projects, knowledge and
innovation have been financed by non-conventional sources. Australia, the Netherlands, EC, US, UK and Canada
have been particularly generous contributors to Indonesia's development in this regard. Donor support, largely
through country-specific trust funds, has allowed the Bank in Indonesia to leverage IBRD-financed projects and
programs and scale up coverage to reach more people. Additionally, the Bank acts as a platform for donors and
Gol to work cooperatively to support experimental approaches across our engagement areas. This includes cutting
edge approaches to poverty monitoring, new ways of working with CSOs to reach marginalized groups, and
experimenting with technologies and partnering with the private sector to support schools and rural infrastructure.

At the same time, as Indonesia evolves, so does the way that trust funds are used and governed. Where typically
the Bank acted as "Trustee", Gol is increasingly interested in administering trust fund financing itself, but looks to
the Bank for technical expertise in fiduciary requirements and implementation. Donors too are looking for
evolving governance models but without losing the Bank's fiduciary oversight which provides confidence that
monies will be well spent. Current discussions with Gol, donors and the Bank on REDD+, the US-financed MCC
(on MDG), and disaster preparedness demonstrate that innovative structures and new roles for the Bank are
possible. A successful REDD+ (see Box 15) could set the direction of many other Bank interventions in Indonesia
and elsewhere. Working to fulfill the Government's longer-term strategy for PNPM/PSF sustainability means that
the structure and staffing of PSF, one of Indonesia's largest trust-funded programs, will evolve over the next
several years with the Bank taking an increasingly smaller role. The lessons from the successful Aceh and Nias
MDF are helping to inform Gol and governments around the world to prepare for disasters rather than only react
when they hit. (See Annex 7 on Trust Funds)

Portfolio Management

128. 
The close alignment of the Partnership Strategy with Government priorities and
programs and more proactive and coordinated management, including for trust funds, has

benefited portfolio performance. The share of problem projects, which used to account for one-
fourth of operations, has been brought down to around 15 percent in recent years, and now compares
favorably to the performance of other large, middle-income IBRD borrowers. Projects at risk tend
to be smaller, so the volume of commitments at risk is less than 10 percent. Continued strong support
will be provided to ensure compliance with Bank fiduciary and safeguard policies. Lessons from
ongoing projects are helping new projects ensure adequate disbursements, better results on the
ground, and fiduciary oversight.

129. 

The performance of trust funds has also benefited from a more coordinated approach

to their mobilization and management. All trust funds are now vetted to ensure alignment with
country priorities and integrated into the program's overall financial and human resource planning.

Quality review processes mirror those of Bank operations. Larger trust funds benefit from being
incorporated into the Bank's general operational management and portfolio reviews. (See Annex 6).

130. 
The Bank is responsive to the demand for higher performance standards in its project
preparation and portfolio management. Indonesia has access to a growing number of sources for
meeting its financing and technical assistance needs, and the Bank must continuously challenge itself
to stay relevant. In response, the Bank is aiming at quicker response times in the preparation and
implementation of projects, more flexibility in its lending program, simplification of World Bank
Group procedures, greater alignment with the country's own systems, and stronger tailoring of the
analytical and advisory products to the needs and timeframes of the Government. As part of the
utilization of national procurement systems, the Bank would explore quick win initiatives including
advance procurement and web-based procurement plan monitoring.

40

Sharing Global Development Solutions

131. 
Indonesia has assumed a growing role in promoting South-South Cooperation through
peer-to-peer knowledge exchange. Most recently, in July 2012, it hosted a High-level meeting
"Towards Country-led Knowledge Hubs" attended by over 300 senior participants from 46 countries.
It has also played a key role in securing the inclusion of "knowledge sharing" as one of nine pillars in
the G20 Development Consensus. Moreover, it pledged a US$1.5 million contribution to the Bank's
South-South Knowledge Exchange facility.

132. 
Indonesia's leadership on South-South knowledge exchange is further demonstrated by
its strong roles as a provider and recipient of "how-to" development knowledge, often in
collaboration with donors or partnering countries. Indonesia has shared its expertise in, inter alia,
agriculture, microfinance, disaster management, and community driven development with states in
Asia, Africa, and Latin America and the Caribbean. Indonesian institutions have received knowledge
through peer-to-peer exchanges in agriculture, urban development, and other key fields. In addition,
the Government has participated in diverse multidirectional learning initiatives, including regional
dialogues on aid effectiveness and triangular cooperation with ASEAN countries. JICA has been a
major partner in financing and supporting Indonesia's South-South agenda.

Results Management Framework

133. 
The CPS seeks to leverage WBG activities in support of the Government's development
and reform programs. While this approach renders the measurement of the direct impact of WBG
activities even more difficult, it reinforces the objective of supporting Indonesia's efforts at policy
and institutional transformation. The appended results framework is furthermore designed to reflect
the flexibility inherent in the CPS' approach: the variations across different engagements in the
framework are indicative of the different stages of maturity, with some partnerships and programs
being well advanced with more clearly definable and measurable targets, while others are at
relatively early stages. The results framework will be monitored and updated periodically. The
dialogue with BAPPENAS around program results would be broadened to include other key partners
including the MoF. These assessments will serve as guidelines for any necessary course corrections
and feed into the CPS Progress Report scheduled for Board presentation in FY14.

Managing for Risks

134. 
Indonesia remains vulnerable to economic shocks. Indonesia's growth performance has
been resilient to recent global economic uncertainty, its economic fundamentals remain solid and the
Government is in a better position to address economic risks than in the past. Nonetheless, the risk
of external economic shocks remains. Indonesia's growth over the past three years has been driven
by its export performance. A global growth and trade slow-down would translate into lower
Indonesian growth as direct exports to affected markets fall, indirect exports (commodities) to the
region fall and international markets remain volatile. Depending on the magnitude and duration of
the slowdown, this could also slow job creation in Indonesia. Another potential risk could come from
a sudden reversal of financial assets held in the Indonesian stock and bond markets, resulting in
exchange rate volatility and inflation. Increasing food prices would particularly hurt the poor.

135. Natural disasters can inflict significant economic and social costs. Indonesia remains
vulnerable to a broad range of disruptive natural disasters, including earthquakes, volcano eruptions
and flooding. Indonesia's experience has contributed to greater disaster preparedness over time; and it
is considering a CAT-DDO to help maintain expenditures in case of a natural catastrophe.

41

136. A comfortable economic outlook may engender a sense of complacency and limit the
scope for reforms. Particularly in the run-up to the 2014 elections political parties may be less
willing to pursuing difficult reforms that could be unpopular. Vested interests may seek shelter from
competitive pressures under the mantle of economic nationalism. At the same time, elections will
also put pressure on political leaders to deliver results, especially in areas such as infrastructure
development, governance reform, and the investment climate. During the transition to a new
administration, the Bank would use the DPR and sector engagements notes as a basis for dialogue.

137. Notwithstanding the ongoing peace-building process in Aceh and the maintenance of
political stability throughout the archipelago, tensions could resurface and regional disparities
could be accompanied by local conflicts. While these do not compare with countries that are
fragile and conflict affected, the past year has seen an increase in the number of instances of violence
and intolerance, primarily on Java, which have highlighted the importance of an unambiguous
government stance to uphold laws and protect minorities.

138. Capacity to develop and implement complex institutional reforms, particularly at the
local level, may be undermined by lack of coordination as well as entrenched organizational
behaviors. To help address some of these implementation risks, the CPS is designed around
institution-building which offers the Bank's convening services, technical assistance and analytic
support for the design and implementation of the government's own reforms.

139. Governance and corruption risks remain significant. 
Through 
its support 
for
government-led programs there may be a risk of an impact on the Bank's reputation, as for IFC and
MIGA through their choices of business partners. To mitigate this risk, the World Bank Group will
only engage where it has confidence in its counterparts, where the authorities are committed to
reform, where effective anti-corruption measures exist, and where it can build long-standing
partnerships. As part of its engagement, the World Bank Group supports measures to strengthen
accountability and build fiduciary capacity in counterparts. For the Bank's own portfolio, strong
governance and anti-corruption action plans and close supervision remain important, including for
trust-funded activities.

42

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

Annex 1: Indonesia CPS FY13-15 Results Matrix

Pro-Growth - Promoting Prosperity

Connectivity

Accelerate growth and 
enhance equity through 
domestic connectivity 

Lack of policy coordination 
to implement policy reforms 
in the connectivity agenda 

1. Improved ranking of Indonesia's 
Logistics Performance Index, 

-Introduction of a set of 
Financing: Connectivity
domestic logistics indicators for DPLs, IFC investments in
monitoring progress in logistics 
private sector projects to

Baseine in201 Inoneia 
rnke 
poicyrefrm.enhance 

Regulatory barriers that 
inhibit better provision of 
connectivity services 

at 59 
2. Increase access for broadband 
intemet services for population. 

-Effective functioning of the 
Connectivity Working Group 

Inefficient use of public 
finance and management 
practice for provision of 
connectivity infrastructure 

Baseline: 5 percent in 2011 

Target: 30 percent by 2015 

-Improved services in 
domestic cargo shipping. 

3. Reduced cost and time to export 
and import, as indicated in the Doing 

-Increased private sector 
participation in logistics and 

Private sector participation 
not being leveraged for the 
agenda of growth and 
connectivity 

Business Survey 
Baseline: 2012: Export: 17 days, 
US$644 per container; Import: 27 
days, US$660 per container 

telecom/ IT services 

43

connectivity (i.e. in

areas of logistics, telecom,
financial infrastructure)
Knowledge: analytic and

advisory work funded by
AUSAID and MDFTIC
(Dutch, Swiss, and USAID);
ESW on logistics and trade

facilitation; policy notes on
logistics, regulatory reform,

knowledge sharing through

managing openness; facilitate
workshops and field visits;
engage local think-tank,
universities and private sector

organizations to participate in
policy dialogue;
Development Policy Review

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

Competitiveness

Enhance 
competitiveness 
through improved 
environment, including 

oenirometv, 
open, competitive, 

sustainableimprovement 

susaiabe ndinhibits 
inclusive markets for 

business to expand and 
increase productivity 

Bottlenecks and 
underdeveloped in trade 
logistics are hurting 
profitability and undermining 

firms' productivity; complex 
rgltr 
niomn 

Bottleneck 

1. Policy framework adopted to 
- Coordinated 
improve competitiveness through 
implementation of the National 
better trade logistics, Baseline: Score Logistics Blueprint 
in 2012 Logistics Performance 

Indicators (LPI) for logistics qualt 
optneo 
.5frbre 
lt 

andt 

OpDeveiopnt ofdSteandr 
prto 
rcdr 
n

hnl 

ivso

Connectivity DPLs; Financial
Sector and Investment
Climate Reform And
Modernization (FIRM) DPL;

IFC supporting companies

private sector 
investment; time consuming 

management of 2.53, Target: 
Improved 2014 LPI score on 

and costly procedures to 
logistics competence of 3.00 and 
establish companies, and 
border management of 2.7, National
clear imports; weak 
omplex 
Single Window acting as the single 
coordination among 
reference for cross-border trade and 
government institutions for 
introduction of single sign-on for all 
investment policy; pressure to participating agencies 

of the capacity of which are cost-competitive in

BKPM (Investment 
Cordnain Bor)Ivetr 

thecexports 
cost competitiverwith import
arkktstorfar
i omeitv arkt mot

ratin 

oadl 

Investor

- Development of the legal
framework to streamline 
current procedures and reduce 

K 

DgeI AA suported

reforms in logistics and trade
facilitation, enhance reform

delays in small claim resolution 

agenda to improve the

use protectionist measures to 

protect domestic vested 
interest; private sector 
companies are undertaking 

projects which will not be 
cost-competitive versus 

global competition in their 
target markets; policy 

decisions are taken without 

sufficient analysis of 
alternatives and of their costs 
and benefits inadequate 
infrastructure and incentive 

regime have limited capacity 

and have not encouraged 
innovation in private sector, 

2. Improved regulatory
environment, interagency produc 
coordination, and consultative 

process in business environment that 
affect competitiveness of Indonesia's 

private sector, facilitate innovation 
and investment facilitation and 

An ivevteto 
p 
f 
refrto 
reue th cost o 

strigabuiesilaotd 
- Strengthened interagency 

coordination and public 
consultation around business 

services. Baseline: 50 days to start a 

regulatory process. 

busine regu Atory
evient; 
IFCeAdisor

Sricaes ProInvesen
ClmtPrra(sb

national Doing Business;
corporate governance;

financial infrastructure)

company; 570 days to enforce
contract; weak consultative
processes prior to issuance of 
regulations; uncoordinated 

investment policy; weak investor 

inquiry handling Targets: 30 days to 
start a company; less than 500 days 
to enforce contract; coordinated 

investment policy and improved 

transparency in regulatory making; 
improved performance of investor

inquiry handlingandincentive

44

which are cost-competitive in 
the exports markets or are cost 

Generation Technology, and
Entrepreneurship; Report and

competitive with imports in 

policy dialogue on

domestic markets 

Indonesia's manufacturing
sector; Report and policy
dialogue on managing

openness; Development

Policy Review

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

Financial Sector

Promote the 
development of a stable, 
efficient and inclusive 
financial sector in 
Indonesia in order to 
foster celratd 
economicInstitution 
reduce poverty and 
strengthen economic 
competitiveness on a 

fotraclrtdof 

sustainable basis, 

1. Maintain financial sector stability, 
deepened financial sector and 
strengthened private sector through: 
improved regulatory and supervisory
frameworks; maintained soundness 

Banks intermediation has 
improved but it is still low to 
the size of economy; Bank 
loans need to increase further 
to support economic growth 
Non-Bank Financial 
(NBFI) assets need Baseline: Key financial ratios of 
to growth further to increase 
banks (Capital Adequacy Ratio 
efficiency and reduce risk in 
(CAR), Non Performing Loan ratio 
financial sector and create 
(NPL), Net Interest Margin (NIM) 

banking sector, 

long-term domestic financial 
resources/savings 
INonesane Financial 

Persistent issues of limited 
access to finance for 

are sound and LDR (Loan to Deposit 
Ratio) is 7 5 %o ( Dec. 2011); 
SE n 
nesre 
ouain

Target: Banking financial indicators 
remain sound and LDR at minimum 

-Bank financial ratios remain 
sound: CAR higher than 8%, 
NPLs do not exceed 50 

Financing: FIRM DPL; IFC
investments in banks,
insurance companies, NBFIs

twice GDP growth rate 

-Bank lending increasing by 
annually; LDR remains at 
minimum 80

-NBFI continues growing and 
maintains 200 share of 

annualpIortneconoEmpowering
financial assets; amount of 
funds raised from equity and 

bonds market increases 
annually 

Expanding support to mid-
the SME market.

sized banks that mostly serve

Knowledge: Financial Sector
Policy dialogues; Financial
Sector Assessment Program

(FSAP); Microinsurance
Marketplace; Review on

KUR (Kredit Usaha Rakyat);
Deposit Insurance Company
(LPS); Improving access to

underserved groups (MSMEs 

and households) 

80%; 

- Continued increase of KUR 

disbursement; increased

Financial Services in

2. Growing capital market and 
NBFI and a higher access to formal 
financial services by the Micro- 

in account holders of 
Tabunganku ( "no frills" basic 
saig account product) 

Female Migrant Workers;
suprtoeabihOK
Fsppor toealish fieoJK

- OJK is operational and the 
Financial System Stability 
Coordination Forum is 

developing a crisis
management protocol
Saving and Loan

functioning. 

- Infrastructure Finance 
Facility is providing long term 
financing for infrastructure 
projects 

Cooperatives; SME access to
Islamic Finance; Capacity

building of Secretariat of
Financial System Stability
Forum; IFC Advisory
Services - Access to Finance
Program in the areas of SME

IdnsasnwFnnil 

Services Authority( OJK) 
must fnction effectively as 
the integrated financial sector 

authority; the transition 
period has to be managed 

properly 

Baseline: 4 % of households have 
access to bank accounts; banking 

loan to SMEs is 5000 (2011), 
disbursed KUR (credit program for 

SME) amounted to IDR 63 trillion 
(2011) 

The financial safety net 
framework and legal basis for Targets: Bank loans to SME 
financial crisis management 
continue to grow and are maintained 

45

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

need to be strengthened; 

Limited local infrastructure 
financing capacity 

at 50% of total bank loans; 
proportion of households with 
savings account increased 

banking (women in business),
mobile banking, and housing
micro finance, as well as in
Investment Climate Program
including ongoing support to
Credit Bureau and Moveable
Collateral registry.

Infrastructure

Increase the level and 
efficiency of public and 
private investments in 
infrastructure to meet 
needs and strengthen 

ned n teghn 

Lack of investment in 
infrastructure, which has not 
kept pace with economic 
growth; investment in 
6% of GDP in 1997 to 2% in 

infrastructure fell from about 

1. Increased effective km of national 
roads maintained and developed, 

Baseline: 1500 km maintained and 

3000 km developed in (2005- 2009) 

- Incentive framework for PLN 
introduced to increase 
efficiency and reduce subsidy 
requirement
-Government Viability Gap 

Financing: 2nd Eastern
Indonesia Region Transport;
Strategic Road Infrastructure;

Improvement project, Road

Asset Preservation;

comptitvenss.2000, but recovered to about 

Tagt nraeb 

5o/erFunding 

mechanism established Connectivity DPL;

400 of GDP by 2011 

(2011-2015) 

and operational 

Transmission Development

growth; investment alne

2. Reduced power infrastructure 
bottlenecks to meet demand and 

inceae ccsstransmission 
Indoesi's nfrstrutur 
Taget Reuce owe suply14%Facility; 
masive,y anreyoemnds wate 
interruption time per customer from 
massve,andbeynd 
hat-At 
can be supported through 
5h/year to 2h/year (20 12-2015). 
pbiinetetaoe 
3. Increased private investment in 

- Increased capacity of power 

substations by 

least one PPP transaction in 
bulk water 

infrastructure through the PPP 

framework 

46

I&II, Renewable Energy for
Electrification); Medium

Hydro; Infrastructure Finance
Geothermal Clean
Energy Investment;
infrastructure Guarantee
Fund; Investments by IFC in
renewable! clean power,

water and sanitation, ports,

shipping and logistics,

telecom, oil and gas

Knowledge: Assessment of
Road Construction Industry;
Roads and Railways PER;

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

Advisory service on energy
service and subsidy; PPP
Framework and Policy;
Viability Gap Financing;
Low-income Housing Policy
and Finance; Geothermal
Power Supply; IFC Advisory
services for structuring and
bidding Public Private
Partnership projects.

Local Government

Strengthen local
government institutions 
to improve 
accountability and 
increase the level and of 
impact public spending 
on service delivery and 
support metropolitan 
areas and medium-sized 
cities to improve 
infrastructure 

Insufficient coordination and 
leadership of the 
decentralization agenda at the 
central level; a limited and 
unclear role for the provinces 

1. Improved fiduciary, social and 
environmental management as well 
as technical performance of LGs in 
the delivery of basic services 
financed using DAK transfers. 

A fiscal decentralization
framework that does not 
provide appropriate 
incentives for increased and 
deceralitionof 
tecity 

2.tiproved at 
os 
inst 
s, 
and 
CSO tioneerent 
ass 
A mo 
nito su- 
atiR 
local institutions to analyze and 

th dlier o bsi srvce

monitor public expenditure and PFM 
Weak capacity of local 
andawi 
governments (LG) to manage 
and to demand better local 
assets and service delivery 
anbnationdepordp
government performance in these 
4s 
technical 

-PEACH transparency and 
accountability components 
enhanced and expanded 

-PEACH expanded to 
additional provinces 

- Oput based urseme 

-Government financing and 

technical assistance framework 
for engagement with 
metropolitan areas in place 
pa

Financing: Local
Government and
Decentralization Project
(DAK) I&II; Urban Sector
Development and Reform
Project (USDRP)

Knowledge: Report on
Urban Agglomerations;
PEACH PERs; PEACH PFM
Buidin a
Delont
Dagnsic Report

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

An inadequate framework for 
and insufficient financing of 
multi-year large scale
infrastructure programs 

areas 

Lack of coordination in 
planning, management and
investment at the
metropolitan and regional in
larger urban agglomerations

Macroeconomic and
Fiscal Management 

Strengthen central 
government capacity for 
implementing 
contingency financing, 
crisis management and 
quality evidence-based 
macro and fiscal policy 
making and 

Indonesia's fiscal financing 

position remains vulnerable 
to changes in investor 
sentiment, 

Despite Indonesia's strong 
recent economic 
performance, significant 
challenges in fiscal and 
macro policy remain in terms 

1. Enhanced Government ability to

meet its financing needs and 

maintain critical public expenditures, 
as measured by continued access to 
markets, and level of maintenance 
and capital expenditures. 
2. Budget allocations informed by 
monitoring and evaluation. Increase 
in the number of line ministries and 
agencies reporting through BRISA 
(the monitoring and evaluation 

Gender responsive Budgeting
and Planning

IFC Advisory services for
Sub-National Doing Business
reforms

-Indonesia maintains continued 

Financing: Program for

access to market financing 
(meeting the targets in its 2012 
Financing Plan) 

-In the event of a crisis the 
Government is able to use
provisions in the Budget Laws 
to revise expenditures and/or 
financing sources under 

Economic Resilience,
Investment and Social
Assistance in Indonesia
(PERISAI); INSTANSI
DPLs; STATCAP-CERDAS

Knowledge: Development
Policy Review; Support for
Enhanced Macro and Fiscal

Policy Analysis institutional

strengthening program;

Analytical and Capacity

of the allocation of spending 

system) from a baseline of zero in 

streamlined parliamentary 

(with subsidies accounting for FY11. 

approval process 

almost one quarter of central 

government spending in the 

proposed 2013 Budget) and 
its efficiency 

-Development and usage of 

Support to Improve

medium-term forecasting tools 
which integrate macro and 

fiscal outlooks 
tresource 
mpcr roved meol ranm 
polinassistance; 

Expenditure and Revenue
Policy including public

expenditure review analysis;
revenues policy and
administration technical
Indonesia

48

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

reallocation of budgetary 
spending

Economic Quarterly report

Strengthening the
Public Sector

Strengthen central
government institutions 
and systems to enhance 
public financial 
management and 
governance to increase 
the development impact 
of priority budget 
expenditures. 

The budget system is input- 
based, excessively detailed 
and inflexible and strictly 
annual, hampering 
implementation of multi-year 
projects 

Controls in budget execution 
processes are generally 
inadequate and could 

jeopardize gains from 

improvements made in other 

1. Strengthened multi-year 
perspective in fiscal planning, 
expenditure policy and budgeting 
Baseline: PEFA P1-12 rating C- in 
2011 

Target: improve PEFA P1-12 rating 
to at least a B-- by 2015 

2. Number of line ministries 

-Increased correlation between Financing: INSTANSI
forward estimates and annual 
DPLs; Management and
budgets. 
Revenue Administration
Project (GFMRAP); Project
for Indonesia Tax
Administration Reform
(PINTAR); Scholarships
Program for Strengthening
Reforming Institutions
Project (SPIRIT);

- Professional association of 
internal auditors and drafts of 
(a) code of ethics and (b) 
internal audit standards 
established 

receiving unqualified opinions for 

their annual financial statements: 

-New regulations for ado .ption 

of accrual based accounting

STATCAP-CERDAS

areas of PFM 
inaeutei deint asicheoSngepblcfdaca

policies and chart of accounts 

issued. 

Knowledge: Public Financial

Management (PFM) Multi
Donor Trust Fund (PFM

management information 

MDTF);

system for national government
provides reliable, timely

information on all stages of
budget execution, including
commitments, in readiness for

move to accrual accounting in

2015

The public procurement 

system ofpcuent 
capacity of procurement 
practitioners; collusion and 

corrupt practices in the

bidding process continue to 
exist, causing leakages and 
losses in the system 

Increasing demand for 
improved quality, timeliness
and responsiveness of data

Baseline: 63% of Ministries and 
Agencies in Financial Statement. 

Target: 85% of Ministries and 
Agencies in Financial Statement for 
FY2013 

3. Implement new Financial 
Management Information System in 
all 177 Treasury Local Offices 

49

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

availability are hampered by
poor ICT infrastructure and
data management and
inefficient business processes

PRO-JOBS - Enhancing Skills and Technology, and Improving Social Protection

Education

Provide good quality 
education to all 
Indonesians and to 
produce a smart and 
competitive workforce. 
Enhance research and 
development, science 

and technology 

Despite significant increases 
in education spending the 
quality of education remains 
low 

Low teacher competency 

Inefficientdlcation 

ofndn 

i education spending 

Weak management of 

education at the district and 

school level under incomplete 
decentralization framework 
pubc2. 
een 
Weak links betweenresource 
education sector and labor
market including skill 
mismatches and weak firm 

1. Improved education quality and 
performance of teachers; Increased 
number of basic education teachers 
meets academic qualification 
mandated by the Teacher Law 

Baseline (2010): 41% of teachers in 

- Increase in the number of pre- 
service teacher training 
programs accredited 

- Nationwide implementation of 
revised policies, plans and 
procedures for continuing 

primary and junior secondary 

education and career 

Financing: BOS-KITA 11,
BERMUTU; Indonesia
Higher Education for
Relevance and Efficiency
(IMHERE); Research and
Innovation in Science and
Technology Project (RISET);

Sustainable Management of

Agricultural Research and
Technology Dissemination

I degree or more 

Target: 70% of primary and junior 

secondary school teachers hold Si1 

degree or more. 

Improved public R&D human 
capacity. 

development of teachers 
- Development of a skills 

training fund supported by 

Project (SMARTD)

govemment and the private 
sector
- Guidelines for district level 
performance and eqnity based 

Knowledge: The Role of

Polic akng: 

ased

Teach R 

ring

Target: Masters or PhD degree 
holders in public research institutes 
(LPNK) increases from 15% to 17% 

school grants developed 

Indonesia; Education PER;
Indonesian School Grants
Program Review; Local

50

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

education schools revised 

Governance Capacity

LPNK institutional assessments 

completed and reform milestones set 

based training 

Indonesia ranks poorly on 
competitiveness and 
knowledge economy indices 

Research and Development 
(R&D) outputs remain low 
compared to other countries 

in the region 

-Strengthened capacity of 
RISTEK management to 
enhance the quality and 

relevance of strategic industry- 

research consortium funding 

-A new competitive research

funding system for RISTEK 

e 

in 

saccess 

Assessment Survey; Survey

Video Study; Projections and
assessment of skills demand;
Higher education studies on

finding modalities and labor

market linkages,
Infrastructure assessment,

asrneadeut 

n

to higher education;

TA on skills development

find; Support for 2015 five
year development;
Strengthening Public
Financing of Indonesias
Knowledge Sector; Building
Innovation Capacity in Clean
Energy in Indonesia.

Knowledge: Advisory
services to Bappenas, DJSN
(national social security

council), the Ministry of

Social Insurance

Provide universal 
coverage of social 
insurance to protect 

Only 5000 of the population 
currently has health insurance 
and only about 1200 of the 

1. Conversion of Jamsostek to a 
not-for-profit institution that can 
administer the SJSN pension and old 

- Roadmap covering SJSN 
pension and old age savings 
programs completed 

workers and the poor 

population has any kind of 

age savings programs 

from adverse life events 

pension, old age savings, 

2. Expand membership and improve 

-Design and financing strategy, 

Labor, the Ministry of

or external shocks 

through the five 

death benefit or work 

accident insurance, 

national socialand 
insurance (SI) programs Complexity of assuring fiscal 

outlined in the Si SN 

(national social security 

sustainability including 

proper investment of program

cincluding 

investment policy, for Finance and others

formal and informal sectors, 

SSvNg plnfiazePension and old agesaig

-Legal and organizational 

roadmap

transformation of Jamsostek to 

Strategy and background

quaiy

51

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

system) Law and the 
BPJS (national social 

assets 
Need to quickly transform the 

BPJS Employment completed 
-Membership expansion and 

papers on various aspects of
the design, financing and

contribution collection strategy

-BPJS Employment begins 
administration of current PT 
Jamsostek benefit programs for 
the current covered group

-Mpalternatives 

age savings programs,

including Jamsostek
institutional transformation,
membership expansion and
contribution collection

Bagond papers on
itrioalperec 

N

Computer modeling and

analysis of program design
and costs;

Development of Policy Notes

on various aspects of SJSN

security administrators)adiittonfpesnad
Law, covering all 
prcse 
ftecmltdold 
processes of thecoped

legal structure and business 

formal and informal 
sector workers. 

administrators 

Complexity of expanding 
membership and collecting 
contributions from the formal 
and informal sectors and 
properly tracking those 
contributions over time

Lack of government capacity 

and experience with

managingethe rio 
programs.

52

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

Pro-Poor - Promoting Communities, Protecting the Vulnerable and Improving Health Outcomes

Poverty Targeting

Reduce absolute 
poverty and improve 
income distribution 
through social 

protection that is based 
poton th 
a 
i 
t 

onproject; 
community 
empowerment and 
expansion of economic 
opportunities of the low 
income population. 
From 12% poverty in 
2012, Government is 
targeting for single 
digits by 2014. 

Develonpmeprtnites

Around 110 million people 
still live under US$2 a day 
(Bank estimate); large 
number of urban and rural 

po u olc ficm
ande inardue 
prakoduictive 

employment opportunities; 
lack of quality service 
deliveiy to poor people; 
access to early childhood 
education remains low, 
particularly for the poor; wide 
regional disparities 
(particularly, easteml 
provinces); poor are 
vulnerable to shocks such as

food price increases, natural 
disasters 

1. National shock monitoring 
system developed and operational. 

units using the national registry of 

-Design and protocols for shock Financing: INSTANSI DPL;
monitoring system are 
ECED STATCAP-CERDAS
developed
-Data sharing agreements are 

supporting Household shock

poor and vulnerable households to 

in place 

Target: 4 programs by 2015 

3. Increased participation in ECED 
services particularly for the poor 

-Memoranda of Understanding 
(MOUs) in place with 
implementing agencies 
agreeing to use the national 
registry 

Basele 

1 

4 

o-y 

Target: 75% 

-Conditional cash transfer 
program (PKH) expansion
strategy is approved

Number of poor households
receiving conditional cash

transfers increased from

720,000 households (20 10)

monitoring and response

integration of
poverty reduction programs;
social assistance reform;
PNPM Rural Economic
Impact Simulation; Village
Infrastructure Census;
Incidence of Benefits of
Households

Community

ack Conmunity Development 

1. 2.5m conmunity members 

Improved local-level 

through the PNPM program 

participate directly in meetings; 80% 

(sub-districts and 

has been expanded to reach 

beneficiaries feel that project 

villages) govemance, 

over 60,000 villages. Impact 

investments reflected their needs; 
>50% of poorest communities

-CSOs engaged in improving 
access to services, livelihoods 

and rights of marginalized 

groups (target: 90 CSOs) 

Financing: PNPM Rural 11-
IV; PSF MDTF; JSDF; KDP

Sulawesi; Justice for the

Poor; CPDA

53

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

quality of service 
delivery and socio- 
economic conditions in 
rural areas through 
wider implementation 
of poverty reduction 
and community 
empowerment programs 
and the provision of 
investment resources to 
support proposals 
developed by 
communities, using a 
participatory planning 
process. 

Enhance access to 
health and education 
services among the poor 

Food Security and
Rural Development

Increase food security 
and continue the 

revitalization of
agriculture to enhance 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

evaluation shows it to be an 
effective program, but it 

needs to consolidate program 
management, enhance 
participation, particularly by 
women and marginalized 
groups. 

involved in planning and decision- 

making meetings; 35% of villages 
provided feedback on health and 
education services) 

decision-making (target: 50% of 

meetings; 30% of women in 

-Increasing provision of 
holistic and integrated ECED 
services for the poor 

3. Improved community access to 
and utilization of health and 
education services in the targeted 
areas. 

Targets: >80%o of pregnant women 

receiving 4 prenatal care visit; 800
of children under 5 weighed
monthly; 5000 of pregnant women
attending nutrition counseling
session; 50k of caregivers of
children under 2 attending nutrition
counseling session; 700 junior
secondary enrollment rate

Knowledge: PNPM Rural
Economic Impact Simulation;
Village Infrastructure Census;
Incidence of Benefits of
Households; Local Level
Institutions 111; Community
Management of Development
Portfolio; Revolving Loan
Fund Study; Governance
Review; Integrated MIS for
PNPM; TA to PokJa
Pengendali, Bappenas,
KPDT; TA to Aceh Local
Government; Papua
analytical work; PNPM Rural

Sentinel

The policy of rice self- 
sufficiency limits the amount 

1. Modernized client and market 
oriented marketing and extension 

-l0% of IAARD's research 
and management staff 

Financing: Farmer
Empowerment through

of resources available for 

services accessible by smallholders. 

undertakes advanced training in Agricultural Technology and

54

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

Baseline: less than 100 of farmers 

accredited foreign institutions 

Information (FEATI)

farm diversification and 
agricultural development 

systems. 

access technology and market 

information through ICT. 

Limited access to technology 
and marketing services due to 

2. Increased value addition in 
smallholder-based agricultural export 

Sustainable Management of

-MoT launches Action Plans 

enhancing the sustainability 
and competitiveness of at least 
one small-holder based 

Agricultural Research and

Technology Dissemination
Project (SMART-D); Water
Resources and Irrigation

self-reliance in food, 
increase the 

competitiveness of
aculettrales pouts 

agriculturalfor 
increase the income 
level of farmers, and 

conserve environment
cosreevrnet 

and natural resources

Reuedpnec 

weak capacity of local and 

n 

national government R&D 

Reduce dependence on 
and extension services 
imports for staple foods 
prevents the emergence of 
while diversifying 
fnd oodirgaon 
viable agribusiness 
consumptionenterprises 
and farm 

Improve income of 
smallholders and 
expand opportunities 
for nonfarm income 
activities, 

toadisoycervcesworgi

diversification, 
Commodities are exported 
with limited domestic value 
addition and issues of quality, 
market positioning, and 

wationa reouresmmaement&

value chains (e.g. coffee, cocoa, and 
tea) coupled with higher productivity 

and more efficient marketing 
systems. Baseline: Regulatory and 
policy framework of value chains of 
smallholder-based exportable 
Taret:Watrdecuityimpovd 
commodities is weak with low 
capacity of support systems. 
3. Improved water resource and 
irrigation and planning and 
coordination mechanisms 

beverage crop (e.g. coffee, 
cocoa, or tea) 

-The ornent issea 
serice 

for modernization of irrigation 
management. 

HealntshheOutcomcees
competitiveness in the value 

established. 

chains persist. 

Mechanisms to promote 

at least 50 irrigation Districts. 

improved service provision 
and planning in irrigation and

wate 

not yet operational.

reourcs 

mnageentlivelihoods 

Sco 
gt 
a
Operational Improvement;

IFC investments in
agribusiness companies with
a view to enhance food
security or to provide

sustainable livelihoods to
poor farmers
Knowledge: TA on Food
Security to MoA ; TA to the
MoPW on irrigation

management modernization

and policy development IFC

saioyrinab 

es alm oin

sustainable

for outgrowers

Improved population 

High out-of-pocket spending 

1. Quality assurance policies 

health outcomes, 
including improvements 
in life expectancy and 

for health, 
Low and variable levels, 
distribution and supply of 

governing the education of health 
professionals with establishment of 
independent National Accreditation 

-Comprehensive analysis of 

supply side availability and 

readiness. 
-Study of human resources for 
health (HRH) policies 

Financing: Health

Professionals Education

Quality; Solid Waste
Improvement in Regional
and Metropolitan Cities;

55

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

reductions in maternal 
mortality and 

malnutrition to meet
MD ares y205 

MDGtrts by 2015 

health services, especially in 
poor and rural areas. 

Agency, and National Agency for 
Competency; accreditation of 7 

completed 
-Analysis of Jampersal 

Indonesia Water and
Sanitation Investment;

Rising HIV/AIDS epidemic, 

especially in select provinces 

health professional schools. 

2. 7 million people provided with 

Jakesmas policies to achieve 

UHC of maternal health care. 

PAMSIMAS; Urban Water

Supply & Sanitation IF;

Slow reduction in maternal 

Access to safe water 
andand 
factor in the health and mortality, despite relatively 
overall 
ao 
attendance and institutional 
Indonesians and 
deliveries 

high levels of skilled birth 

fo rnl tefeat and 

piped water supply and 3.4 million 

peop 

poded withIMpv 

sntio ude PA 

IM S-Economic 

-Second Integrated Biological 
Behavioral Survey (IBBS) 
in Papua provinces. 

analysis of 

HIV/AIDS programs 
-Analysis of multisectoral 

GPOBA Jakarta and
Surabaya; WASAP; IFC
Investments in private sector

water and sanitation

companies
Knowledge: Policy dialogue

expanding coverage is a
priority 

Chronic malnutrition and 
stunting rates 

Acces t sae wterhas-Financing 

stagnath 
sine 2at 
sinassistance 
than half the population, in 

es 

particular urban coverage 

from 60 percent to about 50 

percent by 2009 

Access to sanitary facilities 
significantly lower than other 

comparable countries in the 

region 

56

determinants of double burden 
of malnutrition (DBM). 
facility established 

to support PDAM technical 
and investments 

on universal health coverage;
supply side availability and
readiness assessment; HRH

study; HIV/AIDS IBBS
survey; HIV/AIDS economic
analysis; DBM analysis.

-National expansion of the total Total Sanitation and

sanitation and sanitation 

marketing (TSSM) 
programmatic approach to 
sanitation into a national 

program targeting 20,000 

villages 

Sanitation Marketing, Urban

Wastewater Management;
Surabaya water policy advice;
WASAP; Water and

Sanitation Financing

Program; Political Economy

of Water Tariffs; Assessment
for Water Financing Facility;
Lampung water project TAs.
IFC advisory services for
structuring water sector PPP
projects

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

Pro-Green - Ensuring Sustainable Development and Improving Disaster Resilience

Environment, Natural
Resources and
Climate Change

Deforestation, peat buming, 
habitat loss; globally 
significant emissions: forests 
and land use change. 

Conservation and 
utilization of the natural 
environment that 
supports sustainable 
economic growth and 
increased welfare of the 
Fragmented, overlapping and 
people, accompanied by decentralized land use 
the control and
management o prer 

manage forest and peat lands 

risks, in order to prepare

for the expected 
impacts of climate 
change. 

GHG emission 
reduction of 26% by 
2020. 

Promote renewable 

enrysucsa at 

energy surce 
ofpesustaiae 

development, especially the 

poor; vulnerability in 
agriculture, water
management, health, 

preparedness, resilience 

Great renewable energy 

potential relatively untapped 
due to need for improved 
pricing and investment 

climate incentives 

F 

rmetInvestment 
e ors aet 
growing source of emissions, 
mainly from coal based 

1. Fund for REDD established with 
legal, technical and managerial 
capacity to support and finance 
Indonesia's National REDD+ 
Strategy 

2. Phase III of COREMAP 

and marine protection. 

Financing: Chiller Energy

-Green Growth Support Facility Effic 
t, HCFC
established 
Phase Out Plan; Geothermal
investment projects;
Halmahera Conservation
Project; COREMAP 111,
Sumatra Habitat
- Geothermal investments under Conservation with GEF; IFC

-Increased financing for 
terrestrial biodiversity 

Sustainable Energy Finance -

either directly by IFC or
through intermediaries; and
sustainable forestry!

agribusiness projects

Knowledge: Policy dialogue

and TA on green economy

issues; Green Growth Support

Facility; AAA on fisheries

management and
coral/marine ecosystem
values; Forest Carbon

Partnership Facility; Forest
Program,
Indonesia Forest and Climate
Trust Fund; AAA on Benefit
Sharing, Drivers of

57

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

power generation 

Lack of coordination of 
policies and incentives for 
environmental improvement 
and climate change 
mitigation; weak economic 
incentives; policy distortions 

Limited incentives for firms 
to develop forest plantation 
and climate change mitigation 
program on degraded 
grasslands and to apply best
practices because of high 
costs and risks, as well as 
lack of knowledge and 
experience in blending forest- 
based climate change 
mitigation and commercial 
forestry investment 

58

Deforestation; Support UKP4

on REDD/FREDDI; program

support for REDD Agency
and Financing Mechanism;
Inputs to ongoing Partnership
for Market Readiness, GEF V
pipeline; policy dialogue and
TA; Carbon finance, landfill

gas, and Persistent Organic
Pollutants control (POPs)

Buildng; Gil Suport
onilan G mapp, tnr

and customary land Rights
Outreach to Civil Society &
Customary Peoples, National
Indigenous Peoples' Alliance
of the Archipelago (AMAN)
JSDF Grant; Capacity
building with CSOs;

IFC advisory services in areas

of clean energy development,
sustainable energy finance,
green banking, sustainable
forestry! agribusiness, green
building development etc.

Indonesia's Longer-term 
Objectives 

Issues and Obstacles 

Development Results To Which the 
WBG Will Contribute 

Intermediate Indicative 
Development Milestones

WBG Modes of Engagement

Reduction (DRR); new 
Disaster Management 
Agency structure may not 

the capacity to 

DRR 

measures (e.g., safer schools,
resilient villages and urban wards 
with DRR plan and investment 

program) that can be scaled up and 

replicated nationally 

water and waste management 
Aceh/Nias, Yogyakarta and
programs, agricultural and rural Central Java; Zero Contingent

development programs 

-Gol led disaster fund (IMDFF 

and Disaster Mitigation

Components in WINRIP and

Financing: Multi Donor

Aceh and Nias

(MDF), Java Reconstruction
Fund (JRF), PNPM Support

Facility (PSF) in support of
dstrrcvryi

Enhance capabilities tofor 
improve disaster risk 
preparedness, 

Duplication of efforts due to 
the plethora of development 

miiainmaue, 
partners in Disaster Risk 
mitigation measures,drvndvlpetporm, 

1. Create evidence-based examples 
of practical and concrete disaster and 

climate risk reduction and adaptation 

resilience issues into urban 

development, community 

Disaster Risk
Management 

and post-disaster 
recovery and 
reconstruction 

reposvees ohave 

responsivenesstinabity 

stre g2.e 

Comm nit-baedbsttlmen 

rec oftunincor poratetaue 
thoermen prora 

DR) as new mechanism to 

institutionalize donor support 

Gove nmen pro ramstudy/m 

P P 

ra I

Knowledge: GFDRR
National risk assessment

apping as the basis

for Gol's National Disaster

Management Plan 2009-20 14

and National Action Plan for

DRR 2009-2014.;lndonesia

Disaster Risk Financing
Study and policy dialogue,
Capacity Building module on
PDNA and Post Disaster

Recovery; IFC Advisory

services for Global Index
Insurance products

59

Annex 2: Indonesia: CPS (FYO9-12) Completion Report

October 31, 2012

Date of CPS: Sep 11, 2008 (Report No. 44845- IND)
Date of Progress Report: Feb 8, 2011 (Report No. 59530-ID)
Period Covered by the CPS Completion Report: FY09-12

Summary of Evaluation Ratings

Program Performance

Indonesia made important progress putting into place and initiating implementation of the policies
and programs needed to reach the objectives of the Medium Term Development Plan (2010-2014),
particularly in regard to the areas identified for World Bank Group (WBG) engagement in the
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY09-12. These include macroeconomic management and
strengthening the financial sector, particularly in the face of the global financial crisis, facilitating
financial 
inclusion, enhancing 
the investment climate, reactivating 
infrastructure 
investment,
increasing access to education, targeting poverty programs, expanding successful community
development programs, and initiating responses to climate change. 
Indeed, Indonesia used its new
found voice in the G20 as an international advocate in areas such as financial inclusion, climate
change, food security and social safety nets.

During the CPS period, GDP growth declined to 4.6 percent in 2009, from the 6 percent achieved in
2008, but subsequently recovered to 6.1 percent in 2010 and 6.5 percent in 201, with current
estimates of 6.1 percent for 2012. The fiscal deficit came in below target in 2009-2011 and, with
strong GDP growth, contributed to the downward trajectory of government debt, which has fallen
below 25 percent of GDP. Several of Indonesia's sovereign ratings are back to investment grade for
the first time since 1997. Extreme poverty was reduced from 15.4 percent in 2008 to 12.4 percent in
2011. Despite this, 40 percent of the population remains close to the poverty line and vulnerable to
shocks. Growth has been less equitable than it might otherwise been. 
Indonesia was also less
successful in implementing its strategy to reduce fuel subsidies and shift these budget outlays to
social and infrastructure programs. The quality of public spending for both national and sub-national
roads remains poor and promoting private investment in infrastructure is a major challenge.

WBG Performance

Based on an assessment of strategy design and program implementation at the end of the CPS period,
the Bank's performance is rated as satisfactory in supporting the Government to achieve the expected
development results. The CPS strategy was appropriate to country priorities and goals and was
selectively focused. Close alignment with the Government's reform agenda, synergies with an active
IFC program and far-ranging collaboration with other development donors supported a strong WBG
performance during the CPS period. At the same time, long standing and deep engagements allowed
the WBG to respond quickly to emerging challenges, most significantly to help shield Indonesia from
shocks associated from the global financial crisis and economic downturn.

A self-evaluation of the CPS Results Matrix (Table 1) outlines the program of activities that
supported the CPS and assesses development results.

60

I. 

Introduction

1. 
This Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report (CPSCR) reviews the implementation
and effectiveness of the World Bank Group's (WBG) Country Partnership Strategy for Indonesia for
FY09-12 (Report No. 44845-IND) approved on September 11, 2008. A CPS Progress Report
(CPSPR) was completed on February 8, 2011 (Report No. 59530-ID).

A. 

Indonesia's Economic and Social Background

2. 
At the time of CPS preparation in 2008, Indonesia had made much progress in social and
economic terms since the Asia crisis a decade before. Its real GDP had been growing at 5 to 6
percent annually since 2002. Prudent fiscal management and a strategy of fiscal consolidation had
led to a significant reduction in government debt levels. Inflation was largely kept under control and
Indonesia had a strong balance of payments, with record exports. Public investment, while still low
by historic standards had been steadily increased during the previous five years. Poverty had declined
and public services were receiving additional resources, including 
through community-driven
development programs.

3. 
While Indonesia was doing well it was felt that it could be doing far better across the areas of
poverty reduction, service delivery and governance. In 2007, nearly half of Indonesia's population
was living on 1.5 times the national poverty line or less. still either poor or had per-capita
consumption levels of less than one-third above the national poverty line. Employment growth was
slower than population growth. Public services were inadequate for a middle-income economy.
Many regions, especially in eastern Indonesia were lagging behind and Indonesia was doing
particularly poorly in a number of health and infrastructure related indicators.

4. 
Indonesia was in the midst of initiating the second phase of the National Long-Term
Development Plan (2005-25) with the formulation of the National Medium-Term Development Plan
(RPJMN) for the period 2010-14. The eleven development priorities included: bureaucracy and
governance reform, education, health, poverty alleviation, food security, infrastructure, investment
and business climate, energy, environment and disaster management, least developed, frontier, outer,
and post-conflict areas, and culture, creativity, and technological innovation.

B. 

World Bank Program of Support

5. 
The CPS for FY2009-12 marked the beginning of Indonesia's re-emergence as a confident
middle-income country that had graduated from IDA, and was enjoying a rising regional and global
standing, including membership in the G20. With Indonesia demanding dependable and timely
support for its own development priorities and poverty-reduction agenda, the CPS sought to enable
the World Bank Group to better respond in helping to meet development challenges.

6. 
Notwithstanding these achievements, the CPS noted that this next phase of its development
was likely to be even more challenging for Indonesia because the country was entering into a period
of second generation reforms focusing on institutional 
transformation 
to promote economic
development and social welfare. Failure to begin addressing these reforms ran the risk of falling into
the middle-income trap - squeezed between the innovations of high-income countries and the low
labor cost of low-income countries. The consequences of this could include stagnant poverty levels,
the depletion of natural resources and increased threats to social cohesion.

61

7. 
The CPS outlined a partnership based on: support to the Government's own development
strategies, policy objectives and priority programs; strengthening and using Indonesia's own systems
and procedures; while continuing to put a strong emphasis on fiduciary controls, accountability and
technical excellence; making effective use of existing capacities and harmonizing support; and
supporting efforts to strengthen the consolidation and alignment of resources. The WBG sought to
partner on investing in institutions to enhance governance by strengthening accountability and
capacity.

8. 
In meeting these challenges Indonesia's main constraint was not a lack of financial resources
but the need for effective and accountable institutions to translate available resources into better
development outcomes. This focus also recognizes that WBG financing now represents such a small
share of Indonesia's national budget that it can only make a demonstrable impact if it leverages a
much larger share of Indonesia's own public spending or private investment.

9. 
The program of engagement included: financing priority public programs and supporting
private sector investments; providing flexible, on-demand services, quick-response policy notes, in-
depth analytical and knowledge work, and advisory and technical assistance, and; continuing to seek
opportunities to work together with other development partners to better align policy, analytic and
financial support with government-led strategies and priorities.

10. 
The CPS also acknowledged that the share of the Banks' financial contribution to Indonesia's
development was expected to decline and that knowledge partnerships would increasingly be more
important. Accordingly, the WBG would continue to build on its program of analytical and advisory
services, and align this program with core engagements and support strengthening of institutions and
country systems. Trust Funds were expected to be an integral part of the program, and increasingly
aligned with the core engagements, as well as enhancing harmonization and alignment of funding
from development partners behind core government programs.

II. 

CPS Program Performance

Overall the CPS program performance is rated satisfactory as the program achieved good progress
in the engagement areas evaluated below.

A. 

Overview and Principles of Engagement

11. 
The CPS charted a program of engagement in five core areas overlaying two cross-cutting
platforms based on the WBG's potential to provide value added in support of Indonesian priorities.
These included private sector development, infrastructure, community development and social
protection, education, and environmental sustainability and disaster mitigation. The cross-cutting
engagements were at the national and sub-national levels focusing on supporting the government
institutions and systems. Improved governance was to be promoted through deepening engagements
with core central and local government institutions and partnering around core Indonesian programs
and with key public accountability institutions. Recognizing that the engagement areas were at
different levels of maturity as reflected in the depth of the dialogue, the types of activities supported
and the level of influence to support expected development outcomes, sub-national institutions,
infrastructure and the environment were identified as emerging areas where outcomes and activities
would be better defined during implementation.

62

B. 

Progress by Areas of Engagement

B.1. 

Cross-Cutting Engagement Area 1: Central Government Institutions and Systems

12. 
The engagement supported Gol in its longer-term efforts to strengthen central government
institutions and systems to enhance public financial management and governance to increase the
development impact of priority budget expenditures. For the CPS period in particular, the Bank
sought to Bank expected to support the following outcomes: 
improved results orientation in the
budget process; timely and reliable financial reporting through effective operationalization of the
Single Treasury Account (TSA); improved tax administration; and improved quality and timeliness
of key statistics produced by BPS (the National Statistic Agency), e.g., national accounts, poverty
data.

13. 
The engagement benefited from a longstanding and deep relationship with a full array of
coordinated Bank instruments and collaboration with development partners. The centerpiece was a
continuing Development Policy Loan series (DPLs 5-8), co-financed by Japan (JICA) and the ADB,
underpinned by an important program of knowledge services, which helped to reinforce and broaden
ownership and commitment towards the achievement of reform milestones. 
Investment lending
complemented the DPLs. The Government Financial Management and Revenue Administration
Project (GFMRAP), the Project for Indonesian Tax Administration Reform (PINTAR) and the
Statistical Capacity Building-Change and Reform for the Development of Statistics (STATCAP-
CERDAS), provided technical implementation support and investment. The substantial program of
knowledge services and implementation support was funded by trust funds in collaboration with
other donors, in particular the Public Financial Management - MDTF, which channeled resources to
support critical activities and brought together key development partners, the EC, the Governments
of the Netherlands and of Switzerland, and the Bank.

14. 
The development results that the Bank expected to influence were only partially achieved.
The Government released its medium term development plan (RPJMN) in October 2009 specifying
measurable results and targets for 2010-2014 and beginning in 2011 the annual budget has been more
strongly tied to the planning process. However, results-based budgeting is only being slowly
introduced. The TSA has been extended to all accounts and cash forecasting capacity has been
established, but there is no evidence to show it has improved line ministry cash planning. Updated
PEFA figures are not available, but a significant reduction in qualified audits suggests important
improvement in internal controls and internal and external audit systems. 
Improvements in tax
administration have seen the number of registered taxpayers increase, but procurement delays under
PINTAR to support the tax administration information system limits has limited achievements in
other areas. With Bank support a new procurement agency was established and now issues national
standard bidding documents. While the Bank-financed STA TCAP-CERDAS was only recently
approved and expected improvement have yet to materialize.

15. 
The Gol's goals require a major institutional change over a longer period and Bank support
will continue. More advanced performance-orientated reforms remain works in progress. For
example, the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) and performance based budgeting (PBB)
have only recently been introduced and will require considerable refinement over the next few years.
There is an ongoing capacity building effort to strengthen internal and external audit systems and the
computerized GFMRAP that will strengthen financial management capabilities is to be deployed in
2012, and accrual accounting is due to be introduced in the public sector in 2015. Roll-out of the tax

63

administration information system is now expected to be completed by 2015. An e-procurement
system now in place is expected to support detection leading to sanctions for collusion.

16. 
While not included as specific development outcome targets in the CPS, the Bank supported
Indonesia's efforts to improve governance and anti-corruption. Along with efforts to increase
transparency and efficiency in public financial management, noted above, the Bank supported
increased transparency and efficiency, including participatory mechanisms, in programs for public
service delivery with sub-nationals (DAK), community-driven development (PNPM) and education
(BOS). At the same time, IFC is promoting enhanced standards of governance in the private sector
and launched a new corporate governance advisory service.

17. 
Beyond the support for development results defined when the CPS was formulated, the Bank
was able to respond to additional Gol requests to support the Central Government with unanticipated
lending and knowledge services in a number of crucial areas, including contingency financing in the
face of the rapidly deteriorating global financial situation, and knowledge services to enhance
Indonesia's influence on the global development agenda, respond to spikes in food prices, and
develop a long-term plan to accelerate growth and increase infrastructure 
investment through
enhanced connectivity.

18. 
The global financial crisis was just beginning to manifest itself at the time of CPS
preparation. While the baseline case indicated a small dip in growth from 6.3 percent in 2007 to an
expected 6.0 in 2008, it was noted that external developments would determine the degree to which
Indonesia's growth moderates in 2008 and the speed of recovery in 2009. A prolonged downside
was noted as a risk, but this was somewhat mitigated by the fact that Indonesia was less exposed to
external shocks than other economies in the region. 
Its trade share was relatively small even
accounting for its size, at about 50 percent of GDP, and the structure and destination of Indonesia's
exports was thought to also help protect its external sector. Firms largely finance their investment
through retained earnings. The banking sector was in sound shape and appeared relatively unexposed
to developments in troubled financial markets elsewhere.

19. 
The Government was to seek support from the Bank when in late 2008 and early 2009 there
was a sharp increase in borrowing costs. The Bank responded quickly and presented in early March
2009 the innovative Public Expenditure Support Facility DPL-DDO of $2 billion. Parallel financing
from the Australian Government, Asian Development Bank (ADB) and Japan (JICA) made for a
total package of $5.5 billion. The operation, which closed in December 2010, provided confidence to
the markets, with back-up financing arrangements to sustain public expenditures, and promoted
measures to strengthen the domestic financial sector. Subsequently, with the increased risks
stemming from the Eurozone crisis, a follow-up program with the same development partners of
US$5.5 billion was provided under the PERISAI (Program for Economic Resilience, Investment and
Social Assistance in Indonesia) DPL-DDO in May 2012. The Bank's macroeconomic monitoring
was scaled up and produced the Indonesia Economic Quarterly with wide and anticipated
dissemination and support was provided, with financing by the Australian Government, to build the
capacity of the Fiscal Policy Office for macro monitoring and forecasting and evidenced-based
macro and fiscal policy analysis.

20. 
Through Multi-donor Facility for Trade and Investment Climate (MDFTIC), WBG
responded to Gol requests to strengthen inter-agency coordination for Indonesia's chairmanship in
ASEAN Economic Ministers (AEM) meeting in 2012 and the G20 forum. The Bank played
important role in facilitating knowledge sharing across key economic agencies that helped develop
agenda to strengthen process of regional economic integration by promoting inclusive development

64

in the AEM meeting in 2012. In the next CPS the Bank is likely to develop a program for Gol to
strengthen domestic reform agenda, such as in trade and investment, as follow up from Indonesia's
chairmanship and participation in ASEAN and APEC.

21. 
In collaboration with other donors, Bank support for the Government's food security
concerns include knowledge services and proposed development policy lending aimed at facilitating
rice import mechanisms and to enable the Government to revitalize the agriculture reform agenda.
These include key policy and institutional reforms in the areas of food security, water resources
management, agricultural research, innovation and technology dissemination, which, in turn, would
be complemented by the Bank's portfolio of investment operations. A technical assistance program
funded with a grant from the Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFRP) is assisting the Gol to
identify future policy directions to enable it to achieve the goals related to food security options on
issues such as challenges of food security in the global context, market prospects for food
commodities, the stabilization of domestic prices and the role of social safety nets in mitigating the
impact of high food prices. This has supported an ongoing dialogue on food policy reforms with the
Ministries of Agriculture and Trade in the development of the proposed Indonesia Food Security
Program DPL, which would target rice import mechanisms and support the Government in to
revitalizing the agriculture reform agenda.

22. 
Significant and unanticipated Gol request for the Bank's knowledge and convening support
was also made to help it formulate a Master Plan for "Acceleration and Expansion of Indonesia 's
Economic Development 2011-2025" (MP3EI) as Indonesia's new, longer term strategy to become an
industrialized economy. The Bank played an important role in helping the Gol focus on enhancing
connectivity to accelerate growth and improve equity, including extensive support to clarify the
objectives of the connectivity framework using the WDR 2009 on Reshaping Economic Geography
and to identify a detailed plan of action in priority areas. A Bank study identified priorities with a
focus on intra-island, inter-island and international connectivity issues (Connecting Indonesia: A
Framework for Action). On logistics, the Bank hosted a series of roundtables with stakeholders to
discuss various facets of connectivity issues. The Bank has also undertaken a study on Indonesia's
Logistics Performance Index, and a study of regulatory reform to support the upgrading of logistics
service providers, as well as developing a monitoring system to track the implementation of the
national logistics blueprint. The Bank has also helped Gol to identify quick wins in improving
logistics performances in seaports. In the next CPS period, the Bank is likely to develop a
programmatic DPL services for connectivity to further support Gol efforts.

B.2. Cross-Cutting Engagement Area 2: Sub-national Government Institutions and Systems

23. 
Indonesia launched the "big bang" decentralization reform in January 2001, which has led to
approximately 500 sub-national governments now managing close to 35 percent of public spending
and being responsible for the vast majority of public services. However, the level and quality of
spending at the sub-national level is an issue, as are the division of authority and responsibility at the
central ministerial level and the incentive structure of the fiscal transfer system. As such, Gol's
longer term objective is to strengthen sub-national government institutions to improve accountability
and increase the level and impact of public spending on service delivery.

24. 
This was identified in the CPS as an emerging engagement, and development outcome targets
were defined broadly to support improvements in local government capacity for planning, budgeting
and delivering public services. At the time of the Progress Note, they were adjusted to respond to
opportunities 
to support an improved fiscal decentralization 
framework with incentives 
for

65

accountability by facilitating a coordinated development partner effort and focusing on specific
activities to enhance incentives for accountability. As well, specific targets were added to enhance
sub-national infrastructure financing and spending.

25. 

A coordinated effort to improve the fiscal decentralization framework was achieved. The
multi-donor Decentralization Support Facility (DSF), a trust fund largely supported by UKAID,
provided the means for a harmonized approach among donors to support decentralization 
in
Indonesia. 
Progress was achieved in improving coordination across Bappenas (Ministry of
Planning), Ministry of Home Affairs, and Ministry of Finance on the decentralization agenda, and
included representatives of local government associations. The DSF also has produced a number of
knowledge products including studies on territorial reform, sub-national surplus and reserves, sub-
national borrowing, sub-national capital market development, and sub-national PER. 
The
coordinated effort also resulted in a redrafting of Laws 32 and 33 of 2004 on regional autonomy and
regional finance. However, further efforts to enact legislation were not undertaken by Gol.

26. 
Development outcome targets on the local government side were also achieved. The Bank
helped develop an innovative program through the Local Government and Decentralization Project
(DAK) that uses an existing transfer program to provide incentives for outcomes and accountability
in five pilot provinces. The decision to decentralize BOS education transfers, which benefit 42
million students, was made by Gol and the Bank supported implementation. The capacity of citizens
to assess and monitor sub-national spending was improved with support from the Sub-national
Expenditure and Capacity Harmonization (PEACH). This involved a three-pronged approach to sub-
national public financial management (PFM), including collaborating with local institutions to
prepare public expenditure analysis reports, working with a local partner to design and deliver PFM
capacity building programs and engaging civil society and the media to build demand side pressure
for better budget decisions. This approach has contributed to enhanced PFM in participating
provinces, including a positive shift towards better quality spending, evidence-based planning and
budgeting, and greater transparency and accountability. PEACH has been implemented in 11
provinces including East Java, Papua, Gorontalo, North Sulawesi, South Sulawesi, Southeast
Sulawesi and Aceh.

27. 
Development outcomes to improved infrastructure spending at the local government level
were also achieved. As a sector-wide approach, the DAK focuses on infrastructure spending with
performance incentives. The Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation Project represents a specific urban
infrastructure investment, which also pioneered regulatory changes to facilitate further financing of
infrastructure at the sub-national level. Finally, local government infrastructure spending increased
from Rp. 49.6 trillion in 2008 to an estimated Rp.56.3 trillion by 2010. Additional, knowledge
services are supporting five large municipalities with financial assessments and credit ratings with
the aim of enabling these municipalities to raise their own resources through bond issues. Jakarta is
expected to become the first Indonesian municipality to issue bonds in 2013.

B.3. 

Core Engagement Area 1: Private Sector Development

28. 
The country's long-term objective 
is enhancing 
the environment 
for private sector
development to accelerate growth and poverty reduction. Regulatory environment inhibits private
sector investment; time consuming and costly procedures to establish companies, pay taxes, and clear
imports. 
Indonesia generally ranks in the low 120s in ease of Doing Business (DB). Non bank
financial institutions and capital markets are small and access to finance limited, with few long-term
domestic financial resources. Only one-third of households have access to bank accounts. Linkages

66

among smallholders, rural businesses and commercial markets are weak. Income generating activities
are needed to alleviate poverty, particularly in rural areas where two-thirds of the poor reside.

29. 
The development outcomes that the WBG sought to influence included (i) strengthened
private and financial sector through better regulatory frameworks, improved investment climate,
stronger bank and non-bank 
financial 
institutions; 
(ii) 
improved capacity of sub-national
governments to support business operations through introduction of less cumbersome procedures for
business start-ups; (iii) improved regulatory environment and interagency coordination in the
development of investment policies; (iv) strengthened institutional structure and capacity of the
Ministry of Trade to enable it to develop and implement more effective trade policies; (v) improved
access to markets for Indonesian businesses in select commodity or industry-based sectors; and (vi)
improved market access and long-term sustainability for smallholders by connecting them to selected
firms that are seeking secure and growing supply sources.

30. 
Targets in support of development outcomes to strengthen bank and non-bank financial
institutions where achieved. The overall financial sector stability and soundness have been
maintained since 2008, and banks and non-bank financial institutions (NBFI) have continued to grow
their assets, despite the global financial crisis. In June 2012, the LDR reached 82.6 percent above the
80 percent target. The penetration of NBFI has increased further from 24 percent in 2009, to 28
percent in 2011, and loans to SMEs grew strongly at 24 percent for 2011. Further progress is likely
with a Gol issuing a Capital Market and Non Banking Financial Sector Master Plan 2010-2014,
which provides a working guideline for financial sector diversification. Based on nationwide
household survey data, 41 percent of households now have a bank account, short of the 45 percent
target, but Bank support has helped to place financial inclusion as a national priority. The Indonesia
Infrastructure Finance Facility was established with a joint WBG operation, including an IBRD loan
and IFC equity. Finally, IFC is providing support to the Credit Bureau and Moveable Collateral
registry.

31. 
These achievements were supported by the WBG. Support for strengthening the financial
sector in the face of the global financial crisis was challenged through the two development policy
DDOs and dialogue on the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), including implementation
of a crisis management protocol and capacity building. 
Support was also provided for the
development of the Capital Markets and Non-Banking Financial Sector Master Plan 2010-2014.
WBG worked to support efforts to strengthen and expand financial infrastructure for an economy that
relies heavily on micro and small enterprises, as well as expanding financing alternatives to the most
vulnerable segment of the underserved population in Indonesia, with a strong focus on women, rural
clients, and base of pyramid. A study on Access to Finance supported the development of financial
services for migrant workers, the vast majority of which are women, and facilitating small savings
accounts. More broadly, the study has helped mainstream financial inclusion and underpinned
Indonesia's effort to include financial inclusion in the G20 agenda. Additionally, the Gol has
recently launched a number of efforts to increase access to a broad array of financial services to the
poor and underserved, including preparing a National Strategy for Financial Inclusion and scaling up
its flagship People's Business Credit program as a way to expand access to credit. Additional WBG
support has been for restructuring revolving loan funds used mainly by women to fund micro-
enterprises also contributes to gender equity. IFC has created the Global Business Alliance, a group
of commercial banks from both emerging and developed markets that provide targeted products and
services to women-owned business and is expected to launch its first Advisory Services project
geared exclusively towards women business owners. In addition, IFC committed a US$75 million
gender facility and provided advisory services to enhance products and services to allow women to

67

obtain financing for their SME businesses more easily. BII launched a product specifically for
women-owned SMEs in June 2012. Over a thousand women-owned SMEs participated with a total
loan value of US$97.3 million.

32. 

To further financial sector diversification IFC is developing programs focusing on banks and
non-bank financial institutions' capacity in providing innovative finance products and services for
the micro and largely unbanked segment, such us housing microfinance, micro insurance, and retail
payments. IFC is helping financial institutions to expand services to hitherto under-banked market
segments, such as to SME's undertaking sustainable energy investments and to poor marginal
farmers. Accordingly, IFC extended debt facilities and advisory services to banks with strong
distribution capacity in the MSME sector such as Danamon and Bank Internasional Indonesia (BII).
IFC also assists PT Bank Tabungan Pensiunan Nasional Tbk (BTPN) through equity and debt
facilities to support its expansion in microfinance sector and advisory services in AgriFinance. IFC
also continues to support Bank Andara, the Indonesian microfinance wholesale bank, by providing
advisory services and capital support to be used in the expansion of the bank's distribution capacity
and to increase its leverage capacity to finance its loan expansion. A research project with Bank
Sinar Harapan Bali a subsidiary of Bank Mandiri, is piloting a sustainable business model for mobile
banking system, which could have significant benefits for unbanked populations in rural and frontier
areas. 
IFC has also offered to support Bank Indonesia in further modernizing the national credit
reporting practices and systems to improve efficiency and expand outreach, particularly to MSMEs.
Furthermore, joint IFC and Bank team continues assisting Bank Indonesia with interventions in
regulations and oversight mechanisms in Indonesia for branchless banking services, in particular
those that can support expanding financial inclusion in Indonesia. Two branchless banking products
for the underserved segment have been launched with a total of non-cash retail payments of
US$4.2m. A diagnostic study was completed on the secured transactions framework, and a project to
promote the use of movable collateral registries with the Ministry of Law and Human Rights through
its Ease of Doing Business Reforms Task Force has been developed.

33. 
Development outcome targets have been partially achieved to improve the capacity of sub-
national governments to support business operations through introduction of less cumbersome
procedures for business start-ups and licensing. 
IFC supported efforts through the Sub National
Doing Business Survey (SNDB); all 14 cities surveyed in the first round have implemented reforms
and the average time to start a business and to deal with construction permits have been reduced by
more than 25 percent since 2010, below the 50 percent target. 
Improved capacity of sub-national
governments to attract and retain investors has been achieved through the IFC Sub-national
Investment Generation Project, with investor facilitation, aftercare, policy advocacy and basic
location marketing in two provinces.

34. 
Development outcomes to improved regulatory environment and interagency coordination in
the development of investment policies have been achieved. Business start-up time improved to 45
days (2012) from 105 days (2009). The Indonesia National Single Window (INSW) opened with
improved transparency of trade regulations and procedures for import clearance. 
The National
Commission for Investment and Export Promotion (PEPI) is coordinating investment policy,
including (i) consultations on revised Investment Negative List; (ii) independent cost-benefit analysis
of FDI restrictions; and, (iii) investor problem solving, policy consultations and advice. Doing
Business (DB) ranking improved from 129 (2009) to 122 (2010).

68

35. 
These achievements were supported by the WBG. Building on synergies between IFC and
Bank teams, partnerships were established with key institutions that shape the investment climate,
and instruments included DPLs 5-8, knowledge and IFC advisory services process, including the
Business Entry Regulatory Reform Program, IFC transactions and capacity building in collaboration
with the governments of the Netherlands, New Zealand, Switzerland and Australia through the Multi-
donor Facility for Trade and Investment Climate (MDFTIC). These supported: (i) the roll out of the
Investment and Special Economic Laws; (ii) 
two major economic policy packages covering
investment regulations and institutions, customs, 
tax, infrastructure, finance, and SMEs; (iii)
streamlined business start-up with simplified procedures for establishing limited liability companies
and obtaining licenses; (iv) faster approvals for foreign investors, and; (v) capacity to monitor the
investment climate.

36. 
Targets were met in support of development outcomes to strengthen the institutional structure
and capacity of the Ministry of Trade and enable it to develop and implement more effective trade
policies. Five specialist teams have been established: Public Relations Center; Logistics Team;
Trade Fair Team; Trade Monitoring Team; Commodity Team (to support Food Stability Team at
CMEA). Activities included helping establish a credible review process for non-tariff measures;
supporting engagement with G20, ASEAN, and APEC agenda; rapid response in trade policy with
policy briefs for urgent issues; as well as the aforementioned support on food security with
knowledge services to improve the technical capacity to monitor food price data and to develop
market-based instruments to manage risks from food price shocks. 
Finally, IFC helped to develop
regulations, policies and procedures for a national warehouse receipts system, as well as provided
trade finance to support commodity exports.

37. 
Targets to improved access to markets for Indonesian businesses in select commodity or
industry-based sectors were achieved. IFC is piloting of non-collateralized lending product for cocoa
producers in Sulawesi and has identified prospective partners for coffee lending in Sumatra. Targets
were also achieved toward improving market access and long-term sustainability for smallholders.
IFC supported the establishment of Farmer Training Center (FTC) for smallholder coffee growers in
Sumatra with sponsorship from international coffee off-taker and is piloting of the FTC as direct
purchasing center.

B.4. 

Core Engagement Area 2: Infrastructure

38. 
Improving the quality of infrastructure is an essential aspect of strengthening Indonesia's
competitiveness. Continuing weak investment 
in infrastructure remains a threat to sustained
economic growth and development. At the time of preparation of the CPS, investment in public
infrastructure had recovered to some 4% of GDP (between national and local governments, SOEs
and private investors) but remains below pre-crisis levels (1997) and well behind levels seen in
China, Vietnam and Thailand. The potential of the private sector was largely untapped. As a result,
Indonesia was under-served relative to most comparator countries.

39. 
The WBG engagement aimed to support (i) increased quantity and efficiency of national and
sub-national government spending on infrastructure 
through improvements in subsidy policy,
incentives framework, and expenditure planning and budgeting; (ii) increased private investment in
infrastructure through the establishment of a fiscally sound, credible and transparent PPP framework;
and (iii) availability of bankable Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) and robust pricing formula with
improved capacity of relevant government agencies to conduct tenders and to serve as a model for
subsequent geothermal IPPs.

69

40. 
Targets were met to support increased quantity and efficiency of government spending on
infrastructure, as spending on national infrastructure increased by 52% in real terms between 2006
and 2011. The Bank supported this effort through the Infrastructure DPLs 2-4, which promoted
reforms, including land acquisition legislation to facilitate investment. As well, the Bank revitalized
its investment lending for infrastructure with nine investment operations approved during the CPS in
water, energy and roads.

41. 
Targets were partially met to increase private investment in infrastructure through the
establishment of a fiscally sound, credible and transparent PPP framework and increase private
infrastructure investment, however, only reached an estimated 0.6p percent of GDP in 2009-10. The
Bank supported 
the development of the PPP Framework under the Indonesia Infrastructure
Guarantee Fund (IIGF) through the recently approved Infrastructure Guarantee Project. IFC
advisory services were also provided and a major $2 billion energy project has been tendered.
Private infrastructure investment is estimated to have only reached 0.6% of GDP for 2009-10, below
the 0.75 percent target.

42. 
Additional WBG activities during the CPS period include IFC support for the tender of the
Umbulan Water Project, which would provide water of good quality about to about 3 million people
in East Java, by mobilizing US$100 million in private investment. IFC has financed private sector
investments in infrastructure sector, such as Wintermar (offshore shipping vehicle services), and
financial institutions such as IIF and Saratoga II, who also support investments in the sector. The
Bank is working with IIGF, the Ministry of Finance and the city of Lampung in south Sumatra on a
build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT) scheme to expand water supply coverage for an additional
200,000 people through private investment. The Bank is also helping to set up a viability gap
funding (VGF) mechanism within the Ministry of Finance.

43. 
Target were met in support of bankable Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) and robust
pricing formula, improved capacity of relevant government agencies to conduct tenders to serve as a
model for subsequent geothermal IPPs. The Bank played an advisory role in facilitating six PPAs for
geothermal fields which were signed between PLN and PGE with a price that included a premium
over coal based generation. The Bank also supported MEMR to draft and issue a new pricing policy-
a feed in tariff for geothermal generation. In addition, IFC has worked with geothermal Independent
Power Producers for potential PPPs by assessing 17 geothermal sites specifically for possible
tendering as to their development impact and likelihood of successful implementation. Moreover, it
has been providing financing assistance to private sector players, such as Medco Power, seeking to
develop clean sources of power.

B.5. Core Engagement Area 3: Community Development and Social Protection

44. 
Indonesia's long-term objectives remain to reduce poverty levels and improve equity by
improving livelihoods and service delivery, decreasing remaining pockets of vulnerabilities, and
strengthening inclusiveness. For the CPS period, the Bank sought to support outcomes to improve
socio-economic and local-level governance conditions of the urban and rural poor through wider
implementation of poverty reduction and community empowerment programs; public expenditures
made more pro-poor by reallocating savings from subsidies towards strategic targeted interventions
and successful implementation of conditional cash transfers; and improvements in the integration and
implementation of poverty and social protection programs.

70

45. 
The centerpiece of engagement has been the long term relationship providing knowledge and
financing services to the National Community Empowerment Program PNPM, which includes
collaboration with the majority of bi-lateral and multi-lateral donors in Indonesia. Extensive
knowledge services and development policy operations (DPLs5-8) with development partners
support, provided for a deep and productive engagement.

46. 
Development results were achieved 
to help 
improve socio-economic and local 
level
governance conditions of the urban and rural poor through wider implementation of poverty
reduction and community empowerment programs through the Bank-financed PNPM Urban III and
PNPM Rural II&III. In rural areas, this supported a nation-wide expansion of the program, which
now reaches 63,000 villages and 34 million people. The poverty rate improved from 16.7 percent in
2007 to 12.4% (2011). Data for 2012 are not yet available.

47. 

An impact evaluation of PNPM Rural indicates that:

* Improved household expenditure rates or improved access to economic and social services in 80
percent of the 7,800 wards.
* Infrastructure built 
is 20 percent less expensive 
approaches in 80 percent of participating wards.
* EIRRs >30 percent for major rural infrastructure types in PNPM sub-districts (EIRRs range 35-75
percent in 2011).
* 80 percent of PNPM-Rural sub-projects are functional and adequately utilized by communities (89
percent in 2011 )
* Improved HH expenditure rates and improved access to economic and social services in a
minimum of 2,500 poor sub-districts (5,020 sub-districts covered by PNPM-Rural in 2011).

than that built by non-community based

48. 
Development results for PNPM Rural were also met through the under the PNPM-Generasi
(CCT pilot) for infant immunization from 65 percent (2007) to 75 percent; assisted deliveries from
67 percent (2007) to 77 percent; primary school enrollment from 96.5 percent (2005) to 97 percent;
junior high school enrollment from 57 percent (2006) to 72 percent.

49. 
Support for gender equity, beyond maternal health, also included economic empowerment for
women in accessing revolving funds and microfinance programs, with a minimum of one third of the
proposals submitted by women; established women specific forums to enhance voice in community
matters; promoted social empowerment by requiring that half of village development proposals come
for a women's planning group and ensured that 40 percent of participants in the local coordinating
body. As well, PNPM required that one third of village facilitators be women and that women
participate on village procurement committees. As a result there are more than 50,000 procurement
committees across the county that includes women.

50. 
The target was partially achieved for public expenditures being made more pro-poor by
reducing fuel subsidies and reallocating the savings to strategic targeted interventions for the poor
and successful implementation of CCT. While spending on core pro-poor programs has increased to
4.2 percent in 2012, not including expansion of PNPM, fuel subsidies were not decreased by 50
percent to achieve this.

71

51. 
Development outcomes were achieved for the integration and implementation of poverty and
social protection programs to increase effectiveness and efficiency, and to inform policy and program
decisions through poverty data monitoring and analytics with the creation of the National Team for
the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction (a cabinet-level team headed by the Vice-President), which
was established to integrate and coordinate national poverty reduction policies and programs
(Presidential Regulation No. 15/2010). 
The target to increase benefits coverage for poor men,
women, and children was met with the creation of the national registry of 25 million poor and
vulnerable households (Pendataan Program Perlindungan Social, PPLS 11). Instructions were issued
from the National Team for implementing agencies 
to use the database 
to extract program
beneficiary lists. MOUs were signed with implementing agencies agreeing to utilize the national
registry- Jamkesmas, scholarships for the poor (BSM), Raskin and the PKH expansion.

52. 
The Bank supported these efforts through knowledge services. The Bank supported the
creation of the National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction, and collaborated with it in
the in the design and implementation of new approaches to poverty reduction. The Bank completed
two major research projects that were designed to provide an empirical foundation for key social
assistance reforms: "Protecting Poor and Vulnerable Households in Indonesia", and "Targeting Poor
and Vulnerable Households in Indonesia". This support is considered state-of-the-art in the Bank for
supporting client poverty reduction efforts, and included piloting a conditional cash transfer program
which has increased women's utilization of health services, development of a national targeting
system featuring a unified database, and supporting results-based M&E and improved accountability.

B.6. Core Engagement Area 4: Education Sector

53. 
Indonesia's longer-term objective is to improve access to basic education to meet MDGs on
primary enrollment rates and literacy targets, and improve the quality of education to enhance
competitiveness and inclusiveness. With primary enrollment and gender equity MDG targets
basically achieved, the Bank focused on enhancing equity and quality in the system. Development
outcomes supported by the Bank in the CPS included: (i) improved development of poor children
between 0 and 6 in selected provinces; (ii) increased number of basic education teachers who meet
mandated academic qualifications; (iii) improved efficiency and equity in the use of resources to
increase access to basic education; (iv) greater share of public education resources channeled to end-
users; (v) improved training programs and higher education system through institutional accreditation
and conducting regular tracer studies to gauge effectiveness of training; and (vi) improved
information and better implementation, monitoring and evaluation of education funding through the
BOS-KITA program.

54. 
Development outcomes to improve the development of poor children between the ages 0 to 6
in selected provinces were achieved with the support of the Bank-financed Early Childhood
Education and Development Project (ECED), which helped establish of 6,000 centers in 3,000 poor
villages. Early impact evaluation results show that the project has been successful at raising
participation and development outcomes of children. The target to reduce the percentage of
malnourished children aged 0-6 to 20 percent was surpassed with 18 percent of children underweight
(Riskesdas 2010).

55. 
Targets to increased number of basic education teachers meeting academic qualification
mandated by the Teacher Law were not met. While the percentage of teachers in primary and junior
secondary schools holding an SI degree or more was increased from 30 percent to 41 percent by
2010, this was below the target of 70 percent. Bank support during the CPS period included the

72

teacher quality has been supported through the BERMUTU Project, with Dutch co-financing, which
introduced ICT based distance learning programs to allow existing teachers, to upgrade their
qualifications and to improve their teaching and knowledge skills. Approximately 500,000 teachers
have enrolled in these courses.

56. 
Likewise, the target to improve efficiency and equity in the use of resources to increase
access to basic education were not met. While in 2011 a Ministry decree was issued to tackle over-
supply and poor distribution of teachers. During this CPS period, public financing of education has
increased by over 60% in real terms due largely to the implementation of a constitutional requirement
to spend a fifth of its budget on education. Indonesia has made a clear commitment to education.
The Bank's recent Education Public Expenditure Review notes that most of the additional resources
for basic education went toward teacher hiring, even when the student teacher ratio, already one of
the lowest in the world, demonstrated little positive impact on learning outcomes. Moreover,
distribution of the teaching force is highly inefficient. Attempts to address teacher recruitment and
deployment issues appear to have stalled. The technical issues and solutions are well known, but
political economy issues are hampering reform. 
In addition, a major teacher certification program
meant to provide incentives to improve quality suffers from a lack of rigorous implementation and
has yet to show the expected impact on learning, and the fiscal implications could dramatically
reduce the availability of other educational inputs.

57. 
The development outcomes to channel a greater share of public education resources to end-
users to help make basic education more affordable for poor students and to increase secondary
education enrolment. Recent data not available, however decree issued on free basic education and
since 2009 significant increases in school operational funding (BOS), supported by the Bank-
financed BOS-KITA Project, which benefits some 42 million students, has likely resulted in
important reduction in the overall basic education costs. BOS per student financing has increased in
real terms by 66% and 46% in primary and junior secondary schools respectively. The impact of
BOS is also apparent on net enrollment in secondary education, which jumped from 57 percent
(2007) to 66 percent by 2010.

58. 
Improved training programs and higher education system through accreditation was only
partially achieved. While a higher education law to support this was passed in 2009, it was
withdrawn in 2010 and then passed again in 2012. In 2009, however, accreditation occurred for 55
of 82 higher education institutions significantly above the 5 percent target. 
The Bank-financed
Higher Education Project (I-MHERE), together with AusAID, supported the development of the new
higher education law.

59. 
The target for regular tracer studies of university graduates and graduates from job training
programs was only partially achieved. A national system has yet to be established, though a number
of universities have established systems to undertake tracer studies.

60. 
Efforts to improved information and better implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
education funding through the BOS-KITA program were achieved. Independent monitoring of BOS
financing was undertaken between 2008 and 2011, and a school and district information system
(TRIMS) was established and is being utilized in some districts.

73

B.7. Core Engagement Area 5: Environmental Sustainability and Disaster Mitigation

61. 
Indonesia faces significant environmental and natural disaster related challenges. Half of all
Indonesians live in rural areas and are dependent on communal land, and coastal and environmental
resources that are being depleted. The other half in this rapidly urbanizing society is affected by
water and air pollution, flooding, lack of sanitation, congestion and noise. Indonesia is prone to a
range of natural and man-made risks, as well as the impacts of climate change. Deforestation rates in
Indonesia are among the highest in the world, with globally significant emissions of greenhouse
gases, as a result. Indonesia remains ill equipped institutionally to meet these challenges with
fragmented and overlapping jurisdiction and responsibility and weak mechanisms for the necessary
coordinated effort. Indonesia's longer-term objectives are to strengthen capacity to adapt to climate
change and address environmental challenges, 
including development of integrated disaster
management.

62. While identified as an emerging engagement when the CPS was prepared, targets for
development outcomes based on emission levels were over-ambitious given the weak institutional
framework and the influence that might be exerted by the Bank. At the time the CPSPR
development outcomes which the Bank expected to influence were reformulated to include: helping
to establish coordination mechanisms and institutions for climate change management; enhancing
Indonesia's access to international climate financing; promoting renewable energy and the creation
of viable forest plantations on degraded lands in frontier areas. Specific targets were not developed.
Development outcomes 
in support of disaster mitigation were left unchanged, and included,
strengthening disaster risk resilience in development planning and administration.

63. 
Development outcomes supported by the Bank to help establish coordination mechanisms
and institutions for climate change management were partially achieved. The Bank's engagement
was to be centered on climate change through development policy operations, the Forest Carbon
Financing Partnership Facility (FCFP), the Forest Investment Program (FIP), carbon financing and
GEF with a more limited engagement on biodiversity. Partners included ministries and agencies
dealing with cross-cutting climate change issues, as well as an active network of CSOs fostering
social accountability and participatory mechanisms. The programmatic Climate Change DPL was
designed to support policy dialogue to mainstream the discussion of climate change across a range of
actors, including ministries and agencies dealing with cross-cutting climate change issues, as well as
an active network of CSOs fostering social accountability and participatory mechanisms. Following
the approval of the first phase of the programmatic series, co-financed by France and Japan, the Gol
decided not to borrow further for environmental objectives.

64. 
A major impetus for this shift was the signing of a letter of intent with Norway for a $1
billion REDD+ grant program and Bank support was requested. The Letter of Intent for REDD+ has
been signed and a coordinating unit was established in the President's Office to prepare an
implementation strategy. Over the past year, with advice from the Bank, the Government has led a
participatory and consultative process for developing a National REDD+ Strategy, selected Central
Kalimantan as a pilot province, including issuing a Master Plan on peat land rehabilitation in Central
Kalimantan, and suspended new forest concession licensing for two years. As the institutional
framework for implementation 
is being put in place, the Bank was hired by the Indonesian
government (with financing from Norway) to help operationalize the financing mechanism under the
Indonesia-Norway REDD+ partnership.

74

65. 
Development outcomes supported by the WBG have been achieved in enhancing Indonesia's
access to international climate financing. Apart from the Bank's REDD+ support, it also helped in
launching the National Readiness Program for REDD, completed the Participation Agreement with
the Forest Carbon Financing Partnership Facility, and supported preparation of the Country
Investment Program (CIP) under the Clean Technology Fund (CTF). The Bank collaborated with the
ADB and the Government in the preparation of Indonesia's Investment Program for the Forest
Investment Program (FIP)

66. 
Development outcomes for promoting renewable energy were achieved. The Bank assisted
in the development of the new National Energy Plan, where renewable sources figure prominently,
and the regulations for the new Energy Law regulations. The Bank-Financed Geothermal Clean
Energy Investment Project (CTF co-financed) was approved. 
In addition, IFC has assessed 17
geothermal sites specifically for possible tendering as to their development impact and likelihood of
successful implementation. Moreover, it has been providing financing assistance to private sector
players, seeking to develop clean sources of power. IFC has focused on accessing CTF to support
financing for renewable and energy efficiency projects as well as private sector geothermal energy
projects. Work with the commercial banks to expand sustainable energy finance is further supported
by the IFC's Advisory Services. 
IFC has assessed 17 geothermal sites specifically for possible
tendering as to their development impact and likelihood of successful implementation. It has also
provided US$25 million of equity to Medco Power Indonesia to develop a series of gas and
hydroelectric power plants.

67. 
Development outcomes to support the creation of viable forest plantations on degraded lands
in frontier areas have been partially achieved. 
IFC is assisting a private sector company in
Kalimantan to conduct forest carbon assessment, to allow the company to further build potential
REDD+ revenue streams from its sustainable forestry operations. IFC has also provided funding to
BioCarbon, an equity fund established to acquire and expand sustainable forestry operations.

68. 
Targets for supporting development outcomes to strengthened disaster risk reduction (DRR)
in development planning and administration have been achieved. With Bank support, DRR has been
mainstreamed through risk-based planning processes, and with increased funding capacities in post-
disaster needs assessment and reconstruction have improved. The institutional arrangement and
enabling environment to facilitate participatory implementation of disaster risk reduction were
achieved with a National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction issued by Bappenas; the Disaster
Management Agency is operational; local disaster management plans were prepared; emergency
operations centers are designed and functional; disaster risk reduction policies, legislation and
regulations prepared and implemented in selected provinces; and five-year strategic development
plans are being developed and implemented by provincial governments. As well, public awareness
program were developed and implemented in high risk villages.

69. 

Support for strengthening disaster risk reduction in development planning and administration
has benefited from the Bank's Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), which
provides resources for technical assistance for risk identification, integrating risk reduction in
investment projects, and identifying policy options for catastrophic risk financing. Disaster
contingent components have already been included in two Bank-financed projects (PNPM-Urban III
and WINRIP). Technical assistance is being provided for financing seismic school retrofitting,
including earthquake proofing in 60 high risk districts. The Bank is also supporting the Gol to
establish a standing mechanism for multi-donor support in post disaster recovery, and a trust fund has
been set up, with an initial contribution of NZ$1 million from the New Zealand Government, as part

75

of the Indonesia Multi Donor Funding Facility for Disaster Recovery (IMDFF-DR). This initiative
will also assist 
the Gol 
in 
institutionalizing 
its community-based housing and settlement
reconstruction program (REKOMPAK) as part of future post-disaster reconstruction.

70. 
The rebuilding of Aceh and Nias through the Multi Donor Fund for Aceh and Nias (MDF) as
well as activities for Yogyakarta and Central Java through the Java Reconstruction Fund (JRF) will
be completed in December 2012. Aceh is transitioning from post-tsunami reconstruction towards
sustainable economic development, an important part of which is through strengthening local
capacity. During the CPS period, the Bank was able to mobilize quickly to support Government
efforts in the wake of the Merapi eruption in Central Java. It provided an assessment that fed into
relief and reconstruction plans. Important lessons from the Aceh and Java experiences were used in
channeling support through PNPM and promoting the use of the community housing model for
reconstruction.

III. 

Bank's Performance

Lending Deliveries

71. 
The CPS proposed that Indonesia's macroeconomic progress and financing needs, together
with the emerging reform effort made a strong case for reversing the recent decline in IBRD lending.
IBRD investment of between US$1.5 billion and US$2.5 billion annually was expected, dependent
on macroeconomic performance, financial stability and momentum on key reforms. IFC was to
invest about US$300 million annually in the priority sectors of finance, 
infrastructure and
commodity-based supply chains, but was expected to grow in line with an acceleration of reforms to
facilitate private provision of infrastructure. Support from MIGA was also expected to expand with
improvements in the investment climate.

72. 
The program did reverse the recent decline in IBRD lending and delivered almost $2.7 billion
annually, including the unanticipated two DDO operations at $2 billion each, in keep with strong
macroeconomic performance, financial stability and progress on key reforms. IFC committed new
investments of US$140-290 million for IFC's own account, keeping in line with the demand from the
private sector.

Portfolio Quality

73. 
The share of projects at risk, which accounted for one-fourth of operations in 2008, has been
brought down to an average of around 15 percent in recent years, and now compares favorably to the
performance of other large, middle-income IBRD borrowers. Projects at risk tend to be smaller, so
the volume of commitments at risk is less than 10 percent, and generally, but not exclusively
associated difficult implementation environments and engagements. Sixteen ICRs from the Indonesia
program were reviewed by IEG (WB Business Warehouse 10/2/2012) from FY09 through FY12.
Six of these were rated MU or U. Many of these were approved during the transition period
following the Asia Crisis and exited early on in the CPS period in FY09-10. As such, they are not
representative of the CPS FY09-12 program and do not provide much in the way of evidence for
evaluating the program. All three operations reviewed by IEG and delivered during FY09-12, DPLs
5-6 and the Public Expenditure Support Facility DPL-DDO were rated as "Satisfactory".

76

Non-Lending Services

74. 
An extensive program of knowledge was facilitated by resources from development partners
who valued the bank's expertise in a large number of areas and its ability to provide ESW, on-time
policy notes, and implementation technical assistance. At the same time, the Bank sought to enable
local capacity by partnering with local think tanks, universities and NGOs, and in some instances,
poverty and PEACH for example, fostering new local institutions. As critical elements in defined
engagement areas, knowledge services played an important role in the delivery of the overall
program in support of development outcomes.

Gender Equity

75. 
Gender considerations were not explicitly included in the original CPS, but this was rectified
in the CPSPR, which outlined the status of gender equity in Indonesia and highlighted efforts by the
WBG. The CPSCR notes WBG activities to enhance opportunities for women with greater access to
finance and business support. Under PNPM supported is noted for actions to improve maternal
health, as well as to promote economic, political, and social empowerment for women.

Country Dialogue, Partnerships and Aid Coordination

76. 
The Bank's engagement approach places country dialogue at the center of is partnership
strategy, which has enhanced its scope and impact. Collaboration with development partners and
included a broad range of bi-laterals and multi-laterals, as well as local NGOs and CSOs. The
Consultative Group led by the Bank was abolished by Indonesia, signaling its reemergence as a
confident middle-income country with its own development agenda. While formal aid coordination
no longer exists, engagement-based dialogue continues with Bank involvement based on alignment
of donor resources behind the Government's program.

77. 
Trust fund commitments were at $1.4 billion at the end of the CPS period, with multi-donor
TFs amounting to $1.2 billion, including $654 million in the Aceh MDTF. The performance of trust
funds has benefited from a more coordinated approach to their mobilization and management and
were vetted to promote alignment with country priorities and integrated into the program's overall
financial and human resource planning. Quality review processes mirrored those of Bank operations.
Larger TFs benefited from being incorporated into the Bank's general operational management and
results-based portfolio reviews for all TFs were undertaken regularly in collaboration with Bappenas.
Special consideration was given to ensuring that they contributed to the overall objective of the CPS
in institution building. Recipient executed trust funds accounted for 82 percent of the TF portfolio in
terms of volume.

IV. 

Key Lessons Learned and Recommendations

78. 

These lessons include:

* Effectively supporting an increasingly confident middle-income country requires fully
aligning Bank Group support to Indonesia's development program and the country-led and
owned policy agenda. This solidified its status as the development agency of choice and put
the Bank Group in a position to be responsive to Indonesia's immediate needs, as well as for
informing the debate on emerging policy issues. Full alignment, in turn, had spillover effects

77

for aligning other donor programs behind the country-led agenda in their collaboration with
the Bank Group. This allowed the WBG to deepen its engagements across key development
priorities.

* 

Programmatic development policy 
lending support provides 
important cross-cutting
convening services for step-by-step incremental reforms. As institutional reform efforts
deepen at the sectoral level, effectiveness of implementation support is further enhanced by
drilling down through discrete projects.

* This sustained engagement over several years encourages an evidence-based approach that
allows to carefully recalibrate the scope and design of programs as needed. A good example
is the Bank's support for Indonesia's significant community driven development program,
with demonstrable well-researched impact on the ground. Its country-wide expansion offers
important potential for using social capital as a platform for addressing health and education,
inclusion and environmental concerns, while requiring increased attention to governance and
management, in order to improve impact and reduce operational and reputational risks.

* Knowledge services take an increasingly important role as Indonesia seeks to share both its
best practices and lessons learned in development experiences, particularly with other
middle-income countries. In important areas with diminished need for external financing,
diffused leadership or poor coordination, the Bank's knowledge and convening services can
encourage a policy debate with a view to forging an consensus (e.g. on the incentive
framework for decentralization, nudge forward the reform agenda (e.g. on private-public
partnerships), contribute to effective implementation (e.g. in education) and help with the
coordination among government agencies (e.g. in infrastructure development).

78

Development Outcomes Expected to be Influenced by WBG 

Status and Output Evaluation Summary 

Annex 2.1: Summary of Indonesia CPS (2009-2012) Self Evaluation [10/08/2012]

Major Lending and
Non-lending Activities that
Contributed to the Outcome

Cross-cutting Engagement Area 1 Central Government Institutions and Systems

achieved. The 2010-2014 Medium-term Financing: DPLs 5-8; GFMRAP;

Imprvedreslts rietaton 
i 
th buget rocss.Partially 
Improved results orientation in the budget process.

Baseline: Budget allocations based on organization, detailed 
expenditure,results 
macroeconomic prnctions og andeativites bude 
ens 
ue 
budget preparation process remains strictly annual with no reference to forward 
estimates for outer years. 
Targets: Results-oriented programs with measurable results becoming the main 
aplanning 
for budget allocation and control, with other classifications 
(by 
units 
organization and/or type of expenditure) being applied selectively at an 

types of Development Plan (RJMNP) provides measurable PINTAR
and targets indicators. Beginning in 2011, Knowledge: Budget Reform 
in
Indonesia; Agric Public Expenditure
annual budgets have been more strongly to the 
thenn 
twoes Howeer 
estionlysslo 
be 
nttoue. 
Plani (RJMNP) 
process andor incud 

PER; Sca Protecti 
tPe
InfRScr 
PR;eceh Dilo
Fllo

prtgomt tingcats 

pro 
sPE; mee 
forwardd estimates for
BgEFfe 
iFn 
1;
bpugort have beennmoreecriosy
gMonitoring 

of 

the 

Indonesian

Effective operationalization of TSA, together with strengthened and timelyben 
cash plans from the line ministries.

cashplan frm th 
lin miistres.been 
Baseline: TSA extended to all expenditure accounts but not yet to the revenue 
side. Very rudimentary cash planning 
that 
is not based on expected 

Partially achieved. Treasury Single Account has Economy (SEAMIE).
extended 
to all accounts; cash forecasting

xtddtoalcous;ahfrcsig

Knoeege:rugeiReorgi

capacity has been established. No evidence to show
that it has improved line ministry cash planning.

disbursements.

Targets: Comprehensive TSA coverage of all major government cash balances,
including 
the revenue side. Maximum 10% deviation 
in line ministries'

quarterly cash plans compared with actual cash flows.

Effetiv an reiabe 
imlemntaionof 
tateTresur 
an BugetAchieved. Updated PEFA figures are not available.
Effetie (SAN 
reiable 
implemienatio 
of taeTauy and 
Budgetfiania 
Improvement in 
internal controls and internal and
external audit systems evidenced by significant
Sysotm 
( PNiefr ,anvde 
c dbgi el.n 
c uat 
ia 
ca 
Baseline: PEFA indicators: PI118 on effectiveness of payroll control is at D+; PI 
reduction in qualified audits.

20 on effectiveness of internal controls over non-salary expenditure is at D+; PA
25 on quality and timeliness of annual financial statements is at C+.
Targets: PEFA indicators: PI 18 to rise to C; PE 20 to rise to A; and PP 25 to rise

to A.

achieved. Improved tax administration has seen
Mon the number of registered taxpayers increase, though
taxpayer registration records in the registration database using third-party 
the 
coverage 
still 
remains 
very 
low 
and
data and call centers; increased number of comprehensive and risk-based

gNot 

79

audits of taxpayer declarations; reduced tax arrears through better and 
implementation of the tax administration information
more accurate taxpayer accounts and collection procedures. 
system has been delayed by procurement problems
Baseline: (i) 40% accuracy (2007; based on total of 11 million taxpayer under PINTAR and a restructuring is underway.
records); (ii) regular audits are limited to VAT refunds; (iii) processes to collect
arrears not classified into collectable and non-collectable 
items; collection
enforcement is ineffective.
Targets: (i) 100% accuracy; 
(ii) DGT conducts comprehensive audits
expanding 
the number of returns exposed to compliance programs; (iii)
effective procedures in place to collect arrears resulting in reported arrears not
exceeding 5% of declared tax liabilities.

Improved procurement system; higher capacity levels at national and
provincial levels, and establishment of professional procurement units 
implementing agencies; 
improved quality of procurement audit and 
effectiveness of sanctions. 
Baseline: (i) No procurement law is currently in place and there is no set of
national standard bidding documents; (ii) there is no clear capacity-building
program and percentage of government staff passing the certification test is still
below 15% (mid-2008); (iii) sanctions on colluding firms are relatively limited
and do not apply outside the implementing agency where collusion occurs.
Targets: (i) Procurement law and associated tools are issued; (ii) capacity-
building program in place; (iii) sanctions provide a deterrent for colluding firms.

Achieved. With Bank support a new procurement

documents have been issued, and an e-procurement
system has been introduced to better detect and
sanction collusion.

Improved quality and timeliness of key statistics produced by BPS, e.g., CERDAS was initially delayed, but extensive support
national accounts data, poverty data, etc. 
during project preparation is expected to facilitate
Baseline: (i) Inconsistencies between BPS statistics from various different
sources; (ii) low levels of user engagement and confidence, and (iii) prolonged
data production timelines.
Targets: (i) National accounts move from 1968 System of National Accounts
(SNA) to 1993 SNA; decreased discrepancies between statistics from different
sources; (ii) increased level of user satisfaction and confidence, and (iii) reduced
time lags between collection and data dissemination.

Not achieved. 

The Bank-financed STA TCAP-

80

Cross-cutting Engagement Area 2 : Sub-National

incentives 

fiscal decentralization framework with 

An 
improved 
for Achieved. Bappenas, MoHA, and MoF meeting 
Financing: DAK 
I; 
ILGR;
accountability. 
regularly with DSF as platform for decentralization USDRP; Jakarta Flood Mitigation
Baseline: Fiscal framework distorts incentives, limits own source revenues and 
agenda. Representatives of LG associations included. Project
restricts financing 
The Bank helped develop an innovative program
Target: Coordinated effort to defined new framework underway; DAK 
through the Local Government and Decentralization
approach tying transfers to performance initiated; BOS decentralized; improved Project (DAK) that used an existing transfer program Knowledge: 
Improving
capacity of citizens to assess and monitor (PEACH). 
to 
provide 
incentives 
for 
outcomes 
and 
Intergovernmental 
Framework;
accountability in five pilot provinces. Decision to 
Intergovernmental Transfers; DSF
decentralize BOS taken. Program to support sub- 
studies on Territorial Reform; Sub-
national expenditure and capacity harmonization 
national Surplus and Reserves; Sub-
(PEACH) implemented or underway in 11 provinces. national Borrowing; Sub-national
Aceh and East Java Growth Diagnostic completed. 
Capital market development;
Local 
Government 
and
Achieved. Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation Project Urbanization; Sub-national PER;
approved, which pioneered changes to regulations Public Expenditure Analysis and
that would now facilitate infrastructure financing at Capacity Development; PEACH TA
sub-national 
level 
for non-revenue generating Capacity Building; Aceh, East Java
projects. Local government infrastructure spending Growth Diagnostic
has increased from Rp. 49.6 trillion in 2008 to an
estimated Rp.56.3 trillion by 2010.

Improved infrastructure spending at the LG level. 
Baseline: Limited access by sub-nationals to financing of infrastructure and 
urban projects, lack of focus on urban issues 
Target: Financing of sub-national infrastructure underway through sector-wide 
approaches or specific urban projects; LG capital spending on the increase; 

Core Engagement Area 1 :Private Sector

fraewoks;impove 
inestentcliate stongr bnk nd on-ank 

Strengthened private and financial sector through: better regulatory Achieved. The overall financial sector stability and Financing: DPLs 5-8,
frameworks; improved investment climate; stronger bank and non-bank
financial institutions. 
and non-bank financial institutions have continued to DPL-DDO, Program for Economic
Baseline: Key financial ratios of banks are sound; LDR 60%; 35% of grow their assets, despite the global financial crisis. Resilience, Investment and Social
households have access to bank accounts; saving, investment and risk 
In June 2012, 
the LDR 
reached 82.6%.; The Assistance DPL-DDO. ; Indonesia
management products relevant to poor and vulnerable population are limited. 
penetration of NBFIs in the economy has increased 
Infrastructure Finance Facility, IFC
Targets: Key financial ratios of banks remain sound and LDR reaches minimum 
further from 24% in 2009, to 28% in 2011. Loans to 
investments 
in banks and micro
80%; NBFI assets as proportion of loans to SME doubled; minimum of 45% of SMEs grew strongly at 24% for 2011; Based on 
finance institutions.
households have a bank account; infrastructure finance institution established nationwide household survey, 41% of households Knowledge: 
Support to Financial
and well functioning. Increased efficiency and coverage of credit bureau; 
have a bank account in their name. The Indonesia Sector Policy Support to Financial
increased lending against secured movable collateral. 
Infrastructure Finance Facility was established. IFC Sector Policy; Understanding Labor

soundness have been maintained since 2008. Banks Public Expenditure Support Facility

81

Impratoed 
cactyh iofsubtionaofless 
gov 
bernomenotout 
operins strugh 
nrodulictsin 
oflesscumbersomeprocedures 
Baseline:Sub-nationalDoingBusiness 
strtup anddy liesig 
15citiesanstart 
baseline:ubntina oigBuins(B 
studyes. 
of15citieando 

is providing support 
to 
the Credit Bureau and Market, Review on KUR (Kredit
Moveable Collateral registry. 
Usaha Rakyat): Government Partial
Guarantee 
program; 
Improving
access 
to Financial Services 
in
Indonesia 
Empowering 
Female
business Partially achieved. All 14 cities surveyed in the Migrant Workers; Anti-Corruption
first round, with six cities added to the second round, Harmonization; 
Corruption
have implemented reforms and the average time to Eradication; Enhancing Demand for
a business and to deal with construction permits Legal Reform; Anti-Corruption
have been reduced by more than 25 percent since 
Institute. 
Regulatory Reform,

Targets: Reduction in time and cost of start-ups and licensing of 50% in client 2010. 
cities. 40,000 businesses completing a new reformed procedure, leading to 10% 
increase in the value of aggregate private sector savings from 2010 baseline 
(currently being established). 

Nvtmnt Climae Monon
Suvey, 
CAisory Seris
Invee 
Climatey 
Program.
Advisory Srie 
PrAcesmt

.

Achieved. 
Sub-national Investment Generation Finance 
Program, 
Investment
investor 
facilitation, 
aftercare, 
policy Climate Program including ongoing
Project, 

andclienadvocacy 

and basic 

location marketing 

in 

two 

support 

to Credit Bureau 

and

Ongoing 
Sub National Doing
Business 
Survey 
Round 
11;
Investor Policy and
Completed 
licensin 
rorm DK 
okrt
Aibsines 
ag 
a.
Arbsns 
ikgsPorm

Pr 

to 
Improve 
Indonesia's~
intheAchieved. Business start-up time improved to 45 Trade Policy; Capacity Building on
Ntoa 
igeWno 
I W 
pndwt

Indonesia Trade; Indonesia Domestic Trade

from 105 days 

(2009); 

(2012) 

days 

Improved capacity of sub-national 
Baseline:Absenceoftheuseofinvestors 
(Investmen Genraton) 

Baseline: Absence of the use of investor tracking system and client relationshipMoebeClarlrgity

management approach for investment generation. Absence of a guideline for provinces.
effective investor facilitation, aftercare, policy advocacy and basic location 
marketing. 
Targets: Demonstrated implementation of investor tracking systems and client 
relationship management approach 
in 
two provinces. Development of 
guidelines for effective investor facilitation, aftercare, policy advocacy and 
basic location marketing. 

basiclocaion arkeing.Program 
Imprvedreglatry 
evirnmet ad ineraenc cordintio 
development of investment policies. 

Improved regulatory environment and interaency 

Baseline: 105 days to start a company; weak consultative processes prior to
issuance of regulations; 
inadequate 
links between customs and other 
improved 
transparency of trade 
regulations and
PEPI 
is
government agencies participating in INSW; uncoordinated investment policy. 
procedures 
for 
import clearance. 
Targets: 50 days to start a company; 2 months to receive VAT refund; improved consultatin 
links between customs and other government agencies through the single
submission and synchronous processing of information 
through INSW; 

investment 

Negative Li

(ii) 
independent 
cost-benefit 
analysis of FDI
restrictions; and, 
(iii) 
investor problem solving,
policy consultations and advice; Doing Business

(DB) ranking 

improved from 129 (2009) to 122

(2010).

82

Strengthened institutional structure and capacity of the Ministry of Trade Achieved. 
Five 
specialist 
teams have been
to enable it to develop and implement more effective trade policies. 
established: 
Public Relations Center; Logistics
Baseline: Absence of specialist teams that can provide the required level of Team; Trade Fair Team; Trade Monitoring Team;
analysis for policy decisions.
Target: At least 4 specialized teams embedded in their respective DGs in the CMmoit Teato supprood Sbi 
Ministry of Trade providing analytical support for the development of domesticwarehouse receipts system developed.
and international trade strategies and for rapid policy response; the teams
engage effectively with their policy counterparts in the Ministry.

Tamoat

and inutry-asenld str. ge 

n 

o ai 

olc epne h 

em

Improved access to markets for Indonesian businesses in select commodity Achieved. 

Piloting of non-collateralized 

lending

Baseline: SMEs/entrepreneurs/farmers have little direct access to large markets. 
Target: New investment/financing for SMEs in supply chain; increased SME 
contracts with large firms; increased sales and incomes for impacted firms;
price transparency increases.

product 
for 
cocoa 
producers 
in 
Identification of prospective partners 

Sulawesi.
for coffee

lending in Sumatra.

Improved market access and long-term sustainability for smallholders by Achieved. 
Farmer Training Center 
(FTC) 
for
connecting them to selected firms (known as 'lead-firms') that are seeking 
smallholder coffee growers in Sumatra established
secure and growing supply sources. 
with sponsorship from international coffee off-taker;
Baseline: Long supply chains comprising many middlemen with limited access piloting FTC as direct purchasing center.
for smallholders to markets, information and technology.
Target: Shorter supply chains with direct access for smallholders to lead firms,
improved access to quality seedlings, price information and farming technology.

Core Engagement Area 2 : Infrastructure

2006. 

Target: Actual spending on national infrastructure increased by 25% over 2006 
level by 2010. 

Increased quantity and efficiency of national and sub-national government Achieved. 
Spending on national 
infrastructure Financing: Infrastructure DPLs 2-
spending on 
infrastructure through improvements 
in subsidy policy, 
increased by 52% in real terms between 2006 and 4;2nd Eastern 
Indonesia Region
incentives framework, and expenditure planning and budgeting. 
2011. 
ifrastructure DPLs 2-4 supports improved Transport; 
Strategic 
Road
Baseline: Actual spending on national infrastructure was Rp 18.9 trillion in 
sector and land acquisition legislation to facilitate 
Infrastructure; 
Java-Bali 
Power

investment, and nine 

investment operations are Restructuring; 

Domestic 

Gas

launched 
in water, energy and roads to promote Market 
increased national and SOE investment. 
Mitigation 

Devt; 
Jakarta 
Flood
Project; 
Indonesia

83

Partially achieved. 

Framework established with 

Infrastructure 
Finance 
Facility
Infrastructure Guarantee Project;

Increased private investment in infrastructure through the establishment 
support of Infrastructure Guarantee Project. Major Water Resources 
and 
Irrigation
of a fiscally sound, credible and transparent PPP framework. 
$2 billion energy project has been tendered. Private Sector Mgmt; Dam Operational
Improvement; 
WSSLIC 
II;
Baseline: Private sector financial commitments to private infrastructure projects 
infrastructure investment is estimated to have only 
were 0.5% of GDP in 2005. 
reached 0.6% of GDP for 2009-10. . IFC supported WSSLIC 111; Urban Water Supply
Target: Private sector financial commitments to private infrastructure projects private sector 
investments 
in clean power, gas & Sanitation TF: Aceh Community
increase to 0.75% of GDP by 2010. 
development, logistics etc. sectors. 
Settlement 
Reconstruction;

Availability of bankable Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) and robust pricing Achieved. TFC provided advisory services for power Aceh 
IRFF; Aceh 
Infrastructure
formula. 
Improved capacity of relevant government agencies to conduct 
sector PPP. IFC project development on geothermal Reconstruction Enabling; 
Jogya
tenders and to serve as a model for subsequent geothermal IPPs. 
Independent Power Producers for potential PPPs.. 
Community 
Based 
Settlement

Rehab; Aceh Econ Devt Financing

Geothermal 

Power Generation;

Facility; Livelihood Reconstruction
Yoga/Java; PAMSIMAS Support;

NTB River Basin; W&S Program;

in 

infrastructure

IFC 
investments 
compages.

Knowledge: Completed: 

Papua

Infrastructure Strategy; Ongoing:

Surabaya Water Management
Strategy; Assessment 
of Road

Construction 
Industry; 
PPP
Framework and Policy; Financing
Initiative WASAP 
mn; 
Low-income
Housing 
Policy 
and 
Finance;
Geothermal Power Supply; Energy
Sector Policy Dialog; Infrastructure

Guarantee Fund; 

Timely Land

Acquisition for Infrastructure Devt;
Telecom 
and 
ICT Advisory
Support; Telecom and ICT Policy

Advice; Value of a Well Run Water

Utility; Telecoms/ICT Devt TA;
Building 
Blocks 
for 
E-Govt
Capability; 
WSP 
Program
Administration; WSP Advisory
Support; Aceh-Nias W&S Facility;

Core Engagement Area 3 

Development

SCommunity 

84

Improved socio-economic and 
local 
level (kelurahan-wards) governanceand 
conditions of the urban poor through wider implementation of poverty 
reduction and community empowerment programs for income generation or 
grants for tertiary level infrastructure. 

u 

rban 

area 

Financing: PNPM 
, & IV,
noeg 
Poet 
eDuction
Throug 
e 
con
Gonc 
Strnh 
i

Local Capacity 

for Poverty;

Improved socio-economic and local-level (kecamatan-sub-districts) governance wied 
coPr 63,00 villaeand 3miion B 
PNPM 
in rural areas through wider 
implementation of poverty reduction and pepe Pover rate: 12l4% (01 
Dicin; 
Polc 
unde PNPM; Urban 
III.nin
community empowerment programs and 
the provision of 
investment pN P 
e how 
: 
PNPM; Pl-uy 
resources to support productive proposals developed by communities, using a 
M; 
PNasi 
participatory planning process. Baseline: Poverty rate of 16.7% in 2007. 
9 Improved household expenditure rates or improved Evalatin 
Tat
Target: Poverty level decreased to 12% by 2012. 
access to economic and social services in 7,800 
Erfonc 
of 
Poety
ImtPovem 
t
wards (at 6,240 (80%). 
Pirnoraome 
* Infrastructure built is 20% less expensive than that 
fordPNPM CsAcount

Strat
dtr

and
act

built by non-community based approaches in 80% 

of participating wards. 
* EIRRs >30% for major rural infrastructure types in 

PNPM sub-districts (EIRRs range 35-75% in 

2011). 
* 80% of PNPM-Rural sub-projects are functional 

and adequately utilized by communities (89%in 
2011 ) 

* Improved HH expenditure rates and improved 
access to economic and social services in a 
mirmum of 2,500 poor sub-districts (5,020 sub- 
districts covered by PNPM-Rural in 2011). 

Review 

for CDD; Poverty

Dialog on Pro-poor and Pro-
jobs; PNPM Communication

Strategy;; SP Program Design

and 
Implementation; Helping
Generate 
Jobs 
for Pro-poor

Growth; 
Mechanisms 

Alternative
Service

for 

Delivery; 
PNPM M&E;
Incidence 
of Benefits 
of
Household- and Community-
based pro-poor development

programs TA 
Government; 

to Aceh Local
Local 
Level

Institutions Study

PNPM-Rural targets: Infant immunization: 61.2%; assisted deliveries: 69.5%; Achieved. PNPM-Generasi (CCT pilot) targets for 
130 treatment sub-districts: Infant immunization from

primry nromen: 9.5% 
juiorhig enolmnt:72%65% 

(2007) to 75%; assisted deliveries from 67% Knowledge: 

"Targeting Poor

Public expenditures made more pro-poor by reducing fuel subsidies and Partially achieved. While spending on core pro-poor Partnership 

for Knowledge-

(2007) 
to 77%; primary school enrollment 
from 
96.5% (2005) to 97%; junior high school enrollment 

from 57% (2006) to 72%. 

and Vulnerable Households in
Indonesia" 
(completed);

Protecting Poor and Vulnerable
Households 
in 
Indonesia"~

(social assistance PER and
program review - completed);

85

reallocating the savings to strategic targeted interventions for the poor and programs has increased to from 0.3% of GDP in 2007 based Poverty Reduction (on-
successful implementation of CCT. 
to 0.39% 
in 2011, energy fuel and electricity) 
going)
Baseline: 3.8% of GDP at US$83/bbl. 
increased from 3.8% in 2007 to 4.0% in 2011, though
Target: Fuel subsidies decreased by 50% and resources re-allocated towards pro- 
the revised 2012 budget is for 2.9% of GDP.
poor programs, amongst others.

4. Integration and implementation of poverty and social protection programs Achieved. National Team for the Acceleration of
is improved in order to increase effectiveness and efficiency; policy and Poverty Reduction established 
to 
integrate 
and
program decisions are informed by poverty data monitoring and analytics. 
coordinate national poverty reduction policies and
Target: Increased benefits coverage for poor men, women, and children (decreased 
programs (Presidential Regulation No. 15/2010).
inclusion and exclusion errors, increase in number of poor households receiving Creation of national registry of 25 million poor and

benefits, increase in poor households' share of total benefits). 

vulnerable 
households 
(Pendataan 
Program
Perlindungan Social, PPLS 11). Instructions 
issued

from the National Team for implementing agencies to
use the database to extract program beneficiary lists.
MOUs signed with implementing agencies agreeing to
utilize the national registry- Jakesmas, scholarships
for the poor (BSM), Raskin and the PKH expansion.

Core Engagement Area 4 :Education

Improved development of poor children between the ages 0 to 6 in selected Achieved. 
: 18% of children underweight Financing: 
BERMUTU; 
Early
provinces: Percentage of malnourished children aged 0-6 decreases. 
(Riskesdas 2010). 
Increased community-based Childhood Education and Devt;
Baseline: 27% of children underweight (2001). Target: 20%. 
ECED services in 6000 targeted villages. 
BOS-KITA; Higher 
Education
HERE; 
Health 
Professional
Increased number of basic education teachers meets academic qualification Not achieved. 
41% of teachers in primary and Education Quality; TF: Basic
mandated by the Teacher Law. Baseline: 30% of teachers in primary and 
junior secondary schools hold S1 degree or more Education Capacity
junior secondary schools hold S1 degree or more. Target: 70% of teachers hold 
(MoEC Statistical Yearbook 2010). 
Knowledge: Teacher Management;
S1 degree or more. 
Youth Skills & Devt; Education
Not achieved. In 2011, a Ministry decree was issued Sector Dialog & Strategy; School
Improved efficiency and equity in the use of resources to increase access to 
to tackle over-supply and poor distribution of 
Based mgmt Study; Education
basic education; inefficiencies resulting from excess supply and unequal 
teachers. The decree indirectly tackles over hiring 
Sector Assessment; 
Information
distribution of teachers are reduced: oversupply of teachers as measured 
through better information at the central level. 
Education & 
Communication;
by student-teacher ratio (STR) in basic education is reduced. Baseline: However, implementation has been slow. 2010: 
Education 
Public 
Expenditure

86

Primary STR=20 and junior secondary STR=14. Target: Primary STR=26 and Primary STR=16 and junior secondary STR=13. 
junior secondary STR=22. 
(MoEC Statistical Yearbook 2010).

Review

Greater share of public education resources channeled to end-users making Achieved. 
Recent data not available, however
basic education affordable for poor students and increasing secondary 
decree issued on free basic education and since 2009
education enrolment. Average annual cost per student in primary and 
significant increases in school operational funding
junior secondary for children in poorest quintile decreases. Baseline: Rp 
(BOS) has likely resulted in important reduction in
182,810 for primary and Rp 416,010 for secondary per student per year at 2006 
the overall basic education costs. BOS per student
prices (Susenas, 2006). 
financing has increased in real terms by 66% and
Target: Through co-financing of the BOS program, Rp 150,000 for primary and 46% 
in primary and junior secondary schools

Rp 250,000 for secondary per student per year at 2006 prices, 

respectively.

Net enrolment 
increases, 

in secondary education (junior and senior combined) Achieved. Recent data not available, but with BOS
initiated in 2009, the secondary net enrolment rate

Baseline: 57%o (2007). Target: Through co-financing of the BOS program, 

increase to 70% (2012).

had already reached 66%o by 2010 (SUSENAS 2010)

Improved training programs and higher education system: 
Partially achieved. 
Operative 
legislation was
Institutional accreditation awarded to higher education institutions and 
passed in 2009, withdrawn in 2010 and then passed
private sector training providers. Baseline: 215 private sector training 
again 
in 2012. 
In 2009, however, accreditation
institutions accredited, and no higher education institutions accredited. Target: occurred for 55 of 82 higher education institutions
(670). Further institutional accreditation has stopped
430 private sector training institutions accredited and 5c of higher education 
for the moment, but accreditation of study programs
institutions accredited, 

continues.

Regular tracer studies of university graduates and graduates from job Partially achieved. A number of universities have
training programs to establish their subsequent position 
in the labor 
est 
tems to undertake tracer studies but no
market. Baseline: Tracer studies not yet in place Target: Tracer studies in national system currently in place
place. 
Achieved. 
Independent monitoring of BOS

Improved 
information and better 
implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation of education funding through the BOS-KITA program. 
Baseline: No systematic, regular independent monitoring of education funding. 
Target: School andidistrictninformation systema(TRIMS)aestablished.a

financing undertaken between 2008 and 2011.
School and district information system (TRIMS)
established and being utilized in some districts.

87

Core Engagement Area 5 : Environment

Country Investment Program (CIP) under the Clean 

Technology Fund (CTF).. National energy plan and 
Analysis 
of Climate 
Change;
Energy law regulations issued. Bank Financed 
Persistent Organic Pollutants; POPs
Geothermal Clean Energy Investment Project (CTF 
Awareness and Capacity Building;
co-financed) approved. IFC has assessed 17 
Trade & Climate Change &
geothermal sites specifically for possible tendering 
Logistics Reforms; Aceh Response
TA Facility; Aceh Support; Nias
as to their development impact and likelihood of 
successful implementation.. IFC has also invested 
LEDP Disaster 
Risk Mgmt;
US$25 million of equity in Medco Power, to develop Mainstreaming DRR; Post Disaster
a series of gas and hydroelectric power plants. 
Needs Assessment;

IFC 
Advisory 
Services 
IFC is assisting a private sector Sustainable Forestry Program.

-

Assist Gol in building needed coordination mechanisms and institutions for Achieved. Master plan on peat land rehab in Central 
climate change management to meet targets. Support Indonesia in Kalimantan issued. National Readiness Program for 
accessing and utilization of international financing. Promote renewable REDD launched. Completed Participation 
energy. Target not developed. 
Agreement with Forest Carbon Financing 
Partnership Facility completed . Letter of Intent for 
REDD+ signed and Bank providing advisory 
services for program. Support for preparation of 

Financing: Climate Change DPLs,
Second COREMAP; TF: GEF
Second COREMAP; Geothermal
Clean Energy Investment Project;
GEF ODS Phase-out; Aceh Forest
and Environment
Knowledge: Fuel Quality 

Issues

and Air 

Pollution; Economic

Creation of viable forest plantations on degraded lands in frontier areas Partially achieved. 

with combined objectives of producing timber and climate change benefits 
by working with forest plantation firms, sub-national governments, NGOs, 
local communities and the broader forestry sector. Target not developed, 

company in Kalimantan 
to conduct forest carbon
assessment, to allow the company to further build
potential REDD+ 
revenue 
streams 
from 
its

sustainable forestry operations. IFC has provided

funding to BioCarbon, an equity fund established to

acquire and expand sustainable forestry operations.

Strengthened disaster risk reduction (DRR) in development planning and 
administration, 
Baseline: Existing level of funding for DRR. 
Target: 20% increase by 20 10.

Achieved. DRR has been mainstreamed through
risk-based plauning processes. With 
increased
funding capacities in post-disaster needs assessment
and reconstruction have improved.

Strengthen the institutional arrangement and enabling environment to Achieved. National Action Plan for Disaster Risk
facilitate participatory implementation of disaster risk reduction. 
Reduction issued by Bappenas. Disaster

88

Baseline: Current situation is weak and fragmented DRR capacity and Management Agency operational. Local disaster
policies/regulations. 
management plans prepared. Emergency operations
Target: Improve capacity and operating framework for DRR 
centers designed and functional. Disaster risk
districts/provinces by 2012. 
reduction policies, legislation and regulations
prepared and implemented in selected provinces.
Five-year strategic development plans are developed
and implemented by provincial government

in target 

Public awareness program implemented to promote a culture of safety. 
Baseline: Currently no systematic quality public awareness program. 
Target: Increased public awareness by 2012.

Achieved. Public awareness programs developed
and implemented in high risk villages.

89

Annex. 2.2

INDONESIA: CAS Completion Report

Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries for FYO9-12

CAS Plans (February 8, 2011) 

Status of Deliveries

Project 

IBRD US$M 

TOTAL FYO9-12
FY09 Program 
Fifth Development Policy Loan 
Second Infrastructure Development Policy Loan 
Indonesia - BOS Knowledge Improvement for Transparency and
Accountability 
Public Expenditure Support Facility (DPL-DDO) 
Project for Indonesian Tax Administration Reform (PINTAR) 
Western Indonesia National Roads Improvement Project 
Dam Operational Improvement and Safety 
ID-Urban Water Supply and Sanitation 
National Program for Community Empowerment in Rural Areas
(PNPM Rural II) 
National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas
(PNPM II UPP 
Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation Project 
Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Facility 
FY10 Program 
ID-Urban Water Supply and Sanitation 
Western Indonesia National Roads Improvement Project 
Indonesia Sixth Development Policy Loan 
Third Infrastructure Development Policy Loan 
Java-Bali Power (Additional Financing) 
Health Professional Education Quality Project 
Indonesia Climate Change Development Policy Project 
Indonesia - Add'I Financing BOS Knowledge Improvement for
Transparency and Accountability 
Local Government DAU/DAK Support 
Third National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban
Areas Ill 
Third National Program for Community Empowerment in Rural
Areas (PNPM-Rural 
FY11 Program 

Western Indonesia National Roads Improvement Project 
Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040
MW) Project 
Statistical Capacity Building-Change and Reform for the
Development of Statistics (STATCAP-CERDAS) 
Indonesia: Scholarships Prog. for Strengthening Reforming 

2,490 
700 
200 

600 

145 
80 
50 
30 

250 

185 
150 
100 
3,073 
30 
80 
750 
250 
30 
78 
200 

500 
220 

150 

785 
2,753 

250 

640 

65 
113 

90

Delivered (FY09) 
Delivered (FY09) 

Delivered (FY09) 
Delivered (FY09) 
Delivered (FY09) 
Delivered (FY11)
Delivered (FY09) 
Delivered (FY09)

Delivered FY09) 

Delivered (FY09) 
Delivered (FY12)
Delivered (FY09) 

Delivered (FY10) 
Delivered (FY11)
Delivered FY10) 
Delivered (FY10) 
Delivered (FY10) 
Delivered (FY10) 
Delivered (FY10) 

Delivered (FY10) 
Delivered (FY10) 

Delivered (FY10) 

Delivered (FY10) 

Delivered (FY11) 

Delivered (FY11) 

Delivered (FY11) 
Delivered (FY11) 

Approved
Amount

4,225
750
200

600
2,000
110

50

300

115

100
2,986.36
23.56

750
250
30
77.82
200

500
220

149.98

785

2,242.65

80

640

65
112.65

Institutions

Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation Project 
Water Resources and Irrigation Sector Management Program 2 
Geothermal Clean Energy Investment Project 
Indonesia Seventh Development Policy Loan 
Climate Change DPL2 
Indonesia Power Transmission Development 
Fourth Infrastructure Development Policy Loan 
FY12 Program 

Fourth National Program for Community Empowerment in Rural
Areas (PNPM IV) 
Support for Poor and Disadvantaged Areas II (SPADA II) 
Program for Economic Resilience, Investment and Social
Assistance in Indonesia 
Connectivity DPL 
Road Asset Preservation Project 
Indonesia Development Policy Loan 8 
Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation Project 
Greater Bandung WSS 
Water Supply Output Based Disbursement 
Health Professional Education Quality Project (additional) 
Geothermal Clean Energy Investment Project 
Sustainable Management of Agricultural Research and Technology
Dissemination (SMARTD) 
Infrastructure Guarantee Fund (IIGF) 
Power Transmission II 
Research and Innovation 
Reforming Pre-service Teacher Training 

BOS KITA3 

150 
150 
160 
600 
200 
225 
200 
2,890 

700 
200 

30 
300 
500 

375 
50 
90 

80 
300 
60 
95 
75 

35 

150

600

225
200

3.245

531

2,000

400
139

175

Delivered (FY12)
Delivered (FY11) 
Delivered (FY12)
Delivered (FY11) 
Dropped
Delivered (FY11) 
Delivered (FY11) 

Delivered (FY12) 
Dropped

Delivered (FY12) 
To be delivered (FY13)
To be delivered (FY14
Delivered (FY12) 
Delivered (FY12) 
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Delivered (FY13) 

Delivered (FY13)
Delivered (FY13)
To be delivered (FY13)
To be delivered (FY13)
Dropped

Dropped

91

Annex 2.3

INDONESIA: Trust Funds, FYO9-12*

TRUST FUNDS

Approved 
Amut 

Effective 
Dt 

Activation
ae 

Project 

TF ID 

Closing

Amount 

Date 

Date

PA 3 - Provincial Government Support Program 

TF096864 

2,000,000 

26-May-10 

25-Jun-10 

30-Sep-11

Making Aceh Safer Through Disaster Risk Reduction In Development (Drr-A) 

TF093151 

9,870,000 

22-Oct-08 

6-Nov-08 

31-May-12

Aceh Government Transformation Program 

TF092292 

16,976,163 

22-Jul-08 

14-Aug-08 

30-Jun-12

Nias Island Transition Project 

TF093866 

4,590,000 

1-Apr-09 

19-Jul-09 

30-Jun-12

Indonesia Geothermal Power Preparation Grant 
Partner Agency implemented Projects in the Recovery of Communities in Aceh and
Nias 

TF094705 

2,392,486 

28-Sep-09 

12-Oct-09 

30-Jun-12

TF012569 

750,959 

26-Jun-12 

29-Jun-12 

30-Jun-12

Grant to UGM on Sub-National Capacity Building Programs 
Support for the Implementation of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI) 
in Indonesia 

TF098043 

3,901,171 

30-Nov-10 

12-Jan-11 

31-Jul-12

TF099302 

1,050,000 

22-Jun-11 

11-Jul-11 

22-Oct-12

MDF- Aceh Economic Development Financing Facility Project 

TF093358 

50,000,000 

30-Mar-09 

8-Apr-09 

30-Nov-12

Basic Education Capacity - Gol Executed 

TF091895 

21,819,991 

5-Jun-08 

10-Jul-08 

31-Dec-12

WASAP D - Sanitation Community and Municipal Pilots 

TF094270 

2,210,632 

15-Nov-08 

14-Feb-10 

31-Dec-12

Technical Assistance For Flood Mitigation 
Co-financing Grant to PNPM for Decentralized Management of Natural Resources and
Renewable Energy 

TF092649 

4,127,200 

19-Dec-08 

20-Jan-09 

31-Dec-12

TF093076 

34,000,000 

24-Dec-08 

19-Jan-09 

31-Dec-12

GPOBA W3 - Indonesia - Expanding Piped Water Supply To Surabaya's Urban Poor 
Support Facility for the National Program for Community Development/Program
Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (PNPM), Environmental Pilot Project - 'Green'
PNPM 

TF091511 

2,407,500 

24-Jun-09 

7-Jul-09 

31-Dec-12

TF096887 

2,295,400 

1-Sep-09 

28-Jun-10 

31-Dec-12

Nias Rural Access and Capacity Building Project 

TF095247 

16,000,000 

10-Sep-09 

5-Nov-09 

31-Dec-12

Reimbursement of administrative cost for TF095247 

TF095482 

480,000 

26-Oct-09 

6-Jan-10 

31-Dec-12

Infrastructure Reconstruction Financing Facility - Additional Financing 

TF098082 

36,700,000 

19-Oct-10 

18-Nov-10 

31-Dec-12

92

Nias Livelihoods and Economic Development Program (Nias LEDP) 

TF096865 

8,200,000 

22-Oct-10 

10-Nov-10 

31-Dec-12

PNPM Rural III - Disaster Recovery Support 

TF098819 

13,900,000 

9-Dec-10 

18-Apr-11 

31-Dec-12

PNPM Rural III - Disaster Management Support 

TF098862 

200,000 

9-Dec-10 

18-Apr-11 

31-Dec-12

Settlement Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Project (Rekompak) 

TF098863 

400,000 

9-Dec-10 

15-Apr-11 

31-Dec-12

Settlement Rehabilitation And Reconstruction Project (Rekompak) 

TF098869 

11,100,000 

9-Dec-10 

15-Apr-11 

31-Dec-12

PNPM Urban III - Disaster Management Support 
Third National Program for Community Empowerment in Rural Areas (PNPM-Rural Ill)
Additional Financing 
Integrated Management Information System (MIS) for PNPM Mandiri - SIMPADU
(Phase 2) Project 

TF098870 

1,400,000 

9-Dec-10 

15-Apr-11 

31-Dec-12

TF099616 

32,700,000 

31-Mar-11 

12-Jul-11 

31-Dec-12

TF099083 

977,000 

13-May-11 

9-Jun-11 

31-Dec-12

Advisory and Analytical Activities to Support Public Procurement Reform 

TF098847 

750,000 

10-Jun-11 

24-Jun-11 

31-Dec-12

PNPM GREEN Awareness Raising Project in Sumatera 

TF011930 

265,000 

25-Apr-12 

30-May-12 

31-Dec-12

Communications and Outreach Grant to BAKTI 
Preparation Phase under the Partnership for Carbon Market Readiness (PMR) in
Indonesia 

TF097213 

454,500 

26-Jul-10 

10-Aug-10 

31-Mar-13

TF011883 

350,000 

7-May-12 

17-May-12 

31-Mar-13

Papuan Women's Empowerment Project (PAWE) 

TF093439 

1,728,443 

1-Apr-09 

12-May-10 

11-May-13

WASPOLA Facility RE 

TF095502 

2,325,490 

23-Aug-10 

2-Sep-10 

31-May-13

GPOBA - Improved Access To Water Services In Jakarta Water Project 

TF091024 

1,801,198 

1-Nov-07 

30-Jul-08 

30-Jun-13

GPOBA - Improved Access To Water Services In Jakarta Water Project 

TF091025 

771,942 

1-Nov-07 

30-Jul-08 

30-Jun-13

GEF FSP - Indonesia: Geothermal Power Generation Development Project 

TF092324 

4,000,000 

15-Dec-07 

24-Oct-08 

30-Jun-13

GPOBA W3- Extending Telecommunication In Rural Indonesia 

TF092629 

1,868,338 

19-Jun-09 

30-Jun-09 

30-Jun-13

Lahendong II 20 MW Geothermal Project 
W2-Supporting the Indonesian Corruption Eradication Commission's corruption
prevention strategy 

TFO91097 

4,472,853 

23-Jul-09 

29-Jul-09 

30-Jun-13

TF094467 

600,000 

2-Jul-10 

13-Jul-10 

30-Jun-13

KTF Support for Statistical Capacity Building (Recipient-Executed) 

TF098283 

350,000 

15-Nov-10 

28-Dec-10 

30-Jun-13

93

Building Local Capacity for Policy Advice in Aceh Project 

TF099736 

540,000 

24-Jun-11 

8-Nov-11 

30-Jun-13

Integrated Community Legal Empowerment (ICLE) Project 

TF010255 

325,000 

13-Sep-11 

21-Oct-11 

30-Jun-13

IDF Grant for Indonesia Support to BPK for Preparation of New Strategic Plan 

TF096643 

258,000 

4-Aug-10 

9-Aug-10 

4-Aug-13

IDF Grant for Indonesia Support to BPKP on Pilot Implementation of COSO Framework 

TF096644 

250,000 

9-Aug-10 

26-Aug-10 

9-Aug-13

The Community Ranger Program 

TF099737 

2,600,000 

26-Aug-11 

8-Nov-11 

31-Aug-13

JSDF - Empowering Women Overseas Migrant Workers 

TF091169 

1,563,770 

30-Apr-10 

6-May-10 

31-Oct-13

Program To Improve Trade & Investment Climate 
PAMSIMAS - Support for the Third Water Supply and Sanitation for Low Income
Communities Project (Recipient executed) 

TF094088 

1,580,000 

13-Apr-09 

27-Apr-09 

31-Dec-13

TF094792 

32,611,292 

10-Sep-09 

17-Sep-09 

31-Dec-13

ID-TF PNPM Generasi (Community Cct) Scale-Up 

TF097410 

73,323,000 

16-Aug-10 

2-Sep-10 

31-Dec-13

PNPM Peduli Executing Organization: Lakpesdam Project 

TF099535 

1,520,600 

30-Jun-11 

25-Jul-11 

31-Dec-13

ID-TF PNPM Peduli Executing Organization: Kemitraan 

TF099554 

2,733,300 

30-Jun-11 

18-Jul-11 

31-Dec-13

ID-TF PNPM Peduli Executing Organization: Association for Community Empowerment 

TF099555 

1,966,800 

30-Jun-11 

18-Jul-11 

31-Dec-13

PNPM Community Facilitators Development Program (CFDP) 

TF012270 

1,193,000 

1-Feb-12 

16-Jul-12 

31-Dec-13

National Violence Monitoring System Indonesia (Component 2) 

TF010265 

653,500 

2-Dec-11 

17-Dec-11 

31-Mar-14

Sustaining Women's Leadership 

TF095058 

1,843,105 

26-Apr-10 

4-May-10 

26-Apr-14

National Violence Monitoring System (NVMS) 
Preparing Bappenas for the Future: Strategic Management and Institutional
Strengthening Project 

TF010266 

1,014,070 

16-Jan-12 

25-Jan-12 

31-May-14

TF099200 

435,000 

12-Sep-11 

27-Sep-11 

12-Sep-14

INDONESIA - Bekasi Landfill Gas Flaring Project 

TF091245 

2,515,013 

20-Apr-09 

7-Oct-10 

31-Dec-14

GIKOKO - Makassar LFG Flaring Project 

TF092829 

2,708,475 

20-Apr-09 

6-May-09 

31-Dec-14

Indonesia - FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant 

TF099721 

3,196,428 

10-Jun-11 

18-Jul-11 

31-Dec-14

Indonesia Slum Alleviation Policy and Action Plan (SAPOLA) 

TF097331 

455,000 

6-Oct-10 

25-Oct-10 

31-Mar-15

94

Geothermal Development in Indonesia: Technical Assistance for Capacity Building of
Pertamina Geothermal Energy (PGE) 

TF011854 

6,950,000 

24-May-12 

21-Jun-12 

31-Mar-15

Indonesia Geothermal Clean Energy Investment Project 

TF010407 

125,000,000 

29-Jun-12 

12-Aug-11 

31-Mar-15

Analysis of Alternative REDD+ Financing Mechanisms, Indonesia Grant Bank-Executed 

TF099409 

149,030 

31-Mar-11 

1-Apr-11 

31-Mar-12

SLUM UPGRADING AND LOW INCOME HOUSING 

TF093033 

500,000 

12-Sep-08 

13-Oct-08 

30-Jun-12

Infrastructure Public Expenditure Review 

TF095370 

259,000 

15-Oct-09 

7-Oct-09 

30-Jun-12

Spatial Planning and Balanced Regional Growth 

TF095483 

107,000 

19-Oct-09 

23-Oct-09 

30-Jun-12

Development of The Framework and Policies for Infrastructure PPP 

TF093725 

595,000 

27-Jan-09 

3-Feb-09 

30-Jul-12

Indonesia Water and Sanitation Financing Program 
INDONESIA: Improving Farmers Livelihood through Biological-based Farming System in
Irrigated Agriculture (Seed Fund). 

TF010908 

135,000 

18-Oct-11 

23-Oct-11 

15-Aug-12

TF011383 

35,000 

18-Dec-11 

28-Dec-11 

30-Sep-12

PPIAF SNTA INDONESIA: Jakarta Credit Rating 

TF011980 

75,000 

1-Mar-12 

14-Mar-12 

30-Sep-12

Forest Investment Program in Indonesia 
ID: Geothermal Diaries: The Journey of Developing the Ulubelu and Lahendong fields in
Indonesia 

TF098929 

156,210 

20-Jan-11 

8-Feb-11 

30-Nov-12

TF099499 

162,500 

31-Mar-11 

15-Apr-11 

30-Nov-12

Renewable Energy for Electrification - PLN Capacity Building in HOMER 

TF012077 

50,000 

16-Mar-12 

22-Mar-12 

30-Nov-12

Pioneering Smart Grid transformation: Indonesia and Brazil 

TF012139 

48,200 

2-Apr-12 

3-Apr-12 

30-Nov-12

Advisory and Analytical Activities to Support Public Procurement Reform 

TF096225 

250,000 

5-Jan-10 

12-Feb-10 

30-Dec-12

JSDF Poverty Reduction And Women's Leadership: The "Prime" Project (BANK EXE) 
Advisory And Analytical Activities To Support Public Financial Management Reforms
2009-2011 

TF091172 

40,000 

5-Jun-08 

6-Aug-08 

31-Dec-12

TF093757 

2,400,000 

1-Jan-09 

6-Feb-09 

31-Dec-12

Advisory Services In Support Of Tax Administration Reforms 

TF093765 

910,000 

1-Jan-09 

12-Feb-09 

31-Dec-12

ID-TF PNPM Supervision and Monitoring (Urban) 

TF095751 

800,000 

16-Sep-09 

27-Nov-09 

31-Dec-12

Corruption Prevention Capacity Building 

TF096940 

1,623,990 

10-May-10 

14-May-10 

31-Dec-12

Advisory Services in Support of Tax Administration Reforms 

TF098026 

861,750 

1-Oct-10 

11-Oct-10 

31-Dec-12

95

ID-TF Local Government Capacity Development 

TF098107 

1,730,000 

18-Oct-10 

25-Oct-10 

31-Dec-12

Indonesia Urban Poverty Analysis, Program Review and PNPM-Urban Evaluation 

TF098255 

640,000 

21-Oct-10 

8-Nov-10 

31-Dec-12

Identification and Implementation of Transport Activities in Indonesia 

TF099709 

200,000 

5-May-11 

16-May-11 

31-Dec-12

Indonesia Water Sector Activities - INDII 

TF099799 

100,000 

25-May-11 

1-Jun-11 

31-Dec-12

Energy Efficiency Financing Framework 

TF010697 

170,000 

19-Sep-11 

28-Sep-11 

31-Dec-12

Indonesia Country Coordination and Advocacy 

TF010664 

700,000 

20-Sep-11 

22-Sep-11 

31-Dec-12

DEWATS ESW Review Indonesia 

TF010767 

150,000 

16-Oct-11 

4-Oct-11 

31-Dec-12

Geothermal Power Development Program II 

TF011403 

506,000 

13-Nov-11 

20-Dec-11 

31-Dec-12

Indonesia Urban Solid Waste Management Program 

TF011392 

100,000 

1-Dec-11 

16-Dec-11 

31-Dec-12

Indonesia: Scaling up Access to Clean and Efficient Cooking Stoves 

TF011633 

360,000 

19-Jan-12 

24-Jan-12 

31-Dec-12

Indonesia - Fuel to Power Value Chain Optimization 
W2-Supporting The Indonesian Corruption Eradication Commission's Corruption
Prevention Strategy 

TF011734 

170,000 

8-Feb-12 

7-Feb-12 

31-Jan-13

TF094468 

150,000 

11-May-09 

27-May-09 

30-Apr-13

HRM and Communication 

TF097875 

1,249,149 

1-Oct-10 

27-Sep-10 

30-Apr-13

Advisory and Analytical Activities to Support Public Financial Management Reforms 

TF098024 

1,199,980 

1-Oct-10 

11-Oct-10 

30-Apr-13

Trust Fund Management and Administration 

TF098027 

295,500 

1-Oct-10 

11-Oct-10 

30-Apr-13

Analytical and Capacity Support to Improve Expenditure and Revenue Policy 
W4.2 - Strengthening Governance, Improving Incentives and Reducing Non Collection
and Leakages in Indonesia's Non-tax Revenue Regime 

TF098412 

920,000 

15-Oct-10 

25-Nov-10 

30-Apr-13

TF012560 

197,500 

3-Jun-12 

11-Jun-12 

30-Apr-13

Papuan Women's Empowerment Project (PAWE) (BANK-EXECUTED) 

TF093441 

75,000 

1-Apr-09 

9-Oct-09 

11-May-13

ICT Technical Assistance Program 

TF097339 

211,000 

15-Jul-10 

19-Jul-10 

30-May-13

WASPOLA FACILITY 
INDONESIA: Secure Government Communications and Priority Application
Development Advisory Assistance 

TF094736 

4,941,536 

1-Jul-09 

15-Jul-09 

31-May-13

TF010512 

250,000 

1-Jun-11 

2-Sep-11 

1-Jun-13

96

Indonesia:GFDRR Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction in Indonesia # Phase II (Track
II TA Core) 

TF098020 

1,635,000 

10-Sep-10 

14-Oct-10 

28-Jun-13

ID-TF Consolidating Peaceful Development in Aceh (CPDA) 

TF096353 

2,239,812 

22-Feb-10 

8-Mar-10 

30-Jun-13

ID-TF CPDA Supervision and Operational 

TF096442 

520,600 

22-Feb-10 

19-Mar-10 

30-Jun-13

ID-TF CPDA Program Management and Administration 

TF096443 

284,850 

22-Feb-10 

19-Mar-10 

30-Jun-13

GPOBA (W3 SPN): Expansion of Water Services in Jakarta 

TF010064 

83,914 

1-Jul-10 

5-Jul-11 

30-Jun-13

Korea Trust Fund Support for Statistical Capacity Building (Bank-Executed) 

TF098484 

150,000 

1-Sep-10 

9-Dec-10 

30-Jun-13

Improving Indonesia's Connectivity 

TF097716 

250,000 

6-Sep-10 

2-Sep-10 

30-Jun-13

Food Price Crisis Response 

TF098146 

500,000 

19-Oct-10 

26-Oct-10 

30-Jun-13

EA/IND Scaling Up Rural Sanitation TSSM 1.5 

TF098715 

2,017,081 

17-Nov-10 

12-Jan-11 

30-Jun-13

StAR - Indonesia Country Engagement 

TF010930 

100,000 

1-Jul-11 

18-Nov-11 

30-Jun-13

Building Innovation Capacity in Clean Energy in Indonesia 

TF099957 

450,000 

1-Jul-11 

23-Jun-11 

30-Jun-13

GPOBA (W3 SPN):Expanding Piped Water Supply to Surabaya's Urban Poor - Indonesia 

TF011628 

149,939 

16-Jan-12 

25-Jan-12 

30-Jun-13

Indonesia - Renewable Energy Access Improvement 

TF011879 

350,000 

21-Feb-12 

27-Feb-12 

30-Jun-13

Indonesia - Renewable Energy Access Improvement 

TF012055 

350,000 

1-Apr-12 

21-Mar-12 

30-Jun-13

Indonesia: Irrigation Management Modernization 

TF012442 

250,000 

7-May-12 

22-May-12 

30-Jun-13

Eco2Cities Metropolitan and Urban Development - Phase 1 

TF012439 

150,000 

21-May-12 

22-May-12 

30-Jun-13

Land Market Assessment and Housing Market Segmentation - Phase 1 

TF012440 

225,000 

21-May-12 

22-May-12 

30-Jun-13

GPOBA (W3 SPN): Expansion of Water Services in Jakarta - Indonesia (BEA) 

TF011343 

35,914 

6-Dec-11 

12-Dec-11 

31-Aug-13

Enhancing Rice Price Stabilization 

TF012274 

80,000 

16-Mar-12 

26-Apr-12 

31-Aug-13

Production of Public Expenditure Analysis Reports 

TF094500 

1,387,410 

18-May-09 

3-Jun-09 

30-Sep-13

Technical Support and Capacity Building 

TF094880 

2,417,292 

16-Jul-09 

27-Jul-09 

30-Sep-13

97

Bank Operations 

TF098044 

395,000 

24-Oct-10 

14-Oct-10 

30-Sep-13

JSDF - Empowering Women Overseas Migrant Workers 

TF091170 

35,000 

30-Apr-10 

20-May-10 

31-Oct-13

Indonesia Urban Solid Waste Management Program 

TF011230 

65,000 

1-Dec-11 

30-Nov-11 

31-Oct-13

Building Innovation Capacity in Clean Energy in Indonesia 
COFINANCING GRANT TO PNPM FOR DECENTRALIZED MANAGEMENT OF NATURAL
RESOURCES AND RENEWABLE ENERGY (BANK EXE) 

TF011057 

500,000 

26-Oct-11 

8-Nov-11 

29-Nov-13

TF093077 

735,000 

15-Oct-08 

17-Oct-08 

30-Dec-13

Supporting the Implementation of Indonesia National Strategy on Access to Justice 

TF097761 

1,600,000 

13-Sep-10 

14-Sep-10 

30-Dec-13

ID-TF PNPM COMMUNICATION STRATEGY 

TF092288 

4,350,000 

12-Jun-08 

8-Jul-08 

31-Dec-13

THE RESPEK PROGRAM IN PAPUA AND WEST PAPUA PROVINCES (BANK EXECUTED) 

TF092648 

1,494,624 

30-Jul-08 

21-Aug-08 

31-Dec-13

ADMINISTRATION OF THE JAPAN INDONESIA PRESIDENTIAL SCHOLARSHIP 

TF093171 

800,000 

15-Oct-08 

28-Oct-08 

31-Dec-13

PNPM Mandiri Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) Capacity-Building and Sustainability Project 

TF096352 

8,890,866 

8-Feb-10 

9-Mar-10 

31-Dec-13

Partnership for Knowledge-based Poverty Reduction 

TF097488 

5,174,414 

9-Jul-10 

2-Aug-10 

31-Dec-13

Supervision of PKPR Activities 

TF097489 

241,207 

9-Jul-10 

2-Aug-10 

31-Dec-13

PKPR Management and Administration 

TF098456 

229,035 

31-Aug-10 

1-Dec-10 

31-Dec-13

ID-TF RESPEK: Program Management and Administration 

TF098191 

169,790 

6-Sep-10 

1-Nov-10 

31-Dec-13

GPOBA (W3Sup): Extending Telecommunication in Rural Indonesia 
ID PMR Supervision and Technical Assistance Related to Activities under the
Partnership for Market Readiness (PMR) in Indonesia 
National Program for Community Empowerment (PNPM) Window 3 - PNPM Peduli
Phase II 
Technical Assistance and Support to Bappenas and Kemenko Kesra (Pokja Pengendali
PNPM Mandiri) 

TF097960 

146,300 

10-Sep-10 

7-Oct-10 

31-Dec-13

TF011884 

50,000 

1-Sep-11 

28-Feb-12 

31-Dec-13

TF010671 

1,556,184 

19-Sep-11 

23-Sep-11 

31-Dec-13

TF010700 

1,661,867 

21-Sep-11 

28-Sep-11 

31-Dec-13

National Program for Community Empowerment (PNPM) Field Operations 

TF010808 

2,530,000 

26-Sep-11 

11-Oct-11 

31-Dec-13

Partnership for Social Security Reform 

TF011289 

375,000 

20-Oct-11 

5-Dec-11 

31-Dec-13

Sustaining Women's Leadership (Bank-executed) 

TF095059 

75,000 

26-Apr-10 

21-May-10 

26-Apr-14

98

MDTF TO IMPROVE TRADE CLIMATE 

TF093642 

3,980,000 

14-Jan-09 

22-Jan-09 

30-Sep-14

MDTF TO IMPROVE INVESTMENT CLIMATE 

TF093641 

4,665,000 

15-Jan-09 

22-Jan-09 

30-Sep-14

MDTF PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 

TF094087 

787,100 

26-Mar-09 

1-Apr-09 

30-Sep-14

PAMSIMAS - BANK OPERATIONAL WORK - SUPERVISION 

TF094793 

2,002,000 

5-Jul-09 

15-Jul-09 

30-Sep-14

PAMSIMAS - ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT 

TF094796 

350,000 

5-Jul-09 

15-Jul-09 

30-Sep-14

PAMSIMAS - Technical Assistance for MIS and Evaluation Study 

TF094970 

797,378 

1-Aug-09 

7-Aug-09 

30-Sep-14

Support for Enhanced Macro Economic and Fiscal Policy Analysis 
DUTCH EDUCATION SUPPORT PROGRAM - BANK EXECUTED (PROGRAM
ADMINISTRATION) 
USAID Support for the National Program for Community Empowerment (PNPM) -
Program Management and Administration 

TF012147 

1,500,000 

29-Mar-12 

12-Apr-12 

30-Dec-14

TF093118 

340,800 

10-Apr-08 

17-Oct-08 

31-Dec-14

TF010256 

2,888,268 

1-Jul-11 

16-Sep-11 

31-Dec-14

USAID Supervision and Operational 

TF010260 

149,259 

1-Jul-11 

26-Jul-11 

31-Dec-14

Indonesia FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant Bank-Executed 

TF099269 

403,568 

3-Mar-11 

20-Mar-11 

5-Jan-15

Indonesia Slum Alleviation Policy and Action Plan (SAPOLA) 

TF097332 

45,000 

9-Jul-10 

21-Jul-10 

31-Mar-15

INDONESIA INFRASTRUCTURE SUPPORT - ADMINISTRATION COST 

TF093240 

384,859 

14-Oct-08 

4-Nov-08 

30-Jun-15

Indonesia Sovereign Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance 

TF010729 

200,000 

26-Sep-11 

30-Sep-11 

31-Aug-16

*Based on activation date in FY 09 - FY 12

99

Annex 2.4: Indonesia: Analytical and Advisory Work, FYO9-12

Economic and Sector Work
FY 2009

TF Papua and West Papua ICT Infrastructure and Service Assessment 
Agricultural Research and Development Public Expenditure Analysis 
Health system strengthening - Fiscal Space analysis for health sector 
ID-Health Finance & Dialogue 
Understanding Labor Market Structures and Policies in Indonesia 
Sustainable Economic Development Strategy for Aceh (SEDSA) 
Fuel Quality Issues and Air Pollution 
ID-HIV Interventions 
Budget reform in Indonesia, IMF-WB 
Indonesia DPR FY2008 

FY2010
FSAP Indonesia 
Papua Infrastructure Strategy and Prioritization 
Indonesia Health Workforce and Improvement Services 
Dutch TF - Poverty Reduction Through Strengthening Economic Governance 
ID-Teacher Management 
Indonesia's Development Strategy: Dancing with giants in a world of high commodity prices 
Sub-national Surplus and Reserves 
Intergovernmental Transfer 
NGO Sector assessment: Indonesia Report 
Gender Action Plan: Empowering Female Migrant Workers and Their Families Through Improving Access to Finance 
Indonesia II - Corporate Governance ROSC Assessment 
Spending for Development (Supporting RPJM 2010-2014) 
Agriculture Public Expenditure Review Indonesia 

100

AAA ID 

Delivered to 
Client FY 

Output
Type

P111343 
P114693 
P110116 
P107276 
P104951 
P113716 
P109140 
P107625 
P112100 
P102317 

P104083 
P114181 
P101723 
P104356 
P110513 
P107060 
P110716 
P110714 
P117198 
P110782 
P116861 
P113920 
P114141 

7/1/2009 
9/16/2009 
1/30/2009 
5/28/2009 
11/25/2009 
7/29/2009 
6/30/2009 
6/25/2009 
3/23/2009 
6/22/2010 

4/1/2010
10/21/2009 
10/28/2009 
12/17/2009 
5/20/2010 
3/17/2011 
8/3/2009 
8/3/2009 
5/18/2010
6/30/2010 
3/26/2010
6/29/2010 
6/30/2010 

RPT
RPT
RPT
RPT
RPT
RPT
POL
RPT
RPT
RPT

RPT
RPT
POL
RPT
RPT
POL
POL

RPT

POL
RPT

FY 2011

Territorial Reform 
Indonesian Social Protection Public Expenditure Review (PER) 
Improving Targeting Performance of Poverty Programs 
HIV/AIDS PET Study (UBW 1st Tranche) 
Indonesia ROSC Update Accounting and Audit 

FY 2012
DSF II Focal Area 3 - National Program for Community Empowerment 
ID-Education and Training to Improve Youth Skills, Competitiveness and Employment 
East Java Growth Diagnostic 
National Road Map for Water Supply Investment 
Sub-national Borrowing 
Assessment of the Road Construction Industry in Indonesia 
Indonesia - Public Expenditure Review of the Infrastructure Sector 
Education Sector Financing and Expenditure Review 
Indonesia Economic Quarterly and policy notes 

Technical Assistance
FY 09 Deliverables
Tech assistance to Health Systems Strengthening Initiative 
DSF II Focal Area 3 - National Program for Community Empowerment 
ID-TF Enhancing Demand for Legal and Judicial Reform 
DSF II Focal Area 3 - National Program for Community Empowerment 
Aceh-Nias Water and Sanitation Facility 
Indonesia Youth Investment GOI Support 
DSF II Focal Area 3 - National Program for Community Empowerment 
DSF II Focal Area 3 - National Program for Community Empowerment 
Country Partnership Strategy Sustainability Platform 

FY10 Deliverables
Civil Service Reform in Indonesia 

101

POL
RPT
RPT
RPT
RPT

POL
RPT
RPT
RPT
POL
RPT
RPT
RPT
POL

P110718 
P117977 
P113345 
P116361 
P116987 

P107033 
P110512 
P119656 
P122375 
P110715 
P117179 
P117178 
P122984 
P122979 

P110117 
P107191 
P105945 
P104387 
P099172 
P099128 
P107188 
P107190 
P113859 

9/10/2009 
6/28/2011 
6/28/2011 
6/28/2011 
6/30/2011 

11/19/2010 
11/4/2010 
12/5/2011 
6/20/2012 
3/12/2012 
4/24/2012 
4/24/2012 
6/29/2012 
6/12/2012 

1/13/2009
1/30/2009
4/6/2009
4/30/2009
5/29/2009
5/29/2009
6/16/2009
6/23/2009
6/30/2009

P114903 

7/1/2009

Nias LEDP 
DSF 11 Focal Area 3 - National Program for Community Empowerment 
Indonesia Infrastructure Guarantee Fund (IGF) 
Indonesia Telecom & ICT Advisory Support 
Implementation Support to Financial Sector/FSD Monitoring 
Decentralization: Capacity Enhancement for Eastern Indonesia: Papua Public Expenditure Analysis and Capacity
Harmonization Program (PEACH) 
Governance & Civil Service Reform Dialog 
GFDRR: Indonesia PDNA 
Water Supply and Sanitation Financing Initiative (WASAP 1) 
Improving Indonesia's Investment Climate 
DSF 11 Focal Area 3 - National Program for Community Empowerment 
ID-Education Sector Assessment 
Aceh Dialogue Economic Policy 
Program to Improve Indonesia's Trade Policy 
Indonesia PEFA Follow Up 

FY 11 Deliverables
ID-CCT (Conditional Cash Transfers) 
Poverty Dialogues on Pro Poor and Pro Jobs Strategies and Programs 
Supporting Establishment of Indonesia's Crisis Monitoring System Technical Assistance 
ID-Access to Finance 
DSF 11 Focal Area 3 - National Program for Community Empowerment 
DSF II - Support to Sub-National Entries 
DSF II - Support to Sub-National Entries 
ID: Building Blocks for E-Govt Capability 
Benchmarking Service Sector in Indonesia 

FY 12 Deliverables
Education Sector Dialogue and Strategy 
Support for Bureaucratic Reform in MoT 
Subnational Capital Markets 

102

P112439 
P107406 
P1 14363 
P113803 
P107524 

P104695 
P103788 
P119682 
P109571 
P113347 
P107031 
P110515 
P117755 
P099975 
P119601 

P106082 
P113344 
P116979 
P104430 
P107189 
P107057 
P107059 
P115843 
P104696 

7/15/2009
7/19/2009
7/30/2009
10/26/2009
11/4/2009

11/7/2009
11/23/2009
11/30/2009
2/16/2010
5/26/2010
5/28/2010
4/5/2010
6/1/2010
6/24/2010
6/30/2010

7/13/2010
8/31/2010
10/13/2010
10/25/2010
11/19/2010
11/19/2010
11/24/2010
2/1/2011
2/2/2011

P119259 
P123179 
P114383 

7/7/2011
11/1/2011
11/21/2011

ID - Supporting Post-Conflict Dev (TF) 
ID (TF) Demand for Legal Reform 
Planning and Performance Measurement 
Fiscal Decentralization & Capacity Development 
Data for Monitoring and Evaluation 
Alternative Mechanisms of Service Delivery 
Minimum Service Standards 
Anti-Corruption 
Support for Enhanced Analysis and Monitoring of the Indonesia (SEAMIE) 
Indonesia 2010 PEFA 
PNPM - Strategic Directions 
Support for Public Expenditure Analysis 
Health Sector Reform Agenda TA 
Monitoring and Evaluation Technical Assistance 
Indonesia HIV/AIDS Analysis and Dissemination 
Renewable Energy Project Design 
StAR - Indonesia Country Engagement 

P108748 
P1 14840 
P118498 
P119420 
P110717 
P110721 
P110720 
P104742 
P116552 
P123229 
P120212 
P122981 
P116882 
P120335 
P121279 
P130999 
P128636 

11/30/2011
11/30/2011
3/12/2012
3/12/2012
3/12/2012
3/12/2012
3/12/2012
3/30/2012
6/1/2012
6/7/2012
6/11/2012
6/12/2012
6/12/2012
6/12/2012
6/15/2012
6/24/2012
5/25/2012

103

A. The Current State of the Indonesian Economy

Annex 3: Economic Outlook

1. 
Supported by domestic demand, Indonesia's recent growth performance has remained
robust although, as in other countries in the region, there have been spillovers from the
deterioration in the global economy and volatility in international financial markets. Growth in
2011 moved up to 6.5 percent year-on-year, the highest annual growth rate since 1996, from 6.1 percent
in 2010 (Figure 1). In the first half of 2012 growth remained solid, at 6.3 percent and 6.4 percent in the
first two quarters, despite the weakness in the external environment. Domestic demand, particularly
private consumption and investment, has continued to drive growth. However, weakening external
demand has subtracted from growth since late 2011, in line with the deterioration in the trade and
current account balances discussed below. Recent growth has also been broad-based across sectors, as
the strength of domestic demand continues to support growth in key services sectors, such as trade,
transport and communications. Within the tradable sectors, non-oil and gas manufacturing has also
performed relatively strongly.

Figure 1 
: With 
the external demand Figure 2: The widening current account deficit
weakening, private domestic demand has 
in Q2 2012 
contributed 
to 
the 
fourth
supported Indonesia's recent robust growth 
consecutive overall balance of payment deficit

(percentage point contribution to quarter-on- 
quarter seasonally adjusted growth)

(US$ billion)

4 Percent 

Percent 

3 

2 

1 

o 

-1 

-2 

-3 

Jun-09 

Mar-10 

Dec-10 

Sep-1I 

4 

3 

2 

1 

o 

-1 

-2 

USD billion 
USD billion
m 
Net direct investment m 
Net portfolio
m 
Net other capital 
m Current account

-

Overall balance 

16 

12 

8 

0 

-8 

16

12

8

4

0

4

-8

r 

-3 
Jun-12 

m Discrepancy mmNet Exports 

Investment 

m Gov cons- 

m 

Private cons 

-

GDP

-12 
Ju n-09 

Ju n-1 0 

Jun-1 1 

-12
Ju n-1 2

Sources: BPS and World Bank 

Note: Contributions may not sum to GDP due to seasonal
adjustment

Sources: BPS and World Bank

2. 
Inflation has remained relatively stable over the past year as food price spikes have
unwound and the likelihood of subsidized fuel price hikes has decreased. Sharp increases in food
prices contributed to rising headline CPI inflation in late 2010. But, as these shocks unwound, inflation
declined over 2011 and reached a two-year low of 3.6 percent year-on-year in February 2012. Since
then inflation has moved up gradually, to 4.6 percent year-on-year in July 2012, due mainly to higher
food prices. Core inflation has also remained low at 4.3 percent in July. Expectations of higher prices
associated with a potential adjustment of subsidized fuel prices have also subsided with the reduced
likelihood of such a policy change (see discussion below).

3. 
Following strong inflows over 2010 and 2011, overall balance of payments outflows have
been seen since Q3 2011 (Figure 2). These represent the first quarterly deficits since the end of 2008.
Initially, in the second half of 2011, outflows were due primarily to the reversal of inflows on the

104

volatile capital account. Subsequently, the main driver of the net balance of payments outflow has been
the diminishing current account balance, moving into deficit in the fourth quarter of 2011 and hitting a
record low since the Asian crisis in the second quarter of 2012. As a result of these trends, and with BI
taking measures to stabilize the exchange rate, international reserves have also fallen over 2012, moving
to US$109.0 billion at end-August 2012, around 2.2 times the level of recorded short-term external debt
by remaining maturity.

4. 
In recent years, as in other emerging markets, portfolio capital flows to Indonesia have been
affected by the swings in international investor risk aversion and concern over global growth
prospects. Periods of heightened international risk aversion have contributed to portfolio capital
outflows from Indonesia, primarily of local currency fixed income securities (Figure 3). Non-resident
investor holdings of local assets are relatively high, for example, their holdings of rupiah-denominated
tradable government securities (SUNs), at US$23.7 billion at end-July 2012, accounted for 28.4 percent
of the outstanding stock. As discussed below Bank Indonesia has introduced a number of measures in
recent years to address the risks of short-term portfolio outflows. Direct investment inflows, attracted by
Indonesia's large and growing domestic market, its natural resources and relatively low manufacturing
labor costs, has been rising gradually since 2010. Inflows moderated in the second half of 2011 but
remained relatively strong, moving total inflows up to US$18.9 billion in 2011 from US$13.8 billion in
2010. FDI continued to be solid at US$8.2 billion in the first half of 2012 despite slowing from US$10.3
billion in the same period 2011.

5. 
The trend move into a current account deficit reflects to a large extent the strength of
Indonesia's domestic demand set against weakening external demand. These factors have
contributed to a decline in the goods trade surplus while there has been a continuation of the large
services deficit and rising outflows on the income balance (in line with strong FDI). Both declining
commodity prices and volumes have also contributed to falling export growth as the monthly trade
balance moved into deficit from April to July 2012. Imports have also come down, with a lag as in
2009, in part likely because a capital and intermediate goods imports are related to exports. External
debt-to-GDP has been on a downward trend (moving to 27.3 percent at end-June 2012 from 35.9
percent at end-2006) and is likely to remain stable despite a higher current account deficit (see IMF
2012 Article IV external debt sustainability assessment). There is, though, the risk that, in the current
fragile external environment, a further widening of the deficit raises concerns over external financing
needs. Should weaker export demand persist, this risk should be mitigated by a reduction in imports
used to produce exports and the impacts of price adjustment through the weakening of the exchange
rate. On the capital account side, it is encouraging that, as discussed above, FDI has, to date, remained
solid (accounting for a rising share of capital inflows).

105

Figure 1: Reserves have declined on weaker 
portfolio, and trade balance, inflows 

Figure 2: The goods trade balance has
narrowed over 2012

USD billion 

USD billion 

(US$ billion) 

(US$ billion and percentage change, year-on-year)

-
Export value (LHS)
mmmm Import value (LHS)

----
-

Trade balance (LHS)
Export growth 3mma yoy (RHS) Percent
Import growth 3mma yoy (RHS)
80

150 

125 

100 

75 

50 

25 

Non-resident portfolio
inflows, (RHS): 

Reserves 
(LHS) 

50 

25 

oo 

USD 
billion 
20 

10 

-2-5 

0 

-5 0 

-10 

40

-- 

.. . . I -

a i 

0

-40

-80

Jul-09 

Jul-10 

Jul- 1 

Sources: Bank Indonesia, CEIC, JSEI, World Bank 

Jul-08 

Jul-09 

Jul-10 

Jul-i1 

Jul-12

Source: BPS and World Bank

iEquities mSUN mSBI

'-7-5 
Jul-12 

-20 

6. 
The volatility in international capital markets has been transmitted to local asset prices,
although domestic banking sector performance remains solid. As in international markets, over the
past year Indonesian equities have seen sharp swings in prices. The rupiah has also come under
pressure, depreciating 12.9 percent against the US dollar to Rp 9,573 per US$ from the beginning of
August 2011 to 30 August 2012. Local currency government bond yields have risen gradually over
2012 as a mixed consequence of the expectation on higher future inflation, related to the potential hike
in the subsidized fuel price, and then rising international risk aversion. However, they remain at
relatively low levels historically (with the five-year yields at around 5.5 percent). Overall banking sector
indicators have remained solid. The capital adequacy ratio, while down slightly, remains at 17 percent.
Non-performing loans were down half a percentage point over the year to 2.2 percent.

7. 
Strong growth over the past five years 
is reflected 
in a significant improvement in
Indonesia's poverty and employment numbers. Indonesia's poverty rate, measured at the national
poverty line, fell from 16.6 percent in March 2007 to 12.0 percent in March 2012. Both urban and rural
poverty rates have been declining and the decline was spatially uniform. However, the 0.5 percentage
point decline since March 2011 is the lowest drop in ten years, reflecting the slowing rate of poverty
reduction evident in the last four years The poverty rates over this period for male-headed and female-
headed households are similar (although female-headed household poverty experienced considerably
more volatility earlier in the decade). Despite this positive progress, nearly 40 percent of Indonesians
live on 1.5 times poverty-line expenditure (or less), meaning there are many who remain vulnerable to
impoverishment. There remains the challenge of ensuring that GDP growth translates into sufficient
creation of quality jobs. Employment growth of 3.2 percent year-on-year was seen in August 2010,
falling to 1.4 percent in February 2012. There were changes in the weighting series between August
2010 and February 2011 which makes employment growth comparisons for February 2010 and August
2011 difficult. The official open unemployment rate has continued to trend downwards, falling to 6.3
percent in February 2012 from 6.6 percent in August a year before (or 6.8 percent on February 2011).

106

B. The Macroeconomic Policy Framework

8. 
Bank Indonesia has shifted 
its monetary policy stance 
in 
line with 
international
developments and the prospects for the path of administered fuel prices. In anticipation of a

worsening external environment, and with inflation declining, Bank Indonesia loosened monetary policy
at the end of 2011 and beginning of 2012. Rate cuts in October, one of the earliest policy responses in
the region, were followed by further reductions in November 2011 and February 2012 respectively.
Furthermore, the lower bound of Bank Indonesia's operational corridor (the overnight deposit facility
rate) was also widened in September 2011 and January 2012, moving it to 200 basis points below the
policy rate. With the proposal to raise subsidized fuel prices, inflation expectations picked up and BI
indicated it was ready to shift its stance, including through measures to manage short-term liquidity.
Although inflation expectations have since receded, in August 2012 BI increased the overnight deposit
facility rate by 25 basis points, in part to support the exchange rate in the face of the current account
outflows. As in other economies, the central bank has also made increasing use of a range of macro
prudential tools. For example, in the context of strong credit growth (above 25 percent year-on-year) it
has imposed maximum loan-to-value ratios for housing loans and minimum down payment on vehicle
purchases.

9. 

In terms of exchange rate policy, the Rupiah has depreciated gradually over the year with

interventions to manage volatility. In early May 2012 there were reports of shortages in onshore US
dollar liquidity and BI has responded through a number of measures to support FX liquidity, for
example introducing a foreign currency "Term Deposit Instrument". These measures follow earlier
policy actions aimed at preventing disruptive capital outflows, such as example, reinstating limits on
short-term offshore borrowing of banks and raising holding periods on SBIs. With the rising demand for
dollars given the overall balance of payment outflows, there has been a gradual depreciation in the
exchange rate over the year with the authorities underscoring their commitment to exchange rate

flexibility in the 2012 IMF Article IV.

10. Fiscal deficits and debt continue to be conservative but the allocation of spending could be
improved and, with subsidy spending increasing, the deficit is projected to rise in 2012. The

realized (audited) 2011 government deficit of Rp 84.4 trillion (1.1 percent of GDP) came in well below
the revised Budget level of Rp 151 trillion (2.1 percent of GDP), as under-spending in core government
programs more than offset high spending on energy subsidies. The revised 2012 Budget increased the
deficit for the year to 2.2 percent of GDP, up from 1.5 percent of GDP in the original budget. The
upward revisions to the 2012 revenue and expenditure numbers were both driven by the increase in the
assumed oil price. In light of the likely higher spending on energy subsidies the Government proposed a
one-third increase in the subsidized fuel price in its draft revised Budget. However, the approved revised
Budget authorized the Government to make such an increase, but only if the six-month average
Indonesia crude oil price was 15 percent higher than the US$105 assumed in the Budget. The revised
Budget also included additional spending on temporary compensating programs in the event of a fuel
price increase, including a cash transfer to the poor combined with anti-poverty programs at the
community level and public transport subsidies while infrastructure spending also received a boost. As
in most previous years, realization of expenditures on core programs is likely to come in below budget
and revenues continue to grow strongly, although oil and gas non-tax revenue are lower than initially
projected due to lower oil lifting. Latest government projections are for the 2012 Budget deficit to come
in Rp 179 trillion, slightly below the revised Budget level in nominal terms but still 2.2 percent of GDP.
In terms of budget transparency, the central Government publishes its annual Budget in a timely
manner. It is usually posted on the Ministry of Finance website within one week after the Budget has
been passed.

107

11. For 2013, the Government's recently proposed budget projects a narrowing of the deficit to
1.6 percent of GDP, or Rp 150.2 trillion. The reduced deficit reflects the government's intention to
increase revenue to GDP (from 15.9 percent to 16.2 percent) as efforts continue to broaden the tax base,
while at the same time reducing nominal spending relative to GDP (to 17.9 percent of GDP vs. 18.2
percent in 2012). Despite this conservative overall spending stance, and an oil price assumption in 2013
of US$100 per barrel, US$5 lower than the 2012 assumption, there is a significant increase in energy
subsidy spending, driven by growing consumption and a weaker exchange rate; the energy subsidy
allocation is 62.9 (35.8) percent higher than the level in the original (revised) 2012 Budget. Total
subsidies (rising 29 percent on revised 2012 levels to Rp 316.1 trillion) along with personnel spending
(rising 13.6 percent from 2012 to Rp 241.1 trillion) thus continue to account for the lion's share of total
public expenditure. Capital spending, while projected to rise a further 15 percent in 2013, continues to
run into implementation constraints and will likely lag infrastructure development needs.

12. The decision not to increase subsidized fuel prices on 1 April in the approved 2012 Budget
was as a missed opportunity and there remains the need to redirect this spending to more pressing
development needs to support medium-term growth and development and to address the
distortions and inefficiencies of the current subsidies. The fall in international oil prices since early
May 2012 made it highly unlikely that the condition for a hike in subsidized fuel prices will be met. An
electricity price hike planned for 2012 that would have limited spending on electricity subsidies has also
been postponed. In the proposed 2013 Budget, there is no indication of a fuel price adjustment although
it is proposed that electricity tariffs be increased by 15 percent on average for higher wattage customers
(although details of this mechanism are to be decided and the proposal is subject to Parliamentary
approval). From the perspective of fiscal sustainability a higher deficit is manageable given Indonesia's
strong initial debt position and conservative deficits-to-GDP. However, in the case that oil prices move
up sharply, the risk of hitting Indonesia's three percent of GDP deficit limit could prompt a tightening in
spending in key development areas. Furthermore, it is the opportunity cost of the current spending on
subsidies that is of particular concern given other pressing development needs, along with the fact the
fuel subsidies are an ineffective and poorly-targeted method of assisting the poor (with the vast majority
of the benefits going to richer households who own cars and motorbikes).

108

Table 1: The revised Budget deficit target for 2012 is 2.2 percent of GDP

(Rp trillion, unless otherwise indicated)

2011 
Actual 

2012 
Budget 

2012 
Revised Budget 

2013
Proposed Budget

A. State Revenues and Grants 

i. Tax Revenues, of which 
Income Tax 
Sales tax (VAT) 
Excises 
Export taxes 
ii. Non Tax revenues, of which 
Natural resources 
B. Expenditures 

i. Central Government Expenditures, of

which 
Personnel 
Materials 
Capital 
Social 
Subsidies 
Fuel subsidies 
Electricity subsidies 
Interest payments 
ii Transfer to Regions 

C. Primary Balance 

D. Fiscal Balance 

Source: MoF and World Bank staff calculations

Share 
of 
GDP 

1,210.6 

16.3% 

11.8% 
5.8% 
3.7% 
1.0% 
0.4% 

873.9 
431.1 
277.8 
77.0 
28.9 
331.5 
4.5% 
213.8 
2.9% 
1,295.0 17.4% 

883.7 
175.7 
124.6 
117.9 
71.1 
295.4 
165.2 
90.4 
93.3 
411.3 

11.9% 
2.4% 
1.7% 
1.6% 
1.0% 
4.0% 
2.2% 
1.2% 
1.3% 
5.5% 

Share 
of 
GDP 

1,311.4 

16.2% 

12.7% 
6.4% 

1,032.6 
520.0 
352.9 
75.4 
19.2 
278.0 
177.3 
2.2% 
1,435.4 17.7% 

4.3% 
0.9% 
0.2% 

3.4% 

965.0 
215.9 
188.0 
152.0 
47.8 
208.9 
123.6 
45.0 
122.2 
470.4 

11.9% 
2.7% 
2.3% 
1.9% 
0.6% 
2.6% 
1.5% 
0.6% 
1.5% 
5.8% 

Share 
of GDP 

15.9% 

11.9% 
6.0% 
3.9% 
1.0% 
0.3% 
4.0% 
2.5% 
18.2% 

12.5% 
2.5% 
2.2% 
2.0% 
0.6% 
2.9% 
1.6% 
0.8% 
1.4% 
5.6% 

1,358.2 

1,016.2 
513.7 
336.1 
83.3 
23.2 
341.1 
217.2 
1,548.3 

1,069.5 
212.3 
186.6 
168.7 
55.4 
245.1 
137.4 
65.0 
117.8 
478.8 

Share
of
GDP

16.3%

12.7%
6.2%
4.6%
1.0%
0.3%
3.5%

2.1%
17.9%

12.3%
2.6%
1.7%
2.1%
0.6%
3.4%

2.1%
0.9%
1.2%
5.6%

1,507.7 

1,178.9 
574.3 
423.7 
89.0 
31.7 
324.3 
190.7 
1,657.9 

1,139.0 
241.1 
159.2 
193.8 
59.0 
316.1 
193.8 
80.9 
113.2 
518.9 

8.9 

0.1% 

-1.8 

0.0% 

-72.3 

-0.8% 

-37.0 

-0.4%

-84.4 

-1.1% 

-124.0 

-1.5% 

-190.1 

-2.2% 

-150.2 

-1.6%

Table 2: Bond sales account for the majority of net financing sources

(Rp trillion, unless otherwise indicated)

2011 
Actual 

2012 
Budget 

2012 
Revised Budget 

2013
Proposed Budget

Share 
of 
GDP 

1.8% 
1.8% 

0.5% 
1.5% 
1.6% 
-0.2% 

130.9 
130.9 

40.3 
108.4 
119.9 
-17.8 

Share 
of 
GDP 

1.5% 
1.5% 

0.1% 
1.4% 
1.7% 
0.0% 

124 
124 

8.9 
117 
134.6 
-1.9 

Share 
of GDP 

2.2% 
2.2% 

0.7% 
1.6% 
1.9% 
-0.1% 

190.1 
190.1 

60.6 
134 
159.6 
-4.4 

Share
of
GDP

130.9
130.9

40.3
108.4
119.9
-17.8

150.2 
150.2 

14.3 
155.3 
177.3 
-19.5 

A. Net financing needs 
B. Net financing sources, of which 

Domestic Banking 
Non-domestic Banking, of which 
Bond sales 
Foreign Official Loans 

Source: MoF and World Bank staff calculations

109

13. Low deficits, budget discipline, prudent fiscal policy and high nominal_GDP growth have
enabled Indonesia to reduce its public debt burden significantly. In the past ten years, Indonesia's
public debt-to-GDP ratio has fallen to slightly below 25 percent in 2011, from around 90 percent in
2000. This improvement in Indonesia's debt position stands out among other economies in the region
and has been possible through a combination of fiscal conservatism and high nominal GDP growth.
Indonesia's government debt-to-GDP ratio is likely to continue falling in the years ahead and the
downward debt dynamics appear to be robust to a plausible range of macroeconomic shocks, in line
with those suffered over the past 10 years (see Annex 5). This relatively positive picture focuses on
solvency issues rather than liquidity and roll-over risks, which may occur even if solvency is solid.
Indonesia's financing position is supported by cash reserves from previous over-financing and the still
conservative fiscal deficits. However, as highlighted above, a sharp tightening in global and domestic
financial markets, as seen in 2008, would potentially limit the Government's ability to meet gross
financing needs on reasonable terms. Recognizing this risk the Government has raised a sizeable share
of financing early in the year (with gross securities issuance at end-August at 73.4 percent of the full-
year target under the revised Budget) and has put in place contingent financing from donor partners,
including the World Bank's PERISAI operation.

14. 
In response to the deterioration in the current account deficit in Q2 2012, Bank Indonesia
and the Government also announced a number of policy responses. These policies were designed to
adjust the current account deficit to "a sustainable level to support the momentum of the national
economy". For example, Bank Indonesia will focus on stabilizing the Rupiah "in accordance with its
fundamental conditions" while the measures announced by the Government 
include support for
boosting exports but appear to be aimed mainly at limiting dependence on imports and supporting
domestic production. It is unclear whether such policies are likely to be effective, and they could
introduce distortions over the medium-term. Furthermore, it is important not to over-react to the recent
current account deficit numbers or make policy missteps that could adversely impact investor sentiment,
thereby actually putting more pressure on external balances. Allowing for a gradual weakening of the
exchange rate, as has been seen recently, could also facilitate an improvement in the trade balance.

C. Indonesia's Economic Outlook

15. Risks to the outlook for the Indonesian economy remain weighted to the downside, and are
likely to remain high in 2013. Global financial markets and portfolio flows to Indonesia remain
volatile, with the global economic outlook highly uncertain, with weaker growth in high income
economies, moderating commodity prices and continued financial market turbulence. The direct impact
of lower growth in the EU on Indonesia's economy is likely to be limited, as Indonesia's exports are
relatively diversified by export destination direct 
linkages. However, a further deterioration in
international financing conditions or in commodity prices and demand relative to the baseline scenario
would be of particular concern. A seizing up of global US dollar liquidity could have important
implications for Indonesia's financial sector, and potentially have spillovers to the real economy,
through investment and trade financing, and to government financing costs. Lower international
commodity prices or demand could affect Indonesia's GDP growth via their impact not only on trade
(with commodity exports accounting for around two-thirds of the value of exports) but through
domestic consumption and investment, as well as lower fiscal revenues. However, a sharp recovery in
oil prices, for example due to supply shocks, could also refocus attention on the cost of Indonesia's fuel
subsidies.

16. 
In a baseline scenario of international financial market fragility combined with relatively
weak external, but continued solid, domestic demand, growth of 6.1 percent is forecast for 2012,
moving up to 6.3 percent in 2013. The underlying macro assumptions for this baseline include a

110

continued weakness in external demand with overall international commodity prices also projected to
moderate.

Table 3: Baseline macro economic outlook

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 (p) 

2013 (p) 

2014 (p)

Growth
Real GDP (% change) 

Real investment (% change) 

Real private consumption (% change) 
Real exports (% change) 
Real imports (% change) 
Current account balance (% of GDP) 
Fiscal variables
Central govemment balance (% ofGDP) 1 
Central govemment debt (% of GDP) 
Prices
GDP deflator (% change) 2  

4.6 

3.3 

6.2 
-9.7 
-15.0 
1.9 

-1.6 
28.4 

8.4 

6.1 

8.5 

4.6 
14.9 
17.3 
0.8 

-0.6 
26.0 

8.0 

6.5 

8.8 

4.7 
13.6 
13.3 
0.2 

-1.1 
24.3 

8.4 

6.1 

9.6 

4.5 

6.3 
7.7 
-2.3 

-2.2 
23.0 

6.5 

6.3 

10.0 

4.8 
7.6 
8.1 
-1.6 

-1.6 
21.2 

7.9 

6.6

10.5

4.9
11.0
11.8
-1.7

-1.4
19.5

8.7

CPI inflation (%)2 

4.8 

5.1 

Note: 12011 is actual audited, 2012 is revised Budget deficit and deficit from 2013 to 2014 is based on Govemment
2013 Budget Financial Note. 2 Period averages.
Source: BPS, Bank Indonesia, Ministry of Finance and World Bank staff projections.

5.4 

4.4 

5.1 

5.0

17. Under more adverse but plausible scenarios framed around the above external risks, growth
in 2013 could decline to around 4 percent of GDP, the lowest in a decade. Taking the above
downside risks into account, different scenarios can be considered to simulate the impact of external
shocks on Indonesia's economy (see Table below). The main impact would be felt in 2013 given the
strong performance in 2012 to date. Under a scenario similar to 2009 which assumes a greater growth
slowdown due to the real impact of the financial crisis and credit tightness, as well as a moderate
decline in commodity prices leading to a sharp contraction in the terms of trade, GDP growth is cut to
4.7 percent in 2013 (down 1.7 percentage points on the baseline scenario), reflecting lower investment
and exports. If a financial crisis precipitates, or accompanies, a significant growth slowdown also in
emerging economies as well as a sharp drop in global commodity prices, growth could fall even further
in 2012, down to just under 4 percent.

18. The outlook for China is of particular importance for Indonesia. A drop in China's growth
down to 7 percent would directly cut Indonesia's major trading partner growth by 0.17 pp (given a
weight in Indonesia's exports of 11 percent in 2011). The second round effects via global and regional
trading partner growth would also clearly be important. However, the real concern with a relatively
marked slowdown in growth would be if China's growth leads to a sharp fall in global commodity prices
- particularly coal and minerals that form a sizeable share of Indonesia's exports. If significant
commodity price declines were sustained then this would spill over to domestic consumption and
investment in Indonesia as household incomes and corporate investment, and fiscal revenues would also
decline. Estimates of the spillovers vary across studies but, estimates in the September 2012 IMF Article
IV report on Indonesia, incorporating direct and indirect trade effects and global commodity price
impacts, suggest that a 1 percentage point reduction in China's growth could lower Indonesia's GDP by
up to half a percentage point. The IMF report also highlights there would also be spillovers through the
commodity channel from a shift in the composition of China's growth from investment to consumption.

111

19. Growth could also move substantially lower if the impact of adverse external shocks is
amplified domestically. Growth would still be above 4 percent in the international scenarios discussed
in the previous paragraphs. This is similar to that seen in 2009, when growth dropped during the height
of the global financial crisis but remained at 4.6 percent. However, it is important to note that these
GDP projections combine the external scenarios with moderations in the underlying domestic drivers of
growth, i.e. private consumption and investment. In the event that there was a major dislocation to these
drivers, for example due to domestic policy miss-steps or problems in the domestic financial sector, then
the downside risks to growth could be much greater, and hence the importance of crisis preparedness
measures.

Table 4: Different scenarios for the international environment and their potential impact on
growth in Indonesia

Scenarios 

International 
scenario 1: 
Continuing 
turmoil 
2012f 

2013f 

International 
scenario 2: 
Return to 2009 

2012f 

2013f 

Memo:

International 
scenario 3:
Severe 
global Outcomes
slowdown
2012f 

2013f 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011

3.8 

6.0 

4.6 

6.2 

6.0 

6.4 

5.8 

4.7 

5.7 

25.3 

Indonesian 
GDP 
growth (percent)
Scenario
assumptions
Investment/GDP ratio 
(percent)
Major trading partner
GDP 
growth 
(percent)
Terms 
of 
growth (percent) 
Source: CEIC and World Bank staff projections
Note: Investment/GDP ratio is real and terms of trade series is constructed by World Bank from monthly trade data

-30.0 

-15.0 

trade 

-18.1 

2.0 

I *

23.7 

3.7 

9.0 

25.0 

2.3 

0.0 

25.1 

1.9 

0.0 

25.1 

26.1 

24.1 

3.3 

0.1 

-1.8 

2.0 

-0.7 

7.2 

23.4 

23.9 

-4.2 

5.7 

6.5

24.4

3.6

10.2

D. Policy Challen2es

D. 1. Macro-economic policy

20. There remain a number of challenges for the macro fiscal and monetary policy framework.

Bank Indonesia will need to remain vigilant to potential rising inflation and any financial sector risks if
domestic demand remains robust. The 2012 IMF Article IV report notes that this will require the usage
of traditional monetary policy tools given that macro prudential measures on certain sectors will "not
tackle the underlying condition of easy money". Indonesia's fiscal position is in a strong starting
position at the aggregate level and the deficit is likely to remain conservative. However, flexibility to
respond to a downturn in growth is limited by the disbursement issues in infrastructure and the
efficiency of spending is limited by the continued burden of energy spending. More generally, there is a
need to improve further the quality of the allocation and efficiency of spending, although in the run up
to the elections in 2014 the near-term political environment may limit the likelihood of addressing fuel
spending expenditures or limiting the growth of personnel expenditures. Failure 
to make such
improvements in the medium-term could lower the growth outlook going forward and ability of the
government to meet its development objectives, notwithstanding the level of resources allocated.

21. Although Indonesia is relatively well placed to weather external shocks, it is also important
to further improve preparation for a potential crisis through enhancing the range of instruments
and policies available to deal with increased volatility and improving the resilience of its economy

and public finances. Risks in the global environment remain high both from developments in the

112

Eurozone, the fiscal cliff in the US and the uncertain impact of recent quantitative easing on commodity
and emerging market capital flows. Indonesia remains well-positioned to withstand external real and
financial shocks due to its continued strong economic performance and policies, low government debt
levels and significant reserves. Importantly, the 2013 proposed Budget retains a number of measures to
deal with any future crisis situation that had been introduced in the 2012 Budget. Other elements of the
Government's crisis preparedness has been the establishment of crisis management protocols and
continent financing facilities with development partners 
to support financing of critical public
expenditures in the event of an increase in market financing pressures. The World Bank PERISAI DPL-
DDO operation, in addition to supporting short-term policy measures aimed at enhancing crisis
preparedness, provides contingent budget support, which the Government intends to draw down only in
the event of a significant worsening of the financing conditions. The Government has also secured
additional contingent financing of around US$3 billion from the Government of Japan (Yen 120
billion), Australian Treasury (AUD$1 billion) and the Asian Development Bank (US$500 million).

D. 2. Structural challenges

22. Sustained progress on structural reforms can also play an important role in not only
enhancing medium-term growth prospects but also in supporting the confidence of investors in
the economy in the near term. A number of recent trade and investment policy measures or proposals
have created a sense of rising protectionist policy making. The measures 
include, for example,
restrictions on imported horticulture products, an export tax and new divestment regulations in the
mining sector and proposals to limit single ownership in the banking sector. The objectives of these
policies, such as moving up the value chain domestically and creating quality jobs, are not necessarily
the concern but rather whether these policies are likely to achieve these objectives (and whether they
may introduce distortions into the economy which, in the long-term, could be a drag on growth). In
addition, the presentation of these policies, which is often changing and inconsistent, highlights
coordination difficulties across ministries and limited consultation with stakeholders. In addition to their
uncertain effectiveness, there is a risk that the continuation of such policies, or other perceived "policy
missteps" could weaken some of the confidence of investors in domestic policy making (particularly in
the run up to the 2014 presidential elections). Limiting further such missteps, along with a continuation
of the Government's ongoing work on crisis preparedness will be important to maintain investor
confidence in a fragile global environment.

23. Looking towards the medium-term, continued progress on policy reforms and key
investments in infrastructure and skills development will be required if Indonesia is to move its
potential growth rate up towards 7 percent and beyond. The continuation of recent growth rates of
around 6.5 percent appear sustainable over the next few years, supported on the demand-side by rising
incomes and domestic consumption, and on the supply side by Indonesia's demographic dividend and
strong investment growth rates reflecting the attractiveness of the domestic market, commodity
endowment and relatively low labor costs. However, sustaining such growth rates over the medium-
term, or moving them higher, will require investments in infrastructure and addressing regulatory and
investment climate constraints on businesses. For example, for 2014-2016 the 2011 IMF Article IV
baseline potential growth rate is 7.1 percent, rising to 7.9 percent in an upside scenario in which
infrastructure and structural reforms proceed faster than in the baseline but declining to 6 percent in a
downside scenario in which infrastructure development proceeds slowly and there is little progress on
structural reform. Private and public investment in infrastructure as a share of GDP, at around 4 percent
in 2009, is still significantly lower than prior to the 1997/98 crisis. Infrastructure has been identified by
the Government as a key constraint for growth, leading to large increases in budgetary allocations to the
infrastructure sector as well as efforts to attract more private sector investment.

113

Recent Progress & Challenges

Annex 4: Gender Equity

1. 
Indonesia has successfully developed the necessary legal framework for addressing gender
inequality concerns and has experienced an improvement in narrowing the gender gap in some
important areas such as endowment, opportunities, and voice and agency. Gender parity has been
achieved 
in all levels of education. Maternal health has significantly 
improved. There are no
pronounced gender disparities in infant and under five mortality rates as well as other health outcomes.
Women labor participation rates continue to increase with highly educated women enjoying better
returns on their education than men. Political representation of women in national parliament and nearly
all district and city legislatures has also increased. Indonesia has also ratified important international
conventions and has produced a significant amount of legislations on gender equality such as the anti-
domestic violence act, gender equality in development, and the general election law as well as the
national strategy for enhancing access to justice. A strong political commitment on gender equality has
also outlined in the Medium Term National Plan for 2010-14 (RPJMN). Indonesia is one of a few
countries that assigned a dedicated ministry for women's empowerment and child protection.

2. 
However, challenges remain especially in maternal mortality, political representation at
the national and sub-national level, access to justice, and voice and agency at community level.
Indonesia continues to face challenges in Maternal Mortality Rate (228 per 100,000 births in 2010),
HIV/AIDS (Indonesia has the fastest growth of AIDS epidemic in Asia), as well as stunting and
wasting. Gaps in access to economic opportunities remain large. For instance, female labor market
participation remains at around 50% compared to 80% for men; the gender-wage gap is among the
widest in EAP countries; female-led enterprises tend to be smaller, more precarious, less capital-
intensive and less productive with limited access to finance; women constitute nearly 80% of
Indonesia's cross-border migrant workers with often limited access to financial services and exposure to
exploitation and other sorts of human rights violation. Other areas where Indonesia is lagging behind
include access to legal justice, political representation and participation to key policy decision makings.
These challenges juxtapose the emerging ones in climate change and disaster risk management as
women are more vulnerable to these risks than men.

114

Figure 1. Summary Table for Gender Equality in Indonesia through the Lens of WDR 2012

eIndonesia has achieved gender parity in 
enrollment rates at all levels of education 

SThere are no pronounced gender disparities ine 
infant and under-five mortality rates and ino 
most health outcomes. 

Th Gender 
ag 
in donesiays argr tn in
er En conriew en oly earn about7

ern 

i 
at 
teietin
fsutn 

1-Tepeaec 

a 

er 

r 

in

n atn 

r ut

.but mstl ecan 
femuat wokers tnd tol he less
f Indonesia is considered to have the fastest growth on

AIDS epidemic in Asia.

IN The average annual growth of women entering 
labor market has been substantially higher than 
men over the past seven yearson 

wages 

heHI/ADScae n ndneiaislo 

VO llE A 

Law and legislation products to enhanceacess 
voices and agencies such as onjte 
Swomen's 

women's political participation (General Dci 

Election Law No 10/2008), anti domestic

violence (Act No 23/2004), gender equality in 
development (Presidential Instruction No 
3/2010)maebtepoiialadr
0- Women representation in politics has 
increased from 11I in 2004-2009 to 18 in 2009- 
2014 with similar increases across provincial 

and subdistrit 
leve .2 

secre mtermsal moiymet and are mer 00,000 biths be

10FeaelbrfceptiptonnIdnsa(5%n
21)i 
o 
yEPrgoa 
tnad
te nar 
Indonesia 
o 
6 min
inlother EAP countries-women only earn about 70% of
what men earn, in part because of gender streaming in

workin imns the 
ghestal 
s Ecto
precaeious,alescapital-untnie andstn 
roquie
Woameng entrebothnbos acnt orl mchlwr hr
choice of fields of tertiary education...

10 ... but mostly because female workers tend to have less
secure terms of employment and are more likely to be

self-employed, doing unpaid family work or be

working in the informal sector

plusmcross-bordrsmigranttworkesbandaoftenghac
ENa Female-led enterprises tend to be smaller, more

precarious, less capital-intensive and less productive
Wsp Women entpreneurs account for a much lower share
of loans extended to MSMEs than their numbers
warrant

i1t Women constitute nearly 80% of Indonesia's 6 million-

plus cross-border migrant workers and often lack

financial and other protections and are vulnerable to

exploitation

o the form js 

mn, Worl Ba n a o 

ted

cees 
sstm

s 2011

eas 

repesntaio 

pr 
ery7%o noeinmnadee
mjrt 
51% 
fIdnsa 
oe 
eiv 
e
10 Women's pces oli 
is low mnyt18
1-Wmnaeas 
ne-ersne 
nteplc
spe 
-i201ony9ofteEhl-Ilvl
make bttheir olntaiti 
ledestcsyem
l 
ofi alinGlwrwme

efmlutical 

2 Policy Brief on Gender 7: Women's Voice In Politics and Decision Making, World Bank and others, 2011

115

Access to Justice 

ccess to justice:

I The development of national strategy on 

1Women's access to the formal justice system is limited

Access to Justice : in which women's access to 

justice is one of the 8 key elements of the 
strategy - making legal justice as compulsory, 

as is their role in traditional justice systems

1While property laws are non-discriminatory, the
Marriage Law only recognizes men as household heads

free of charge, and affordable for women

I Legal framework for access to justice and

issuance of some progressive law that provide
protection on women and children
10 Supporting facilities for access to justice such
as Prodeo - the cost-free court, support

Indonesia is a signatory to most major 

international conventions upholding principles 

A 

of gender equality and the RPJM-N identifies 

gender mainstreaming within Gol as a priority 
target 
IN- Indonesia is one of only a few countries that 

has a dedicated Ministry of Women's 
Empowerment and Child Protection (KPPA) 

l-ndonesia's social assistance programs favor 
female-headed households 
INdA broad range of sex-disaggregated data are

collected by BPS

The weak bargaining position of KPPA as a state

Law enforcement need to be further strengthened
t 
a 
t 
ministry towards other technical ministries is the major

challenge for KPPA in delivering their main mandate
of advocacy.
10- Female-headed households tend to be more vulnerable

to shocks and poverty rates amongst female-headed
households tend to be more volatile.

The existing sex disaggregated data are not widely
accessible

World Bank Support of Gender Equality So Far

3. 
The Bank Group has been working actively with the Government on programs to help
remove barriers to gender equality. There have been a number of successes in integrating gender
equality and women's economic empowerment into the Bank program in areas such as equitable access
to resources, voice of women in the development of their community and country, and access to new
opportunities. Furthermore, the Bank's support covers the key dimensions of endowment. The Bank has
provided support through operations such as Early Childhood Education and Development, BERMUTU,
PNPM-Generasi (CCT) programcPKH, and SPADA (in its training for teachers), and gender-informed
reports on basic education, teacher quality. The Health Professional Education Quality Project (HPEQ)
supports the strengthening of quality assurance policies governing the education of health professionals,
including midwifery education through accreditation of education institutions and certification of
graduates. Some analytical works on safe motherhood have also been conducted such as the well-known
report "...and then she dies". Activities such as HIM (HIV in Indonesia Model) and child nutrition
(under PNPM Generasi) are other health areas where the Bank is actively doing gender analysis and
informing project design accordingly. The CCT program has been underway since 2007, through two
pilot programs - one community-based funded under PNPM and one household-based funded by the
Government in six provincs, West Java, East Java, Jakarta, Nusa Tenggara Timur, Gorontalo and North
Sulawesi. They provide cash assistance to 720,000 poor households on the condition that children
receive preventative healthcare and attend school, and mothers receive pre- and post-natal care. The
project targeted EFA (Education For All) goals and maternal mortality, as well as poverty alleviation.
Work on gender also involves seeking to expand access to finance to women owned enterprises. A
study on Access to Finance has supported the development of financial services for migrant workers,
mostly women. IFC provided a US$75 million gender facility and advisory services to Danamon and
Bank Internasional Indonesia (B11) to facilitate access by women to finance their SMEs.

4. 
The Bank's engagement in economic opportunities focuses on labor market participation,
access to finance, livelihoods and property rights, some of which specifically target the women's
economic empowerment and focus on female-headed household, as well as on female migrant

116

workers. PNPM has strong women's economic empowerment components and equipped with tools to
well address women's needs. The Bank provides supports to migrant workers, the majority which are
women, through a training module on financial literacy that uses the research results from studies on
migrant workers' access to finance. A joint titling initiative of MDTF/RALAS is another important
Bank's effort to support women's economic opportunities. The Indonesia Jobs Report (2010), using
sex-disaggregated data, identifies gender inequity issues in male and female labor participation, 
labor
trends, analysis of labor market segmentation, examination of the effects of labor regulations on
workers, and skill attainment and returns to education, among others. A number of studies have been
carried out to analyze issues faced by female migrant workers and identify policy solutions 3 . The FMW
program also provided grants to strengthen the institutional capacity of relevant ministries, including the
State Ministry of Women's Empowerment (SMoWE) and Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MoFA), in
addressing female migrant workers' issues.

5. 
The Bank has addressed strategic and sustainable women's voice and agency at
community level focusing on legal rights and access to justice, as well as participatory planning
and public decision-making. The Bank's PNPM supported program adopted gender equality and
equity in its twelve basic principles. Gender equality and equity is also part of the first specific goal on
community's participation. The Bank has also put the foundation for women's political empowerment
through establishing women's specific forum to ensure women's voices are heard in program
development and planning in both PNPM Rural (including PAWE-Papuan Women's Empowerment
Program of PNPM RESPEK) and PNPM Urban, and PAMISMAS. The Japan Social Development Fund
(JSDF) women leadership program and the Justice for the Poor's women legal empowerment program
are two major initiatives for enhancing women's access to justice at the community level and with
formal justice institutions. The Bank has also played an important role in ensuring gender to be one of
the eight thematic areas of the National Strategy for Access to Justice, providing support on women's
legal empowerment, as well as research and diagnostic work on gender in thematic areas, such as the
"Aceh Gender Impact of Titling" by the MDF team for Aceh and Nias and "Case study on Women
Dispute Resolution through Adat Institutions in Aceh" by the Justice for the Poor team. The Bank has
also mainstreamed gender issues in its Initiatives for Local Governance Reform Project (ILGR), which
supports district (Kabupaten) governments 
to 
improve 
transparency, accountability and public
participatory practices and to undertake reforms in financial management and procurement. The MDTF
and JRF has adopted the community-based settlement planning (CSP) in which women and men work
together to develop comprehensive village mapping, prepare a needs assessment report for discussions
at the Rukun Warga (community group) level, and at the village level to prioritize proposed facilities for
CSP funding. A participatory approach was also adopted in Water and Sanitation support.

6. 
Efforts have also been made in addressing some of the key cross-cutting issues that are
highly relevant and can be valuable for Bank's initiative on endowment, opportunities and voice
and agencies such as making sex-disaggregated data and gender analysis in analytical works more
available, supporting the Ministry of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in developing
the minimum standard for public services, and conducting gender informed public expenditure
reviews. The Bank has actively supported Indonesia by identifying key gender issue in its analytical
work and using sex-disaggregated data. The National Targeting System benefits from such analysis,
particularly as regards pregnant mothers. The Social Service Data Collection Survey (PPLS 11) has also
been established with sex-disaggregated for better targeting. The PEACH program has incorporated

3 Including the following studies: (i) Malaysia - Indonesia Remittance Corridor Study containing a descriptive overview
of the Malaysia - Indonesia remittance corridor and a set of recommendations to the Government on how to maximize
the developmental impact of remittances; (ii) a study to map out points of vulnerability experienced by female migrant
workers (FMW) from the pre placement to post-placement stage, and to identify the causes of such vulnerability.

117

gender analysis in its public expenditure review, identifying key gender issues (such as migrant
workers) that the local government in different pilot areas needs to pay attention to. Through its DSF
program, the Bank supported the Government in developing the national minimum standard for public
services with among others, the Ministry of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

Moving Forward on Gender Equity, the World Bank Group Strategy

7. 
The quite extensive Bank Group support for gender equality and development needs to be
further shaped in a more systematic and comprehensive manner, and with visible connections
across sectors. The Bank has been engaging extensively not only in the overall dimensions of gender
equality (endowment, opportunities, and voice and agency) but also the cross cutting dimensions by
making sex-disaggregated data and gender analysis more available. These supports, however, have been
conducted sporadically rather than an in a systematic and integrated manner. This is partly due to the
absence of a well-documented review detailing the various Bank activities and their interconnections
and joint contributions, as well as to the lack of an explicit strategy to move towards more equitable
development.

8. 
Moving forward, the Bank Group is developing a gender engagement strategy that further
identifies ongoing and upcoming activities within the three dimensions of gender equality of
endowments, voice and agencies, and opportunities to fortify Indonesia current achievement and
further address existing challenges on gender equality. The sum of these efforts is significant and
will be built through a more strategic, program-wide approach to gender, for improving effectiveness,
enhancing synergies with various stakeholders, and increasing the ability to affect gender-related
reforms. The Government has signaled a renewed commitment and is seeking to accelerate improved
gender equity; Inpres No.3/20 10 on equitable development, highlights issues of justice for women and
children, gender equality and women's empowerment. The RPJMN also outlined the importance of
increasing the role of women in development, particularly women leadership in public sector, business
community and social organizations.

9. 
The Bank Group will continue mainstreaming gender into its operations, financing, and
analytical programs at different levels and has dedicated resources in translating the Bank's
commitment into practice. A gender practice group at country level, which includes relevant TTLs,
has been instituted with a gender coordinator assigned to lead the group and a gender advisor hired to
backstop. In addition, many of the programs/projects have their own gender advisor/analyst/focal point.
These will further shape, define, and monitor the Bank's engagement on gender equality in Indonesia.
This work will be done in collaboration with the relevant line ministries and development partners such
as the Australian Government, as well as civil society organizations.

10. 
Moving further, considering the broad range of the issues, Bank's limited resources and
scope of work, as well as the Bank's comparative advantage, the Bank will work selectively and
strategically. The Bank will work on areas where (a) pressing needs are evident - MMR and stunting
and wasting, (b) emerging opportunities that carry emerging risks - urbanization, migrant workers,
DRM/Climate Change, ICT, Population Aging, HIV/AIDS 
-- and (c) strategic interventions 
to
accelerate gender equality in other areas - voice and agency at community level, gender streaming in
education, and access to justice.

11. 
Future assistances will also include the emerging trends as identified by WDR 2012 - EAP
Companion Study, which not only identifies new opportunities but also new risks in the Region,
including Indonesia -
increased global economic integration, the rising use of information and
communication technologies, migration, rapid urbanization, and population aging. Between 2000
and 2015, Indonesia, together with China and Cambodia are predicted to increase their urban
118

populations by 17 percent, 13 percent, and 9 percent, respectively (UN, 2010). This will affect all
aspects of life, employment structure, service availability, family and community networks supports.
Emerging areas for further support include gender-sensitive social protection, more equal access to
ICTs, stronger protection and law enforcement for women migrant workers, safe and enabling
environments in urban areas for full female labor participation such as affordable day care services and
inclusive finance, as well as old age income security for an aging population.

12. 
Careful monitoring and evaluation will be critical to meet the Group's commitments to
gender equality. Currently, monitoring and evaluation tools seem to be effectively tracking sex-
disaggregated indicators at the output and, to a degree, outcome levels. Going forward, more effort will
be required to ensure that the gender dimension is integrated in the outcome monitoring and impact
evaluations. This could be achieved by strengthening partnerships to agree on gender goals and targets
and to identify and select the gender-relevant indicators to measure results and impacts. Such
information could be valuable in improving program interventions and increasetheir impact.

13. 
The Bank Group will also work in partnership with other development stakeholders. The
Bank will continue to work collaboratively with the relevant line ministries and other development
partners and further strengthened the current partnership. The Bank will also work closely with the IFC,
which is in the process of defining the gender aspects of its sustainable forestry and infrastructure work
as well as agribusiness. A series of gender finance modules and analytical work have been conducted by
IFC. IFC is also seeking to collaborate further with the Bank and other development partners especially
in expanding women's participation in the value chain of important agri-commodities in Indonesia.

14. 
Below are Indonesia's gender-related goals, which the WBG would seek to support. The
Bank would closely monitor the results and be accountable for the activities designed to support them
(As higher level country goals they are not formally part of the CPS Results Matrix).

Indonesia - Gender Country-Level Result Framework

Result 

Indicator 

Part 1: National Level Targets
1.1. Progress toward gender-related 
Millennium Development Goals is 
achieved

1.2. Country policy and Institutional 

Assessment (CPIA) indicates 
progress on key gender issues 

men/women to human capital development 

1.2.2. CPIA rating: Promote equal access for 

Mainstreamin
g Team

Gender

119

Relevant
Sector

EASPR,
EASHD, SD

EASHD

EASPR, SD

EASHD,
EASPR, SD
EASHD,

EASPR

1.1.1. 

1.1.2. 

1.1.3. 

1.1.4. 

Eliminate gender disparity in primary and 
secondary education in all level education no
later than 2015 (MDG2A)
Increase share of women in wage employment 
in non-agricultural sector (MDG 3.2)
Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990-2015, the 
under-five mortality rate (MDG4A) 
Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 

2015, the Maternal Mortality Rate Ratio 

(MDG5A)
1.1.5. Achieve, by 2015, universal access to 
reproductive health (MDG5B)
1.1.6. 
Reduce the spread HIV/AIDs (MDG6A) 
EASHD
1.1.7. Achieve, by 2012, universal access to treatment EASHD
for HIV/AIDS for all those who need it
(MDG6B)

EASHD

1.2.1. 

CPIA rating: Promote equal access for 

Gender

men/women to productive and economic 

resources 

Mainstreamin

g Team

CPIA rating: give men and women equal status Gender
and protection under the law 
Mainstreamin
g Team

100 % of IBRD projects in country portfolio 
and percentage are gender informed 

80% of all of projects under implementation 
have a sex-disaggregated indicator in results
framework
80% of project in portfolio conduct an-end-of- 
project impact evaluation with sex-
disaggregated data

3.3.1. 

3.2.1. 

Number of certified female teachers at the 
respective project areas
3.1.2. Number of relevant policy papers and
analytical works that are gender informed
Number of female migrant workers target 
beneficiaries with financial access in the 
respective project areas
3.2.2. Number of relevant policy papers and
analytical works that are gender informed
Percentage of women participated in relevant 
decision meetings at community level in the
respective project areas.
3.3.2. Number of community proposed projects that
are gender informed in the respective project
areas
3.4.1. Number of women organization and 
organization that have concerns on gender and 
development issues consulted
3.4.2. Number of relevant policy papers and
analytical work that are gender informed

3.6.1. 
3.6.2. 

3.7.1. 

Fully operational gender focal point 
Country
Implementation of the gender focal point TORs Management
Team
Country-wide team and processes exist for 
Country
providing gender technical backstopping in the Management
project preparation phase 
Team

Gender
Mainstreamin
g Team
All sectors

All sectors

EASHD

EASPR,
EASHD, SD

SD

EASPR,
EASHD, SD

1.2.3. 

2.1.1. 

2.2.1. 

2.3.1. 

3.1.1. 

Part 2: Operational Work
2.1. Project are gender informed 

2.2. 

Projects' results frameworks are 
gender responsive 

2.3. Evaluation of projects provides 
information on the gender-related 
consequences 
Part 3: Project Results across Four
Dimensions
3.1. Gender equality in endowments and 
human development is promoted 

3.2. Active measures taken to close 
gender gaps in economic 
opportunity 

3.3. Active measures taken to strengthen 
women's voice and influence 

3.4. Gender inequalities addressed in 
emerging risk areas 

Part 3: Gender-related organization
within country team
3.5. Gender focal point is appointed 
3.6. TOR for gender focal point is 
available 
3.7. System in place to review gender in 
project preparation phase 

**) From MDGs Road Map, Indonesia, 2010

120

Annex 5: Governance and Anti-Corruption

Introduction

1. 
Over the past decade, the Indonesian government's progress on public accountability is
unmistakable. The World Bank's partnership with the Gol on governance issues reflects our continuing
commitment, but also change and variation over time. Governance and anti-corruption have featured in
the programs of successive governments with early years of reformasi focusing on sweeping reforms
and constitutional amendments. For example, between 1999 and 2004 press freedom was enhanced;
authority was devolved to the regions; checks and balances between the executive, legislative and
judicial branches were strengthened; the role of security forces (police and military) was redefined;
direct elections for President and for regional heads were mandated; and an institutional framework to
prevent, investigate and prosecute corruption was developed. Civil society played an important role in
driving these changes with the Partnership for Governance Reform especially prominent. These years
also saw the enactment of foundation fiscal laws and the rearrangement of key economic ministries, all
designed to improve budget and financial management systems.

2. 
By 2004, Indonesia was 
increasing the focus on improving service delivery and
consolidating accountability agencies. This effort built on the legislative foundations for public
financial management, (including public procurement, business regulation, auditing, and monitoring and
evaluation) and introduced limited (ministerial level) civil service reforms. The consolidation of
accountability continued in the anti-corruption area, with the role of the Anti-Corruption Commission
(KPK) especially prominent and high-level corruption 
investigations and convictions became
increasingly common. However, reforms in the judiciary, the police and the attorney general's office
have been slow and collaboration a problem. Indonesia's free press functions well, with corruption
scandals regularly revealed and covered. The role of CSOs has increased and they have increasingly
developed specialized expertise. For example, in the area of budget transparency and environment,
CSOs played a critical role in Indonesia's accession to candidate status in the Extractive Industry
Transparency Initiative (EITI).

3. 
The administration has continued its focus on reform of core government systems. In fact,
there is an increased emphasis on bureaucracy reform at the whole government level, a previously
identified constraint to the effectiveness of civil service reforms at the ministerial level. Nevertheless,
the process of improving accountability has not been smooth, as witnessed by the continued political
and bureaucratic attacks of the authority of the KPK. The public popularity of the KPK and its ability to
weather repeated conflicts with its power in tact suggests a strong, underlying foundation for better
governance. Meanwhile, the police and the attorney general's office continue to be plagued by
corruption allegations. A growing concern is electoral corruption at both the national and regional level
and the effect this corruption has on budget and policy decisions.

4. 
The World Bank and other development partners have played an important role in
supporting governance reforms in Indonesia. The Partnership for Governance Reform led the CSO
alliance that supported the critical Government initiatives that transformed Indonesia in the aftermath of
the Asian financial crisis. The World Bank provided analytical and technical support including through
its flagship publication Combating Corruption in Indonesia. The World Bank GAC team has been led

121

by a senior governance advisor in Jakarta with a mandate to address both systemic and Bank-specific
governance problems (including such things as project specific anti-corruption action plans).

5. 

The World Bank's governance focus has evolved since 2004. With sustained economic
growth and a solid performance during the global economic crisis international credibility was renewed.
Strong governance-related reform programs, especially at the Ministry of Finance, but also at the KPK
and elsewhere, attracted attention. Against this background, World Bank support evolved in two
important directions. First, institutional reform programs confined initially to the Ministry of Finance
(MoF) on improved budget and treasury systems were expanded to tax administration and then on to
other government agencies. These programs focused on comprehensive institutional change, revised
business processes, 
improved human resource management, and supportive 
information and
communication systems. In addition, the World Bank added support for key government programs
around improved governance of major poverty, education and regional transfer programs to its earlier
focus on policy and project lending. The Bank's support to key accountability agencies (outside of
KPK) was limited given restricted change in the judiciary. Support for improved performance through
demand side efforts (by CSOs) has been continued with a focus around specific programs and
engagements, an approach common with other development partner efforts.

6. 
IFC launched corporate governance advisory program in Indonesia in 2012. The work
program involves working with regulatory bodies to enhance corporate governance standards in the
industry, to increase awareness about the benefits of higher governance standards, and to work directly
with private sector businesses and sponsors to provide them with advise on enhancing their companies'
corporate governance practices.

Governance and Anti-Corruption Work going forward

7. 
The governance and anti-corruption approach in the Country Partnership Strategy is led by
the Indonesia Governance and Anti-Corruption Team (IGAC). The IGAC team is made up of
senior management augmented by selected country leadership team personnel.

8. 
The country governance program (the IGAC agenda) is organized around four pillars: 1)
increasing transparency and efficiency 
in public financial management, 2) increasing the
efficiency of public service delivery, 3) strengthening checks and balances, and 4) promoting open,
transparent competition. These cross cutting focuses will be used to improve coordination and
provide strategic direction. In the public financial management pillar, the focus is on the civil service,
and effective and transparent budget and tax systems (SPIRIT, SPAN, PINTAR). The engagements
around improved public service deliver focus on improved systems (including procurement) and citizen
feedback mechanisms (DAK, PNPM, BOS). In checks and balances we will partner with Indonesian
institutions leading the fight against corruption (e.g. the KPK) and engaging with CSO's to reinforce
accountability. To promote open and transparent competition the Bank is focused on Indonesia's
resource endowment, including the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), Reduced
Emissions through Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+), and support for regulatory framework and
financial sector reforms.

122

9. 
The Bank's governance approach will build on the Indonesian Government's Open
Government Partnership (OGP). The OGP should serve as a powerful governance tool to promote
transparency, increase civic participation, improve service delivery, reduce corruption, and harness new
technologies to make government more open, effective, and accountable. In September 2012 Indonesia
became co-chair of this initiative. The Bank's engagements on PFM and improved statistics are
designed around data as a public good, while community driven development, sub-national
development, health, education, water and sanitation, have substantial social accountability elements.
The Bank will leverage the ongoing engagement and relationship with Government to create a space for
citizen participation and cooperation, through the recently announced Global Partnership for Social
Accountability (GPSA).

10. The governance approach will also take advantage of an increased focus on tri-party and
international accountability mechanisms. Leadership of the Open Governance Partnership, adoption
of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), a commitment to Reducing Emissions
through Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+), as well as the UN convention against Corruption
(UNCAC) represent significant steps in increasing the transparency of the GOI's commitments to good
governance and an increased focus on monitoring. The World Bank will support these efforts as part of
our governance engagement since they provide much needed support for local institutions and
communities.

11. The IGAC team will strengthen the country program through better integration and
additional tools at the engagement level. These tools include a Governance, Operational and Anti-
Corruption Lens (GOAL) Analysis that is being piloted in the form of an annex to our Engagement
Strategy Notes. GOAL focuses on aligning with government policy, taking into account of the
stakeholders and institutional constraints and opportunities. With GOAL there is an assessment of
governance and anti-corruption issues at the engagement level well before projects and AAA are taken
on. Second, there will be more emphasis on selected political economy analysis. The IGAC team will
also provide a forum for integrating and developing approaches to cross cutting issues, for example, ICT
for accountability and Open Government.

12. The IGAC agenda will be supported by a Governance and Anti-Corruption secretariat who will
provide technical support across the governance pillars, and take the lead on governance work on
enhanced fiduciary oversight in Bank projects.

Partnering with Indonesian institutions leading the fight against corruption.

13. 
The World Bank support for Indonesian anti-corruption institutions is wide ranging with
special attention to the engagement with the Anti-Corruption Agency (the KPK). The World Bank
program with KPK includes capacity building, (professional and leadership training as well as
knowledge sharing), and support on communications and reporting. Under the Bank's Governance
Partnership Facility, work is getting underway to support KPK audits of public service institutions
including developing mechanisms to handle public feedback.

123

14. 
While the KPK is the leading institution combating corruption in Indonesia, the majority
of corruption cases are investigated and prosecuted by the attorney general's office (AGO). In
recognition of the AGO's crucial role, the World Bank is supporting the AGO R&D bureau reform its
processes and procedures based on evidence from field research and public consultation. For example,
consultations with communities are leading to a change in the remedies for misappropriation of funds in
community-driven development projects.

15. 
The Bank is also working with select ministries and agencies on enhancing transparency
and accountability. These efforts encompass support for the application of e-government tools in DG
Highways in order to improve project transparency and reporting, and collaboration with DAK on the
creation of a results-based financing mechanism for local governments where infrastructure financing is
released based on the achievement of transparency standards.

Collaborating with CSOs for Improved Accountability

16. 
The World Bank GAC team is also working with CSOs in Indonesia, to improve
institutional accountability. To do this involves assessing and aiding CSOs with technical input and
strategic advice with our partnership not limited to formal agreements but also including idea sharing,
discussions and consultations.

17. 
In the area of social accountability, the Bank is facilitating CSOs working on open
government to improve the transparency and reporting in Government Institutions. The GAC
Team working with Anti-Corruption NGOs, practitioners, academia and the public is working to
develop concrete recommendations on how budget reporting should be done. This ongoing effort will
augmented by the World Bank's Global Partnership for Social Accountability.

Strengthening Indonesia's anti-corruption systems in WBG-supported projects

18. 
The integration of governance principles World Bank initiatives is done by mainstreaming
anti-corruption measures and initiatives. A Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC) team, led by the
Indonesia Country Office Senior Governance and Anti-Corruption Officer (a member of the Country
Leadership Team and head of the IGAC secretariat), coordinates anti-corruption relationships and
policy dialogue, oversees governance-related operations, advises project team leaders on governance
and anti-corruption strategies, and is responsible for the development of the research agenda and
governance monitoring framework. A field-based operations support team supervises fiduciary practices
to mitigate the risks of corruption and integrates anti-corruption mechanisms into project design,
supports and reviews Anti-Corruption Action Plans (ACAPs), monitors the implementation of ACAPs,
shares recommendation and liaises with Gol partners. The GAC team also works with Gol agencies on
ACAPs and to support government investigations of corruption allegations in WBG-financed programs.

19. 
Regular meetings are held with the MoF to review progress, develop follow-up actions,
and discuss remedies and sanctions, as well as possible measures to prevent recurrence. When the
WBG proposes to exercise legal remedies or apply administrative sanctions, it discusses these with MoF
the basis for the proposed action and with adequate advance notice.

124

20. 
Since 2003, all Bank-supported projects have 
included governance-related risks to
achieving project objectives and how those risks will be mitigated and managed. Nevertheless
ownership and implementation problems with ACAPs persist and addressing this problem will require
collaboration with key organizations, including the KPK, the AGO, and sectoral counterparts such as
Ministry of Public Works and the Ministry of National Education. It is anticipated that this collaboration
will improve our ability to address corruption at the institutional level (that is above the project level),
leading to change in the role of agencies around identifying and mitigating risks. The Bank support for
this initiative will alter the nature of the ACAPs -
from an instrument of compliance with Bank-
financed projects to a government-owned mechanism of accountability to improve public sector
performance.

125

Annex 6: Portfolio Performance

1. 
Among the East Asia Pacific countries, Indonesia has the second largest portfolio after
China, in terms of net commitment amount, which at end August 2012 amounted to US$ 7.7
billion including a US$ 2 billion of a DPL DDO. The portfolio consists of 31 lending projects, as well
as two GEF operations and nine other large trust funds.

2. 
Portfolio performance is comparable to the other middle-income countries (MICs). In
EAP, the Indonesia's commitment at risk (8%) is same as China (8%) and significantly lower than of
the Philippines (19%). The number of at risk project (18%) is comparable with China (13%) and the
Philippines (19%). The percentage of project at risk increased from 11.8% (FY 2010), to 12% (FY
2011), to 19.4% (FY 2012), and 18.2% in FY 2013. The increase could come from a combination of
more realistic and stringent project assessment rating and some innovative and high risk project that was
approved during this period. The amount of commitment at risks in Indonesia portfolio, in terms of
percentage to the lending & GEF projects has been increased too from 3% in FY 2010, to 3.8% in FY
2011, 8.6% in FY2012 and currently at 8% in FY 2013. This level of commitment at risks is among the
lowest compare to other selected IBRD countries (as shown in the table below).

No 

Country 

# of 
project 

1 Indonesia 
2 China 
3 Philippines 
4 
India 
5 Pakistan 
6 Brazil 
7 Mexico 
8 Turkey 
9 Egypt 

Source: Business Warehouse

33 
89 
21 
79 
24 
57 
22 
11 
21 

% 
Commitment 
at risk ($)
8% 
8% 
20% 
18% 
12% 
6% 
1% 
16% 

10% 

% of at risk
project (#)

18%
13%
19%
13%
17%
12%
9%
27%

24%

IFC Portfolio

3. 
As of September 30, 2012, IFC's committed portfolio in Indonesia was US$911.71 million for
IFC's own account and US$332.25 million held on account of participant banks. NPLs were at 0% of
total portfolio, while the equity committed portfolio accounted to US$215.07 million. Detailed
information about the portfolio is given in "Annex B8: IFC".

Financial Management, Procurement and Country Systems

4. 
The Bank continues to work closely with the Indonesian government in enhancing project
implementation in the area of financial management and procurement, as well as on country
system as envisaged in the CPS.

* For financial management the progress to date is improvement of internal controls and internal
and external audit systems, and more timely and reliable financial reporting is evidenced by an
important reduction in qualified audits. The implementation of COSO control framework needs to
be accelerated and the internal audit function strengthened at all levels of Government. The capacity
126

building of the supreme audit institution (BPKP) needs to continue particularly in the area of follow
up and impact on its audit findings and linkages with the legislature. The proposed Financial
Sector and Investment Climate Reform and Modernization DPL (FIRM) would promote reforms
would include strengthened financial reporting and auditing standards and practices in alignment
with global benchmarks.

* 

In terms of improving public procurement system the progress to date is the establishment of a
new procurement agency, issuance of a revised presidential decree and national standard bidding
document, and requirement to establish procurement service unit in all implementing agency.
The Bank, the National Public Procurement Agency and other key stakeholders will engage on a
joint work program 
to support strategic priorities such as procurement performance
measurement, modern risk management, and professionalization of the procurement function.
This cooperation will include knowledge transfers from other countries with successful, relevant
experiences. The main area of focus will be on increasing procurement efficiency by, for
example, more strategic use of e-procurement, data driven procurement policy making and
management, and enhancing the use of framework contracts to achieve savings and streamline
transactions. In addition, the Bank will look at ways to shift more of its procurement resources
to strengthening institutions by reducing transaction work, better integrating work at the project
and country level, and tailoring capacity building strategies to specific circumstances such as
implementing agencies' performance, objectives, and level of decentralization

* The BOS KITA and Local Government DAK projects use country systems in terms of internal
controls, financial management and procurement. Under BOS KITA project, the objective is to
strengthen school-based management and community participation, 
improving existing
fiduciary arrangement for greater transparency and accountability. The features of Local
Government DAK project are results focused, reimburse eligible outputs, strengthen local
government internal control, and improve current Government fiduciary and monitoring system.

* The Bank and the Government undertook a Joint Country Portfolio Review for year 2012
(CPPR 2012). The Government took lead of the review process with analytical support from the
Bank.

Development Impact

5. 
Indonesia has a legacy of poor development impact, but performance has been on the
upswing since 2005. Of the 32 operations rated by IEG during the FY09-12 period, 12 have been rated

as MU or U (38 percent). Most of these poorly performing operations were approved during the
transition period following the Asia Crisis leading up the first President SBY administration in 2005.
As well, these MU or U operations were largely in sectors, health and agriculture, where few reforms
were undertaken by the Government and implementation was difficult and drawn out. Of the 10
operations approved prior to the SBY administration, 8 were rated as MU or U (80 percent). 
Improved
development impact since that time can be attributed to the increasing alignment of the Bank's program
with the Government's agenda and reform efforts, as well as improved implementation capabilities. Of
the 22 operations approved since 2005 and rated by IEG in FY09-12, only 4 were rated MU or U (18
percent).

127

Annex 7: Trust Funds

1. 
The Country Team has well defined procedures for taking on new trust funds. All
proposals go to the Indonesia Country Leadership Team (CLT) for endorsement prior to establishment.
The CLT screening focuses on priorities, approach and staffing implications.

2. 
The Indonesia trust fund portfolio will remain a strategic component of the World Bank's
program. TFs are essential to support clients in their own implementation of programs and projects, to
undertake analytic work and support sector dialogue, and to help build a pipeline of future investment
lending. It is expected, however, that the size and composition of the trust funds will remain dynamic.
For example, today's portfolio will shrink by 30% with the closing of the Multi Donor Trust Fund for
Aceh & Nias (MDF) and the Java Reconstruction Fund (JRF) by the end of FY13. The lessons learnt
from the MDF and JRF - both from its implementation and its closing -- will be invaluable for
Indonesia (and other countries) and the TF is supporting a number of learning activities for both
domestic and international audiences as part of its exit strategy over the course of FY13. Whether a
similar level of assistance will be necessary for a disaster/emergency in the future is, of course,
unpredictable. 
In the current trust fund portfolio, a new trust fund is in place under Gol leadership that
could support better readiness to respond to disasters in the future. While it is difficult for donors to
commit funds to a future disaster, putting in place the governance structure could prove useful to ensure
a rapid response to emergencies.

3. 
This is not to say the "trust fund model" is static. As Indonesia evolves so does the way
that trust funds are used and governed. Gol is increasingly interested in directly administering trust
funds, but continues to look to the Bank for technical expertise both in terms of fiduciary requirements
and implementation. Donors too are looking for evolving governance models but without losing the
Bank's fiduciary oversight. Current discussions with Gol, donors and the Bank on REDD+, MCC (on
MDG), and disaster preparedness demonstrate that innovative structures and new roles for the Bank are
possible. 
If REDD+, where the Bank acts not as trustee, but as advisor, is successful, it could set the
direction of many other Bank interventions in Indonesia and elsewhere. Working to fulfill the
Government's longer-term strategy for PNPM/PSF sustainability means that the structure and staffing
of PSF, one of Indonesia's largest trust-funded programs, will certainly evolve over the next several
years. The PSF team, and the Country Office more widely, is engaging with a number of regional and
Bank Corporate units to seek advice and guidance on how best to take on these challenges which will
ultimately lead to the Bank's exit from this program.

4. 
Other multi donor engagements such as on trade and investment climate, public financial
management, and PNPM support will continue until at least 2015 and are country priorities
reflected in the CPS. TF funding in these areas is multi-year and quite secure. As Government
changes some of its borrowing priorities (in particular for education where it will no longer seek IBRD
financing), the Bank's engagement in the education sector will be supported more heavily by trust fund
sources of financing. 
If P4R lending 
is successfully 
introduced to Indonesia, analytic and
implementation support by Government will likely need to be assisted through trust fund financing.
As in many other countries, analytic work in other priority borrowing sectors for Government, including
infrastructure, can likewise be expected to have some trust fund financing.

128

Management of Trust Funds

5. 
Portfolio monitoring of TFs is done on a regular basis including through The Indonesia
Dashboard and includes specific issues e.g. grants with no disbursement, overdue GRMs, overdue
ICMs, grants with closing date in the next 6 months. All staff are encouraged to enroll in online TF
accreditation as part of their learning plans. In FY 12, 100% of LORs were signed on time and without
qualifications. During the preparation of trust funds or grants, it is ensured that the cost of administering
the TFs will be fully recovered. For large grant programs in particular the PNPM Support Facility, the
PSF team has established an additional Portfolio Management Dashboard that integrates data to help
the Sector Manager and TTLs assess the portfolio on a real time basis.

6. 
Accountability. Supervision is conducted on a regular basis to ensure that trust funds are
used for the agreed purposes. Financial Management Specialists (FMS) are an integral part of all task
teams, but also provide clearance for a reallocation or extension of a grant, specifically with regard to
the availability of an audit report. Time required for proper FM review could be better planned by some
task teams. The inability to charge preparation costs to the TFs can be another constraint to FM input. In
the case of NGO recipients, the use of NGO selection worksheet and IAF is useful in providing a
preliminary assessment of the recipients and to anticipate potential issues during the assessment. Risk-
based financial management reviews are conducted twice a year for big TFs and once a year for small
TFs. Additional reviews are conducted if required. The review includes accounting, reporting, internal
control framework and limited transaction sampling. These reviews take into account the projects'
management report, previous reviews and audit reports. They are conducted by financial management
specialists (FMS) and Bank consultants under FMS supervision. There are no overdue audit reports as
of June 2012. The Bank's procurement Unit normally delivers procurement training to Implementing
Agencies for all projects so that they can better carry out procurement processes in compliance with the
Bank's guidelines and procedures as indicated in the GA. Nevertheless, procurement remains an area
that is often very difficult for government counterparts in both trust funded and IBRD financed projects.

Trust Fund Portfolio

7. 
AAs of the end of FY12, Indonesia managed 25 country-specific TFs and 38 global/
corporate TFs, totaling of USD 1.681 billion. These trust funds finance 215 active grants totaling
USD 1,155 billion. The Multi Donor Trust Fund for Aceh and Nias projects accounted for 39% of the
total (USD 654 million out of total of USD 1.681 billion, of which USD 480 million is active). These
TFs will complete activities and close on December, 31 2012.

8. 
Contributions have come from 17 Donors to Indonesia Country Specific Trust Funds for a
total of USD 1.448 billion. New contributions were received in FY 12 for a total of USD 123 million.
In terms of value, Recipient executed TFs are 83 percent of the portfolio. Cumulative disbursement

reached 73% compared to 68% at the end of FY 11.

129

Summary Indonesia Trust Fund Portfolio

Country Specific Trust Funds 

Regional / Corporate Trust Funds 

25 

38 

1,448 

233 

757 

202 

165 

31 

922 

233 

55 

36 

70 

54 

125 

90 

662 

32 

127 

789 

170 

15 

47 

10 

38 

7 

208

18

Indonesia Country Specific Trust Funds - end of FY 12

Trust Funds 

Total Contribution Amount
(
(USID)

COUNTRY SPECIFIC TF
Single Donor
KDP - Sulawesi (Canada) 
KDP - Respek Papua (Australia) 
Dutch Basic Education (Dutch) 
BERMUTU (Dutch) 

--------------------------------- 

Early Childhood Educ. (Dutch) 

Indonesia Infra. (Australia) 

Geothermal Power Support Program (Dutch) 

Geothermal (New Zealand) 
Inst. Dev & Cap. Buil. (Dutch) 

Poverty Reduction (Australia) 

WASAP (Dutch) 
PAMSIMAS (Australia) 

Multiple Donor 

PNPM Support Facility 

Consolidating Peaceful Develop.in Aceh 
Basic Education Capacity 
MDTF Aceh Nias 

Java Reconstru. Fund 

Public Financial Mgt. 
Macroeconomic and Fiscal Policy Analysis5,452

Trade & Invest. Facility 

Disaster Management Fund (DMF) 
DSF II 
PEACH 

---

1 

1 

1 

1 
I 

15,420,512

2,981,600
31,132,800
52,000,000

25,300,000

9,522,217

2,708,711

7,356,000
25,358,325

7,483,550

33,921,796
53,405,679

10 
2
265,041,803

6,770,750
61,935,047
654,661,379

94,062,124

25,993,316

11,656,084

2,048,850
44,384,290
9,165,460

130

Indonesia Active Trust Funds - end of FY 12

Pro Growth 
Public Financial Management & Expenditure Management 
NationalI nstitution - Governance 
PHRD 
local governance reform co-financing (USDRP) 
Decentralization (PEACH & PREM Aceh) Dutch +CIDA 

Infrastructure grants (AusAid, PHRD, GEF, Dutch Geothermal) 

MDF Economic Development Financing Facility 

MDF Livelihood 

Trade 

Investment Climate 
Pro Job 

Education - Bank executed 
Education - Government executed 

Education - Cofinancing ECED 
Education - Cofinancing BERMUTU 
Pro Poor 
PNPM Support Facility 

Food Crises 

Other KDP and community development 

Conflict 
Justice for the Poor 
Gender, Female-headed households & Female migrant workers 

National Institution - Poverty 
PAMSIMAS and WSLIC2 cofinancing 

WSP :WASAP (Recipient Executed) 

Other- WSP 

Others -Water 
Pro Green 

MDF Aceh Forect (LIF) 

MDF Aceh Forect (FFI) 

Environmental Sustainability- excluding green KDP 
Climate change / Global environment issues (GEF, CDM, ODS) 

Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery 

GEF COREMAP 
MDF Infrastructure Reconstruction Financing Facility (IRFF) 

Java Reconstruction Funds (Jogya housing) 

Marine Electronic highway 

Others 

MDF Admin 

Fiscal Agency - MDF Aceh and Nias 
Fiscal Agency - Decentralization Support Facility 

131

Grant Amount (million USD)
268
21
5

5
8

160

50
8
0
10

145

45
23

25
52
281
186

1

7

8
2
7

6
27
3

30

5
295

10
8
11
33

2

8
137

86

1

166

24

141
2

Annex 8: CPS Consultations

* 

To obtain feedback on the 2009-2012 CPS and provide input for the new 2013-2014 CPS, the
World Bank and IFC carried out consultations with a wide cross-section of civil society, from the
media to the private sector, as well as civil society organizations focused on environment issues,
governance, community development, and poverty reduction. The World Bank Indonesia program
also conducted the World Bank Client Survey, with 265 respondents selected out of a pool of 866
stakeholders. The following is a summary of comments from the consultations and from the Client
Survey:
* Efforts at poverty reduction are best 
implemented 
through Capacity Development.
Respondents of the Client Survey judged the Development Policy Loan as the least effective
instrument for poverty reduction. While respondents believe the Bank performs well at monitoring
and evaluation its programs, they are less convinced of the policy prescriptions, deeming some of
them too technocratic and less accommodating of political realities. Respondents add that Bank
procedures can be too bureaucratic and as a result project implementation can be less than timely.
* A 'sectoral' strategy is inadequate, particularly concerning environmental and poverty.
Participants noted that a 'green economy' cuts across sectors, while at the same time requiring a
micro 'not-one-answer-fits-all' approach. There is also a call, considering the archipelagic nature of
Indonesia, for more focus on marine environments. Similarly, CSOs focused on poverty note that
poverty-reduction programs must have more linkages between sectors.
'Middle-income' status may not necessarily fit. Participants noted that 'middle-income'
definitions do not apply in more remote provinces, particularly in areas where MDG indicators such
as maternal mortality remain critical. Regional disparity must be better addressed. In general, the
CSOs urge that the CPS reflects a more sober picture of Indonesia, one marked as much by
shortcomings and challenges as well as successes.
* The infrastructure-intensive sweeping approach of the Master Plan is neither strategic nor
effective. Many society groups argued that a shift back to agriculture and capacity-building at the
local level would be more helpful to address food security concerns than the large-scale programs of
MP3EI, and that connecting poor regions with more affluent areas do not necessarily translate into
more prosperity for the poor. They also note that the MP3EI does not explicitly address the
concerns of the Pro-Poor or the Pro-Green agenda. Participants added that private sector
involvement in the Master Plan has impeded community rights to land, while others note that the
focus on infrastructure may lead to reduced investments on human resources development.
Governance-focused CSOs remarked that past infrastructure programs have been poorly carried out
and prone to mark-ups. Conversely, however, representatives from the private sector note the need
for improved infrastructure in order to be able to expand business potential.
* Reinforce focus on bureaucracy reform. From CSOs to the private sector, the World Bank was
urgently reminded to not veer from a reform agenda focused on public service delivery. Participants
believe that this is where the World Bank provides added value and that our close partnership with
the government can lead to improved outcomes, if the programs remain focused on these reforms.
* Focus on upstream influence is outdated, and increased grassroots involvement 
is needed.
Participants noted that Bank relationships with stakeholders are concentrated in the capital, Jakarta.
They called for a greater engagement of local governments, and increased training for the
bureaucracy as well as for CSOs working at the grassroots level. Participants also suggest
modifications of 'technical assistance' to suit local needs and local capacity, and that data obtained
by CSOs should be incorporated more into the Bank's work. Going forward, they suggest that
CSOs are involved in budget formulation, and not just at the monitoring stage.

132

* Growth targets are too ambitious. Participants note that high economic growth has not
necessarily translated into better livelihoods, and stress the importance of quality development.
They point out the inadequate availability of skilled employment amongst youth that, if not
addressed, will lead to more inequity and possible unrest. Private sector representatives also urge
the government to not be side-tracked by high ambitions, and instead focus on basic priorities such
as civil service reform and health service delivery.
* The four pillars (Pro-Growth, Pro-Poor, etc.), encompassing many programs, prompts the
question: What are the Bank's priorities? Some participants noted that the Indonesia program
may be too 'comprehensive' and not selective in its approach.
* Community participation must be increased. Participants called for the involvement of CSOs in
the monitoring and evaluation of infrastructure projects. Community development organizations add
the financial management capacity of local institutions needs to be strengthened, and that current
programs do not adequately address this issue. They add that while the national CDD program has
been successful, it would benefit from increased strengthening of accountability mechanisms and
community involvement. Poverty-reduction NGOs also note that the Bank is focused on the CDD
approach and process rather than obtaining more results. Advocacy groups add that empowerment
without real power does not lead to lasting results, and that the voice of poor communities must be
amplified. There is a strong call to amplify the need for social justice.
* Closer partnerships with civil society should be developed. Civil society participants note that
they would be more effective in encouraging reforms. Many participants feel that the World Bank
should play a bigger catalytic role in maintaining the reform agenda, particularly reforms relating to
the bureaucracy or to the regulatory environment. There is also a very strong call for greater
knowledge sharing with CSOs, in order to improve their capacity.

* Addressing inconsistencies in governance and law enforcement. Some participants note that
private investors do not adhere to low-carbon principles as outlined in the Master Plan. Advocacy
groups note that policies supporting better governance face obstacles at the implementation level.
Participants call for an increase 
in programs that provide public expenditure analysis and
dissemination of that information.

133

Standard: CPS Annexes

Annex AI: Key Economic amd Program Indicators

Key Econoic& ProgramIndicators -Changefom LastCAS

AO[l9fl8JZO12

Frecast LastGAS 

ActuI 

CurrentCASFoicast

EconnvC 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2010' 

2011' 

2012, 

2013 

2014 

2015

GDP 

6.0 
9.5 

64 

67 

67 
91 

62 
15.3 
S.3 

45 
B.6 
17.3 

61 
2.E 
7.1 

43 
5.7 
4.7 

6.6 
1l 
11. 

46
1.2
117

Exporl 

8.4 

86 

S10.0 

9.9 

7.9 

13.3 

Ia~ A) 

9.8 

7.0 

60 

5.5 

51 

5.4 

4.4 

5.1 

5.0 

48

Naia1aesCl(%DP)
Cretcmta 

e 

0.0 
27.7 

0.9 
2?.0 

0.3 
2?.0 

.2 
27.0 

0.7 
32.1 

.2 
32.0 

-23 
33.3 

-1.6 
34.5 

-1.7 
3.4 

.9
36.6

P i 

(% GDP)

Fc 

c 

1 

99 

-5 

vi 

.7 

-1.1 

-24 

-1.7 

-1.4 

-5

F~gfmei 

0.5 

43 

43 

-3 

0.4 

0.2 

0.7 

0.6 

0.7 

0.9

43.0 
d4.0 

44.2 

456 

49.7 

%.2 
40 

110.1 
7.2 

110.2 
43 

122.5 
45 

143.1 
4.7 

159.9
42

( 

42 

40 

64 

PrgrmBaEs: 
Lding~(Smillio) 

FY-200< FY20 FY2}00 EF201 FY2010' FY2011t FY2D2 FY2013? FY-2014 FY2015
972 
11314 
120 
13231 
B>5I

5326 S,50D S.70D 920D 

12)159 

e. Actuatoucm3

134

Annex A2: Indonesia at a glance

Indonesia at a glance 

10/12/12

East 
Asia & 
Pacific 

Lower
middle
income 

Key Development Indicators 

Indonesia 

Age distribution, 2010

2011) 

Male 

Female

Population, mid-year (millions) 
Surface area (thousand sq. km) 
Population growth (%) 
Urban population (% of total population) 

242.3 
1,905 
1.0 
54 

1,962 
16,302 
0.7 
46 

2,519 
23,579
1.5
39 

75-79

45-49

30-34

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI per capita (PPP, international $) 

649.6 
2,680 
4,200 

7,249 
3,696 
6,657 

4,078
1,619
3,632 

0-4 

-A10 
,5 O

GDP growth (%) 
GDP per capita growth (%) 

6.5 
5.4 

9.7 
8.9 

6.9 
5.3

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2005-2011)

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %) 
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 

18 
46 
68 
27 
18 

14
33 
72 
20 
6 

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

65
50 
25 

9o
70

60

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older) 
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older) 
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group) 
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group) 

95 
89 
119 
115 

96 
91 
111 
112 

80 
62 
110 
104 

so
40
30
20

10

Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population) 

80 
52 

90 
66 

87 
47

O 

1990 

1995 

2000 

2010

Net Aid Flows 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2011

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid 
Top 3 donors (in 2010):
Australia 
France 
United States 

941 

1,716 

1,653 

1,393 

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita(%)

48 
44 
117 

77 
122 
31 

72 
22 
174 

356 
262 
180 

15
10

5

0

Aid (% of GNI) 
Aid per capita (US$) 

1.3 
6 

1.6 
9 

1.1 
8 

0.2 
6 

_s
-10

-15

Long-Term Economic Trends 

-20

95 

05

Consumer prices (annual % change) 
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change) 

9.5 
10.4 

7.7 
7.7 

3.7 
20.4 

5.4
8.4 

-p--ei.

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$) 
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100) 

627 

1,843 
107 

8,422 
100 

10,121
137

.. 

1980-90 1990-2000 
2000-11
(average annual growth %)
2.0 
1.5 
6.1 
4.2 

Population, mid-year (millions) 
GDP (US$ billions) 

151 
78 

184 
114 
(% of GDP)
19.4 
39.1 
20.7 
41.5 

213 
165 

242 
734 

1.2
5.4

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

24.0 
41.7 
13.0 
34.3 

15.6 
45.9 
27.7 
38.5 

14.7 
47.2 
24.3 
38.1 

3.6 
7.3 
12.8 
6.5 

2.0 
5.2 
6.7 
4.0 

3.5
4.2
4.6
7.4

Household final consumption expenditure 
General gov't final consumption expenditure 
Gross capital formation 

51.4 
10.5 
24.1 

58.9 
8.8 
30.7 

60.7 
6.5 
22.2 

56.8 
9.0 
32.8 

5.2 
4.6 
7.7 

6.6 
0.1 
-0.6 

4.6
7.8
6.4

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross savings 

34.2 
20.2 
28.7 

25.3 
23.7 
28.1 

41.0 
30.5 
26.1 

26.3 
24.9 
31.3

2.7 
1.2 

5.9 
5.7 

7.7
8.2

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2010.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

135

Indonesia

Balance of Payments and Trade 

2000 

2011

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2010

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob) 
Total merchandise imports (cif) 
Net trade in goods and services 

65,408 200,788
44,404 
182,604 
15,243 
24,154 

Voice and accountability
Political stability and
absence of violence

Current account balance 
as a % of GDP 

7,998 
4.8 

1,712
0.2

Workers' remittances and 
compensation of employees (receipts) 

Rule of law
Control of corruption

1,190 

6,916 

Reserves, including gold 

29,268 

106,530 

0 

25 

0 

75 

201

Central Government Finance 

oCountry's 

percentile rank (0-100)

high.-I.atu 

i-#ybatt.,rt#,gs

(% of GDP)iolence

Current revenue (including grants) 

19.7 

16.3

Tax revenue 
Current expenditure 

11.1 
15.6 

11.8
10.3

Technology and Infrastructure 

2000 

2010

Overall surplus/deficit 

-1.8 

-1.1

Paved roads (% of total) 
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people) 
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports) 

57.1 

56.9

Highest marginal tax rate (%) 
Individual 
Corporate 

35 
30 

30 
28 

5 

108

16.4 

11.4

External Debt and Resource Flows

Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Total debt service 
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI) 

143,344 199,240 
16,624 
30,681 
-
-

Agricultural land (% of land area) 
Forest area (% of land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area) 

25 
54.9 
13.6 

30
52.1
14.1

Total debt (% of GDP) 
Total debt service (% of exports) 

86.9 
26.2 

27.2 
13.0 

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters) 
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

9,218 

8,504

Foreign direct investment (net inflows) 
Portfolio equity (net inflows) 

-4,550 
-1,021 

19,242 
-326

C02 emissions per capita (mt) 

1.2 

1.7

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

3.6 

4.3

Composition of total external debt, 2011

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent) 

730 

851

IBRD, 9,717

Short-ter 
38,173

, 

IDA, 2,277

Othe multi- 

World Bank Group portfolio 

2000 

2010

,ateral, 10,848

(US$ millions)

Bilateral,
43,639

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Interest payments 

11,715 
1,051 
761 
950 

9,054
2,078
900
291

Private, 94,5B6

US$millions 

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 
Total debt service 

714 
59 
31 

2,313
142
49

Private Sector Development 

2000 

2011 

Time required to start a business (days) 
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita) 
Time required to register property (days) 

-
-
-

45 
21.5 
22 

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio 
of which IFC own account 
Disbursements for IFC own account 
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account 

880 
480 
20 

648
507
46

Ranked as a major constraint to business 
(% of managers surveyed who agreed) 
Economic and regulatory policy uncertainty 
Corruption 

2000 

2010 

43 

165

48.2
41.5 

MIGA
Gross exposure 
New guarantees 

56 
0 

207
207

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP) 
Bank capital to asset ratio (%) 

16.3 
6.0 

58.4 
11.4

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011 data are preliminary. 
.. indicates data are not available. -
indicates observation is not applicable.

10/12/12

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

136

Millennium Development Goals 

Indonesia

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years) 

Indonesia

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition 
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population) 
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population) 
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%) 
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5) 

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %) 
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group) 
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %) 
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24) 

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%) 
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment) 
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%) 

Goal 4: 
reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000) 
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %) 

Goal 5: 
reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total) 
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49) 

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIVIAIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49) 
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people) 
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms) 

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population) 
Forest area (% of land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area) 
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita) 
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people) 
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people) 
Internet users (per 100 people) 
Computer users (per 100 people) 

1990 
54.3 

.. 

9.4 
31.0 

1995 
43.4 
17.6 
9.0 
27.4 

2000 
47.7 
23.4 
9.6 
24.8 

2010
18.1
13.3
8.3
17.5

98 
96 
48 
96 

93 
29 
12 

85 
56 
58 

620 
32 
50 

0.1 
189 
21 

71 
33 
65.4 
10.0 
0.8 
3.7 

0.6 
0.0 
0.0 

95 
99 
49 

.. 

93 
29 
13 

67 
46 
63 

440 
37 
54 

0.1 
189 
9 

74 
38 

.. 

10.9 
1.1 
4.0 

1.7 
0.1 
0.0 

90 
93 
53 

.. 

96 
32 
8 

54 
38 
74 

350 
64 
55 

0.1 
189 
21 

77 
44 
54.9 
13.6 
1.2 
3.6 

3.1 
1.7 
0.9 

.. 

95
105
77
99

98
32
18

35
27
89

240
75
57

0.2
189
66

80
52
52.1
14.1
1.7
4.3

15.8
91.7
9.9
1.5

Education indicators (%) 

Measles immunization (% of 1-year 
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125 

100 

75 

50 

25 

100 

75 

50 

.

2000 

2005 

2010 

O 

1990 

1995 

2000 

2010 

120

100

80

6

40

20

0

2000 

2005 

2010

.1ki 

netenrollentra.-b-ia

1ry 

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available. 

10/12/12

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

137

CAS Annex B2 - Indonesia

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 10/10/2012

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number C 

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount 8, C 

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number 8 ' d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013

34 
4.1 
8.8 

2.2 

11.8 
3.0 
54.5 

No 
3,444 
52 

33 
3.7 
12.1 

3.7 

12.1 
3.8 
43.2 

No 
4,901 
50 

31 
3.8 
16.1 

7.0 

19.4 
8.6 
38.5 

Yes
5,620 
52 

33
3.8
15.2

6.9

18.2
8.5
6.8

5,800
52

Memorandum 
Item 
Proj E\l by OED by Number 
Proj E\l by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY80 Last Five FYs
291 
16
27,285.6 
1,931.7
37.5
24.9 
20.0 
13.3

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. A\erage age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on de\elopment objecti\es (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

138

CAS Annex B - Indonesi

Indicative IBRD Lending Program, FYi13-15

FY 13 

Planned Deliverables

P[. G[1.th 

Po Trnisin 

andDitributi 

11 

Institutional,TamxAdministration,Social andlIndestmnent (INSTANSI)

DPL 

Connecti ityDPL 

Financial Sector and IndestmnentClimnateReform and

Moderniation (FIRM) DPL 

IngrastructureGuarante Fund 

Pro Jobs 

Sustainable Management of Agricultural Research and Technology

Disenination project(SMARTD) 

ResearchandInnbalio 

iScience &Tchology Project (RISET) 

Pro Pinr 

National CommunityEmpowermnent Program in Urban Areas for

2012-2014Project(PNPM-UrbanIV) 

National CommunityEmpowermnent Program in Rural Areas for

2012-2014 Project (PPM- Rural) 

Rural aterand Sanitation Program AF PAMSIMAS II) 

2048

857

327 

300 

100 

100 

30 

175

80 

95 

1016

266 

650 

100 

M 

M 

H 

M 

H 

M 

M 

H 

H 

M 

M

L

L

L

H

H

M

M

m

M

139

FY 14 

Planned Deliverables

P[. G[odth 

Institrutional,TamxAdministration,Social andlIndestment (INSTANSI)

DPL II 
Conneiv DPL II 
Road Assets Preservation Program (RAPP) 

Pr G[een 

Solid Waste ManagementlImproserment Support Project for
Regional and Metropolitan Citier 

Corm Reef RehaiIlion andManagement Projectll (COREMAP
N11) 

Potential Deliverables

Financial Sector and IndestmentClimateReform and

Moderniaion (FIRM) DPL II 

GeothermlI 

Catastrophe DeferredDrawdownOption (CAT O) 

Renewable Energy coSrElerto(1,000islande) 

FYl5 

Planned Deliverabes

Pro Grodth 

Institrutional,TamxAdministration,Social andlIndestment (INSTANSI)

DPL III 

Conneiv DPL III 

LocalGReoermetand Decentraliation Projectll1(DAK

Reribursrmentll) 

Potential Deliverables*)

MatenenPumped stormaepower project 
Metropolitan Area Development project 

Skills Traningfor Economi Transoro 

Corridor5 TLobokTourris Development 

PNIPM Rurl 

PNIPM Urbn 

Indonesia ater Suppy andAnitation IndestmentFailty (IVIF) 
EnergyEfficienc Fiance fril 
Smalland Medium HydR Deelopimenl 

750

600

300 

100 

200 

150

100 

50 

100 

300 

500 

300 

650

650

300 

100 

250 

400 
400 
100 

100 

200 

100 

100 

100 

100 

M 

M 

H 

m 

M 

M 

M 

m 

m 

m 

M 

H 

m 
H 

M 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

M 

*su blecttoresuolvinof&Inonesiasex 

sresd/odrreadfingassafdictlso,ndiatrSe

L

L

m

H

M

L

M

L

m

L

L

M

m
H

H

H

M

M

M

M

M

140

Annex B4: Summary of Knowledge Services

PLANNED ANALYTICAL AND ADVISORY WORK, FY13-14 

(Thousand US$)
BB 
TF

Economic and Sector Work
FY2013
Indonesia-Openness, Competition and Grow 
Indonesia Economic Quarterly FY13 
Indonesia: Urban Poverty Analysis 
An Agenda for Senior Secondary Education 
Indonesia Life Long Learning 
Teacher Reform in Indonesia 
PER: Financing Local Governments in ID 

FY2014
Education: ID-HE Strategic Studies 
Indonesian Social Protection Public Expenditure Review (PER)
Improving Targeting Performance of Poverty Programs
HIV/AIDS PET Study (UBW 1st Tranche)
Indonesia ROSC Update Accounting and Audit

Technical Assistance
FY2013
Support for Bureaucracy Reform 
Public Procurement Reform 
Indonesia's Non-Tariff Measures 
Policy Dialogue on Services 
Rapid Response Supp. on Fin. Sec. Policy 
Rapid Response Supp. on Trade Mon. & Pol 
Supp. for ID Intl Econ. Engagement-FORA 
Support for Enhancing Fiscal Transfer 
Indonesia Viability Gap Financing 
Corruption Prevention Capacity Building 
Indonesia - Access to Justice (TF097761) 
ID: eServices Secure Govt Network 
Helping Generate Jobs for Pro-Poor Growth 
Supp. for Dev. Gender Engagement in ID 
TA- Food Security Policies in Indonesia 
Sustainability of Ag Export Crops 
Stunting Reduction and PNPM-Generasi TA 
Indonesia Beverage Crops Value Chains 
Food Security Policies in Indonesia 

141

143.2 
21.5
33.9 
77.4
107.4
12.4
192.2

14.9

101.6

12.1 
8.7 
49.7 
33.9 
10.8 
2.4
122.1

174.1 
73.1
108.6
73.8 
205.7
14.8

173.5

612.4

228.1
70.5
30.6
170.3
58.6
367.1

936.5
1,087.1
60.8
2,063.2

42.0

170.2

PNPM Field Operations 
PNPM WINDOW 3 
PNPM Supervision and Monitoring 
TA for PNPM Generasi Pilot Program 
PNPM M&E and Special Studies 
PNPM Communication Strategy 
Mainstreaming DRR in Indonesia phase II 
Disaster Risk Financing 
ID Climate Policy and Institutional Support 
WSP - Program Administration 
WSP-Advisory Services 
Geothermal Power Support Program 
Low-income Housing Policy and Finance 
Modernizing Water Management Sys 
MDTF - Indonesia Domestic Trade 
TA for MIS and Evaluation Study 
Energy Efficiency Financing Program 
Indonesia Clean Stove Initiative 
MDTF to Improve Investment Climate 
ID - Logistics and Connectivity 
Supporting Financial Sector Development 
Jakarta Fiscal and Bond Issue 
Strengthening Local Capacity for Poverty 
ID-TF Local Government Capacity Development 
Supp. for Strengthening Sub-National PFM 
Sub National Development Diagnostics 

FY 2014
Public Expenditure Analysis and Capacity Harmonization 
Improving Poverty Data Quality 
Support for Social Security Reform 
Support for Domestic Trade 
Integration of Poverty Reduction 
Support for Non-Tax Revenue Management 
Supporting ID Corruption Eradication 
Indonesia SP Engagement TA 
ID-TF CPDA 
ID-TF CPDA Supervision & Operational 
ID-TF CPDA Program Management & Admin 
ID - Higher Education Intro/Dissemination 
Natural resources and governance 
Gas Development Master Plan 
Sustainable Cities Dialogue 
PEACH -TA and Capacity Building (BETF) 

142

1,362.1

554.1
4,931.2
3,616.9
7,763.8
2,387.0
842.9

164.09
2,135.0
2,713.1
899.6
480.4
4.1
2,037.7
392.6
75.2
186.0
2,286.2
474.8
50.9
52.2
475.2
1,441.1

794.4
1,051.9
86.4
108.4

2.7
86.2

1,768.1
272.9
211.3

7.2
1,155.0

38.4
533.7 
14.6 

0.1 
126.2 
1.0 

17.0 
20.3 

142.6 

135.6
32.7

215.5 
43.2 
63.3 
123.0 
11.8
47.3 

145.4

(46.0)
55.5
78.4
69.9 

Annex B5: Indonesia - Key Social Indicators

Latest sinide year 

Same reiodincome group
East 
Lower-

Asia & 
Pacific 

middle-
income

1980-85 

1990-95 

2005-11 

POPULATION
Total population mid-year (miionE) 

168.1 

199.4 

242.3 

1961.6 

2518.7

Growth rate (% arnal average for period) 
Urban population (% of populatiori 
Totalfertilityrate (birth per womai) 

2.2 

1.6 
35-6 

11 
53.7 

017 
45.9 
1.8 

1.6

26.1 

39-4

3.7 

2.7 

2.1 

2.9

POVE RTY (% of populatio)
National headcont index 
Urban headcoint index 
Rural headcont index 

13.3
9.9
16.6

INCOME
GNI per capita (USS) 
Coniner prine index (2005=100) 
Foodprice index (2(k00100) 

510 
20 
15 

980 
44 
38 

2680 
239 
260

3.696 
131 

1.619
140

INCOME /CONSUMPTION DI STRIBUTION

Share of icom e orc cturnption

Giti index 

30.5 

29-3 

34.0

Lowest quintile (% oE inCoM e or C0nsumnption) 
Highest quirie 
(% of irne 
or consumption) 

8.7 
39.5 

9.5 
39.1 

8.3
42.8

SOCIAL INDICATORS

Public expenditure

Health (% af GDP) 
Education(% ofGNI) 

0.6 

1.2 

2.0 
3.8 

2.0
4-0

Net primary school enroliment rate

(% qf age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

98 

95 
97 
92 

95 
97 
94 

93 
93 
94 

85

99 
92 

87
83

Access to an imp:roed water source
(%A 4flpulafion)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

74 
91 
65 

80 
89 
71 

90 
97 

87
93
83

84 

Immunization rate

% of chilaien ages 12-23 month)

Measles 

26 
27 

63 
69 
27 

89 

95 
94 
6 

8o

DPT 

83 

79

Child m alinutition ( 

trder S years) 

11 

25

Life expectancy at birth

Total 
Male 
Female 

60 

64 
62 
66 

68 

72 
70 
74 

65
64
67

58 

67 

62 

70 

Mortality

Irfart (per 1.000 live births) 

67 
104 

46 
67 

27 
35 

20 
24 

50

Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 

69

Adlt (15-59)
Male (per 1.0O0 popLiatica 

368 
308 

275 

210 
175 
240 
75 

157 
105 
89 
91 

244

Female (per 1.000 populatori 
Maternal (per 100-L0 
Births attended by sklled healt staffC() 

219 
440 
37 

175
300
57

live brts) 

CAS AnnexB5. This table was pmduced fromthe CrJLDE system. 
Note: O or 0.0 meam aem or less than halfthe uait shown. Imrmnintion: fefers to children ages 12-23 months
who received vaccnations befare one ve2r of age or at any ttn before the a urvey.

10.11/12

143

Annex B6: Indonesta - Key Economic Indficaturs

<-- -- A u 
2009 
2A10 

-

> ]htnaat 

< 
2A122 

R it.n 

-

-
2A14 

ladato 

213 

2A15

Nafieaul ~.nes%dCP

dntpdc"10Y 

10Y MW MW M M M

Agbn1m 

13 

113 
47.0 
37.7 

14.7 
47s 
3s. 

l26 

107 
404 
498 

93 
37.S 
529 

82

ldsy47.7 
Sms37.1 

43. 
44 

352
56

Toaoupe 

2 
31.1 
1.4 
298 

65.7 
32.1 
1.2 
30.8 

65.8 
32.0 
1.6 
304 

67.8 
313 
2.0 
313 

675 
345 
2.1 
324 

M6 
354 
19 
335 

659
36.6
19
347

adont.f eiumt,et 

Gove..etinet,et 

Biaevemn 

]Aol&NS 

2 
]am:GF)21.4 
Gmdeteams33.8 

M6 

2y3 

31.0 
2B.8 
22.9 
249 
343 
342 

2j.0 
265 
2 

272
25 s 
33.4 4M1

289 
322 

24.7

Qdont.pouc(As 

11mnateur.tpr 

54Y 
2,1W0 

70S 

S47 
20 

S9H 
3,01 

LjA2 
34.2 

lir 
3lse 

17
433G

GNIphap 

j(USSAtlaj=ethild) 

250 

Gmsdnetipouttnetpe 
GmsDasd]cme7. 

4.6 

6.2 

6.5 

6.1 
5.0 

6.3 
91 

6.6 
6.5 

6.6
7.

4.1 

6.6 

Gmeaese uttnetpee 
T.l.~.uplo 

3.5 
3.2 

5.1 
3.0 

5.4 
2.6 

5.0 
3.7 
3.6 

5.3 
3.6 
3.9 

5.6 
4.3 
4.1 

5.6
4.2

Biaeosupin1.6 

2.7 

3.9 

4.0

]hprbil@m 328 
119. 
]modtl@)111.6 

174.8 
236.8 
153. 
197 
]27.4 

22, 

259.6 
24,8 
278.4 
1O 
(23) 
2B.1 
(0.63 
10e, 
(e.) 

271.7 
2759 
2952 
227.4 
(259) 
36.4 
6 ( 

306 39
3ll4
335 
3740
23s.4 
2lx5 
(ff)

MeebeeO 

15. 

20Y.S 

MemadeO 
Peaebhc 
14eretnsis4.6 
mentccounbahM4 

887 

3GIP

2 

2e.3 

2A2 

(1me 
4. 
51 

4.2 
1.7 

A4 
(202 

459
(12.6
11.0
(16.6

10. 

14tavaefnigdnctnvstant2.6 
Giagenrsees(I25) 

11.1 

115 
(30.3) 

10. 
(119 

1. 
(1325 

23 

loreaeciofD)39 

3.0 

29 

21 

23 

2 

5

MeebnsenodiFBe-94 
Meibaneenper(CI) 

4.6 

4.5 
7.2 

29 
3.6 

i 8 

11.1 

106
Y2.

179 

18.6 

]25 

]21 

144

Indonesia - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

<-------------- Actual ------------- > Estimate <----------- Projection ----------- >
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)c
Revenues 
Expenditures 
Budget surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 

Price indices( YROO =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)d 

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

15.1 
16.7 
-1.6 
2.7 
0.7 

38.2 
13.0 

328.5 
430.3 
76.3 
129.3 

4.8 
8.3 

15.5 
16.2 
-0.7 
2.6 
0.4 

38.4 
15.4 

415.0 
521.5 
79.6 
146.3 

16.3 
17.4 
-1.1 
2.8 
0.2 

38.7 
16.4 

504.6 
604.0 
83.5 
146.7 

16.0 
18.3 
-2.4 
3.5 
0.7 

38.7 
13.0 

578.4 
699.9 
82.6 
135.7 

5.1 
8.1 

5.4 
8.4 

4.4 
6.5 

16.1 
18.1 
-1.9 
3.6 
0.6 

38.7 
14.7 

567.8 
708.3 
80.2 
129.1 

5.1 
7.9 

16.2 
18.0 
-1.7 
3.4 
0.6 

38.7 
15.9 

573.6 
711.4 
80.6 
122.0 

5.0 
8.7 

16.1
17.7
-1.6
3.3
0.9

38.7
15.9

572.0
714.3
80.1
115.6

4.8
8.7

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Actual figures was consolidated central government.
d. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

145

Annex B8: 1FC

Indonesia
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 9/30/2012
(in USD Millions)

FY ApgLova I 

an 

Loa n 

-Y 
Eguit 

**Quasi 
Ly 

*GT/RM 

Partici 
2gnt 

L__ EgUL 
oan 
ity 

**Quasi 
Eg__
uity *GT/RM 

Partici
2gnt

Committed 

Disbursed Outstanding

2006 
2011 
10/12/2008 
10/12/2008 
2011 
2004 
2009/12 
2012 
2012 
2007/08 
2009 
2010 
2012 
2011 
2004/05 
7/8/2006 
2008 
2008 
2006/08 
2008/09 
2009/11 
2008/09 
2010 
0/13 

Bank danamon 
Bank intl indo 
Bank of banks 
Bima 
Biocarbon 
Bona\Asta school 
Btpn 
Cimb niaga 
Fhp indonesia i 
Fugui indonesia 
liff 
Jict 
Medco power 
Oto finance 
Pt ecogreen 
Pt karunia (kas) 
Pt prakars (pas) 
Pt sas 
Pt tas 
Pt his 
Pt \Ascose 
Saratoga asia ii 
Trada 
Wintermar 

58.18 
75 
0 
15 
0 
0.21 
149.58 
75 
0 
18.82 
0 
29.14 
0 
71.84 
4.58 
11.27 
7.09 
2.45 
6.18 
10.91 
56.67 
0 
33.13 
44.59 

0 
0 
9.51 
22.58 
5 
0 
68.88 
0 
25 
0 
39.49 
0 
25 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
19.61 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12 
0 
0 
0 
10 

Total Portfolio: 

669.64 

215.07 

22 

Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

5 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2.44 
0 
40 
0 
116.25 
0 
0.67 
2.22 
0.67 
0 
0 
170 
0 
0 
0 

332.25 

58.18 
0 
0 
15 
0 
0.21 
49.58 
0 
0 
18.82 
0 
24.86 
0 
71.84 
4.58 
11.27 
7.09 
2.45 
6.18 
10.91 
47.67 
0 
33.13 
25.6 

0 
0 
7.91 
20.25 
1 
0 
68.88 
0 
0.14 
0 
21.57 
0 
25 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7.72 
0 
0 

387.37 

152.47 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12 
0 
0 
0 
0 

12 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2.44
0
34.29
0
116.25
0
0.67
2.22
0.67
0
0
137
0
0
0

0 293.54

147

CAS Annex B18 - Indonesia

Operations Portfolio (1BRI1DA and Grants)

IB I 

.A*IP 

D

.afwU,hi-ha b ~ndpk 

11,9-147

TllklirsdAcEve 

4.5A41

TN-txliisd(lsd 

-

0.A00-

ProjectID 

ProjecName 

Fiscl Year 

IBRD 

IDA 

GRANT. 

Cacl. 

Und.sb. Orig.

P11434B 

Wat.rRsourcsand .rMgmtrogra 2 5 

1 

15 

1 42.5 19.5

P0691 
PD9221 

PDTT15R 

pD.3742 
P0613 

PD9975 
p113341 

P 313 
11577 
P 1221 

200 
20 
200 

00 

200 
207 
200 
2 
20107782 
20.5 
20. 

16. 
10 
24. 
16 

32. 

51 
3.15 
220 
5119 

12 

61. 

67. A.7 
6I89 

3A 

8. 

4 

10.6 

3.6 

32 
100. 
191 
9.2 

32 
2. 
43. 
7.M. 
345I. 
16.3 
21.7 

1-71 

0.I

16.7I
19.

.2
2. 
1.3

41.63
-13..

37.

1.5

.

-4.5I

.

.

P0714 

POS947 

D-N,t .nal UPP(PPNPM UPP) 
M5 
M5 
U-nd lfrastrcturFinnc Fci- Mu 
Mu 
-ERMUTU 
5 
M5 
I AU D-a tcaMPrktDevR penProj 5 M5 
-ErChikhowdEduct-nnd 
5 
5P 
-amrmae.Agric.Teh.f 
M5 
M5 
U-GEF MARINEELCTRNK'.HWVP 
M5 
M5 
Mu 
5 
M5 
M5 

R-GEF-e~ hermalP 
erGenert-n Dev 
D-Heth PIRAs 
InEDucaI GQuA 
PD534N-GHEREDUCATION 
D-va-BalPIrSector &StrenTh 
D-eGvrmetnDcntaiae 
D-PNPM RURALW 

M5 
5. 
M5 

M5 
5 

5 

M5 

5 

201Di 
2012 

148

71.4 

0.2

4.8
10.4 

0.3

24.8

0.0

81.0
-7.7

0.0

46.7
233.8 

17.0

10.4

105.8

PP79906 
P078070 
P090991 
P071296 #D-USDRP 

P05375 
P09532 
Pi18916 
P117323 
P111034 
P100740 
P119113 
P130046 
P118151 
PI106384 
P1 17243 
P112158 
P090990 
Overall Resut 

D-Strategic Roads Infrastructure 
[D-Support for Poor and Dsadvant Areas 
[1-URBAN WATER SUPPLY 

D-WSSLIC Ill (PAMSIMAS) 
0: Dam Operatinal Improvement (DiSP) 
IndGnesialnfrastructureGuarantee Fund 
Indones Power Transmission Develapmen- 
Jakarta Urgent Fbuck Mfitigatin Praject 
PINTAR 
PNPM- Urban III Project 
Progr flr Econ Resilken ce, Inv & Soc Ass 
Scholarships Program 
Strengthening Indonesisn Statistics 
Sustainable Management 
fAg Research 
UpperCQsnkan PumpedStorage Hydru-Elct 
Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. 

MS 
MS 
3 
MS 
3 
MU 
# 
MS 
3 
MU 
MS 
# 
MS 
MS 
# 
5 
5 

MS 
MS 
mLS 
mLS 
5 
u 
# 
mU 
S 
mU 
MS 
# 
MS 
MS 
# 

MS 

r 

r 
r 

r 

r 

12007 
2005 
2010 
2005 
2006 
2009 
2013 
2011 
2012 
2009 
2010 
2012 
2011 
2011 
2013 
2011 
2011 

414.4551764 
138 
23.56 
90 

50 
29.6 
225 
139.64 
110 
149.9, 
2000 
112.65 
65 

80 
640 
250 
6565.592176 

35 

137.5 

1.5 

6.6 

521.5 

12.3 

22.3 

69.9 
1.4 
16.7 
3.8 
9.3 
39.2 
29.6
225.0
139.6 
109.7 
7.0 
20011.
104.9
65.0
0.0
640.0 
250.0 
4590.6 

149

112W 

125 

saai a p" 

.d by

9 

s-2r 's 125o 

~INDO 

NESIA

coors, dnmnatomn and

Ih=y 

i aian ska 

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

i.,, 

al pan f Th. hVa Ban

on 

 

PROVINCE CAPITALS

15' 

aaa 

k 

nt,,
or an norsement o (  NATIONAL CAPITAL
aacceptance of such

NDONESIAn 

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

PHIEPPIE 

RAILROADS

===PH==ppI 

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

lW 

10 

-

-

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

135- 

140

Band Acieh

AA

5 

BRUNEL 

5

\ 

i 

Ta ra 

An 

* -ACIFI 

O EAN

Pemaangsantar24

SimeiuluA 

M.ta;

,SINGAPORE 

23 

Manado

Tiria" 

olahr

Nis.Pekanbaru, 

a 

ITaunpmang 

5 

TernatBes amhr

oiny3 

PBnhanak 

K ALIMANTAN 

26 

Goaontalo 

wai 9 eo

Pia9' 

20 

mn 

a 

30 

-

Manokan 

Ba

sr 

5 .Jambi 

sangko 

21 
PIaangkaraya e 

BalPorP"" ULA 

ES2 

~Taa 

Jaapt

o,T 3Cagka pmang 

SUSA 4eESca 

aaaln

* 6 

Palemanga 

Belihing 

22 

272 

Amhai Fak!akac>AU'

7e 

Bandlarmasin 

29 Kendan 

anBu *Q 

33, 

,PAPUA--

engkulB "B' 

Parepa 

Ambon 

- Timiko 

A Pancak Jay

8 > 

' 0 ssm

Lngn 
- Be. 
arps. 
mnpang 

1I 

,iiSiMlasmrv~-Ma 

a

AKARTA 

Makassar

0 

200 

400 Kilors 

A 

0

B__1_an dn 

Semaang 

Mad,ra

0 

100 200 300 400Miles 

JAWA Y 
95y1001o5Denal 

16 

BaUr 

/ on,nbar

a 
Raba 
DBBpinoW inaai17in a 18 
17 

MFk "

,na. 

TIMOR-LESTE 

i 

Sco

Scla 

-Tno

PROVINCES: 

10s 

WTamT
Kupang

1 NANGGROE ACEH DARUSSALAM 12 JAWA BARAT 
23 KAUMANTAN TIMUR 
2 SUMATERA UTARA 
13 JAWA TENGAH 
24 SULAWESI UTARA
3 RIAU 
14 D.I. YOGYAKARTA 
25 GORONTALO
4 SUMATERA BARAT 
15 JAWATIMUR 
TENGAH 
5 JAMBI 
16 BALI 
27 SULAWESI BARAT 
6 BENGKULW 
17 NUSA TENGGARA BARAT 28 SULAWESI SELATAN 
7 SUMATERA SELATAN 
18 NUSA TENGGARA TIMUR 
29 SULAWESI TENGGARA
19 RIAU KEPULAUAN 
30 MALUJKU UTARA 
20 KALIMANTAN BARAT 
31 MALUJKU 
21 KALIMANTAN TENGAH 
32 PAPUA BARAT 
22 KALIMANTAN SELATAN 
33 PAPUA 

26 SULAWESI 

NDIAN 

OCEAN

A,

...

8 LAMPUNG 

15 

15

9 BANGKA-BELITUNG 
10 BANTEN 
11 D.K.1. JAKARTA 

gi,

AUSTRALIA 

115 

120 

125 

130 

135140

150

