Document of 
The World Bank Group 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 84645-PK  

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

AND  

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

AND 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

AND 

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

FOR THE 

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN 

FOR THE PERIOD FY2015–19 

April 4, 2014 

Pakistan Country Management Unit 
South Asia Region 

International Finance Corporation 
Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Region 

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency  

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS: 

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(Exchange Rate Effective as of April 4, 2014) 
Currency Unit: Pakistani Rupees 
US$1.00 = PKR 98.2 
GOVERNMENT’S FISCAL YEAR: 
(July 1–June 30) 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AAA 
Analytical and Advisory Activities 
ADB 
Asian Development Bank 
AIDS 
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome 
AML/CFT 
Anti-Money Laundering/Combating Financing   
                           of Terrorism 
BISP 
Benazir Income Support Program 
CASA1000 
South Asia Central Asia Electricity  
Transmission and Trade Project 
CEM 
Country Economic Memorandum 
CPS 
Country Partnership Strategy  
CPSPR 
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report 
DFID 
Department for International Development (UK) 
DPC 
Development Policy Credit 
DPL 
Development Policy Loan 
Disco 
Distribution Company 
DLI 
Disbursement Linked Indicator 
DPs 
Development Partners 
DSA 
Debt Sustainability Analysis 
EAD 
Economic Affairs Division 
EFF 
Extended Fund Facility (of IMF) 
FATA 
Federally Administered Tribal Areas 
FBR 
Federal Board of Revenue 
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment 
FMIS 
Financial Management Information System 
FTA 
Free Trade Agreement 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
GFDRR 
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction  
                            and Recovery 
GPE 
Global Partnership for Education 
GST 
General Sales Tax 
GTFP 
Global Trade Finance Program 
HIV 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
IBRD 
Int’l Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
ICR 
Implementation Completion and Results Report 
IDA 
International Development Association 
IDF 
Institutional Development Fund 

IEG 
IFC 
IMF 
JICA 
KOEL 
KPK  
LNG 
MDGs 
MIGA 
MSME 
MTDF 
NEPRA 
NFC 
NLTA 
NWFP 
OSS 
PEFA 
PER 
PHRD 
PIFRA 

PPAF 
PPF 
PPP 
PRSP 
SME 
SEZ 
SOE 
SRO 
TA 
TARP 
TTF 
WBG 
WDR 
WEF 
WSP 

Independent evaluation Group 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 
Japan International Corporation Agency 
Karachi Organic Energy Limited 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
Liquefied Natural Gas 
Millennium Development Goals 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise 
Medium-Term Development Framework 
National Electric and Power Regulatory Authority 
National Finance Commission 
Non-Lending Technical Assistance 
North West Frontier Province 
One-Stop Shop 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Public Expenditure Review 
Japan Policy and Human Resource Development 
Project to Improve Financial Reporting and  
  Auditing  
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund 
Project Preparation Facility 
Public–Private Partnership 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
Special Economic Zone 
State-Owned Enterprise 
Special Regulatory Orders 
Technical Assistance 
Tax Administration Reforms Program 
Trade and Transport Facilitation 
World Bank Group 
World Development Report 
The World Economic Forum 
Water and Sanitation Program 

Vice President: 
Country Director: 

IBRD and IDA 
Philippe Le Houérou  
Rachid Benmessaoud 

IFC  
Vice President:   
Dimitris Tsitsiragos 
Regional Director/ 
Mouayed Makhlouf 
Country Manager: 
Nadeem Siddiqui 
Task Team Leader: 
Uzma Basim, Jose R. Lopez Calix 
Task Team Leader: 
Shabana Khawar 
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the close collaboration of Pakistan’s authorities in the preparation of this 
Country Partnership Strategy and the feedback from stakeholders. The preparation of the document involved 
extensive discussions with government representatives at federal, province, and regional levels, as well as other 
stakeholders, for example, the private sector, parliamentarians, the academia, youth groups and civil society. The 
strategy is a result of a team effort and the document received many useful contributions from the Pakistan Country 
Team and individuals across the WBG. Although it is impossible to name them all, we gratefully acknowledge and 
thank them for sharing their guidance, knowledge, and experience. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 

I.  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ......................................................................................................................... i 
II.  COUNTRY CONTEXT: DIAGNOSIS AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ..................................................... 1 

A.  Political and Social Context ..............................................................................................................  1 
B.  Poverty and Shared Prosperity Trends ..............................................................................................  1 
C.  Recent Economic Developments ......................................................................................................  2 
D.  Economic Prospects ..........................................................................................................................  3 
E.  Development Challenges and Opportunities .....................................................................................  5 
F.  Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy .......................................................................  10 
III.  WORLD BANK GROUP PAKISTAN COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 2015–19 ......................... 11 
A.  Lessons Learned from Previous CPS 2010-14 and Stakeholder Feedback .................................... 11 
B.  Proposed WBG Country Partnership Strategy ................................................................................  13 
C. 
Implementing the FY15–19 Pakistan Country Partnership Strategy .............................................. 28 
IV.  MANAGING RISKS .............................................................................................................................. 35 

Figures 

Figure 1: Poverty and Growth ....................................................................................................................... 2 
Figure 2: The Electricity Deficit ................................................................................................................... 6 
Figure 3: Private Sector Credit and Private Investment (as percent of GDP) ............................................... 7 
Figure 4: Agriculture and Water Productivity .............................................................................................. 7 
Figure 5: Pakistan on Human Development Index ....................................................................................... 8 
Figure 6: Financial Access .......................................................................................................................... 20 
Figure 7: Public Expenditures ..................................................................................................................... 23 
Figure 8: Pakistan CPS Results Chain: Results Areas and Outcomes ........................................................ 26 

Box 1: The Program with the IMF, 2013/14 – 2017/18 ................................................................................ 4 

Boxes 

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators ................................................................................................................ 5 
Table 2: FY15-19 CPS Financing Envelope ............................................................................................... 29 
Table 3: First Two Years Indicative Lending and Analytical Program ............................................. 31 

Tables 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXES   

Annex I(a): 
Annex I(b):  
Annex II:  
Annex III:  
Annex IV:  
Annex V:  
Annex VI: 
Annex VII:  
Annex VIII: 
Annex IX: 
Annex X: 
Annex XI: 
Annex XII: 
Annex XIII:  
Annex XIV: 
Annex XV 

Summary Matrix Pakistan CPS Selectivity and Impact on WBG Goals 
Pakistan CPS FY2015-19 Results Matrix 
Pakistan CPS FY2010-14 Completion Report  
Pakistan CPS Stakeholder Consultations  
Poverty and Shared Prosperity in Pakistan 
Status of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)  
Government of Pakistan Vision 2025 (proposed) 
Filters for Selectivity for the Pakistan CPS (FY15–19) 
World Bank Group – Pakistan Energy Initiative 
Promoting More and Better Jobs for Pakistan 
A New Tax Reform Strategy for Pakistan 
Strategizing WBG’s Role under Devolved Setup  
WBG’s Governance Action Plan 
Investing in Women in Pakistan 
Youth Inclusion in Pakistan 
Restoring Trust between Citizens and Governments in KPK,  
FATA and Balochistan 
Annex XVI: 
Climate Change in Pakistan  
Annex XVII:  
Pakistan’s Growth Potential as the Regional Economic Hub 
Annex XVIII:  WBG’s Portfolio Management 
Annex XIX:  
Overview of WBG’s Partnerships and Trust Funds  
Annex XX: 
Provincial Graphs 

CPS Standard Annexes from SAP Business Data Warehouse 
i. 
Selected Indicators of IBRD/IDA Portfolio Performance and Management 
ii. 
IFC Investment Operations Program  
iii. Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 
iv. 
Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio  
v. MIGA statement 

 
 
 
 
 
 
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

"The Government of Pakistan’s Development Agenda is to address 
the 4Es: Energy, Economy, Extremism and Education” 
Mohammad Ishaq Dar, Federal Minister for Finance, Pakistan 

i. 
Pakistan now has a “window of opportunity”. A democratically elected government 
came to power a year ago with a strong mandate for change. It has taken on this agenda with 
strong commitment and leadership, including new plans for energy and revenue mobilization, 
and an International Monetary Fund (IMF) program. At the same time, however, many of the 
underlying challenges that have held Pakistan back in making progress in the past remain 
strongly embedded – corruption, violence, vested interests and bureaucratic inertia. It is the right 
time to support change, but with due consideration of sequencing and risks.  

ii. 
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Pakistan is therefore structured to help 
the country tackle the most difficult—but potentially transformational—areas to reach the 
twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The four strategic pillars—results 
areas—of the CPS are anchored in the Government’s framework of 4Es: Energy, Economy, 
Extremism and Education; and the priorities of the proposed Vision 2025: 

 Transforming the energy sector. The World Bank Group (WBG includes the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, IBRD; 
the International Development 
Association, IDA; the International Finance Corporation, IFC; and  the Multilateral 
Investment Guarantee Agency, MIGA) is committed to support reforms and large 
investments in the power sector to reduce load shedding, expand low-cost generation supply, 
improve governance and cut losses. Key outcomes will be to reduce average daily blackouts 
from 8 hours to 5 hours; reduce average generation costs from 12¢/kWh to 10¢/kWh, target 
subsidies on the poorest—reducing them from 1.8 percent to 0.4 percent of gross domestic 
product (GDP); and improve collection of billed electricity from 86 percent to 94 percent. 
 Supporting private sector development. The WBG will aim to expand policy-based support 
for strengthening the business environment, including in the provinces, to improve 
competitiveness and expand investment, improve productivity of farms and businesses, and 
make cities more growth friendly to create productive and better jobs (especially for youth 
and women). Key outcomes will be to strengthen the business environment as evidenced by 
the Doing Business report indicators; restructure/privatize at least five state-owned 
enterprises (SOEs) including three in energy; increase yields of major crops by 20 percent; 
increase the number of trainees in skills programs by 20 percent; and improve trade 
logistics. 
 Reaching out to the underserved, neglected, and poor. This requires a stronger focus on 
micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), women and youth, fragile provinces/regions 
and poorer districts, social protection, and resilience and adaptation to the impact of climate 
change. Key outcomes will be to increase access to finance for MSMEs by 25 percent with a 
focus on women borrowers; reduce vulnerability to income shocks by expanding the 
coverage of the Benazir Income Support Program (BISP) by 20 percent with females as 
major beneficiaries; increase girls’ gross primary enrollment faster (15 percent) than 
overall; and improve resilience to natural disasters. 

i 

 
 
 
 
 
 Accelerating improvements in services. The pace of improvement is far too slow. At the 
federal and provincial levels this means increasing revenues to fund services and setting 
more ambitious stretch targets for areas that are not producing change fast enough (especially 
education and health). Key outcomes will be to increase tax revenue from 9.6 percent of GDP 
to 11.5 percent and no special tax exemptions issued; increase provincial non-wage 
expenditures on education and health by 20 percent; improve public financial management; 
expand use of modern contraceptive methods from 26 percent to 30 percent; increase child 
immunization by 20 percent; increase gross primary enrollment rates by at least 10 percent; 
improve adoption of education quality assessments and learning outcomes; and increase the 
number of public departments/services with a citizen feedback system by 30 percent. 

iii. 
Leveraging regional markets. Interwoven with the four results areas, this cross-cutting 
program focuses on energy and trade, including critical building blocks of an integrated regional 
electricity market in South Asia with power transmission links to Central Asia and India; sub-
regional Punjab–Punjab (Pakistan–India) collaboration; and other opportunities to capture the 
potential of cross-border trade between Pakistan and its neighboring countries. Sustained 
regional cooperation has the potential to add 2 percent to Pakistan’s GDP per year, help create 
viable transit corridors, and contribute to overall stability in the region. 

iv. 

Getting transformational change also requires a shift in instruments and engagement:  

 Increase Development Policy Financing. For the past five years, no development policy 
financing was possible, as the difficult but necessary reforms were not taken. In FY14, the 
Bank would propose extending two operations – Power Sector Reform and Fiscally 
Sustainable and Inclusive Growth DPCs. Both the DPCs have been designed as parts of a 
series and will form the backbone of the program. The reforms have been frontloaded in light 
of the country’s track record and past failure to follow-through. The Bank will also explore 
province-specific policy operations. The policy operations are expected to amount to 20–30 
percent of the financing envelope.   
 Leverage large, private sector funding to complement public sector reforms. The WBG will 
mobilize significant private funding, particularly for low-cost energy production. Addressing 
the business environment constraints will also help bring new players beyond existing vested 
commercial interests. This involves IFC using a mix of instruments to support private 
investors; MIGA providing risk mitigating instruments; and use of IDA/IBRD guarantees. 
The goal is to catalyze more funds from the private sector than WBG puts in directly (aided 
by stronger collaboration between the World Bank, IFC, and MIGA). 
 Increase focus on results. The WBG has had good success with results-based operations in 
Pakistan in education. This approach was recently extended to urban, health and governance 
projects. More of the investment portfolio is to be results-based, with “stretch targets” to 
strengthen accountability. More emphasis will also be placed on reviewing results at strategy 
and portfolio levels, and expanding the use of third-party monitoring and impact evaluations.  
 Build knowledge partnerships, facilitate evidence based dialogue and develop deeper 
understanding of political economy to strengthen public and private institutions, ensure 
wider ownership of the development narrative and generate greater confidence in reforms.  A 
particular emphasis will be placed on introducing more transparency into systems to help 
create the demand for good governance. 

ii 

 
 
 
 
 Reduce fragmentation in subnational engagements. This means establishing province-
specific programmatic engagement and bringing different sectors together at the province 
level to focus the dialogue on key barriers to poverty reduction and results. It also means 
developing a better understanding of intergovernmental relations and local governments; and 
strengthening coordination with the development partners to reduce overlap. 
 Focus on governance as an integral part of the WBG program.  This means systematically 
identifying ways to enhance accountability and transparency in all public and private 
institutions and systems we are working with. It also means helping the Government to 
implement its stated zero-tolerance policy for corruption in all transactions. 

v. 
The CPS envisages an indicative financing envelope of about $11 billion over the CPS 
period. This includes an IDA lending of about $1.1 billion per year (subject to SDR/$ exchange 
rate). Pakistan could also benefit from additional regional IDA allocations, particularly in trade 
and energy. IBRD lending would require strengthened macroeconomic balances, evidenced 
among other things by foreign exchange reserves equal to at least 2½ months of imports of goods 
and services and a stable or declining public debt to GDP ratio. If IBRD lending resumes, it 
would be limited to investment lending of $500 million a year and a maximum of $2 billion in 
total over the CPS period. IFC will also expand its efforts to bring in more private capital, 
investing $500 million–700 million a year from its own sources and mobilizing another 
$50 million–100 million per year from other investors. Altogether with MIGA and MDTF, the 
financing envelope would represent a 20 percent increase over the last CPS period. 

vi. 
Leveraging financing from other sources. Several donors are committed to cofinancing 
the Power Sector Reform DPC (Asian Development Bank, Japan International Corporation 
Agency), or use the Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth DPC as a foundation to provide 
their own support. This also means that the Bank would use the Multi-Donor Trust Fund 
(MDTF) for Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and 
Balochistan to strengthen coordination of interventions beyond those provided by MDTF itself. 

vii. 
The WBG’s analytical support will help implement key activities. The CPS has 
benefited from a “Country Economic Memorandum: Finding the Path to Job-Enhancing 
Growth” and 16 sector policy notes under “Pakistan: The Transformative Path”. During the first 
half of the CPS, analytical work will focus on implementing the strategy, particularly on private 
sector development and intergovernmental finance. In the second half, further work will focus on 
other critical challenges e.g. population, climate change and water to help inform the next CPS. 

viii. The risks are high. These include the risk of a declining commitment to reform in the 
CPS outer years, as well as corruption, deeply embedded public and private vested interests and 
a volatile national and international security situation. This is why this CPS is structured to 
provide the maximum change from the start. If a negative scenario unfolds, the areas of focus 
would likely remain but the instruments would be expected to shift. Without a stable macro-
economic framework or IMF program, the Bank could not extend new Development Policy 
Financing operations. Instead one could expect an even stronger push toward using knowledge 
instruments and on investments in social protection, inclusion, and working with the provinces 
on critical social sector outcomes. Similarly, IFC will focus on portfolio management, selective 
counter-cyclical investments, and high impact advisory support. Any such shifts would be 
reflected in a revised strategy in the mid-term CPS Progress Report (CPSPR).  

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT: DIAGNOSIS AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA 

A. 
Political and Social Context  
1. 
In May 2013, Pakistan’s orderly democratic political transition brought in a new 
government with a strong reform mandate. Led by the Pakistan Muslim League–Nawaz it had a 
clear majority at the federal level. At the province level, PML-N retained its mandate to govern 
Punjab, the biggest province. It also got favorable numbers in Balochistan and chose to become a 
partner in the coalition there. Of the two main opposition parties, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf won a 
mandate in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK) and the Pakistan People’s Party managed to maintain its 
stronghold in Sindh. 

2. 
A second key political change is the devolution of power to the provinces. The 18th 
Constitutional Amendment passed by the National Assembly on April 8, 2010, enhanced 
provincial autonomy and reshaped federal–provincial relations. A total of 43 departments in 18 
ministries were abolished in 2011/12 and transferred to the provinces. In parallel, a new resource 
redistribution formula under the 7th National Finance Commission (NFC) Award of 2010 shifted 
greater funding to the provinces. The provinces’ taxing powers was expanded, including a sales 
tax on services; internal and external borrowing by provinces was also permitted.  

3. 
Pakistan’s security environment and law and order situation remain volatile. Security 
challenges are deepening: militancy, sectarian, and ethnic violence alongside rising crime 
undermine the state’s writ. More than 50,000 citizens, including members of the armed forces, 
civilian law enforcement agencies, and paramilitary organizations have been killed in the last 
seven years. Pakistan also faces uncertainty over the post-2014 transition in Afghanistan and 
possible spillovers. The new national and provincial governments are beefing up efforts to 
address militancy and law and order. Also, recent developments in rebuilding ties with 
Afghanistan and India, though tentative, could help develop trust and peace in the region.   
B. 
Poverty and Shared Prosperity Trends 
4. 
Pakistan has made considerable progress in reducing absolute poverty and improving 
shared prosperity over the last two decades. Between 1991 and 2011, the proportion of people 
with an income of less than $1.25 a day was more than halved, led by rural areas (Figure 1). The 
percentage of the population below the national poverty rate has fallen from 34.7 percent in 
FY02 to an estimated 13.6 percent in FY11. Though a majority of the nation’s poor people still 
live in rural areas, growing urban slums are very much a part of the poverty picture. The real per 
capita consumption of the bottom 40 percent of the population—a measure of shared 
prosperity—grew faster than among the top 60 percent. Progress, however, slowed in FY09–11 
due to two massive floods hitting the country, conflict, and the global economic slowdown. 
Estimated poverty among females is slightly higher than among males—13.7 percent versus 12.8 
percent—but without reliable data on the allocation of resources within households it is hard to 
be accurate. Similarly, we cannot draw a clear picture on shared prosperity by gender because it 
is not well defined by population group (see Annex IV on Poverty & Shared Prosperity). 

1 

 
 
 
Figure 1: Poverty and Growth 

Source: World Bank staff calculations using Pakistan HIES/PSLMS data. 

5. 
Despite gains in poverty and shared prosperity, nearly three-quarters of the population 
are still either poor or vulnerable. Pakistan’s recent poverty gains remain fragile in part because 
many households are clustered near the poverty line. Households just above the poverty line and 
the share of the population considered vulnerable climbed from 53.1 percent in 1999 to 60.1 
percent in 2011. Poverty remains widespread in all provinces, and varies little across them 
(except Balochistan).  

6. 
Pakistan’s progress against human development and MDG targets has been poor. 
Despite some improvements, Pakistan remains one of the worst performers against MDG goals 
in the South Asia Region. Although data is unreliable, progress against many of the MDGs 
(education, gender, health) appears off-track. Such slow progress is inadequate to address the 
large burden caused by a growing population and needs to be accelerated (see Annex V). 

7. 
Poverty reduction in Pakistan is highly correlated with growth. Growth incidence 
analysis confirms the pro-poor characteristic of Pakistan’s growth, which reinforces the 
importance of growth. According to the WBG’s estimates/simulations,1 in a baseline moderate 
growth scenario (average GDP growth rate of 4.3 percent), Pakistan would be on track to meet 
the WBG goal of reducing extreme poverty to 3 percent by 2030. But higher growth (7 percent) 
would advance reaching this milestone by about a decade. The high case scenario also reduces 
the population under the vulnerability threshold from 74.2 percent in 2011 to about 64.0 percent 
in 2018, a decline of 2 percentage points a year (versus 1 percentage point a year under the 
baseline). 
C. 
Recent Economic Developments 
8. 
Growth over the past five years has been weak. Recovery from the 2008–09 global 
financial crises has been the weakest in South Asia, with GDP growth averaging 2.9 percent in 

1 Projections using the MAMS model follow those assumptions used in Pakistan: Finding the Path to Job-Enhancing 
Growth – A Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) 2013. Elasticity estimates for shorter periods are highly 
volatile and very sensitive to the starting value in each period. This becomes a problem especially in periods with 
high fluctuation in GDP growth as is the case for Pakistan. 

2 

 
 
 
 
                                                            
FY09–13, about half the FY04–07 rate. Fiscal deficits of 6 percent or more prevailed for four 
years in a row, and the deficit of 8.5 percent of GDP for FY12 was the second highest ever. 
These deficits stem largely from high and untargeted power subsidies and from poor tax 
collection. Financing the deficit has crowded out private sector credit, dampening growth further.  

9. 
External accounts and reserves have also been under pressure. While the current 
account has improved, mainly on rising remittances, international reserves have been affected by 
declining financial inflows and sizable debt repayments. Barely improving short-term 
imbalances were hit further by the floods. Armed conflict too has hit investment: it fell from a 
peak of 19.3 percent of GDP in FY06 to 14.2 percent in FY13, as foreign direct investment (FDI) 
plunged from $5.3 billion in FY08 to $744 million in FY12. With output below potential, 
supply-side factors have kept inflation high. Borderline stagflation, for now at least, prevails.  

10. 
Under a three-year IMF Extended Fund Facility (EFF), the government has taken 
steps to stabilize fundamentals and change the growth trajectory. The country aims to achieve 
6–7 percent growth and cut inflation to 7 percent. The perception of an investment-friendly 
country with solid macro fundamentals and much lower risk is a prerequisite for accelerating 
growth. Key measures under the EFF (Box 1) include rebuilding reserves and ensuring fiscal 
consolidation (2 percent of GDP). But stabilization alone will not succeed: so, working closely 
with international financial institutions, the government is committed to structural reforms, 
particularly in energy, taxes and SOEs to secure a positive response from private investors and 
lower Pakistan’s future needs to draw foreign aid.  
D. 
Economic Prospects 
11. 
Encouraging preliminary data from the first semester of FY14 suggest the economy 
might be about to turn. Growth seems to be picking up, driven mainly by services and 
manufacturing. The past year’s lower interest rates, settlement of the circular debt in the energy 
sector, increased credit to private business, faster economic activity, continued strong 
remittances, and dynamic exports have all helped. FDI also grew by 18 percent during July, 
2013-February, 2014. Notably, reserves have recovered somewhat from their lows and are now 
back over one month of imports.  If recovery and reforms continue, reserves may pick up and are 
projected to reach 1.8 months of imports by end FY14. Inflation was in double digits at end-2012 
due to hikes in the General Sales Tax (GST) and in administered prices of electricity, gas, and 
perishable food items, but appears containable at 10 percent as the economy strengthens. A 
stronger global economy may also improve the outlook. 

12. 
Pakistan’s economy is expected to stabilize and gradually recover from stagflation. 
Real GDP growth for 2013/14 should remain above 3.6 percent. In the medium term, and under a 
baseline scenario that mainly assumes compliance with the three-year EFF, growth is expected to 
climb gradually (Table 1). The fiscal deficit (excluding grants) is projected to decline to 4.4 
percent of GDP by 2017/18. The cornerstone is an expected improvement in tax revenue by 
about three percentage points of GDP and reduction of current expenditures by about two 
percentage points of GDP, mainly due to lower electricity subsidies. Total public debt (including 
IMF obligations) is projected to fall to around 58 percent of GDP by 2017/18. Any delay in 
undertaking tax reforms, or in non-materializing nontax revenues, or in reducing power subsidies 
poses risks to this outlook. Similarly, a recalibration of monetary policy and relatively stable or 

3 

 
 
 
 
declining international commodity prices are expected to help reduce inflationary pressures and 
gradually bring average inflation down to around 7 percent by 2017/18. Though, structural 
bottlenecks in agricultural production, floods or any adverse international commodity price 
shock pose the risk of a return to higher inflation. Strong remittances and recovery of private 
sector credit are also projected to support consumption. 

Box 1: The Program with the IMF, 2013/14 – 2017/18 

Overall goals: The government envisages stabilizing the economy, bringing inflation down to the 6–7 percent range; 
and accelerating growth to 6–7 percent by 2017/18 or earlier. This implies the following: 
Stabilization (preventing a balance-of-payment crisis) 
 Moving to fiscal consolidation. The goal is to reduce the fiscal deficit from 8.0 percent of GDP in 2012/13 to 
3.5–4 percent in 2016/17. To do this requires: (i) tax policy measures to increase revenues by over 1 percent of 
GDP annually, up to a tax-to-GDP ratio of 14–15 percent; (ii) no increase in tax rates, but elimination of tax 
expenditure exemptions and zero rates under SROs ; (iii) reduced corporate tax rates to ensure regional equity 
and encourage foreign investment; (iv) rationalized sales tax by ensuring a standard rate for all items and 
broadening the scope of GST; (v) increased provincial revenue; (vi) austerity in expenditure management based 
on significant reductions in ministries’ nonwage current expenditures; (vii) rationalized social outlays while 
strengthening the safety net (BISP); (viii) reduced power subsidies and losses from SOEs; and (ix) active public 
debt management. 
 Rebuilding the external position and tightening monetary policy. The goal is to rebuild international reserves up 
to a comfortable level (3 months of imports). The main measures involve: (i) scaling back monetary 
accommodation of fiscal deficits by limiting government borrowing; (ii) setting up policy rates to keep real 
interest rates positive; (iii) strengthening the central bank’s independence; (iv) rebuilding the external position 
by repurchasing reserves to cushion against major shocks; and (v) taking steps to eliminate money laundering. 
Major growth-enhancing reforms  
 Reforming the power sector comprehensively. The goal is to reduce power subsidies; restructure boards of power 
distribution and generation companies; make new investments; strengthen the power sector regulator; expand 
alternative sources of energy; and lower cost. This includes: (i) transmission and distribution losses to be 
brought down to 10 percent (from 33 percent); (ii) collection of 100 percent of billed amount of electricity; (iii) 
power subsidies only for users below 200 units; (iv) privatization of generation companies; (v) corporatization 
and privatization of DISCOs; (vi) rationalization of energy tariffs in line with international prices; (vi) tariffs to 
be determined and notified by the National Electric and Power Regulatory Authority; (vii) tariff rationalization 
in the gas sector; (viii) improved wellhead pricing for oil and gas exploration and production companies; and 
(ix) set up a wholesale market for electricity. 
 Reforming SOEs. This entails privatizing or restructuring—the latter requiring professional chief executives and 
board members with a corporate structure in line with corporate governance rules. A list of 31 companies has 
been drawn up. 
Increasing openness and normalizing trade relations with neighbors. The goal is to return to a simple and 
transparent framework trade regime with four slabs and a maximum tariff of 25 percent with few exceptions. 
Policies include: (i) gradually simplifying tariffs; (ii) phasing out trade-distortive SROs on 4,000 products; (iii) 
following a “trade not aid” policy; (iv) strengthening regional cooperation forums like the South Asian 
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC); (v) ensuring preferential trade agreements (with e.g. Malaysia 
and China); and (vi) obtaining GSP+ preferential access (zero duty) on 75 line items for exports to the European 
Union. 
 Enhancing the business climate to raise investment. The goal is to increase the investment-to-GDP ratio to 20 
percent (from 14.2 percent). On the business climate, this requires Pakistan to (i) enforce contracts through a 
new draft bankruptcy law; (ii) establish a virtual and physical One-Stop Shop for registering limited liability 
companies; (iii) strengthen the Board of Investment in facilitating implementation of investment-friendly 
regulations. Promoting investment requires it to (i) approve a package of incentives to investors; (ii) draw up 
PPPs in power, gas, and other areas; (iii) convert 50 percent of remittances into investments; (iv) push though 
with large infrastructure projects including highways, dams, and housing; and (v) set up a Bureau of 
Infrastructure Development to coordinate private sector participation in infrastructure and to develop financing 
schemes. 

 

4 

 
 
Output and prices (annual percentas ge change)
Real GDP at facto r co s t
Con s umer p rices (period average)

Balance of Payments (in percent of GDP; unles s otherwis e indicated)
Cu rren t accoun t balance
Expo rts o f goods & s erv ices
Impo rts o f goods & s erv ices
Remittances
Gros s o fficial res erves (in mon ths o f impo rts o f G&S) 1/

Publ ic Finance (in percent of GDP)
Revenue and g ran ts
Expend itu res
o f wh ich: Curren t
Overall fis cal balance 2/
To tal pub lic deb t (incl. ob ligat ion to IMF)
Memo randum items :
GDP at market p rices (in b illions o f Pakis tan i Rupees )
No tes :

2.6
10.1

(2.2)
14.0
21.5
5.0
3.6

14.3
20.2
15.8
(6.2)
61.3

3.7
13.7

0.1
14.6
20.4
5.2
3.9

12.6
18.9
16.0
(6.5)
59.4

4.4
11.0

(2.1)
13.2
21.6
5.9
2.7

12.9
21.5
17.8
(8.8)
63.7

3.6
7.4

(1.0)
13.3
20.5
5.9
1.4

13.1
21.0
16.0
(8.0)
63.0

3.6
10.0

(1.0)
14.9
22.5
6.4
1.8

14.3
19.9
15.5
(5.8)
64.2

2014/15
2015/16
Pro ject ions

2016/17

2017/18

4.0
9.2

(0.8)
15.0
23.1
6.6
2.6

14.7
19.9
15.2
(5.4)
63.5

4.4
8.4

(1.0)
15.0
23.3
6.7
3.0

15.3
19.6
14.4
(4.5)
62.1

4.7
7.3

(1.4)
14.8
23.3
6.8
2.9

15.5
19.8
14.3
(4.4)
59.5

5.0
7.0

(1.6)
14.5
23.3
6.8
2.8

15.5
19.8
14.2
(4.4)
58.0

13. 
The external position is expected quickly to rebuild a reasonable buffer. The external 
current account deficit is projected to remain modest, increasing to 1.6 percent by 2016/17. 
Exports are expected to regain dynamism with the recovery in global trade and increased market 
access in Europe, while imports should expand with rising consumption and investment. Strong 
remittances are expected to cushion trade deficits. Unfolding privatization plans and other 
economic measures introduced by the government are expected to attract FDI and financial 
inflows. Foreign exchange reserves are projected to improve to close to three months of import 
coverage in 2017/18. The risk to this positive outlook comes from any external shock that cuts 
workers’ remittances, lowers external demand for exports or raises oil prices, or from any delay 
in privatization.  

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators 

2011/12

2012/13

2009/10

2010/11

2013/14

14,867

18,285

20,091

22,909

26,139

29,485

33,171

37,217

41,795

1/ Excluding gold and foreign currency dep os it s of commercial banks held w it h t he St at e Bank of Pakist an.
2/ Excluding grant s .

Source: In ternational Monetary Fund and WB s taff

E. 

Development Challenges and Opportunities 

14. 
The most important challenges are to sustain reforms and move Pakistan onto a higher 
growth trajectory to create more productive jobs. Although poverty reduction in Pakistan is 
aligned closely with growth in per capita income, growth (hence poverty reduction) comes only 
in spurts. To sustain this conversion of growth into poverty reduction the country must address 
its weak fundamentals and create more productive jobs—by making the energy sector itself more 
sustainable, addressing barriers to private sector development, improving human capital and 
skills, and increasing trade.  

15. 

The binding constraints to growth are both emerging and structural.2 Emerging 
constraints include massive cuts in electricity availability and macroeconomic instability leading 
to high country risk and a sudden decline in external and domestic financing. Structural 
constraints that have a long history, block transition from low- to high-productivity jobs and 
include government and market failures (micro risks) that impede investment, entrepreneurial 

2 Pakistan: Finding the Path to Job-Enhancing Growth – A Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) 2013.  

5 

 
 
 
 
                                                            
        
        
          
        
        
               
               
             
           
           
        
        
        
        
               
               
             
           
           
    
    
    
    
          
          
        
      
      
activity, and competitiveness—limiting job-enhancing growth by holding down total factor 
productivity. 

16. 
Energy emerged as the biggest constraint on growth. Pakistan has not invested in 
generation capacity to keep up with growth and has the highest power losses compared to other 
countries. Severe institutional shortcomings constrain electricity supply, resulting in widespread 
power outages and load-shedding (Figure 2). 

Figure 2: The Electricity Deficit 

Electricity shortfall is increasing over time 

s

t
t

a

W

a
g
e

M

19,000

18,000

17,000

16,000

15,000

14,000

13,000

12,000

11,000

10,000

Shortfall or Surplus
Peak demand
Peak supply

4
5
4
5
5 -
4
6
2

-

7
9
1

7
4
2
1

-

6
3
2

6
8

-

5
3
4

8
0
4
6

-

1
5
1
6

-

3
9
3
8

-

8
1
0
7

-

FY02

FY03

FY04

FY05

FY06

FY07

FY08

FY09

FY10

FY11

FY12

Source: Enterprise Survey 2007; Ministry of Water & Power presentation (January 26, 
2010); and State Bank of Pakistan 2010–12 annual reports. 

17. 
At the same time, weak private sector participation is holding back growth and jobs. 
The private sector should drive the country’s growth, but a poor business climate and structural 
weaknesses limit its role in the economy. About 90 percent of Pakistan’s GDP originates in the 
private sector. Contrary to other developing economies, about 70 percent of firms are classified 
as small, and most of them do not aspire to expand in scale, given the costs associated with 
formalization of businesses, which also explains the predominant informality and low 
registration of firms as taxpayers. The private sector is faced with numerous challenges including 
macro-instability, severe energy shortages, security, a weak business climate, low access to 
finance and crowding out by large public sector borrowing (Figure 3). The SOEs also constrain 
private sector growth because of poor service provision while they crowd out private provision in 
product and factor markets. At the same time, cities and thriving urban centers are important to 
address weak connectedness and to attract both investors and higher skilled job seekers.   

6 

 
  
 
 
 
Figure 3: Private Sector Credit and Private Investment (as percent of GDP) 

18. 
Productivity at all levels is low. Agriculture contributes about 80 percent of export 
earnings directly and indirectly through its forward links to agriculture-based industries; but its 
growth suffers from low water productivity (Figure 4) -- largely due to weak investment in 
irrigation and slow adoption of new technologies; weak extension services; and lack of 
financing. Further, the highly protectionist agricultural trade policy stifles competition and 
innovation. Increased agricultural productivity (especially among smallholders) would help 
diversify manufacturing, expand services, generate new jobs, and promote inclusion. 

Figure 4: Agriculture and Water Productivity 

Source: WDI; Yu and others (2012 draft), Climate Risks on Water and Agriculture in the Indus Basin  
of Pakistan; Planning Commission (2005), Medium-Term Development Framework, 2005–10 

19. 
Similarly, the country has the lowest labor productivity among its regional competitors. 
Pakistan’s population is projected to almost double to over 350 million by 2050, with mostly 
unskilled working age youth not ready for high quality productive jobs. Having one of the 
highest fertility rates worldwide, the country ranks 145 of 187 countries on the UNDP’s Human 
Development Index (Figure 5). Gaps are particularly large among youth and women, with wide 
gaps between urban and rural areas, and across provinces. Low labor productivity is often related 
to chronic demand for low-skilled jobs and growing labor supply of low quality human capital. 
Pakistan should therefore invest in its people, as an educated, skilled and healthy workforce is a 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
central plank of any strategy aimed at creating more and productive jobs and sustaining higher 
growth. 

Figure 5: Pakistan on Human Development Index 

Pakistan ranks very low on Human Development Index, 2012

Country rankings (Total 186 countries, 1= high; 186 =low)
50
100
150
146

200

0

Pakistan
Bangladesh
India
Indonesia
Philippines
Egypt
Thailand
China
Sri Lanka
Malaysia

Source: World Economic Forum 2013; UNDP Human Development Report 2013;  
PSLMS Government of Pakistan; and Pakistan Economic Survey 2012-13. 

20. 
Severe disparities persist, as devolution increases complexity of economic management 
and service delivery. Uneven development progress and resulting inequalities constrain the 
country’s achievement of poverty reduction and shared prosperity goals, as growth by itself does 
not translate into equal opportunity (see Annex XX on Provincial Graphs). The different growth 
paths for the provinces and their underlying factors and growth constraints need to be tackled. 
The 7th NFC Award sharply raised the share of the provinces in the divisible pool of federally 
collected taxes, from 46.3 percent to 57.5 percent, increasing provincial dependence on fiscal 
transfers and lowering provincial incentives to generate their own revenue. Provincial budget 
allocations and expenditures on poorer districts do not match needs. Social outcomes are dismal, 
and gender inequities continue to be huge. Pakistan ranked3 124 on women’s health and survival, 
129 on women’s educational attainment (key education and health indicators, particularly for 
girls, show little or no progress), and a staggering 135 on equal economic participation and 
opportunity (see Annex XIII on Investing in Women). Provincial governments struggle with 
limited management capacity, and coordination across provinces is unclear. These challenges 
will increase with new local governments as elections are held in the coming months.  

21. 
Corruption puts development efforts at risk, by undermining growth, private 
investment, and service delivery. Four-fifths of Pakistanis view government corruption as 
widespread.4 The National Accountability Bureau claimed that corruption costs PRs 10 billion–
12 billion a day. In 2012, Transparency International ranked Pakistan 139 out of 176 countries 
(with 1 being the least corrupt).5 This is worse than India, better than Afghanistan and the same 
as Nepal. The World Bank’s Control of Corruption indicator6 shows Pakistan on a slight 
negative trend since 2007. Incentives not to be corrupt (pay and promotion linked to 
performance, and effective penalties) are rare. The country ranks among the weakest performing 

3 World Economic Forum Report 2013. 
4 Gallup poll http://www.gallup.com/se/ms/154259/Pakistan-Troubled-State.aspx. 
5 Transparency International Corruption perception Index 2012 http://cpi.transparency.org/cpi2011/results/ 
6 TI Pakistan: National Corruption Perception Survey. 

8 

 
 
 
 
                                                            
countries on governance indicators worldwide. Of six governance indicators Pakistan ranks 
lowest in the region (where scores are already low) on political stability and below average on all 
other indicators except regulatory quality. 

22. 
 Deteriorating security environment is imposing heavy economic and social costs and 
negatively impacting the development efforts. Most recent Bank estimates show the annual costs 
of conflict in Pakistan at no less than 2 percent of GDP. The perception that Pakistan is a high 
risk country discourages private and foreign investment for growth and job creation. Violence is 
correlated with poverty as well as inequitable growth: provinces with the highest conflict 
intensity have higher poverty rates.   

23. 
Pakistan is highly vulnerable to shifting climatic patterns with risks further 
exacerbated by a growing population, water scarcity and uncontrolled urbanization. The 
country has seen a considerable increase in frequency and intensity in extreme weather events 
and natural disasters, causing huge losses. The floods in 2010 and 2011 caused damage of $10 
billion and $3.7 billion, respectively; while the earthquake in 2005 resulted in 73,000 deaths and 
$5 billion in losses. The country has also had its share of droughts and cyclones in recent years. 
The risks are projected to increase. The melting of the Hindu Kush-Karakoram-Himalayan 
glaciers could affect water flows into the Indus River system with implications for energy and 
food security. The government has launched a National Climate Change Policy outlining 
mitigation and adaptation measures. To preserve its poverty and shared prosperity gains, 
Pakistan needs to make concerted efforts at adaptation to conserve water and build resilience. 

24. 
The foregoing challenges notwithstanding, Pakistan has several opportunities. It needs 
to exploit them better.  

 Democratic transition. Pakistan has the window of opportunity offered by the orderly 
democratic political transition that brought a new government with a strong mandate for 
reform. This bodes well for political stability and continuity that is important for sustained 
development. The initial steps of the new government have been promising.  

 Rich natural resource base and strategic location. Balochistan alone has an estimated $3 
trillion in mineral resources. Unexploited hydrocarbon reserves are estimated at 27 billion 
barrels and 280 trillion cubic feet of natural gas. Unexploited hydroelectric potential is 
estimated at more than 100,000 Megawatts, enough to make Pakistan a regional power 
supplier. Pakistan is the only overland route between India and the energy-rich countries of 
Central Asia and the Persian Gulf. It is also China’s most direct overland route to the Arabian 
Sea and the Persian Gulf. Gwadar’s underused port also carries huge potential for supporting 
the country’s trade and regional cooperation. 

 Regional cooperation. This could support growth acceleration because South Asia is one of 
the most dynamic but least economically integrated regions. (Intraregional trade accounts for 
just 5 percent of its total trade, versus about 25 percent in ASEAN.) This reflects historical 
mistrust. Pakistan has yet to fully benefit from economic relations with China, or with India, 
if most-favored-nation status is granted. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Economic resilience. Three factors cushion the economy against international shocks: the 
heavy weight of agriculture; the informal economy; and remittances (see below). Agriculture 
still generates about 21 percent of GDP, 45 percent of jobs, and about 80 percent of export 
earnings directly and indirectly. And despite malnutrition among the poor, it ensures there is 
no risk of nationwide food shortages or famine. Pakistan has strong potential as a food 
exporter—it bounced back quickly from the floods—to meet rising demand for food from 
China, India, and Southeast Asia. In addition, as much economic activity is informal—above 
70 percent—paradoxically the situation is rarely as bad as official statistics indicate.  

 Strong worker remittances. Remittances totaled almost $14 billion in FY13, equivalent to 
about half of total exports. They raised consumption among the rural and extreme poor; 
helped reduce income inequality; and contributed to housing improvements, primary school 
enrollment, and investments by small businesses. In most provinces in 2007/08, about 72 
percent went to rural areas, and the balance to urban areas. Punjab and KPK received the 
highest shares, while Balochistan had less than 1 percent of the total.  

 Rapid growth of the female labor force. There are now more women than men in colleges 
and universities. If female labor force participation rises from 23 percent to 27 percent as 
expected, with a million well-educated and trained women joining the workforce every three 
years, many will take jobs in the modern sector. 

 National Poverty Registry. Pakistan is one of the few countries in the world that has 
developed a comprehensive National Poverty Registry (NPR), validated by the National ID 
system, containing welfare information on more than 27 million households (170 million 
people). This serves as a robust mechanism for targeting the development effort for the poor.  

F. 

Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy  

25. 
The new government’s vision is supported by an ambitious economic agenda. This sets 
targets for the end of its five-year term: raise the tax-to-GDP ratio from 9.6 percent to 15 percent, 
bring inflation down to 7–8 percent, and raise investment from 12 percent to 20 percent of GDP. 
It involves large infrastructure projects including dams. The government also set ambitious goals 
on the human development side to double social assistance, to increase resources for education to 
4 percent of GDP, and increase health spending to 2 percent of GDP. In the first 5 months, it has 
taken important first steps to stabilize the economy. It entered into an IMF program on 
September 4, 2013, setting the stage for fiscal and structural reforms (see Box 1).  

26. 
The Government Energy Policy 2013 and a new approach to mobilizing revenue 
appear promising platforms for reforms. Issued on July 31, 2013, the energy policy provides for 
phasing out the energy subsidy over three years, except that targeted to the poor; retiring and 
limiting the recurrence of the circular debt; prioritizing new investments and attracting private 
sector; improving performance in energy companies and piloting privatization of some 
Distribution Companies (Discos) immediately; smart metering with transparent billing and 
cutting off nonpayers; and energy conservation and efficiency standards. Similarly, the tax 
reform approach is based on three pillars: tax policy; measures to increase the tax base 
(particularly eliminating exemptions supported by distortive Special Regulatory Orders (SRO), 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
which should increase revenues by some 1–1.5 percent of GDP); and improved tax 
administration. This way, the government expects to avoid the need for further increases in tax 
rates. The plan aims to incorporate 300,000 new taxpayers into the income tax net, with 75,000 
first notices dispatched by end-March 2013. Finally, in December 2013 the FBR launched a plan 
to enhance revenue administration for sales tax, excise, and customs (see Annex X on New Tax 
Reform Strategy in Pakistan).  

27. 

The government is in the process of developing a more comprehensive development 
framework. The WBG’s CPS is anchored in the Government’s five-year development vision 
through a framework of 4Es: “Energy, Economy, Extremism and Education;” sector policies 
(e.g. energy); and the priorities listed under the draft Vision 2025 (see Annex VI on Pakistan 
Vision 2025). Provincial governments have also developed or are working on their own 
development visions and strategies, which will guide the WBG’s engagement in the provinces 
over the five-year CPS period. 

III. WORLD BANK GROUP PAKISTAN COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 2015–19 

A. 

Lessons Learned from Previous CPS 2010-14 and Stakeholder Feedback  

28. 
The CPS has been informed by a rich set of knowledge work,7 evaluation and lessons 
from the previous country strategy (Annex II), two rounds of country-wide consultations 
(Annex III), and federal and provincial governments’ strategic priorities (see previous 
section). Recent knowledge and analysis work on poverty, investment climate, job-enhancing 
growth, policy notes on key reforms, provincial expenditure reviews, and access to finance, 
contributed to the strategy formulation. This work, with stakeholder feedback, helped identify 
persistent and emerging constraints to poverty reduction and shared prosperity, and the key 
priorities for the WBG support in the next five years. 

Lessons from the CPS Completion Report 

29. 
The draft completion report (CR) of the CPS 2010–14 notes many lessons to inform the 
new strategy. These include (see Annex II on CPS Completion Report): 

a) Key strategic engagements take time. For many years efforts on fiscal reforms/tax policy and 
energy made little or uneven progress. Yet these engagements have laid the foundation for 
more recent, productive engagements. These are long-term issues because problems are 
deeply embedded in political-economy and structural, institutional conditions. 
b) Coordinating donor responses can make a big difference. Coordination on responses to 
challenges—as for floods, social protection and the MDTF—underscores the value of 
partnerships with stakeholders. Such partnerships also help to build a common narrative and 
maintain focus on long-term issues.  

7 Pakistan: The Transformative Path 2013; Pakistan: Finding the Path to Job-Enhancing Growth – A Country 
Economic Memorandum (CEM) 2013; World Development Report 2013: Jobs. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                            
 
c) Traditional approaches to capacity building have only been moderately effective. Technical 
assistance (TA), training, just-in-time analyses, and IFC advisory services have helped, but 
staff turnover in the civil service is so high that it is hard to gain long-term traction. Focusing 
more on improving “systems” than “training” could therefore be more effective. Outsourcing 
activities to the private sector or NGOs where feasible could also be considered.  
d) There is a need to focus more on monitoring and evaluation and on results reporting from 
the start. Data on many sector/project implementation indicators are only collected at project 
completion—too late for mid-course correction.  
e) A simpler CPS results framework with fewer outcomes would help keep the engagement 
focused. A simpler results matrix would also make it easier to monitor and report on simple 
results everyone understands and remembers.  
f) Strengthened attention at province level is not a choice; it is a necessity. Devolution (the 
18th Amendment and the 7th NFC award) has fundamentally changed operational modalities. 
While remaining engaged with the federal government, the WBG has increased its outreach 
to provinces.  
g) The Pakistan program must become more selective. There is no way that a World Bank 
portfolio of over 30 projects and an IFC portfolio of 40 projects can be effective. Selectivity 
criteria can help, but there is no substitute for strong leadership, led by the country, to make 
trade-offs and enforce selectivity.  
h) A strong counter-cyclical role played by IFC has helped ramp up support to the private 
sector even in difficult circumstances. IFC has increased its short-term trade finance and 
enhanced investments in infrastructure, especially low-cost and renewable power, to address 
one of the major constraints faced by Pakistan’s private sector. 
i) IFC-World Bank collaboration, built around an explicit agreement on joint priorities, 
helped increase the impact of services provided. Keys to success included a strong field 
presence with co-location, regular communication at all levels, and use of private networks to 
leverage policy dialogue. 

Feedback from Stakeholder Consultations and Client Survey 

30. 
The WBG consulted with over 4000 individuals across Pakistan through a combination 
of face-to-face meetings with stakeholders, interview-based Client Survey and an online 
Facebook survey (see Annex III on CPS Stakeholders Consultations). The stakeholders 
represented a diverse range -- civil society organizations, parliamentarians and political leaders, 
civil servants, academics, think tanks, youth groups, media representatives, private sector, and 
other development partners. In addition, over 700 clients and stakeholders participated in a 
Client Satisfaction Survey conducted through Gallup Pakistan and 3000 provided feedback 
through a Facebook survey.  

31. 
There were common messages heard across the government and non-government 
stakeholders: 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
a) Tackling the energy crisis with low-cost generation options like hydro-power and improving 
access to community-led small-scale off-grid and renewable energy sources, such as solar for 
remote areas of Balochistan and FATA. 
b) Fostering entrepreneurship and access to finance, increasing economic opportunities and 
productively engaging youth and women. 
c) Improving social service delivery, particularly investing in education and health and focusing 
on women and children 
d) Addressing inequity in all shapes and forms (with special attention to lagging regions and 
vulnerable groups). 
e) Combatting climate change and improving water management – disaster preparedness and 
recovery support, storage dams, modern irrigation techniques, improving availability and 
quality of drinking water. 
f) Engaging with local communities, especially women and youth.  
g) Enhancing economic growth and human development and partnerships with the private 
sector was considered essential for reaching the development goals of ending extreme 
poverty and building shared prosperity. 
h) Expanding WBG engagement with academia, youth and 
communicating development results. 

local governments, and 

32. 
There were some unique features in priorities among the provinces and regions, 
reflecting the different development contexts and needs. Punjab’s focus is on energy and 
improving the investment climate to attract the private sector, while in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, 
improving the security situation and creating jobs were identified as foremost priorities to create 
conducive conditions for economic and social progress. In Balochistan, water scarcity, 
transparency and benefit sharing in development of natural resources, girls’ education and 
private sector’s access to finance came out as major concerns. For FATA, governance and 
constitutional reforms and bringing the region at par with the rest of the country were identified 
as crucial to achieving development results. Energy, economy, education, youth skills 
enhancement, revenue mobilization, restructuring of state-owned enterprises, and climate change 
were highlighted as the top priorities at the federal / national level. 

B. 

Proposed WBG Country Partnership Strategy  

33. 
The overarching goal of the Pakistan CPS (FY15–19) is to help the country accelerate 
poverty reduction and build shared prosperity. The CPS follows the WBG interim guidelines on 
the overarching poverty and prosperity goals and strategy products. This will be a transition 
strategy to help set the framework for aligning country engagement with the twin goals. To that 
end, the WBG would work with the government to strengthen institutional capacity for 
generating credible data for consistent reporting and for adopting policies to support and monitor 
progress toward the twin goals. With the client, the WBG will also review and restructure the 
portfolio (where justified) to ensure that operations are contributing to the twin goals and geared 
to create a beneficial impact on the poor and vulnerable.  

34. 
The CPS is structured around four strategic themes, or result areas. The four strategic 
results areas are energy, private sector development, inclusion, and service delivery (see Figure 
8). Taking into account new realities, it proposes fundamental game changers for the next CPS 

13 

 
 
 
 
period. First, it deals with vulnerable macroeconomic external and domestic conditions that mark 
the initial CPS period. Second, it addresses the country’s essential development challenges and 
focuses on two key constraints on growth —energy and private sector development. It explicitly 
recognizes the critical role of the private sector to help respond to these development challenges, 
and of the WBG in creating the enabling environment for more effective development solutions 
and in using its limited resources to leverage other development and private funding for 
maximum impact. Third, it supports the role of inclusion for dealing with what appears to be the 
most significant challenge in the medium term: materializing the population dividend and 
reaching out to the marginalized. Fourth, it accommodates the realities that the devolution of 
more responsibilities to provinces, in line with the 18th Constitutional Amendment, implies for 
the development process in terms of governance and service delivery. Finally, while the CPS 
consolidates the response to conflict-affected areas in particular, it also foresees WBG’s 
initiatives to support a new regional dimension opening up for Pakistan. Overall, the CPS builds 
upon the new administration’s framework of 4Es and the key priorities identified as part of the 
Vision 2025. 

35. 
The CPS also mainstreams several high priority development themes for Pakistan. On 
governance, the WBG will systematically identify ways to enhance accountability and 
transparency in all of the public and private institutions and systems we are working with. This 
also means helping the Government to implement its stated zero-tolerance for corruption in all 
transactions (see Annex XII). On gender, most WBG projects in Pakistan are currently gender 
informed and all new projects will be screened for this.  Further specific attention will be paid to 
promoting women’s participation in education, health, labor and private sector (see Annex XIII). 
In light of the demographic trends, the CPS recognizes youth engagement as a critical theme, 
and within this a particular emphasis on innovative approaches to promoting economic 
opportunity for youth (see Annex XIV). The CPS seeks to address sources of fragility and 
conflict, with an emphasis on restoring trust between citizens and the Governments of KP, 
FATA, and Balochistan (see Annex XV). And finally, an underlying theme of the CPS is 
creating more and better 
jobs, particularly by building 
the business environment, 
competitiveness, marketable skills for a growing labor force, and facilitating cross-border trade 
(See Annex IX). 

Results Area 1: Energy 

36. 
The WBG aims to address energy security, particularly power sector needs, as the top 
priority and necessary condition for growth. Power sector goals could not be met in the 
previous CPS for several reasons – lack of clear government/sector policy; poor implementation 
of reforms and setbacks from political opposition, public and private vested interests; and limited 
WBG engagement and instruments to influence policy reforms. By making energy a stand-alone 
results theme in the CPS, the WBG is placing greater focus on the sector’s issues. With an IMF 
program in place, there is a broad consensus across government and major donors (WBG, ADB, 
JICA, DFID, USAID) on the key policy reforms and investment needs of the sector. This also 
opens up the possibility of using a combination of instruments, particularly Development Policy 
Financing, which was not available earlier. All these factors help the WBG to be in a unique 
position to support energy reforms in a comprehensive and coordinated manner.   

14 

 
 
 
 
 
37. 
The WBG interventions will be at both the policy and investment levels, with an 
increased focus on hydropower and other renewable energy. On the policy side, the World 
Bank, with ADB and JICA, will extend a series of Development Policy Credits (DPCs) aimed at 
strengthening the policy and institutional framework within the energy sector. On the investment 
side, it is supporting major public investments, while IFC will play a significant role by 
mobilizing large private investments in the sector, using its debt and equity instruments, with 
MIGA political risk insurance.   

38. 
The WBG has started a Transformational Energy Initiative to support new investments 
and reforms in the power sector. The program entails ongoing WBG investments including IDA 
lending in the Tarbela-IV Extension; upcoming investment in the large hydropower project—
Dasu Hydropower Stage 1 (2,160 MW); and first two in a series of DPCs to improve financial 
viability, investment climate and transparency of the power sector. IFC has been supporting low-
cost generation using indigenous gas and hydropower resources as well as promoting alternative 
sources (wind, solar, waste to energy), and has invested in (i) two private sector hydro projects—
Laraib (84 MW) & Star Hydro, joint project with MIGA (147 MW); (ii) one private power project 
based on indigenous gas—Uch-II (404 MW); (iii) two wind projects—Zorlu and Metro Wind 
(100 MW); and (iv) a waste to energy project KOEL(25 MW). The Uch-II (404 MW) will come 
on stream in 2014, while most of the other projects will become operational during the next two 
to three years. In addition, IFC has financed about 800 MW of electricity generation for the first 
privatized integrated electricity utility (K-Electric). IFC is expected to mobilize substantial 
equity investment with international investors for the establishment of a platform company to 
develop hydro, thermal, and wind power over the next five years. In addition to its own direct 
funding, IFC will leverage and mobilize significant capital from international equity investors 
and lenders to support the large pipeline of power projects in Pakistan. Finally, IDA and IFC are 
working together to bring Central Asian power to Pakistan through Afghanistan (CASA-1000), to 
help address energy shortages during the summer and support regional cooperation and 
Afghanistan’s role as a transit country (see Annex VIII on WBG–Pakistan Energy Initiative). 

Outcome 1.1: Reduced Load Shedding  

39. 
Reducing load shedding in the short term is key to revitalizing the economy. The 
strategy addresses the immediate need to reduce load shedding through a combination of strong 
policy dialogue and program support using DPCs as instruments. These will address 
shortcomings in tariff setting and targeting of subsidy, and the weak sector governance and 
accountability. These underlie the chronic liquidity crisis in the sector, known as the circular 
debt, which contributes to the high levels of load shedding experienced particularly during the 
summer months. Longer term measures to increase generation capacity and improve operational 
and technical performance of the distribution companies, as well as reforms in the gas and 
petroleum sectors are also needed and are discussed below. The key outcome to be monitored 
from all these activities will be to reduce load shedding from 8 hours to 5 hours a day over the 
CPS period.  

15 

 
 
 
 
Outcome 1.2: Reduced Cost of Electricity Production 

40. 
The World Bank Group aims to mobilize substantial investments (up to $10 billion) 
over the next five years to reduce power generation costs. The focus of the WBG strategy is to 
shift the generation mix to low-cost sources and prioritizing supply of natural gas to thermal 
power generation, thus making electricity more reliable and affordable.  Hydropower 
development along the Indus River Cascade will be the cornerstone of the WBG strategy, for 
more and lower cost power generation. The WBG will support large public sector hydropower 
projects, including Tarbela and Dasu, while IFC will engage with domestic and international 
sponsors (from China and the Republic of Korea) to finance large private hydropower and 
renewable power projects over the next three to five years. It will support the development of 
small, predominantly renewables-based, electrification schemes to bring affordable electricity to 
those not served by the grid, particularly in Balochistan. IFC will also invest in developing a 
storage and regasification terminal to facilitate liquefied natural gas imports. The WBG is 
supporting enhancing the supply of natural gas through the Natural Gas Efficiency Project. The 
Power Sector Reform DPC will support the government in putting in place a policy framework 
mandating expansion in generation through a least-cost plan, for all new future power 
generation. The DPC will also help the government establish the policy and incentive framework 
that allows direct contracting between gas producers and open access to the transmission system, 
including determining transportation wheeling tariffs and starting a market for all new gas 
discoveries. The key outcome to be monitored will be to cut the average generation cost from 
12¢/kWh to 10¢/kWh over the CPS period.  

Outcome 1.3: Improved Financial Sustainability of the Electric Power Sector 

41. 
Reforms for enhancing the financial viability of the power sector need to proceed in 
tandem with new investments. Clearly it is not possible to make the fiscal situation sustainable 
without heavily cutting the huge power subsidies. The government has initiated a plan to phase 
them out, targeting them toward the poorest and most vulnerable. Similarly, improving sector 
governance, system efficiency and management, especially in Discos, is crucial for sustainability 
of the sector in the long term. In addition, management autonomy and accountability needs to be 
introduced in the Discos, including through privatization where feasible. Operational and 
technical performance can be improved across a wide spectrum—(losses, theft, voltage, and 
other indicators of service quality), commercial areas (collection), etc. The WBG will support 
these efforts through policy dialogue and a series of budget support operations (DPCs) prepared 
with the IMF and other key development partners (ADB, JICA, DFID). Based on the 
government’s request, IFC’s PPP advisory work will look at options to support the government 
in privatizing the Discos. To help the poorest offset the impact of reduced subsidies, the WBG 
will work with the government to enhance coverage of the BISP cash transfers and other 
mechanisms.  The key outcomes to be monitored will be to reduce untargeted subsidies from 1.8 
percent to 0.4 percent of GDP; and improved collection of billed electricity from 86 percent to 
94 percent over the CPS period. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Results Area 2: Private Sector Development  

42. 
It is critical for the WBG to help Pakistan change the trajectory of growth with greater 
private sector development. Under this results area, the WBG will focus on policy reforms at the 
federal and province levels to enhance the enabling environment, including legal framework and 
unlock constraints on the private sector participation. These reforms and policy interventions will 
also support outcomes under other results areas (such as energy). The Bank and IFC along with 
MIGA support will help Pakistan attract and mobilize private investment. The WBG will also 
focus on improving competitiveness and productivity of farms, small businesses, and key 
economic sectors—which account for the bulk of the country’s GDP and employment—as well 
as enhance skills, especially for youth and women in Balochistan, KPK and FATA.  
Outcome 2.1: Improved Business Environment for Private Sector 

43. 
Raising private investment is crucial for the government’s ambitions to accelerate 
growth. Supported by the WBG, the Board of Investment has formulated a plan to improve its 
Doing Business ranking. It includes federal actions to improve power access, streamline tax 
payments, setting up a One-Stop Shop for business registration, and approving the credit 
information law (all actions supported by the Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth DPC 
and ongoing TA). Further assistance can be channeled through Indicator Based Reform Advisory. 
At the local level, provincial governments are creating new courts to resolve commercial 
disputes with support from IFC—one in Sindh and another in Punjab. The Punjab Land Records 
Project is helping computerize land registration and easing procedures for approval of 
construction permits. The Bank and IFC will work together to improve competitiveness 
including focusing on (i) labor intensive manufacturing by rehabilitating and developing 
industrial estates (e.g. Punjab Apparel Park); (ii) reforming regulations and procedures for 
construction permits; and (iii) attracting strategic investors into the agribusiness sector to support 
conversion to high value added export. Support for revitalizing the private sector in Balochistan, 
KPK and FATA will contribute to the development of local natural resources. The key outcome 
to be monitored will be to make progress on Doing Business indicators such as cutting the 
number of days required to start a business from 21 to 15 

44. 
The WBG will promote increased private sector development through SOE reform, 
including privatization. State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) are a heavy burden on already strained 
fiscal resources, deliver poor services, and create market distortions—all of which harm private 
investment. Eight initial SOEs have already been cleared as priority for the first drive of 
privatization during FY15 and the Bank’s DPC on Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth as 
well as IFC’s Investment Climate and PPP advisory are supporting these efforts. The IFC will 
support privatization transactions in the financial and infrastructure sectors through technical 
advisory and strategic investments (subject to government inviting IFC to be part of the process). 
Also, with the ongoing TA on SOE reforms, the WBG will continue supporting the government 
in improving corporate governance and accountability of SOEs, amending the regulatory 
framework for PPPs, and approving new regulations—allowing the swift opening of special 
economic zones (SEZs). The key outcome to be monitored will be to help the government 
restructure or privatize at least five SOEs (including three in the power sector). 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
45. 
The WBG will support financial-infrastructure improvements. A key reform area in 
financial intermediation to the private sector relates to reducing the underlying risks by 
strengthening creditors’ rights through reforms in credit information and in secured transactions. 
Credit bureaus and credit registries are essential parts of the financial infrastructure and facilitate 
access to formal finance, reduce information asymmetries, increase access to credit for small 
firms, lower interest rates, improve borrower discipline, and support bank supervision and credit 
risk. The Bank’s DPC on Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth will support reforms to 
enhance financial intermediation to the private sector by strengthening creditors’ rights. IFC will 
support the deepening of financial markets through equity and debt investments in financial 
institutions including further private participation, and expanding its advisory services to the 
banks. IFC will also explore opportunities to support long-term market development through 
local currency bond issuance and support to housing finance.   

Outcome 2.2: Increased Productivity in Farms in Selected Irrigation Schemes 

46. 
The WBG operations thus far have been focused on increasing efficiency of water 
distribution and use, as well as promotion of agricultural value chains. Ongoing and planned 
investment operations in Punjab, Sindh, and Balochistan will contribute to productivity 
outcomes. Water resource management, particularly small-scale community water infrastructure 
and storage in Balochistan will be a priority. Agricultural trade–distortive policies will be 
indirectly tackled through eliminating SROs supported by the Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive 
Growth DPC. Fostering agricultural value chains is part of planned TA. IFC will continue to 
provide PPP support for grain storage facilities in Punjab and Sindh. In addition, it will support 
supplier finance in agriculture, and TA to commercial banks to expand finance to agribusiness. 
The key outcome to be monitored will be to raise yields of major crops (wheat, cotton, rice) in 
selected areas by 20 percent. 

Outcome 2.3: Improved Youth’s Skills for Business 

47. 
Part of the efforts to increase productivity relies on unlocking cities’ potential for job-
enhancing growth, and improving youths’ skills so that they can perform these jobs. The 
World Bank has operations to improve urban management in Punjab, FATA, and KPK, and will 
be providing TA for Karachi. But if cities are to become growth-friendly clusters, skills will have 
to be upgraded. (The Bank’s 2007 investment climate survey found that less than 5 percent of 
firms had provided training to their employees.) Technical and Vocational Education and 
Training in Sindh, and the IFC-led Business Edge skills program are expected to provide 
training, 
job-search assistance, 
internships, and microenterprise 
support 
to 
foster 
entrepreneurship. Youth skills program for Balochistan and other regions will also be considered. 
The key outcome to be monitored will be to increase the number of trainees in skills development 
programs by 20 percent.  

Outcome 2.4: Improved Trade Tariff and Ports / Borders Logistics 

48. 
Pakistan’s ability to compete globally and boost exports should improve after tariffs are 
simplified and trade regulations streamlined. Supported by the Bank’s DPC on Fiscally 
Sustainable and Inclusive Growth and related TA, the government expects to gradually return to 

18 

 
 
  
 
  
 
  
four tariff slabs, while phasing out SROs. Tariff reform would reduce the average tariff rate to 
close to 10 percent, with reduced dispersion, and would pay off in the longer term by allowing all 
Pakistan’s producers to benefit from cheaper inputs. The key outcome to be monitored will be to 
reduce average tariff rate from 14.4 percent in FY13 to 10 percent and no special tax exemption 
issued.  

49. 
Improvements in port operations and border post management are equally important. 
A sound trade facilitation and logistical system can play a decisive role in attaining export-led 
growth—by reducing trade costs, upgrading service quality, improving connectivity between 
domestic and foreign markets, and moving up the supply chain. Projects include the IBRD-
supported Karachi Port Improvement Project, the IFC Qasim International Container Terminal, 
the Pakistan International Bulk Terminal and Intercity Transport Projects. Pipeline operations 
are Wagah Border logistics improvement, and IFC’s Freight Train Project. Over the CPS 
implementation period, the WBG will consider other opportunities to facilitate cross-border trade 
between Pakistan and its neighbors and to help all provinces and regions achieve their full trade 
potential. Particular focus will be on activities to increase local resource generation and exports 
in Balochistan, KPK and FATA. The key outcome to be monitored will be to reduce waiting time 
at Wagah by 20 percent and improve occupancy rate of selected Karachi Port berths from 74 
percent to 50 percent.  
Results Area 3: Inclusion 

50. 
Pakistan needs targeted measures to benefit the poor and other disenfranchised groups 
to address persistent disparities. There is uneven progress with rural-urban gaps and inequities 
within and across provinces. Among the poor, women and girls and those living in the conflict-
affected areas are particularly vulnerable. The development efforts should reach these 
disadvantaged regions and groups to provide equal opportunity, if the WBG were to achieve its 
shared prosperity goal for the bottom 40 percent of the population.   

51. 
 The WBG will support inclusive growth by reducing inequities for vulnerable groups, 
including women and youth, and those in poor or conflict-affected areas including 
Balochistan, KPK and FATA. It will bring increased attention to these groups and areas that are 
denied access to resources and services, hindering their full participation in society. One key 
component will be efforts to increase financial access of MSMEs, particularly among women. 
Another will be to address vulnerable groups either through stand-alone projects such as safety 
nets or as part of activities supported under other results areas. The WBG will also help Pakistan 
reduce its vulnerability to disasters, which usually has the biggest impact on the poor. To 
measure the distributional impact of all the WBG interventions and to strengthen evidence on 
development impact, the WBG will work with the Bureau of Statistics and relevant institutions 
in the provinces to improve reliability of data (Figure 6 on Financial Access). 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Financial Access 

                        Source: World Bank Financial Inclusion Data.

Outcome 3.1: Increased Financial Inclusion for MSMEs and Women 

52. 
Promoting financial inclusion for women, households in the poorest districts and 
MSMEs particularly in Balochistan, KPK and FATA will help increase economic 
opportunities for the disadvantaged. Given Pakistan’s low access to finance (only 14–16 
percent), the WBG’s DPC on Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth will support reforms to 
enhance financial intermediation and access to finance by strengthening credit information. The 
Bank will focus its analytical work on supporting development and implementation of the 
Financial Inclusion Strategy under Pakistan’s first Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS) to 
include product development for MSMEs, low-income housing, and crisis-prone sectors (crops 
and livestock), and insurance markets. On the investment side, IFC’s Global Trade Finance and 
Supplier Finance Programs will assist businesses and support commercial banks to expand 
guarantees for increased access to finance for SMEs, while investments in four microfinance 
banks will continue to expand outreach in the microfinance sector. IFC will also expand its 
investments in banks with MSME focus, and enhance advisory and technical assistance in areas 
including agriculture supply chain management, gender finance, entrepreneurship and 
management skills, corporate governance, and sustainable finance. A key outcome to be 
monitored will be to enhance MSME outreach by at least 25 percent, with women’s participation 
increased by 10 percent. The WBG would also seek to increase overall financial inclusion by 10 
percent (including women’s access by at least 3 percent). 

Outcome 3.2: Reduced Vulnerability for Groups at Risk 

53. 
The WBG has played a central role in strengthening social protection systems for the 
poorest and will help take these programs to the next level. The WBG will support the 
government’s commitment to minimize the potential negative impact of fiscal adjustment and 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
structural reforms on the poor and vulnerable. The government has significantly increased 
spending on safety nets and transitioned to a stronger institutional framework to cushion 
vulnerable households from the negative effects of transitory income shocks. However, a large 
share of public expenditure is still devoted to regressive and inefficient universal subsidies. 
Administrative efficiency of social assistance programs should also be upgraded, in part through 
further consolidation and coordination of interventions. The WBG will build on ongoing 
engagements through BISP, the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund, and interventions under the 
MDTF for KPK, FATA, and Balochistan. Part of this will be to support innovative pilot 
programs to focus on medium- and long-term interventions to help families move out of poverty. 
This includes the livelihoods grants and conditional cash transfer programs to improve school 
enrollments and attendance as well as transfers linked to improving their health status. 
Facilitating access to productive assets for income generation is also important, and the WBG 
support to microfinance, entrepreneurship, and skills development will contribute to that 
objective. The key outcome to be monitored will be to expand BISP coverage by 20 percent and 
expand the use of conditional cash transfers to 25 districts.  

54. 
The WBG will have focused interventions for the second vulnerable group comprising 
women and girls. Within each activity, not just health and education but also infrastructure, 
finance, governance, training, and agriculture, the WBG will identify approaches to ensure that 
women have increased access to services. In education, the WBG will seek stronger access for 
girls as a priority, such as Promoting Girls Education in Balochistan (MDTF). The key 
indicators to be monitored will be to increase girls’ gross primary education enrollment by 15 
percent more than the overall rate.  

55. 
Those living in border areas affected by violence form a third vulnerable group. WBG 
will continue to support the government in the implementation of the Post-Crises Needs 
Assessment (PCNA) and the Balochistan Development Needs Assessment (BDNA), with 
continued emphasis on addressing the drivers of crises. The engagement will focus on increasing 
employment and livelihoods opportunities and improvements in delivery of basic services.  Over 
the past three years, the World Bank has piloted an MDTF for KPK, FATA, and Balochistan for 
a total of $160 million from 11 donors. The MDTF has been used in basic health and education 
services, emergency road rehabilitation, rural development, governance, and economic 
revitalization.  The WBG has learned a great deal on how to operate in these areas and plans to 
expand operations under a second phase (targeted at more than $200 million) with a 
programmatic approach to reduce fragmentation with each of the three regions. The WBG will 
use the MDTF to help provide a framework through which all donor interventions can be 
coordinated in these areas and build capacity of the government to lead the donor coordination 
effort. There is no stand-alone indicator to be monitored, as operations in the MDTF will be 
integrated into the rest of the program.  

Outcome 3.3: Increased Resilience to Disasters in Targeted Regions  

56. 
The WBG will work with the government to improve understanding of disaster risks to 
build resilience and strengthen disaster risk management and early warning systems. It will 
build on existing programs and expand dialogue. The WBG will support efforts for multi-hazard 
risk assessments for major urban centers, updated provincial disaster risk management plans and 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
standard operating procedures, and enhanced disaster response and coordination capacity at the 
national, provincial, and district or city level. The key outcome to be monitored will be to 
increase the number of provinces with disaster risk management plans, improved management, 
and early warning systems. 

Results Area 4: Service Delivery 

57. Weak institutional governance and service delivery disproportionally affect the poor. 
The poor and disadvantaged are overwhelmingly dependent on public services, and lack of 
quality access restricts human opportunity as well as negatively impact growth. The recent 
Lancet Commission on Global Health notes that investing in health has a huge payoff. Mortality 
reductions account for 11 percent of recent economic growth in low- and middle-income 
countries. Evidence suggests similar economic pay offs for education. Investing in people is 
therefore critical not only for human development gains but to sustain growth and development 
outcomes. However, increasing funding alone is not sufficient. Addressing weaknesses in the 
public service delivery mechanisms and promoting transparency are also necessary.  

58. 
The WBG aims to break through the “good enough” barrier on services. The pace of 
improvement is far too slow and needs to be accelerated. This requires the governments to 
improve resources management – increasing revenues and allocations, as well as improving 
targeting and efficiency of pro-poor expenditures. Pakistan’s revenue collection -- tax-to-GDP 
ratio is the lowest in South Asia and most of the country’s resources go on non-development 
expenditures (Figure 7). At the same time, lack of administrative capacity and transparency are 
also contributing to poor outcomes. The WBG will work with federal,  provincial and local 
governments to help improve revenues and expenditures to fund services, and setting more 
ambitious stretch targets for areas of past WBG involvement that are not producing change fast 
enough (such as health and education). Previous WBG strategy dealt with resources, social 
services and governance aspects under separate pillars. Yet the nature and scale of these 
interlinked challenges call for a more integrated approach. They also call for greater focus on the 
roles of federal and provincial governments, with the former providing coordination or 
stewardship, even as service provision is devolved to the latter. The WBG will also facilitate 
innovative approaches and delivery mechanisms involving the private sector.   

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Public Expenditures 

Outcome 4.1: Improved Public Resources Management  

59. 
The WBG will focus on helping government mobilize revenue and improve 
development expenditures to create fiscal space. As documented in the CPS Completion Report, 
WBG could not achieve the revenue mobilization targets under the previous strategy for several 
reasons – including lack of political will, public and private vested interests resisting tax reforms, 
institutional capacity, and lack of the WBG’s instruments to influence policy reforms to 
compliment interventions supporting administrative efficiency. Building on the lessons and the 
opportunity to use the policy instruments, the WBG’s DPC on Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive 
Growth is supporting the government’s comprehensive national tax reform agenda to increase 
the tax-to-GDP ratio. Ongoing analytical engagement and investment operations at subnational 
level through PERs, PEFAs, and DSA in KPK, Balochistan, Punjab, and Sindh aim to support 
provincial tax reforms as well. PIFRA-II will support the launch of a medium-term budgetary 
framework at federal and provincial levels. The Punjab and Sindh Public Management 
Improvement Program will also support more efficient use of public resources, while 
subnational PEFAs aim to support expenditure reform focusing on improvements in the 
efficiency of provincial departments. The key outcomes to be monitored will be (i) to increase the 
tax-to-GDP ratio by two percentage points from 9.6 percent to 11.5 percent at federal level, no 
special tax exemptions issued, and expand tax revenues at province level; (ii) to increase non-
wage recurrent expenditure by provinces in education and health by 20 percent; and (iii) 
improve quality and timeliness of government accounting, auditing, and reporting at federal and 
province levels against PEFA scores.  

23 

 
 
 
Outcome 4.2: Improved Access to Maternal and Child Health Services 

60. Health outcomes are very poor, as public delivery systems struggle to keep pace with an 
ever-increasing population. The WBG’s engagement in the health sector will primarily focus on 
improving maternal and child health for the poor. Specifically, it will support efforts to improve 
coverage of immunization services to address recurrent outbreaks of vaccine preventable diseases 
in children, including polio. Building on the multi-sectoral dialogue on nutrition from previous 
years, it will support provinces in rolling out plans for scaling up nutrition interventions and 
strengthening cross-linkages across health, agriculture and related sectors. Besides addressing 
maternal mortality and fertility rates, the WBG will engage in a broader dialogue and analytical 
work on population management. The WBG will help strengthen health systems as well as 
capacity and stewardship in provincial governments, such as the ongoing support for Punjab, in 
the context of post 18th Amendment. The key outcomes to be monitored will be (i) to increase the 
percentage of births attended by skilled health personnel from 52 percent to 60 percent; (ii) to 
increase use of modern contraceptive methods from 26 percent to 30 percent; and (iii) to 
increase fully immunized children by 20 percent.  

Outcome 4.3: Increased School Enrollment and Adoption of Education Quality Assessment 

61. 
Pakistan needs to address its education emergency as a matter of urgency. The WBG’s 
investment in the sector is over $1 billion, with a focus on improving access, quality and learning 
outcomes at primary and secondary levels in Sindh, Punjab and Balochistan and higher education 
standards at the federal level. The results-based approach and community-managed schools 
under these programs have supported improvements in the quality and accountability of teachers 
and the leveraging of PPPs in education. The Global Partnership for Education is considering 
complementing these efforts with two education projects of up to $100 million in Sindh and 
Balochistan. At the federal level, the WBG will continue to support the government in 
developing standards, quality assurance, and monitoring and evaluation to address disparities and 
facilitate attainment of the objective of education for all. In higher education post 18th 
Amendment, the WBG will continue to strengthen quality and relevance at federal and province 
levels. IFC will aim to explore its E4E (Education for Employment) initiative to include 
Pakistan, with a view to improving the quality of private post-secondary education to better suit 
the needs of the labor market. The key outcomes to be monitored will be to increase gross 
enrollment rates at primary school by at least 10 percent; have at least three provinces carry out 
annual student achievement tests; showing positive trend in learning outcomes.  

Outcome 4.4: Adoption of Performance and Transparency Mechanisms in Selected Institutions 

62. Weak implementation capacity and lack of transparency and accountability are 
contributing to deteriorating service delivery standards. The WBG will support efforts to 
improve performance and transparency in public institutions, by continuing to provide technical 
and advisory support for enacting right to information legislation and establishing performance 
monitoring mechanisms at federal and province levels. The MDTF and IDA Governance Support 
Operations in KP, FATA and Balochistan; Punjab Public Reform Management Project, and 
Punjab Cities Governance Project would help establish credible performance management and 
citizen’s feedback systems in target institutions. The key outcomes to be monitored will be to 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
increase by 30 percent the number of departments/services with citizen feedback in place, and to 
increase number of service delivery units in the federal and provincial governments with 
improved performance management systems.  

Cross-Cutting Themes 

63. 

Interwoven within these four pillars is a cross-cutting program to leverage cross-border 
and regional opportunities and markets. In energy, this will mean helping Pakistan put in place 
the policy, institutional, and infrastructure arrangements to import electricity from energy-rich 
Central Asia (beginning with CASA-1000) and potentially establish an interconnection with 
India, which will be a key building block of the planned South Asian Association for Regional 
Cooperation Electricity Grid. The Bank and IFC will continue the recently begun support to the 
government and private sector to expand trade with Pakistan’s neighbors by reducing barriers, 
thereby stimulating competitiveness, productivity, and consumer welfare. This effort will also 
support confidence-building measures (such as dialogue and joint investments in economic 
infrastructure with Afghanistan and potentially between Pakistan Punjab and Indian Punjab), 
contribute to improving the overall investment climate, and position Pakistan as an attractive 
investment destination as well as a viable transit route between the West/Central Asia and the 
more rapidly growing countries further east (Annex XVII). 

64. 
Another interwoven theme is deepening engagement at the province level, while further 
clarifying the roles between the provinces and the federal government. On the finance side, the 
Bank’s engagement with the DPCs on Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth, governance 
projects at the province level, and further related TA at federal and provincial levels will provide 
a focus to help the government further clarify and strengthen intergovernmental finance flows as 
well as support local governments. At the sector level, service operations at the provincial level 
will focus increasingly on results but also help to build space as feasible for a "stewardship" role 
for the federal government. This approach will help to empower provinces to take greater charge 
of service delivery with the finances necessary, while recognizing that the federal government 
can continue to play a role in advocacy, information campaigns, research into alternative models 
of delivery, and building countrywide standards and data systems. Informally, the WBG has also 
established province-level teams that can come together across sectors (Annex XI on World 
Bank’s Role under Devolved Setup). 

65. 
The third cross-cutting area is climate change adaptation and mitigation in public and 
private sectors, focusing on energy, water and agriculture investments. Climate change threatens 
the water, food and energy security of Pakistan. The WBG efforts aim to reduce vulnerability, 
improve readiness and achieve low-carbon green growth and resilient development. This would 
involve supporting (i) preparedness towards disasters and climate related emergencies; (ii) water 
conservation and management by modernizing irrigation networks and installing high efficiency 
irrigation systems; (iii) efforts for low-carbon development, particularly in energy (renewables) 
and industries (see Annex XVI on Climate Change). 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Pakistan CPS Results Chain: Results Areas and Outcomes 

26 

 
66. 
The CPS is more selective than in the past. Given limited resources and principles of 
comparative advantage, the WBG cannot extend help in all areas (see Annex VII on Filters for 
Selectivity). The results areas are therefore kept quite focused in identifying only a few outcomes 
and indicators under each. In the last CPS, 17 outcomes and 42 indicators were identified, which 
made the focus too diffuse and hard to monitor regularly. This CPS cuts the number to 14 
outcomes and 25 indicators. The CPS results and targets have been set to reflect the WBG 
contribution to the broader country level outcomes. 

67. 
The most important filter in selectivity is to ensure that the CPS outcomes under the 
four results areas are tightly linked to poverty reduction and shared prosperity goals. The 
impact of CPS outcomes on poverty reduction and shared prosperity is appraised and articulated 
under Annex I(a) - Summary Matrix Pakistan CPS Selectivity and Impact on the WBG Goals.  

 The Result Area 1 addressing energy has the highest priority. The WBG and Pakistan led 
studies have demonstrated the direct link between power supply and growth, and similarly, 
between growth and poverty reduction and shared prosperity. These studies indicate annual 
GDP losses due to power load-shedding equivalent to about 2 percentage points; and direct 
and indirect employment losses for the poor.   
 The Result Area 2 addressing private sector development has mixed impact in terms of 
reducing extreme poverty but very high impact on shared prosperity. Studies show the 
correlation between policies improving the business climate and rising rural productivity to 
growth -- based on the link between higher efficiency and productivity. Similarly, improved 
job skills are correlated to quality jobs. These findings are most relevant for the large mass of 
individuals that are just above the poverty line and able and willing to benefit from new 
opportunities, whereas the very poor might have much less possibility to directly benefit. 
WBG interventions under inclusion and service delivery areas will help bridge this 
opportunity gap.  
 The Result Area 3 addressing inclusion is critical in terms of its impact on reducing 
extreme poverty. By directly supporting women, youth and the most vulnerable the WBG 
will be providing support to the poorest and disadvantaged.  But just as importantly, by 
supporting girls’ education and programs, such as micro-lending to bring them into the 
economy, they will contribute to the economic growth of Pakistan.  
 The Result Area 4 addressing service delivery is also high priority in terms of development 
impact, especially for human development outcomes for the poor. Analysis shows strong 
correlation between education and health outcomes and productivity and growth. Since the 
poor are dependent on public services, improvements in fiscal space and administrative 
efficiency targeting human development outcomes, are all strongly linked to rapid growth 
and poverty reduction.  

68. 
Beyond their contributions to the twin poverty goals, further filters have been 
established to ensure that WBG operations remain focused where they can have the most 
impact. The most important of these is government ownership and commitment, as evidenced by 
clear national and province level strategies and sectoral plans.  Priority would also be given to 
larger, more transformational operations where the WBG can play a catalytic role, and areas 
where the WBG has a comparative advantage and which involve cross-sector collaboration, 

27 

 
 
 
 
where others find it hard to operate. Balance is also needed between Federal/Province and 
between provinces. Additional selectivity filters would be whether an operation is grounded in 
sound analytic work; and if the implementation readiness of a project allows for speedy 
disbursements. The IFC and MIGA will continue to pay close attention to the integrity of 
potential private sector partners (see Annex VII for further details on selectivity filters).    

69. 
The CPS envisages enhanced partnerships with development partners to maximize 
impact. The WBG is closely coordinating with the IMF, ADB, JICA, DFID, and USAID for 
supporting Power Sector Reform DPC and Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth DPC and 
investments. Similarly, the WBG will build on its partnership with DFID in education, safety 
nets, and financial inclusion. MDTF Round II will consolidate coordination with bilateral 
donors. Also, working relationships with partners such as the Gates Foundation and the Global 
Partnership for Education will help contribute to CPS outcomes. Donor coordination will be used 
as a key mechanism to identify those areas that the WBG will work on together with others 
because of synergy, and those areas that are best implemented separately according to 
comparative advantage. But even where we are working separately, enhanced knowledge sharing 
and common program/results frameworks will be needed to avoid fragmentation.   

C. 

i) 

Implementing the FY15–19 Pakistan Country Partnership Strategy 

Financing and Principles of Engagement 

70. 
The CPS envisages an indicative financing envelope of about $11 billion over the five-
year CPS period (see Table 2).  This includes an IDA lending of about $1.1 billion per year (or 
$5.5 billion over the CPS period). These levels are notional, as actual allocations will span two 
IDA replenishment cycles -- IDA-17 and the first two years of IDA-188.  Pakistan could also 
benefit from additional regional IDA allocations for participation in projects that promote 
regional integration, particularly in energy and trade.  

71. 
IBRD lending would require strengthened macroeconomic balances, evidenced among 
other things by foreign exchange reserves equal to at least 2½ months of imports of goods and 
services and a stable or declining public debt to GDP ratio, lower than the 64.2 percent projected 
for end-2013/14. If IBRD lending resumes, it would be limited to investment lending of $500 
million a year and a maximum of $2 billion in total over the CPS period. Within this, lending 
amounts would be further modulated according to improvements in Pakistan’s creditworthiness, 
and would also depend on IBRD’s lending capacity and demand from other borrowers.  

72. 
IFC intends to continue expanding its investments in Pakistan with an envelope of 
$500 million–700 million a year from its own account, and another $50 million–100 million 
per year from other investors. About half this amount will be in short-term supplier and trade 
finance, while the rest will focus on catalyzing private investments in high development impact 

8 IDA17 financing will be projected in June 2014 (the projections will include the final allocation for FY15 and indicative 
allocations for FY16 and FY17).  Pakistan allocation is fixed at 7% of the total country-allocable envelope and is assumed to be 
in the proximity of the IDA 16 levels (SDR 2,110 million). The financing is indicative and could change depending on exchange 
rates, and adjustments to terms of IDA assistance introduced in the context of the IDA17 Replenishment. The strategy assumes 
that IDA18 allocation will be on the same order of magnitude as in IDA17. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
projects in (i) infrastructure, including low-cost and renewable energy; transport; logistics and 
communications; (ii) expanded access to finance and development of long-term capital markets; 
and (iii) selected industrial, agriculture, manufacturing, and services growth sectors with an 
emphasis on jobs and exports. IFC will also focus on expanding its TA to improve the business 
climate, corporate governance, and capacity building of MSMEs, as well as support PPP 
projects. IFC will also look at options for supporting the government’s efforts at privatization of 
key SOEs. MIGA’s commitments will be firmed up as the program takes shape. 

73. 
The MDTF for the areas bordering Afghanistan will be expanded. The first round of 
the MDTF working with 10 donors covering FY12–14 amounted to about $160 million. The 
Bank is in the process of replenishing this at a larger level (notionally shown here at $200 
million but actual amounts will be set by MDTF donors). But more importantly than the size is 
that, based on experience, we will reposition the MDTF in two important ways: (i) the WBG will 
establish programmatic engagements with each province for a holistic dialogue on priorities 
(rather than via discrete small operations as now); and (ii) the WBG will use the MDTF as a 
forum to coordinate and catalyze other donor funding (to reduce fragmentation across donors).  

Period FY15–19 
Total Financing 

Table 2: FY15-19 CPS Financing Envelope 
IDA9 
IBRD MDTF10 
MIGA11 
Total 
$5.5 bln $2.0 bln 
$200 mln 
$50-200 mln About $11bln 

IFC 
$2.5-3bln 

74. 
All projects and programs will be vetted against the outcomes of this CPS (see Table 3 
on indicative program). The CPS deliberately does not contain a detailed list of future projects, 
except for those already planned. Instead, the WBG plans to engage the government in an annual 
work program planning exercise to review progress against the CPS outcomes and agree on a 
pipeline of projects and analytical activities that will best deliver these outcomes. The CPSPR 
will then report on these activities as identified and extended. Key criteria will be those 
operations (i) that have a line of sight impact on the outcomes sought in this CPS; (ii) where 
WBG has knowledge leadership and/or can play a catalytic role in bringing financing from 
others; and (iii) where commitment of the federal and provincial governments is strong. The 
WBG will also build flexibility to reallocate resources within the country’s IDA portfolio to 
further support a rapid response in eligible crisis and emergency situations. 

75. 
The “legacy” program and activities will be reviewed. The strategy includes and duly 
reflects the ongoing projects as well as pipeline to be delivered in FY14. While all ongoing 
projects in some way contribute to the attainment of CPS goals, many are fragmented and are not 
as results oriented as they could be. This also includes several projects that were developed 
during FY14, but because of IDA allocation limitations had to wait until the first quarter of FY15 
to be delivered. During the CPS period, the World Bank will review these operations, as needed 

9 IDA allocations are in SDR terms and the US dollars equivalent may change depending upon the prevailing exchange rate. 
10 This amount is notional and is not intended to pre-empt MDTF donor discussions. 
11 Tentative volume of gross guarantee issuance by MIGA over the CPS period; to be determined by client demand and on a case 
by case basis 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
and decide with the government whether and how these could be consolidated, restructured, or 
even partially cancelled to make room for more transformative, higher impact activities.  

76. 
Getting the CPS results and impact on the twin goals of poverty reduction and shared 
prosperity  will also require a shift in the instruments and engagement as follows:  

 Increase in Development Policy Financing. For the past five years, no Development Policy 
Financing was possible. In FY14, the Bank would propose extending two DPCs – Power 
Sector Reform and Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth DPCs. These DPCs have been 
designed as a series and will form the backbone of the WBG reform program. The WBG will 
also explore province-specific policy operations. Policy operations are expected to amount to 
20–30 percent of the total IDA/IBRD financing envelope.  
 Leverage large private sector funding to complement public sector reforms. The WBG will 
mobilize significant private funding, particularly as regards low cost energy production along 
the Indus River Cascade. This includes IFC supporting large international private investors, 
MIGA providing risk mitigating instruments, and IDA/IBRD guarantees. The goal would be 
to catalyze more funds from the private sector than the World Bank puts in directly (aided by 
the close collaboration between the institutions, and drawing on comparative advantages of 
the Bank, IFC, and MIGA together). 
 Increase focus on results. The WBG has had good experience with results based operations 
in Pakistan in the education sector. In the last year, the WBG has also extended this to an 
urban, health and a governance project. The WBG would target an increasing number of its 
investment portfolio to be results based, with stretch results, and with much stronger 
accountability for results. This also includes more emphasis on reviewing results at the 
strategy and portfolio levels, and expanded use of project level third party monitoring and 
impact evaluations.  
 Reach out to the underserved, neglected and poor. This means a stronger focus on poorer 
districts, crises-affected provinces, women and youth. The WBG will target increased 
development resources, improvements in health and education outcomes and service 
delivery, financial inclusion, safety nets to protect against income shocks, and building more 
resilience to the impact of natural disasters and climate change. 
 Build knowledge partnerships and capacity, develop deeper understanding of the political 
economy and facilitate evidence based dialogue to strengthen public and private institutions, 
ensure wider ownership of the development narrative and generate greater confidence in 
reforms. 
 Reduce fragmentation in subnational engagements: This means establishing province 
specific programmatic engagements and bringing different sectors together at the province 
level to raise the dialogue and focus on key barriers to poverty reduction and results.  

77. WBG’s analytical and advisory support will be focused on implementing key activities. 
The CPS has benefited from having a Country Economic Memorandum and 16 sector policy 
notes at the start. Thirteen AAA pieces were delivered in FY13 and eighteen pieces are planned 
for FY14. These include critical pieces on business registration and State-owned Enterprise 
(SOE) reforms; policy notes on subnational fiscal management; and a competitiveness study. 

30 

 
 
 
 
Analytical work during the first half of the CPS will prioritize activities that will both support 
lending and provide knowledge transfer. This means a strong focus on private sector 
development and intergovernmental finance. Towards the second half, a new stocktaking 
exercise to determine a new generation of AAA will be undertaken to help inform the next CPS. 
Population, climate change and water are likely to figure prominently in this work. 

Table 3: First Two Years Indicative Lending and Analytical Program12 

Tentative Lending and AAAs FY15 

AAAs 

Lending 

US$ m 

Linked to Lending: 
 TA in Support of Implementing the DPCs (power, 
tax, commerce, private sector development, social 
protection) 
 
Intergovernmental Finance and Local Governments 
 Political Economy Analysis of the Power Sector 
 Provincial Public Expenditure Reviews  
 Advisory to support PPP and SOE Privatization  
 Analysis of Wheat Sector and Grain Storage 
Management 
 TA and Reimbursable Advisory Service (RAS) on 
Financial Inclusion and Infrastructure Support 
 Reproductive health/Population Policy TA 
 Jobs, Competitiveness and Skills  Study 
Advocacy/Quick Notes: 
 Continued support for Poverty Analysis and Data 
 Youth Engagement Strategy  
 Climate Change and Water  
 Girls Education and Women Entrepreneurship 
 TA on Regional Trade  
 TA on Karachi Transformation 

IDA/IBRD: 
 Pakistan: Power Sector Reform DPC II 
 Pak-India Power Connectivity 
 Pakistan: Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth 
DPC II 
 Sindh Irrigated Agriculture Productivity Enhancement 
Project  
 Sindh Water Sector Improvement AF  
 Sindh Agriculture Growth Project  
 Sindh Public Sector Reform Project  
 Punjab Skills Project  
 Financial inclusion project 
 Enhanced Nutrition for Mothers & Children  
IDA/IBRD Total 
MDTF  
IFC  
MIGA 
FY15 Grand Total 

Tentative Lending and AAAs FY16 

300 
100 
300 

200 

160 
76.4 
50 
50 
tbd 
40 
1,276 
50 
500 
50 
1,876 

AAAs 

Lending 

US$ m 

Linked to Lending: 
 TA and advisory to banks and MSMEs to improve 
access to finance and investment climate  
 TA and advisory support on competitiveness and 
regional economic cooperation 
 Agriculture, health and nutrition nexus 
 SME Portal developed for Regional Trade 
Advocacy/Quick Notes: 
 TA on Water and Sanitation 
 Continued support for Poverty Analysis and Data 
 Urban Poverty 
 Food Security 

IDA/IBRD: 
 Dasu Hydropower Project II 
 Punjab Agriculture Competitiveness Project  
 Sindh Barrages  
 Trade Facilitation & Logistics Project (Wagah Border)   
 Social Safety Net 
 Health  
 National Immunization support 
IDA/IBRD Total 
MDTF  
IFC  
MIGA  
FY16 Grand Total 

700 
100 
150 
100 
tbd 
tbd 
50 
1,100 
100 
600 
50 
1,850 

12  Mix of IDA, IBRD to be determined once Pakistan meets the criteria / parameters for IBRD lending; MDTF amount is 
indicative and subject to donor Round II pledges; IFC and MIGA commitment figures are indicative – number, scope and size of 
projects to be determined by client/country demand.  

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
ii) 

Portfolio Management 

78. 
The total portfolio commitment has increased over the past CPS period, but 
disbursements have not kept pace. On December 31, 2013 the Pakistan portfolio of active 
projects under implementation consisted of 36 investment operations, including 12 funded from 
the Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) for the conflict-affected areas bordering Afghanistan. Total 
net commitments for this portfolio were about $4.5 billion for IDA/IBRD, and $0.1 billion for 
the MDTF. The portfolio is balanced with a mix of fast disbursing DLI based operations and 
more traditional projects. However, the amount disbursed during the Bank Fiscal Year (July to 
June) has decreased from $807.5 million in FY11 to $554 million in FY13. Disbursements in 
FY14 are expected at around $600 million, not counting DPCs.  

79. 
Key factors contributing to overall slow disbursements and implementation of the 
portfolio include staff turnover, weak capacity to deal with procurement and financial 
management, and delays in government approvals. Building on lessons from implementation 
and as part of ongoing practice, the World Bank will continue to conduct frequent joint reviews 
with the Government of Pakistan counterparts to identify measures to remove these bottlenecks 
and accelerate disbursements. These reviews and engagement will be strengthened at: (i) the 
federal level, by having high-level reviews of flagship projects at the Economic Coordination 
Committee of the federal cabinet that can track and influence the pace of implementation; (ii) the 
provincial level, working with Chief Ministers’ offices and a core group of provincial cabinet 
ministers, as well as the delivery units that some provinces like Punjab and KPK are already 
setting up to strengthen implementation; and (iii) the federal, provincial and local government 
levels, to strengthen public financial management programs focusing on the weakest areas of 
accounting, internal and external audits, procurement systems, budget transparency, and social 
accountability. Specific attention will be on meeting readiness criteria for implementation, 
encouraging use of available tools such as retroactive financing, and building in flexibility in 
project design for emergency response including increased attention to preparedness and shared 
approaches for managing disaster risk. Additionally, efforts are underway to build partnerships 
with leading institutes in the country for capacity building support. WBG will strengthen 
capacity through building systems; and facilitating outsourcing / contracting out to the private 
sector (e.g. for community mobilization). (See Annex XVIII).  

80. 
IFC and MIGA’s portfolios expanded over the past few years. As of February 28, 2014, 
IFC’s committed portfolio in Pakistan amounted to $809 million in 38 companies. Infrastructure 
represents the largest exposure of about 56 percent of the committed balance, while general 
manufacturing and services represents 25 percent, and financial markets 19 percent. MIGA’s 
current gross commitment is $310 million ($217 net) in 3 projects.  These are in the financial 
services, power and manufacturing sectors’ and were signed in FY11, FY12 and FY13 
respectively. A weak macroeconomic environment and persistent energy crisis have negatively 
affected the private sector (including IFC clients), and increased overall risk perception in the 
last five years. However, IFC has maintained portfolio quality through proactive engagement 
including assisting clients to address operational issues (restructuring, etc.) and policy-related 
issues in a timely manner. Having a strong portfolio team on the ground has also helped maintain 
portfolio quality. 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
iii) 

Communications and Knowledge Sharing 

81. 
The WBG will continue to communicate results and share knowledge. In light of 
development priorities identified during CPS consultations, especially areas of improvement 
pointed out by the Client Satisfaction Survey 2013, the WBG will (i) expand development 
dialogue through partnerships with the academia, media, civil society organizations, and other 
stakeholders; (ii) increase development effectiveness by using political economy analysis and 
embedding strategic communication in operations; (iii) establish the relation between the WBG’s 
knowledge and operational work and how it helps reduce poverty and build prosperity; and 
(iv) regularly communicate CPS progress on results, share results stories, and solicit feedback 
using traditional and online platforms. To sustain economic reforms and ensure development 
effectiveness, broad public ownership is important. The WBG’s support to federal and provincial 
governments for effective communication will help them broaden support for, and sustainability 
of, development initiatives and reforms.  

iv) 

Collaboration and Partnerships 

82. 
The WBG coordination has improved over the years and the WBG will continue to 
work across IDA/IBRD, IFC and MIGA to present the best solution to the client. The last 
strategy period saw credible efforts for WBG joint and coordinated tasks, particularly in energy 
and access to finance. The four results areas under the CPS provide further opportunities for 
WBG institutions to work together. The WBG will continue to improve on this front by 
leveraging the newly established global practices and program leaders, and by building on its 
knowledge partnerships with the World Bank Institute and the Water and Sanitation Program.  

83. 
The WBG will continue to emphasize working with multilateral and bilateral 
development partners to address the key constraints to poverty reduction and shared 
prosperity. There has been a strong track record of donor coordination in the last strategy period 
and the WBG will build on it. Close coordination around managing dialogue on pressing 
economic issues during the political transition in 2013 and the IMF program are good examples. 
Also, the results-based instruments and MDTF proved to be good platforms for partnerships. 
Similarly, several donors are committed to co-financing the Power Sector Reform DPC (ADB, 
JICA) or to using the Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth DPC as a foundation to provide 
their own support. Donors and government continue to seek coordinated financing mechanisms 
and enhanced policy and strategic dialogue to increase aid effectiveness and reduce the strain on 
government capacity. The WBG is committed to fostering trust and better coordination among 
development partners, and will continue to engage in a constructive manner in related working 
committees and other forums.  

84. 
A strong trust fund portfolio indicates the strength of our growing partnerships. The 
Pakistan trust fund portfolio has 64 active grants with a total commitment of $117 million. 
Disbursements over the last CPS period were $165 million (equivalent to 6 percent of IBRD/IDA 
disbursements over the same period). During previous CPS period of FY10–14, trust funds 
mainly complemented IBRD/IDA project funding and around 85 percent of the total 
commitment was recipient executed. Major donors in the current portfolio include the Gates 
Foundation ($68.6 million), DFID ($11 million), Japan ($6.31 million), UN Foundation ($9.2 
million), and USAID ($2.14 million). DFID had also funded large co-financing TF grants during 

33 

 
 
 
 
the CPS period. Going forward, the Global Partnership for Education (GPE) is considering to 
fund two education projects of up to $100 million in Balochistan and Sindh. The major sectors 
supported through trust funds are Human Development ($78.9 million) and Social Protection 
($11 million). Some of the other sectors mobilizing trust fund resources include Water and 
Sanitation. A recent trust fund assessment helped ensure greater alignment with country and 
regional strategies and a tighter focus on demand- versus supply-driven programs. Based on 
lessons learned, the current portfolio mainly includes programmatic TFs to reduce fragmentation. 
Also, TF sources are increasingly being used to fund TA and advisory services (see Annex XIX 
on Partnerships and Trust Funds Overview). 

85. 
The MDTF has been successful in coordinating donor programs for crisis-affected 
regions. With the financial contributions of eleven donors, the MDTF has been instrumental in 
supporting the development priorities of the crisis-affected KPK, Balochistan and FATA. Such 
mechanisms can help bring together many different actors for common goals. The WBG is 
discussing the replenishment and scaling up of the MDTF to meet the continuing needs of the 
targeted regions, and to help mitigate the likely impact of the 2014 transition and ISAF 
drawdown in Afghanistan (see Annex XV on Restoring Trust between Citizens and 
Governments in KPK, FATA, and Balochistan). 

86. 
Partnerships with private sector and other stakeholders, including academia, civil 
society, youth, parliamentarians and political leaders will be expanded. The WBG will 
continue to consult these groups when designing strategies and programs, and taking it a step 
further will encourage their feedback and participation throughout to support implementation and 
advocacy. Also, the WBG will enhance its dialogue with the private sector seeking regular 
feedback on key reform areas. 

v) 

Monitoring and Evaluation 

87. 
Increased focus on results will guide CPS monitoring and evaluation at the strategy as 
well as project level. The results framework will guide the monitoring of the CPS 
implementation. The framework lays out 14 priority outcomes aligned with the government’s 
plan with 25 indicators—many of them common to the World Bank, IFC, MIGA, and the 
MDTF—to reflect their aggregate contribution to program outcomes. The CPS outcomes are a 
narrower but aligned sub-set of the broader country-level goals the government is seeking, and 
reflect the selective focus and level of WBG’s contribution. Achievement of these results would 
derive from the ongoing portfolio and pipeline of future programs. As the program develops and 
legacy operations are more thoroughly reviewed or restructured to enhance their link and impact 
on the twin goals, the outcomes and indicators may need adjustment. Any such revisions will be 
documented and reported in the mid-term CPS progress report.  

88. 
Annual results reviews are being introduced to strengthen strategic monitoring and 
evaluation. These will be dedicated to a discussion of results and will be, in addition to the 
regular six-monthly portfolio reviews, conducted with the federal and the provincial 
governments. The rationale for such reviews is to focus on outcomes at the program level rather 
than the physical progress of individual projects.  

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
89. 
Third-party monitoring and impact evaluations will continue. These tools have been 
successful in supporting WBG’s monitoring and evaluation efforts, particularly in difficult-to-
reach areas, and for the MDTF. The WBG will expand their use. Community / Beneficiary 
engagement in program design, implementation and monitoring; as well as use of social 
accountability mechanisms will be enhanced. 

IV. MANAGING RISKS  

90. 
Achieving the results and outcomes supported by this CPS entails mitigating economic, 
political, security, and implementation risks.  

91. 
Reform fatigue may set in. Pakistan has a history of starting strong and finishing weak, 
but it is more likely to stay the course if results are good. Still, changing political dynamics, 
vested interests in public and private sector, weak implementation and negative external shocks, 
such as a fall in remittances, slow recovery of FDI and other inflows, terms-of-trade shock, 
severe drop in demand for exports, or a natural disaster, might undermine growth and reform 
momentum, in turn leading to suspension of the IMF Program. This likelihood is partly mitigated 
by WBG efforts to bring reforms upfront, strengthening political economy analyses to address 
likely roadblocks, and by a strong TA program providing implementation and hands-on support. 
If the program performs well, the World Bank may be able to bring in additional IBRD lending, 
but if reforms are not maintained, including a possible suspension of the IMF Program, the 
World Bank could not continue its Development Policy Financing. It would need to reorient its 
program, while maintaining the critical social sector support. Any such shifts or reorientation 
would be brought to the Board in the CPSPR.  

92. 
Slow reform progress may hold back private sector development. Private sector 
investment and FDI might not pick up as expected given increased political, economic and 
security risks. The private sector may be affected by lack of progress in privatization, tax 
simplification, enhancement of the investment climate, and market-based energy tariffs in power 
and gas. WBG will work with development partners and other stakeholders to sustain dialogue 
on an enabling policy environment for private sector. IFC will mitigate such risks by standing 
ready to provide counter-cyclical support to help current (and new) private sector clients 
continue their operations and maintain their workforce, aiming to offer flexible and timely 
assistance. IFC will also ensure proper sequencing of activities with the World Bank to improve 
WBG’s ability to attract private investment into Pakistan. 

93. 
Pakistan’s weak implementation capacity, coupled with risks of violence and natural 
disaster, could derail results. Project implementation has suffered long delays in recent years due 
to staff turnover and capacity constraints. Poor security adds a further constraint, while renewed 
conflict in Afghanistan could bring more stress to Pakistan. Similarly, any natural disaster may 
well affect the pace of the WBG’s work. The CPS therefore assumes much higher operational 
risk. Some of these risks are beyond the WBG’s capacity to mitigate fully, but it will seek higher 
level reviews of key projects to improve progress, address capacity issues, improve disaster risk 
management as well as help improve economic opportunities as a means to reducing the risk of 
conflict.  

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94. 
Overall, CPS implementation risks are substantial/high, but opportunities to make a 
difference are enormous. The WBG approach is to accept informed risks and undertake 
proactive mitigation, drawing on the findings of the World Development Report 201413 and 
lessons from past engagement in Pakistan. The WBG will (i) build stronger partnerships at 
various levels of governments – federal, provincial, local levels; (ii) mainstream broader 
stakeholders’ engagement in sector/policy dialogue beyond official government circles to build a 
deeper constituency for reforms and WBG interventions; (iii) provide timely TA and capacity-
building support on key reform issues, especially at province level; and (iv) continue producing 
timely and focused analytical and advisory work, for advocacy and to identify and mitigate sector- 
or reform-specific risks.  

13 World Development Report 2014 on Risks and Opportunity: Managing Risks for Development. 

36 

 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex I(a):  Summary - Pakistan CPS Selectivity and Impact on WBG Goals 

Annex I(a) 
Page 1 of 2 

Impact WBG 
Goals 
Poverty 
Sh.Pros
p. 

High 

High 

Medium High 

High 

High 

Low 

High 

Low 

High 

High 

High 

Medium High 

Medium Medium 

Expected 
Outcomes 

Specific Problem Areas or 
Challenges Addressed 

Theme 1: Energy 
1. Reduced load 
shedding 

Frequent power outages disrupting 
lives and economic activity 

2. Reduced cost of 
production of 
electricity 

High production costs and 
inefficiencies in power sector and 
low private sector participation 

Heavy dependence on non pro-poor 
government subsidies and poor 
service management  

3. 
Improved fiscal 
sustainability of the 
electric power 
sector 
Theme 2: Private Sector Development 
4. 
Improved 
Low and falling private investment 
business  
and FDI 
environment for 
private sector 

Heavy SOEs losses and contingent 
liabilities 

5. 
Increased 
productivity in 
farms in selected 
irrigation schemes 
6. 
Improved 
youth’s skills for 
business 
7. 
Improved trade 
tariff and 
ports/border 
logistics 

Inefficiencies in water delivery 
systems 

Widening skill gap, and limited 
adoption of technical knowledge 

Distorted Customs tariff regime. 
Fragmented institutionally towards 
trade facilitation and logistics. High 
port and border costs. 

Development Solution: WBG Tailored Package of Services 

Key Target Indicators 

Mix of Bank and IFC investment lending for power generation, 
distribution, and transmission planned with Development Policy Credit 
(DPC) to support power sector. 
Natural gas efficiency WBG lending shifting to low cost sources and 
prioritizing provision of natural gas to thermal plants generation. AAA 
on renewable energy resource mapping and on design of strategy to 
scale-up renewable energy. 
Plan to phase out subsidies supported by Bank’s Power DPC combined 
with IFC PPP Advisory work on Discos privatization. Planned AAA to 
improve sector governance, reduce theft and corruption, and improve 
targeting of power subsidies. 

Average daily hours of power load 
shedding reduced from 8 to 5 
hours 
Average generation cost reduced 
from 12¢/kWh in FY 2013 to 
10¢/kWh 

Government subsidies reduced 
from 1.8 percent of GDP to 0.4 
percent  

IFC lending and Bank’s Growth DPC support to privatization and to 
One Stop Shop business registration.  WBG TA to divestment of large 
bank shares and strategic sales, the improvement of Doing Business 
indicators, capacity building of the Institute of Capital Markets, and the 
Punjab land record and commercial disputes centers. Bank’s six 
regional competitiveness studies. 
Bank financing on water sector improvement, management and 
productivity in three provinces: Sindh, Punjab and Balochistan. Bank 
support for improving irrigated agriculture in Sindh and Punjab. IFC 
TA for farmers, suppliers, businesses and banks. 
Bank interventions in KP/FATA on rural livelihoods, economic 
revitalization and development of competitive industries. Ongoing 
Sindh Skills Development project and future Punjab Skills project. 
Bank’s Growth DPC support to tariff simplification. Bank lending and 
TA support for trade facilitation and logistics at the Wagah border. IFC 
support on intercity transport and freight trains. Planned TA on 
international trade to Ministry of Commerce is planned by the Bank. 

At least 5 SOEs restructured/ 
privatized.  

Number of days required to start a 
business reduced from 21 to 15 
days. 
Increased yields of major crops in 
selected irrigation schemes by 20 
percent. 

Increased number of trainees 
supported by skill development 
programs by 20 percent. 
Average statutory Customs tariff 
rate reduced from 14.4 percent to at 
least 10 percent; and no special tax 
exemptions issued. Average waiting 
time at Wagah Border reduced by 
20 percent; occupancy rate of 
targeted Karachi port berths 
improved from 74 percent in FY13 
to 50 percent. 

Theme 3: Inclusion 
8. 
Improved 
financial inclusion 

Low access to finance, especially for 
MSMEs and women. Lack of financial 

IFC ongoing projects on Trade Finance to support SMEs and 
microfinance, and planned operation on financial inclusion and debt 

Number of MSME and women 
borrowers from banking system 

High 

High 

 
 
 
 
Expected 
Outcomes 

Specific Problem Areas or 
Challenges Addressed 

for SMEs and 
women 
9. Reduced 
vulnerability for 
groups at risk 

inclusion strategy and weak capacity 
of banks and MSMEs. 
Low and institutionally fragmented 
pro-poor public expenditures 
focused on vulnerable groups 

10. Increased 
Little understanding of disaster risk 
resilience to 
management to inform timely 
disasters in Targeted 
decision-making and investments for 
Regions 
building resilience. 
Theme 4: Service Delivery 
11. Improved 
Low tax revenue, poor tax 
public resources 
administration, narrow tax base and 
management 
skewed tax structure 

and equity investments to support MSME and agri-related investments. 
Bank AAA on Financial Inclusion Strategy. 
WBG engagement through BISP, the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation 
Fund and the MDTF. Bank Growth DPC addresses BISP budgetary 
protection. Follow-up Social Safety Net project should support 
expanded coverage and primary education conditional cash transfers. 
MDTF girls project in Balochistan. AAA on disaster recovery, social 
protection and poverty updating to PBS. 
Bank’s support to Balochistan on disaster risk management; and AAA 
on risk assessment, risk financing, and strengthening of Pakistan’s 
urban disaster response capacity.   

WBG will combine Growth DPC actions, TA-related activities on tax 
administration, investments under a Bank Punjab Public Reform 
Management project and a future Sindh public sector reform project. 
IFC support to Punjab Revenue agency. 

12. Improved 
access to maternal 
and child health 
services 

Dismal maternal and child health, 
and nutrition indicators; with low 
immunization coverage of vaccine 
preventable diseases 

Bank’s interventions in polio eradication and health, and planned 
lending on national immunization support, and nutrition for mothers 
and children. AAA on reproductive health and immunization coverage 
evaluation.  

13. Increased 
school enrollment 
and adoption of 
education quality 
assessment 
14. Adoption of 
performance and 
transparency 
mechanisms in 
selected institutions 

Wide gaps in access to education 
with regional and gender disparities 

Bank’s ongoing operations supporting teaching quality and 
accountability in Balochistan, Sindh, Punjab and, at the Federal level, on 
improved access and quality of primary, secondary and tertiary 
education services. IFC expansion of E4E initiative for Arab youth. 

Low Public Expenditure Financial 
Assessment (PEFA) ratings. Weak 
implementation capacity, low 
accountability and lack of 
transparency of public institutions. 

Bank lending for improvement in financial reporting and auditing. 
Future AAA on PEFAs ratings will improve financial management. 
Bank lending on cities governance, municipal services, land record 
management in Punjab. MDTF-supports governance in KP/FATA/ 
Balochistan and strengthens institutions of accountability in public 
services. Sindh governance project planned. Bank’s TA capacity 
building and support of anticorruption units in KPK and Punjab. 

Development Solution: WBG Tailored Package of Services 

Key Target Indicators 

Annex I(a) 
Page 2 of 2 

Impact WBG 
Goals 
Poverty 
Sh.Pros
p. 

increased by 25 percent and 10 
percent.  
BISP coverage of unconditional 
cash transfers expanded from 4.5 
to 5.5 million families.  
Conditional cash transfers 
expanded to 25 districts from 5 
districts in FY13. 
At least 2 provinces set up an 
operational Disaster Risk 
Management and Early Warning 
System. 

Tax ratio increased to at least 11.5 
percent of GDP from 9.6 percent 
in FY13 and no special 
exemptions issued; improved 
collections in provinces 
Increased births attended by 
skilled personnel from 52 percent 
to 60 percent, and child 
immunization coverage increased 
by 20 percent from 54 percent in 
FY13. 
Increased gross enrollment rates for 
Primary education by 10 percent. 
Student achievement tests done in 
at least 3 provinces; showing 
positive trend in learning outcomes.
Increased number of provincial 
departments adopting citizens’ 
feedback and performance 
management systems. 

High 

High 

High 

High 

High 

Medium 

Medium High 

High 

High 

High 

High 

High 

Medium 

 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

Poverty Reduction: 
Shared Prosperity: 

An efficient, 
sustainable, 
affordable and 
consumer oriented 
electric power 
system that meets the 
needs of its people 
and economy. 

Annex I(b):  PAKISTAN CPS FY15-19  
Results Matrix 

Annex I(b) 
Page 1 of 11 

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

Overarching Goals 

RESULT AREA 1: ENERGY 
1.1  Reduced Load Shedding 
Additional 500 million cubic 
feet of gas per day available 
for electricity generation 
6,000 Additional MW of 
power generation capacity   

 Average daily hours of power 
load shedding reduced from 
eight hours  in FY13 to five  

Frequent power outages 
disrupting lives and 
economic activity 
across the country 

The sector relies 
heavily on government 
subsidies; not targeted 
to the poor 

High costs, and 
inefficiencies that 
prevent the sector from 
financing all its costs.   

1.2 Reduced Cost of Production of 
Electricity 

 Average generation cost  
reduced from 12¢/kWh in FY 
2013 to 10¢/kWh  

 

Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 Tarbela 4th Extension  
Hydropower project  
 Electricity Distribution and 
Transmission Project  
 Natural Gas Efficiency Project   
 Water Sector Capacity 
Development Project  
 AKRSP Renewable Energy 
Community Development 
Carbon Finance Project 
IFC Energy Projects: Engro 
Energy Project, KESC Project, 
Uch-II Power Project, Laraib 
Energy Project, KOEL Energy, 
Zorlu Energy and Metro Wind 
Project 
IFC/MIGA Star Hydropower 
Project 
Planned Pipeline Operations: 
 Dasu Hyrdopower Project  
 Power Sector Reform DPC 2 
 CASA-1000 Electricity 
Transmission Project  

 

12,000 MW public and private 
investments in power 
generation projects (hydro, 
thermal, wind, biomass and 
solar) facilitated by WBG  

Level of WBG facilitated 
private investment for off-grid 
solar, renewable and clean 
energy.  

Policy guidelines on tariff 
mgmt. and subsidies with pro 
poor targeting developed, 
adopted and implemented  

Publicly-owned generation 
companies (Gencos), 
distribution companies 
(Discos), the transmission 

Lack of institutional 
mechanisms linking 
supply and demand side 
governance result in 
poor service 
management 

1.3 Improved Financial 
Sustainability of the Electric Power 
Sector 

 Reduced electricity subsidies 
(except for the poorest) 
allocated in Federal budget 
from 1.8 percent of GDP in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

FY13 to 0.4 percent of GDP  

 

Improved collection of billed 
electricity from 86 percent of 
billing in FY13 to 94 percent. 

company (NTDC) and the 
power purchasing agency 
(CPPA) establish commercial 
relations.  

First Report on the 
implementation status of the 
National Power Policy 
published by mid FY15  

Develop an enabling 
environment to 
foster private 

Steady decline in 
investment and  
deterioration of real 

RESULT AREA 2: PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT 
2.1 Improved Business  
Establishment of a virtual one-
stop-shop (OSS)  
Environment for Private Sector 

Annex I(b) 
Page 2 of 11 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

 

 Pak-India Power Connectivity 
 
IFC’s expected investment in 
CSAIL Power;  
IFC new investments in : (a) At 
least 3-4 private power projects; 
(b) LNG import for Power; and 
(c) Investment in one privatized 
Disco 
 MIGA At least one power deal 
Ongoing Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 Community-based Renewable 
Energy Development  
 Renewable Energy Resource 
Mapping  
 Strategy to Scale-up Renewable  
 SAWI Glacier Monitoring  
 
IFC PPP Advisory on 
privatization; Punjab Power; 
SBA for small renewable 
projects.  
Planned Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities:  
 Political Economy Analysis of 
the Power Sector including the 
issue of theft/corruption. 

Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 Punjab Cities Governance 
Project 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

investments and 
improve Pakistan’s 
performance 
(measured as 
improvement in 
Pakistan Doing 
Business index). 

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

 The number of days required to 
start a business decreases from 
21 in FY13 to 15 days  

 Restructuring / Privatization of 
at least 5 State-owned 
Enterprises (SOEs). Baseline: 
no privatization transaction 
took place in last 6 fiscal years. 

Restructured and professional 
Boards of SOEs constituted 
and  Corporate Governance 
Rules applied 

Regulatory framework for 
PPPs, credit bureau & secured 
transactions approved.; 
AML/CFT law enacted  

At least one SEZ established 

Improved urban management 
in targeted cities 

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

fixed capital formation 

Distortionary incentive 
regime to diffuse 
competition  

Structural issues as a 
result of  burdensome 
administrative and 
regulatory frameworks 

SOEs losses posing a 
major drain on 
country’s fiscal position 

Inadequate urban 
infrastructure and 
services 

Sustained growth in 
agriculture, with 
enhanced 
productivity of farms 
and generating 
linkages for rural 
non-farm economy  

Inefficiencies in water 
delivery system. 

Low crop yield and 
production not 
sufficiently diversified 
into higher value 
agriculture products  

2.2 Increased Productivity in 
Farms in Selected Irrigations 
Schemes  

Water Storage capacity 
increased by 295 million cubic 
meters 

 

Increased yields of major crops 
(wheat, cotton, rice) in selected 
irrigation schemes by 20 

Irrigation and drainage 
systems  improved / 
rehabilitated 2,632,011 
hectares  

Annex I(b) 
Page 3 of 11 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

 FATA Urban Centres Project  
Planned Pipeline Operations: 
 Growth DPC 2 
Ongoing Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 Trade Finance 
 Consumer Protection and 
Financial Literacy 
 Business Registration Reform  
 SOE Reforms; CG Rules  
 FIRST: Strengthening Insurance 
Regulatory Framework 
 Punjab Jobs &Competitiveness 
 Punjab Investment Policy  
 Construction Permits Reforms 
 Capacity Building of ICM 
 Regional Competitiveness 
studies on 6 priority sectors.  
 PK:AML/CFT TA 
Planned Analytical/AAA/TF: 
 PPP Advisory for SOEs 
 NLTA- Planning Commission 
 NLTA- Karachi Transformation 
 NLTA- Trade and tariff reforms 
Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 Sindh Water Sector Improvement  
 Sindh On-Farm Water Mgmt AF  
 Balochistan Small Scale Irrigation 
 Punjab Barrages Improvement II  
 Punjab Irrigated Agriculture  
 Water Sector capacity project  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

Lack of adequate 
storage capacity for 
major crops/grains 
leading to high wastage 
and  lower incomes for 
farmers 

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

percent.   
Baseline at country level:  Wheat: 
2714 kgs/ha; Cotton: 815 kg/ha; 
Rice: 2396 kg/ha. 

634,180 farmers adopted 
improved technologies for 
efficient water use 

Grain silos established in 
provinces ( especially in Sindh 
and Punjab) 

Supply chains for linking of 
corporates to famers 
developed 

Annex I(b) 
Page 4 of 11 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

 Pak Poverty Alleviation Fund  
 FATA Rural Livelihoods  
 KPK Southern Area Development 
 
IFC Engro Asahi project 
 
IFC Engro Fertilizer Project 
 
IFC Packages Project 
Planned Pipeline Operations: 
 Sindh Irrigated Agriculture  
 Sindh Water Sector AF  
 Punjab & Sindh Agriculture  
 Sindh Barrages (Guddu) Project  
 Balochistan: Porali & Nari River 
Basin Water Resource Mgmt 
Ongoing Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 
IFC Grain Silos Projects (Punjab 
and Sindh) 
Public Grain Stocks and Price 
Stabilization Policy 
 Financing water and energy 
conservation projects in agri  
Planned Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 
IFC Advisory /TA on Agri; 
Gender; Sustainable Finance  
 Climate Smart Agriculture   
 Analysis of Wheat Sector and 
Grain Storage Management 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

Accelerate the 
growth of MSMEs 
sector through 
increased  
productivity and 
policy interventions 

Development of  
competitive skills 
base to enhance 
productivity 

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

Widening skill gap 
resulting in low 
productivity and 
competitiveness.  

Technical knowledge 
and expertise not 
widely adopted 

Improve 
infrastructure to 
support economic 
activity, trade and 
extend outreach to 
remote areas 

A fragmented approach 
towards trade 
facilitation and 
transport logistics 

High port and border 
costs and long dwell 
times 

2.4 Improved  Trade tariff and 
Ports/Border  Logistics 

 The simple average statutory 
tariff  rate reduced to below 10 
percent, from 14.4  percent in 
FY13; and no special Statutory 
Regulatory Orders (SROs) 
granting tax exemptions are 
issued by FBR except for those 
with Parliament approval. 

A non-discriminatory Policy 
on International Trade 
developed and approved by 
the Cabinet  

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

Annex I(b) 
Page 5 of 11 

2.3 Improved Youth’s Skills for 
Businesses 

 

Increase in number of trainees 
supported by skills development 
programs by 20 percent (with 
gender disaggregation). 
Baseline: 35000 trainees 

Performance management 
contract and tracer studies 
institutionalized in skill 
development programs 

 

Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 Sindh Skills Development Project  
 Economic Revitalization Project 
in KP/FATA (MDTF) 
 Competitive Industries in 
KP(MDTF) 
Planned Pipeline Operations: 
 Punjab Skills Project  
 
IFC Supplier Finance Program 
Ongoing Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 
IFC Corporate Governance 
program for SMEs; and 
IFC Business Edge skills 
development program for SMEs 
Planned Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 SME Portal developed for 
regional trade. 
 Skills for Jobs Study 
 Financial Inclusion and 
Infrastructure Strategy  
Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 Karachi Port Improvement 
Project  
 KPK Roads Project (MDTF) 
 FATA Rural Roads Project 
(MDTF)  
IFC Qasim International 
Container Terminal (QICT) 
Project 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

Support private 
sector led growth 
and job creation 
through access to 
finance to SMEs  

Low access to finance, 
especially for MSMEs 
and Women 

Lack of financial 
inclusion strategy  

The weak capacity of 
banks and MSMEs 

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

Annex I(b) 
Page 6 of 11 

 Average waiting time at Wagah 
Border reduced by 20 percent 
from 6.5 hours average in FY13; 
and improvement in occupancy 
rate of targeted Karachi port 
berths from 74 percent in FY13 to 
50 percent.  

 

 
 

IFC Pakistan International Bulk 
Terminal ( PIBT) 
 
IFC Intercity transport project 
Planned Pipeline Operations: 
 Trade Facilitation & Logistics 
Project (Wagah Border)    
IFC Freight Train Project 
IFC investment in telecom, 
transport, logistics) 
Ongoing Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
- 
Planned Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
- 

RESULT AREA 3: INCLUSION 
3.1 Improved Financial inclusion 
Financial Inclusion Strategy, 
covering MSMEs, rural 
for MSMEs and Women 
finance, housing finance, 
payment systems, branchless 
banking, developed  

 

 

Ongoing Operations/ Portfolio 
IFC: Global Trade Finance with 
12 banks; 
IFC investments in 4 
microfinance banks; 1 in medium 
sized bank; and  1 investment in 
largest commercial bank-HBL 
(with highest SME market share) 
Pipeline Operations: 
 Financial inclusion project 
IFC Global Trade Finance 
program roll over with 12 banks;  
IFC’s new trade facility for oil / 
potential gas imports; and 
financing for warehouse and 
trade working capital programs 

 

 

 Number of MSME borrowers 
increased by 25 percent from 2.95 
million borrowers in FY13, with 
women borrowers increased by 
10 percent from 0.7 million in 
FY13. 

 Number of accounts by financial 
institutions 
increased by 10 
percent from 35 million accounts 
in FY13; with women accounts 
increased by 3 percent from 5.3 
million accounts in FY13. 

Capacity of commercial and 
microfinance banks, SMEs 
enhanced 

Credit information on MSME 
borrowers available to all 
financial institutions 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

Annex I(b) 
Page 7 of 11 

 

 

 

IFC debt/equity investment in 
large/mid-sized banks with 
MSME 
Ongoing Analytical/ Advisory 
 Secured transactions law under 
DPC 1 
IFC Banking Advisory  with 2 
banks- HBL; Alfalah 
Planned Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities 
 Financial Inclusion and 
Infrastructure Strategy 
IFC Advisory to banks/FIs with 
focus on MSME, Gender, Agri 
and Sustainable Finance (2 new 
banks) 
Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 Social Safety Net Project  
 Floods Emergency Cash 
Transfer Project 
 PPAF III Project 
Planned Pipeline Operations: 
 Social Safety Net  
Ongoing Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 Labor Supply and Vulnerability  
 Disaster Recovery and Social 
Protection  
 NLTA: Integrated SP Systems   
Planned Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 

Develop sound 
social protection 
programs to 
empower the poor 
and protect the most 
vulnerable through 
social mobilization, 
safety nets, and 
facilitating access to 
productive assets for 
income generating 
activities.  

Insufficient pro-poor 
expenditures and 
fragmented programs 

Lack of mechanisms to 
cushion households 
from the negative 
effects of transitory 
income shocks.  

The weak institutional 
arrangements and 
capacity at devolved 
level 

Limited coordination at 
the federal and 

3.2 Reduced Vulnerability for 
Groups at Risk 

 Basic cash transfers for BISP 
beneficiaries expanded by 20 
percent from baseline of 4.5 
million beneficiaries in FY13; 
and Conditional Cash Transfers 
for primary education expanded 
to 25 districts from baseline of 5 
districts in FY13. 

 

Increase girls gross enrollment 
rates for primary education by 15 
percent from 63 percent in FY12 

Improved reliability of poverty 
and shared prosperity data at 
national and provincial level  

Wider application of the 
Safety Net System in the 
federal and at least 2 
provincial programs  

Enhanced investments in 
human capital amongst the 
poor through complementary 
safety net graduation programs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

provincial levels 

baselines 

Reduce vulnerability 
to disasters by 
development of a 
holistic disaster 
management 
program 

Lack of consensus and 
understanding of 
disaster risk to inform 
decision-making and 
guide investments for 
building resilience. 

3.3 Increased Resilience to 
Disasters in Targeted Regions 

Multi-hazard risk assessments 
for major urban areas prepared 

 Number of provinces with 
operational Disaster Risk 
Management and  Early Warning 
Systems increases from 0 in FY13 
to 2  

Provincial DRM plans and 
SOPs updated 

Improved domestic 
revenue mobilization 
to finance 
Pakistan’s 
development needs  

Improve allocations, 
expenditure 
efficiency and 
financial mgmt.  

Inefficient tax 
administration, narrow 
tax base and skewed tax 
structure 

The weak financial 
management and 
spending inefficiencies  

Low expenditure and 

RESULT AREA 4: SERIVCE DELIVERY 
4.1 Improved Public Resources 
Intra-government transfer 
policies adopted 
Management 

 Tax revenue ratio increased from 
9.6 in FY13 to 11.5 percent at 
Federal level and no special 
exemptions issued; improved 
collection in targeted provinces  

Urban Immoveable Property 
Tax (UIPT) automation 
completed in 5 large cities of 
Punjab 

E-procurement strategy 
developed and 25 percent 

Annex I(b) 
Page 8 of 11 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

 NLTA on poverty data with PBS 

Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 Balochistan Disaster 
Management Project (MDTF) 
Ongoing Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 GFDRR Development of 
National Platform for Risk 
Assessment and Catastrophe 
Risk Financing  
 GFDRR Program for Hazard 
and Risk Assessment in Urban 
Areas 
 PHRD Strengthening Pakistan’s 
Urban Disaster Response 
Capacity 
Planned Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 NLTA Disaster Risk Management 
Authorities 

Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 Second Project for Improvement 
in Financial Reporting and 
Auditing (PIFRA II)  
 Punjab Public Reform 
Management Project  
 Punjab Cities Governance 
Improvement Project 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

economic deprivation in 
backward and conflict 
affected areas 

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

procurement staff trained  

 Non-wage recurrent expenditure 
by provinces in education and 
health increased by 20 percent 
from PKR 50 million in FY12. 

 Quality and timeliness of 
government  accounting, auditing 
and reporting improves at Federal 
and Provincial level against 
PEFA scores of assessments 
undertaken in FY12 and FY13 
(specifically PI-22 to PI-25) (P1-
22 was rated D+ at Federal and B 
in Punjab in FY13; PI-24 and PI-
25 were rated C+ in Federal and 
Punjab in FY13) 

Enhanced focus and 
improved 
management of 
health, nutrition, 
population and  
sanitation services 
with good progress 
towards MDG 

Poor management of 
health and  population  
and sanitation services 

Persistent low 
immunization coverage 
and recurrent outbreaks 
of vaccine preventable 

4.2 Improved Access to Maternal 
and Child Health Services 

 

 percent Births attended by 
skilled health personnel 
increased from 52 percent in 
FY13 to 60 percent  

Performance management and 
coverage evaluation studies 
institutionalized in 
Immunization program 

Provision of family planning 
products and services through 
all public health outlets in 

Annex I(b) 
Page 9 of 11 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

Planned Pipeline Operations: 
 Growth and Revenue 
Mobilization DPC (1 and 2) 
 Sindh Public Sector Reform 
Project  
Ongoing Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 Tax Administration NLTA 
 Sindh PEFA Assessment 
 Subnational Fiscal Policy Notes 
 MDTF Subnational Fiscal Mgmt 
 
IFC Punjab General Sales Tax 
project 
Planned Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 PEFA Updates   
 Performance Mgmt Assessment 
for Supreme Audit Institution. 
(Auditor General`s Office) 
 Punjab Expenditure and Service 
Delivery Survey 
 NLTA for provincial tax 
administration 
 KPK DEMPA  
Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 
3rd Partnership for Polio 
Eradication Project  
 Punjab Health Sector Reform 
Project  
 Revitalizing Health Services in 
KPK   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

targets 

Better educational 
outcomes through 
improved access and 
quality of primary, 
secondary and 
tertiary education 
services 

Annex I(b) 
Page 10 of 11 

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

diseases 

High malnutrition 
among children and 
pregnant and lactating 
women 

Persistently high 
fertility and stagnating 
contraceptive use.  
High population growth 
continues to impose 
stress on public sector 
delivery systems with 
adverse impact on 
social indicators.  

Gaps in access to 
education persist, with 
regional and gender 
disparities 

The weak 
implementation and 
management capacity 
across administrative 
levels and schools  

Student learning levels 
are low and quality of 
teaching needs 
improvement  

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

 

 

Increased use of modern 
contraceptive methods from 26 
percent in FY13 to 30 percent  

Increase child immunization by 
20 percent from 54 percent in 
FY13 to 65 percent.  

Punjab  

Provincial plans for scaling up 
nutrition interventions rolled 
out in all provinces 

Change in behavior of 5 
million people and 5,000 
villages certified as ‘open 
defecation free’ reducing the 
incidence of diseases  

Planned Pipeline Operations: 
 National Immunization support  
 Enhance Nutrition for Mothers 
and Children  
Analytical Work Ongoing, Planned 
 WSP Provincial Sanitation TA  
 Reproductive health/Population 
Policy Note/TA 
 Hospital and Private sector AAA 
 Financial Risk Protection study 
 
Immunization Coverage 
Evaluation  

4.3 Increased School Enrollment  
and Adoption of Education 
Quality Assessment  

 Gross enrollment rates for 
Primary (6-10 yrs) increased by 
at least 10 percent from 68 
percent (M:72 percent;F:63 
percent) in FY12 baselines 

 Annual student achievement 
tests for grade 5 and 8 
implemented in at least 3 
provinces; and showed positive 
trend in learning outcomes  

 Teacher recruitment 
against school specific, 
needs-based teaching 
posts implemented in 
target provinces 
 Expansion of low-cost 
private schools in target 
provinces 
 School specific non-salary 
budgets  

Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 Balochistan Education Support 
Project  
 MDTF Promoting Girls 
Education in Balochistan  
 Sindh Education Sector II  
 Punjab Education sector II  
 Tertiary Education Support 
project  
Planned Pipeline Operations: 
 Global Partnership for Education 
Project – Sindh and Balochistan  
Analytical Work Ongoing, Planned 
 Early Childhood  Care and 
Development (ECCD) TA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government 
Strategic 
Development  
Objectives (federal, 

provincial Plans) 

Revitalized and 
strengthened 
institutions of 
implementation, 
improved 
transparency and 
accountability of 
public services.  

Key Issues and 
Constraints  

Lack of implementation 
capacity and 
accountability of public 
institutions 

Lack of transparency 
and disclosure of 
information   

CPS Outcomes and Indicators 

Indicative Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (on-
going and planned) 

Annex I(b) 
Page 11 of 11 

4.4 Adoption of Performance and 
Transparency Mechanisms in 
selected institutions  

 Departments / Services with 
citizen feedback in place 
increased by 30 percent (from 5 
Departments and 13 Services with 
citizen feedback in FY14) 

 Service delivery units, with 
improved performance 
management systems, increased 
from 0 in FY13 to at least 4  

Right to Information (RTI) 
Acts passed and 
implementation mechanism 
established at national and 
provincial levels 

Improved performance 
management framework  
developed for service delivery 
units  

ICT-based data collection, 
analysis, presentation and 
disclosure mechanisms,  set up 
in selected provinces 

Ongoing Operations/Portfolio: 
 Punjab Cities Governance 
Improvement 
 Punjab Municipal Services 
Project 
 Punjab Public Reform 
Management Project  
 Punjab  Land Record 
Management Project 
 KP/FATA/Balochistan 
Governance Support Project  
 FATA Urban Centers Project  
Planned Pipeline Operations: 
 Sindh Governance Project  
 MDTF Governance AF 
Ongoing Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 MDTF Governance TA  
 Strengthening Forum of Pakistan 
Ombudsman- IDF grant  
Planned Analytical/AAA/TF 
Activities: 
 WSP TA: Peshawar Water CO  
 WSP TA on inter-governmental 
fiscal transfers to WASAs  
 Supporting implementation of 
RTI in KPK and Punjab  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex II:  FY10-14 Pakistan Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report 

Annex II 
Page 1 of 43 

Country: 
Date of CAS: 
Date of Progress Report: 
Period covered by CPS Completion Report: 
CPS Completion Report completed by:  

Pakistan 
FY10-14 
November 16, 2011 
July 2010 to June 2014 
Roger Grawe 

I. Introduction and Background 

1. 
This Completion Report is a self-assessment by the Pakistan country team of results under the 
World Bank Group1 Country Partnership Strategy FY10-13 (Report No. 53553-PK), July 30, 2010 (CPS) 
and the Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report (CPSPR) FY10-14 (Report No. 65286-PK), 
November 16, 2011.  The self-assessment focuses on two summary evaluations: (i) CPS program 
outcomes, which would contribute to the achievement of country development goals; and (ii) World Bank 
Group (WBG) performance, which assesses the WBG’s contribution to the CPS’s design and 
implementation.  It is important to note that these are not assessments of Pakistan’s progress toward its 
development goals, but rather of program achievements directly linked to WBG-supported activities and 
to the WBG’s engagement in Pakistan.  

2. 
Overall, the Completion Report rates the achievements of the CPS program outcomes as 
moderately unsatisfactory.2 While the majority of outcomes were either mostly or partially achieved, 
with the IFC strategy and program exceeding expectations, key transformative outcomes were not 
achieved.   The Completion Report rates overall WBG performance as good.  On design, the CPS pillars 
were appropriate and well linked with Pakistan’s PRSP II, and the inclusion of a Multi-Donor Trust Fund 
for conflict affected areas was positive. The main weaknesses were the underestimation of 
implementation risks and inadequate mitigation measures, and the realism of the initial CPS results 
framework; the latter was substantially revised during the CPSPR.  The WBG showed good ability to 
adapt to changing circumstances, including addressing support for unforeseen floods in 2010 and 2011, 
strengthening analytic and technical support during a period of lagging reform commitment, thereby 
building the foundation with other partners for renewing policy reforms prior to and after the 2013 
elections. The WBG struggled during implementation to understand and adapt to the devolution of 
responsibilities to the provinces.  

3. 
The CPS came two years after the 2008 elections had returned Pakistan’s government to civilian 
hands. The Government had prepared a second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II) and an IMF 
program was in place.  However slowing reform momentum, massive floods in 2010 and 2011, and 
continuing security concerns dampened progress.  The CPS Progress Report (CPSPR) in November 2011, 
reported low growth, accelerating inflation and deteriorating public finances, the latter exacerbated by the 
18th Amendment to the Constitution, enacted in 2010, which devolved most government services to the 
Provinces and the related 7th National Finance Commission award which allocated a significantly 

1 In this report, the World Bank Group (WBG) constitutes the World Bank (WB), the International Finance 
Corporation (IFC), and Multilateral Insurance Agency (MIGA).  The WB lending windows are the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Development Association (IDA). MIGA 
activities during the CPS period were mostly in conjunction with IFC investments and are not covered separately. 
2 This report follows guidelines issued jointly by the Operations Policy and Country Services unit and the 
Independent Evaluation Group in November 2013 with respect to ratings methodology and categories.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
 
Annex II 
Page 2 of 43 

increased share of revenue to the provinces.  The IMF program had been off-track for over a year before it 
closed in September 2011. Elections held in June 2013 brought a successful democratic transition, with 
the convincing win by the PML-N providing a mandate to implement growth-oriented reforms and 
increase public investment.   The Government entered into a new arrangement under the IMF’s EFF in 
August 2013, and has been on-track with this program since then.   

4. 
The CPS built on Pakistan’s own priorities as laid out in the PRSP II, consolidating these into 
four pillars: i) Improved Governance and Public Sector Performance, ii) Improved Human Development 
and Reduced Vulnerability; iii) Improved Infrastructure to Support Growth and iv) Improved Security and 
Reduced Threat of Conflict.  Under these pillars, the CPS identified three “transformational” activities: i) 
assisting the government to raise the ratio of tax revenue to GDP through strengthened tax policy and 
administration; ii) supporting power sector reform to ensure a sustainable expansion of power supply; and 
iii) addressing security issues related both to coping with the consequences of conflict and reducing the 
risk of future conflict.  The CPS also laid out a broader “core” program comprising activities in human 
development (primarily education), skills, social protection, and livelihoods, ports, water management 
and financial management.  The CPS foresaw engagement in additional areas such as urban development 
and provincial fiscal management as contingent on the readiness and likelihood of success of individual 
activities as well as progress in the transformational agenda.  Finally the CPS identified selected areas in 
which the WB would not significantly engage: these included coal, civil service and judicial reforms, 
health, agriculture, telecoms, and highways.  

5. 
IFC expected to support the energy sector with a focus on renewable power generation (hydro 
and wind) and energy efficiency, privatization of utility and distribution companies with the objective of 
improving efficiencies. IFC also expected to support access to finance to underserved groups, especially 
micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs), by strengthening financial intermediation, improving 
business management and corporate governance practices at enterprise level.  Other areas of IFC program 
included investment opportunities in logistics, transport health, education, and agribusiness (including 
warehousing and logistics) as well as supporting PPPs.  IFC also expected to step up its program of 
advisory services.   

6. 
The CPSPR underscored the significance of the political and macroeconomic risks; but confirmed 
WBG commitment 
to 
the 
transformational agenda and core program, emphasizing 
that 
the 
transformational challenges were long-term.  The CPSPR updated the CPS Results Matrix to reflect slow 
progress in economic governance and power and better align outcomes with the WB operational program.   

7. 
The CPS put forward a financing program of $3.7 billion over the initial three years of the CPS 
period, approximately $1 billion of which would be IBRD.  IFC anticipated investing $1.3 - $1.5 billion 
during the CPS period.  The CPS also anticipated mobilizing up to $150 million in a multi-donor trust 
fund (MDTF) to support security under Pillar 4. Confirming the strategic focus of the CPS, the CPSPR 
extended the period to FY14 and anticipated a total IDA allocation of $4.5 billion and IBRD 
commitments totaling $1 billion. Based on approved projects through mid-FY14 and anticipated 
operations during the remainder of FY14, IDA commitments will total $4,975 and IBRD $762 during the 
CPS period3.   IFC far exceeded its CPS targets, both in the investment and advisory areas, and committed 
over $2.3 billion (during FY10-13) with record investments of $696 million in FY11.  

3 Project details are reported in Table 2.  Anticipated operations during the second half of FY14 include two DPLs 
totaling $600 million, which would constitute about 12 percent of the total IDA allocation if planned commitments 
are confirmed.   

 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex II 
Page 3 of 43 

II.   

Progress Toward Key Development Goals 

8. 
Economic performance in Pakistan was disappointing during the CPS period with slow 
growth, low investment, deteriorating public finances and a weak external sector.  GDP growth 
averaged less than 3 percent p.a. between 2009 and 2013 as private investment declined from 14 percent 
of GDP to less than 11 percent.  The public sector deficit expanded from 6.6 percent of GDP in 2010/11 
to over 8.5 percent in 2012/13 underscored by a declining tax ratio that hovered slightly below 10 percent 
of GDP (one of the lowest in the world). The share of trade in the economy also declined while Pakistan’s 
external reserves dipped to dangerously low levels.  Severe floods in 2010 and 2011 and continuing 
security crises stretched management capacities, especially at the provincial level. Significant declines in 
security expenditures failed to translate into increases in public sector development expenditure while 
energy and untargeted subsidies continued at high levels.   

9. 
Pakistan continued to lag in human development with insufficient progress to meet MDGs 
in education and health; however social protection measures were modernized and coverage 
improved.  Access to education remained low at all levels with only marginal increases in net enrollment 
ratios.  Disparities in gender, income, location and social groups continued to influence participation 
significantly. The primary completion rate remained extremely low and the limited data available suggest 
that poor learning outcomes persisted Improvement in health outcomes was slightly greater but still 
inadequate relative to the MDGs and Pakistan’s own goals.  Declines in child and infant mortality lagged 
behind those achieved elsewhere in the region while child and mother nutritional status continued to 
stagnate at unacceptably low levels.  High fertility rates persisted with contraceptive prevalence stagnant.  
Health service coverage improved in maternal care and immunization though not sufficiently to affect 
outcomes in the short term.  Both education and health expenditures remained extremely low.   

10. 
Significant improvements were made in Pakistan’s delivery of social protection services.  
Pro-poor social protection expenditures rose significantly during the CPS period to 0.79 percent of GDP 
in 2012, approaching the target of 0.9 percent of GDP set in PRSP II. The main safety net mechanism, the 
Benazir Income Support Program (BISP), developed a comprehensive objective targeting mechanism 
through a national household census thereby increasing coverage of the poor. The introduction of good 
governance and accountability arrangements propelled BISP to the forefront of internationally recognized 
good practice in delivering social protection; cash transfers to disaster victims also achieved global 
standards. Partly as a result, overall poverty in Pakistan appears to have declined significantly to 13.6 
percent in FY11, although data reliability remains an issue4.  

11. 
Infrastructure shortfalls, especially in power, worsened with significant adverse effects on 
economic performance.  Between 2010 and 2013, effective energy generation capacity stagnated while 
demand continued to grow resulting in peak demand (at current prices) shortfalls of around one-third for 
electricity and one-quarter for gas with economic losses estimated close to 10 percent of GDP, with 
untargeted energy subsidies around 2 percent of GDP. Transport, communications and water 
infrastructure also continued to underperform in both physical and financial dimensions.  Transport 
inefficiencies alone led to economic losses equivalent to 4.6 percent of GDP while public finances were 
strained by continuing financial losses of both railways and the national airline. Delays in 3G licensing 
also cost both the economy and government finances.  Productivity growth in agriculture, a key 
contributor to poverty reduction and broader structural change, has remained flat during the past decade.   

4  Pakistan will meet the poverty reduction MDG. Data issues include an outdated poverty line, which led the 
previous government to disallow any official poverty statistics (including the WB’s 2011 Poverty Assessment); 
however the current government has made the 2010/11 estimates official and appointed a commission to review 
poverty statistics.     

 
 
 
                                                            
Annex II 
Page 4 of 43 

12. 
Insecurity continued to exact a toll on economic and social well being, although there were 
some notable improvements in governance. Progress on institutional reforms such as Right to 
Information legislation, legal ombudsman, and public expenditure consultations demonstrated that 
government could be responsive to citizen concerns.  Access to border regions remained difficult with 
inevitable impact on development activities; nonetheless many pilot activities demonstrated the feasibility 
of scaling up development activities in conflict-affected regions with a strong emphasis on capacity and 
institution building.  The 18th Amendment to the Constitution and related National Finance Commission 
7th award fundamentally changed the institutional environment for service delivery with significant 
complications for public finance, institutional reform and regional equity.  Continued uncertainty 
regarding local government elections and implementation of the local governance systems in three out of 
four provinces added to this complexity.   

13. 

Pakistan’s performance during the CPS period fell short of Pakistan’s own goals in many 
areas and created many challenges for the implementation of the CPS and WBG support.   

III.   Program Outcomes of the WBG CPS 2010-2014 

14. 
A series of sector consultations and country team meetings resulted in the CPS Program Self-
Evaluation Summary (Table 1). The country team gave greater weight to outcome clusters associated with 
transformational activities. Data gaps weakened some outcome assessments, particularly those related to 
delayed or on-going WB operations and unspecified benchmarks characterized some qualitative 
outcomes.  While not minimizing these shortcomings, the country team was confident in making a 
reasonably robust overall assessment.  Overall, the Completion Report assesses the CPS program 
outcomes as moderately unsatisfactory.   

15. 
Pillar 1:  Improved Governance and Performance of the Public Sector - moderately 
unsatisfactory.  Outcomes related to improved macroeconomic management and the transformational 
goal of improved tax policy and administration were not achieved, notwithstanding adjustments made to 
the relevant deficit and tax indicators at the time of the CPSPR.  Outcomes in public sector management 
capacity and those in public expenditure management were mostly achieved building on the 
Government’s strong financial management systems.  Outcomes clustered under the heading of improved 
market governance were partially achieved with stronger performance in micro-finance (with important 
IFC contributions) than in the areas of labor and trade.  Implementation of the CPS under this pillar relied 
primarily on analytic support and limited investment lending as the planned series of policy-based 
operations could not move forward.  Public sector performance across all dimensions was significantly 
impacted by devolution under the 18th Amendment and the accompanying reallocation of public finances 
as mandated by the 7th National Finance Commission (NFC).   

16. WB support to strengthen macroeconomic management and tax administration contributed 
to deeper and broader understanding of the underlying issues but failed to stem continuing 
deterioration in fiscal and revenue outcomes.  The WB was unable to initiate the planned series of 
policy-based operations as the Government’s macroeconomic program came off-track already by mid-
2010.  Efforts to resuscitate the program were complicated by the economic and social shocks emanating 
from the 2010 and 2011 floods.  The WB played a major role in ameliorating the crisis through a highly 
collaborative Damage Needs Assessment followed by the mobilization of significant support for oil 
imports from restructured IDA credits ($300 from the unused portion of the 2005 Emergency Earthquake 
Credit) and technical and financial support to the cash transfer program for flood affected households.  
IFC also stepped up its investments in agri-business with $30m additional financing and facilitated access 
to finance to support MSMEs.  The implementation of the 18th Amendment and the 7th NFC award 
significantly reduced flexibility on the expenditure side. WB analytic work contributed to a better 
understanding of the need to reduce subsidies and raise tax revenue.  The CPSPR adjusted program 
outcome targets; but fiscal outcomes continued to fall short. The new Government entered into a program 

 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 5 of 43 

with the IMF in September, 2013 and the WB’s analytic work and policy dialogue helped lay the 
groundwork for a renewal of WB policy based support which took place towards the end of the CPS 
period with the preparation of DPCs focused on growth and energy reforms.   

17. 
Investment lending support to tax administration reforms failed to improve tax revenue 
performance.  The failure of the Tax Administration Reform Project (TARP) to lead to improved tax 
revenue performance underscored the limitations of administrative reforms in the absence of 
complementary policy and legal reforms.  The TARP ISR also detailed other shortcomings, which 
contributed to poor results including insufficient TA, underestimated implementation risks including the 
institutional and political environment, and inadequate monitoring and evaluation effort.  At the 
provincial level, IFC advisory services initiated work for streamlining General Sales Tax processes and 
improving private sector compliance in Punjab. 

18. 
A combination of investment lending, non-lending technical assistance (NLTA) and analytic 
work contributed to significant progress in public expenditure management and government 
accountability.  Investment lending to improve financial reporting and auditing (PIFRAI- II) supported 
the implementation of a world-class financial management system (FMIS) at the federal level leading to 
the achievement of almost all financial reporting targets and substantial progress procurement institutions 
and capacity.  The WB supported the use of country systems through the inclusion of fourteen WB 
projects in the FMIS.  Analytic support through public expenditure reviews and NLTA contributed to the 
full implementation of a medium term budgeting framework at the federal level and its initiation at the 
provincial level.  Although aggregate institutional ratings (WEF Global Competitiveness and WB CPIA) 
deteriorated slightly during the CPS period, institutions and systems of accountability received support 
from the WB Punjab Land Records Management and Information Systems project (LRMIS) and the 
MDTF Governance Support project with some notable achievements.  In Punjab the transformation of 
land records has already reached high levels of customer satisfaction with significant impact on the ability 
of households to manage their major asset more efficiently.  In KPK, pro-active advocacy and technical 
support contributed to international best practice Right to Information legislation (under development in 
Punjab as well) and other accountability initiatives, including proposed anti-corruption legislation, and the 
use of mobile devices to enhance citizen feedback and internal monitoring.   

19. Measures to improve the governance and performance of markets relied on WB analytic 
and advisory instruments with only partial success although related IFC investment and advisory 
services exceeded targets. In the absence of the intended policy-based lending, WB interventions 
consisted primarily of assessments (e.g. ICA, Doing-Business) and NLTA. Labor, trade and other product 
market outcomes were not significantly affected.  Measures, including IFC investments, to support 
financial sector deepening contributed to the growth of active micro-credit borrowers. IFC’s trade finance 
program, aimed primarily at SMEs, also expanded significantly, though partner banks faced the 
challenges of non-performing loans. IFC advisory services ramped up in areas of access to finance, 
investment climate, PPPs and sustainable business, exceeding targets in most areas. Two significant 
initiatives in this cluster of activities involved the extension of doing-business assessments to the sub-
national level and the heavy emphasis in WBG support on improving financial access for women 
entrepreneurs. IFC focused on gender based results through its investments and advisory programs, 
including enhancing the number and quality of women on boards, training of women entrepreneurs, a 
study on women-owned SMEs for financial institutions, and investments in microfinance and SME banks.  
The WB also contributed a key piece of analytic work on gender and access to finance.   

20. 
Pillar 2:  Improved Human Development and Reduced Vulnerability - moderately 
satisfactory.  The majority of outcomes in the education cluster were mostly achieved, although 
improvements in targeted indicators (net enrollment rates) were modest. Safety net outcomes were also 
mostly achieved with exceptional support to the use of the poverty score card and the computerized 
national identity card to improve targeting. Health outcomes were only partially achieved in spite of 

 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 6 of 43 

their relatively narrow focus on two vertical programs, polio and aids. Rural livelihoods outcomes were 
achieved though household impact was uncertain.  Lending played the lead role in the education sector 
and was prominent in all clusters while AAA made particularly prominent contributions to social safety 
nets and health.  Improved governance and accountability was a major focus of capacity building efforts.   

21. WB operational activities responded to decentralization challenges in education and 
broadened support beyond basic education to skills development and tertiary levels. The CPSPR re-
focused education outcomes on net primary enrolment in Punjab and Sindh where WB operations were 
concentrated.  These outcomes were met in Punjab but not in Sindh.5  Overall, enrolment gains were 
modest relative to Pakistan’s needs and MDG goals; although Pakistan’s relatively high population 
growth rate did put additional pressure on net enrollments.  The substantial lending for education (an 
aggregate portfolio of $1.2 billion in education) was structured to disburse against a set of quantitative 
and qualitative indicators (DLIs) that supported measures to improve sector governance, increase 
accountability and introduce quality criteria.  Achievements in these areas marked good progress toward 
the milestones identified in the CPS.6  The focus on DLIs strengthened collaboration with key 
development partners (notably DFID) and, especially in the second generation of projects, involved 
counterparts at the provincial level contributing to capacity and institutional development.  During the 
CPS period, the WB also broadened its education interventions to include skills development and tertiary 
education.  Although data on anticipated outcomes was not yet available,7 these operations signaled the 
intention of the WB to provide greater support to the key issue of jobs growth. 

22. 
Analytical and advisory work supported by strategic, timely financial support contributed 
to Pakistan’s ability to protect vulnerable citizens and help households recover from natural 
disasters.  Building on Pakistan’s system of unique citizen identification numbers and poverty score 
cards, WB inputs contributed to a world class safety net mechanism through BISP, currently benefiting 
4.9 million households.8. The use of cash transfers to help 1.2 million families recover from the 2010/11 
floods created an internationally recognized benchmark for disaster relief, including best practice in donor 
coordination.  Innovations in FM included the use of debit cards and electronic verification systems to 
replace the archaic postal money order system.  A monthly reconciliation system monitored fund flows 
and internal audits covered cash transfer payments. This resulted in a high percentage of beneficiaries 
getting money in an efficient and transparent manner.  

23. 
Experience from the programs on polio and AIDs combined with the impact of the 18th 
amendment contributed to a shift in WB health sector support to a broader systems approach 
embracing cross-sectoral challenges such as nutrition.  The CPS foresaw little additional operational 
support in the health sector beyond carryover activities related to vertical programs combatting polio and 
a national initiative against AIDS.  A high profile outbreak of polio led to additional funding to polio 
eradication and targets were achieved; but formulation of a national AIDS project was stalled and 
replaced by a provincial intervention in Punjab (a consequence of the 18th Amendment) necessitating a 
revised outcome in the CPS PR.  WB interventions were incorporated into a more systematic approach to 
the health sector in two provinces (Punjab and KPK) linked to a strategic health public expenditure 

5 The impact of the 2010/2011 floods especially in Sindh province affected school access and is likely to have 
affected the reliability of data on school attendance. 
6 IEG ICR reviews of the Punjab and Sindh Education Sector Projects confirmed progress across a broad range of 
education management outcomes, rating both operations as moderately satisfactory. 
7 Project support to tertiary education met with bottlenecks early on due to ownership issues and then later on 
account of the 18th amendment, there were pressures to make the higher education commission at the federal level 
redundant in favor of provincial management of the sector.   
8  An estimated 7.2 million households are eligible for assistance.  The shortfall will be progressively closed as 
households receive their unique identification number. 

 
 
 
                                                            
Annex II 
Page 7 of 43 

review; The broader approach to the sector developed during the CPS period also led to the preparation of 
WB’s Immunization Support Program (going beyond Polio) and to a multi-donor “Partnership for 
Improved Nutrition Program.”  Both initiatives focused on mothers and children health in line with the 
CPSPR. 

24. 
Building on a long history of engagement with Pakistan’s Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF), 
WB support helped shift PPAF focus to livelihoods in the poorest districts/regions, building 
linkages to the private sector and strengthening PPAF capacity in monitoring and management 
systems.  At the beginning of the CPS period, the WB had entered its second decade of support to PPAF 
with a third project.  The emphasis in this operation broadened from a primary focus on microfinance to 
rural institution building for sustainable livelihoods, especially through linking community and farmer 
organizations with the private sector and with government line departments.  CPS outcome targets for 
such linkages were fully met.  In addition the WB encouraged PPAF to go deeper into the poor regions 
and develop a broader institutional perspective, building capacity for monitoring and evaluation, 
introducing management systems, and encouraging a more integrated approach to PPAF activities.  The 
WB also supported PPAF to develop its role in promoting cross cutting issues, notably gender and 
nutrition. A key lesson for a poverty-focused institution such as PPAF is the importance of developing a 
strong results framework with a continuous M&E feedback loop to determine better what is working and 
what isn’t and to operationalize evolving perspectives on poverty (such as the role of inclusion).   

25. 
Pillar 3:  Improving Infrastructure to Support Growth - moderately unsatisfactory 
although IFC exceeded its investment targets in energy, transport and logistics.  Outcomes in the key 
sector of energy, which emerged as the key constraint to Pakistan’s prosperity and growth prospects, were 
not achieved.  Transport, irrigation and agriculture outcomes were partially achieved while urban and 
environment outcomes were mostly achieved.  Lending was the primary vehicle for WBG support under 
this pillar. Analytic and advisory activities made important contributions in agriculture and urban and 
were the sole source of WB support on the environment while IFC pursued an active investment program 
in alternative energy sources to support its focus on climate change.  Informal TA, often linked to project 
implementation support was also an important contribution particularly in energy and irrigation.     

26. 
The WBG ramped up financial support to the energy sector although improvements in 
sector performance remained elusive; several investments by IFC supporting alternative energy 
sources and privatization had promising results.  After a long hiatus in direct support to the energy 
sector in Pakistan (1995-2008), the WB renewed lending first to electricity transmission and distribution 
(ETDP) in 2008 and to gas distribution and hydropower generation (Tarbela IV extension) in 2012.  Both 
distribution projects have fallen short of expectations. Tarbela IV extension (which accounts for about 
two-thirds of the WB’s approximately $1.2 billion in financial commitments to the sector) has started 
satisfactorily in its early construction phase.  Recognizing long-standing institutional constraints and the 
impact of the 2010/11 floods, the CPSPR modified outcome targets related to transmission and 
distribution losses, load-shedding and financial performance; but even these more modest targets were 
missed.   On the positive side, WB informal technical and analytic support was markedly successful in 
rebuilding relationships with government counterparts and other development partners in the sector. , IFC 
contributed to private sector innovation through pilot and precedent-setting activities, including wind 
power, waste-to-energy and run-of-the-river hydro in addition to low-cost thermal. IFC’s investment in 
the Karachi Electric utility company helped ensure the success of that privatization and was deemed by 
the client as best practice in terms of hands-on financial and institutional support. IFC’s combined 
investments including supervision of the only privatized integrated utility in the power sector are expected 
to contribute to about 1,640 MW by 2016.  By the end of the CPS period, sector dialogue and 
coordination with key partners improved sufficiently so that the WB was able to initiate the preparation of 
a DPC focusing on energy reforms linked to the eventual achievement of program outcomes.  

 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 8 of 43 

27. 
The WBG maintained engagement in the transport sector through contributions to 
construction activities; but support to logistics and trade facilitation was less successful.  Both the 
WB and IFC supported rehabilitation of berths at Karachi port;9 but the CPS outcome relating to reduced 
container transit time remained unmeasured pending the completion of the relevant project. IFC exceeded 
its target with four investments in container and bulk shipping, projects that are currently performing 
well. However WB support to trade and transport facilitation (TTF), which should have been the core of 
institutional reforms to promote a more open economy, proved less satisfactory.  The WB’s TTF project 
encountered serious implementation obstacles due to a shift in national priorities and a complex 
institutional environment lacking reform champions.10 Although not included as a CPS outcome, the 
WB’s on-going support to highway rehabilitation (with additional financing fully disbursed during the 
CPS period) contributed to notable improvements in road condition, road safety and travel time.   

28. 
Continuing assistance for irrigation and water management combined with AAA to step up 
engagement on the broader issues of agriculture sector reform and growth.  On-going operations 
during the CPS period continued the long-standing WB focus on upgrading and improving irrigation 
infrastructure in the Indus basin and supporting water management institutions in Punjab, Sindh and 
Balochistan.  The targeted equity improvements in water delivery performance remained undocumented 
pending the completion of WB projects; but proxies indicated improvements in system reliability and 
efficiency.  O&M and financial recovery target assessments were also pending. The same portfolio of 
activities also contributed to the use of improved agriculture techniques as indicated by increased 
cropping intensities and crop yields11.During the CPS period the WB responded to a Government request 
to help accelerate agricultural growth and productivity.  This led to a number of AAA inputs and 
preparation of Punjab Irrigated Agriculture (FY13) and Sindh Agriculture projects (FY15). IFC initiated 
several activities to strengthen its agriculture and agribusiness portfolio including three investments.  

29. 
Good progress in urban service delivery and management benefited from innovative WB 
operational support in Punjab supplemented by technical assistance and sector analysis.  WB efforts 
focused on institution building for improved service delivery in all towns and cities in Punjab linking 
financial support to agreed service delivery indicators chosen by the municipalities themselves. Punjab’s 
five largest cities made considerable headway toward managing each metropolitan area and its service 
providers through a single authority with accountability and appropriate managerial and fiscal autonomy 

30. 
Environmental policy formulation in the public sector and demonstration investments by 
the private sector received timely support from the WBG, though challenges remain in 
mainstreaming responses to environment challenges.  WB supported a dispersed institutional structure 
with analytical and advisory activities, focusing on the formulation and implementation of a national 
strategy culminating in the cabinet approval and launch of a National Climate Change Policy in 2013. IFC 
placed great emphasis on climate change, especially through its program of energy investments in 
renewable sources.  IFC exceeded its targets in this area and has built a strong pipeline for continued 
investments in renewable energy sources.  IFC also provided key advisory services linked to guidelines 
for sustainable energy finance and renewable energy sources.  

31. 
Pillar 4:  Improving Security and Reducing the Threat of Conflict - moderately satisfactory.  
This rating takes into account that activities took place in areas significantly affected by conflict.  As post-
conflict activities, results were assessed at an earlier stage of the results chain largely focusing on the 
achievement of project implementation targets.  With this caveat, outcomes clustered under the objective 
of increased employment and livelihood opportunities for conflict-affected areas were mostly achieved 

9 IFC withdrew from its investment due to the inability of its partner to meet the necessary conditions.   
10 The Government commented that the TTFP was overly complex, involving too many implementing agencies.   
11 Data from Sindh and Balochistan only. 

 
 
 
                                                            
Annex II 
Page 9 of 43 

and increased responsiveness and effectiveness of the state were partially achieved, as delays in the 
initiation and implementation of the relevant projects suggest caution in translating project inputs to 
sustained results.  While MDTF-financed projects were the primary instrument supporting Pillar IV 
outcomes, AAA activities (also MDTF-supported) helped lay the basis for project support.  

32. 
After a slow start, MDTF supported projects are making good progress and largely on 
track to achieving the set objectives in the CPSPR. The slow start-up period for the MDTF was 
effectively utilized in developing a stronger analytic base through a public expenditure review in KPK 
and a Development Needs Assessment in Balochistan.  Even more important, extensive NLTA and 
project preparation activities created strong relationships with implementing agencies and local 
stakeholders that contributed to progress on the portfolio.  The 2013 annual donor review cited these 
activities as contributing significantly to the goal of rebuilding confidence in government and the state, 
which they consider as an essential step in achieving a lasting peace.  While results related to employment 
opportunities and community infrastructure did not fully achieve the targets set in the CPSPR results 
framework, progress has accelerated since the CPSPR and activities are on course to achieve these goals.  

IV.  

Performance of the World Bank Group 

33. 
The Completion Report assesses the performance of the World Bank Group as good.  This rating 
reflects both the design of the CPS aligned to the Pakistan’s needs and the effectiveness of the WBG 
response to adapting to challenging and difficult circumstances during the implementation of the CPS by 
strengthening partnerships and analytic underpinnings while building a stronger pipeline. The WBG was 
overly optimistic in the initial design of the CPS with disappointing results in the transformative areas 
that the CPS designated as high priority.  The CPSPR reflect these developments, and put the WBG on 
track to build a strong pre- and post- election dialogue that enabled it to engage strongly with the new 
Government through both AAA and a series of policy DPCs.  

34. 
The CPS design was well aligned with Pakistan’s development priorities; but weaknesses 
emerged in the original design of some WB interventions as country circumstances evolved.  The 
CPS mapped well into the priorities of the Pakistan’s PRSPII (2009) with corresponding emphases on 
macroeconomic stability, protecting the poor and vulnerable, human development, energy, agricultural 
productivity, private sector involvement in infrastructure through PPP and improved governance.  The 
CPS explicitly recognized the security challenges facing Pakistan and translated WB support for the 2009 
Post Crisis Needs Assessment (PCNA) into a full pillar under the strategy.  The CPS also built on a key 
lesson from the previous CAS by increasing the focus on long-standing structural issues - designating tax 
revenue, power availability, and security/conflict as transformational issues.  While this built greater risk 
into the program, it correspondingly raised its potential development impact.  However, weaknesses in the 
design of WB interventions emerged soon in the CPS period.  The off-track Government program 
precluded the planned series of DPCs, which were the cornerstone of WB support to the transformational 
objectives in tax reform and energy.  Investment operations in these areas were unable to deliver the 
intended results without policy leverage.  With regard to the security objective, the direct WB role was 
limited to administering the MDTF after a shift in government priorities led to the cancellation of an 
approved IDA credit12.  This left the MDTF on its own relatively limited resources and reduced the 
“footprint” of security/conflict related activities within the WB.   

12 The IDA credit focused on the provision of cash transfers to poverty affected families and had been prepared and 
negotiated with representatives of the KPK and FATA authorities; however after approval, the Provincial Core 
Committee requested the WB to shift the financing to infrastructure.  The WB could not comply under the approved 
objectives of the project and consequently the Government requested its cancellation. Thereafter the provincial 
government focused on grant support, thereby limiting opportunities to leverage complimentary IDA financing. 

 
 
 
                                                            
Annex II 
Page 10 of 43 

35. 
The CPS tackled the perennial issue of selectivity explicitly but disconnects emerged with 
the adequacy of interventions under some objectives and also failed to consider adequate mitigation 
measures for some key risks.  The CPS proposed a hierarchy of transformational, core and contingent 
activities defined by sector and also indicated a number of sectors in which the WB would not expand 
lending activities. This sector specific approach limited achievements of several CPS objectives and 
dialogue with the authorities. CPS performance could have been facilitated better by selectivity criteria 
that put more emphasis on WB comparative advantage and project development impact rather than 
including or excluding particular sectors. The CPS also took insufficient account of the impact of the 18th 
Amendment and 7th FC award on the dissolution of federal ministries and the challenges of aligning CPS 
objectives with WB instruments at the provincial level.  In recognizing the macroeconomic risks, the CPS 
failed to consider mitigation options if the planned DPCs couldn’t proceed.13 The CPS also 
underestimated the extent of the capacity and institution building necessary to mitigate risks related the 
implementation of devolution.  WB sector teams and provincial authorities both cited capacity gaps at the 
provincial level as a key constraint to achieving a higher level of performance under the CPS. Although 
the CPS failed to anticipate the risks of natural disasters, the CPSPR took these into account and linked 
mitigation measures to program flexibility and enhanced preparedness planning.   

36. 
The quality of the CPS Results Framework improved in terms of less reliance on process 
indicators but realism and relevance of outcomes and indicators fell short.  The CPS Results 
Framework identified 17 outcome clusters, 42 outcome indicators and 60 milestones. Only six indicators 
relied on process measures: all others were intermediate outcomes of varying impact on or relevance to 
the CPS higher-level objectives.  Lack of realism in relation to available data, inadequate linkage to WBG 
interventions or lack of progress toward outcome targets resulted in revisions to about 30 percent of the 
original outcomes in the CPSCR. Nine additional outcomes were added linked to these revisions. Many of 
the new and revised outcomes “retrofitted” to on-going WB activities.  The resulting matrix was highly 
complex, difficult to monitor and consequently unhelpful in evaluating overall progress toward CPS 
outcomes.  Although the results framework covered IFC activities as part of the array of CPS 
implementation instruments, IFC input into the formulation of outcomes and milestones was not evident.  

37. 
In the implementation of the CPS, the WBG tackled significant program management 
challenges. Through an intensive upgrading of office and country security measures and sustained 
recruitment the international staff complement in Islamabad increased from one to twelve by the end of 
the CPS period including the key positions of lead economist and operations advisor.  This reinforced a 
pro-active approach to managing portfolio quality that included biannual federal and provincial portfolio 
reviews.  Third party monitoring provided additional oversight over MDTF activities in the border areas.  
As a result the number of projects at risk declined from 20 percent in FY11 to 15 percent in FY14 and 
commitments at risk from 27 percent to 13 percent over the same period. The use of DLIs at the 
provincial level encouraged mainstreaming fiduciary capacity and the WB aligned 12 projects with 
country information systems with two more in the pipeline.  IFC also made significant contributions to 
corporate governance with both its advisory services and in the implementation of its investment 
programs.  Overall, safeguard and fiduciary activities were well integrated into the WBG program.   

38. 
The WBG used analytic and advisory assistance (AAA) effectively both in project 
development and as direct support to CPS objectives.  AAA was the sole instrument supporting 
over one-third of CPS outcomes across all four CPS pillars (Table 3). The high profile and wide 
dissemination given to the CEM, Finding the Path to Job-enhancing Growth, and to the set of policy 
notes prepared for the new Government in 2013, Pakistan, the Transformative Path, helped to build a 

13 The fiscal bind created by the combination of the 18th Amendment and the award of the 7th National Finance 
Commission imposed constraints on federal finances that reduced the options to undertaking unpopular, politically 
difficult fiscal reforms quickly and drastically or missing program targets.  The government chose the latter.   

 
 
 
                                                            
Annex II 
Page 11 of 43 

broader understanding of reform options and to lay the groundwork for Government actions leading to an 
IMF program and the renewed prospect of WB policy support.   The Flood Damage Needs Assessment 
and the Post-Crisis Needs Assessment were key inputs, along with a Poverty Assessment, Safety Net 
review and less formal reports, to WB contributions to BISP and other measures (such as the cash transfer 
program for flood victims) to protect vulnerable households.  The two needs assessments were also major 
vehicles for enhancing partnerships with other development agencies.  Sector and regional PERs 
effectively laid the groundwork for expanding operational activities more strategically in health and in 
KPK.  During the CPS period, IFC’s advisory services program in Pakistan grew significantly to become 
one of the largest in the region, with over 40 projects and a funding commitment of over $10 million, an 
increase of two-thirds over the previous period. Advisory services contributed to enhancing access to 
finance for MSMEs, building capacity of small businesses, improving corporate governance, creating a 
better business environment, and encouraging mediation. In addition, IFC carried out a Jobs Study with a 
leading bank to assess the impact of access to finance on growth and job creation in SMEs. Overall, WBG 
AAA was directly relevant to the CPS objectives and contributed significantly to CPS results.   

39. 
Coordination with development partners improved significantly during the CPS period.  At 
the onset of CPS implementation, other development partners were looking to the WB to provide 
leadership in responding to both the security crisis and back-to-back flood disasters and in coordinating 
that response with a more effective policy dialogue with the Government.  The Government insisted that 
resources devoted to crisis response be additional to amounts pledged some years earlier in Tokyo in the 
context of the Friends of Democratic Pakistan forum.  The Government was also unwilling to link 
(stalled) reforms to additional resources and at the same time was engaged in the initial stages of 
implementing the 18th Amendment, which put crisis response burdens more directly on provincial 
governments. Flood damage and foreign exchange shortages associated with both conflict and floods had 
also exacerbated Pakistan’s long-standing energy crisis leading to the creation of a special energy task 
force headed by the ADB.  WB relationships with other partners and the Government in energy issues had 
suffered from technical and analytic lapses and needed rebuilding. Responding to this demanding 
situation, the WB mobilized a large multi-sectoral team to coordinate needs assessments and in particular 
brought in top global expertise to develop an early recovery cash transfer program for flood victims. The 
WB team mobilized broad support from both development partners and the concerned Government 
agencies, and coordinated the development partners’ support to the cash transfers program, which covered 
over one million affected households.   As coordinator of the MDTF, the WB played a pivotal role in the 
overall donor response to the security crisis. A subsequent donor review of the functioning of the MDTF 
appreciated the progress and highlighted areas for improvement to which the WB effectively responded.14  
On the energy front, the WB took decisive steps to strengthen its technical position and work closely with 
the ADB and other DPs to development a coordinated position on energy sector issues.15  In addition the 
WB helped mobilize and coordinate development partners’ support to several cross-cutting and 
challenging areas including: i) chairing. the Inter-Agency Group on Gender and Development from 
January - June 2013 and developing a gender policy note for the new government; ii) providing leadership 
in nutrition and social expenditures at the D-10 forum leading to the Government’s adoption of the 
Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) framework16 and to provincial PERs to improve efficiency and composition 
of social spending. IFC strengthened collaboration with DPs in the areas of access to finance and 
investment climate with advisory services and programs. 

14 MDTF partners confirmed their satisfaction with the WB response to the donor review, though some noted that 
the WB could have been more pro-active in responding to donor concerns prior to the review.   
15 ADB and UASID both confirmed the effectiveness of current working relationships in the energy sector.   
16 The SUN movement is an alliance of over 100 partners from member countries, international donors and 
governmental agencies and UN agencies. It seeks commitment and actions by member countries to address under-
nutrition, scaling up cost-effective nutrition interventions. 

 
 
 
                                                            
Annex II 
Page 12 of 43 

40. 
The IFC and WB worked to strengthen synergies during the CPS period.  With an 
investment program approaching $2 billion representing an increase of approximately 50 percent over the 
previous four years, IFC emerged during the CPS period as a leading provider of foreign exchange 
financing to Pakistan’s private sector.  While IFC faced institutional constraints on its ability to expand in 
priority areas (such as SMEs) due to high country risk ratings for Pakistan and the inability to lend in 
domestic currency, IFC was nevertheless able to exceed its investment targets across its operating units.  
In line with the CPS priorities, IFC stepped up its engagement with the power sector and other 
infrastructure, including transport, ports, and logistics with the aim to support the modernization and 
efficiency of the entire sector value chain.  IFC continued to support access to finance through its 
international trade finance program- the GTFP, and working with banks to develop SME-specific 
instruments, also focusing on women and rural clients.  In addition IFC explored possible investments in 
health and education in line with Pillar 2 of the CPS.  Parallel financing between IFC and the WB proved 
problematic due to differing time lines and operating procedures.  However management commitment to 
a stronger strategic alliance improved coordination and led to better exchange of information at sector and 
task team levels.  

41. WBG implementation of the CPS responded strongly both to the challenging situation at 
the outset of the CPS and to changing circumstances during the CPS period. Particularly notable in 
this effort was a program of NLTA around key economic issues during the political transition both before 
and after the June, 2013 elections.  Outreach to youth, academia, media, politicians, and policy makers 
with the participation of WB and global experts significantly increased the WB’s contribution to 
broadening the development dialogue in Pakistan. AAA, NLTA and policy dialogue paid dividends with 
the renewal of policy support to macroeconomic and energy objectives.  The WB also responded flexibly 
to changing circumstances in sectors that the original CPS had precluded in its sectoral approach to 
selectivity.  As a result, the CPS period closed with strong prospects for effective WB support to 
development objectives in health, agriculture, transport and governance. As the implications of the 18th 
Amendment and 7th NFC award became more apparent, the WB increased its analytic work and 
implementation support to the provinces and adjusted CPS outcomes to reflect the increased provincial 
focus.  IFC responded to the volatile and difficult operating environment in Pakistan by increasing its 
short-term finance interventions, especially through trade finance support to the private sector. 

42. 
The CPS Progress Report (PR) was a timely and pertinent update of the CPS.  The CPSPR 
was prepared on a timely schedule early in FY12 and appropriately documented the impact of changing 
country circumstances on the CPS program and outcomes.  The CPSPR also extended the CPS timeframe 
through FY14 to align better with Pakistan’s political cycle and IDA16, documenting an increase in total 
WB resources available to Pakistan from $3.7 billion over the original three years to an estimated $5.9 
over five years.  The PR proposed a program of fewer but larger operations, increased engagement with 
the provinces and increased performance based operations.  The first two goals were achieved: i) average 
project size increased from approximately $115 million in FY11 with eight operations (not counting the 
flood emergency credit and two additional financing operations) to an average of almost $200 million 
(not counting IBRD and two additional financing operations) for eight operations spread over the three 
years following the PR and ii) lending to the provinces (primarily Punjab) increased to approximately 50 
percent of total commitments in FY12-14 as compared to less than 10 percent in FY11. The proportion of 
performance based lending using DLIs also increased from 29 percent of total commitments in FY11 to 
34 percent midway through FY14.  The PR also reviewed the risks identified by the CPS noting that 
overall risks had increased particularly those associated with political transition, macroeconomic 
performance and program implementation.  Mitigation measures identified by the PR concentrated on 
intensive engagement and dialogue, especially at the provincial level and front-loading IDA assistance to 
support critical expenditures on social spending and growth enhancing infrastructure.  This risk and 
mitigation assessment provided a more realistic framework for CPS implementation.   

 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 13 of 43 

V.   

Lessons, Learning and Recommendations  

43. 
Detailed lessons arising from the individual output clusters are reported in the relevant column of 
the Summary of CPS Program Self-Evaluation (Table 1).  Broader, more generic lessons include those 
drawn from the previous CAS CR re-validated by experience during the current CPS and lessons newly 
generated from the current experience.   

44. 

Lessons revalidated from the previous CR include the following:    

 A focus on long-term strategic issues take time.  Progress on core long term issues, such as 
fiscal reforms/tax policy and energy is very likely to be uneven because problems are deeply 
embedded in political economy with structural, institutional parameters. During much of the CPS 
period, WB efforts on fiscal reforms/tax policy and energy made little or uneven progress.  But 
over time, these efforts laid the foundation for more productive engagements, which carried over 
to lay the basis for progress during the next CPS period. IFC’s leadership and confidence 
boosting role helped support the private sector and attract foreign investors at a difficult time in 
Pakistan.  This highlights the importance of remaining engaged and playing a counter-cyclical 
role even in difficult and volatile situations. The sustained improvement in PFM and the 
development of a world-class financial management system over the last 15 years is testament to 
the value of supporting long-term strategic issues. 

 Flexibility is essential in taking a long-term view and adapting to uneven progress.  WB needs to 
adapt to changing circumstances using all available instruments, remaining open to opportunities.   

 Enhanced partnerships – coordinating donor responses can make a big difference.  
Coordination on responses to challenges during this CPS period -floods, social protection and 
MDTF, energy -- underscores the value of partnerships with stakeholders.  Such partnerships help 
to build a common narrative and maintain focus on long-term issues. 

 Take a realistic approach to capacity building and institutional reform-traditional 
approaches to capacity building have only been moderately effective.  Enhanced project 
implementation support, just-in-time analyses and NLTA (including IFC advisory services), rapid 
response facilities, and frequent presence “on the ground” have all contributed to capacity and 
institution building; but staff turnover in the Pakistan civil service is so frequent that long term 
benefits remain elusive.  In such circumstances, focusing more on improving “systems” than 
“training” could be more effective.  Outreach to non-governmental parties, as the WB did prior to 
the elections, can pay capacity dividends. Institutionalizing self-paced online courses and regular 
training of operational staff in partnership with local institutions such as IBA, LUMS, could help.   

 Timely, reliable M&E – There is a need to focus more on M&E and results reporting from 
the start.  Data on many sector/project implementation indicators is only collected at project 
completion, too late to provide information for mid-course correction.  Systemic reviews of M&E 
status for the CPS could be useful; but only if there is a strong commitment to mainstream. 

45. 

In addition to these “revalidated” lessons, new learning from the FY10-14 CPS included:  

 Strengthened attention at the province level is a necessity.  Devolution (18th Amendment and 
7th NFC award) fundamentally changed operational modalities. The WBG has increased its 
outreach to provinces, enhancing the potential for bringing services closer to the people but also 
raising challenges of regional inclusiveness, capacity building and institutional development at 
state and local levels, and ensuring partner harmonization across provinces.  Engagement with the 
federal government should support national standards, guidelines, targets and regulatory 

 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 14 of 43 

frameworks to guide provincial governments and ensure that national goals (such as MDGs) 
remain on target.  The WBG will need to explore options for engaging in “lagging” provinces;  

 Pakistan is a high risk – high reward environment. Risk analysis and mitigation strategies 
need greater attention. Risk-reward trade-offs could be more explicit in program design and 
mitigation strategies could take a more central role both in design and implementation, enhancing 
the importance of M&E and more frequent program re-alignment as experience accumulates. 

 Program selectivity needs continuous management attention – CPS experience suggests 
identification of selectivity criteria at the level of CPS program objectives (not sector activities) 
taking into account development impact and WBG comparative advantage with frequent reality 
checks during implementation is a useful way forward.  This approach confirms that there is no 
substitute for strong country management engagement and accountability to promote and enforce 
selectivity.  CPS pillars and outcome “clusters” should be supported through the full range of WB 
instruments if possible, taking advantage of opportunities to promote integrated, multi-sector 
approaches to achieving CPS outcomes. 

 A simpler CPS Results Framework with limited numbers of outcomes would help keep the 
engagement focused. A simpler results matrix would also make it easier to monitor and report on 
simple results everyone understands and remembers. Country management and the country team 
should apply selectivity stringently to the number of outcomes and objectives for which the CPS 
will be accountable and then determine the appropriate mix of sectors and instruments to achieve 
these goals, undertake frequent monitoring and evaluation of the progress toward those goals and 
identify adjustments to the program accordingly.  This approach would imply greater integration 
across sectors, proactive project restructuring and cancellations for non-performing projects. 

 Success in transformational activities requires that institution building and support to 
reforms go hand in hand (a key lesson of the Tax Administration and Reform project).  This 
will inevitably create a challenging environment when lack of progress precludes policy-based 
lending.  Such circumstances may require reassessing the mix of instruments or their sequence. 

 Just-in-time AAA and NLTA demonstrated high pay-off and could figure more explicitly in 
the results framework through mechanisms such as rapid response facilities. 

 

 

IFC has been able to ramp up support to the private sector even in difficult circumstances.  
Increased short-term trade finance. Investments in infrastructure, especially in low cost and 
renewable power, and the use of private sector networks to leverage policy dialogue were all 
effective.  IFC’s confidence boosting role helped support the private sector and attract foreign 
investors at a difficult time in Pakistan. The WB and IFC could further pursue these ‘counter-
cyclical” efforts as part of their joint outreach efforts. 

IFC-WB collaboration, built around an explicit agreement on joint priorities holds promise.  
Keys to success included a strong field presence with co-location, regular communication at all 
levels, and appropriate sequencing of collaborative activities. 

Annex Tables: 

Table 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-Evaluation  
Table 2: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY10-14) 
Table 3: Planned Non Lending Services and Actual deliveries (FY10-14) 

 
 
 
 
Table 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-Evaluation 

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

Outcome Pillar 1: Improved Governance and Performance of Public Sector 
Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

Annex II 
Page 15 of 43 

1.1: Improved Macroeconomic Management 
Rating: Not Achieved 
1.Fiscal deficit target (including 
grants) is at or below 5.5  percent in 
2013-14, down from 6.6  percent of 
GDP in 2010-11(Revised PR) 

Milestones:  
 Expenditure levels consistent 
with macro stability 
 Strategy for restructuring or 
privatisation of public sector 
enterprises developed 
 At least one public sector 
enterprise restructured and/or 
privatised 

 Not achieved; fiscal deficit estimated 
at 8.0 percent of GDP in 2012-13 and 
projected at 7.8 percent in 2013-14. 
(IMF Article IV baseline scenario) 
with IMF 2013-14 revised program 
target of 5.2 percent  
 On the expenditure side, untargeted 
subsidies remain a key issue 
especially those in the power sector, 
which have remained constant at 2 
percent of GDP since 2010.  
 The failure to privatize any State 
Owned Enterprises (SOEs) since 2007 
has contributed to continued budget 
losses and lack of potential non-tax 
revenues.  Government currently 
designing restructuring plan for 40 
SOEs with some steps taken to 
improve SOE governance and 
procurement. 
1.2: Strengthened Tax Policy and Administration 
Rating: Not Achieved 
2.Federal Tax to GDP ratio 
improved to at least 10  percent of 
GDP (from 9.4  percent of GDP in 
2010-11 by 2013-14)  (Revised PR) 

 

 Not achieved:  Tax revenue to GDP 
ratio estimated at 9.7 percent in 2012-
13 and is projected at 9.8 percent in 
2013-14 by IMF Article IV in baseline 
scenarios.  IMF revised program target 
for 2013-14 is 10.6 percent 
 Tax compliance audits not 
implemented systematically 

Milestones:  
 Risk-based tax compliance 
management implemented (tax 
payer audits reintroduced, 

Completed AAA: 
 Country Economic 
Memorandum (CEM) (2013) 
 Series of Policy Notes (FY 13) 
 Poverty Assessment Update 
(FY11, FY12) 
 Poverty Monitoring (FY 11) 
 PPP Assistance (FY 10, FY 11) 
 Private Sector – Planning 
Commission  TF (FY 11) 
On-going AAA:  
 Poverty Update II (FY 14) 
 SOE Reforms (FY 14) 
 Trade Finance (FY 14) 
 Sub-national Fiscal Policy 
Notes (FY 14) 

 

In the absence of lending operations, 
continuous engagement through 
advisory services together with non-
lending technical assistance has been 
well-received and contributed to 
richer understanding of issues; but 
has had little impact on outcomes 
during CPS period though arguably 
helped lay groundwork for current 
IMF program and laid groundwork 
for DPCs under preparation. 
 The WB should be cautious in 
selecting higher-level country 
outcomes as CPS program targets 
given political economy risks. 

Completed Lending: 
 Tax Administration Reform 
Project (TARP) 
Completed AAA/ Advisory 
 Pakistan Tax Policy Report 
 Federal Expenditure Review    
(FY 10) 
IFC Technical assistance to 
Punjab Revenue Authority for 

 

 Reforms of tax administration and 
tax policy have to be undertaken in 
tandem to enhance revenues.  
 Assessing tax administration reform 
by enhanced revenue is insufficient 
in capturing the full set of results; 
such indicators may lead managers 
to undertake ad hoc and/or short-
term measures to enhance revenues 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

enforcement efforts stepped up) 
 Broad-based VAT introduced 

 VAT not introduced 
 Punjab introduced Reformed General 
Sales Tax (RGST) in 2011 and Sindh 
introduced RGST on services. 

streamlining GST processes and 
compliance for private sector   
(FY 10) 

1.3: Strengthened Public Expenditure, Financial and Procurement Management 
Rating: Mostly Achieved 
3. Medium Term Budget Framework 
(MTBF) functional at the federal 
level and launched at the provincial 
level 

4. Increased timeliness of 
government financial data: in-year 
reports within 10 days of month 
end; year-end reports within 3 
months of year-end. 

5. Improved quality and timeliness 
of government audits: audit reports 
consistent with ISA completed 
within 7 months of-year end 

 Mostly achieved: MTBF is being 
implemented in all federal ministries. 
All frameworks, budgets and 
strategies prepared at the federal level 
are ratified by the Cabinet on an 
annual basis.  
 MTBF implemented in KPK since 
2011 (with initial DFID 
support).Annual budgets and 
strategies are prepared and ratified by 
the cabinet on a regular basis. MTBF 
introduced in Punjab but not sustained 
following initial ADB support. The 
implementation of MTBF is being 
piloted in Sindh.  
 Financial reporting target achieved. 

On-going Lending: 
 Second Project for Improvement 
of Financial Reporting and 
Auditing (PIFRA – II) – closing 
date extended till Dec 31, 14  
 PIFRA II Additional Financing 
– closing date extended till Dec 
31, 14 
Completed AAA: 
 Public Expenditure Review (FY 
2010) 
 Financial Sector Assessment 
Update (FY 2010) 
 Regional Conference on 
Economic Stabilization and 

Annex II 
Page 16 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 
but do little to change the overall 
administrative structures. 
 Establishing IT systems for 
improved tax administration and 
collection needs continued dialogue 
on institutional reform and business 
process re-engineering to ensure that 
systems are utilised. Continuity of 
the Bank’s task team also necessary 
for sustained focus on bigger picture. 
It is Important to have flexible and 
results-orientated lending 
instruments supporting a tax reform 
strategy with sequencing of actions, 
recognition of political economy 
factors, provision of technical 
assistance and sustained policy 
dialogue.  Technical assistance 
requires ownership from the key 
institutions involved.  

 

 

 PFM reforms need long-term 
support and consolidation across 
government levels to lead to ultimate 
goal of improved service delivery.   
18th Amendment led to significant 
capacity gaps at provincial levels 
particularly in line departments.    
 PFM reforms can benefit from 
governance initiatives (e.g. 
increasing transparency and 
accountability) as demonstrated in 
KPK.  
 Building broad ownership essential 
to sustaining PFM reforms after 
donor support for initial 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 17 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 
introduction. 
 Greater use of results based lending 
instruments can increase WB use of 
country systems but greater efforts 
needed to include other partners. 

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

 

Recovery (FY 10) 
Improved Debt and Cash 
Management (FY 10, 11, 13) 
 Competition Policy II (FY 10) 
 FM and Procurement 
Harmonization (FY 10) 
 PEFA Updates (FY 11) 
 Procurement Performance 
Update (FY 12) 
 Access to finance and bank 
resolutions (FY 12) 
 Gender Notes (FY 12) 
 Financial Management: Federal 
and Provincial (FY 12) 
 Punjab Social Sector PER (FY 
13) 
On-going AAA: 
 Sindh PEFA Assessment (FY 
14) 
 Punjab Competitiveness (FY 
14) 
 Government Debt Policy and 
Management (FY 14) 

6. Inclusion of new WB lending in 
FMIS for real-time entries leading 
to improved accuracy of accounts 
and use of country systems. (New 
PR) 

Milestones: 
 Sectoral reviews and Budget 
Strategy Papers prepared to 
guide the MTBF process 
 Strategy for reform of public 
investment processes and 
institutions prepared 
 Treasure Single Account fully 
functional and expanded to 
cover provinces 
 Fully integrated country-wide 
financial management 
information system functional 
 Timely and reliable fiscal 
operations tables and in-year 
civil accounts published 
 Completion of audits within 6 
months of end FY and delivery 
of audit reports to the 
legislature within a month of 
audit completion 

Civil accounts are prepared within 10 
days of month-end (compared to 15-
20 in 2010) while year-end accounts 
are prepared within 2 months of end 
of fiscal year (compared to over 2 
months in 2010). 
 Audits target mostly achieved. Audit 
reports, consistent with ISA 
completed within 8 months (compared 
to over 8 months in 2010).  
 Use of country system target 
achieved. A total of 14 WB projects 
have been brought onto the FMIS 
system. 
 Milestones achieved and documented 
in CPSPR 
 Overall procurement performance 
review achieved for federal, Sindh 
and Punjab governments through 
PEFA and BIS. Procurement 
regulatory framework gaps bridged. In 
Sindh, SBDs and RFPs were 
developed and notified, implementing 
regulations drafted, second tier of 
appeals mechanism developed. In 
Punjab, procurement rules notified 
and resources allocated for 
development of SBDs and RFPs. In 
KPK, the revised procurement law 
approved. All PPRAs collaborated to 
form a common platform and develop 
a draft national procurement strategy.  
Auditor general’s office and 
procurement regulators aligned to 
conduct procurement performance 
audits.  All PPRAs (federal and 
provincial) collaborated to form 
common platform and develop a draft 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 18 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

 Lack of Government responsiveness 
and culture of secrecy prevents 
implementation of Freedom of 
Information Ordinance/Right to 
Information laws and disclosure of 
information 
 Frequent changes in project 
implementation offices have reduced 
ownership of reform efforts and 
prevent achievement of outcomes.  

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

national procurement strategy. 
1.4: Enhanced Capacity and Accountability in Public Sector Management 
Rating:  Mostly Achieved 
7. Strategy developed for improving 
effectiveness of institutions of 
accountability such as Ombudsman, 
Public Accounts Committee, 
Auditor General 

8. Improved land records service 
delivery, as measured by number of 
districts/tehsils with operating 
service centers in Punjab (at least 10 
centers by June 2014); and issuance 
of fard (land record extract) in less 
than 30 minutes at a service centers 

Milestones: 
 Action plan for implementation 
of Freedom of Information  
 Ordinance developed and under 
implementation 

 

On-going Lending: 
 Punjab Land Records 
Management and Information 
Systems (LRMIS) Project       
(FY 07) 
 LRMIS Additional Financing 
(FY 13) 
 Completed AAA: 
 
Institutions of Accountability 
Report (and strategy)– internal 
(FY 12-13) 
Institutions of Accountability 
policy note (FY 13) 
 Governance Policy Note (FY 
13) 
 RTI policy note/s (FY 14) 
 KPK Charter of Good 
Governance (FY 13) 
 Forum of Pakistan’s 
Ombudsmen (FY 15) 
 Revenue Mobilization (FY 11) 
 Strengthening FTO under 
Revenue Mobilization DLI) (FY 
14) 
 Strengthening KPK’s 
anticorruption establishment 
(FY 14) 

 Mostly Achieved.  Four main 
benchmarks achieved or on track to 
support institutions of accountability: 
 Right to Information (RTI) in KPK, 
represents international best practice. 
Punjab draft in process. Action plans 
developed for implementing RTI at 
federal and subnational levels. 
 Anti-corruption legislation, Right to 
Public Services and local governance 
legislation underway in KPK  
 Citizens’ feedback and grievance 
redress mechanism adopted at a large 
scale in Punjab and KPK.  
 Two innovations - leveraging cell 
phones to seek feedback from citizens 
and using smart phones to enhance 
internal monitoring - are in use at 
scale in the Punjab and KPK. 
 Land records target achieved. A total 
of 60 Land Records Service Centers 
operational. 30 min service adhered 
to; customer satisfaction over 95 
percent 
 Land records data entry completed for 
approximately 60 percent of Punjab; 
data verification and quality control in 
progress. Roughly 10 percent of 
Punjab fully converted to new digital 
system 
 Overall WEF Global Competitiveness 
“Institutions” score declined from 
3.34 in 2010 to 3.2 in 2013 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 19 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

 

Increased access to finance 
stimulates employment growth in 
small and medium enterprises 
 Smaller firms could be helped to 
grow and expand into medium sized 
businesses – to achieve higher scale 
and impact on growth and job 
creation. 
 Supporting SMEs in key sectors of 
high potential for job growth and 
inclusion. The services (wholesale, 
retail and trade) and manufacturing 
sectors, particularly textiles, are 
among the greater contributors of 
job growth. 

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

1.5: Strengthened Governance of Markets 
Rating: Partially Achieved 
9. Labor market flexibility enhanced 
as measured by business surveys and 
private sector opens up 

10. Reduced anti-export bias 
resulting from trade restrictions as 
measured by the average MFN tariff 

11. Increase in number of active 
borrowers by 35  percent relative to 
baseline (1.8 million borrowers) 

12. New Government Growth 
Strategy and implementation plan 
for private sector led growth 
adopted by Government (New PR) 

Milestones:  
 Strategy and implementation 
plan for private sector adopted 
by Government 
 New Employment and Services 
Conditions Act (ESCA) and 
Occupational Health and Safety 
Act (OSHA) approved and 
provincial regulations proposed 
 Strengthened monitoring and 
implementation of Doing 
Business Reforms particularly 
around business entry, labor 
flexibility and creditor rights 
 Financial Sector areas identified 
for strengthening 
Improved policy and 
institutional foundation to 
support capital markets and 

 

 Not achieved.  Labor market 
characterized by high degree of 
informality, poor skills base and bad 
outcomes for vulnerable groups.  . 
Pakistan’s score in the Doing Business 
rankings fell from 77 in 2009 to 110 
in 2013 Pakistan’s rating on the 
Global Competitiveness Survey 
declined from the 70th percentile in 
2008 to the 82nd percentile in 2012 
 MFN tariff target not achieved. The 
budget support operation to leverage 
reforms in this area could not 
materialize.  Latest data on Overall 
Trade Restrictiveness Index indicates 
increase in protection (9.9 in 2010 vs. 
9.0 in 2004) and calculations of 
Effective Rates of Protection confirm 
anti-export bias. 
 Microfinance target achieved. 
According to the numbers reported by 
the industry 
(www.mixmarket.org/mfi/country/Pak
istan and 
www.microfinanceconnect.info/ 
      publications/category/Microwatch), 
there were 2.80             million active 
borrowers (increase of 35.7 percent) as 
of first quarter 2014  
 New growth strategy target partially 
achieved. Pakistan Framework for 
Economic Growth, emphasizing 
private sector led growth, developed 
by the Planning Commission and 
adopted by the Cabinet in July 2011. 
However, it could not be fully 

 

On-going Lending: 
 Pakistan Poverty Alleviation 
Fund (PPAF) – II 
IFC supported microfinance 
loans to 572,112 borrowers 
through its portfolio of 
microfinance banks. In addition, 
IFC’s international trade finance 
program has been the second 
largest amongst 70 countries in 
2011, providing financing 
facilities to SMEs. IFC rollover 
trade finance with 13 Banks in 
Pakistan. 4 MSME investments 
in SME & micro finance banks 
(NRSP, First Micro, Silk Bank, 
KASHF) especially focused to 
reach women and rural clients;  
 MIGA support to Habib; 
Metropolitan Bank expansion 
Completed AAA: 
 
Investment Climate Assessment 
(FY 10) 
 NLTA: Strengthening the 
Insolvency Regime  
 NLTA: Support for PSD Task 
Force (FY 11) 
 NLTA: Export Competitiveness 
& Trade Policy  (FY 12) 
 Doing Business in Pakistan 
Report –(FY 11) 
 NLTA: Regulatory Institutions 
(FY 12).  
 NLTA Sub-national Doing 
Business Follow Up (FY 12) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 20 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

 

NBFIs 
Increased access to commercial 
liquidity by MFIs 

implemented for lack of ownership 
and ensuing political transition.  

 Strengthening Market 
Governance (FY 12) 
 Gender and Access to Finance 
study titled “Are Pakistan's 
Women Entrepreneurs Being 
Served by the Microfinance 
Sector?” (FY13) 
 FIRST: Micro insurance 
Regulation and Supervision – 
Part I (FY 12) 
 AML/CFT Support to 
Government of Pakistan– Phase 
I (FY 2013) 
 Policy note: Reforming SOEs 
(FY13) 
 Policy note: Enhancing the 
Business Environment (FY13) 
On-going AAA: 
 Business Regulation Reform, 
One Stop Shop  
 The Global Trade Finance 
Program (GTFP) at IFC 
provides financing solutions for 
smaller companies to secure 
trade financing support and 
access to international markets. 
The GTFP network covers all 
major private banks, managing 
approximately 80 percent of the 
country’s trade flows. 
 Alternate Dispute Resolution 
Phase-1 Karachi; and, ii) 
Alternate Dispute Resolution 
Phase-II Lahore 
 Financial Sector Monitoring 
 Part II: FIRST assistance to 
SECP on Micro insurance 

 
 
 
 
CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

Annex II 
Page 21 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

 

 

 Pilot Program to Unleash the 
Competitiveness of Women 
Entrepreneurs (FY15) 
 Capacity building of Regulators 
 Consumer Protection & 
Financial Literacy Diagnostic 
Assessment (FY14) 
IDF: Capacity Building of 
Institute of Capital Markets 
IFC: 7 advisory projects in 
Access to Finance, Investment 
Climate and Sustainable 
Business (focusing on SME 
banking, rural finance, corporate 
governance and capacity 
building). HBL SME Banking, 
Bank Alfalah SME Banking, 
HBL Rural Finance,  
Jobs Study Corporate 
Governance, Program Business 
Edge Program, Pakistan Credit 
Bureau and Microfinance 
project 

Outcome Pillar 2: Improved Human Development and Reduced Vulnerability 
Rating: Moderately Satisfactory 
2.1: Improved Equitable Access to Quality Education 
Rating: Mostly Achieved 
13. Primary NER in Punjab 
increases from 71 percent in 
2008/09 to 73 percent 2013/14 
(Revised PR) 

14.Primary NER in Punjab for rural 
girls (6-10 years) increases from 63 
percent in 2008/09 to 65 percent in 
2013/14   (Revised PR) 

15.Primary NER in Sindh increases 

 Achieved for Punjab. According to 
PLSM data, primary NER (ages 6-10) 
in Punjab increased to 74 percent in 
2011/12. 
 Primary NER in rural Punjab for girls 
in rural areas (aged 6-10 increased 
from 63 percent to 69 percent. 
 Not achieved for Sindh.  Primary NER 
fell from 64 percent to 59 percent 
 Rural Sindh target not achieved. 
Primary girls NER fell from 46 

On-going Lending: 
 Punjab Education Support Project 
(FY 10) 
 Punjab Education – Additional 
Financing (FY 11) 
 Sindh Education Support Project 
(FY 10) 
 Sindh Education Additional 
Financing (FY 11) 
 Higher Education DPC (FY 10) 

 Devolution of power has allowed 
provinces to develop their specific 
capacities for improved service 
delivery. The federal government 
should support this process by 
ensuring national standards and 
monitor achievements and 
disparities in access.  
 Sequenced interventions that build 
on past successes are essential to 
ensure continuity and 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 22 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

sustainability.  
 Donor coordination should be 
fostered where it is essential to 
gain traction in a sector.  
 Crosscutting issues should be 
proactively and strategically 
addressed.  
 Use of DLIs has demonstrated 
effectiveness in enhancing 
coordination with stakeholders and 
development partners and focusing 
greater attention on results as 
opposed to administrative 
implementation issues. 
 Experience with DLIs points to 
need to strengthen results chain 
(IEG finding in ICR reviews) 

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

from 64 percent in 2008/09 to 66 
percent in 2013/14 (Revised PR) 

16. Primary NER in Sindh for rural 
girls (6-10 years) increases from 46 
percent in 2009/09 to 48 percent in 
2013/14  (Revised PR) 

17.  Tertiary GER increases from 4 
percent to 6 percent 

18. Percent of trainees of youth 
development program who are 
employed and/or enrolled in 
continuing education three months 
after completion of training 
(Baseline – 28  percent in FY 10 
and target – 40  percent by FY 14)  
(New PR) 

 

Milestones: 
 Educational institutional 
capacity and governance 
strengthened: 
Improved governance and 
management of education 
service delivery 
 Better and strengthened 
measurements of student 
learning 
 Establishment of teacher 
standards and certification 
systems 
 Roll out of national and 
provincial programmes for 
Vocational Education and 
Training Reforms 

percent to 41 percent 
 Overall Pakistan NER increased 
modestly from 67 percent to 68 
percent and rural girls NER increased 
from 56 percent to 59 percent.   .  
 Range between lowest (Balochistan) 
and highest (Punjab) province in NER 
has increased between 2009 and 2013 
– from 54 percent - 71 percent in 2009 
to 49 percent-74 percent in 2013.  
Inequality gap grew even more in case 
of girls NER.  
 GER at the tertiary level not available, 
ISR data suggest an increase of 
174,000 (38 percent) students 
attending HEI’s between 2011 and 
2013, which suggests GER increases 
achieved.  
 Youth training target partially 
achieved.  Data on training and 
placement is not yet available on the 
Sindh Skills Development Project 
(SSDP) as training is scheduled to 
start in December 2013. Employment 
rate of JSDF financed trainees reached 
35 percent in 2013. 
 The original CPS milestones related to 
strengthened educational institutional 
capacity and governance. With the 
18th Amendment, these efforts were 
concentrated in Punjab and Sindh. 
While improvements have been made 
in areas such as teacher recruitment, 
on-site support and school 
infrastructure rehabilitation, 
developing improved systems of 
performance and controls against 
malpractices remained weak.  

 Balochistan Education Sector 
Project (BESP) (FY 06 
 Balochistan Education Sector 
Project Additional Financing (FY 
10) 
 Tertiary Education Support 
Project (FY 11) 
 Sindh Skills Development Project 
(FY 11) 
 Punjab Education Sector Project 
II (FY 12) 
 Sindh Education Sector Project II 
(SEP II)(FY 13) 
 Promoting Girls Education in 
Balochistan (PGEB) FY 2013 
Completed AAA: 
 Education Sector Review (FY 11) 
 
Impact evaluations of Sindh 
Differential Stipends Program   
(FY 12) 
Impact evaluations of Sindh PPP 
interventions (FY 12) 
On-going AAA: 
 Education Sector Review (FY 14) 
 
IFC study on low cost private 
schooling models 
IFC business management skills 
training program for 
science/technical graduates  

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

 Learning assessments have been 
designed and are under 
implementation in Punjab and Sindh 
but weaknesses remain in test design, 
administration, analysis and utilising 
results in policy although in Punjab 
test results have fed back to teacher 
incentives and targeting support to 
lagging schools.  Test results have not 
been reported in ICRs or ISRs.  
 The WEF Global Competitiveness 
score for “quality of education” 
declined from 3.2 to 2.9 between 2011 
and 2013. 
2.2 Reduced Vulnerability Through Effective Safety Nets 
Rating: Mostly achieved 
19. Number of families covered by 
social safety nets increases to 7 
million by 2012 

20. Improved targeting of safety net 
program  

21.At least one million flood-
affected families receive cash 
transfers (New PR) 
22. Improved response and 
coordination capacities through 
SOPs, emergency protocols etc. for 
DRM institutions at the Federal 
level and in at least one province  
(New PR) 

Milestones: 
 Nationwide poverty scorecard 
(PSC) roll out (in at least 80 
percent of districts in the 
country) completed and data 

Annex II 
Page 23 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

 

 Mostly achieved. 7.2 million families 
are eligible for cash transfer under the 
safety net program, of which a total of 
4.9 million are currently covered. The 
families not covered are in the process 
of updating their CNIC, which will 
allow them to be included in the 
program and raise the coverage to 
more than 7 million. 
Improved targeting achieved. Poverty 
scorecard (PSC) has been 
implemented in 98 percent of the 
country (except 2 agencies in FATA), 
covering 27 million households 
against a target of coverage in 80 
percent of the districts in the country. 
Targeting performance of safety nets 
increased from about 40 percent to 
over 65 percent.  
 Floods transfers target achieved. A 
total of 1.2 million Flood affected 
families received cash transfers. 

On-going Lending: 
 Safety Net DPC 
 SSN Additional Financing 
(FY12) 
 Flood Emergency Cash Transfer 
(FECT) Project (FY 11) 
 Balochistan Disaster Management 
Project (BDMP) (FY 12) 
Completed AAA: 
 
Just in Time Policy Notes on 
Social Protection (FY 13) 
 Social Safety Net Rapid Impact 
Evaluation Report (FY 14) 
 Pakistan Safety Net Review (FY 
12) 
 Sindh Floods Damage and Needs 
Assessment (FY 11) 
 Assessment of BISP 
beneficiaries’ financial inclusion 
and TA on financial literacy (FY 
13) 

 Pakistan has the capacity to 
initiate, organize and deliver 
essential services overcoming gaps 
and logistic obstacles when there is 
political will, as demonstrated by 
the cash transfer flood relief 
program, and the BISP, both 
recognized as global good practice.  
 The World Bank should develop a 
clear strategy on issues such as 
DRM; and, engagement with the 
Government to ensure continuity 
of policy frameworks and 
operating environments. 
 Support needs to be provided to 
the government in streamlining the 
roles, responsibilities and 
mandates of the various entities 
responsible for different 
components of disaster risk 
management through a review of 
the existing legislations and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

Annex II 
Page 24 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

institutions working in the area.

processed for eligibility 
determination 
 National social protection 
policy (NSPP) updated; policies 
developed to increase informal 
sector employees’ access to 
social insurance; and provincial 
social protection programs 
harmonized with federal 
programs 
 Graduation strategies for safety 
nets piloted and results 
evaluated 
Implementation agency for 
national safety net established 
and coordinated with relevant 
graduation program 

 

 DRM target partially achieved. The 
Government of Balochistan has 
developed and is implementing SOPs 
in the field of disaster response and 
management, Disaster Management 
Information System (DMIS) and 
Community-Based Disaster Response 
Mechanisms (CBDRM). 

 First draft of the National Social 
Protection Policy had been completed. 
Post-enactment of the 18th 
amendment, the Planning Commission 
is engaging the provinces to develop 
an integrated federal-provincial social 
protection policy framework 
 The Government of Pakistan has 
notified the formation of a National 
Working Group on Risk Assessments 
led by the National Disaster 
Management Authority. This Working 
Group would own and steer the 
process of risk assessment with 
technical support from the Bank 
 Prime Minister approved the Future 
Disaster Response Action Plan, 
endorsing early recovery support 
through cash transfers. 

2.3: Enhanced Delivery of Health, Nutrition and Population Services 
Rating: Partially Achieved 
23.HIV/AIDS prevention, care and 
treatment services provided to 50 

 HIV/AIDs Not achieved. Punjab 
health operation only became 

 Process evaluation of BISP 
Waseela-e-Rozgar program (FY 
13) 
 TA for Social Protection Reform 
(FY 12) 
 Relief in Disasters Study (FY 11) 
 Social Protection Report (FY 11) 
On-going AAA: 
 GFDRR: Pakistan Floods PDNA 
 Labor Supply and Vulnerability 
 Disaster Recovery and Social 
Protection 
 Dialogue with BISP on 
graduation program and financing 
 Employment of poor and 
vulnerable individuals 
 GFDRR: Development of a 
National Platform for Risk 
Assessment and Catastrophe Risk 
Financing Mechanism (with co-
financing from DFID) 
 GFDRR: Development of a 
Programme for Hazard and Risk 
Assessment in Urban Areas 
 Strengthening Pakistan’s urban 
disaster response capacity 
 Capacity building of the National 
Disaster Management Authority 
(NDMA) to improve risk 
mapping and disaster response.  
 Support to NDMA and MoF in 
undertaking a Fiscal Risk 
Assessment 

 

On-going Lending: 
 Third partnership for Polio 

 Flexibility in terms of strategic 
direction is essential to address 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

Eradication Project (TPPEP) (FY 10) 
 Punjab Health Sector Reform 
project (FY 2013) 
 KPK Revitalizing Health Services 
(FY 12) 
Completed AAA: 
 Health Sector Review (FY10) 
 Policy Note on Immunization      
(FY 12) 
 Health Public Expenditure 
Review (FY 13) 
Investigating the financial 
impacts of health shocks in 
disasters (FY 13) 
On-going AAA: 
 Pakistan Nutrition Report - 
Provincial/Policy Guidance Notes 
(FY 2013) 
 Multi Sector Nutrition Dialogue 
and TA 

 

On-going Lending: 
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund 
(PPAF – II) (FY 09) 

percent of target groups in Punjab 
(Revised PR) 

24. Polio vaccine coverage is at 
least 90 percent in the targeted 
accessible populations in all high 
risk districts (New PR) 

Milestones:  
 Health service delivery systems 
strengthened 
 A plan for a publicly funded 
health insurance programme 
developed 

effective in October 2013 
 Polio target achieved. OPV coverage 
in the targeted accessible populations 
in all high-risk districts currently 
stands at 95 percent against a baseline 
of 93 percent. Total immunized with 
OPV by May 2013 - 652.86 million. 
Polio cases reduced from 144 in 2011 
to 24 in 2013. 
 Health service delivery strengthened 
through People’s Primary Health 
Initiative; over half of Pakistan’s 
districts contracting out health 
services management  
 BISP piloted a health insurance 
scheme to protect the poor from costs 
of catastrophic illness in Faisalabad 
District of Punjab financed by federal 
budget  

2.4: Enhanced Rural Livelihoods 
Rating: Achieved 
25. Expanded use of farmer and 
community organizations to link 
producers to markets (at least 20 
percent of federated organizations 
report effective linkages with market 
and private sector) 

 Milestones: 
 
70 percent of community 
organizations have received 
requested skills training and/or 
livelihood grants 
 Centers linking farmers to 
markets and financial services 
created 

 

 Achieved.  22 percent of federated 
organizations successfully established 
links with markets and line 
departments. 10 percent received 
improved infrastructure to access 
markets.   
44 percent of community 
organizations trained’ 50 percent of 
individuals received livelihoods 
training. 73 percent of mobilized 
families received productive assets.  
15 Growth Centers created on a pilot 
basis linking farmers to markets and 
financial services.  
Institute for Development Innovation 

 

 

Annex II 
Page 25 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

rapidly evolving needs, such as the 
shift to access plus quality.  

 Shift from PPAF focus on 
microfinance to livelihoods and 
community institution building 
needs to be accompanied by 
stronger M&E capacity 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

survey showed PPAF beneficiaries’ 
incomes increased 178 percent over 
the period 2008-12 while non-
beneficiaries’ rose by only 41 percent 
over the same period. The survey 
reported a poverty graduation rate of 
84 percent for beneficiaries  
 Gallop survey showed increment of 9 
percent in increased personal income 
of PPAF beneficiaries 2012 over 2009 
compared to 7 percent for non-
beneficiaries. 
Outcome Pillar 3: Improving Infrastructure to Support Growth 
Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory 
3.1: Increased Power Provision and Increased Efficiency and Reliability of Energy Supply 
Rating: Not Achieved 
26. Losses in electricity expected to 
reduce from 22 percent to 20 percent 
and unaccounted for gas expected to 
reduce from 10 percent to 9 percent 
(Revised PR) 

 Not achieved. Power losses declined 
to approximately 21 percent in 2011 
(last year available); gas losses 
increased to 13 percent in 2013. 

27. Average load shedding in power 
sector presently at 30 percent of 
peak demand not worsening; gas 
load shedding not worsening 
(Revised PR) 

28. Improved financial viability: (a) 
zero budget support for tariff 
subsidies; and (b) real rate of return 
on investments remains positive 
(Revised PR) 

Milestones: 
 Strengthened electricity and gas 
networks leading to improved 
technical and commercial 

 Not achieved. Power and load 
shedding situation increased reaching 
approximately 33 percent of peak 
demand.  
 Viability target partially achieved. 
Financial viability has continued to 
worsen with tariff subsidies remaining 
at 2 percent of GDP. Rate of return on 
private investments in this sector are 
positive; estimates from the 
experience of the Karachi Electric 
Supply Company (KESC) reveal that 
annual profits increased by 156 
percent in the year 2012-13. Partially 
achieved. 
 Electricity and gas networks remain 
generally weak although performance 

 

Annex II 
Page 26 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

 

Intensive engagement and 
stakeholder communications with 
the Government on priority 
interventions has resulted in 
increased ownership and renewed 
commitment as evidenced in 
Government Energy Policy 2013. 
 The power sector requires 
coordinated interventions that focus 
on all three of the following: i) 
governance of the sector and 
ownership by the government; ii) 
strategy of engagement by the World 
Bank; and, iii) new generation of 
power to ensure that the demand 
does not outstrip supply.   
 Realistic planning is essential to 
ensure that the proposed financing is 
in sync with the proposed 
interventions. 
 Donor coordination to build 
consensus around energy policy 

 

On-going Lending: 
 Electricity Distribution and 
Transmission Project (FY08) 
 Natural Gas Efficiency Project 
(FY12) 
 Tarbela IV Extension Project 
(FY12) 
IFC: Six investments in power: 
Laraib Energy (FY10) 
(renewable), UCH Power II 
(FY11), Zorlu Pakistan (FY12) 
(renewable), Star Hydro (FY12) 
(renewable), InfraV-Koel 
(FY13) (renewable), Metro 
Power (FY14) (renewable) 
 One new power investment- 
CSAIL (planned FY14.) 
IFC has continued to support the 
sustainable turnaround of K-
Electric as part of the strategy to 
support privatization of 
electricity utilities 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

 

performance of energy 
networks, gas and electricity 
 Expansion of public hydro 
generation capacity initiated 
under Tarbela Extension project 
Investments in cross-border 
energy supply infrastructure 
initiated under CASA 1000 
project 
 Catalytic investments to 
promote private investments in 
gas and energy 

is highly variable with some 
distribution companies performing at 
levels exceeding comparator countries 
while others lag far behind.  
Continuing improvements in network 
should lead to achieving modified loss 
reduction targets albeit with delay. 
Investments in Tarbela, Casa 1000 
and by private sector have been 
initiated.  

 

3.2: Improved Efficiency and Reliability of the Transport and Logistics Network 
Rating: Partially Achieved 
29. Transit time of containers from 
Karachi Port to Lahore reduced from 
11 to 6 days at end of CPS period.  

30.  A railway revitalization strategy 
developed including an emergency 
plan for keeping railways 
operational and afloat, while the 
longer-term actions are started. 
(New PR) 

Milestones: 
 Logistics Performance Index 
from 2.62 in 2007 to 2.36 at end 
of CPS period 
 Ports Master Plan prepared 
 Road sector review covering 
financial, regulatory governance 
and institutional framework for 
national and subnational 

 Transit time outcome partially 
achieved. The outcome cannot be 
measured before completion of project 
construction activities at the Karachi 
Port and ii) institutional strengthening 
as part of WB support. Two proxy 
indicators measure interim progress: i) 
birth occupancy rates, which have 
fallen from 74 percent in 2010 to 51 
percent in 2013; and, ii) ship turn-
around time, which currently stands at 
80.64 hours or 3 days and 9 hours. 
Consistent with transit time goals.  
 Railway strategy target partially 
achieved. Railway Revitalization 
Strategy has been developed but it is 
yet to be ratified and implemented by 
the Government.  
 Pakistan’s rank in LPI improved from 
110 in 2010 to 71 in 2012.  Score 

Annex II 
Page 27 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 
issues is key to ensuring 
Government ownership;  
 WB financial share in new power 
generation investments too small to 
guarantee a “seat at the table.” 
Donor coordination and good 
diagnostic work can fill the gap. 

 Capacity and institutional 
assessments should precede and 
inform program design.  
 Trade and Transport Facilitation 
involved too many agencies for 
effective implementation.  Multi-
faceted operations require clear 
institutional framework with agency 
champions.   

Completed AAA: 
 Pakistan India Power 
Interconnection (FY 13) 
 Power Sector Dialogue and 
Policy Notes (FY 11) 
 Energy Sector Circular Debt 
Note (FY 11) 
 Large-scale Efficient Lighting 
Program (FY 12) 
IFC Advisory Services 
facilitating Punjab Energy 
Department to support off grid 
power provision reforms to 
encourage captive generation 
 PPP Advisory project on 
FESCO 

 

On-going Lending: 
 Karachi Port Improvement 
Programme (KPKIP) (FY 10)  
 Trade and Transport Facilitation 
2 (FY 09) 
 Highway Rehabilitation Project 
(FY 04) 
 Highway Rehabilitation Project    
Additional Financing (FY 10) 
IFC: Four investments in 
Qasim International Container 
terminal (QICT I FY10) 
QICT II - FY11 ,Pakistan 
International Bulk Terminal 
(PIBT - FY 2012); and Intercity 
Transport (FY14) 
Completed AAA: 
 M&E of Transport Sector (FY 
13) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 28 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

highways completed 

improved from 2.53 to 2.83 (original 
milestones indicator inverted) 
following deterioration between 2007 
and 2010. .  
 Port Master Plan has been completed 
but the Highway Sector Review, 
which was planned as part of the 
National Trade Corridor Improvement 
Programme has not been completed. 
3.3: Strengthened Irrigation Infrastructure and Agricultural Competitiveness 
Rating: Partially Achieved 
31.  Improved equity in water 
distribution as measured by delivery 
performance ratio from 0.4 to 0.6 
(with perfect equity equaling 1.0) 

 Mining and Regional Integration 
Study (FY 13 
  IFC Advisory Services: 
 Wagah Border Trade 
Facilitation: Identifying ways in 
which to streamline and simplify 
time, cost and documentation for 
trade facilitation across the Wagah 
border.  

On-going Lending:  
 Sindh Water Sector 
Improvement Project Phase I 
(FY 07) 
 Sindh Water Sector 
Improvement Project Phase i: 
Additional Financing (FY 13) 
 Punjab Barrages Improvement 
Programme (FY 09) 
 Sindh On-Farm Water 
Management Project Additional 
Financing (FY 09) 
 Balochistan Small Scale 
Irrigation Project (FY 08) 
 Punjab Irrigated Agriculture 
Productivity Improvement 
Programme (FY 12) 
 Sindh On-Farm Water 
Management Project (FY 09) 
 Sindh Agriculture Growth 
Project (FY 13) 
IFC Lending: 
Four investments in the agri-
business sector. 
 Engro Corp Corporate Loan 
(FY 10) 

 

 Water distribution target partially 
achieved.  Equity cannot be measured 
until on-going investments completed. 
Operations in Sindh and Punjab show 
evidence of increased channel 
conveyance efficiency –from baseline 
value of 52 percent to 71 percent at 
present.  Ratio of available water to 
estimated demand has improved from 
39 percent to 59 percent. 
In Balochistan, water conveyance 
efficiency has increased by 84 
percent.  
 O&M and cost recovery data not 
available until investments completed. 
Improved techniques for crop 
production have been introduced in 
Punjab. These include: a) A total of 
1,190 laser leveling units provided to 
farmers; b) High efficiency irrigation 
systems (HEIS) introduced on 
approximately 9,500 acres; c) A total 
of 1,594 water courses improved; d) 
130 road shows organized to 
demonstrate HEIS; e) 21 professional 
training courses organized on HEIS; f) 
A total of 55 technical courses on the 

 

32. O&M spending increased by 20 
percent and cost recovery increased 
by 10 percent 

33. Expanded use of improved 
techniques for crop production and 
animal husbandry  

 

Milestones: 
 Decentralization of water 
management with more farmer 
participation 
20 percent increase in numbers 
of farmers’ organizations and 
area managed by them. 
 Strengthened capacity of water 
management institutions 
Initiation of rehabilitation and 
modernization of 2 barrages 
Improved agriculture research, 
extension services, training and 
policy analysis capacity 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 29 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

maintenance of laser leveling 
machines organized.  
 No data on improved animal 
husbandry techniques. 
 Cropping intensity of major crops in 
Sindh increased by 12 percent against 
a target of 10 percent and yields of 
cotton, sugarcane and wheat increased 
by 43 percent, 7 percent and 14 
percent respectively from 2008 to 
date. Crop yields in Balochistan 
increased 30 percent on average and 
cropping intensity by 50 percent.   
 Water management decentralization 
on track and exceeding targets 
 The rehabilitation of Jinnah barrage in 
Punjab underway; feasibility study of 
Guddu barrage in Sindh completed. 
Augmentation of Band-e-Khushdil 
Khan (BKK) in Balochistan 
completed.  
 Research, extension, training and 
policy analysis targets met  
 Overall WEF index of “costs of 
agricultural policies” shows slight 
improvement between 2011 and 2013 
with increase from 3.3 to 3.5 

 

 

 Engro Polymer – RI (FY 10) 
 Engro Corp – emergency loan 
for agri-business to counter the 
adverse impact of the 2010 
floods (FY 11) 
 MATCO rice export (FY 12) 
Completed AAA: 
 Bank Netherlands Water 
Support Program (FY 12) 
Improving procurement 
capability of TMA (FY 12) 
 Water Sector Capacity Building 
and Advisory Services (FY 
2011) 
 Agriculture value added (FY 
2011)NLTA: Agriculture 
Competitiveness (FY 2011) 
. The Indus Basin of Pakistan: 
The Impacts of Climate Risks 
on Water and Agriculture 
FY2013) 
 Roundtable on Agriculture 
Policy Priorities (FY 2012) 
 NLTA: Irrigated Agriculture 
(FY FY12) 
 Agriculture value added (FY 
11) 
 NLTA: Agriculture 
Competitiveness (FY 11) 
 The Indus basin of Pakistan: 
The Impacts of Climate Risks 
on Water and Agriculture (FY 
13) 
 Roundtable on Agriculture 
Policy Priorities (FY 12) 
 NLTA: Irrigation Agriculture 
(FY 12) 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 30 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

 Sequencing of activities is critical: 
WB should assist implementing 
agencies to put in place robust 
systems to address technical and 
crosscutting aspects of project 
implementation. 

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

 

IFC Agri/warehouse receipt 
financing workshop conducted 
in partnership with State Bank 
of Pakistan 
 Two public partnerships on 
grain silos in Punjab and Sindh 
 Assessment of investments in 
medium dairy farms 
IFC: Needs assessment study of 
dairy sector. 
On-going AAA: 
 Pakistan Flood Management 
and Hazard Reduction study 
(FY 14) 

 

On-going Lending: 
 Punjab Municipal Services 
Improvement Project (PMSIP) 
(FY 10) 
 Punjab Cities Governance 
Improvement Project (PCGIP) 
(FY 13) 
 Walled City of Lahore Cultural 
Heritage Project (FY12).  
 Completed AAA: 
 Urban Policy Reform (FY 11) 
 Urban/rural water supply and 
sanitation services sector study 
(in collaboration with Water and 
Sanitation Program (WSP)) (FY 
2013) 
Implementing Decentralization 
in Balochistan (FY 10) 
 Punjab Property Tax Reform 
(FY 10) 
Integrated Solid Waste 

 

 

3.4: Improved Urban/Municipal Infrastructure and Services 
Rating: Mostly Achieved 
34. Improved urban planning and 
management implemented in 38 
select municipalities of Punjab. 
Initiation of improvements in urban 
management through improved 
operational procedures and systems 
in metro governments of five large 
cities in Punjab (Revised PR) 

Milestones: 

 Metropolitan areas in Punjab 
and their service providers 
managed by a single authority 
with accountability and 
appropriate managerial and 
fiscal autonomy 
Improved database on land and 
housing issues 

 

 Achieved.  Improved urban planning 
and management in select Punjab 
municipalities (TMAs) as indicated by 
the following:  In 11 TMAs, 53 
percent of the households connected 
with water supply schemes (baseline 
40 percent) In 105 TMAs, 73 percent 
of the street lights in functioning 
condition (baseline70 percent). In 105 
TMAs, 74 percent of solid waste 
disposed per day at landfill sites 
(baseline 0). Web-based performance 
management systems operationalized 
in 105 TMAs, with real-time, 
province-wide data available at TMA 
level 
 Walled city of Lahore Act (2011) was 
promulgated, Walled City of Lahore 
Authority was established and pilot 
for the restoration of heritage assets in 
Lahore is underway.  
Improvements in the city district 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

Management (FY 10) 
 Punjab WASA Restructuring 
(FY 12) 
 Post Disaster Housing Capacity 
Building (FY 12) 

On-going AAA: 
 Pakistan Urban Sector 
Assessment 
IFC: Waste paper supply chain 
strengthening advisory project 

 

governments (CDGs) of five largest 
cities of Punjab include: i) contiguous 
planning boundaries with service 
delivery entities and joint consolidated 
annual development budgets; ii) 
consolidated, comprehensive fiscal 
reporting; iii) new business 
procedures for procurement, public 
disclosure, and grievance-redressal; 
and iv) electronic data base pilot in 
Sialkot to provide improved land and 
housing database.   
 Achievements i) and ii) mark progress 
toward single accountable authority 
managing each metropolitan area and 
its service providers. 
 Overall the percentage of urban 
households using hand pumps 
declined from 10 percent in 2008-9 to 
7 percent in 2011-12 while the 
percentage of households with 
improved water piped on premises 
increased from 56 percent to 58 
percent.  The percentage of urban 
households with flush toilets increased 
from 94 percent to 97 percent and 
those with underground drains from 
48 percent to 55 percent (Pakistan 
SLSM surveys).  

3.5: Environmental Sustainability for Better Health Outcomes and Improved Competitiveness 
Rating: Mostly Achieved 
35.  As a result of the Bank’s 
analytical work with the Pakistan 
Environment Protection Agency 
(EPA), Planning Commission, 
Ministry of Industries and 
Environment and Government of 

 Mostly Achieved: Policy 
recommendations delivered to 4 
counterpart agencies.  Engagement 
sustained in all but Ministry of 
Industries. 
 Recommendations identified 

Completed AAA: 
 Environment Program (FY 10) 
 Policy options to reduce the 
costs of outdoor air pollution in 
Pakistan (FY 11) 
 Strategic Environmental, 

Annex II 
Page 31 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

 Where Government institutional 
structures are not sufficiently robust 
or strengthened to ensure ownership, 
advisory services mixed with non-
lending technical assistance has 
contributed to a richer understanding 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 32 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 
of issues and continued engagement.  

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

Sindh, policy recommendations will 
be available to the Government for 
adoption and furthering 
environmental management debate 
in the country. (Revised PR) 

36. National strategy for Climate 
Change Adaptation designed and 
under implementation 

Milestones: 
 Adoption of environmental and 
social sustainability criteria in 
manufacturing and 
transportation sectors 
 Strategic medium –term 
environmental action plans 
developed by provinces 
 Cleaner Production Advisory 
completed 

 

environmental and social 
sustainability criteria for “green” 
industrial growth and trade and 
transport; but not yet adopted. Action 
plan under development only in Sindh 
 The National Climate Change Policy 
(NCCP) was prepared, approved by 
federal cabinet in 2012 and launched 
in February 2013.  
Joint preparation of environmental 
and social sustainability analyses in 
industry and transport sectors 
completed.  Implementation steps 
pending.   
 Environmental action plan prepared 
and under discussion in Sindh 
 Overall Pakistan’s score on the 
Yale/Columbia global Environment 
Performance index related to health 
outcomes increased marginally from 
64.73 in 2010 to 64.97 in 2013; 
however this represented a 20.5 
percent increase relative to Pakistan’s 
GDP peer set. Pakistan’s overall EPI 
score also increased marginally from 
34.42 to 34.58 which however 
resulted in a fall of one position to 
rank 148 out of the 178 countries 
ranked.   

 

Poverty and Social Assessment 
of Trade and transport reforms 
(FY 11) 
 NLTA: Environmental 
sustainability and Industrial 
Competitiveness (FY 11) 
 NLTA: Environmental 
management for growth and 
poverty alleviation in Sindh (FY 
12) 
 Climate Change and 
Environmental Priorities in 
Sindh (FY 12) 
 Greening Freight Transport 
PSIA and SEA (FY 12) 
 Climate Change and Water 
Adaptation (FY 12) 
Inclusive Green Industrial 
Growth (FY 12) 
 Air Quality Management and 
Climate Change (FY 11) 
IFC: 5 investments in the power 
sector focused on renewable 
energy, including wind, hydro, 
and waste to energy (Laraib, 
Zorlu, Star Hydro, KOEL, 
Metro- See 3.1)  
IFC: G-4, Green Building 
investment. 
 Cleaner production 
 Sustainable Energy Finance 
Study 
 Sustainable Energy Guidelines 
in Pakistan 
 Advisory services in the clean 
production technology 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 
Pillar 4: Improving Security and Reducing the Threat of Conflict – Increased Employment and Livelihoods Opportunities in Conflict Affected Areas 
Rating: Moderately Satisfactory 
4.1: Increased Employment and Livelihoods Opportunities in Conflict Affected Areas 
Rating: Mostly achieved 
37. Economic recovery in targeted 
regions by creating sustainable 
employment opportunities through 
rehabilitation of Small and Medium 
Enterprises (SMEs), investment 
mobilization and institutional 
capacity building. At least 2,000 
jobs/employment (direct and 
indirect) generated in enterprises 
supported by the MDTF project. 
(Revised PR) 

On-going Lending: 
 Economic Revitalization of 
KPK and FATA Project 
(ERKF) (FY 12) 
 Competitive Industries for KPK 
Project (CIKPK) (FY 12) 
 FATA Rural Livelihoods and 
Community Infrastructure 
Project (FATA RLCIP) (FY 12) 
 KPK Southern Area 
Development Project (KPK 
SADP) – (FY 13). 

Annex II 
Page 33 of 43 

 Setting realistic targets. Of the total 
SMEs to be supported by ERKF, 
850, 3 percent are earmarked to be 
women (a total of 26 SMEs). 
However, in the relatively 
conservative environment of KPK 
and FATA, it is difficult to find a 
sufficient number of SMEs that are 
owned by women. 
 Commitment and ownership of the 
Government and Bank teams is 
essential for successful design. 
Because the teams involved in the 
identification and preparation of 
CIKPK were committed to the 
project, it was prepared and declared 
effective in less than 10 months. 
Project design is innovative with full 
buy-in from the Government. 
 Sensitization of Government and 
communities is essential to ensure 
effective design and smooth 
implementation. This requires 
strategic communications to engage 
communities.  
 Community Driven Development 
(CDD) projects are effective in 
enhancing government legitimacy 
and enhancing state-citizen trust. 
Because CDD is a new concept for 
the governments of KPK and FATA, 
extensive handholding and technical 
assistance is required to ensure 
success.  

 Mostly achieved. The Economic 
Revitalization of KPK and FATA 
(ERKF) have extended support to 587 
SMEs (out of a projected total of 850) 
for upgrading, rehabilitation and 
business development services. A total 
of 9 grants have been provided to 
female SME owners (against a target 
of 26 or 3 percent of the projected 
total). In addition, the project has thus 
far created an estimated 1428 direct 
and 4284 indirect jobs against the 
joint target of 2000. 
 Livelihood grants target achieved. In 
FATA, the Bank has supported 889 
farmers with livelihoods support. This 
support is channeled through the 
mobilization of 237 community 
organizations that have helped 
organize 7,110 households.  

38. Supporting small-scale 
community infrastructure and 
livelihoods opportunities for the 
local communities in targeted areas 
through grants, skills development 
and market linkages. Selected 
villages in targeted tehsils of FATA 
benefit from asset development and 
livelihoods grants under MDFTF. 
(Revised PR) 

Milestones:  
 Community based planning and 
implementation of rural 
livelihoods enhancement 
interventions 
 Commercial and small-scale 
market-oriented agriculture 
expanded 
 Regulatory reforms facilitate 
‘doing business’ in KPK and 
FATA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

 Direct firm support through 
matching grants and challenge 
funds generate new private 
sector employment 
 Social protection interventions 
secure minimum livelihoods for 
displaced persons and 
vulnerable crises-affected 
population implemented 
 General education and TVET 
training programs developed 
and targeted to address market 
demands for specific skills and 
expertise 

4.2: Increased Responsiveness and Effectiveness of the State  
Rating: Partially Achieved 
39. KPK and FATA are able to 
manage and coordinate 
implementation of PCNA short and 
medium term interventions and 
design longer-term interventions 
measured by operationalization of 
PCNA Implementation Support Unit 
in KPK and FATA 

40. Overall multi-year Governance 
Program designed 

41. Improved access to a defined 
package of health, nutrition and 
reproductive health services in 
FATA 

42. Enhanced inter-district access 
and mobility in KPK and FATA 
through two roads projects 

 Achieved. Three ISUs have been 
established, staffed and declared 
operational in KPK and FATA to 
implement the recommendations of 
the PCNA and in Balochistan to 
implement the recommendations of 
the BDNA. In addition, 28 planning 
documents, programmatic reports and 
concept papers for reform have been 
prepared in KPK and 32 in FATA. 
 Governance program outcome 
partially achieved. Preparation of the 
10-year governance program initiated. 
Initial consultations held. Reforms 
already underway in complaints 
handling and grievance redressal 
mechanisms.  
 Access to health services not 
achieved. Activities on the health 
project not yet initiated  
 Road access and mobility outcome 

On-going Lending: 
 Governance Support Project 
(GSP) (FY 12) 
 FATA Urban Centers Project 
(FUCP) (FY 12) 
 Revitalizing Health Services in 
Crisis (RHS KPK) (FY 12). 
 Promoting Girls Education in 
Balochistan Project  (PGEBP) 
(FY 13) 
 KPK Emergency Roads 
Rehabilitation Project (KPK 
ERRP) (FY 12) 
 FATA Emergency Roads 
Recovery Project (FATA 
ERRP) (FY 13) 
Completed AAA: 
 Post Crisis Needs Assessment 
(PCNA) (FY 11) 
 Operationalization of the Post 

Annex II 
Page 34 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 
 Flexibility in designing projects 
through the inclusion of quick-win 
activities is not only helpful in terms 
of achieving quick results (and 
disbursements) but is also useful in 
ensuring that vulnerable groups are 
targeted.  
 Rapid evaluations and proactive 
results monitoring ensures course 
correction particularly when 
exogenous factors negatively 
influence implementation. 

 Flexible project design is necessary 
for i) project interventions to be 
effective; and, ii) for the 
Government and communities to 
have ownership;  
 Building capacity is necessary and 
should focus on at least: i) 
recruitment of qualified staff; and ii) 
development of systems for 
procurement, financial management, 
contract management, M&E etc. 
 AAA activities have to be combined 
with recommendations that are 
combined with a detailed and robust 
action plan so that the Government 
can benefit from the knowledge 
being produced.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex II 
Page 35 of 43 

Lessons and suggestions for the new 
CPS 

CPS PR Outcomes and Milestones  Status and Evaluation Summary 

Lending and AAA 

Milestones: 
 Completion of PCNA with 
transition results framework and 
action plan 
 PCNA action plans contributes 
to enhanced governance, 
improved service delivery in 
fragile and conflict affected 
regions with direct community 
participation including CDD 
mechanisms 
 Key infrastructure and public 
services restored in conflict-
affected areas.  

partially achieved. A total of 15.5 km 
of provincial highway in Swat district 
In FATA, resettlement activities 
undertaken in advance of the 52 km 
road construction. 

Crisis Needs Assessment 
(OPCNA) (FY 12) 
 Public Expenditure Review – 
KPK (FY 12) 
 Balochistan Development 
Needs Assessment (BDNA) (FY 
13) 
 On-going AAA: 
 MDTF Sub-National Fiscal 
Management II (FY 2014) 
 MDTF Governance TA in 
Conflict (FY 2014) 
 Review of Anti-Corruption 
Establishments in KPK (FY 
2014) 

 
 
 
	
 
 
Table 2: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY10-14) 

Annex II 
Page 36 of 43 

US	($	millions)
IBRD
IDA

US($	millions)
IBRD
IDA

Status	

300 Subtotal	

100 Actual	
200 Actual	
Actual	
300 Dropped	due	to	macro	situation
Actual	
100 Actual	($250	mln)	‐ renamed	KPK/FATA	
the	request	of	GoP	
Emergency	Recovery.	Canceled	subsequently,	at	
300 Dropped	due	to	macro	situation
100 Dropped	due	to	change	in	client	priorities
20 Actual	
55 Delayed		
32 Dropped	due	to	implementation	issues	in	phase	I
Moved	to	FY12 ($840	mln)
24 Actual	
50 Delayed	to	FY14
Moved	to	FY12 ($200	mln)
Highways	Rehabilitation	Project
Earthquake	ERC (AF)
Tertiary	Education
Flood	Emergency	Cash	Transfer
Punjab	Education (AF)
Sindh	Education	(AF)
3rd Partnership	for	Polio	Eradication	(AF)

Additional	Actual	Projects

981	 Subtotal	
1281	

Subtotal:		FY10‐11	Actual	

300

100
200
250
21
24
130
300
300
125
50
50
41

1291	
1591

146
116

262	
262

146
112

400
200

858	
858	

Project	
Fiscal	
Year	
CAS	Plans	for	FY10‐11		

Subtotal	

Higher	Education	Support	Program
Social	Safety	Nets	DPC		
Punjab	Barrages	Improvement	Phase	II
Karachi	Port	Improvement	
PRSC	I	
NWFP	Emergency	Recovery	Credit	
NWFP	Human	Development	
PRSC	II	
Sindh	Skills	Development	Project
Enhance	Nutrition	for	Mothers	and	Children	Project
HIV/AIDS	II	
Tarbela	IV	Hydropower	Extension
Central/South	Asia	Regional	Electricity	Transmission
Gas	Enhancement	and	Efficiency	Improvement
Improved	Financial	Report	and	Auditing	II

FY10	

FY11	

CAS	Plans	for	FY12‐14		
Sub	total	
Subtotal:		CAS	Plans	for	FY10‐11	

 
 
 
	
	
	
Fiscal	
Year	

FY12	

FY13	

FY14	

Project	

PRSC	III	
Sindh	Education	Sector	Project	II
Education	Project	(Region)	
Punjab	Education	Sector	Project	II
Electricity	Transmission	and	Distribution	APL	II
Tertiary	Education	Project	
Safety	Net	–	Graduation	(AF)	
Balochistan	Education	(AF)	
Punjab	Large	Cities	
Punjab	Land	Records	(AF)	
3rd	Polio	Eradication	(2nd	AF)		
Punjab	Health	Sector	Project	
Punjab	Public	Sector	Management Reform	Program
Power	Sector	Reform	DPC	
Fiscally	Sustainable	and	Inclusive	Growth	DPC
Dasu	Hydropower	

Subtotal	

Subtotal	

Annex II 
Page 37 of 43 

US($	millions)
IBRD
IDA

400
100

500

350
150
250
100
440
150
70
400
24
100
120
50

744

1290

US	($	millions)
IBRD
IDA

200

200

Status	

Additional	Actual	Projects

350 Moved	to	FY13 ($400	mln)
300	 Dropped	due	to	macro	situation
300 Actual	
30 Delayed	
300 Delivered	in	FY11
Dropped	due	to	implementation	issues	in	phase	I
100	 Actual	
15 Financed	under	MDTF
Tarbela	IV	Hydropower	Extension
Punjab	Irrigated	Agriculture
Natural	Gas	Efficiency	Project
150 Actual	(Revised	title	– Punjab	Cities	Governance	
Improvement)	
24 Actual	
70 Actual	
Actual	
100 Actual	
40 Actual	
Actual	CASA	1000	(includes	regional	IDA	of	$80	
300 On	track	($600	mln)
mln)	
300 On	track	($400	mln)
700 On	track	($565	mln	IDA	credit	&	$115 mln IDA
credit	guarantee)		

344 Subtotal	

1395 Subtotal	

Subtotal	
Subtotal:	FY12‐14	CAS	Progress	Report	Plans	
Total	(FY10‐14	CPS/CPS	PR	Plans)1/	

200
1058

1340 Subtotal	
3079 																				Subtotal:		FY12‐14	Actual	
4360 																				Total	(FY10‐14	Actual)	1/2/	

170
2204
3795

500
762

1/	As of April 2014.   2/ The total projected amount as of June 30, 2014 would be $5,475 million. 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 
Table 2A: IFC – Planned and Actual Investments (FY10-FY14) 

Annex II 
Page 38 of 43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3:  Planned Non Lending Services and Actual deliveries (FY10-14) 

Annex II 
Page 39 of 43 

Fiscal	
Year	
CAS	Plans	for	FY10‐11	

Name	of	the	Activity	

Poverty	Assessment	
Public	Expenditure	Review
Financial	Sector	Assessment	Update

Type	

RPT	
RPT	
RPT	
HTG	
RPT	
HTG	
HTG	
HTG	
IDP	
KSF	
KSF	
IDP	
IDP	
NLTA	
POL	
NLTA	
NLTA	
NLTA	
RPT	
RPT	
RPT	
RPT	
RPT	
RPT	
POL	
POL	
POL	

FY10	

FY11	

Agriculture	Value	Added
Government	Debt	and	Cash	Management
Urban	Policy	Reform		
Agricultural	Adaptation	to	Climate	Change
Environmental	Sustainability	and	Industry
Country	Economic	Memorandum
Institutions	of	Accountability	Review
PEFA	Updates	
Procurement	Performance	Assessment
Social	Protection	Report
Education	Sector	Review
Regional	Transportation	Study	
Climate	Change	Adaptation
Export	Competitiveness/Trade	Policy

Status	

Additional	Products	Completed	in	FY10

Completed	(FY10)
Completed	(FY11)
Pakistan	Health	Sector	Review
Implement	Decentralization	Balochistan
Improvement	Debt	and	Cash	Management
Competition	Policy	II
Pakistan	PPP	NLTA
Integrated	Solid	Waste	management
Punjab	Property	Tax	Reform
Environment	Program
Improving	Procurement	Capability	of	TMA
TA	on	FM	&	Procurement	Harmonization
Completed	(FY11)
Completed	(FY13)
Completed	(FY12)
Completed	(FY11)
On	going
Completed	(FY12)
Completed	(FY12)

 
 
 
 
 
		
		
		
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Name	of	the	Activity	

CAS	Plans	for	FY12‐14	

	Export	Competitiveness/Trade	Policy	
Gender	Notes	
	Sector	Governance	Analysis
Securities	Market	
	Province	Revenue	Mobilization
	Poverty	Update	
	National	Education	Assessment
Social	Safety	Net	Impact	Evaluation	Report
	Evaluation	of	Sindh	Differential	Stipends
	Tax	Administration	NLTA
	Labor	Market	&	Vulnerability
	Environmental	Management	for	Growth	and	Poverty	Alleviation	in	Sindh
Access	to	Finance	&	Bank	Resolution

Fiscal	
Year	

FY11	

FY12‐
14	

FY12	

Type	

POL	
POL	
RPT	
POL	
HTG	
RPT	
HTG	
HTG	
HTG	
HTG	
IDP	
CDR	
KSF	
POL	
POL	
IAR	
RPT	

RPT	
RPT	
RPT	
RPT	

Annex II 
Page 40 of 43 

Status	
Additional	Products	Completed	in	FY11

Post	Crisis	Needs	Assessment
NWFP	Mining	Sector	Policy	Note
Revenue	Mobilization
Doing	Business	in	Pakistan
TA	for	Social	Protection	Reform
Relief	in	Disaster
Insolvency	Framework
Poverty	Monitoring
GFDRR:	Pakistan	Floods	PDNA
Agriculture	Competitiveness
PPP	Assistance
Air	Quality	Management	&Climate	Change
Planning	Commission
Completed	(FY12)
Completed	(FY12)
Completed	(FY12)
Completed	(FY12)
Completed	(FY12)
Post	Disaster	Housing	Capacity	Building
Greening	Freight	Transport	PSIA	&	SEA
KPK PER
IE	of	Sindh	PPP	Intervention

Additional	Products	Completed	in	FY12

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Fiscal	
Year	

FY12	

FY13	

FY14	

Type	

CDR	
CDR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
STS	
STS	
RPT	
PER	
EPD	
EPD	
EPD	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
STS	
RPT	
PFA	
RPT	
RPT	
IAR	
IAR	

Name	of	the	Activity	

Sindh	PEFA	Assessment
Consumer	Protection	&	Financial	Literacy
Labor	Supply	and	Vulnerability
Education	Sector	Review
Disaster	Recovery	and	Social	Protection
Impact	Evaluation	of	SSN	Program
Pakistan	(Balochistan)	EI‐TAF

Annex II 
Page 41 of 43 

Status	

Additional	Products	Completed	in	FY13

Large	Scale	Efficient	Lighting	Program
Punjab	WASA	Restructuring	
Resettlement	&	Land	Acquisition
Operationalization	of	the	KPK/FATA	PCNA
Subnational	Doing	Business	Follow	Up
Financial	Exclusion	of	Women	Entrepreneurs
Strengthening	Market	Governance
Bank	Netherlands	Water	Support	Program
Financial	Management:	Federal	&	Provincial		
SOE	Reform
Sindh:	Climate	Change	&	Environment	Priorities
Inclusive	Green	Industrial	Growth
Water	Supply	and	Sanitation	Sector	Note
Development	Dialogue	&	Policy	Notes
Punjab	Social	Sector	PER
CEM	Towards	Accelerating	Growth
Pakistan	India	Power	Interconnection
Agricultural	Competitiveness
Pakistan	AML/CFT	Support
Health	Shocks	in	Disasters
Pre‐Post	Election	Development	Dialogue
Mining	and	Regional	Integration
Balochistan	Needs	Assessment
M&E	of	Transport	Sector
Debt	Management
On	going
On	going
On	going
On	going
On	going
On	going
On	going

Additional	Products	to	be	Completed	in	FY14

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Fiscal	
Year	

FY14	

Type	

IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	
IAR	

Name	of	the	Activity	

Business	Registration	Reform
Multi	Sectoral	Nutrition	Dialogues	and	TA
MDTF	Subnational	Fiscal	mgmt.	II
Poverty	Update	II	
Punjab	Competitiveness
MDTF	Governance	TA	in	Conflict
Subnational	Fiscal		
Government	Debt	Policy

Status	

On	going
On	going
On	going
On	going
On	going
On	going
On	going
On	going

Annex II 
Page 42 of 43 

CDR: Client Document Review 
EPD: Event Proceeding Document 
HTG: “How‐To” Guidance 
IAR: Advisory Service Review 
IDP: Institutional Development Policy 
KSF: Knowledge Sharing Forum 
POL: Policy Note 
RPT: Report 
STS: Sector or Thematic Study/Note 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
 
Table 3A:  IFC - Planned and Actual Advisory Services (FY10-FY14) 

Annex II 
Page 43 of 43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex III 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex III: CPS (FY2015-19) Stakeholders Consultations for World Bank Group Pakistan 

1. 
The process of developing the World Bank Group Pakistan CPS has been participatory and a 
diverse range of stakeholders and clients in Pakistan have been consulted. Beginning in July 2013 and 
lasting through January 2014, consultations under round one were conducted in various forms: in face-to-
face meetings, by mail, as well as online. Almost 30 meetings were held in five different cities across 
Pakistan by the CPS core team, attended by over 400 individuals. Meetings to discuss national 
development priorities were held in Islamabad while sessions with provincial stakeholders were 
conducted in Lahore, Quetta, Karachi, and Peshawar. Discussions for the Federally Administered Tribal 
Areas (FATA) were held in Peshawar; and for other regions in Islamabad.  

2. 
The WBG met with individuals from civil society organizations, media representatives, 
parliamentarians, Chief Ministers and cabinet members, civil servants, academics, think tanks, youth 
groups, the private sector, and other local and international development partners. 

Distribution of Stakeholders

Provincial Participation

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Private Sector

7%

5%

Think
Tanks/Academia/
Media/ Civil
Society/ Youth
Parliamentarians

10%

22%

20%

21%

15%

Government

Sindh

Punjab

Balochistan

Fed

KP

FATA

Others

3. 
Along with this, the World Bank Group commissioned a Client Satisfaction Survey, conducted 
by Gallup Pakistan, and a short survey on its Pakistan Facebook page, to which 700 and 3000 people 
respectively responded. 

Consultation Sessions Round I:  

4. 

Below are some common messages and themes heard across various groups of stakeholders: 

 Jobs creation remains an important goal for the country, through a strategy that is private sector led, 
for which conducive investment conditions and a strong regulatory environment are necessary. 
 Partnerships with the private sector were considered essential for reaching the development goals of 
ending extreme poverty and building shared prosperity. 
 Governance and anti-corruption reforms came out as the third important theme, with an increasing 
recognition that support to devolution / local governments, public service delivery mechanisms, and 
promoting transparency is important. 
 Tackling the energy crisis with low-cost generation options like hydro-power, and improving access 
to community-led small-scale off-grid and renewable energy sources for difficult areas like 
Balochistan and FATA. 
 Fostering entrepreneurship and access to finance, increasing economic opportunities and 
productively engaging youth and women. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
Annex III 
Page 2 of 2 

 Improving social service delivery, particularly investing in education and health and focusing on 
women and children. 
 Addressing inequity in all shapes and forms (with special attention to lagging regions and vulnerable 
groups). 
 Combatting climate change and improving water management – disaster preparedness and recovery 
support, storage dams, modern irrigation techniques, improving availability and quality of drinking 
water. 

5. 
There were some unique features in priorities among the provinces and regions, reflecting the 
different development contexts and needs. Punjab’s focus is on energy and improving the investment 
climate to attract the private sector, while in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, improving the security situation and 
restoring peace were identified as foremost priorities. In Balochistan, water scarcity, transparency and 
benefit sharing of development of natural resources, girls’ education and private sector access to finance 
came out as major concerns. For FATA, governance and constitutional reforms and bringing the region at 
par with the rest of the country were identified as crucial to achieving development results. For other 
regions, attracting private investment was of key importance to develop natural resources and reduce 
dependence on federal transfers. Energy, economy, education and youth skills enhancement, revenue 
mobilization, restructuring of state-owned enterprises; and climate change were highlighted as the top 
priorities at the federal / national level. 

Client Satisfaction Survey:  

6. 
The Client Satisfaction Survey, administered by Gallup, asked questions about what Pakistan’s 
development priorities should be in the next five years. All in all, over 1000 hours of interviews were 
conducted and 711 responses received – 523 from stakeholders and 188 from World Bank Group clients.  

7. 
Education and energy were identified as the two major priorities that the WBG should focus on. 
Other priorities identified included economic growth, job creation, agricultural development, law and 
justice, health, and anti-corruption. The organization was seen as the best among its category, although 
stakeholders and clients had divided views about the effectiveness and value for money of some Bank 
programs. The WBG was advised to work more with academia and local governments.  

Facebook Survey:  

8. 
Conducted on the World Bank Pakistan's page, the survey reached approximately 20 percent of 
the country’s Facebook audience, receiving 3013 responses, from all regions of the country. More than 
two-thirds of respondents were less than 35 years old. Education was by far the most important 
development priority, with energy, job creation, and governance also featuring prominently.  

Consultations Sessions Round II:  

9. 
Second round of stakeholder consultations meetings were held in March 2014 (Karachi, Lahore, 
Quetta, Islamabad) to validate the draft strategy.  The proposed CPS result areas were endorsed and some 
further suggestions to improve focus and implementation were shared.  

10. 
Full summaries of the consultation meetings (Round 1 & 2) and detailed findings of the Client 
Satisfaction and Facebook surveys can be found at:  
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2014/02/06/world-bank-holds-country-wide-consultations-
for-new-pakistan-strategy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annex IV 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex IV: Poverty and Shared Prosperity in Pakistan 

1. 
WBG is aiming to contribute to improvements in measuring progress towards poverty 
alleviation and shared prosperity and how programs and policies contribute them.  A main goal 
during the CPS period is to put into place an institutional framework to regularly estimate, monitor, report 
and evaluate poverty and shared prosperity; and to analyze the impact of programs and policy measures. 

2. 
Pakistan has made impressive progress in reducing absolute poverty and improving shared 
prosperity during the last two decades.  According to World Bank Group’s estimates, the percentage of 
population below the national poverty rate fell from 34.7 percent in FY02 to an estimated 13.6 percent in 
FY11. This decline is impressive by international standards. From 2002 to 2008, the pace of poverty 
decline ranked 13th out of the 37 countries for which data are available. The factors explaining the FY02-
08 poverty rate decline are well known, but those suggested behind the FY08-11 decline (remittances, 
support to selected agricultural prices, better crop seeds, BISP targeted interventions) remain affected by 
data reliability issues. Nonetheless, the country has already achieved the first Millennium Development 
Goal (MDG) by more than halving the proportion of people whose income is less than $1.25 a day 
between 1991 and 2011. According to WBG’s estimates, assuming average moderate growth (4.2 
percent), Pakistan would be on track to meet the WBG goal of reducing extreme poverty to 3 percent by 
2030. Higher growth (7 percent) would advance reaching such milestone by about a decade.  

3. 
Pakistan’s impressive progress against poverty is also reflected in broadly shared 
prosperity.  Real per capita consumption of the bottom 40 percent of the population grew 5.5 percent in 
FY06-08.  This rate of growth for the bottom 40 percent exceeded that of the top 60 percent, which grew 
by 4 percent over the same period.  However, progress slowed down to 1.4 percent in FY09-11 due to a 
variety of shocks at the end of the decade, including floods, conflict, the global slowdown and the 
aftermath of the macro crisis of 2007/08. The improvement in living standards for the bottom 40 percent 
remains impressive by regional standards: Between 2002 and 2011, shared prosperity in Pakistan was 
higher than in all SAR countries, except for Nepal.  

4. 
Despite this impressive progress, nearly 26 million people remain poor.  Poverty rates 
remain sizeable in each province, and too many households are still vulnerable to falling back into 
poverty. Punjab has about 57 percent of the poor, followed by Sindh (23 percent), KPK (14 percent) and 
Balochistan (6 percent).  Poverty rates do not vary significantly across provinces, except for Balochistan, 
as a sizeable portion of residents in Balochistan are nomadic and live in conflict areas that are difficult to 
reach. Since 2002 reductions in poverty have been fastest in KPK (28.5 percentage points); and in more 
populous—and rural—Sindh and Punjab, falling by 24.8 and 17.8 percentage points respectively between 
FY02 and FY11.  Pakistan’s recent gains in poverty were rapid, but remain fragile, in part because many 
households are clustered near the poverty line. Therefore, a small reduction in consumption can greatly 
increase poverty rates, and vice versa.  

5. 
Furthermore, poverty measurement remains controversial in Pakistan. An inordinate 
amount of energy and attention in the poverty debate has focused on the accuracy of a single number – 
the Poverty headcount rate – instead of on the underlying factors driving poverty and the programs that 
might improve the welfare of the poor.  The large decline in headcount poverty has been met with 
considerable public skepticism, and respected economists in Pakistan are producing estimates that are at 
odds with the official figures. The 2007/08 poverty figures were never officially released and estimates of 
the 2010/11 poverty rate were only recently validated. Poverty estimates are indeed affected by several 
methodological imperfections. The Government has established a Technical Group to review poverty 
methodology, find sources of variance in poverty estimates, update the poverty line based on a revised 
consumption basket, and recommend final official estimates. Nonetheless, different estimates do not alter 
the main conclusion that poverty has fallen substantially.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex IV 
Page 2 of 2 

 The poverty line has not been updated in many years. The official national poverty line is based on 
the simple food energy intake approach (with minimum caloric intake of 2350) using the 1998-99 
data. As a result, the current reference basket may not accurately reflect the consumption patterns of 
the households in the bottom quintiles. A re-estimation of the poverty line is urgently needed to 
obtain accurate estimates.  
 The poverty line is updated using the inflation rate from the Consumer Price Index (CPI), applied to 
household data on consumption collected in the Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement 
(PSLM) Survey. The CPI may not be an adequate index to adjust for inflation over time, however, as 
PBS collects price data for the CPI only from big cities and ignores price changes in rural areas. 
 The CPI measures price changes for the average household, but the poor spend an above-average 
share of their budget on food. Since food prices have been growing faster than non-food process, the 
CPI has underestimated price increases for the poor. Correcting for this raises poverty by about 3 
percentage points. Also, spatial price adjustment for expenditure is carried out using unit prices for 
food in the PSLM. As a result, spatial price adjustment is based entirely on food prices and its 
reliability declines when food and non-food prices change at a different rate over time. 
 PBS has not collected a population census data since 1998. The lack of a recent population census 
reduces the reliability of the sampling frame used to select the PSLM households and determine the 
population weights. This is a serious problem in Balochistan with a vast territory and a highly 
dispersed population. Migration and conflict may have also aggravated the sampling problem in 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK) in the last few years. 
 The household survey questionnaire does not include sufficient information on the expenditure of 
durable goods. As the share of non-food consumption increases in Pakistan, consumption estimates 
without durable goods become more unreliable.  
6. 
A new institutional approach is called for as the debate, among other things, needs to shift 
from poverty measurement to poverty analysis. Over the next several years, WBG’s efforts on poverty 
will shift towards institutionalizing the work through a constructive partnership with official authorities, 
donors and academia toward high-quality and timely poverty and shared prosperity measurement, 
analysis and program evaluation. WBG proposes to support the Pakistan Bureau of Statistics and the 
Ministry of Planning in their effort to foster a partnership among in-country professionals/think tanks that 
will carry out the poverty update with its publication at a fixed date each year, and refocus the poverty 
debate on programs and policies. 

7. 
In the short term (1 to 2 years), we propose to make progress on two fronts. The first is to 
organize a national conference in mid-2014 on poverty measurement that will set a roadmap for poverty 
data upgrade. The WBG should contribute with a solid review of the relevant literature on poverty in 
Pakistan, presenting alternative indicators and robustness tests, and discusses the merits of different 
methods. At the same time, we plan to continue providing technical assistance to the Pakistan Bureau of 
Statistics with computer-assisted personal interviews (including mobile data collection devices) to collect 
price and household data, and if requested, support a new census.  

8. 
In the medium term (3-5 years), the Bank’s efforts will shift towards using refined statistical 
tools to (a) improve poverty monitoring; and (b) to evaluate social policy and programs. Currently, 
poverty estimates are only representative at the province level, and additional proxies of poverty collected 
at the Moaza or Tehsil level could be used to generate more detailed estimates to help policymakers 
locate poor pockets within districts. In addition, there is a great need to generate more evidence on the 
effectiveness of different interventions in reducing poverty.  Examples of programs or policies that could 
be evaluated include past expansions in education and infrastructure, particularly health programs such as 
lady health workers or childhood immunizations; income promotion such as the Pakistan Poverty 
Alleviation Fund; the impact of BISP transfers; or training programs designed to help households use 
remittances more effectively.  Generating better evidence on the effects of these programs on poverty can 
provide valuable information to guide future efforts to reduce poverty.    

 
 
 
 
 
Annex V 
Page 1 of 3 

Annex V:  Status of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 

1. 
Pakistan is signatory to the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and is regularly measuring 
its progress towards achieving the eight goals.  Overall, Pakistan’s progress in achieving MDGs has been 
erratic and uneven and it is lagging behind its neighboring countries. Despite some improvements, it 
remains the worst performer in the South Asia Region, only Afghanistan has worse indicators. Review of 
data which is available only for 33 indicators, indicates that the progress is mixed with Pakistan on track 
to achieve the targets on 11 indicators and off track on the remaining 22 indicators. The achievement of 
MDGS varies for federating units across Pakistan. Punjab’s performance is significantly better than the 
other provinces followed by Khyber Pakhtunkwa. Both provinces’ performance is higher than the national 
average in 14 and 10 of the MDGs indicators respectively.  Sindh and Balochistan lag significantly 
behind other provinces.   The country is not likely to achieve the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) related to human development (education and health), is partially on track to achieve those 
related to eradicate extreme poverty and on track to achieve those related to ensuring environment 
sustainability.  

Summary of Status of MDGs in Pakistan1 

MDG Goal 
Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger 
Achieve Universal Primary Education 
Promote Gender Equality & Empower Women 
Reduce Child Mortality 
Improve Maternal Health 
Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria & other diseases 
Ensure Environmental Sustainability 

Status 
Partially on Track 
Off Track 
Off Track 
Off Track 
Off Track 
On Track 
On Track 

Indicators off Track 
2/3 
3/3 
3/5 
3/6 
5/5 
4/5 
4/6 

2. 
On reducing extreme poverty, Pakistan is on track by more than halving the proportion of people 
living on less than $1.25 a day between 1991 and 2011.  The percentage of population below the national 
poverty rate has fallen from 34.7 percent in FY02 to an estimated 13.6 percent in FY11.   

3. 
Pakistan has made some improvements in primary school enrollments and gender parity in 
primary and secondary education. However, despite improvements, efforts remain inadequate to address 
the large burden caused by the growing population and Pakistan is unlikely to achieve MDGs related to 
primary education, but it is on track for gender parity.  

4. 
Pakistan’s performance in maternal and child health (MCH) has improved, but it remains a poor 
performer in the South Asia Region, only Afghanistan has worse indicators. Significant inequity exists in 
health service access and utilization, and little has changed for the poorest and rural population since the 
1990s.  

5. 
Pakistan is also off track on most MDGs related to health, nutrition and population. Given its 
current rate of progress, in 2015 Pakistan’s infant mortality rate (IMR) will be 65 deaths per 1,000 live 
births and the under-five mortality rate (U5MR) will be 78, considerably above the MDG4 targets of 33 
and 43 deaths per 1000 births respectively. Pakistan will not achieve the MDG related to nutrition as the 
progress is off track on achieving target related to under nutrition where interventions coverage remains 
limited.  Childhood malnutrition in Pakistan is higher than in sub-Saharan Africa, and the rate of decline 
is significantly slower than in the rest of South Asia. In addition, Pakistan’s fertility rate currently at 4.1, 

1 Pakistan MDG Status Report 2012, Government of Pakistan and UNDP Pakistan  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex V 
Page 2 of 3 

although declining, is higher than its neighbors’ and predicted to remain so. While there has been some 
progress on improving health outcomes, the rate of progress is much slower and the poor, in particular, 
are being left behind.   

6. 
Child mortality is declining but it is still high. The IMR and the U5MR at 74 and 89 deaths per 
1,000 live births are significantly higher than Bangladesh and India. At these levels, it implies that almost 
1 in every 10 children born in Pakistan between 2001-02 and 2011-12 died before reaching five years of 
age.  Maternal mortality remains high at 276 per 100,000 live births however no recent data is available.  
The rate of births attended by skilled attendants and institutional delivery, often used as a proxy for the 
maternal mortality rate, are increasing significantly, which is likely to have an impact on maternal 
mortality.  Pakistan also lags behind its neighbors in immunization coverage and contraceptive prevalence 
rate. Both have shown improvements in recent years however the rates are less than a third and less than 
half that of other South Asian countries. 

7. 
Pakistan has made efforts to address issues related to human development in recent years but the 
efforts are inadequate and not enough for achieving MDGs targets.  The slow and uneven progress is 
likely to negatively impact on economic growth. Interventions focused on improving MDGs outcomes are 
necessary for the sector to serve both as a catalyst to growth and as a beneficiary of it.  To achieve this 
Pakistan needs to improve significantly its performance which requires strong leadership, good 
governance, and effective management, particularly at the provincial and district levels to implement 
fundamental reforms, restructure institutions, and strengthen systems in the context of the 18th 
Amendment to the Constitution In addition, the country requires substantial investments in human 
development to meet the growing basic health nutrition and education needs of the large population. 
Without this investment, Pakistan is unlikely to capture a potential demographic dividend and to enjoy 
high levels of economic growth. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex V 
Page 3 of 3 

Pakistan:  Status of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 

Goal
Goal 1 : Eradicate Ex tre me Pove rty and Hunge r
   P roportion of population below the calorie based food plus non-food poverty line
   P reva lence of underweight children under 5 years of age
   P roportion of population below minimum leve l of dietary energy consumption

Goal 2 : Achie ve Unive rs al Primary Education
   Net primary enrollment ratio
   Completion/survia l rate Grade 1 to 5
   Literacy rate

Goal 3 : Promo te Ge nde r Equality and Wome n's Empowe rme nt
   Gender parity index, primary education
   Gender parity index, secondary education
   Youth literacy gender parity index
   Share of women in wage employment in the non-agricutural sector

Goal 4 :  Re duce M ortality
   Under 5 mortality rate (deaths per 1,000 live births)
   Infant mortality rate (deaths per 1,000 live births)
   P roportion of fully immunized children 12-23 months
   P roportion of under 1 year children immunized against measles
   P roportion of children under 5 who suffered from diarrhea in the last 30 days
   Lady health worker's coverage (percent of target population)

Goal 5 : Improve M ate rnal He alth
   Ma ternal mortality ratio
   P roportion of births attended by skilled birth attendants
   Contraceptive prevalence rate

Goal 6 : Compat HIV/AIDS, M alaria and Othe r Dis e as e s

   HIV P revalence amont 15-49 year old pregnant women
   P roportion of population in malaria risk areas using effective malaria prevention and 
treatment measures
   Incidence of tuberculosis per 100,00 popula tion
   P roportion of TB cases detected and cured under DOTS (Direc t Observation Treatment   
Short Course)

Goal 7 : Ens uring Environe me ntal Sus tainability
   Forest cover
   Land area protected for consera tion of wildlife
   GDP (in 1980-81 Rs.) per ton of oil equivalent (energy efficiency)
   Sulfur content in High Speed Diesel
   P roportion of population with access to improved water sources
   P roportion of population with access to sanitation

2001 /02

2007 /08

2010 /11

2011 /12

34.50
41.50
30.00

42.00
57.00
45.00

0.82
0.75
0.65
9.65

..
77.00
53.00
57.00
12.00
38.00

350.00
24.00
28.00

17.20
38.00
..

55.00
47.00
56.00

0.88
0.82
0.78
9.89

..
..
73.00
76.00
10.00
76.00

..
40.00
30.00

12.40
..
..

56.00
49.00
58.00

0.88
0.85
0.79
10.45

..
..
81.00
82.00
11.00
..

..
47.00
..

..
31.50
..

57.00
50.00
58.00

0.90
0.81
0.81
..

89.00
74.00
80.00
81.00
8.00
..

..
51.00
..

Targe t 
(2015 )

13.00
<20
13.00

100.00
100.00
88.00

1.00
0.94
1.00
14.00

52.00
40.00
>90
>90
<10
100.00

140.00
>90
55.00

..

..

..

0.04

Baseline t o be 
reduced by 50%

20.00
181.00

30.00
181.00

40.00
230.00

79.00

85.00

..

4.80
11.20
27,047
1.00
86.00
45.00

5.00
11.30
24,852
1.00
91.00
66.00

5.20
11.50
..
0.60
87.00
66.00

..
..

..

5.20
11.50
..
..
89.00
72.00

75.00
45.00

85.00

6.00
12.00
28,000
0.5-0.25
93.00
90.00

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex VI 
Page 1 of 1 

Annex VI: Government of Pakistan’s Vision 2025 (Proposed) 

1. 
The Ministry of Planning, Development and Reform is undertaking work on two development 
plans; a long term plan Vision 2025, and a five-year medium term plan for the tenure of the current 
government.  

2. 
The Vision 2025 aims at transforming Pakistan into a developed and export-led economy with 
strong social values through promoting inclusiveness, peace and security and greater inter-provincial 
harmony. It aims to achieve a per capita income of US$ 5,000 by 2025 through private sector led growth, 
a responsive and accountable civil service, vibrant civil society, and strong democratic values and 
institutions. 

3. 
As such, the objectives of Vision 2025 include a good quality of life and high living standard for 
all citizens, while depending on domestic resources, reducing poverty and investing in job creation and 
youth centric programs.  

4. 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 
vii. 

viii. 

ix. 

The following are the proposed pillars of the Vision:1 
Energy security through a holistic and integrated approach espousing principles of 
availability, efficiency, affordability and competition. 
Sustained and inclusive higher growth in a stable macroeconomic environment. To achieve 
an annual average growth rate of 7 to 8 percent that is inclusive and endogenous. 
Private sector led growth through incentivizing innovation, quality and productivity 
enhancement in an open economy without distortionary concessions and exemptions. 
Modernization of existing infrastructure and creation of state of the art new infrastructure to 
support a vibrant and growing economy through innovative modes of financing like Public 
Private Partnerships and reducing the government footprint. Improving regional connectivity 
through trade corridors, motorways, energy corridors, and industrial zones. 
Improving Competitiveness in Industry & Trade: Transforming productive sectors into 
value-added and globally competitive sectors through facilitation, dynamic productivity 
growth, transparency, fairness, customer satisfaction, innovative and knowledge based 
production mechanism. 
Internal resource mobilization with focus on Taxes, Investment & Export promotion (TIE). 
Institutional and governance reforms: Strengthening democratic governance through 
institutional reforms in public, judicial, financial, and economic institutions. Ensuring 
supremacy of merit, transparency, community participation and digitalization. Introducing 
professional management in State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) in a transparent fashion and 
holding them accountable with periodic performance evaluation. 
Harnessing the potential of Social capital especially human resource development to reap 
demographic dividend through creating job opportunities.  
Revival of Confidence through extensive stakeholder consultations, improving security, 
enhancing competitiveness, providing incentives and establishing Business and Economic 
Councils. 

1 http://www.pc.gov.pk/?page_id=145 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex VII 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex VII: Filters for Selectivity for the Pakistan CPS FY15-19 

1. 
The World Bank’s loan portfolio has grown to over 30, from about 24 projects a few years ago.  
This can be traced to three factors – (i) the tendency to extend ongoing projects rather than complete 
them, (ii) the desire to be in all provinces in all sectors, in light of the devolution of responsibilities to the 
provinces, and (iii) the establishment of the MDTF for border areas, with its large number of small 
projects.  Similarly, IFC has ramped up its investments in the private sector since the last five years, with 
a portfolio of some US$810 million in 38 companies. These increasing trends across the WBG are 
understandable, but at the same time there are risks that the World Bank Group will be spread too thin, 
reducing rather than increasing its impact. Therefore it is critical that strong selectivity filters be 
established with buy-in from the Country Team, Government and Civil Society.  

2. 
The most important filter for selectivity will be how the operation fits within the twin goals 
to (i) reduce extreme poverty and (ii) build shared prosperity.  For this, the CPS has identified the 
four pillars or result areas of intervention (energy, private sector development, inclusion, and service 
delivery) and a few key outcomes sought in each area.  Any project to be considered will first be viewed 
within this lens and for their ability to directly contribute to the two goals of poverty reduction and shared 
prosperity.  The WBG would aim that our entire program be directly linked to the key CPS outcomes that 
in turn contribute directly to the twin goals.   

3. 
The other top filter will be country, province and region level priorities. The Government has 
laid out significant goals in its political manifesto, has established several sectoral plans such as in energy 
and tax reform, and is working on a comprehensive national development framework.  In addition, each 
of the provinces is either preparing a provincial strategy or has sectoral strategies within it.  Taken as a 
whole, these documents can be used to guide WBG operations. Where these do not exist, it will be 
important to get clear guidance and commitment from appropriate authorities.  Feedback of civil society, 
the beneficiaries, the poor and the private sector can also be used. The WBG would aim for all activities to 
be linked to one or more of these national / provincial priorities and would only go forward with a project 
with the clear guidance of the government as appropriate.   

4. 
Beyond the above two overarching filters, the World Bank Group would take into account the 
following considerations in developing its programs: 

 Priority should be given to larger, more transformational operations.  This often means working with 
other partner organizations and the private sector to leverage our interventions.  It can also mean 
finding ways of working across sectors within a particular province, or across provinces within a 
particular sector (while at the same time keeping projects as simple as possible). However, there will 
always be room for smaller pilot operations or continuing on a selected basis ongoing operations that 
have a good track-record.   

 Activities that work across sectors or between IFC/Bank/MIGA or between countries should be given 
special attention. The WBG Group is often at its best, and can add most value, when it works at the 
intersection of institutions, regions / places or sectors, where others find it hard to operate. 

 Balance is Needed Between Federal/Provincial and Between Provinces: The bulk of operations in the 
portfolio should be in the provinces, and there should be some balance between provinces 
(particularly between the two largest – Punjab and Sindh and the least developed Balochistan) in the 
portfolio. As a benchmark, a 30/70 split between Federal and Provincial operations would be aimed 
for.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex VII 
Page 2 of 2 

 Balance is Needed between Development Policy Financing and Investment Operations:  As long as 
the macro-environment permits, budget support policy operations are appropriate.  Synergy is greatest 
where you have areas supported by both policy reform in budget support operations and related 
investments. But budget support would remain within 20-30 percent of the program overall (inclusive 
of Development Policy Financing Operations at both the federal and provincial levels). 

 For MDTF, the first round started small, with the intention to scale up success.  As we approach the 
second round, it will be important to make good on this promise and scale up those areas of success.  
It will also be important to make the MDTF the tool to coordinate funds from all sources going 
towards expenditures in a particular area.    

 For IFC and MIGA:   In addition to the above filters (client priorities and large, transformation 
projects which exploit synergy among the World Bank Group) the IFC and MIGA also need to pay 
close attention to the sponsors and management (Integrity Due Diligence – IDD) of the operation to 
keep reputational risk manageable. At the same time, special focus will be on private sector 
development in the least developed Balochistan, KP and FATA to enhance local resource generation 
and employment opportunities.   

 For Analytic/Advisory Work:   Analytic work should be prioritized around the same filters as for 
lending with three additional filters used to identify priorities:  (i) analytic work that directly supports 
effective implementation of operations, (ii) analytic work that fills an important knowledge gap, and 
(iii) analytic work that plays an advocacy role on issues that are emerging in importance. 

5. 
The CPS will rely on selectivity filters rather than pre-identifying specific sectors we would 
not be involved in.  Nevertheless, the filters do suggest certain areas where WBG operations would 
be less likely. Such areas include mining development and clean coal power generation, which are 
currently being supported by private sector or development partner e.g. ADB. Other areas of great 
potential are highways and railways, but here the Government itself and other donors may be the best 
provider and the additional value the WBG would bring beyond financing is unclear. Nevertheless, these 
areas are not ruled out, and in fact some knowledge and capacity building efforts may be useful even 
when lending is not yet warranted.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annex VIII 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex VIII: World Bank Group – Pakistan Energy Initiative 

1. 
Pakistan’s energy sector is facing a serious crisis, especially in electricity.  Based on 
preliminary estimates, the poorly performing electricity sector is thought to have reduced GDP growth by 
2 percent per annum for the past several years.  The sector relies heavily on government support, through 
direct subsidies amounting to about 1.75 percent of GDP in FY12/13.  Costs that cannot be recovered 
from consumers or the government accumulate on the books of the public electricity distribution 
companies (Discos).  The Discos in turn fail to pay fully for goods and services they receive, especially 
electricity, thus spreading the shortfall throughout the supply chain.  Commonly called the circular debt, 
these accumulated arrears amounted to about four percent of GDP in FY12/13.  Actions are required to 
address two main distortions: the longstanding gap between the cost of service and revenues gained either 
from tariffs or subsides; and the unusually high cost of providing that service.  At the same time, there is a 
need to address the inequities caused by poorly targeted subsidies and ensure that the sector develops in a 
socially and environmentally sustainable way. 
2. 
For sustained economic growth, Pakistan needs to increase generation capacity by over 
10,000 MW in the next 5 years.  It must also reduce reliance on imported fuel oil/diesel based thermal 
generation. The sector requires huge investments requiring at least $3-4 billion in funding annually. This 
funding far exceeds the capacity of the public sector and development institutions combined. Innovative 
financing solutions and instruments are, therefore, required to attract private funding from new sources, 
especially in low cost hydro and renewable sources. Reforms of the sector are critical to sustain the 
investments in new generation and enhance the financial viability of the sector. 
3. 
The WBG has embarked upon a “Transformational Power Initiative”, to support 
significant new investments and reforms in the power sector. The program aims to mobilize over $10 
billion to support new generation in a mix of public and private projects that address current supply gaps 
and future needs. The program will also support significant reforms for enhancing the financial viability 
of the sector. The objectives pursued under this program include: significant reduction in load-shedding; 
reduction in energy production costs; and improve sustainability of the energy sector. The program 
comprises the following ongoing and new WBG initiatives:  
(I) 
Ongoing WBG Energy Projects in Pakistan 
 Tarbela fourth extension. Approved Feb 2012. The project installs a 1,410 MW hydro plant on an 
existing dam with an already constructed tunnel and adds 6 percent to the country’s installed capacity.  
 Natural Gas Efficiency Project. Approved Apr 2012. The objective is to reduce physical and 
commercial losses of gas in the pipeline system. It covers the south of the country (Sui Southern Gas 
Company Ltd). The project is being restructured.  
 IFC Energy investments: IFC has been supporting low cost generation using indigenous gas and hydro 
resources as well as promoting alternative sources (wind). IFC’s current portfolio comprises: two 
private sector hydro projects- Laraib (84MW) & Star Hydro (147MW); one private power based on 
indigenous gas- Uch-II (404 MW); two wind projects- Zorlu (50MW); and Metro (50MW); and a 
waste to energy- KOEL (25MW). In addition, IFC has financed about 800MW of electricity 
generation for the first privatized integrated electricity utility (K-Electric).   
 Laraib Energy, the first private sector hydro power with 84MW capacity came into operations in 
September 2013. Uch-II Power with 404MW capacity is expected to come on stream by mid-2014, 
while IFC-supported investment by Korea Water in Star Hydro’s 147 MW plant is expected to be 
operational by 2016. 
(II) 
New Energy Reform Program supported by the World Bank: 
4. 
The World Bank is preparing a series of Power Sector Reform Development Policy Credits 
(DPCs) with parallel financing by the ADB and JICA (the first DPC is scheduled for Board on May 1, 
2014).  The DPCs will support the following reforms in the near term: 

 
 
 
Annex VIII 
Page 2 of 2 

 Opening up the gas sector:  to give priority allocation of gas to the power sector; and improve third 
party gas access rules.   
 Addressing circular debt: Government to issue guidance for circular debt management related to 
payment of arrears by distribution companies 
 Reducing discretion in tariff setting: Revising regulatory rules to set tariffs faster and for a longer 
period through objective regulatory channels and publishing principles for setting tariffs. 
 Least-cost investment plan: for all new investments in the sector 
 Improving performance of energy companies, including corporatization/privatization:  Reducing theft, 
arrears and losses; improved management with clear performance contracts; and privatization of few 
distribution companies.   
 Improving transparency:  Widen the availability of information to consumers and others to increase 
accountability, including publishing the order and cost with which it takes the power. 
(III) New WBG Energy Investment Projects: 
 IDA plans to support the first phase of Dasu Hydropower Project (2160 MW) in FY14. This 
investment will alone bring down the overall cost of generation in Pakistan by as much as 5-12 
percent, depending on assumptions.   
 IFC is engaging with local and international sponsors (Chinese and Korean) to finance private energy 
projects, including hydro, thermal, and renewables as well as LNG imports. IFC is expected to 
mobilize substantial equity investment with international investors for the establishment of a platform 
company to develop hydro, thermal, and wind power over the next five years. These efforts will 
leverage and mobilize significant capital to support the large pipeline of power projects in Pakistan. 
 IDA and IFC are working together to bring Central Asia power to Pakistan through Afghanistan 
(CASA-1000).  IDA is also doing a feasibility study for an India / Pakistan transmission line. 

Pakistan Energy Program: Indicators of Transformative Effect 

Problem 

Current situation  

Situation in 2020 if program is 
successfully implemented  

Comment 

Insufficient generation 
capacity & supply 

21,000 MW operational 
93 TWh 

33,000 MW1 
145 TWh 

High costs of energy 

Average cost ¢12 per kWh 

Carbon intensive energy 

30 percent renewables in 
energy mix of capacity  

High losses in production 
and consumption 

Poor Sector Performance 
in a weak institutional 
setting resulting in 
financial deficit 2 

Average distribution losses 19 
percent; Average collections 
85 percent 
Total subsidy 1.8 percent of 
GDP  plus 4 percent of GDP in 
circular debt 

Average cost ¢10 per kWh at least 
20 percent lower  
50 percent renewables in energy 
mix of capacity  

Average distribution losses 16 
percent 
Average collections 96 percent 
Total subsidy 0.4 percent of GDP 

Financing to be secured by 2020 if the 
combined program is successful.   

At constant 2014 prices 

Since some renewables do not generate 
continuously the mix in the actual 
electricity generated will be lower 
Expected levels in line with requirements 
for Discos’ performance targets 

DPC actions support reduction in losses, 
improved collection, timely notifications 
through multi-year tariff keeping in view 
subsidy limitations.  

1 WB investments Tarbela IV 1410 MW hydro, Tarbela V 1000 MW hydro, Dasu Stage I 2160 MW hydro, CASA importing 
1000MW, India Pakistan Interconnector importing 1000, operationalizing existing capacity 2500 through additional  800mmcfd 
gas supplied at 40 percent higher cost.  IFC investments additional 687 MW from existing portfolio (Star Hydro, Uch II, Zorlu 
and Laraib) and additional 2 370MW of hydro solar and wind through CSAIL.   
2 Financial deficit accrue for following reasons: (1) actual distribution losses (19 percent) being higher than NEPRA target (16 
percent), (2) non-collection of bills (current collection rate is 89 percent), (c) 6-9 months delay in tariff determination and 
notification particularly with rising cost and (d) late payment of subsidies. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex IX 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex IX: Promoting More and Better Jobs for Pakistan 

1. 
With an entry of 1.2 million people every year, Pakistan has one of the fastest growing 
labor-force in the world and this number is likely to increase significantly in the coming years. 
During the next 20 years, over 2 million workers will be entering the labour force per year. As such the 
country’s strength, wellbeing and future economic prospects would depend on creating enough quality 
jobs to absorb these new entrants into the job market. The Government of Pakistan is fully cognizant of 
the issue and is geared to meet this challenge over the long term and is dedicated to building a sustainable 
foundation for a growing and prosperous country.  The three key elements of the government’s better jobs 
strategy hinges on:  

2. 
Improving business environment and productivity: With a significant potential of providing 
increased job opportunities, the growth of micro, small and medium enterprise (MSME) sector is severely 
constrained by several factors.  Two central ones are the lack of access to finance and tax regulations.  

 The key issue is that the commercial banks endure a much higher risk and cost in terms of 
identification of bankable MSMEs and conducting their due diligence for them. On the demand side, 
the MSMEs lack information on the requirements to qualify for bank financing. The government 
intends to enhance access to finance by developing an enabling environment that makes MSME 
lending safer, cheaper, and faster, rather than on prescriptive measures such as directed lending 
programs, which often lead to distortions. For this, the government is strengthening credit bureaus to 
help overcome adverse selection and moral hazard in lending, improving efficient secured transaction 
registries for available movable assets to address MSME’s lack of conventional collateral, and 
providing technical assistance and financial literacy training to MSMEs.  

 A cumbersome and inequitable tax system is another obstacle to higher productivity. Pakistan’s tax 
base is very small, and firms in the tax net bear a heavy tax burden.  This dissuades new firms from 
voluntarily registering themselves as taxpayers. In addition, weak political will and inadequate 
administrative capacity to enforce tax laws causing the bulk of the tax burden to fall on a limited 
number of large formal manufacturing firms, thus penalizing the important creators of jobs.  In 
addition, serious distortions have been created in the tax structure through large number of tax 
exemptions and concessions, which accentuate inequities in the system and discourage productivity 
increases. The Government is striving to enhance the efficiency and fairness of the tax system by 
bringing into the tax net a higher number of individuals and businesses; reducing tax exemptions and 
concession; and enhancing the transparency of the tax system. For this, the management and 
organization capacities of revenue administration are being enhanced; information technology is 
being updated and improved to efficiently process massive information flows from taxpayers; and 
investigative and enforcement capacity of tax authorities is being supplemented. A better functioning 
tax system would not only remove distortions which hamper economic activity, but by generating 
higher revenue will expand Government’s fiscal space for more crowding-in investments.  

3. 
Tackling energy shortages through a reliable energy sector.  Pakistan’s poor electricity 
availability features prominently as a major obstacle.   Approximately 75 percent of firms cite electricity 
as a major or severe constraint to business; and reported 69 hours of power outages, on average, per 
month, and lost revenue equivalent to 9.2 percent of sales. Reforming the power sector is, therefore, 
crucial for these firms to expand, and thereby create more jobs.  This will mean addressing the energy 
sector deficit in Pakistan which is estimated to reduce growth by no less than 2 percentage points a year.  
The Government of Pakistan is pursuing a number of avenues to improve the financial and commercial 
viability of the power sector.  These include: (i) increasing the level of tariffs to reflect the cost of supply 
and rationalizing tariffs to address cross subsidization; (ii) reducing losses by improving collection; (iii) 
curbing leakage and improving overall efficiency; (iv) enhancing efficiency through improved 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex IX 
Page 2 of 2 

governance and better management practices of the sector; and (v) improving the capacity and 
independence of regulatory agencies to ensure transparency and accountability in tariff-setting. 

4. 
Enhancing marketable skills and competencies of Pakistani workers.  The Government of 
Pakistan is making significant investments in education to equip its youth with the skills needed to 
compete effectively in the global market.  Nevertheless, education completion levels in Pakistan remain 
low, especially for its rural and female population. Further, Pakistan’s record in student learning is 
modest, with a recent study showing that only 52 percent of students enrolled in Grade 5 were at the 
reading level expected of students in Grade 2, and only 34 percent of children enrolled in Grade 5 could 
do simple arithmetical divisions.  

 Like many developing countries, in Pakistan too, the demand for low skilled workers is waning, while 
the demand for more highly skilled workers—those with secondary and tertiary education—is 
outpacing supply.  This is reflected by higher wage premiums for students who have completed 
higher levels of education than those with little schooling in Pakistan.  In 2008, there was a 26 percent 
wage premium for students who had completed higher secondary versus students who had incomplete 
primary schooling in Pakistan.  

 Given the increasing business’ demand for higher anlaytical skills, there is a need for higher public 
and private investments in tertiary education and pre-employment training systems. In addition, 
equity of these systems needs to be enhanced by improving the access of females to such systems and 
students from the poorer or crises affected regions, particulalry Balochistan, KPK and FATA. Pre-
employment vocational training, in particular, provides a viable alternative for students who do not 
pursue tertiary education. The Government has increased its investment in pre-employment training 
significantly, but as in other countries, it is critical that such training should be of high quality and 
impart skills relevant to the labor market. These include ICT, communication, analytical and 
behavioral skills. Moreover, it is important to encourage firms to invest more in on-the-job training.  
Firms in Pakistan, for instance, provide considerably lower levels of on-the-job training relative to 
comparator countries.  The most recently available figures show that only 17 percent of medium-sized 
farms and only 35 percent of large farms invest in on-the-job training in Pakistan. 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex X 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex X: A New Tax Reform Strategy for Pakistan 

1. 
The Government has designed a Tax Reform Strategy aimed to increase tax collection from 
9.7 to 14 percent of GDP by 2016/17.  The GOP estimates that no less than two-thirds of such effort will 
have to come from the federal government and one quarter from the provincial governments.  And 
success will rely on significant improvement in tax compliance and in the broadening of the tax base by 
improving registration, closing the tax gaps and making taxation more equitable. Such a goal is consistent 
with its commitment to achieve a sustainable deficit of around 4 percent of GDP by FY2016/17 where 
over half of such adjustment should come from revenue mobilization. As an initial step, since December 
2013, FBR is implementing a Plan to enhance revenue mobilization for sales, excises and customs taxes. 
These efforts have been assisted by a WB Project Preparation Facility (PPF) for a Revenue Mobilization 
DLI project, the IMF and DFID. WBG will continue to actively provide technical assistance on tax 
administration in close liaison with our development partners. 

2. 
Lessons learned from the success and failures of previous tax efforts have guided the 
preparation of the new strategy.  The World Bank financed Tax Administration Reform Project 
(TARP) left important learning that helped shape the new strategy: 

 A tax reform initiative is likely to be more successful if it integrates tax policy, with tax 
administration and legal measures.  
 The institutional capacity of the Federal Board Revenue (FBR)--both managerial and technical--
has been eroded over time and needs to be carefully assessed before ramping up reform amplitude 
and intensity. Any reorganizational plans need to be carefully phased with adequate safeguards 
and internal ownership. 
 Hence institutional development, including strategic planning, change management, audit and 
enforcement controls, need to move in parallel with revenue mobilization efforts. 
 An IT-supported performance monitoring and evaluation system should be in place from the 
beginning.   

3. 
The FBR tax reform strategy relies on three pillars: tax policy measures, measures to 
increase the tax base (the elimination of exemptions rooted in distortive Statutory Regulatory 
Orders--SROs), and improved tax administration.   

 Main initial tax policy measures were approved with the FY13/14 budget. These have been the 
one percent increase in the General Sales Tax (GST) last July and the Gas Infrastructure 
Development Cess (GIDC) introduced end-December. With a broader tax base and higher 
collection, GOP expects to avoid further increases in tax rates. 
 Broadening the tax net relies on a 3-year program of elimination of most tax exemptions and 
loopholes granted through Statutory Regulatory Orders (SROs). The ultimate objective of the 
SRO plan is to achieve an increase in revenues of some 1–1½ percent of GDP, with all designated 
SROs eliminated in no more than three years. So far, GOP has issued no new SROs granting so-
called “special exemptions,” compared to some 56 in the previous fiscal year, and by end-
December 2015 legislation is expected to permanently prohibit the practice. FBR plans to start 
eliminating the first batch of SROs identified in the FY2014/15 budget, to be approved by end-
June, as part of a package of identified actions totaling 0.75 percent of GDP. Necessary changes 
will also be made in the tax laws to prohibit a future resort to such ad-hoc policy measures. 
 Tax administration reforms are projected to gradually deliver further improvements in revenue 
collections. A massive initiative to incorporate 300 thousand new taxpayers into the income tax 
net is moving ahead. FBR is on track to issue 75,000 first notices by end-March and to follow up 
with a second notice to at least 75 percent of those who did not respond satisfactorily to their first 

 
 
 
Annex X 
Page 2 of 2 

notice within 60 days. FBR will also issue a provisional tax assessment to 75 percent of those 
who did not respond satisfactorily within 60 days to the second notice. So far, over 6,000 
individuals have registered and filed returns as a result of the initiative, and this number is 
expected to rise in the coming months. In addition, FBR has reactivated ballot-based audit and 
published in mid-February a Tax Directory of all current parliamentarians at both the federal and 
provincial levels in an effort to foster a culture of transparency and compliance. 

4. 
Greater government, and FBR ownership of the strategy enhances its chances of success. 
One of the critical success factors for reforms is its broad ownership by the country. In Pakistan with the 
exception of few occasions, there has never been a broad based ownership of reforms nor has any reform 
package been designed and formulated by the economic managers of the country. In most cases, the main 
motivation for reforms has been to secure infusion of short term liquidity to avert the impending foreign 
currency crisis. As soon as the liquidity situation improves, the will to continue with reform wanes. This 
moment is then utilized by powerful interest groups to reverse or at least dilute the policy content.  
Government policies are then reversed or at the minimum diluted. As such, inculcating a strong 
ownership of the tax reforms within FBR and the general government is the integral part of FBR 
strategy.1  In the next attempt promoting ownership on the strategy, FBR will prepare an appropriate 
communication plan to disseminate it among taxpayers. This plan will not only highlight the key features 
of the strategy, but also the rights and responsibilities of the taxpayers.  This would be the first step 
towards protection of the taxpayers rights, especially of the small taxpayers. 

5. 
But efforts at increasing tax collection cannot spare provinces.  A well-known reason for a 
low tax-to-GDP ratio is the extremely poor tax effort by provinces.  Although it is true that major broad-
based taxes are in the federal domain, yet the provinces have not effectively utilized the tax bases 
assigned to them by the Constitution. Provincial taxes, on the average, have contributed less the 4 percent 
to overall tax collection (equivalent to less than 0.5 percent of GDP). However, this contribution 
increased to almost 7 percent after GST on services was transferred to the province in 2010/11 following 
the 18th Constitutional Amendment, for which Punjab and Sindh has set-up adequate mechanisms to 
collect revenue. Notwithstanding the increased contribution to revenue by province, there is significant 
scope for even more improvement. This could be achieved by:  

 Expanding the base of services GST: by bringing import of services into the tax net or levying 
presumptive tax on informal services;  
 Updating the evaluation of properties: by reducing the differential in rates of property tax for 
rented and owned properties, and devolving the property tax to city governments;  
 Levying a presumptive agricultural income tax at marketing stage; and  
 Strengthening provincial tax administrations: by modernizing them not only to support 
enforcement and audit, but taxpayers’ compliance and e-filing, one of the major obstacles 
identified by the Doing Business reports.  

6. 
All these measures can help increase the provincial revenue collection to over 1 percent of 
GDP in next two years. In order to help provinces achieve this goal, the WBG is actively involved with 
the governments of Sindh2 and Punjab3 in improving tax policy and administration at provincial level. 

1 As a start, the strategy was initiated in a workshop titled “A Real, Relevant and Owned Strategy for FBR” where 
the FBR management, the leadership of FBR field units and international experts openly discussed the future reform 
direction for FBR.  
2 Under the Sindh Public Administration Reform Project  
3 IFC is working Punjab Revenue Authority to improve business processes in collection of services GST. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex XI 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex XI: Strategizing WBG’s Role under Devolved Setup 

1. 
Over the last two years there have been some significant changes in the federalism landscape of 
Pakistan. The Seventh NFC Award sharply increased the share of provinces in federally collected 
revenue, while the 18th Amendment has introduced some profound changes in multi-order governance in 
Pakistan, including devolution of significant number of additional functions from the federal to the 
provincial governments. Some other key functions, e.g. electricity generation, statistics, planning and 
regulation, have been made a shared responsibilities of the federal and provincial governments. These 
changes have also created significant challenges for World Bank Group (WBG) operations in the country 
requiring some fundamental adjustments in the type and modality of our engagement with the 
government, and the designing of our projects and programs.  

2. 
Although the transitional process had been quite orderly it is by no means complete. The slow 
adjustment to these changes is mainly an outcome of weak political and administrative institutions, which 
are not yet strong enough to adequately manage changes of this magnitude.  Insufficient coordination 
between the federal and provincial and among the provincial governments has been the main obstacle in 
the process. Going forward, significant inter-government coordination would be required to make 
decentralization work for the maximum benefit of the country, especially in critical areas of security, 
energy, social safety nets, resource mobilization, water management, regional cooperation and population 
growth. The federal government will need to build a more proactive role in meeting these critical 
challenges posed by the devolution process, and the World Bank Group and other development partners 
can support the federal and provincial governments in this endeavor through various instruments. 

3. 
The most critical of decentralization challenges include: (i) complication of fiscal and financial 
management; (ii) fragmentation of debt management and increased riskiness of borrowing arrangements; 
and (iii) a marked shift in development and service delivery focus toward the provinces with insufficient 
attention on coordination and capacity.   

4. 
The WBG has been working with the federal and provincial governments to meet some of these 
challenges:   

a) WBG is working with the federal and provincial governments to improve their fiscal and 
financial management systems. After the NFC Award and the 18th Amendment, fiscal 
management in Pakistan has become more complicated. Greater revenue transferred to the 
provinces, along with inherent rigidities in expenditure, has created acute fiscal difficulties for the 
federal government. In order to achieve overall fiscal stability and discipline, provinces would 
have to play a more prominent role than before. The WBG has been actively working with 
provinces to meet the fiscal management challenge. Over the last two years a number of 
analytical products were designed to develop awareness among the stakeholders and build 
consensus on some of the more important issues related to fiscal and financial management in the 
devolved set-up.  These products include: two sub-national PERs, PEFA assessments of the 
federal and two provincial governments and an international workshop in the implications of the 
18th Amendment. Moving forward, revenue mobilization is going to be critical area for ensuring 
sub-national fiscal discipline.  Under its governance and TA projects in Sindh and Punjab, WBG 
is helping the provincial governments to strengthen their tax administration apparatuses.   

b) WBG is also engaged with the federal and provincial government to reduce the debt 
management risk created by the 18th Amendment. Weak fiscal management has led to a sharp 
increase in public debt, which needs to be carefully managed. In addition, by giving the provinces 
the right to borrow from international donors and financial markets, the 18th Amendment has 
heightened the debt concerns and has reinforced the need for more active debt management at the 

 
 
 
 
Annex XI 
Page 2 of 2 

provincial level. Over the last two years, World Bank has helped the Punjab government to 
undertake a Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) and is presently working with 
Sindh government on a similar exercise.  

c) WBG is in the process of developing a comprehensive approach to engage with the provincial 
governments to meet the service delivery and development challenges. With increased revenue 
transfers, provinces are expected to play a much bigger role than before in economic and social 
development. Being closer to the people, province-centric development has many obvious 
advantages; yet there are some inherent risks. Most important of these are: 
i. Uneven development: Fiscal capacity varies significantly across provinces. As such, 
distribution of federal government’s development portfolio was an important source of 
ensuring developmental equity across provinces. Now with federal government likely to 
reduce its role in development, there is genuine risk of uneven development across 
provinces.   
ii. Weak capacity: The returns from the expected rapid growth in development spending by 
provinces can be jeopardized by weak institutional capacity of the provincial 
governments to design, execute and manage a larger portfolio of projects. There is a real 
risk, especially in smaller provinces, that the weak delivery mechanisms can adversely 
affect the quantity and/or quality of devolved services.  
Inadequate ownership: Regarding the devolved functions, e.g. immunization, lady health 
workers and population programs, there is a risk that the provinces may have different 
priorities than the federal government and therefore may shift their level of commitment 
and financing for some of these activities.  

iii. 

5. 
Moving forward, donor coordination would be vitally important: Given the political, equity and 
client-relationship undertones behind each of these issues, it is critically important to develop a consensus 
among the donor community on the way forward and the role that each donor would play in different 
areas of each sector. These roles would depend on the capacity, comparative advantage and interest of 
each donor.  For example, the World Bank can provide its knowledge and financial resources to help 
provincial governments meet these challenges, while it may be appropriate that institution and capacity 
building aspects of sector development be undertaken by bi-lateral donors through grant financing.   

6. 
WBG, through its analytical and advisory work, will continue to deepen its dialogue with the 
federal and provincial governments on many areas of intergovernmental relationship to help them 
better manage the challenges and attain maximum benefits from the decentralization process. As a 
continuation of our engagement with the government on fiscal and financial management, an international 
workshop on national and sub-national fiscal rules is planned for April 2014 to highlight the role of 
appropriately designed fiscal responsibility laws in establishing fiscal discipline. As the deliberation on 
the next NFC Award would start early in the next fiscal year, WBG would be willing to assist the process 
through dissemination of knowledge on best global practices on modes and management of fiscal 
decentralization; and, if asked by the government, provide technical support to the NFC.    

7. 
WBG will remain engaged and willing to provide support to the local governments when they 
are formed. The decentralization process in Pakistan is an evolving and on-going process. For logistical 
reasons, there have been delays in formation of local governments; however in each province elections for 
local governments are planned in the next few months. Local governments will provide new 
developmental opportunities, along with new risks and challenges. Moreover, as a deviation from the 
past, each provincial government has opted to define a different set of roles, responsibilities and powers 
of local government. Therefore the process of decentralized governance in the coming few months is 
likely to be even more complex than in the past. WBG will look for opportunities to work with the local 
governments when they are established to deliver local development solutions and strengthen capacity 
and accountability of local systems for better results. 

 
 
 
Annex XII 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex XII: WBG’s Governance Action Plan 

Governance Context in Pakistan 

1. 
Pakistan is still facing significant governance challenges that may hamper attempts of 
policy changes leading to poverty reduction and economic growth. Pakistan is facing broad critical 
governance challenges ranging from rule of law, democratic governance and security to corruption 
legacy, resource management, and civil service effectiveness both at federal and provincial levels. 
Addressing these challenges will be critical to success of policy decisions aimed at improving the energy 
sector, service delivery, competitiveness, as well as stability in the country. 

2. 
Meanwhile, progress has been achieved in terms of political governance. In terms of political 
governance, important milestones were achieved with the adoption of the Constitution’s 18th Amendment, 
which has delegated service delivery responsibilities and resources1 to provincial governments, and the 
completion of the full term of a civilian government for the first time in Pakistan’s history.  

Government Program Addressing Governance Challenges 

3. 
At the federal level, Pakistan Vision 2025 is expected to include a broad governance agenda 
and measures to strengthen resources mobilization. Pakistan Vision 2025 governance agenda is 
expected to be articulated around the following priorities: (i) Strengthening democratic governance; (ii) 
Modernizing Public Sector Management through E-Government and Civil Service Reform; (iii) 
Introducing performance monitoring and professional management of SOEs; (iv) Enhancing revenue 
mobilization through establishing a broad and equitable tax system that facilitates tax registration and 
compliance. 

4. 
At the provincial level, the governments of Punjab, Sindh, KPK, Balochistan, and FATA 
are formulating and implementing good governance strategies. The provincial governments’ 
programs are comprehensive and intend to improve government performance and service delivery by 
strengthening performance monitoring, public finance management, revenue mobilization, transparency 
and accountability. 

World Bank Group Response to Pakistan Governance Challenges 

5. 
The World Bank Group is proposing an approach simultaneously selective and integrative 
to support Pakistan’s federal and provincial governments to address governance challenges. This 
approach is intending to integrate mainstreamed actions in each sector; to develop governance operations 
supporting specific governance reforms; and coordinate actions with other donors. Meanwhile, 
interventions will be selective, targeting priority areas and developing standardized instruments across 
sectors. The following main types of actions are foreseen: (i) Mainstreaming Governance and Corruption 
(GAC) in WBG Programs through Risk Management; (ii) Sector Governance; (iii) Donor Coordination 
on Anti-corruption; (iv) Projects supporting governance reforms; (v) Fiduciary safeguards in WBG 
Programs; and (vi) Private Sector Good Governance Program. 

(i) Mainstreaming GAC in World Bank Programs through Risk Management 

 

IMPACT: A standardized governance risk management will be mainstreamed in each 
WBG Project. This risk management approach consists of a risk management diagnostic at 

1 The last National Finance Commission (2010) increased the provincial share in revenue from 46.25 percent to 57.5 
percent. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex XII 
Page 2 of 2 

preparation stage complemented with mitigating measures. A team has been set-up for this 
purpose and works in coordination with project teams. Disbursement rates will be used as 
proxy to output and outcome.  

I 
ICT instruments to support monitoring of project outputs and outcomes. 
M Management of Risk through systematic diagnostic embedded in the portfolio management 
process. 
P Private Sector interventions: IFC will continue to enhance its Comprehensive Integrity Due 
Diligence (IDD) for each project before formally engaging with clients. 
A Accountability measures through supporting Accountability Institutions and Social Accountability 
actions. 
C Country systems strengthening for effective mitigation of risks in areas such as financial 
management, procurement, Ombudsman. 
T Transparency interventions such as support to Right to Information, open government. 

(ii) Sector Governance 
 At the Federal level: Governance and Political Economy analysis targeting four areas 
(Energy; Tax Administration; Large Procurement and Contracting activities; and SOEs). 
 At the Provincial level: Monitoring of Service Delivery Performance through ICT in areas 
including Education, Health, and Livestock. 

(iii) Donor Coordination on Anticorruption 
The Anti-Corruption Action Group (ACAG) includes the Bank and other donors involved in 
governance, and functions as a cooperative to develop donors’ response/action to address 
corruption related issues. 

(iv) Specific programs supporting Governance Reforms 
 Federal Level: Technical Assistance on Revenue Mobilization and SOEs funded by DFID. 
 Federal Level: IDF supporting Ombudsman institutions. 
 Punjab: Public Management Improvement Program (PforR) supporting government 
actions on tax administration; transparency; public procurement; and performance 
monitoring of service delivery. Program developed in cooperation with DFID. 
 Sindh: Public Sector Reform Program supporting government actions on 
tax 
administration; public financial management; public procurement; and monitoring and 
evaluation. Program developed in cooperation with the EU. 
 KPK, Balochistan, and FATA: Governance Support Program focusing on Judicial; Public 
Procurement; Service Delivery; and Anti-corruption. Program financed by the Multi-Donor 
Trust Fund. 

(v) Fiduciary safeguards in WBG Programs 
Enhanced fiduciary safeguards will be implemented in projects as described in the fiduciary 
section of each project. This will complement actions mentioned in this annex. 

(vi) Private Sector Good Governance Program 
 Collective action by business associations and relevant chambers of commerce will be 
explored for government to business (G2B) transactions where unethical or corrupt 
practices are detected.  
 Corporate governance program of IFC will be leveraged to support task teams to send a 
clear signal to the relevant private sector entities on the ethical standards expected under 
WBG financed projects. A guidance note will be prepared to facilitate this effort. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex XIII 
Page 1 of 2 

Pakistan’s Context 

Annex XIII: Investing in Women in Pakistan 

1. 
Gender equality and women empowerment are central to reducing poverty and achieving 
sustainable development.  By prioritizing and integrating gender in education, health and labor policies, 
Pakistan can make meaningful progress towards achievement of its Millennium Development Goals. Just 
as importantly, empowering women and investing in women and girls can be key drivers of peace-
building, social justice, economic growth and reducing inequality. Although Pakistan has come a long 
way in addressing these issues, it has progressed at a much slower pace when compared to other 
developing countries, particularly in South Asia. The World Economic Forum report 2013 suggests that 
Pakistan moved down in the rankings from 134th to 135th position due to a worsening in political 
empowerment this year and occupied the last spot in the Asia and Pacific region. The country ranked 124 
on women’s health and survival, 129 on women’s educational attainment and a staggering 135 on equal 
economic participation and opportunity. Currently only 22 percent of women participate in the labor 
force. 

2. 
At the core of the women’s exclusion and lack of women empowerment are the structural 
inequalities in Pakistan in which society and tradition can be powerful forces in differentiating access to 
resource and services and marginalizing women and girls, particularly in poor and rural areas and in time 
of natural disasters and insecurity. Lack of government resources, high poverty and low levels of literacy 
all contribute to the fact that very few women are aware of their rights, while also complicating the 
implementation and enforcement of reforms required to improve their situation. 

3. 
The Government of Pakistan has a concrete agenda for women development and empowerment. 
Major efforts include: Protection Against Harassment of Women at the Workplace Act (2009), the 
Domestic Violence Prevention and Protection Act 2009, Ministry of Women Development’s ‘Gender 
Reform Action Plan’ aimed at undertaking a coherent gender reform agenda. The Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Paper (PRSP) and Medium Term Budgetary Framework have also incorporated various gender-
sensitive amendments. While these efforts have made some impact, the country needs a comprehensive 
gender development strategy with stronger implementation to create a substantive long term change. 

WBG Gender Portfolio Review 2013 

4. 
The WBG Gender Portfolio Review 2013 assesses gender development changes in WBG’s 
operations in Pakistan building upon the findings of the earlier Gender Portfolio Review done in 2009. It 
was found that Gender mainstreaming at the Bank has made significant progress with regards to gender 
informed inputs. Inclusion of gender analysis in social assessments, gender specific interventions and 
gender sensitive results indicators are some of the areas where improvements have been made post gender 
portfolio review 2009.  

5. 
Thirty one (31) projects were evaluated for their level of gender integration and were rated using 
a Threefold Rating Matrix along three separate dimensions, namely, analysis (assessed the quality of 
analysis), action (provided details of the gender interventions undertaken by project operations) and 
monitoring and evaluation (evaluated gender responsive impact of interventions). Any project was 
marked as gender informed if it included at least one dimension in its social assessment, safeguard 
policies or feasibility reports.  

6. 
It was found that 92 percent of the projects from the human development sector were gender 
informed as opposed to only 66 percent from the economic sectors. The Education sector projects took 
the lead in embracing gender integration as an important tool for development. The Private sector (IFC) 
mainstreamed gender as an important cross-cutting theme in its advisory and investment services. On the 
Investment Services side, most of gender related impact has come from investments in the microfinance 

 
 
 
 
Annex XIII 
Page 2 of 2 

and SME sectors which have directly or indirectly facilitated women—both in terms of access to finance 
as well as in job creation. On the Advisory Services side, Corporate Governance and Business Edge 
projects were both gender inclusive and worked towards reducing gender-based barriers in the business 
environment.  

7. 
However, there were a few gaps identified across sectors including energy, finance and 
infrastructure due to the fact that gender planning is technical in nature and involves a transformative 
process way. Overall, a continued effort needs to be made to ensure that gender equities are addressed 
throughout program design and implementation and quality based indicators are used in the results 
framework. 

Looking Forward 

8. 
The World Bank Group chaired the Inter-Agency Group on Gender and Development (INGAD) 
from January - June 2013 and developed a note for the new government which highlights three critical 
areas—education, health and labor—where clear strategies, financing and implementation mechanisms 
are needed to tackle gender challenges, both at the Federal and Provincial levels. The WBG CPS 2015-19 
mainstreams actions on these three dimensions and also provides a special focus on gender under the 
Result Area III on Inclusion. A central element in implementing these strategies will be the collection and 
analysis of gender-disaggregated data, and effective monitoring and evaluation of this data to enable 
policy makers to see what works and what does not, and holding service providers accountable.  

9. 
Education: Article 25A ensures education for all, and this should be monitored and enforced. 
Increasing the education budget for all children and enhancing quality, efficiency and accountability of 
education expenditures are critical; however there is an equal need to focus on building gender based 
infrastructure and human resources. An effective strategy to address gender disparities in education 
should focus on increasing enrollments and decreasing dropouts of girls, particularly in the rural areas. 
Investments in improving the quality of teacher training, building gender aware infrastructure such as 
separate bathrooms and boundary walls, and standardizing a gender sensitive curriculum will also 
improve gender indicators in education. 

10. 
Health: Gender sensitive health strategies and budgets, particularly at the provincial level, need 
to be shaped so that they address both access and availability, particularly for women’s health, 
contraceptives, child vaccinations and nutrition, and in rural and poor areas.  Increased support for Basic 
Health Units and Rural Health Centers can significantly improve maternal and neo-natal health, as can the 
deployment of Lady Health Workers and roll-out of health insurance. Malnutrition can also be addressed 
through awareness campaigns as well as increased availability of nutrition supplements.  

11. 
Labor: The upcoming youth bulge, has the potential of paying a demographic dividend, if and 
only if an investment is made now in empowering women. One of the greatest catalysts for robust 
economic growth is investment in women and girls’ access to labor markets, both formal and informal.  
To do so, it is important to ensure that both men and women have equal opportunity to increased 
education, vocational skills training, job placement and access to credit. Laws that address Workplace 
safety, social benefit and security, and gender harassment need to be properly implemented and 
monitored.   

12. 
Private Sector: Ongoing and new work to advance gender focus in the private sector would 
include: (i) expanding opportunities for women entrepreneurs to grow their businesses with increased 
access to finance and access to markets; (ii) improving financial institutions’ understanding of women’s 
markets; and (iii) increasing women’s voice as leaders and stakeholders by expanding training for women 
directors on corporate boards. 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex XIV 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex XIV: Youth Inclusion in Pakistan 

Why is Youth Important to Pakistan? 

1. 
Pakistan today is one of the youngest countries in the world; and youth play an important 
role in the economy. Around two thirds (68 percent) of the population is under the age of thirty, and the 
median age is 22. Over the next several decades, Pakistan is poised to become the fourth most populous 
country in the world. With nearly 53 million active youth (under 25), the challenges of inclusion and 
empowerment of these young people will only continue to grow as the proportion of young people in the 
country rises. Youth in Pakistan is increasingly urbanized and tech-savvy segment of the population. 
More than a third of youth currently lives in urban areas and their share is expected to reach 50 per cent 
by 2030. The large numbers of Pakistani youth represent not only a source of labor but also the potential 
to bring innovation, entrepreneurship, new skills and ideas to the economy. Global experiences have 
demonstrated that the participation of a growing youth population into the economic fabric can contribute 
to accelerated growth and development in the country. In addition, nearly a fifth of the 85 million 
Pakistanis registered to vote are between 18 and 25.  Looking beyond the short term promises made 
during the recent elections, it is important to recognize both the emerging trends and deeper changes 
taking place in Pakistan, as well as the increasing role that young people may play in these changes.  

What are the Key Issues and Priorities for Pakistan’s Youth? 

2. 
Pakistan’s youth face unique issues alongside broader patterns of social exclusion. 
Pakistan’s youth are subject to broader forms of social, political and economic exclusion based on their 
gender, religion, and social class. However, youth face particular forms of exclusion that are specific to 
their social transitions to adulthood. Within a hierarchical culture, social norms dictate seniority over 
youth and this hierarchy persists even within gender, religious and social groups. Thus the ability to speak 
out, to voice ideas, to lead are mitigated in a context of where the young are expected to ‘know their 
place’ in society. With rapidly shifting values and norms, and multiple and often conflicting social 
identities, young people in Pakistan are fixed in traditional pathways to transitioning to adulthood that 
remain stifling and limit voice, opportunity and empowerment.  

3. 
Youth face barriers to opportunities in two areas: employment and education. Longstanding 
unemployment is often linked with eroded trust and social cohesion, which could further exacerbate 
Pakistan’s fragility. While youth unemployment in Pakistan is comparable to many other countries (at 7.7 
percent versus an overall unemployment rate of 5 percent), this figure translates to 3.7 to 4.6 million 
young people.1 Pakistan’s Planning Commission estimates that, in order to productively absorb the large 
number of youth, Pakistan’s real GDP needs to grow at an annual average rate in excess of 7 percent.2 For 
young people, access to employment opportunities not only signifies material improvements, but has 
important implications for social transitions to adulthood, political participation and belonging, and social 
cohesion. Second, the quality of education has not equipped young people with necessary skills. Pakistan 
spends less than 3 percent of GDP on education. Poor quality of education and outdated skills limit 
opportunities for youth. Pakistan has a relatively large proportion (32 percent) of uneducated youth with 
no vocational and life skills, who end up in elementary occupations or remain either unemployed or 
inactive.3 Eroding public services, particularly in critical areas such as education, undermine the future 
skill development and opportunities of the emerging generation. This, combined with underemployment 

1 World Development Indicators, 2008 
2 Planning Commission 2011. “Pakistan: Framework for Economic Growth”, Planning Commission, Government of 
Pakistan, May 2011 
3 Planning Commission 2011. “Pakistan: Framework for Economic Growth”, Planning Commission, Government of 
Pakistan, May 2011 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex XIV 
Page 2 of 2 

is typically considered major structure factors to continued youth exclusion, and is linked with an increase 
in the likelihood of violence. While not predictive of conflict, countries with young age structures and a 
combination of unemployment, poor education, and weak governances are more highly correlated with 
violent conflict.4  

Government Strategy and Program for Youth Engagement  

4. 
Both the Federal Government and the provincial Governments, especially Punjab and Sindh have 
instituted youth programs to enhance skills and promote employment. For example the Federal 
government as a part of its broader youth program provides loans to youth for small businesses, as well as 
training and skills development.5 Both the Punjab and Sindh Governments also have youth programs 
aimed to address unemployment of youth by providing training and skills development e.g. The Sindh 
Benazir Bhutto Shaheed Youth Development Program (BBSYDP) 6 and the Punjab Youth Internship 
Program (PYIP).7 In addition the Government has several initiatives focused towards enhancing youth 
learning achievements. One such program is the federal governments Youth Laptop Scheme, where 
eligible students from public sector HEC approved universities receive laptops.8 The effectiveness of 
these programs is yet to be determined, as no systematic evaluations have been done to date.  

World Bank Group Support for Youth Engagement 

5. 
The World Bank recognizes the importance of the role youth play in Pakistan’s 
development.  Integrating youth and addressing needs and priorities of the younger generation is critical 
to Pakistan’s longer term development path. Over the past few years, the WBG has focused on better 
understanding the specific youth exclusion patterns, and improving engagement with young people in the 
development process. This was reflected in improved mainstreaming of youth participation in existing 
operations, and in collaboration between the MDTF and University of Peshawar where Youth Advisors 
were selected for Governments of KPK and FATA. This encouraged the development of valuable skills 
and created networks for long term engagement of youth in local development challenges. 

6. 
The new CPS brings focused attention to supporting innovative pathways to social inclusion 
and youth employment under the Result Area III -- Inclusion.  One area of increasing focus will be on 
youth employment opportunities, recognizing this as an important avenue for individual material security 
and broader economic growth, but also as a social transition to adulthood and social inclusion. To this 
end, innovative pathways to inclusion in the local, national and global will be supported to promote the 
expansion of employment. For example, opportunities in the fast-moving digital economy hold great 
potential for young Pakistanis. Studies estimate that the online contracting market is worth US$1 trillion 
globally.9 While the tech industry in Pakistan is still nascent, it may be well positioned to partake in this 
high growth sector. The World Bank hopes to support the Government of Pakistan in exploring 
innovative ways to expand economic and job opportunities for youth via technology solutions, and to 
support entrepreneurship and innovation that could create new employment avenues for young people. 

4 In 1990s, countries with a very young structure were three times more likely to experience conflict than countries 
with a mature structure. Between 1970 and 1999, around 80 percent of all new outbreaks of civil conflicts occurred 
in countries in which 60 percent or more of the population was under age 30. (BARGAD 2010)  
5 http://youth.pmo.gov.pk/ 
6 http://www.bbsydpsindh.gov.pk/ 
7 http://pypb.punjab.gov.pk/ 
8 http://youth.pmo.gov.pk/?page_id=28 
9 Connecting to Work, Raja, S. Imaizumi, S., Kelly, T.Paradi-Guilford, C., The World Bank, September 2013 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex XV 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex XV: Restoring Trust between Citizens and Governments  
of KPK, FATA and Balochistan 

Status of Engagement 

1. 
The WBG engaged for several years with the provincial Governments of KPK, FATA and 
Balochistan, mainly through IDA window. The last CPS had dealt with crises-affected provinces and 
regions under a separate pillar supported by the Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF). The new strategy 
brings attention to mainstreaming the dialogue on special needs of the groups and regions at risk under 
the Result Area III - Inclusion.    

2. 
The MDTF was established in 2010 as a mechanism to support the provincial governments in 
implementing their post-crises development priorities. The fund is supported by eleven development 
partners.  Currently, the total funds allocated to MDTF stand at US$ 157.15 million, committed to 11 
projects.  

3. 
Since 2011, MDTF has made gains both in terms of establishing robust delivery mechanisms as 
well as achieving results on the ground and has moved from a funding mechanism for KPK, FATA and 
Balochistan to a strategic instrument aimed at contributing to PCNA (Post Crisis Needs Assessment) and 
BDNA (Balochistan Development Needs Assessment) objectives while helping provincial and regional 
governments to build their own capacity to address wider development needs.   

4. 
WBG Global Center on Conflict, Security and Development (CCSD):  During this period, 
MDTF benefitted from the support of the WBG CCSD hub in Nairobi, which helped design the MDTF 
strategy, from the PCNA operationalization report (OPCNA) to the new Programmatic approach, and 
provided guidance and global experiences/best practices on management of the Third Party Monitoring 
Agents (TPMAs), and results/monitoring for emergency projects.    

5. 
External Donor Reviews:  Since 2012 three donor reviews were completed, providing 
recommendations in the most critical areas of MDTF operations.  The most important were aimed at 
building a more strategic MDTF i.e. contributing more efficiently to PCNA objectives and thus to 
peacebuilding through efforts for restoring trust between citizens and the governments. The 
recommendations of the reviews concentrated on  (i) improving the MDTF Results Framework and 
project outcomes and indicators, (ii) measuring the performance of the Governance Support Program in 
its effort to build capacity of the local administration for basic services delivery, (iii) strengthening the 
MDTF Secretariat, and (iv) designing a communication strategy. 

6. 
Following CCSD’s and Donors Recommendations, the MDTF Secretariat has developed a 
comprehensive results framework, which represents a collation of portfolio level results and maps these 
activities against the PCNA Strategic Objectives. The MDTF Consolidated Results Framework (CRF) 
presents a log frame for the portfolio and captures all deliverables. The CRF presents key outcomes and 
outputs outlined in the Operationalisation of the PCNA (OPCNA) document and the associated results, 
which are delivered through the portfolio.   

7. 
In consultation with the governments and development partners, the MDTF is currently 
developing a round-II strategy and results framework to scale up engagement in the three regions. The 
strategic focus, however, needs to be strengthened in order to advocate for an increase in on-budget 
bilateral support and to help donors and governments to prioritize and harmonize their investments and 
align them with the agreed PCNA objectives.   

 
 
 
 
Annex XV 
Page 2 of 2 

Lessons from Implementation and Emerging Needs 

8. 
To that end, the MDTF has undertaken multiple analyses to identify i) those activities and sectors 
that would ensure capitalizing on the achievements/gains so far; ii) key lessons that can be drawn from 
implementation experience to date; iii) new needs that can be addressed by the MDTF; and, iv) under-
covered sectors and geographical locations. These analyses have generated three broad conclusions.  

 First, the studies found that MDTF activities to date are not sufficiently strategic in that the actual 
interventions undertaken by the MDTF may not significantly contribute towards the outputs 
highlighted in the PCNA.   
 Second, while MDTF activities to date have made considerable impact towards enhancing the 
capacity of provincial governments in piloting development interventions for greater state legitimacy 
and state-citizen trust, these interventions have been fragmented.  Further, the PCNA financing to 
date has been skewed towards infrastructure, education and health sectors at the expense of 
investments in the areas of law and justice, communications, governance and social protection.   
 Third, the lack of flexibility has resulted in slow pace of implementation and disbursements. While 
the use of country systems is essential for capacity building, it does come at a price in terms of speed 
of implementation and the resource intensive nature of technical support. Initial concerns over slow 
implementation have resulted in improved understanding of government & Bank policies/procedures 
by all parties with more effective application in support of program delivery and consultations, such 
as the MDTF Advisory Committee to inform decision making and to raise and discuss impediments 
to implementation. These innovations need to be strengthened to make MDTF more efficient.  

Towards a Programmatic Approach and Scaling up Existing Interventions 

9. 
Noting the recommendations from the analyses that the MDTF should consolidate its 
programming, the MDTF will establish a single programming window for each of the two provinces and 
FATA.  Each program would have components that align with the three MDTF engagement themes: (i) 
Growth and job creation, (ii) Policy reform and governance and (iii) Improved service delivery 

10. 
In addition, the MDTF would manage a fourth program that provides a mechanism to allow for 
quick response in areas experiencing rapid deterioration of the economic and social environment, 
particularly in the context of the ISAF drawdown from Afghanistan.    

11. 
Scalability will be essential to capture the economies of scale that are likely to accrue from 
Round I activities both in terms of i) building on previous success; ii) enhancing the geographical 
coverage of MDTF activities beyond the initial pilot phase; iii) moving from a project to program 
approach where MDTF-supported interventions become more strategic with a whole-of-sector focus; and 
(iv) possibly matching MDTF funds with IDA resources thus leveraging greater funding for development 
priorities.  

12. 
Being also less fragmented and more flexible, MDTF will ensure that its development impact is 
transformational, increases exponentially and that the benefits are sustained. This requires that the MDTF 
adopts a new programmatic approach towards implementation. This programmatic structure would 
provide flexibility to shift resources between components as well as allowing greater capacity to adapt 
operations in response to changing security situation. 

 
 
 
Annex XVI 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex XVI: Climate Change in Pakistan 

1. 
Pakistan is the 54th most vulnerable country and the 25th least ready country for global climate 
disruption according to the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index for 2012. In a 4°C hotter world without 
deep, fast reduction of global carbon emissions, Pakistan could face extreme risks this century including: 
(i) Seas higher by at least one meter leading to coastal erosion, saline sea water intrusion, and risk for 
coastal cities in particular; (ii) 6°C hotter temperatures with some 4 in 5 summers much hotter than 
usual1; (iii) Increased drought, with less rain by up to some 30 percent in western Pakistan,2 and greater 
groundwater stress; (iv) 75 percent higher peak river flows for the Indus River delta, due to glacier melt 
and greater monsoon variability as well as cloud bursts leading to flash floods, exposing more people to 
inundation; and (v) More intense cyclones, fueled by warmer and higher seas.  

The Urgency of Action and Potential Opportunities to Manage Climate Change Risks 

2. 
The above risks threaten the water, food and energy security of Pakistan in coming decades. 
There is an urgent need for significant investment and innovations to reduce vulnerability, improve 
readiness and achieve low-carbon, resilient development. Integration of climate change and other policy 
objectives is particularly important as today’s investments will ‘lock in’ infrastructure and technologies 
for use in decades to come. Particular opportunities include renewables and greater attention to energy 
efficiency, development of low-cost public and private generation - especially hydropower and long-term 
transport planning. For adaptation, opportunities include flood defense, assistance for development of a 
policy framework that emphasizes demand management and conservation, modernize current / traditional 
irrigation networks / early warning and preparedness systems, fiscal resilience and insurance instruments. 

Government of Pakistan’s Commitment to Climate Action 

3. 
Pakistan adopted a National Climate Change Policy in 2012, with the overall goal to promote 
climate resilient development, as well as to mainstream climate change issues within various sectors of 
the economy through implementing adaptation and mitigation measures. The policy envisages a number 
of shifts to better manage climate risks: (i) Climate-resilience. Priorities include better data of water 
systems, and disaster risk management; (ii) Clean, low-carbon and low-water growth. Financial and 
governance reforms as well as public investments in the energy sector particularly in clean technology are 
a priority; (iii) Finance. Mobilize domestic and international sources of finance to realize the above plans; 
(iv) Capacity building and institutional strengthening; (v) Awareness building; and (vi) Regional 
cooperation. The strategy further highlights a number of important sectors/ areas where climate change 
adaptation measures need to be mainstreamed and vulnerabilities addressed through relevant mitigation 
measures. These include: (i) Water Resources; (ii) Disaster Preparedness; (iii) Energy; (iv) Transport; (v) 
Urban/ Town Planning; (vi) Industries; (vii) Agriculture; and (viii) Forestry.  

What the World Bank Group Can Do to Help Support the Shift 

4. 
The national priorities envisaged by the Government of Pakistan demonstrate important areas of 
convergence with global best practices in the area of climate change adaptation. Owing to relevant 
international experience, the World Bank Group can help support the Government in implementing the 
envisaged shifts in a number of areas: 

1 ‘Turn Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts, and the Case for Resilience’ (World Bank 2013, 
p.113, Figure 5.4).  
2 World Bank 2013, p.115, Figure 5.6. Precipitation in western Pakistan by 2071-99 would be around 10-35 percent 
less annually, relative to 2051-80 multi-modal mean. 

 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex XVI 
Page 2 of 2 

a) Water Conservation and Management. Given Pakistan’s widening gap between water supply 
and water demand and the potential impact of climate change to exacerbate water deficiencies, 
the Bank can support GOP to develop a policy framework that emphasizes demand management 
and conservation and pricing schemes for water use. As part of such national policy formulation, 
Pakistan may consider implementing regulations that monitor and enforce water use schemes. In 
parallel, the Bank can support investment in water conservation, modernize current / traditional 
irrigation networks and install high efficiency irrigation systems in water-scarce areas.  

b) Low Carbon Development. The national policy has highlighted climate-resilient development as 
a primary goal for the country. The World Bank Group may assist the government in its 
respective efforts through facilitating access to available financing sources, providing technical 
assistance, and supporting the integration of adaptation/ mitigation strategies in sectors such as 
agriculture, energy, transport, urban planning, and industries. The CPS envisages investment in 
large scale hydro projects to change the energy mix, as well as exploring small scale renewable 
energy potential. Furthermore, the role of the IFC will be important to engage with the private 
sector towards piloting and implementing mitigation and adaptation measures. 

 Support access to climate finance for low-carbon/low-water development. Pakistan formally 
requested access to the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) in April 2013. CTF will consider the 
question of new membership in June 2014 when the outlook for operationalization of the 
Green Climate Fund will be clearer. 

 Explore possibility of a low-carbon growth study. This will facilitate readiness to access 
climate finance by Pakistan. The study would identify and prioritize low-carbon interventions 
for the next 5-10 years consistent with longer-term vision for green growth. A low carbon 
study should identify options based on consensus within different sectors on reference 
scenario emissions, specific mitigation measures and financing needs. 

c) Improved Preparedness towards Climate related Emergencies. A number of recent events 
have demonstrated the country’s vulnerability to disasters linked to climate change such as 
flooding and meteorological events. Given the socio-economic impact of such events in the past 
as well as increased risk in the future from rising sea levels, higher river flows, and likelihood of 
drought, Pakistan needs to improve the availability and use of hydro-meteorological data as well 
as to make sizable investments in preparedness for and ex-ante mitigation of climate related 
shocks. The World Bank Group may support a number of important activities, including: 

 

Improve Early Warning Systems and access to risk information. To meet the challenges 
arising from the increased risk of hydro-meteorological disasters resulting from a change in 
the climatic conditions, Pakistan needs to have access to better risk information for better 
targeting of mitigation investments. It also needs to have a mechanism for communicating 
risk information through the creation of multi-hazard early warning systems going down to 
the community levels to better warn the vulnerable communities for improved preparedness.  

 Support establishment of a Glacier Monitoring and Research Center. The Hindu Kush-
Himalaya (KHK) region’s 18,495 glaciers are an important source of water to the Indus River 
Basin, which covers 65 percent of Pakistan. Data on most glaciers is lacking. Policy makers 
need better data to prepare for hydrological changes. 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex XVII 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex XVII: Pakistan’s Growth Potential as the Regional Economic Hub 

1. 
Pakistan is strategically placed to become a regional hub for trade and investment by 
connecting the markets of South Asia, Central Asia and the Middle East. Given South Asia’s rapidly 
changing geo-political scene, democratic transitions and emergence of a dynamic private sector, Pakistan 
is strategically located to gain from regional economic cooperation. Although national development 
issues remain central to poverty alleviation, recent trends and events, such as widening political support 
for regional economic cooperation have opened policy space for leveraging the economic opportunities 
within the region which could become a dynamic global marketplace.   

2. 
South Asia is one of the least economically integrated regions of the world with intra-regional 
trade accounting for just 5 percent of total trade. In addition to enhancing economic growth, stability and 
prosperity, regional cooperation could pave the way for South Asian countries to collaborate on shared 
climate change-related challenges which threaten sustainable growth. The desire of South Asian leaders to 
be full players in the emerging “Asian Century”, the draw-down of ISAF troops from Afghanistan, and 
the large numbers of young people entering the work force, make this is an open enough moment for 
strengthening the resolve and policy focus on regional economic cooperation. 

3. 
Building momentum for economic cooperation. India and Pakistan have revitalized ministerial-
level negotiations on expanded trade including granting Non-Discriminatory Access to India. India has 
modernized its Attari border post with Pakistan and offered to export 500 MW of power. India and 
Bangladesh have enhanced their bilateral ties while Afghanistan and Pakistan have started implementing 
a 2011 transit and trade treaty. These developments and the slowdown of western economies are among 
the factors further strengthening the case for regional economic cooperation.  

4. 
While gains from greater cooperation through power trade, commerce and river basin 
management will be substantial, they will be asymmetric across countries, within countries and in time. 
The greatest gains are in the power sector, with connectivity enhancing system reliability, lowering costs 
and carbon emissions, and relieving debilitating shortages by enabling sustainable development of the 
hydro/gas-based power generation potential of the region. Transmission infrastructure, clean energy 
generation, and fair pricing agreements across borders hold the key to realizing this potential. There are 
abundant unexploited opportunities for regional economic cooperation in South Asia, in areas such as 
commerce, transport, energy, agriculture, wild life conservation, governance, migration, tourism, climate 
change adaptation, health/epidemiology and education. 

5. 
Cross-border trade is especially important for smaller and/or landlocked provinces/countries, 
including Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal, Northeast India, and parts of Central Asia. 
Expanded intra-regional trade, increased investment and supply-chain integration, will need policy 
reforms, and improvements in regulations, border management, and infrastructure, with due regard to the 
security concerns dominating each country’s view of borders. SMEs are likely to play a large role in 
expanded commerce, creating a wider canvas of opportunities for cooperation and poverty reduction.  

6. 
Recognizing the strategic importance of regional economic cooperation, the WBG created a 
new Regional Integration Program in FY11 to promote and support economic cooperation. The 
program, working closely with relevant WBG teams, has made progress in building political support for 
regional cooperation, deepening knowledge in key areas, and developing a selective portfolio of 
transformative cross-border operations. Three projects ($280 million IDA) are under implementation and 
the pipeline is expected to grow in the coming years.   

7. 
The overall aim of the WBG Regional Cooperation Strategy for the next 3-5 years is to step up 
support for three main objectives which are listed below: 

 
 
 
 
Annex XVII 
Page 2 of 2 

i. Help put in place the building blocks for an integrated regional electricity market in South 
Asia (with links to Central Asia) to relieve energy shortages that constrain sustainable and 
equitable growth. The activities include low capital intensity transmission projects that better 
utilize existing endowments like CASA-1000 to bridge the gap between Central Asia’s 
surpluses with Pakistan’s summer peak demand. High capital investments in new power 
plants in Nepal, Afghanistan, Central Asia and Pakistan will be supported. The proposed 
India-Pakistan power transmission line will be a critical link for power sharing in the region.  

ii. Double the volume of trade and investment in goods and services to enhance 
competitiveness. The strategy focuses on helping the government develop evidence based 
policies to enhance regional trade. The WBG is supporting the regulatory framework, 
business processes and infrastructure at border posts to facilitate higher volumes of trade, and 
in Pakistan, the up-gradation of the Wagah border post on international standards.  

iii. Improve the in-country and cross-border authorizing environment for regional economic 
cooperation by systematically building awareness and “championship” around the need for, 
and benefits from, increased regional cooperation. Building on analytical work on the costs of 
the status quo and high impact opportunities, and by leveraging lessons from South Asia 
region and global experience, the strategy will facilitate sustained action in priority areas 
where there is already sufficient demand across countries and build support for new high 
priority areas.  

8. 
Although the goal is to move towards an integrated market across South Asia for overall trade, 
the strategy foresees an intermediate stage involving promoting sub-regional cooperation/integration 
based on practical realities rooted in the sub-continent’s politics and the current willingness to engage on 
the regional agenda by the countries. One sub-region comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal 
(with links to South East Asia) in the Northern and Eastern part of the South Asian subcontinent and a 
second, Pakistan and Afghanistan (with links to India, Central Asia and the Middle-East).  This approach 
also helps manage program risks deriving from the possible renewal of political tensions in any one part 
of the subcontinent. 

 
 
 
 
Annex XVIII 
Page 1 of 2 

Portfolio status 

Annex XVIII: WBG’s Portfolio Management 

1. 
The World Bank has 35 active projects in Pakistan for total commitment of $4.5 billion.  Most of 
the commitment is IDA ($3.5 billion), while IBRD amounts to $0.95 billion.  The WB also administers a 
small Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) of $130 million in commitments for the conflict-affected areas 
bordering Afghanistan.  

2. 
About 57 percent of the portfolio provides support at the federal level; and 43 percent directly to 
the provinces. The human development sector is the largest share with 38 percent, followed by energy 
with 27 percent, and agriculture with 15 percent.  Disbursements have been good - $554 million in FY13, 
for a disbursement ratio of about 20 percent.  The ratio throughout the last CPS period was above 20 
percent.  Balancing the portfolio with a mix of fast-disbursing and regular investment operations has 
helped maintain the good disbursement ratio. There are currently 5 projects (total commitment of $734 
million) at risk. The riskiness of the portfolio has steadily decreased from a high of 28 percent in FY11to 
the current (FY14) 16 percent.   

3. 
IFC has committed around $4.5 billion in cumulative investments. Its portfolio as of February 
2014 amounted to US$809 million in 38 companies. Exposure in the infrastructure cluster represents 
about 56 percent of the committed balance, financial markets 19 percent, while the remaining 25 percent 
includes general manufacturing and services.  IFC committed $555 million in FY12 and $514 million in 
FY13. The portfolio performance is strong with only one non-performing loan out of a total of 38 
projects. 

4. 
MIGA’s current gross commitment is $310 million ($217 net) in 3 projects.  These are in the 
financial services, power and manufacturing sectors.   These were signed in FY11, 12 and 13 respectively.   

Implementation issues  

5. 
World Bank: The South Asia Region Portfolio Performance Assessment conducted in FY2014 
highlighted several key issues affecting the quality at entry and during implementation, including high 
staff turnover, weak capacity  for fiduciary aspects, lack of implementation readiness, project complexity 
and inadequate risk analysis and mitigation. Other cross-cutting issues like fragmentation and limitations 
in accessing project sites in conflict-affected areas have added to implementation problems.   

6. 
IFC: Despite weak macro-economic environment and a persistent energy crisis which has 
negatively affected the private sector (including IFC clients) in the last five years, IFC has managed to 
maintain its portfolio quality through proactive engagement, including assisting clients to address 
operational issues and policy related issues in a timely manner. Having a strong portfolio team on the 
ground to actively engage in portfolio management has helped maintain portfolio quality during the 
difficult external environment. 

7. 
Key challenges for IFC’s engagement with the private sector include: (i) volatile security, law 
and order dampening portfolio clients’ business activity; (ii) incoherent government policies and delays in 
regulatory and policy action adversely impacting growth of private investment in infrastructure sector 
development; (iii) shortage of energy making local industry uncompetitive in international market; (iv) 
lack of local currency funding product to support manufacturing agribusiness and services sectors; (v) 
lack of innovative products and services catering for SMEs and an under developed capital markets and 
non-banking financial sector; and (vi) weak corporate governance, limiting growth and investment 
potential of SMEs, and IFC’s ability to engage with Tier- 2 companies.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex XVIII 
Page 2 of 2 

Moving forward 

8. 
Building on lessons from implementation and recommendation of the recent review, the World 
Bank will work with the Government of Pakistan to remove the bottlenecks and improve the pace of 
implementation and project outcomes. Specific attention will be on meeting the readiness for 
implementation requirements before Board presentation.  

9. 
In addition to portfolio reviews, we plan to raise the bar by (i) having high-level federal reviews 
of flagship projects at the Economic Coordination Committee level –  the federal cabinet -- that can track 
and influence the pace of implementation; (ii) working with the Chief Ministers’ offices and a core group 
of provincial cabinet ministers, as well as the Delivery Units that some provinces like Punjab and KPK 
are already setting up to strengthen implementation; (iii) at federal, provincial and local government 
levels, strengthening our PFM programs focusing on the weakest areas of accounting, internal and 
external audits, procurement systems, budget transparency, and social accountability; and (iv) building in 
flexibility in project design for emergency response and by increasing attention to preparedness and 
shared approaches for managing disaster risk.  

10. 
Consultation and dialogue with the private sector, elected representatives, civil society, youth, 
communities and other stakeholders, including the media, will continue to be a key requirement in project 
design and implementation.  In addition to ensuring the presence of communication specialists on the 
ground, staff and government counterparts will be encouraged to undergo communication and media 
training.  

11. 
The use of third party monitoring will be stepped up, especially in the conflict-affected areas, as 
will the use of technology, such as Caliper to plan, process and track procurement, Pointer to remotely 
monitor works’ progress, and Video conferencing for more regular interaction with governments and 
implementing agencies. 

12. More focus will be given to the development of programs consistent with the CPS themes, 
making optimal use of the Global Practices and the convening abilities of the Program Leaders across the 
practices. This will assist address fragmentation.  Simplicity and readiness for implementation, a better 
blend of local and global knowledge and experience including in program leadership, will help address 
the design and implementation support issues that have contributed to slow implementation. 

13. 
For MDTF, use of country systems will continue, with cognizance of trade-off between capacity 
building and implementation efficiency.  Governments will continue to lead implementation, but will be 
encouraged to make more use of private sector and NGOs. To address fragmentation, design of the 
second round will take a programmatic approach consistent with the thematic pillars, but simplicity of 
operations will also be ensured.  Co-financing will be encouraged, to help mainstream the MDTF. 

14. 
Project risk assessment and mitigation will be enhanced in accordance with the recommendations 
of the governance and corruption -- PGAC-II strategy  

15. 
IFC will provide counter-cyclical support to help existing and new clients continue and expand 
their business operations.  It will consider providing flexible and timely assistance, including through 
short-term financing instruments, selective debt and equity investments, advisory service work, and active 
portfolio management.  IFC will work closely with WB to improve the overall investment and business 
climate, remove specific constraints on the energy sector and take forward the privatization agenda. With 
its strong local and regional presence, IFC will expand its advisory work to enhance private sector’s 
capacity (especially Tier-2 companies), including introducing better corporate governance, skills 
development, improved financial and operational management. It will also work with client banks to 
improve their lending practices and expand outreach. 

 
 
 
Annex XIX 
Page 1 of 4 

Annex XIX:  Overview of WBG’s Partnerships and Trust Funds  

Partnerships 

1. 
In the spirit of the Paris Declaration and aid effectiveness commitments, the WBG supports the 
Government in leading coordination of the donor support in Pakistan. The Economic Affairs Division has 
established a Donor Coordination Cell and has been working to improve its functional capacity. In the 
provinces, the Provincial Planning and Development Departments are responsible for coordinating with 
development partners. Donor coordination and cooperation in Pakistan have deepened in recent years 
through regular meetings of the Heads of Agency, the MDTF Core Group and Steering Group 
Committee. A series of bilateral meetings are also being organized to strengthen partnership and strategic 
dialogue.  

2. 
The Table 1 highlights the engagement of development partners in Pakistan with reference to the 
priority themes identified in the proposed Vision 2025. The World Bank regularly coordinates with these 
development partners to ensure effectiveness and synergies. Key examples of such partnerships have been 
outlined below.  

Coordination on Policy Reforms 

3. 
WBG took the lead and actively worked with the IMF, ADB, DFID and USAID in the pre and post-
election transition dialogue on key reforms, including brainstorming on the reforms supported under the 
IMF program. The partnership has helped support a shared understanding and common narrative on key 
reform areas. This was important for providing inputs to not only the planned IMF program, but also for 
informing the overall dialogue on short and medium-term priorities with the new governments elected in 
2013.  

4. 
The IMF’s Extended Finance Facility (EFF) focuses on the short-term stabilization program and on 
selected structural reforms in tax administration, SOEs, and the power sector. To compliment, the 
government’s multiyear program with the WBG brings focus on medium to long-term structural adjustment 

Table 1: Coverage of Country Priorities Areas by Development Partners   

W

o
o

r

l

d
p
u

B

a

k
n

G

r

D
A

B

I

M

F

U

K

-

D

F

I

D

E

u

r

o

p

e

a

n

C

o

m
m

i

s
s

i

o

n

s
I

l

a
v
a

m

i
l

c

D

e

e

o

p

m

e

n

t

B

k
n

a
J

p

a

n

A

u

s

A

I

D

S

w

i

t

r
e
z

l

a

d
n

O

n

e

N
U

P

r

g
o

r

a

m
m

e

I
I

U

S

A

I

D

C

I

A
D

N

e

t

h

r
e

l

a

d
n

s

G

r
e

m

a

n

y

I

F

D
A

Energy Security  
Macroeconomic stability and 
investment climate 
Human development , 
Municipal management, gender  
Water and transport 
Trade and skill development 
Social Protection  
Disaster Management and 
Environment 
Agriculture 
Capital and finance 
Revenue mobilization,  public 
financial management, PPPs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex XIX 
Page 2 of 4 

efforts in these reform areas as well as trade competitiveness, the business climate and private participation, 
access to finance, and social safety nets. The WBG is also engaging in parallel technical assistance work 
supporting institutional capacity.  

5. 
The WBG is collaborating closely with the IMF on the (a) two DPCs – Fiscally Sustainable and 
Inclusive Growth DPC and the Power Sector Reform DPC; (b) financial sector reform, including joint 
efforts to prepare a Financial Sector Assessment Program; and (c) debt management through joint missions 
and preparation of a Medium-Term Debt Strategy. 

6. 
Other development partners are also contributing to the dialogue on policy reforms and supporting 
the WBG’s DPC series. DFID is planning to provide parallel financing, and its representatives have 
participated in the discussions primarily focusing on tax policy and administration, the BISP safety net, 
and the One Stop Shop (OSS) for businesses. ADB and USAID are also supporting the power sector 
reform and have shown interest in providing parallel technical assistance, and support for SOEs reform.  

Collaboration in Social Sectors 

7. 
The WBG has been actively engaged with the Government and other development partners in 
helping strengthen social safety nets in Pakistan. Our reform initiative with the Benazir Income Support 
Program (BISP) is serving as a viable platform to channel funds to support the Government. USAID and 
the ADB have provided direct budget support to BISP for cash transfers to eligible beneficiaries identified 
under the program and DFID has financed a WBG administered Trust Fund used to support TA work on 
safety nets. The education sector is another area with encouraging progress on partnerships. The WBG is 
working with DFID, EU and CIDA, to coordinate support around the medium term education sector 
reform programs of Punjab and Sindh. Recently, the Global Partnership for Education has joined hands 
with the WBG to provide a total of $100 mln for education programs in Sindh and Balochistan.  

8. 
Similarly, in the health sector the WBG continued its innovative partnership with the Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP) and Rotary 
International (RI) through the UN Foundation (UNF). These have supported three Partnerships for Polio 
Eradication Projects through IDA buy-down mechanism, which converts the IDA credit to a grant for the 
government. Similarly, the Punjab Health Sector Reform Project is also working closely with DFID to 
fund sector outcomes for enhanced impact.  

Joint Crises and Emergency Response 

9. 
Militancy Crisis: Responding to the militancy crisis in KPK and FATA, the Bank worked 
closely with the Federal, provincial and regional governments and development partners to carry out the 
Post-Conflict Needs Assessment (PCNA). The PCNA was prepared in collaboration with the UN, EU, 
and ADB as key partners. Based on the PCNA, the WBG took the lead in establishing and managing the 
Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) for KPK, FATA, and Balochistan. The MDTF involves extensive 
collaboration, as it is supported by 11 donors - Australia, Denmark, European Union, Finland, Germany, 
Italy, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom and United States – collectively contributing US$ 159 Million. 
To support priority interventions in Balochistan, a comprehensive Balochistan Development Needs 
Assessment (BDNA) was also carried out. As the MDTF enters into its round two, it will continue to 
operate as an instrument to strengthen donor coordination and provide greater policy and investment 
coherence, within the country, province and region led frameworks. 

10. 
Flood Emergency Response: After both the 2010 and 2011 floods, the Government requested 
the WBG and the ADB to play a lead role for preparing a joint Damages and Needs Assessments (DNAs) 
in coordination with the One UN, the EU and other donors. The Government and Donors further looked 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex XIX 
Page 3 of 4 

to the WBG to assist them in building a robust Citizens Damage Compensation Program (CDCP). WBG-
funding and the project framework also leveraged the support of US, DFID, and Italy to finance the 
second phase of the CDCP. Going forward, such partnerships will be further strengthened as the team 
prepares for additional financing of the project.  

Analytical Work, Trust Funds and other Alignment Initiatives 

11. 
The WBG has been encouraging joint analytical work to inform policy dialogue and program 
development around key issues. Many of IFC’s analytic and advisory work also leverages partnerships 
with donors as well as corporate and development organizations to expand outreach and enhance 
development impact. During the previous CPS period, the Bank also worked with DFID, EU, USAID and 
ADB to deliver Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) updates for Punjab and 
Sindh.  Similarly, the WBG chaired the Inter-Agency Group on Gender and Development (INGAD) 
from January - June 2013 and developed a note for the new government which highlights three critical 
areas—education, health and labor—where clear strategies, financing and implementation mechanisms 
are needed to tackle gender challenges, both at the Federal and Provincial levels.  

12. 
The WBG has been able to develop and enhance these partnerships through improved utilization 
of trust funds and ensuring that they are integrated into World Bank budgeting and strategy processes. 
More details and analysis of the Trust Funds Portfolio are given in the following section.  

13. 
The WBG will continue to build on the strong foundation of partnerships based on mutual trust 
and accountability. In the same spirit, the WBG Country Partnership Strategy 2015-2019 benefitted from 
consultation and valuable feedback of development partners. This would be used as a basis for a sustained 
dialogue in the coming years to ensure complementarity and effectiveness of donor support to Pakistan. 

Trust Funds Overview 

14. 
The Pakistan Trust Fund Portfolio currently has 64 active grants with a total commitment of US$ 
117 million. Disbursements over the last CPS period were US$ 165 million (equivalent to 6 percent of 
IBRD/IDA disbursements over the period). Of the 64 grants, 13 (20 percent) are Recipient Executed Trust 
Funds (RETF) and 51 (80 percent) are Bank Executed Trust Funds (BETF). In terms of management, 45 
(70 percent) grants are managed by the South Asia Region and the remaining 19 (30 percent) are Network 
managed or managed outside the region. 

FY10-14 TF Snapshot (amounts in US$ millions) 

Trust Funds Summary * 

Number of Grants 
Net Commitment  
Total Disbursement 
*Data as of end December 2013 excluding MDTF and IFC 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

59 
117.6 
39.9 

60 
132.2 
120.1 

53 
210.5 
199.2 

FY13 

62 
195.5 
109.7 

FY14 

64 
117.4 
19.6 

15. 
Overall, the CPS period of FY10-14 experienced an increase in the use of TFs which has largely 
remained unchanged in terms of number of grants but TF financing fluctuated with spikes owing to key 
co-financing  activities such as (i) Tax Administration Reform Project by DFID ($20.1m), (ii) Pakistan 
Third Partnership for Polio Eradication Project by Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and UN 
Foundation ($55.6m and $9.2m respectively) and, (iii) Flood Emergency Cash Transfer Project by DFID 
($91.3m). Trust Funds often complement IBRD/IDA project funding and are normally executed by 
recipient agencies as around 85 percent of total commitment during FY10-14 consisted of RETFs. In 
addition, TF sources are increasingly being used to fund Technical Assistance and Advisory Services. The 
table below gives more information on donor-wise distribution of Trust Funds. The major sectors 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex XIX 
Page 4 of 4 

supported through trust funds are the Human Development (US$ 78.9m), and Social Protection (US$ 
11m). The Water and Sanitation Program has also mobilized significant trust fund resources for financing 
activities in Pakistan.  

Donor Wise Summary (amounts in US$ millions) 
Number of 
Grants 

Donor 

Net Grant 
Amount 

Total 
Disbursement to 
Date  

FY14 Disbursement 
to Date  

AusAID 
Gates Foundation 
IBRD 
Japan  
UN Foundation  
UK - DFID 
USAID 
Netherlands 
Multiple Donors 
Total  

5 
4 
3 
5 
2 
5 
9 
1 
30 
64 

1.58 
68.58 
1.33 
6.31 
9.20 
11.03 
2.14 
1.86 
15.43 
117.46 

1.22 
0.29 
0.56 
3.02 
2.40 
5.03 
1.56 
0.64 
4.90 
19.62 

0.18 
0.18 
0.25 
0.02 
0.59 
2.27 
0.38 
0.13 
1.42 
5.42 

16. 
The current TF portfolio mostly includes programmatic TFs -- main ones are the Carbon Fund 
(2, US$ 8m), Polio Buy Down (6, US$77m), Japanese Social Development Fund – JSDF (2, US$2.8m), 
Institutional Development Fund (IDF) (3, US$1.33m), Policy and Human Resource Development – 
PHRD (2, US$3m) and Water and Sanitation Program- WSP (11, US$1.78m).  Going forward, Global 
Partnership for Education (GPE) will be funding two major education projects of up to US$100m in 
Balochistan and Sindh.  

Trust Fund Portfolio Performance 

17. 
Alignment: Overall, during the CPS period FY10 – 14 the TF portfolio has been broadly aligned 
with the CPS goals. Use of co-financing arrangements allows for the trust fund activities to be formally 
linked to ongoing IDA / IBRD projects; however technical assistance and standalone trust funds are also 
generally aligned with the overall lending portfolio. The Pakistan Country TF Guidelines, which were 
implemented in FY11, allow for easy checks to ensure alignment as well as ownership and demand 
from the clients and government. All recipient executed TF grants are required to have requests from 
the recipient, duly endorsed by the Economic Affairs Division (EAD.) The practice of including RETFs 
in portfolio reviews has been initiated and regular reports on these RETFs are shared with the EAD.  

18. 
Risks and Performance: The risks for TF grants are generally the same as for regular lending 
projects and AAAs including:  lack of capacity, inadequate needs assessment, very little sustainability, 
lack of commitment from the government, and slow approval processes. There is often a lack of 
management attention given the relatively smaller size of the grants. However, the overall implementation 
performance and achievement of results of the Trust Funds portfolio has been satisfactory during FY10-
14. TFs linked to ongoing projects are supervised along with the IDA/IBRD projects and many 
standalone grants have supervision budgets built in to allow teams to carry out implementation support. 
At the corporate level, there have been several reforms that have ensured that there is more management 
focus and integration in country programs as well as improvement in transparency and access to TF data. 

19. 
Lessons and Recommendations: To ensure successful implementation of the TF program, early 
consultations with the government and the WBG country management are necessary. This would also 
expedite Government approval at various stages of design and implementation and regular reviews will 
allow for timely advice and guidance. This formalization of the review process is critical for effective 
delivery. In addition, strengthened focus and attention on needs assessment and monitoring is required. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex XX: Provincial Graphs 

Punjab 

Annex XX 
Page 1 of 2 

Source: World Bank 2013. Punjab Public Expenditure Review Report.; World Bank staff calculations based on 
HIES/PSLMS; Labor force survey 2010/11; P is provisional. 

Sindh

Source: World Bank 2013; World Bank staff calculations based on HIES/PSLMS; Labor force survey 2010/11:  
P is provisional. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 

Annex XX 
Page 2 of 2 

Source: World Bank 2013. Punjab Public Expenditure Review Report.; World Bank staff calculations based on 
HIES/PSLMS; Labor force survey 2010/11; P is provisional. 

Balochistan 

Source: World Bank staff calculations, based on HIES/PSLMS.  
Note: Balochistan poverty estimates for 2006 and 2008 are omitted due to concerns about data quality.  
P is provisional. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B2 -
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

As Of Date 
1/30/2014 

CPS Annex B2 
Page 1 of 2 

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment 

Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio ( percent) e 

Portfolio Management 

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

2011

24
3.0
12.5
10.5
29.2
20.5
62.1

2012 

2013

2014

23 
3.4 
13.0 
12.5 
21.7 
18.6 
33.4 

25
3.7
12.0
11.8
20.0
16.9
18.7

24
4.0
16.7
14.9
16.7
14.9
7.1

Memorandum Item 

Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
Percent of OED Projects Rated U or HU by 
Number 
Percent of OED Projects Rated U or HU by 
Amt 

Since FY 80 

176
16,316.8

24.0

32.0

Last Five FYs 

15 
2,653.3 

28.6 

6.6 

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio. 
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP). 
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the  
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only. 
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, 
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year. 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
IFC Investment Operations Program 

CAS Annex B2 
Page 2 of 2 

Commitments (US$m) 
IFC Own Account (OA) 
IFC Own Account + Mobilization 

IFC OA Commitments by Sector (%)  
  Utilities  
  Construction and Real Estate 
  Transportation and Warehousing 
  Food and Beverages  
  Chemicals  
  Finance and Insurance  
  Electric Power  
  Total 

IFC OA Commitments by Instrument (%) 
  Guarantee 
  Loan-LN 
  Quasi-Equity (inc. Loan Type) 
  Straight Equity (inc. Fund) 
  Total 

*FY14 as of end-February 2014 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14* 

516.1 
616.1 

696.1 
696.1 

555.1 
555.1 

345.4 
513.9 

276.1 
276.1 

1% 
0% 
6% 
0% 
10% 
77% 
7% 
100% 

74% 
13% 
10% 
4% 
100% 

0% 
0% 
1% 
0% 
4% 
80% 
14% 
100% 

80% 
16% 
4% 
0% 
100% 

0% 
0% 
21% 
1% 
0% 
61% 
18% 
100% 

61% 
35% 
0% 
4% 
100% 

0% 
3% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
96% 
1% 
100% 

96% 
3% 
1% 
0% 
100% 

0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
100% 

100% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
100% 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
CPS Annex B8 
Page 1 of 4 

 
 
 
CPS Annex B8 
Page 2 of 4 

MDTF 
Total Disbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 

US$ Millions 
47.1 
92.6 

Active Projects 

CPS Annex B8 - Pakistan 
Multi-donor Trust Fund 
Portfolio (MDTF) 
As of Date 02/28/2014 

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Project ID 

Project Name 

Development Objectives 

P128096 
P127253 
P126833 
P125414 
P124268 
P126425 
P126426 
P128966 
P125584 
P130835 
P143661 

Promoting Girls Education in Balochistan 
Balochistan Disaster Management Project 
FATA Rural Livelihoods & Infrastructure 
FATA Urban Centers Project 
KPK/FATA Economic Revitalization 
KPK/FATA Governance Project  
Revitalizing Health Services in KPK 
FATA Emergency Rural Roads Project 
KPK Emergency Roads Recovery 
KPK Southern Area Development Project 
Competitive Industries Project for KPK 

MS 
MS  
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S  
MS 
MS 

Implementation 
Progress 
MS 
MS 
MS 
S 
MS 
S 
MU 
MS 
HS 
MS 
MS 

Original Amount 
in US$ Millions 

GRANT  

 Undisbursed Amount 
in US$ Millions  

10.0 

5.0 

12.0 
7.0 
20.0 
8.8 
16.0 
16.0 

17.1 

18.0 
9.0 

5.6 

4.0 

5.1 
5.0 
13.4 
4.4 
13.0 
8.7 

9.1 

15.9 
8.5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Annex B8 
Page 3 of 4 

Re g ion(s ):M iddle Eas t and North Africa
Country(s ) : Pak is tan

C omm i tm e n t
Fi s ca l Ye ar

In s t i tu t i on
S h o rt Nam e
ABL (P AK)
200 9 / 20 10 / 2 011 / 201 2 / 2 013 / 201 4
BAHL
200 8 / 20 09 / 2 010 / 201 1 / 2 012 / 201 3 / 20 14
Bank Alfalah
201 3 / 20 14
Bank Islam i
200 5
CSIBL
199 4 / 19 97 / 2 002
Crescen t Bahuman
200 3 / 20 04
Dewan Salman
200 7
Dewan P et ro leum
199 8 / 20 07 / 2 008 / 201 0
Engro Asah i
200 8 / 20 09
Engro En ergy
201 0 / 20 11
Engro Fer t ilizer
200 8 / 20 12
FINCA MFB P AK
201 3
G4 Off ice T ower
200 6 / 20 07 / 2 008 / 200 9 / 2 010 / 201 1 / 20 12 / 2013 / HMBL
200 6 / 20 08 / 2 009 / 201 0 / 2 011 / 201 2 / 20 13 / 2014 Habib Bank L t d
200 8
INT SL
200 7
JSP E Fun d
200 7 / 20 13
KESC
201 3
KOEL
201 0
Laraib
201 2
MAT CO Rice
199 3 / 20 08 / 2 009 / 201 0 / 2 011 / 201 2 / 20 13 / 2014 MCB Bank
200 8 / 20 09 / 2 010 / 201 1 / 2 012 / 201 3 / 20 14
Meezan Ban k
200 2 / 20 11
Micro Bank
201 2 / 20 13 / 2 014
NIB Bank
201 1
NRSP MFB
201 2
P IBT
196 5 / 19 87 / 1 990 / 199 2 / 1 994 / 199 5 / 20 05 / 2006 / P ackages
201 0 / 20 11
QICT
200 8 / 20 09 / 2 010 / 201 1 / 2 012 / 201 3 / 20 14
SilkBank Lim it ed
200 7 / 20 08 / 2 009 / 201 0 / 2 011 / 201 2 / 20 13 / 2014 So ner i Bank
201 2
St ar Hydropower
200 7
T P S (P )
200 4 / 20 07
T RG P ak ist an
200 6 / 20 07 / 2 008
T ameer Ban k
200 9 / 20 10 / 2 011 / 201 2 / 2 013 / 201 4
UBL
199 7 / 20 04 / 2 005
Uch P ower
201 1
Uch -II
201 2
Zo r lu P ak ist an
To ta l Po rtfo l i o

IFC Pakistan Portfolio 

(as of February 28, 2014 – Amount in US$) 

LN

ET

Q L + Q E

GT

RM

ALL

ALL

COMMITTED 

0
0
0
0
0
0
17 .50
0
14 .00
39 .24
0
0
11 .00
0
0
0
0
41 .25
0
33 .48
0
0
0
0
0
0
26 .50
0
37 .30
0
0
60 .00
0
0
0
0
(0 .00 )
1 01 .15
32 .33
4 13 .75

0
0
0
0
0
0 .5 1
0
1 .2 2
7 .8 6
2 .7 9
0
0 .7 0
0
0
0
4 .6 9
19 .9 9
28 .4 4
0
0
4 .8 6
0
0
2 .9 7
0
1 .8 1
19 .0 0
44 .1 8
0
13 .9 7
0
0
12 .7 7
0 .5 4
0 .4 4
0
0
0
0
166 .7 3

0
0
0
0
3 .77
0
4 .00
0
0
0
80 .00
0
0
0
25 .00
0
0
23 .28
2 .50
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
138 .54

9 .79
4 .47
7 .69
0 .40
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3 .65
1 .23
0
0
0
0
0
0
3 .79
14 .8 7
0
29 .4 8
0
0
0
0
2 .31
11 .1 8
0
0
0
0
1 .22
0
0
0
90 .0 9

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

9 .79
4 .47
7 .69
0 .40
3 .77
0 .51
2 1 .50
1 .22
2 1 .86
4 2 .03
8 0 .00
0 .70
1 1 .00
3 .65
2 6 .23
4 .69
1 9 .99
9 2 .97
2 .50
3 3 .48
4 .86
3 .79
1 4 .87
2 .97
2 9 .48
1 .81
4 5 .50
4 4 .18
3 7 .30
1 6 .28
1 1 .18
6 0 .00
1 2 .77
0 .54
0 .44
1 .22
(0 .00 )
10 1 .15
3 2 .33
80 9 .11

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 4 .00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 .00
0
0
1 4 .00

OUTSTANDING

LN
ET
Q L + Q E
GT
RM
ALL
ALL
O u t - IFC O u t - IFC O u t - IFC O u t - IFC O u t - IFC O u t - IFC O u t - Part
0
0
0
9 .79
0
9 .7 9
0 .00
0
0
0
4 .47
0
4 .4 7
0 .00
0
0
0
7 .69
0
7 .6 9
0 .00
0
0
0
0 .40
0
0 .4 0
0 .00
0
0
3 .77
0
0
3 .7 7
0 .00
0
0 .51
0
0
0
0 .5 1
0 .00
17 .50
0
4 .00
0
0
2 1 .5 0
0 .00
0
0 .00
0
0
0
0 .0 0
0 .00
14 .00
7 .86
0
0
0
2 1 .8 6
14 .00
39 .24
2 .79
0
0
0
4 2 .0 3
0 .00
0
0
80 .00
0
0
8 0 .0 0
0 .00
0
0 .54
0
0
0
0 .5 4
0 .00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 .00
0
0
0
3 .65
0
3 .6 5
0 .00
0
0
25 .00
1 .23
0
2 6 .2 3
0 .00
0
4 .69
0
0
0
4 .6 9
0 .00
0
9 .34
0
0
0
9 .3 4
0 .00
41 .25
2 8 .44
23 .28
0
0
9 2 .9 7
0 .00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 .00
33 .48
0
0
0
0
3 3 .4 8
0 .00
0
4 .86
0
0
0
4 .8 6
0 .00
0
0
0
3 .79
0
3 .7 9
0 .00
0
0
0
1 4 .80
0
1 4 .8 0
0 .00
0
2 .97
0
0
0
2 .9 7
0 .00
0
0
0
2 9 .48
0
2 9 .4 8
0 .00
0
1 .69
0
0
0
1 .6 9
0 .00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 .00
0
4 4 .18
0
0
0
4 4 .1 8
0 .00
37 .30
0
0
0
0
3 7 .3 0
0 .00
0
1 3 .83
0
2 .31
0
1 6 .1 4
0 .00
0
0
0
1 1 .18
0
1 1 .1 8
0 .00
24 .89
0
0
0
0
2 4 .8 9
0 .00
0
1 2 .77
0
0
0
1 2 .7 7
0 .00
0
0 .54
0
0
0
0 .5 4
0 .00
0
0 .44
0
0
0
0 .4 4
0 .00
0
0
0
1 .22
0
1 .2 2
0 .00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 .00
90 .87
0
0
0
0
9 0 .8 7
0 .00
32 .33
0
0
0
0
3 2 .3 3
0 .00
330 .87
13 5 .44
136 .04
9 0 .02
0
69 2 .3 7
14 .00

 
 
 
 
CPS Annex B8 
Page 4 of 4 

Statement of MIGA'S Exposure 
in Pakistan as of December 31, 2013 

1.  MIGA'S EXPOSURE (CONTINGENT LIABILITY) 

Transfer 
Restriction 

Expropriation 

War & Civil 
Disturbance 

Breach of 
Contract 

US$ million 
Gross Exposure 
percent of total portfolio 
Net Exposure 
percent of total portfolio 
CUP 
Current Amount* 
* On a gross basis 

161.8 
2.5 
-380.8 
-11.1 
0.0 
124.7 

2.  NET EXPOSURE BY SECTOR 

Agribusiness 
Construction 
Financial 
Financial Services 
General Banking 
Investment Fund 
Leasing 
Mortgage 
Infrastructure 
Electric, Gas and 
Sanitary Services 
Power 
Telecommunication 
Transportation 
Water Transportation 
Water Supply 
Other 
Manufacturing 
Mining 
Oil and Gas 
Retail 
Services 
Tourism 
Total 

US$ million 
0.0 
0.0 
47.2 
0.0 
47.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
98.5 

0.0 
98.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
72.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
217.7 

161.8 
2.1 
-380.8 
-9.0 
0.0 
124.7 

Pakistan 

percent 

0.0 
0.0 
21.7 
0.0 
21.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
45.2 

0.0 
45.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
33.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 

72.0 
1.3 
-428.0 
-14.4 
0.0 
35.0 

Asia 
US$ million 
0.0 
0.0 
47.2 
0.0 
47.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
415.8 

20.9 
213.4 
172.5 
0.0 
0.0 
8.9 
0.0 
195.9 
147.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
805.8 

148.5 
4.2 
-401.5 
-23.8 
0.0 
0.0 

percent 
0.0 
0.0 
5.9 
0.0 
5.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
51.6 

2.6 
26.5 
21.4 
0.0 
0.0 
1.1 
0.0 
24.3 
18.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 

Non Honoring 
of 
Sovereign 
Financial 
Obligations 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

Maximum 

310.3 
2.7 
217.7 
3.2 
0.0 
124.7 

MIGA Worldwide 
US$ million 
percent 
176.7  
2.6 
5.8  
0.1 
2,229.2  
33.0 
365.1  
5.4 
1,565.2  
23.2 
0.0  
0.0 
178.6  
2.6 
120.3  
1.8 
2,924.3  
43.3 

34.0  
1,064.9  
399.7  
876.0  
263.1  
206.5  
80.0  
623.2  
153.6  
386.0  
113.7  
135.0  
11.9  
6,759.2  

0.5 
15.8 
5.9 
13.0 
3.9 
3.1 
1.2 
9.2 
2.3 
5.7 
1.7 
2.0 
0.2 
100.0 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
