d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 87928-BA 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR 

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 

FOR THE PERIOD FY12–FY15 

June 3, 2014 

South East Europe Country Unit 
Europe and Central Asia 

International Finance Corporation, IFC 
Europe and Central Asia 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the 
performance of their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World 
Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of Last Country Partnership Strategy: August 30, 2011 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(Exchange Rate Effective May 1, 2014)  
Currency Unit = Convertible Mark (BAM) 
BAM 1.00 = US$ 0.709429 
US$ 1.00 = BAM 1.412152 
GOVERNMENT’S FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 – December 31 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Brcko District 
Current Account Deficit 
Central European Free Trade Agreement 
Country Partnership Strategy  
Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility  
Development Policy Operation 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
European Commission 
European Investment Bank 
Euro 
European Union 
Federation of BH 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Fiscal Year 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environment Facility  
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
International Development Association  
International Finance Corporation 
International Financial Institutions 
International Monetary Fund 
Instrument for Pre-Accession  
EU Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance for Rural Development  
Joint IBRD/IFC Business Plan 
Labor Force Survey 
Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations 
Non-performing loans 
Protected Areas 
Public-Private Partnership 
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Public Financial Management 
Research and Development 
Republika Srpska 
Stand-By Arrangement  
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency 
Small and Medium Enterprise  
Technical Assistance 
Trust Fund 
United Nations Development Program 
United States Agency for International Development 
Value Added Tax 

i 

AAA 
BH 
BD 
CAD 
CEFTA 
CPS 
CRIF 
DPO 
EBRD 
EC 
EIB 
EUR 
EU 
FBiH 
FDI 
FY 
GDP 
GEF 
GFDRR 
IBRD 
IDA 
IFC 
IFI 
IMF  
IPA 
IPARD 
JBP 
LFS 
MoFTER 
NPLs 
PA 
PPP 
PEIR 
PEFA 
PFM 
R&D 
RS  
SBA 
SIDA 
SME 
TA 
TF 
UNDP 
USAID 
VAT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task Team Leaders: 

World Bank 
Laura Tuck 
Ellen A. Goldstein  
Anabela Abreu 
Goran Tinjic 

IFC 
Dimitris Tsitsiragos 
Tomasz Telma 
Per Kjellerhaug 
Lada Busevac 
George Konda 

Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank BH team members, in particular Sandra Hlivnjak (Economist, ECSP2), Simon 
Davies (Economist, ECSP2), Gallina Vincelette (Lead Economist and Sector Leader, ECSPE), Wolfgang 
Fengler (Sector Leader, ECSPF), Timothy Johnston (Sector Leader, ECSH1), Raymond Bourdeaux (Sector 
Leader, ECSSD), Maria Eugenia Davalos (Economist, ECPS3), Ruvejda Aliefendic (Private Sector 
Development Specialist, ECPF3), and Nichola Dyer (Country Program Coordinator, ECCU4) for their 
valuable input and comments. 

ii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY12–15 PROGRESS REPORT 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I. 
INTRODUCTION .....................................................................................................................1 
II.  COUNTRY CONTEXT.............................................................................................................3 
III. CPS PROGRESS, IMPLEMENTATION AND ADJUSTMENTS ..........................................9 
A.  CPS Implementation Progress to date ..................................................................................9 
B.  Portfolio Performance and Partnerships ............................................................................11 
C.  Adjustments to the CPS Program and strategy going forward ..........................................12 
IV. RISKS 
...................................................................................................................................15 
Annex 1: Results Matrix ..........................................................................................................16 
Annex 2: List of active Bank administered Trust Funds in BH ...............................................26 
Annex 3: AAA Program and Contribution to CPS Pillars .......................................................27 
Annex 4: Gender Gaps in BH ..................................................................................................31 
Annex 5: Key Economic and Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS ..........................33 
Annex 6: BH at a Glance .........................................................................................................34 
Annex 7: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ....................37 
Annex 8: IBRD/IDA Program Summary .................................................................................38 
Annex 9: IFC Investment Operations Program .......................................................................39 
Annex 10: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) .......................................................40 
Annex 11: Map ........................................................................................................................41 

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

I. INTRODUCTION 

1. 
The Board of Executive Directors discussed the FY12-15 Country Partnership 
Strategy (CPS) for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BH) on August 30, 2011 (Report No. 64428-
BA). This report focuses on how the Bank has responded to changes in the country context since 
then, and how it will position itself strategically for the remaining period. It also provides initial 
details on the impact of the catastrophic flooding that occurred during the finalization of this 
report, and on the Bank’s response. 
2. 
In mid-May 2014, a major natural disaster struck BH, as the heaviest rainfall in 
Serbia and BH in 120 years of recorded weather measurement caused devastating floods 
and landslides. From May 13, the country saw massive flooding and over 3000 landslides. 
Governments declared a state of emergency on May 14, 2014, and requested international 
assistance. The floods touched about one third of the country’s territory, hitting hardest the 
northern and central flatlands, where the main agriculture industry is located. The human cost 
includes 25 confirmed deaths and one million people directly affected, with 40,000 evacuated 
and sheltered in 42 collective centers/temporary accommodation facilities. Preliminary evidence 
indicates the largest impact on infrastructure relating to housing, local infrastructure, transport, 
water and sanitation, and agriculture.  
3. 
Initial reports indicate that damage is extensive and the productive capacity of the 
economy has been shattered. Side roads and over 20 bridges have been destroyed or damaged, 
preventing humanitarian assistance from reaching remote areas. Many crops have been 
completely destroyed and livestock losses are severe, with possibly over 60,000 ha of farm land 
affected. Water supply was severely interrupted in the affected areas; one million people were 
deprived of drinkable water at the peak. Animal carcasses, contaminated water and debris pose a 
serious threat to public health. Over 25,000 houses are damaged and 230 health and school 
facilities fully or partially destroyed. Land mines that had been well-marked have been dislodged 
and the warning signs washed away, making recovery efforts more challenging and 
reconstruction more hazardous. The floods have created significant strains on the supply chains 
for a variety of goods crucially needed to ensure the continuity of public services and economic 
opportunities. For example, coal mines have been flooded, resulting in an interruption of supply 
to the Tuzla and Uglevik thermal power plants (which together account for over one-quarter of 
capacity and about 35 to 40 percent of generation). The plants are running on available stocks, 
but these will run out in the next few weeks.  
4. 
The authorities have requested World Bank support for a recovery needs 
assessment as well as an emergency recovery operation. A $150,000 Global Facility for 
Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) grant has been obtained. The recovery needs 
assessment led by the government and supported by the Bank, the EU and the UN started on 
May 29, 2014. The needs assessment will guide possible project restructuring; the emergency 
recovery project ($57 million1, envisaged to be funded out of the Crisis Response Window) is 
already under preparation. This operation is to support the governments of BH in reestablishing 
public services and economic opportunities in flood-affected areas. It would finance emergency 

1 The ongoing needs assessment will inform the exact credit amount.  

1 

 
                                                 
disaster recovery goods and rehabilitation of key local infrastructure as well as technical 
assistance and capacity building activities for the implementation of the project. In light of BH’s 
imminent graduation from IDA, Board approval of this emergency operation by no later than 
June 30, 2014 will be sought.  
5. 
The CPS was designed in 2011, with the overall objective of supporting BH’s EU 
integration, the CPS’ broad objectives are to: (i) support economic growth by improving 
productivity and competitiveness; (ii) improve social inclusion by strengthening the 
targeting and fiscal sustainability of social benefits and improving delivery of basic public 
services; and (iii) strengthen the sustainable use of key natural resources and improve 
climate change adaptation. The CPS program was built on an analysis of BH’s key 
development challenges and was kept flexible to reflect the continuous political uncertainty in 
the country. The CPS envisaged total IDA/IBRD lending of $348 million of which $148 million 
was IDA and $200 million was IBRD lending. IFC commitments were projected at $80 – 100 
million. As of May 16, 2014, $250 million or 72 percent of the total lending envelope was 
committed ($130 million – IDA; $120 million – IBRD), while IFC’s commitments reached $40 
million (including $7 million from IFC-Canada Climate Change Program).  
6. 
The political system in BH is complex, reflecting the provisions of the country’s 
constitution established to end bitter ethnic conflict nearly twenty years ago. The general 
government sector consists of four units: the State (or central) level, two entities—Federation of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and Republika Srpska (RS)—and Brcko District (BD). The State is 
governed by the Council of Ministers; each entity has its own government and local government 
units. In the FBiH, 10 cantons, each with its own government, represent an additional layer between 
the Government of the FBiH and local government units. 
7. 
Political fragmentation and stalemate have undermined reform processes. As 
recognized in the initial CPS document, the risk of weak political commitment to reform and of 
policy reversal was significant. This risk has materialized as the authorities have failed to 
advance sensitive reforms of social and veteran benefits that would have improved the quality of 
spending. Consequently, the Bank cancelled its planned programmatic Public Expenditure DPO 
series. The Bank then demonstrated flexibility and engaged in preparation of a new DPO because 
the authorities expressed sufficient commitment to business environment and investment climate 
reforms. Political fragmentation and stalemate remain the principal risks for delivery of the 
program during the remaining CPS period. This may lead to slower than expected progress 
against CPS outcomes and failure to deliver the full lending program. A flexible and 
opportunistic approach is necessary to achieve meaningful results despite limited political 
cohesion and will to reform. 
8. 
Political stalemate also undermined performance of the Bank Group program. In 
FY13, two projects worth $160 million (38 percent of total commitments) faced repeated 
effectiveness delays, and four projects were rated unsatisfactory temporarily in terms of progress 
either towards development objectives or implementation. FY12 disbursement performance was 
unusually strong, with the disbursement ratio at 40.7 percent, but in FY13 it deteriorated to 8 
percent due to the effectiveness and implementation delays. At end-April 2014 it stood at 16.5 
percent and is expected to reach 22 percent by the end of FY14. 
9. 
Progress toward CPS outcomes has been satisfactory with the notable exception of 
fiscal consolidation associated with an aborted DPO series. The CPS has been flexible to 
accommodate changing client demand and political cohesion. This CPSPR revises outcomes and 
indicators to reflect the shift in focus away from fiscal consolidation (Pillar II) and toward 

2 

 
business climate reform (Pillar I). Three outcomes were dropped for lack of an associated 
program, and the rest are either achieved or on track to be achieved by the end of the CPS period. 
10. 
BH graduates from IDA eligibility to IBRD-only status at the end of the IDA16 
period. Although its per capita income has long exceeded the threshold for eligibility to IDA 
funding, eligibility was extended to accommodate post-conflict needs. The graduation from IDA 
is a complex milestone with important implications because the country has extremely limited 
access to international capital markets. At the same time, the country faces a notable financing 
gap in the medium term which is likely to widen in the outer years of the decade if the 
commitment to fiscal consolidation remains weak.  
11. 
The CPS strategic focus on competitiveness, social inclusion, and environmentally 
sustainable development remains valid for the rest of the CPS period, and is well aligned 
with the World Bank Group’s twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and boosting 
shared prosperity. These objectives address a still-fragile economic recovery, continued social 
vulnerabilities and lack of national cohesion, and the need to enhance competitiveness, growth 
and job creation. Specifically, the focus on enhancing competitiveness provides a foundation for 
job creation, opening up more opportunities for the poor and less well-off to improve their living 
standards and contribute to economic growth. Enhancing social inclusion is also clearly linked to 
the corporate goals by supporting increased access to economic opportunities for vulnerable 
groups, particularly to labor markets and health services. The program is also working towards 
promoting environmental sustainability in BH, an overarching goal of the World Bank Group. 
12. 
The Bank Group will continue to be selective and adjust the lending program to 
reflect the political will to tackle structural reforms.  In the course of this CPS, the Bank 
made a strategic shift away from deeper fiscal reform (where political will was insufficient) 
toward improvement of the business environment and investment climate, where ownership of 
reforms was sufficient across all levels of government and results would stimulate growth and 
jobs.  For the remainder of the CPS, the IFC/IBRD/IDA program will maintain its focus on 
reducing poverty and achieving shared prosperity by improving the competitiveness of the 
economy, facilitating job creation and strengthening the delivery of basic services for the 
vulnerable.  

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

Political Developments 
13. 
In the first half of the CPS period, a series of political crises affected implementation 
of the government’s programs. Continued political fragmentation marked the period 2011-
2013. State-level Council of Ministers formation took 18 months after the October 2010 
elections and as a result, the State level budget for 2012 was not adopted timely. Beyond 
stymying structural reform efforts, that situation temporarily jeopardized foreign debt service. 
Reshuffling of the FBiH government has not been completed 23 months after the June 2012 
breakup of the ruling coalition. In the RS, the government resigned in block in February 2013, 
but a new government was formed the following month. Overall, the internal political stalemate 
weakened the country’s progress toward EU accession and delayed implementation of structural 
reforms, including those earlier agreed upon with the IMF, the World Bank and the EU. More 
recently, the government has made some progress on structural reforms with the support of the 
IMF and the Bank. Both entities are now processing important reforms aimed at improving the 
business environment and investment climate. The FBiH also adopted a pension strategy aligned 
with the Bank’s recommendations.  

3 

 
14. 
The domestic political situation continues to pose the most important risk for BH’s 
development and for EU accession. A 2009 ruling by the European Court of Human Rights 
(the “Sejdic-Finci” case) stated that BH needs to reverse a situation created under the Dayton 
peace agreement that prevents ethnicities other than Serbs, Croats and Bosniaks from holding 
elected positions. As a result of this and a lack of movement on an EU coordination mechanism 
and on trade issues, the last EU Progress Report noted little advancement on the path to EU 
membership. The EU reduced by around EUR47 million ($60 million) the 2013 Instrument for 
Pre-Accession (IPA) funding for BH, and suspended discussion of further IPA-2 financing for 
the 2014-2020 period pending progress in these areas.   

Recent Economic Developments and Outlook 
15. 
BH’s economy performed poorly in 2012 due to weak internal and external 
economic environments. After two years of fragile recovery from the 2009 recession, BH 
experienced a second downturn in 2012 (Table 1). Deteriorating external conditions, especially 
the prevailing uncertainty in the Euro zone, a severe winter at the start of 2012, and wildfires in 
the second half of that year all negatively affected economic activity. Consumption, investment, 
and exports each slumped in 2012. Industrial production also dropped, mainly due to weak 
external demand for BH exports.  
16. 
A surge in exports supported a modest economic recovery in 2013. After 14 
consecutive months of negative growth rates, industrial production picked up by 4 percent in the 
first ten months of 2013. Manufacturing grew by 9.7 percent compared with the same period in 
2012 - significantly higher than the 5.7 percent in September - and intermediate goods by 15.6 
percent, suggesting some revival in the manufacturing sector. Exports of goods grew by 9 
percent in the first three quarters of 2013 compared with the same period of 2012. Internal and 
external risks to this recovery remain, including a slow recovery in the EU, which could 
prejudice exports, and a slow-down in fiscal revenues, which would affect the 2014 budget. 
Economic and political risks are discussed in more detail below. 
17. Macro projections were prepared prior to the floods and will be updated once the 
damage and loss assessment is completed. The impact of the recent floods on economic 
activity in BH is not known yet, however downward pressure on the recovery is expected in 
2014. Preliminary information indicates that agriculture, industry, and mining are especially 
affected. The floods have harmed numerous small and medium size businesses in manufacturing 
and farming, and have hit predominantly areas with low and middle income households. 
Reconstruction efforts will partially counteract the negative effect on economic activity, 
provided adequate financing for reconstruction becomes available. A pickup in construction 
activities, investment and consumption (as lost items are gradually replaced) is expected. With 
increased domestic activity, a reversal of the current deflationary trends is possible.  
18. 
The currency board continued to support monetary stability and inflation remained 
low into 2013.2 Inflation was around 2 percent in 2012 (with core inflation below 1 percent) and 
the country experienced deflation of 1.5 percent in the first ten months of 2013. International 
reserves, which are crucial to maintaining monetary stability, remained at a comfortable level 
during 2013 (at around 5 months of imports). Given BH’s reliance on a currency board which 

2 BH operates a currency board, under which the Bosnian convertible mark (KM) is convertible to the Euro at the fixed rate of 
KM 1.96:EUR1. 

4 

 
                                                 
limits the scope for monetary policy, flexible labor markets and sustainable fiscal policies are 
exceptionally important to maintain macroeconomic balances and boost economic growth. 
19. 
Labor market participation and employment remain stubbornly low and below pre-
crisis levels. Preliminary 2013 Labor Force Survey (LFS) results indicate that labor market 
participation in 2013 is just under 50 percent of the working age population.  The employment 
rate in 2013 remained one percent below the 2008 (pre-crisis) level of 33 percent.  The 
unemployment rate at 28 percent remained elevated compared with 23 percent in 2008. 
Unemployment is particularly high among those without tertiary education, women, and young 
people. The poor investment climate and labor market rigidities have greatly contributed to the 
persistent unemployment problem in BH.  Labor market outcomes are poorer for those in the 
bottom 40 percent of the income distribution, as they have lower employment rates than the rest 
of the population due to higher unemployment and lower participation rates. 
20. 
After two years of large current account deficits, the external deficit narrowed in 
the first half of 2013. From 9.6 percent in 2012, the trade deficit declined to around 6 percent of 
GDP in the first three quarters of 2013, thanks to higher exports of electricity and goods. Imports 
of goods were 3.6 percent lower in the first three quarters of 2013 than during the same period of 
2012. A blend of foreign direct investment (FDI), grants, foreign credit and remittances financed 
the external account. FDI performed well in 2013, with investments totaling 2.6 percent of GDP 
in the first three quarters of the year compared with 1.9 percent in the first three quarters of 2012. 
However, a part of this increase was due to a surge of investments from Croatian companies 
wanting to maintain access to CEFTA markets following Croatia’s accession to the EU in mid-
2013.  FDI slowed considerably in the third quarter of 2013.  
21. 
Remittances continued to be an important source of financial flows for BH. 
Remittances held up during the crisis and remain a major part of foreign financing. In 2012, 
remittances in the narrow definition (workers’ compensation and remittances) amounted to 10.8 
percent of GDP and in the broader definition (narrow definition plus private current transfers) to 
16.6 percent of GDP. Remittances were largely unchanged in the first three quarters of 2013 but 
have declined slightly as a percent of GDP. 
22. 
Although the banking sector remained relatively stable in 2013, a high level of non-
performing loans (NPLs) continues to plague the system. Many of the foreign-owned banks, 
which dominate the banking system, gradually deleveraged in the years after the global financial 
crisis. Some of the largest banks in BH shrank their balance sheets to repay deposits or loans 
from their parent banks. Banks’ foreign liabilities, which accounted for 31 percent of total bank 
liabilities at end-2008, represented 18 percent at end-2012 and fell further to 15.6 percent by 
October 2013. Moreover, the quality of banks’ credit portfolios deteriorated for the fourth year in 
a row alongside the stagnant economy, pushing NPLs to 14.3 percent of total loans at end-June 
2013. Provisioning for these rising NPLs, is at around two thirds. Although reliance on parent 
banks has declined, continued global financial market turbulence or a further downturn in Europe 
could make it more difficult for banks to raise funds from parent groups if required to deal with 
NPLs. In addition, the regulatory framework for dealing with NPLs needs further strengthening. 
23. 
BH faces significant fiscal challenges exacerbated by declining revenues. The 
authorities began fiscal consolidation in 2010 and reduced the deficit to 2.6 percent in 2012 from 
5.5 percent of GDP in 2009. In 2012, weak economic performance brought revenues down by 
1.3 percent of GDP, with direct taxes and social security seeing especially large falls. To 
maintain a sustainable fiscal stance in the face of declining revenues, the authorities took some 
measures to reduce expenditures, but government spending remains overly concentrated in non-

5 

 
growth enhancing areas. Efforts to contain current spending in 2012 were weak. Wages and 
social benefits together amounted to 27.7 percent of GDP in 2012. Social benefits are not 
adequately targeted with only an estimated 37 percent reaching the poorest quintile and over 12 
percent going to the wealthiest quintile in the country. This leakage is largely due to excessive 
spending on war-related benefits, which tend not to reach the neediest.  
24. 
The extension and augmentation of the Stand-By agreement with the IMF in 
January 2014 will continue to support the financing of the 2014 budget. The BH public 
sector financing needs for 2014 amount to around 4 percent of GDP, of which 1.4 percent is the 
deficit and the remainder debt amortization. In January 2014, the IMF completed the fifth review 
of BH’s economic performance under a 24-month SBA and extended the program through end-
June 2015 to provide an anchor for economic policies during the election period and the political 
transition. 3 However, the IMF has not been able to complete the sixth review under the SBA as 
some fiscal targets and structural benchmarks were not met.  
25. 
Total public debt is considered broadly sustainable. At the end of 2012, BH’s public 
debt reached 45 percent of GDP, of which 28 percent was external debt.  This external public 
debt is predominantly on concessional terms to international financial institutions (IFIs). Total 
public debt is expected to decrease slightly to below 45 percent in 2013.  
26. 
The medium-term macroeconomic framework assumes a slow economic recovery in 
the region and in the EU in 2014 (Table 1). Overall, the economy is estimated to have grown 
by 0.8 percent in 2013 and is expected to expand by 2 percent in 20144, driven mainly by 
recovering export demand. Over the medium term, growth is projected to increase gradually to 
around 4.0 percent by 2016, based on increased exports and continued stable inflows of 
remittances. Significant progress in implementing structural reforms will be important if BH is to 
achieve faster economic growth than currently foreseen.  
27. 
Strengthening public financial management, including debt management policies 
and practices, as well as focusing spending on growth-enhancing areas, will be an integral 
part of reinforcing fiscal sustainability and ultimately increasing BH’s medium-term economic 
potential.  
28. 
The medium to long term growth potential of BH’s economy is also constrained by a 
weak business environment. BH, ranked 131st out of 185 economies worldwide on the Doing 
Business index, is the worst-ranked country in Southeast Europe.  Businesses face a large 
bureaucratic burden, complex governance structures, overlapping provisions between different 
levels of government and lack of transparency and consistent enforcement. 
29. 
External and internal risks threaten the macroeconomic outlook. Since the outlook 
assumes sufficient recovery in Europe for BH to see continued export growth, external risks are 
related to deterioration in the European economy and a potential rise in interest rates due to 
monetary policy tightening in the US and EU. The EU countries remain BH’s largest trading 
partners, hence an anemic recovery of the Eurozone would have a negative effect on BH’s 
economic outlook through a number of channels: a reversal of the increase in exports seen in the 

3 The authorities entered into a 24 month Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) with the IMF in September 2012. On Jan 31, 2014, the 
SBA was extended by nine months and five days, increasing access by SDR 135.28 million to meet additional financing needs 
expected to arise mainly in late 2014. 

4 This estimate was prepared prior to the 2014 floods; growth projections will be updated once the damage and loss 
assessment is completed. 

6 

 
                                                 
first half of 2013; a potential reduction of remittances; and a potential decrease of capital flows. 
The Bank is adjusting its support to help address some of these risks by supporting alignment to 
relevant EU systems, including EU inspections systems for export promotion. In addition, as 
liquidity conditions tighten in the US and, eventually, the EU, interest rates could increase, 
making it more challenging for the entities to raise financing through short-term debt. Internal 
risks are posed primarily by the challenges of reconstruction following the devastating floods 
and by domestic politics. BH’s political environment presents a tough background for reforms; 
the October 2014 general elections are likely the single largest risk for implementation of 
planned reforms. To address these risks, the Bank Group is ramping up stakeholder engagement 
across entities and political parties. Also, financial sector vulnerabilities, including the high level 
of NPLs and lack of an adequate regulatory framework, persist. The Bank is paying greater 
attention to the financial sector through increased monitoring and analysis as well as technical 
assistance to the Financial Stability Unit of the Central Bank.  
30. 
BH will no longer have access to IDA funding at the end of this IDA replenishment. 
The last IDA resources will be delivered this fiscal year. This is a complex milestone with 
important implications as the country has extremely limited access to international capital 
markets. The country is facing a notable financing gap in the medium term, and the cost of filling 
that gap will rise as the country’s access to concessional financing ends. Access to IBRD 
resources will be consistent with a strong and continued lending program after graduation from 
IDA, in line with the country’s performance and IBRD capacity. 

Table 1. Key economic indicators for Bosnia and Herzegovina 

GDP Growth
Inflation
Unemployment rate

Consumption
Gross capital formation
National Savings
Saving-Investment balance

Fis cal Se ctor
Revenue
Expenditure
Fiscal Balance
Public debt

Ex te rnal s e ctor
Current Account Balances
External Debt 
FDI (Net)
Gross Official reserves (in months of imports)

2011

2012

1.0
3.7
27.6

108.7
15.7
6.8
-8.9

46.1
48.9
-2.9
40.5

-9.9
49.1
2.1
5.4

-1.1
2.0
28.0

108.6
16.0
6.3
-9.7

46.3
49.0
-2.7
45.1

-9.7
52.4
3.4
5.4

2014

2013
Est.
0.8
2.0
0.3
1.1
28.0
…
in percen t o f GDP
106.2
106.4
16.6
16.3
8.6
8.7
-8.0
-7.6

2015
P roj.
3.5
1.5
…

105.4
16.4
9.4
-7.0

45.9
48.1
-2.2
44.9

-7.9
53.0
2.8
5.2

46.2
47.5
-1.4
42.8

-7.6
53.9
2.3
5.1

45.7
47.0
-1.3
40.2

-7.0
52.4
2.3
4.9

2016

4.0
1.9
…

104.6
16.2
10.1
-6.1

45.7
46.5
-0.8
37.4

-6.2
49.5
2.3
4.6

Social Developments 
31. 
Living standards were rising and poverty declining prior to the 2008 crisis, but past 
gains likely were eroded since. The period 2004-2007 was marked by strong GDP growth 
averaging 6 percent per annum.  Headcount poverty--measured as the fraction of the population 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with incomes below BAM 205 per person per month—was 14 percent in 2007, almost 4 
percentage points less than in 2004. Poverty was assessed to be primarily rural, with rural 
poverty twice as high as that in urban areas, and three out of four poor people living in rural 
areas.5 Although poverty estimates are not yet available post 2007, empirical simulations suggest 
that the GDP decline over the last years has led to a rise in poverty. Data restrictions currently 
prevent the estimation of a shared prosperity indicator for BH.6  
32. Widespread poverty and high unemployment triggered massive protests throughout 
the country in February 2014. The protests quickly spread from Tuzla, once the industrial 
center of the country, to main cities across BH. Initially violent, they continued more peacefully 
afterwards with protesters demanding new and accountable governments, jobs, fight against 
corruption, and social equality. 
33. 
BH has made significant progress in promoting gender equality, yet gender gaps 
remain particularly in access to economic opportunities and agency. Significant gender gaps 
persist in labor markets, with low female labor force participation rates (32.5 percent in 2013) 
and lasting gender wage gaps.  Moreover, gender inequalities in agency also exist in the country, 
with relatively fewer women than men participating in politics and leadership positions. 
Although data are limited, the high incidence of domestic violence is also a source of concern. 
Annex 5 and Box 1 (below) present more details on the gender situation in BH. 

Box 1: Gender issues are being integrated into the Bosnia and Herzegovina program 
The World Bank Group program in BH proactively mainstreams gender issues to address existing inequalities. 
First, for all projects in the pipeline, gender issues are being considered and included from the early stages. For 
example, the recently approved (FY13 Q2) Real Estate Registration Project includes raising public awareness of 
legal rights of women and producing sex-disaggregated data on real estate ownership to narrow gender gaps in 
women’s access to assets.  
Second, the gender dimension is also being actively incorporated in selected projects in the portfolio. The ongoing 
Irrigation Development Project is strengthening its gender dimension through (i) a project desk review to identify 
opportunities to address gender inequalities, and (ii) engaging in discussions with the Project Implementation Unit 
and relevant key stakeholders, together with a gender specialist, to identify, address and raise awareness on gender 
challenges in the project area. Furthermore, in the context of the Real Estate Registration project, the Bank 
organized (with grant funds from the Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality of the World Bank) a regional 
leadership training for key Government and non-Government stakeholders in the Western Balkans on land and 
gender issues, including those from BH. The objective of the training was to promote practical and proactive sector 
reform initiatives to modify attitudes, norms, and systems in order to facilitate women’s land acquisition and full 
utilization of land and property rights. 
Finally, BH will benefit from analytic and advisory activities with important gender components, including 
analytical work on employment and job creation, the existing regional program on poverty, the Gender Monitoring 
in the Western Balkans program and the activities under the recently approved Trust Fund “Promoting Gender 
Equality in the Western Balkans” with support from the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation and with 
a focus on women’s access to economic opportunities. 

5 As per the 2009 Poverty Update. 
6 Due to restrictions in data access, available poverty estimates are only available up to 2007. However, a recently signed MoU with the statistics 
offices is paving the way to providing more updated poverty and shared prosperity numbers and analyses. 

8 

 
 
                                                 
III. CPS PROGRESS, IMPLEMENTATION AND ADJUSTMENTS 

A. 

CPS IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS TO DATE 

34. 
Progress towards CPS outcomes has been satisfactory for the competitiveness and 
environmental sustainability pillars but less so for the social inclusion pillar. The CPS has 
been flexible to accommodate changing client demand and political cohesion. As a result, out of 
the original CPS outcomes for Pillar 1, two (Improved commercial use of the Sava river corridor 
and Improved confidence in the financial statements of business entities, including SMEs, by 
using accounting standards adapted to their size) were dropped and three revised. The two 
outcomes were dropped because associated Bank programs were not pursued. Two new 
outcomes were added to reflect the increased focus on business climate reforms. Of the ten 
outcomes now included in Pillar 1, three have been fully or partially achieved and the remainder 
are on track to achieve expected results by end-FY15. For Pillar II, the planned outcome of fiscal 
savings equal to 1.8 percent of GDP through improved targeting of social and veteran benefits 
was dropped because the programmatic Public Expenditure (PE) DPO series, which was the 
cornerstone of this pillar, was terminated due to lack of commitment of the entity governments to 
implement the reforms. The other three outcomes under this pillar are on track to achieve 
expected results by end-FY15. For Pillar III, of the three outcomes, one has already been fully 
achieved, while two are on track to be achieved by the end of the CPS period.  

Pillar I – Competitiveness 
35. 
The Bank Group’s program was effective in enhancing competitiveness and 
contributing to job creation. The program was anchored in analytical work on competitiveness 
carried out during the previous CPS (see Annex 3). IDA investments in road infrastructure, in 
partnership with EBRD and EIB, rehabilitated 220 km of roads and helped reduce user costs by 
almost 18% in the FBiH and by 10.5% in the RS, which exceeded the target of 10%. IBRD 
financing enhanced access to capital for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) during the 
financial crisis. The original loan of $70 million was fully disbursed in 2011 and 2012, and 110 
SMEs received loans from participating commercial banks. It is estimated that these loans helped 
sustain 4,000 jobs and create 1,120 new jobs. Additional IBRD financing of $120 million was 
approved in response to the government’s request for continued intervention in improving access 
to financing for SMEs. To complement the countercyclical IDA and IBRD crisis response, the 
IFC invested $40 million to support capacity expansion and energy efficiency improvements of 
the largest producer of glass, soda ash, and related chemicals in the country, and to support a 
local company exporting precision tools for the automotive, electrical and ski industries.  
36. 
Efficient registration of real estate helped develop transparent land markets. 
Property registration transactions, which used to take several months to complete, are now 
completed in one day in larger urban centers thanks to the IDA-financed Land Registration 
Project. The project also helped reduce the backlog of pending cases from 80,000 in 2006 to 
18,200 in 2012.  
37. 
IFC focused on reducing costs and risks of doing business through improving the 
business environment and investment climate. IFC is helping the BH authorities to adopt a 
new and modern law on FDI that would simplify export-import procedures and is expected to 
yield significant savings for businesses. IFC assisted local governments to simplify over 800 
business related permits and licenses, resulting in over $40 million in private sector savings. 

9 

 
Going forward, IFC will continue to provide advisory services in the key areas related to 
investment climate improvements. With financial support from a Swedish grant, IFC and IBRD 
will jointly work to help with streamlining and reorganization of the inspection functions, 
processes and legislation in accordance with EU requirements.  
38. 
The Bank demonstrated flexibility and restructured the Agriculture and Rural 
Development project in response to an urgent need to assist farmers in flooded areas. That 
assistance included provision of seedlings and greenhouses, as well as investments in rural 
infrastructure. Competitiveness of the agriculture sector will be further improved through 
investments in irrigation systems that will be financed by IDA. With IFC’s assistance, state level 
institutions adopted the Food Labeling Rulebook, which is expected to facilitate local food 
producers’ access to the EU market. Given that poverty in BH is primarily rural, these 
interventions are expected to contribute to the government’s efforts to increase economic 
opportunities for the poorest 40% of the population.    
39. 
In the infrastructure sectors, IFC’s objective is to increase private sector 
participation by mobilizing private investments and the granting of long-term concessions.  
IFC is the lead advisor helping the FBiH Government to attract private investments through a 
public-private partnership (PPP) transaction for a 40 km section of the country’s 5c highway 
corridor, part of the Pan-European transport corridor. The project is expected to attract EUR350 
million worth of investment. Also, IFC supported entity governments in drafting 18 pieces of 
legislation aimed at unlocking a renewable energy market worth EUR900 million (660 MW total 
capacity); from among these, the governments have already adopted four critical laws.  
40. 
In the financial sector, IFC has signed a Trade Finance Line with a foreign bank, to 
enhance its ability to provide export finance, thus contributing to export growth. IFC will 
continue working with financial intermediaries to provide better access to finance for the private 
sector, and especially for micro, small and medium enterprises. With IFC’s assistance, three 
leading microfinance institutions were certified to adhere to the highest standards in client 
protection in the microfinance industry (SMART campaign). IFC recently partnered with eight 
municipalities to support debt counseling to over-indebted individuals or small businesses, 
mainly clients of microcredit institutions.  

Pillar II – Social Inclusion 
41. Guided by the Bank’s analytic work on poverty and social assistance,7 which was 
reinforced by the conclusions of the Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR) in 
2012, the CPS greatly focused on enhancing the quality and efficiency of public spending. 
Following the global financial crisis, in 2010 the Bank launched a programmatic Public 
Expenditure DPO series. While DPO I ($111 million) was disbursed in 2010 after the authorities 
successfully legislated reforms of cash transfers, the Bank dropped DPOs II and III as structural 
reforms stalled in 2012, with entity governments stating that they no longer enjoyed the political 
and social support needed to undertake the reforms. In contrast, businesses and governments in 
both entities as well as the State government expressed support for investment climate reforms to 
enhance growth and create jobs. 

7 Policy note on Social Assistance Transfers in BH – Moving Toward a More Sustainable and Better-Targeted Safety Net – April 
2009; and Protecting the Poor during the Global Crisis – Poverty Update – December 2009. 

10 

 
                                                 
42. 
As a result, the Bank shifted towards greater support for Pillar I activities through 
business environment reforms, and scaled down the associated Pillar II lending. The Bank 
Group initiated a new DPO to support post-crisis growth through improvements in the business 
environment and investment climate. This growth-oriented reform program is deemed less 
politically and socially controversial than the earlier fiscal consolidation reforms. 
43. 
Nevertheless, the Bank has maintained a policy dialogue with BH counterparts on 
public spending and fiscal matters. Technical assistance on pensions and planned technical 
assistance on public health financing stem directly from the PEIR recommendations. As a result, 
the FBiH recently adopted a new pension strategy. In addition, through the debt management 
technical assistance, the Bank is supporting prioritization and production of a coordinated plan of 
action to strengthen debt management practices.  
44. 
The Social Safety Net and Employment Support Project has been effective in 
extending job brokerage for vulnerable job seekers. The project achieved the objective of 
extending job-brokerage services to 10,000 active job seekers among hard-to-employ categories 
(disabled, long-term unemployed etc). Furthermore, policy dialogue contributed to adoption of 
the new law on social protection in RS aimed at improvement of targeting of social benefits in 
this entity. Finally, ongoing technical assistance on options to improve poverty targeting criteria 
for social assistance programs will be incorporated in the new social assistance legislation which 
is planned to be introduced in FBiH during 2014-2015. Social assistance targeting in RS is also 
expected to benefit from incorporation of additional poverty indicators. 
45. 
IDA financing is proving effective in enhancing health system efficiency through 
strengthening of primary health care along the family medicine model. Population coverage 
through family medicine teams reached 1.25 million in FBiH and 1.03 million in RS, well on 
track to meeting the targets of 1.5 million and 1.25 million respectively, or 70 percent coverage 
of the population by the end of 2014. Given the demographic and epidemiological profile of the 
population in BH these are critical elements to increase shared prosperity by improving the 
health status of the population and contributing to reducing out-of-pocket expenditures on health. 

Pillar III - Environmental Sustainability 
46. 
Bank support is helping to reduce pollution from municipal sources into the Neretva 
and Bosna rivers and consequently the Adriatic Sea and Danube basins. Bank support 
strengthened water management through already-completed rehabilitation of the waste water 
treatment plants in four sites. Rehabilitation of a fifth plant is underway, while rehabilitation of 
two more plants is expected to be completed during FY14-15. In partnership with the EU, IBRD 
will significantly upgrade waste water infrastructure in Sarajevo, thus reducing pollution of the 
Bosna River from the country’s biggest urban center.  
47. 
Coverage of protected forest and mountain areas has increased. The GEF Forest and 
Mountain Protected Areas project expanded the protected area to 5.5 percent or 280,921 ha, 
exceeding the goal of 3 percent or 140,000 ha coverage by the end of the project in FY14. 

B. 

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND PARTNERSHIPS 

48. 
After a strong performance of the Bank’s investment portfolio in FY12, continued 
political stalemate negatively affected overall portfolio performance in FY13. The Bank’s active 
portfolio currently consists of 12 
investment operations with commitments 
totaling 

11 

 
$454.6 million (IDA – $184.1 million; IBRD – $250 million; GEF grants – $14.5 million). In 
addition, the active recipient-executed trust fund portfolio amounts to $33 million. The period 
FY10-FY12 saw a healthy portfolio and strong disbursement performance. However, FY13 was 
marked by a slowdown of project implementation. The political situation delayed effectiveness 
of recently-approved projects (Irrigation Development Project, Real Estate Registration, and 
Additional Financing for Enhancing SME Access to Financing) which in turn impinged on 
overall disbursement performance. Portfolio performance is expected to improve in FY14 as 
recent restructurings start to bear results, and implementation of larger projects is accelerated. 
The disbursement ratio for FY14 is currently projected to reach 22 percent. IFC’s portfolio 
currently stands at $123.8 million, with 11 projects.  Due to the complex political environment 
and high country risk profile, new foreign and domestic investments remain limited.  
49. 
The Bank has developed strong collaboration with partners, in particular the 
European Commission. Trust funds (TFs) are integrated with the Bank Group strategy and 
complement projects in areas such as environment, transport and investment climate (see Annex 
2). The EU approved a total of about $39 million of IPA resources, $19 million of which are 
effective and under implementation, as co-financing or additional financing for five Bank-
supported investment projects in environment and transport. Three SIDA TFs totaling about 
$13.7 million complement the Bank’s efforts in improving water management, agriculture and 
rural development, as well as the investment climate. The Swiss Development Cooperation is the 
key partner for the new program on risk factors awareness. USAID and UNDP have collaborated 
in the preparation of the Energy Efficiency Project. Furthermore, the IMF has been a key partner 
in structural reforms in the social sector, which were central to the IMF’s stabilization program.  

C. 

ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CPS PROGRAM AND STRATEGY GOING FORWARD 

50. 
A flexible CPS has been essential given BH’s difficult political economy and 
changing external environment. Flexibility has enhanced responsiveness to client demand, 
facilitating program scale-up in relevant areas and allowing the Bank Group to strategically shift 
support to areas most conducive to reform. In the wake of the Eurozone crisis, the Bank’s 
additional support to enhance SMEs’ access to financing augured a strategic shift toward private 
sector development. When political will to engage in sensitive public expenditure reforms 
proved insufficient and the Bank cancelled the originally-envisaged Public Expenditure DPO 
series ($200 million), the Bank Group responded flexibly by developing a new Business 
Environment DPO ($50 million). Indeed, the main shift in the Bank Group strategy since its 
inception has been to increase focus on Pillar 1 activities related to competitiveness and 
improvements in the business environment, and concomitantly reduce lending associated 
with fiscal reforms under Pillar 2. To respond to the flood emergency, support is being 
prepared rapidly to enable the country to access resources through IDA’s Crisis Response 
Window prior to BH’s graduation.8 In addition, the portfolio is being reviewed to identify 
projects that can be restructured to redirect resources to flood response if needed. 
51. 
In response to changing client demand, most recently, the Bank cancelled the 
proposed IDA credit for the Sava Waterway Rehabilitation Project after the governments 
failed to reach agreement over institutional arrangements. The remaining IDA resources have 

8 The proposed project would finance inter alia energy and power sector goods such as petroleum and fuel products 
necessary for continuous operation of the thermal electricity generation plants. 

12 

 
                                                 
been used for the Drina River Basin flood preparedness project, which was advanced into FY14. 
All available IDA funds will be fully committed, reaching $187 million (including the 
emergency project), by end-FY14. In addition, IBRD lending may reach $218 million upon 
delivery of the new DPO in FY15 and a possible additional $48 million operation in FY15 (see 
para. 50), consistent with the original planned CPS lending envelope. The original CPS Results 
Matrix has been revised to reflect all past program adjustments as well as planned adjustments 
for FY14 and FY15 (Annex 1). 
52. 
The Bank Group will continue to take a flexible approach, reflecting political 
commitment for specific reform programs and the adjusted strategy for FY14-15; this 
approach also allows for rapid response to the flood emergency. Access to IBRD resources 
will be consistent with a strong and continued lending program after graduation from IDA that 
will help Government maintain capital spending and pursue a limited structural reform agenda.  

Table 2. Revised CPS Lending Program, FY12-15 

ORIGINAL CPS LENDING PROGRAM (US$ m) 
                                            IDA 
IBRD Total 
Country Regional 

REVISED CPS LENDING PROGRAM (US$ m) 
IDA 
IBRD GEF 

Total 

DPO II 
Irrigation Development 
CRIF  
Real Estate Registration 
Sava Waterway Rehab 
DPO III 
FY12 - FY13 Total 

Sector Investment  
Regional Flood Control  

40 
2 
30 
16 

88 

42 

100 

100 
200 

3 

15 

18 

FY12 – FY13 

Enhancing SME Access AF
Irrigation Development

Real Estate Registration

40 

34.1 

120 

306 

FY12 - FY13 Total 

74.1 

120 

194.1 

FY14 - FY15 

Energy Efficiency 
Drina Flood Control
Emergency Flood Response 
DPO
Competitiveness and Jobs 
(high case) 
Sustainable Forest and 
Landscape Management    
Adriatic Sea GEF 
FY14-FY15 Total 

32 
24 
57 

50 
48 

113 

98 

5.6 

2.4 

211 

FY14-FY15 Total 

42 

42 

TOTAL IDA and IBRD 

 TOTAL IDA and IBRD 
OVERALL TOTAL  
*Total lending does not include the GEF operations (US$8.0 million) 

130 

18 

200 

348 

187.1 

218 

405.1* 

53. 
In FY14 the CPS program has focused on delivering remaining IDA through the 
Environmental Sustainability Pillar. IDA financing will support improvements in energy 
efficiency and improvements of flood preparedness along the Drina River Basin. The Energy 
Efficiency project (FY14 Q3) will demonstrate the benefits of energy efficiency improvements in 
public sector buildings in the education and healthcare sectors and support the development of 
scalable energy efficiency financing models. The Drina flood preparedness project will provide 
increased protection from flood events to agricultural and commercial interests and communities 
in project areas, increasing resilience to recurring floods and mitigating the catastrophic impact 
of such floods, especially for the poorest. Finally, the GEF will also support two more projects in 
FY14: Sustainable Forest Management - $5.6 million (FY14 Q3) and the proposed Adriatic Sea 
Environmental Pollution Control - $2.44 million. A proposed $57 million IDA emergency flood 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
response operation is under preparation, to access IDA’s Crisis Response Window before BH’s 
graduation at end-FY14. The ongoing needs assessment will inform the exact credit amount. 
54. 
The Bank Group will pursue a more comprehensive approach to competitiveness 
and job creation in FY15, supporting a greater focus on shared prosperity. IBRD financing 
will support business environment and investment climate reforms through the Business 
Environment DPO, facilitating business start-up, streamlining investment procedures in 
inspections and construction, and simplifying cross-border trading processes. Depending on the 
outcome, a further $48 million of IBRD resources could be used, consistent with the CPS 
objectives, to develop a more comprehensive approach to increasing competitiveness of the 
economy, strengthening public finances (including public debt management) and enhancing job 
creation. If the appetite for further reform in this area is weak, Bank support could be re-directed 
toward priority investment projects such as reforming the health sector or improving the quality 
of the road network. Political fragmentation and upcoming elections may prohibit the entities 
from agreeing on a coherent reform program or identifying a priority investment operation to be 
supported by IBRD resources. In that case, absorption of IBRD resources may fall below this 
projection.   
55. 
The Joint IBRD/IFC Business Plan (JBP) for BH, prepared in early 2013, focuses on 
the competitiveness pillar of the CPS while recognizing the complex and challenging 
environment. The JBP focuses on policies and programs for SMEs as an area of high client 
demand, shared WBG interest and often joint interventions. The JBP recognizes that BH has one 
of the most unfavorable business environments in the region, along with complex government 
structures, yet also desires to seek to create a single economic space. Progress has been 
exceptional in the short time since the JBP’s preparation. Working hand-in-hand, combined 
IBRD and IFC teams initiated the joint Business Environment DPO. IBRD led on the scope of 
structural reforms and dialogue, while IFC provided technical advice in reform implementation 
and country analytics, along with established stakeholder relations. Going forward, this joint 
approach will continue to inform a more comprehensive approach to competitiveness and job 
creation. 
56. 
The key medium-term development challenges in BH are likely to remain: 
(i) improving the business environment and the overall competitiveness of the economy; 
(ii) fostering social inclusion and increasing the pace of job creation; and (iii) maintaining 
macroeconomic stability, including through strengthening of public financial management. 
During the second half of the CPS cycle and in preparation for the new Country Partnership 
Framework, the Bank will engage in policy dialogue with the authorities to ensure that the new 
program remains firmly anchored in poverty reduction and shared prosperity, with a strong focus 
on income growth and welfare of the poorest 40 percent of the population. This policy dialogue 
will be underpinned by the findings of previous and forthcoming analytic and knowledge work 
conducted by the Bank in BH and the Western Balkans.  
57. 
Analytic and knowledge services in the second half of the CPS period will provide 
an important diagnostic foundation for preparing the upcoming FY16-19 Country 
Partnership Framework (CPF) in alignment with the twin goals of eliminating extreme 
poverty and enhancing shared prosperity. The Western Balkans Poverty Assessment provides 
for regular monitoring of key poverty and inclusion indicators and statistical support and 
capacity strengthening, and will address knowledge gaps on poverty and distributional issues, 
particularly as they relate to Bank-supported reforms and projects. The Regional Activation and 
Smart Safety Nets programmatic analytical work will provide technical support for labor force 

14 

 
participation and social safety net reforms. The Western Balkans Jobs Challenges is intended to 
identify the main labor market incentives, determine policy priorities and discuss policies to 
improve labor market outcomes. The Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) 
Assessment provided a systematic overview of the status of public financial management and 
quantitative key budget performance indicators. This report represented a new platform for a 
number of PFM policies and its findings can significantly advance the Bank’s and donor policy 
dialogue in the country. Building on the extensive work on debt management at both the entity 
and state levels, the Bank continues to support the authorities in improving debt monitoring and 
strategy. Through the Western Balkans Regional Research & Development Strategy for 
Innovation Technical Assistance the Bank will help Western Balkan countries, including BH, to 
identify funding instruments for the implementation of their R&D action plans. The Western 
Balkans Financial Sector Outlook will continue to provide a semi-annual analysis of key 
vulnerabilities of the financial sectors in the region, together with recommendations to mitigate 
them. Finally, the new regional Deep Dive: Turn Down the Heat will feature the Western 
Balkans, and will help develop country-specific assessments and recommendations to help BH 
better prepare itself for extreme climate and possible future natural hazards. Annex 3 summarizes 
planned and actual delivery of analytic and knowledge services for the CPS period. For IFC 
specifically, Bosnia and Herzegovina will remain on the list of Fragile and Conflict Affected 
countries, and as such a priority country to support increased investment in selected sectors and 
balanced advisory support. Special FCS approval protocol for investments up to $10 million has 
been activated. 

IV. RISKS 

58. General elections scheduled for October 2014 will further affect the environment for 
reforms. The governments are unlikely to pursue substantial reforms as parties start positioning 
for elections. Therefore there is a risk to the Bank Group program, particularly the proposed 
DPO in FY15, should political instability increase and the country fail to meet all prior actions 
and/or the IMF SBA targets. In this case the Bank will pursue investment lending in niche areas 
where the government has a clear commitment to narrower sectoral reforms (see para. 50).  
59. 
Portfolio implementation risks will remain. The Bank’s program will continue to face 
implementation obstacles as a result of complex political processes. This risk may be augmented 
after the election due to possible delays in formation of the state and entity level executives. 
While issues such as effectiveness delays are not completely within the Bank’s control, the Bank 
will continue to work closely with project units and governments to mitigate this risk by 
preparing procurement packages so that contracting can start immediately upon effectiveness. 
The recent flood disaster may bring additional challenges to portfolio implementation as 
government attention is diverted to address the impact of the floods; overall government capacity 
may be further weakened. To help address this issue in the context of the flood support, the Bank 
will work with existing Project Implementation Units that have demonstrated capacity and are 
well-versed in Bank procedures. More generally, the Bank will continue to work closely with 
project teams and counterparts and to provide training as needed. The Bank will also continue its 
collaboration with key development partners, in particular EU institutions. 

15 

 
 
ANNEX 1: RESULTS MATRIX 

Original CPS Outcomes 

Revised and new CPS Outcomes 

Progress to date 

CPS Instruments and 
Partners 

Pillar I - Competitiveness: Support economic growth by tackling some of the bottlenecks to competitiveness and faster productivity growth 

Partially achieved. Backlog of cases 
was substantially reduced although a 
backlog of 18,200 remains in the 
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegonia 
(FBiH). Transactions completed within 
one day for 53% of cases in Republika 
Srpska (RS), and 39% of cases in the 
FBiH. Goal of data entered into 
automated database for 1.6 million 
folders was exceeded as 1,609,202 
folders were completed by June 2012. 

Closed projects: Land 
Registration Project 
(P096200)  

Current portfolio: Real 
Estate Registration Project 
(P128950) 

AAA: Public Expenditure 
and Institutional Review 
(FY12 delivered);  

Partners: SIDA 

Results are expected during the second 
half of the CPS cycle. 

Transparent land markets developed 
through registration of real estate 
rights, and complementary policies that 
enable transactions to be made with 
security and efficiency 

Baseline (2010): Backlog of 80,000 cases 
and several months (on average) to 
complete transactions (2010) 

Target (2011):  Almost no case backlog 
and transactions completed in one day for 
95% of cases. Target (2014) in case of a 
follow up project: further improved 
transparency and efficiency by making 
the integrated registration and cadastre 
information available online nationwide. 

Original CPS outcome remains valid   

New CPS Outcome: further improved 
transparency and efficiency of real estate 
registration by making the integrated 
registration and cadaster information 
available online nationwide 

Baseline (2013): no cadaster records 
available online. 

Target (2015): 20% of cadaster records 
available online. By 2018, 100% of 
cadaster records available online.  

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Current portfolio: IFC 
Advisory Services; SIDA 
TF011205 Investment 
Climate. 

Partners: SIDA, SECO, 
Austrian Government 

New financing: Business 
Environment DPO under 
preparation for delivery by 
early FY15. 

Results are expected during the second 
half of the CPS cycle.  

Results are expected during the second 
half of the CPS cycle.  

Results are expected during the second 
half of the CPS cycle. 

Improved investment climate by: a) 
reducing costs and risks of businesses 
by improving inspection services, 
business operations and exit processes; 
b) improving the information and data 
exchange system among institutions in 
BH in order to comply with respective 
EU processes, and c) enabling capacity 
building within institutions 

Baseline (2011): 12 procedures, 23-40 
days to register a business in BH. 

Target (2015): Reduction in time and 
procedures to commence operations in 
BH for 10%, and improvement of 
investment climate through reformed  
inspection services and information 
exchange 

Revised CPS outcome: Improved 
investment climate by strengthening 
inspections systems in the country, 
indicated by establishing the  
Interoperability Information System 
enabling electronic data exchange 
between relevant institutions:  

Baseline: (2013): no Interoperability 
Information System exists 

Target: (2015): Interoperability 
Information System 80% completed 

Revised CPS outcome: Improved 
business environment by reducing the 
cost and time for business registration: 

Baseline (2013): RS - cost - KM 1,500, 
time - 23 days. FBiH – cost - 1,021 KM, 
time - 40 days. 

Target (2015):  RS - cost - KM 750, time 
- 11 days; FBiH - cost KM500, 
time 20 days 

New CPS Outcome: Efficient and 
effective inspections regime created 
through enactment of the new inspections 
law (FBiH) and process of obtaining 
construction permits improved through 
enactment of the Law on construction 
(RS). 

Baseline (2013): FBiH – average number 
of certificates issued per day is 311. 
Direct costs for business, based on 
frequency of visits, is KM 9 million. RS – 
time required for individual permits on 
average 45 days. Direct and indirect costs 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
related to obtaining all construction 
related permits estimated at KM 180 
million annually, based on actual 
frequency of requested permits in all 
cities and municipalities in the RS. 

Target (2015):  FBiH – effectiveness of 
certificate issuance increased by 15% 
Direct costs for businesses based on 
frequency of visits is reduced by 10% 
after introduction of risk based 
inspections. RS – time to obtain 
construction permits is up to 15 days. KM 
17 million annual direct and indirect 
savings for businesses.  
Revised CPS outcome: Enhanced access 
to finance for SMEs in the context of the 
global financial crisis; indicated by the 
total amount of loans disbursed by 
participating financial institutions under 
the SME additional financing project.     

Baseline (2010):  US$0 
Milestone: (2012): US$ 64.9m 
Target (2015): US$ 154 million. 

Enhance access to finance for SMEs in 
the context of the global financial crisis  

Baseline (2010): lending under the 
Enhancing SME Access to Financing 
project by participating financial 
institutions to SMEs - 0 US$ 

Target (2014): US$ 70 million 

Improved confidence in the financial 
statements of business entities, 
including SMEs, will enhance access to 
finance and alleviate the administrative 
burden on SMEs by using accounting 
standards adapted to their size 

Dropped 

18 

On track. US$ 64.0 million of funding 
had reached the SMEs by 2012. 110 
SMEs received loans from participating 
commercial banks. It is estimated that 
these loans helped sustain 4,000 jobs, 
while creating 1,120 new jobs.  

Current portfolio: 
Enhancing SME Access to 
Finance   
(P111780); IFC 
investments in MFIs. 
IFC’s Microfinance 
Advisory Project  
AAA: Western Balkan 
Financial Sector Outlook – 
delivered in FY13; 
Consumer Protection TA – 
delivered in FY13. PEFA; 
Western Balkans Regional 
R&D Strategy for 
Innovation.  
Partners: EBRD, EC, 
ADA, SECO, Government 
of Luxembourg  
National REPARIS (The Road to Europe: Program of Accounting  
Reform and Institutional Strengthening) - TA was dropped as planned 
EU financial support for the activity was not provided.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline (2010): Partial implementation 
of the EU acquis communautaire as it 
relates to corporate financial reporting. 
Uneven application of international 
standards for financial reporting.  

Target (2015): Better implementation 
and application of the EU acquis and 
international standards. 

Stronger State and Entity institutions 
deliver more efficient and effective 
agricultural services. 

Baseline (2010):  Lack of adequate farm 
and client livestock registers necessary for 
tracking of direct payments and tracking 
of livestock movement.  Lack of effective 
demand driven extension services. 
Regulatory framework under 
development by the Food Safety Agency, 
Agency for Plant Health Protection, and 
the State Veterinary Office to 
operationalize registries, and inspections 
services.  Capacity building at 
laboratories under way. Draft extension 
strategies in both entities completed. 
Drafts lack strategic vision to develop 
sustainable system.  

Target (2012): 50% of holdings 
registered in central farm and client 
registry; 70% of large livestock registered 
in the national register. 60% of regulatory 
framework approved by the Council of 
Ministers.  

Current portfolio: 
Agriculture and Rural 
Development Project 
(P101213)   
Partners: SIDA, EC. 

On track (food safety): Farm and client 
register operational in both Entities. RS 
to upload data in harmonized register. 
State Veterinary Office operationalizing 
National Livestock registry for large 
livestock, small ruminants and pigs 50% 
achieved. Residues laboratory testing 
capacity under development. Food 
Safety Agency with State Veterinary 
Office developed hygiene package 
adopted by the Council of Ministers. 
Agency for Plant Health Protection 
established digital phyto-register with 
multiple modules and completed border 
pest inspection manual. State Food 
Safety regulatory framework 
substantially developed, in process of 
harmonization with Entity inspection 
services. Food Safety Agency 
increasingly assuming its risk 
assessment capacity role in line with 
recent amendments to food safety 
legislation. 

Original CPS outcome and baseline 
values remain valid. 

Revised target (2015): food safety - 
100% of holdings registered in identical 
Entity based farm and client registry. 
100% of large livestock, small ruminants 
and pigs registered in the animal registry 
with accurate data as confirmed by field 
checks of 10% of stock.  Phyto-register 
operational. 80% of regulatory 
framework compliant with EU and 

19 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approved by the Council of Ministers and 
harmonized with entity Laws for 
inspections and with clear assignment of 
responsibility for operator databases in 
both Entities.    

Revised target (2015): paying system -
100% of EU IPARD like payments and 
direct payments made through transparent 
paying system based on farm and client 
register data operating in both Entities. 
Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic 
Relations has limited direct access to 
manipulate database and generates 
regular reports of agriculture payments in 
both Entities and publishes consolidated 
reports 

Original CPS outcome remains valid   

On track with delays (paying 
systems): No progress with regard to the 
establishment of a State-level single 
paying agency and authority. Both 
Entities working on establishing paying 
systems to capture both IPARD and 
Direct Payments. In 2012, 45% of the 
agricultural payments in the RS were in 
the form of structural investment 
(IPARD like). In FBiH some 10 - 30% 
of agricultural payments are made as 
structural investments.  In FBiH, 
substantial progress has been made to 
strengthen programing and develop 
systems to coordinate with cantonal 
structures to harmonize payments.  

On track: four large civil works 
contracts for irrigation systems 
development are underway, and when 
completed incremental areas with 
improved irrigation systems will be 
approximately 3,900 ha.  

Current portfolio: 
Irrigation Development 
Project (P115954). 

New financing: Regional 
Flood Control Project 
(FY14) – outcomes will 
not be achieved during this 
CPS cycle.  
Partners: EC, WBIF 

Improved performance of the 
irrigation systems and the irrigation 
institutions to support agricultural 
producers. 

Baseline (2011): 0 ha with improved 
irrigation system, and no incremental 
irrigation water added; no new operations 
and maintenance agreements signed with 
water users associations, and operations 
and maintenance fee collection rate 30%  

Target (2014): 3,500 ha with improved 
irrigation system, 10 million m3 of 
incremental irrigation water added, 4 new 
operations and maintenance agreements 

Revised target (2015): 3,900 ha with 
improved irrigation system, 10 million 
m3 of incremental irrigation water added, 
4 new operations and maintenance 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
signed, rate of operations and 
maintenance fee collection above 30%.  

agreements signed, rate of operations and 
maintenance fee collection above 30%. 

Original CPS outcome remains valid   

Original CPS outcome remains valid   

Partially achieved. The ECSEE APL3 
project supported the government’s SEE 
and EU market integration efforts with 
successful outcomes on market 
liberalization for no-residential 
customers, environment and financial 
and management systems, as well as 
partially achieved outcomes on markets, 
distribution, generation assets and dam 
safety.  In terms of electricity 
generation, target was fully achieved. In 
terms of renewable energy, IFC 
supported entity governments draft 18 
pieces of legislation. Four key laws have 
already been enacted (Decree on 
Renewable Energy Sources and 
Cogeneration, Renewable Energy Law 
RS, Law on Concessions RS, Law on 
Renewable Energy and Efficient 
Cogeneration FBiH).   
Achieved. Decline in vehicle operating 
costs of 17.75 percent in the FBiH, and 
10.5 percent in the RS, compared to 
baseline values. 

BH participates in the SEE energy 
market, and is meeting requirements 
for integration into the EU energy 
market  

Baseline (2005): electricity generation - 
12,800 gWh. In 2009, generation and 
export reached record levels.  Regulatory 
framework for renewable energy projects 
not enacted. Twenty renewable energy 
projects developed. 

Target (2012): Equal or greater 
electricity generation. Number of laws / 
regulations /amendments enacted on 
entity level 12: (FBiH 6; RS 6). No of 
renewable energy projects implemented - 
60. As a result of new renewable energy 
plants – 0.5 MtCO2e/year avoided.  

Upgraded road network, and reduced 
user costs on the priority sections. 

Baseline (2010): the FBiH Road 
Directorate and the RS Road Directorate 
collect data on road user costs for 
rehabilitated road sections.  

Target (2012): 10% road user cost 
reduction.  

Improved commercial use of the Sava 
river corridor (Croatia, BH, and 
Serbia) in BH. 

Dropped 

Project was cancelled 

21 

Closed project: ECSEE 
APL3 (P090666)  
Partners: KfW, EBRD, 
EIB 

New financing: Energy 
Efficiency - outcomes will 
not be achieved during this 
CPS cycle; IFC 
investments in renewable 
energy.  

AAA: IFC advisory 
services. 

Closed project: Road 
Infrastructure and Safety 
Project (P100792). 

AAA: IFC’s Private Public 
Partnership advisory 
mandate. 

Partners: EC IPA TF (EUR 
5.6 million) finances 
preparatory activities such 
as feasibility studies and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline (2011): sections of the river are 
not navigable.  

Target (2017): Priority sections of the 
Sava river returned to navigability.     

demining. 

Original CPS Outcomes 

Revised and new CPS Outcomes 

Progress to date 

CPS Instruments and 
Partners 

Pillar II - Inclusion: Improve the delivery of public services for the vulnerable and the targeting and fiscal sustainability of social benefits to the poor 

Increased share of social benefits reach 
the poorest. Fiscal savings resulting 
from reforms of cash transfers equal 
1.8% of GDP. More effective job 
brokerage services extended to the 
vulnerable active job-seekers. 

Baseline (2011): it will be established 
with the 2011 Extended Household Based 
Survey. Job-brokerage services extended 
to 1,468 vulnerable active job-seekers. 
Legal framework in place for 
implementation of means/income testing 
for non-insurance cash transfers. Bylaws 
regulating means/income thresholds need 
to be adopted.  

Target (2014): Improved targeting 
accuracy by 25%. Job-brokerage services 
extended to 10,000 vulnerable active job-
seekers, 35% are employed one year after 
receiving the services. Means/income 
testing underway for selected vulnerable 
categories. Fiscal savings equal 1.8% of 
GDP.  
Reduced incidence of non-
communicable diseases through 
increased access to quality family 

Current portfolio: Social 
Safety Net and 
Employment Support 
Project (P116774). 

AAA: Western Balkan 
Poverty Assessment; 
Poverty TA, Pension TA. 
Smart Social Safety Nets 
TA 

On track. Job-brokerage services were 
extended to 10,000 vulnerable active job 
seekers. In the FBiH, 70% are employed 
one year after receiving services. 
Development of the new eligibility 
determination processes and formulae is 
underway based on EHBS 2011 survey. 
New social assistance legislation with 
comprehensive income test is adopted in 
the RS. New social assistance law is 
under preparation in the FBiH. 

The target related to fiscal savings is 
dropped due to the failure of the Public 
Expenditure DPO.  

Revised CPS outcome: Increased share 
of social benefits reach the poorest.  
More effective job brokerage services 
extended to the vulnerable active job-
seekers.  

Baseline (2013): Means testing of last-
resort social assistance exists but 
targeting to the poorest needs to be 
improved. Job-brokerage services are 
extended to 1,468 vulnerable active job-
seekers. 

Target: (2015): Social assistance laws 
adopted with improved means testing of 
last-resort social assistance benefits. Job-
brokerage services extended to 10,000 
vulnerable active job-seekers by the end 
of 2014, 35% of them stay employed one 
year after receiving the services.  

Revised CPS outcome: Increase access 
to quality family medicine primary health 
care with special focus on primary and 

On track. Coverage of population 
through Family Medicine (FM) teams 
reached in FBiH: 1,250,000 and in RS: 

Current portfolio: Health 
Sector Enhancement 
Project Additional 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1,034,229. A pilot program introducing 
payment incentives for primary and 
secondary prevention of NCD under 
implementation in the FBiH. 

Financing (P088663) 
New Swiss TF – anti-
tobacco 
Partners: Council of 
Europe Development 
Bank. 

On track. Number of unserved 
households reduced for 50,000 
equivalents to 6.5% reduction. 
Extension of regional solid waste 
management system ongoing but with 
delays. Rehabilitation of regional 
landfills ongoing in five regions. This 
will result in significant increase of 
percentage of households served by 
formal waste management system both 
in RS and FBiH.  

Current portfolio: Solid 
Waste Management II 
(P107998) 

Partners: EC IPA TF grant 
financing (EUR 8 million) 
supports investments in 
Banja Luka, and Mostar, 
and will be extended to 
Bos. Krupa, Neum, 
Srebrenik and Sarajevo 
sanitary landfills.  SIDA 
financing – focusing on 
collection – complements 
Bank financed activities. 

CPS Instruments and 
Partners 

secondary prevention of non-
communicable diseases 

Baseline (2010): about 58% of 
population covered through family 
medicine (FBiH: 1,000,000; RS 
1,200,147).  

Target (2014): about 70% of population 
covered (FBiH: 1,500,000; RS: 
1,250,000) 

Original CPS outcome remains valid   

medicine primary health care. 

Baseline (2010): about 58% of population 
covered through family medicine (FBiH: 
1,000,000; RS 1,200,147).  

Target (2014): about 70% of population 
covered (FBiH: 1,500,000; RS: 
1,250,000) 

Improved availability, quality, 
environmental soundness, and financial 
viability of solid waste management 
services.  

Baseline (2010): 75% of households in 
targeted area not served by the formal 
waste management system. 145 of 
estimated 1,200 wild dumps closed.  

Target (2015): number of unserved 
households reduced by 50%. 25% of wild 
dumps closed. 

Original CPS Outcomes 

Revised and new CPS Outcomes 

Progress to date 

Pillar III - Environmental Sustainability: Ensure a sustainable use of natural resources, such as water and forestry, which are key to economic growth in BH, 
and adapt to climate change. Promote the sustainable development of basic municipal services 

Reduction of the population’s exposure 
to highly polluted water from Miljacka 
and Bosna rivers, and improved waste 
water collection in the Sarajevo 
Canton. 

Original CPS outcome remains valid   

On track. Works on the sewerage 
network in Sarajevo nearly completed. 
Contracting (supply and install) 
underway for the works on Sarajevo 
wastewater treatment plant. 

Current portfolio: Sarajevo 
Waste Water Project 
(P090675). 
Partners: EC IPA TF grant 
financing (EUR 8 million) 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CPS outcome remains valid   

Baseline (2010): 0 m3/day of waste water 
collected treated at primary level. 0 
connections rehabilitated. 

Target (2014): 200,000 m3/day treated at 
primary level. 48,000 connections 
rehabilitated.  

Reduced pollution from municipal 
sources into the Neretva and Bosna, 
subsequently reduced pollution in the 
Adriatic sea and Danube basin, and 
more sustainable water management. 

Baseline (2010): 5.5% of municipal waste 
water is treated and discharged according 
to standards. No integrated water 
management in any river. 

Target (2015): 11% of municipal 
wastewater treated in accordance with 
new water standards. Main rivers are 
covered by completed or near-completed 
frameworks for sustainable water 
management. 

will close the financing 
gap identified in Sarajevo 
Waste Water project.  
EBRD financing will 
complement the Bank 
financing. 
AAA: Vrbas River basin 
management (P117927) – 
delivered in FY13. 

Current portfolio: 
Water Quality Protection - 
GEF (P085112); Neretva 
and Trebisnjica 
Management - GEF 
(P084608). 

Partners: EC IPA TF grant 
financing (EUR 1.5 
million) supports 
investments in Zivinice 
and Mostar waste water 
treatment plant. SIDA also 
co-finances waste water 
treatment plant in Zivinice 
and Mostar.  EC IPA TF 
(EUR 1.9 million) will also 
support rehabilitation of 
the sewerage network in 
Ljubuski municipality.  

New financing: Regional 
Flood Control Project 
(FY14), GEF Adriatic 
(FY14) – outcomes will 
not be achieved during this 
CPS cycle. 

On track. Numeric values on the 
percentage of municipal wastewater 
treated in accordance with the net 
standards will be available by the end 
2014 once all the works are completed. 
The rehabilitation of the wastewater 
treatment plants in Trnovo, Odzak, and 
Bileca were completed and the plants 
are fully operational.  A reduction in the 
level of municipal-sourced pollution of 
the Bosna river has been confirmed and 
in line with technical specifications and 
standards. The rehabilitation of the 
Zivinice wastewater treatment plant 
phase I was completed, and phase II is 
underway. Rehabilitation of the 
wastewater treatment plant in Mostar is 
underway, as well as the  rehabilitation 
of the Ljubuski sewerage system. 
Progress was also made in developing 
framework for sustainable water 
management.  Three key studies were 
completed: (i) a Wastewater 
Improvement Plan for reducing River 
Pollution, (ii) Biological Monitoring of 
Rivers, Lakes and Reservoirs, and (iii) a 
feasibility study on low-cost, natural 
treatment of wastewater. 

Expanded coverage of protected forest Original CPS outcome remains valid 

Achieved. 5.5% or 280,921ha of areas 

Closed project: Forest and 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and mountain areas, and strengthened 
institutional and technical capacity for 
their sustainable management. 

Baseline (2010): 2.1%, or 112,000 ha of 
areas under formal protection.  

Target (2013): 3% or 153,000 ha 
formally protected.   

under formal protection achieved.   

Mountain Protected Areas 
- GEF (P087094). 

New financing: GEF 
Sustainable Forest 
Management (FY14) - 
outcomes will not be 
achieved during this CPS 
cycle. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 2: LIST OF ACTIVE BANK ADMINISTERED TRUST FUNDS IN BH  

Trust Fund # 

Trust Fund Name 

Net Grant Amount 
(thousands of USD) 

Donor Country 

Exec. By 

TF011204 

TF011205 

TF011422 

TF011456 

TF011484 

TF012243 

TF012937 
TF013095 

TF014050 
TF014657 

TF014890 
TF015153 

TF051092 

TF090773 

TF012620 

TF099534 

Total 

BiH Institutional Strengthening SIDA TF - WB 
Technical Advisory 
Bosnia and Herzegovina: Technical Assistance 
for Improving Investment Climate and 
Institutional Strengthening 
Bosnia and Herzegovina EC IPA TF for Water 
Quality Protection Project - Zivinice Water and 
Sanitation Subproject 
Bosnia and Herzegovina EU IPA CO-TF for 
Second Solid Waste Management Project, 
Mostar and Banja Luka Subprojects 
Bosnia and Herzegovina Investment Climate 
Program 
Bosnia and Herzegovina Sava Waterway 
Rehabilitation Project - Recipient Executed 

European Union Instrument for Pre Accession 
Trust Fund for Sarajevo Waste Water Project 
SAFE BiH PEFA 2012 
Bosnia and Herzegovina #10295 Liberalizing 
MTPL Insurance Market 
Bosnian Road PPP 

Bosnia & Herzegovina Microfinance, Phase II 
Bosnia-Serbia Knowledge Exchange Grant 
EU INVESTMENT GUARANTEE TRUST 
FUND FOR BOSNIA HERZEGOVINA 

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA SWEDISH 
GRANT FOR AGRICULTURE & RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 

EC IPA TF for Ljubuski Sewage-Neretva 
Trebisnjica Project 

882.00 Sweden 

Bank 

3,750.00 Sweden 

Recipient 

1,939.15 EU 

Recipient 

7,206.53 EU 

Recipient 

2,515.40 Sweden 

Bank 

7,311.90 EU 

Recipient 

10,495.55 EU 
279.09 EU 

467.37 Other 
600.00 Austria 

1,200.00 Switzerland 
49.00 Other 

13,861.00 EU 

Recipient 
Bank 

Bank 
Bank 

Bank 
Bank 

Bank 

6,444.74 Sweden 

Recipient 

2,639.35 EU 

Recepient 

SIDA CO-TF for Water Quality Protection 
Project, Mostar Water and Sanitation subproject 

3,455.75 Sweden 

Recipient 

63,096.83 

26 

 
 
  
 
ANNEX 3: AAA PROGRAM AND CONTRIBUTION TO CPS PILLARS 

Prior to this CPS 

Description 

Delivered 
FY 

Pillar I Pillar 
II 

Pillar III 

Investment Climate Assessment  

Local Governance and Service 
Delivery in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina  

Are Skills Constraining Growth in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 

Moving Toward a More 
Sustainable and Better-Targeted 
Safety Net  
Protecting the Poor During the 
Global Crisis – Poverty Update  
The Road to Europe, Transport 
Sector Review 

Agricultural Sector Policy Note 
for Bosnia and Herzegovina: 
Trade and Integration Policy Note 

The study assessed the main obstacles that require attention 
if private sector-led growth is to become a significant 
influence in the expansion of the BH economy. 
The study analyzed the outcome of local services and found 
that: i) access to and user satisfaction with services is low; 
ii) municipalities lack resources and need to increase fiscal 
space to expand access to services; iii) service providers lack 
incentives to improve performance. 
The policy note assessed what types of skills firms are 
looking for and not finding in the marketplace. It found that 
the shortage of skills sought by key export-oriented and 
import competing industries is substantial and threatens to 
constrain future economic growth of BH. 
The policy note analyzed the level of spending on non-
insurance social protection cash transfers, and the targeting 
accuracy. 
Provided an update on headcount poverty and found that 
headcount poverty declined by 4% between 2004 and 2007. 
The transport sector review provided an in-depth assessment 
of the transport sector in BH and provided recommendations 
on key policy areas that need to be addressed in the transport 
sector. 
The policy note analyzed competitiveness of the agriculture 
sector in BH and provided recommendations on policy 
actions that need to be taken to improve competitiveness of 
agribusinesses in the country.  

FY09 

FY09 

FY10 

FY09 

FY10 

FY10 

FY10 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During CPS FY12-FY15 

Description 

Social Exclusion in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina and the Global Crisis  

Public Expenditure and 
Institutional Review: Challenges 
and Directions for Reform  
Integrated Water-Energy 
Development Study on the Vrbas 
River   

Pension Technical Assistance 

Public Expenditure and Financial 
Accountability (PEFA) Assessment  

Western Balkans Poverty 
Assessment  

Regional Activation and Smart 

The policy note started documenting the household impact 
of the financial crisis in BH, and for the first time presented 
estimates of the indicators of social exclusion. 
The report provided policy recommendations in the areas 
such as fiscal, pensions, public sector wages, health, 
education, forestry and energy. 
The study evaluated different options of developing water 
resources and hydro-energetic potentials in the Vrbas river 
basin, and provided recommendations on further actions in 
this area.   
Technical assistance was provided to entity authorities to 
further strengthen their pension systems. The TA also helped 
develop a pension sector strategy in the FBH. 
The study will provide a systematic overview of the status of 
public financial management and quantitative key 
performance indicators, covering budget planning and 
preparation, budget execution and control, reporting and 
transparency, and external scrutiny and oversight.  This 
report represents a new platform on which a number of PFM 
policies can be advanced and its findings can significantly 
advance the Bank’s and donor policy dialogue in the 
country. 
The study will: (i) provide regular monitoring of poverty, 
inequality and exclusion indicators; (ii) provide statistical 
support and strengthening capacity in areas related to the 
measurement of poverty and exclusion; and (iii) address 
knowledge gaps on poverty and distributional issues, 
particularly as they relate to Bank-supported reforms and 
projects.    
Analytical work provided technical support for labor force 

28 

Planned 
FY 

- 

Delive
red 
FY 

FY12 

FY12 

FY12 

FY11 

FY12 

FY12 

FY13 

FY13 

FY14 

FY13-FY15 

FY14-
FY15 

Pillar I Pillar 
II 

Pillar III 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

FY13 

FY13 

x 

x 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Safety Nets Programmatic 
Analytical Work  

participation and social safety net reforms through a 
combination of analytical/knowledge products, just-in-time 
advice, and intensive policy dialogue. 
Western Balkans Jobs Challenges  Analytic work will identify the main labor market 
incentives, determine policy priorities and discuss policies to 
improve labor market outcomes. 
The TA will identify funding instruments for the 
implementation of the R&D action plans in Western Balkan 
countries. 

Western Balkans Regional 
Research & Development Strategy 
for Innovation Technical 
Assistance 
Western Balkans Financial Sector 
Outlook  

Western Balkans Energy 
Efficiency Scale-Up in Buildings 

Directions for the Energy Sector 
in the Western Balkans 

Biomass Based Heating in the 
Western Balkans 

Regional Deep Dive: Turn Down 
the Heat  

Western Balkans Programmatic 
Gender Monitoring  

FY14-FY15 

FY14-FY15 

FY14-FY15 

- 

- 

- 

x 

x 

x 

x 

FY14-
FY15 

FY14-
FY15 

FY14-
FY15 

FY14 

FY15 

x 

x 

FY15 

FY15 

FY15 

FY13-FY15 

FY13-
FY15 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

Provides semi-annual analysis of key vulnerabilities of the 
financial sectors in the region, and recommends actions to 
mitigate such vulnerabilities. 
Aimed at developing a roadmap for implementation and 
sharing of energy efficiency best practices, policy and 
implementation options, case studies and plans across the 
target countries. 
Meant to identify key energy issues and constraints which 
require country-specific and regionally-coordinated 
interventions, in order to position and guide the Bank’s 
policy dialogue, technical assistance, and financing support 
in the Western Balkans. 
Will identify options and solutions for increasing the 
sustainable use of biomass for heating throughout the 
Balkans. 
The study will help develop country-specific assessments 
and recommendations to help BH better prepare itself for 
extreme climate and possible future natural hazards. 
The program aims at promoting gender equality by 
strengthening the knowledge base and evidence on gender 
disparities in BH, Kosovo, FYR Macedonia and Serbia, in 
order to inform government, donor and civil society 
interventions. The work will identify and prioritize 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Education ESW 

opportunities to strengthen the regional knowledge base on 
gender, as these countries face similar challenges in several 
areas, while at the same time addressing country-specific 
obstacles for gender equality.  
Dropped 

FY13 

- 

x 

30 

 
 
 
ANNEX 4: GENDER GAPS IN BH 

BH has made significant progress on gender equality issues, and the government has been 
supportive in these efforts. The 2003 Law on Gender Equality required the government to 
create a Gender Action Plan. Completed in 2006, the plan outlines strategies and program 
objectives for achieving gender equality. Positive developments have 
included 
“legislation on gender equality, the legal prohibition of gender-based violence and 
harassment, and the institutionalization of gender mainstreaming in government offices,” 
(ILO 2011).  

Lack of recent microdata prevents an in-depth, updated analysis of gender issues in BH. 
Nevertheless, a literature review of available sources has been conducted to inform this 
CPSPR and suggests that important constraints to gender equality remain, most notably 
in the areas of access to economic opportunities and agency. Upon availability of recent 
microdata, a thorough gender assessment will be conducted to shed further light on 
gender inequalities in the country.  

Education. There are currently no significant gender gaps in primary and secondary 
enrollment rates in BH, and women are more likely than men to enroll in tertiary 
education (WDI 2011). However, a higher proportion of adult women than men still have 
only primary education (ILO 2011). Similar to patterns in the region, segregation exists 
in fields of study, affecting labor market outcomes and contribute to the gender 
segregation seen there as well.  

Health. BH has positive female health outcomes in many areas with gaps persisting in 
others. Nearly all pregnant women receive antenatal care and have births attended by a 
skilled attendant (UNICEF 2012), and maternal mortality is low (WDI 2010, 2011). Life 
expectancy is comparable to the ECA average for both men and women (WDI 2011); 
nevertheless, male adult mortality is nearly double female adult mortality (WDI 2010).  

Access to economic opportunities. Some of the most significant gender gaps in BH are 
in access to economic opportunities. Female and male labor force participation rates are 
lower than the regional average in BH, at 42 percent and 68 percent, respectively, for 
those aged 15 to 64 (WDI 2011). This gender gap, primarily driven by low female 
activity, is larger than that in ECA and is in part determined by traditional gender roles 
and insufficient child care facilities (WDI 2011, ILO 2011). For women who work, a lack 
of data limits discussion of the wage gap, but in 2006 the UNDP estimated it to be 42 
percent in the non-industrial production sector (2007). Further, only 33 percent of firms 
have female participation in ownership, and only 14 percent have women in top 
management despite a larger share of women than men in the labor market having 
completed tertiary education (WDI 2009, 2009, 2011). Women’s property rights are 
legally protected, yet tradition frequently favors male inheritance of property, and 
ownership of property is traditionally registered to male family members.  

Agency. Women in BH are less likely than men to occupy leadership positions. Women 
hold 19 percent of the seats in Parliament, and only 12 percent of government ministers 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between 2006 and 2011 were female (Inter-Parliamentary Union 2013, UNICEF 2012). 
Data is not widely collected on violence against women, yet it is estimated that a third of 
women are victims of domestic violence, and that few ever seek help from the police. At 
the same time, sex trafficking is highlighted as a source for concern in the country, 
particularly among vulnerable groups such as the Roma (U.S. Department of State 2012).  

Sources: 

International Labor Organization (2011), Lejla Somun-Krupalija, “Gender and 
Employment in BH - A Country Study.” Bureau for Gender Equality, Working Paper 
4/2011, Inter-Parliamentary Union (2013), available at http://www.ipu.org/wmn-
e/classif.htm  
OECD (2012), Social institutions and gender index, available from: 
http://genderindex.org/    
UNECE (2008), Statistical Database, available at http://w3.unece.org/pxweb/  
UNICEF(2012), available at 
http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/bosniaherzegovina_statistics.html  
UNDP (2007), “Social Inclusion in BH”, available at 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/nationalreports/europethecis/bosniaherzegovina/BOSNIA_
AND_HERCEGOVINA_2007_en.pdf  
U.S. Department of State (2012), “Trafficking in Persons Report 2012.”, available at 
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/192594.pdf  
World Bank (2012), World Development Indicators (WDI) 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 5: KEY ECONOMIC AND PROGRAM INDICATORS - CHANGE FROM LAST CAS 

Forecast in Last CAS
2013 b
2014 b
2015 b

Actual
2012 c
2013 c

Current CAS Forecast
2014 a
2015 b
2016 b

2012 a

4.0

4.3

4.5

4.5

2.5

-5.8
20.7

-1.7

4.4

2.5

-5.7
21.2

-1.0

4.2

2.6

-5.4
21.6

-0.5

4.0

2.7

-5.3
22.1

0.1

4.0

-1.1
-3.0
-4.0
2.0

-9.7
16.0

-2.7
2.7
5.4

0.8
6.5
1.0
0.3

-7.9
16.6

-2.0
2.1
5.0

2.0
9.7
7.0
1.1

-7.6
16.3

-2.2
2.9
5.2

3.5
10.1
7.6
1.5

-7.0
16.4

-1.4
2.4
5.1

4.0
8.2
8.2
1.9

-6.2
16.2

-1.3
1.0
4.9

FY12a
145

FY13b
161

FY14b

FY15b

21

21

FY12a
160
455

FY13b
34.1
439

FY14a

FY15b

FY16b

56
450

98

Economy (CY)
Growth rates (%)
   GDP
   Exports
   Imports
Inflation (%)
National accounts (% GDP)
   Current account balance
   Gross investment
Public finance (% GDP)
   Fiscal balance
   Foreign financing
International reserves
 (as months of imports)
Program (Bank ’s FY)
Lending ($ million)
IBRD total debt outstanding ($ million)*
*End of calendar year data
a.  Estimated year
b.  Projected year
c.  Actual outcome

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 6: BH AT A GLANCE 

34 

 
 
35 

Bosn ia and Herzegovina

B a la nc e o f P a ym e n t s a nd T ra de

2 0 0 0

2 0 12

(US$ m illio ns )
To tal merchandise expo rt s (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rt s (c if )
Net t rade in go o ds and serv ices

1,130
4,166
-2,577

6,261
11,120
-3,987

Current ac co unt balance
   as a % o f GDP

-396
-7.2

-1,327
-7.6

Wo rkers ' rem it tances and
   co mpensat io n o f emplo yees (receipt s )

1,607

1,849

Reserves , inc luding go ld

497

4,390

C e n t ra l G o v e rnm e n t F ina nc e

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (inc luding grant s )
   Tax revenue
Current expenditure

39.0
21.1
42.8

48.7
42.1
44.1

T e c hno lo gy a nd In f ra s t ruc t u re

2 0 0 0

2 0 12

Overall surplus /def ic it

-5.8

-1.8

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
F ixed line and mo bile pho ne
  subs c ribers (per 100 peo ple)
H igh techno lo gy expo rt s
  (% o f manufac tured expo rt s )

52.3

92.1

H ighes t marginal tax rate (%)
   Indiv idual
   Co rpo rate

..
..

..

23

111

10

1.8

2.5

E xt e rna l D e b t a nd R e s o u rc e F lo ws

E nv i ro nm e n t

(US$ m illio ns )
To tal debt o ut s tanding and disbursed
To tal debt serv ice
Debt relief (H IP C , M DR I)

2,800
319
–

10,577
1,062
–

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo res t area (% o f land area)
Terres t rial pro tec ted areas (% o f land area)

42
42.8
0.6

42
42.8
1.5

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt serv ice (% o f expo rt s )

50.9
14.2

60.6
12.5

F reshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters )
F reshwater withdrawal (% o f internal reso urces )

9,108

9,246
1.0

..

Fo reign direc t inves tment (net inf lo ws )
P o rt fo lio equit y (net inf lo ws )

146
0

350
0

CO2 em is s io ns per capita (m t )

6.1

8.1

GDP per unit o f energy use
   (2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent )

4.3

4.0

Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent )

1,133

1,848

 Wo r ld B a nk G ro up po r t f o l io

2 0 0 0

2 0 12

 (US$ m illio ns )

 IB RD
   To tal debt o ut s tanding and disbursed
   D isbursement s
   P rinc ipal repayment s
   Interes t payment s

562
0
0
33

455
26
25
8

 IDA
   To tal debt o ut s tanding and disbursed
   D isbursement s
   To tal debt serv ice

398
44
3

1,193
22
33

P r iv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e n t

2 0 0 0

2 0 12

T ime required to s tart a bus ines s (days )
Co s t to s tart a bus ines s (% o f GN I per capita)
T ime required to regis ter pro pert y (days )

–
–
–

37
14.9
25

 IFC (f is cal year)
   To tal disbursed and o ut s tanding po rt fo lio
      o f which IFC o wn ac co unt
   D isbursement s fo r IFC o wn ac co unt
   P o rt fo lio sales , prepayment s and
      repayment s fo r IFC o wn ac co unt

30
30
5

98
98
0

Ranked as a majo r co ns t raint to bus ines s
   (% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
      n.a.
      n.a.

2 0 0 0

2 0 12

1

12

..
..

34.9
33.3

 M IGA
   Gro s s expo sure
   New guarantees

21
21

104
0

Sto c k market capitalizat io n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to as set rat io (%)

..
20.1

..
11.3

No te: F igures in italic s are fo r years o ther than tho se spec if ied. 
.. indicates data are no t available.  – indicates o bservat io n is no t applicable.

3/13/14

Develo pment Eco no m ic s , Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

0.0

25.0

50.0

75.0

100.0

Con trol of cor rup tion

Rule of law

Reg ulat ory qu al ity

Po l it ica l stab i lity

Vo ice a nd acco un tab il ity

Country' s percenti le rank (0-100)

hi gher v al ues impl y better ratings

2012
2000

Go vern an ce ind icato rs, 2000 and 2012

Sourc e: W orl dw i de Gov ernanc e Indi c ators (w w w .gov i ndi c ators .org)

IBRD, 455
IDA , 1,193

IMF, 888

Other mul ti -
l ateral , 1,228

B i l ateral , 922

P ri vate, 4,629

Short-term, 
1,262

Compo si tion o f to tal extern al d eb t, 2012

US$ mi l l ions

 
Mi l lennium Deve lopment Goals

Bosn ia and Herzegovina

With se lected targets to ach ieve b etween 1990 and  2015

(es t im at e c lo ses t t o dat e sho wn, +/ - 2 years )  

G o a l 1: h a l v e t h e r a t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e r t y a nd m a lnu t r i t io n
   P o v ert y headco unt rat io at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulat io n)   
   P o v ert y headco unt rat io at nat io nal po vert y line (% o f po pulat io n)   
   Share o f inco m e o r co nsum pt io n t o the po o res t qunit ile (%)  
   P revalence o f m alnut rit io n (% o f c hildren under 5)   

G o a l 2 : e n s u re t h a t c h i ld re n a re a b l e t o c o m p l e t e p r im a ry s c ho o l ing
   P rim ary s cho o l enro llm ent (net , %)
   P rim ary co m plet io n rat e (% o f relevant age gro up)   
   Seco ndary s cho o l enro llm ent (gro s s , %)   
   Yo ut h lit erac y rat e (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

G o a l 3 : e l im in a t e g e nd e r d is p a r i t y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
   Rat io o f girls t o bo ys in prim ary and seco ndary educ at io n (%)   
   Wo m en em plo yed in t he no nagricult ural sec t o r (% o f no nagricult ural emplo ym ent )   
   P ro po rt io n o f seat s held by wo men in nat io nal parliam ent (%)   

G o a l 4 : r e du c e und e r - 5 m o r t a l i t y b y t wo - t h i rds
   Under-5 m o rt alit y rat e (per 1,000)   
   Inf ant m o rt ality rat e (per 1,000 live birt hs )   
   M eas les imm unizat io n (pro po rt io n o f o ne-year o lds imm unized, %)

G o a l 5 : r e du c e m a t e rna l m o r t a l i t y b y t h re e - f o u r t h s
   M at ernal m o rt alit y rat io (m o deled es t im ate, per 100,000 live births )   
   B irt hs at t ended by s k illed health s t af f (% o f to t al)   
   Co nt racept iv e prevalence (% o f wo m en ages 15-49)   

G o a l 6 : h a l t a nd be g in t o re v e rs e t h e s p re a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t h e r m a jo r d i s e a s e s
   P revalence o f H IV (% o f po pulat io n ages 15-49)   
   Inc idence o f t uberculo s is (per 100,000 peo ple)   
   Tuberculo s is case det ec t io n rat e (%, all fo rm s )

..
94
96

G o a l 7 : h a l v e t h e p ro po r t io n o f pe o p l e wi t ho u t s u s t a ina b l e a c c e s s t o ba s ic n e e d s
   A c ces s t o an impro ved wat er so urce (% o f po pulat io n)
   A c ces s t o im pro ved sanitat io n f ac ilit ies (% o f po pulat io n)
   Fo res t area (% o f land area)   
   Terres t rial pro t ec t ed areas (% o f land area)
   CO2 em is s io ns (m et ric t o ns per capit a)   
   GDP per unit o f energy use (co ns t ant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent )   

97
..
43.3
0.5
1.0

..

G o a l 8 : d e v e lo p a g lo b a l p a r t n e rs h ip f o r de v e lo pm e n t   
   Telepho ne m ainlines (per 100 peo ple)   
   M o bile pho ne subs c ribers (per 100 peo ple)
   Int ernet users (per 100 peo ple)   
   Ho useho lds wit h a co m put er (%)

14.5
0.0
0.0
..

B o s n i a a nd H e r ze go v in a

19 9 0
..
..
..
..

19 9 5
..
..
..
..

2 0 0 0
<2

..
9.1
4.2

..
..
..
..

..
..
..

18
16
52

18
97
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..

14
12
53

14
99

..

..
84
72

97
95
43.1
0.5
1.0
3.7

6.8
0.0
0.0

..

..
..
..
100

..
..

7

10
9
80

10
100
48

..
63
100

98
95
42.8
0.6
6.1
4.3

20.3
2.4
1.1
5.2

2 0 12
<2
14.0
6.7
1.5

..
..
..

100

..
41
21

7
6
94

8
100
46

..
49
76

100
95
42.8
1.5
8.1
4.0

23.1
87.6
65.4
39.8

Edu cation ind i cato rs (%)

25

0

2000

2005

2010

P rimar y net enrol lm ent rati o ( ..)

Rati o of gi rl s to boy s i n pr ima ry & sec ondar y
educ ati on (..)

Measl es immun i zation (% o f 1-year 
o ld s)

ICT ind i cato rs (p er 100 p eop l e)

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2000

2005

2010

Fi x ed + mob il e s ubsc r iber s
Inter net us ers

100

75

50

25

0

1990

1995

2000

2012

Bos nia a nd Her zegov i na
Europ e & Centr al As ia

36 

 
 
ANNEX 7: SELECTED INDICATORS OF BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND MANAGEMENT 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 8: IBRD/IDA PROGRAM SUMMARY  

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program 

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b (H/M/L) 

2014 

2015 

Overall Result 

Energy Efficiency Project 
Drina Flood Protection Project 
Emergency Flood Response 
  Result 

BiH DPL  
Competitiveness and Jobs 
  Result 

  32.0 
  24.0 
  57.0 
113.0 

  50.0 
  48.0 
  98.0 

211.0 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 9: IFC INVESTMENT OPERATIONS PROGRAM 

As of 4/30/2014
(In USD Mil lions)

Commi tted

Disbursed Outstanding

FY Approva l

Compa ny

Loa n

Equi ty

**Qua si 
Equity *GT/RM

Pa rtici 
pant

Loa n

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM

Pa rtici 
pant

2013
2008
2008
2006
0/05
11/13/2007
0

Bek to prec isa
Cimos bosnia
Heart center bh
Nova banka
Raiffeisen-bos
S isecam bosnia
Unic redit bosnia

Tota l Portfol io:

11.06
0
3.22
0
13.14
49.49
0

76.91

0
0
0
1.58
0
0
8.43

10.01

0
30.42
0
0
0
0
0

30.42

0
0
0
0
0
1.2
0

1.2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

11.06
0
3.22
0
13.14
49.49
0

76.91

0
0
0
1.58
0
0
8.43

10.01

0
30.42
0
0
0
0
0

30.42

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Produc ts .
** Quas i Equity inc ludes both loan and equity types .

39 

 
 
 
 
ANNEX 10: OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO (IBRD/IDA AND GRANTS) 

40 

 
 
 
ANNEX 11: MAP 

41 

 
 
 
