Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 22205-LAC

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

THE EASTERN CARIBBEAN SUB-REGION

June 4, 2001

Caribbean Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit: Eastern Caribbean Dollar (EC$) US$1.0 = EC$2.7
Currency Unit: Barbados Dollar (B$) US$1.0 = B$2.0

FISCAL YEAR
Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent and the Grenadines: January I-December 31
Dominica: July 1-June 30
Barbados, St. Lucia: April 1-March 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CAS 
CDB 
CFAA 

AAA 
Analytical and Advisory Activities 
ACP 
African, Caribbean, Pacific 
APL 
Adaptable Program Loan 
CARICOM 
Caribbean Community 
CARIFORUM Caribbean Forum 
CARTAC 
Caribbean Regional Technical 
Assistance Center 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Caribbean Development Bank 
Country Financial Accountability 
Assessment 
Caribbean Group for Cooperation in 
Economic Development 
Canadian International Development 
Agency 
Country Procurement Assessment 
Review 
Country Portfolio Performance 
Review 
Civil Society Organization 
Department for International 
Development (UK) 
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank 
Economic Commission of Latin 
America and the Caribbean 
European Union 
Foreign Direct Investment 

ECCB 
ECLAC 

CPPR 

CSO 
DFID 

EU 
FDI 

CGCED 

CIDA 

CPAR 

FSAP 
GDP 
GNP 
HDI 
IBRD 

IDA 
IDB 
IDF 
IMF 
IPCC 

LIL 
MTES 
OAS 
OECS 

OED 
PAHO 
REER 
SIDS 
UNDP 
USAID 

UWI 
WHO 
WTO 

Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
Gross National Product
Human Development Index
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
International Development Association
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Monetary Fund
Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate
Change
Learning and Innovation Loan
Medium-Term Economic Strategy
Organization of American States
Organization of the Eastern Caribbean
States
Operations Evaluation Department
Pan-American Health Organization
Real effective exchange rate
Small Island Developing States
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International
Development
University of the West Indies
World Health Organization
World Trade Organization

Vice President 
Director 
Lead Economist 
Task Manager 

IBRD/IDA 

David de Ferranti 
Orsalia Kalantzopoulos 
Ali Khadr
Claudio Visconti 

IFC

Assaad J. Jabre
Karl Voltaire

Kalim M. Shah

Constantine Symeonides-Tsatsos served as co-task manager for this CAS. In addition, the following staff
members made important contributions to the preparation of the document: Caroline Becquart, Maria
Donoso Clark, William Experton, Homa Z. Fotouhi, Jyoti Shukla, and Kevin A. Tomlinson. This CAS
benefited greatly from the guidance of Ms. Neeta Sirur, Lead Operations Officer (LCOQE).

EASTERN CARIBBEAN SUB-REGION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY............................................... 

.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. 

THE EASTERN CARIBBEAN: KEY FEATURES .

..................................................

I

II. RECENT TRENDS, ISSUES AND DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES ............................................... 3
A. Macroeconomic Developments and Medium-Term Prospects .............................................
3
B. 
Structural Change ...................... 
,.,.,.7
C. Human and Social Development ....................................... 
D. Governance, Institutions and Organizational Capacity ....................................... 
E. 
The Eastern Caribbean Development Strategy .1................................. 

,5.,, 

I I
13
15

111. THE EASTERN CARIBBEAN-WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP ................................................. 16
A. Objectives of Bank Group Assistance and CAS Development Process ..................... ............... 16
B. 
Progress since the last CAS ............................................ 
, 
16
C. Coordination with Development Partners ............................................ 
19
D. Bank Group Assistance to the Eastern Caribbean in FY02-06 ............................................ 
22
E. 
Risks and Low Case Scenario .................... 
,, 
, 
27
F. CAS Program Monitoring .................... 
29

IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS .................... 

30

BOXES
Box A 
Box B 
Box C 
Box D 

Sources of Current Fiscal Imbalances in the OECS .........
The Banana Industry in the Windward Islands ....................................
Climate Change and the Caribbean ......................... 
HIV/AIDS in the Caribbean ......................... 

,.,.,.9

4.............................4
7

12

TEXT TABLES
Table 1 
Basic Economic and Social Indicators for the Eastern Caribbean .................... 
........................2
Table 2 
Eastern Caribbean - Key Economic Indicators (averages 1990-1994 & 1995-1999) ............... 5
Table 3 
OECS: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance, FY95-FYO I ................................ 18
Table 4 
Current Matrix of the Overall External Assistance to the OECS ........................ ...................... 21
Table 5 
Proposed Base Case Bank Assistance Program, FY02-06 ................................
24
4...................... 

ANNEXES
Annex A 
Country Profiles and Medium-Term Projections .............................................................. 
31
Annex B I 
Fastern Caribbean Program Matrix ......... 
......................................... 
.
.......... 81
Annex B2 Bank Portfolio Performance and Management .............................................................. 
85
Annex B3 Bank Group Program Summary .............................................................. 
86
Annex B4 
Summary of Non-Lending Services ................... 
........................................... 
87
Annex B5 
Status of Bank Group Operations ....................... 
, 
88
Annex B6 CAS Summary of Development Priorities ............................. 
89
Annex C 
CAS Consultations .............................. 
90

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

Executive Summary

The countries of the Eastern Caribbean face special development challenges because of their small
size and vulnerability to natural disasters and other external shocks. With an overall population of about
eight hundred thousand, institutional capacity is limited and per capita costs of basic social and infrastructure
services are very high. Hurricanes and floods regularly reverse economic gains, by destroying infrastructure
and disrupting key economic activities, such as agriculture and tourism. Moreover, most of the islands have
historically promoted monocropping in agriculture, relying on preferential trade arrangements, which now
face certain, albeit phased, dismantling as a result of recent World Trade Organization (WTO) rulings.
Susceptibility to external shocks is a key factor underlying the substantial income/consumption volatility to
which Eastern Caribbean countries and households are subject (significantly higher than international
experience). This volatility, in turn, contributes to continuing income poverty among about a third of the
sub-region's households, despite the relatively good social indicators exhibited by the sub-region. Available
data and analyses indicate that, depending on the country, between 12 percent (Antigua and Barbuda) and
3 8 percent (St. Vincent and the Grenadines) of the population lives in absolute poverty. Income inequality in
the sub-region is also relatively high.

ii. 
This World Bank Group assistance strategy for the Eastern Caribbean States covers the five-year
period from July 2001 through June 2006 (Bank FY02-06). It follows the last five-year Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS) for the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) countries which was presented to
the Board in May 1995. While focusing on the OECS countries, this sub-regional CAS also includes some
discussion of socio-economic developments and issues in Barbados, given the importance of the latter in
influencing the sub-region's socio-economic priorities as well as development outcomes in many key sectors.
Although Barbados was graduated from Bank lending in 1993, the Bank has remained engaged with the
country through analytical and advisory services in selected areas requiring a well coordinated sub-regional
approach, e.g., financial sector reform and disaster mitigation. Moreover, a loan to Barbados is being
proposed -
on an exceptional basis -
alongside this CAS to enable the country to fully participate in a
Bank-supported program for WFV/AIDS prevention and care in the Caribbean, a region now second only to
Sub-Saharan Africa in terms of HIV incidence. This loan and a similar loan for the Dominican Republic
together mark the first phase of the Caribbean-wide HIV/AIDS program, and the full rationale for provision
of Bank financing for the Barbados portion of the program is provided in the relevant loan documentation.
No further lending to Barbados is expected.

iii. 
For the FY02-06 period, the main objective of the World Bank Group's proposed assistance to the
Eastern Caribbean is to help reduce poverty in close collaboration with the countries themselves, sub-
regional organizations and external partners by: (i) reducing income insecurity and vulnerability at the
aggregate and household levels; and (ii) building human and institutional capacity. With regard to (i), the
aim would be to assist countries in the sub-region in their efforts to promote sustainable, private sector-led
economic diversification, create a supportive environment for promising, newly-emerging "sunrise"
industries (including lowered infrastructure costs and improved management of natural environmental
resources) and mitigate disaster risks to the extent feasible. With regard to (ii), the Bank's objective would
be to assist governments in the direct provision of services to the population (e.g., education and public
health, especially HIV/AIDS) where this is appropriate and, in parallel, to help strengthen the broader
functioning of the public sector as it copes with the many legislative, regulatory and supervisory needs
arising from new economic and social challenges.

iv. 
These objectives and the Bank Group's specific assistance program are fully consistent with a
framework for medium- and long-term sub-regional development drawn up by the OECS Secretariat and the
countries themselves through a broad consultative process. The Bank Group's assistance strategy was
defined on the basis of the OECS development strategy, as well as of Medium-Term Economic Strategy
Papers drawn up by the countries themselves, the Report of the World Bank/Commonwealth Secretariat Task
Force on Small States, and analytical work undertaken under the auspices of the Caribbean Group for

ii

Cooperation in Economic Development (CGCED). The planned Bank program was also widely discussed
with, and endorsed by, the countries, sub-regional and regional organizations as well as external partners,
who were consulted at a number of fora held in the sub-region in late 2000 and the first part of 2001.
Specific areas of intervention, both lending and AAA, were selected with due regard to the prospective roles
and activities of other external partners and the private sector, with the aim of focusing on areas of Bank
technical comparative advantage and playing an overall catalytic role.

v. 
Building on the generally satisfactory macroeconomic and development performance in the Eastern
Caribbean over the period of the last CAS, the proposed Bank Group assistance program to the Eastern
Caribbean for FY02-06 would entail new commitments (both IDA and IBRD) in the order of
US$100-1 10 million for the five OECS Bank borrowers as well as AAA activities in priority areas. Among
the parameters considered in setting the sub-regional resource envelope were competing claims on Bank
resources (especially IDA, since four OECS countries are IDA-IBRD blend countries), absorptive capacity,
and creditworthiness for IBRD lending. On a country basis, resources will be allocated mainly on the basis
of country policy and portfolio performance. 
In terms of lending instruments, cost-effectiveness
considerations and the aim of promoting sub-regional integration point to increasing reliance on grouping
similar Bank operations under sub-regional umbrella mechanisms, while still shaping each (sub) project to
meet the particular needs of each country. This is possible with some adaptation (to a sub-regional rather
than individual country context) of the Bank's new flexible instruments, including APLs and LILs. In
parallel, IFC will continue to support private sector activities via regional initiatives in the financial and
tourism sectors as well as direct investments, including in private infrastructure.

vi. 
The main risks to the Eastern Caribbean economies -
and, by implication, to the proposed Bank
Group assistance strategy -
stem from two sources which are not entirely independent, namely, exogenous
shocks and fiscal slippage (which itself could be the result of exogenous shocks). Potential sources of
exogenous shocks include: (i) natural disasters which could cause major economic damage and necessitate
unforeseen public spending -
for instance, the damage caused by hurricane Georges in St. Kitts and Nevis
was about 140 percent of GDP and has been the primary source of St. Kitts and Nevis' present fiscal
difficulties; (ii) the concentration of exports in a few goods and services (sugar, bananas, tourism, and
financial services) -
in turn, making the economies very vulnerable to further erosion of EU trade
preferences and/or heightened criticism of the sub-region's off-shore banking industry; and (iii) swings in
prices of key commodity imports (e.g., oil) -
fiscal performance in most OECS countries was affected by
recent oil price rises due to pressures to accept reduced yields from the consumption tax on petroleum
products in an effort to maintain lower prices for consumers. While exposure to the potential shocks cannot
be eliminated, the Eastern Caribbean countries are taking steps to mitigate their negative impact through
improved macro-economic management and financial integration, increased economic diversification,
emphasis on disaster mitigation and investments in human and institutional capital. In the short run, it is vital
that the OECS countries stay the course of prudent public sector finances, strengthening fiscal savings and
keeping indebtedness at a comfortable level, especially by exercising caution and judgment when borrowing
on commercial terms.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE EASTERN CARIBBEAN SUB-REGION

I. The Eastern Caribbean: Key Features

1. 
Introduction. The OECS countries' face special development challenges because of their small size
and extreme vulnerability to external events, including natural disasters, that can cause high volatility in
national (and hence household) incomes. Though at different stages in their development, the OECS
countries share a number of common features, including: (i) small populations (varying from about 45,000
in St. Kitts and Nevis to over 150,000 in St. Lucia); (ii) fragile ecosystems, compounded by the presence of
active volcanoes on some islands and the location of most of the countries in the Atlantic "hurricane belt";
(iii) well-entrenched democratic traditions, with Westminster-style parliamentary government systems and
professional, civil service cadres in the British tradition; (iv) past policy choices promoting reliance in
agriculture on monocropping with dependence on preferential trade arrangements for key commodity exports
(mainly bananas or sugar, depending on the country); and (v) a domestic private sector that is relatively small
and with limited human and financial capacity. While not a member of the OECS and substantially larger in
terms of population (270,000), Barbados shares many of the key geographic, social, politico-institutional and
economic characteristics of the OECS countries. Moreover, it plays an influential role in the sub-region2
and, in some sectors, is the key to successful development and implementation of sub-regional cross-border
initiatives.

2. 
Economic Cooperation and Integration. 
In an attempt to overcome some of the political and
economic limitations deriving from the Eastern Caribbean countries' small sizes, the OECS was formed
within the larger Caribbean Community (CARICOM) in 1981. Since then, economic integration among the
members has been deepened, inter alia, through the maintenance of a common currency, the Eastern
Caribbean dollar (EC$), which is issued by a shared Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB). The ECCB's
successful institutional role in coordinating monetary policy and in deepening and further integrating the
OECS sub-regional financial system, is complemented, in other areas of sub-regional development, by the
establishment of a "sister" coordinating body, the OECS Secretariat. The Secretariat is directly responsible
to the Heads of Government of the member countries. Thus far, the Secretariat has had only modest and
variable success in spearheading cooperation among OECS members in its areas of responsibility (including
fiscal policy coordination and specialized functional cooperation in areas such as education and the
environment). This may be appropriate in many cases, given differences in the countries' socio-economic
development, but a number of areas (e.g., infrastructure, health care provision) could benefit greatly from
tighter linkages and more concerted action than has yet been achieved.

3. 
Growth and Social Indicators. Overall, there is little doubt that the sub-region has recorded
substantial achievements, measured in terms both of rises in income per capita and improved social
indicators, since independence from the United Kingdom was achieved in the late 1970s and early 1980s.

I 
For purposes of this CAS, the OECS is defined to include Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis,
St. Lucia and St. Vincent and the Grenadines, the six independent countries of the OECS and all members of the World Bank Group.
There is a seventh full member (Montserrat) and two associate members (Anguilla and the British Virgin Islands) which are overseas
territories of the United Kingdom. It should also be noted that Antigua and Barbuda is not currently a Bank Borrower.
For this document, the term "sub-region" (unless qualified) refers to the 6 independent OECS member states and Barbados.
In accordance with a quasi-currency board arrangement, the EC$ is pegged to the US$ at a rate of US$1=EC$2.7, and
foreign exchange reserves are maintained in a common pool. While maintaining its own currency, Barbados, too, has pegged its
dollar to the US dollar at a rate of US$1 =B$2. The currency pegs for both OECS and Barbados have been in place, at the same rates,
since the mid-1970s.

2 

3 

2

Growth performance was exceptional during the 1980s, when the OECS countries grew at an average annual
rate of about 6 percent -
owing principally to a favorable external environment including large concessional
aid flows for infrastructure investments; and preferential market access and favorable prices, which, in turn,
allowed a doubling of banana exports and tourism.4 The OECS countries continued to display positive
growth over the decade of the 1990s, albeit at slower rates of about 3 percent as a result of a number of
external shocks (especially greater frequency of natural disasters, reductions in preferential access for
commodity exports and reduced concessional aid flows). Growth rates in Barbados were considerably lower
than in the OECS countries, but on average positive in both decades (see Table 1).
Table 1: Basic Economic and Social Indicators for the Eastern Caribbean

Antigua and 

Barbuda 

Dominica Grenada 

St. K.itts 
and Nevis

St. Lucia 

St. Vincent

and the 

Grenadines

Barbados

Populatnon 

71.4 

77.6 

101.0 

45.4 

156.0 

115.1 

GNI per Capita 

9,190 

3,260 

3,520 

6,660 

4,070 

2,690 

Gini Index 

Povertyheadcount index 

(1996-2000)

HIDI ranking (2000) 
(I - 174 countries) 

Unemployment Rate 

(estimate)

Life expectancy (yrs.) 
Literacy rate 
Access to safe water 
(% of population)
Mortality rate, infant 
(per 1,000 live births)
Net 
(primary) 
enrollment 
ratio (%) bl 
Growth Rate 

(secondary) 
(1980-89) 
(1990-99) 

52.5 

12.0 

37 
37

7.0 

75 
78 
91 

48.8 

33.0 

51 

45.0 

32.1 

54 

20.0 

12.5 

76 
94 
96 

72 
96 
94 

44.5 

31.0 

47 

4.5 

71 
90 
98 

42.6 

25.1 

88 

44.8 

37.5 

79 

18.0 

22.0 

72 
82 
98 

73 
82 
93 

16.1 

14.3 

13.2 

20.0 

15.9 

19.6 

78

6.4 
3.2 

89 

68 
5.3 
2.5 

98 

50 
4.6 
3.7 

100 

98 
6.2 
4.0 

100 

66 
6.3 
2.4 

84 

44 
5.5 
3.6 

270.0

9,330

46.0

13.9

30

9.3

76
97
100

14.4

100

98
1.7
0.5

Source: World Bank data and estimates; and the United Nations' Human Development Report
a/ Human Dev. Index is calculated using: life expectancy at birth; adult literacy; gross enrollment; and GDP per capita.
b/ The ratios are calculated by dividing the number of children of official school age enrolled in each level of schooling by the number of children in
the age group corresponding to that level. For Antigua and Barbuda, the ratio encompasses gross primary, secondary and tertiary enrollment. For
St. Vincent and the Grenadines, the secondary school ratio actually represents the transition rate from primary to secondary school.

4. 
Continued growth coupled with relatively stable population size has meant notable improvements in
income per capita throughout the sub-region in the decades since independence. Currently, the average GNI
per capita for the OECS countries is close to US$5,000, with the Leeward Islands of Antigua and St. Kitts'
significantly better-off than the Windward Islands of Dominica, Grenada, St. Lucia and St. Vincent.
Barbados' per capita income of over US$9,000 puts it at the upper end of the OECS range, roughly similar to
Antigua. Concomitantly with incomes, social indicators in the sub-region have improved significantly
during the 1980s and 1990s and now compare favorably with other middle-income countries in the Latin
America and the Caribbean region. Life expectancy is estimated at about 74 years, infant mortality is around
16 per 1000, and literacy and access to safe water are now near-universal in many countries (close to 90 and
95 percent respectively on average). According to the UN's 2000 Human Development Index (HDI), a

By contrast, some of the larger Caribbean countries had low or negative growth rates over the same period.

Throughout this document, Antigua refers to Antigua and Barbuda, St. Kitts refers to St. Kitts and Nevis, and St. Vincent

4 
5 

refers to St. Vincent and the Grenadines. In addition, the Bank refers to the World Bank Group.

3

composite measure which combines income and social indicators, the sub-region's countries rank relatively
high among the 174 countries for which the Index is calculated. Barbados and Antigua were seen as having
"high" HDIs, ranking 3 0th and 3 7 th respectively, while the remaining OECS countries were generally in the
upper half of the "medium" range.

5. 
Poverty and Income Insecurity. Despite the progress in income growth and social service
provision, poverty remains a problem in all the countries of the sub-region. Data from country-level
household surveys commissioned by the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) in the last 4-5 years
(sometimes with substantial differences in methodology), indicated that depending on country, from about
12 percent (Antigua) to nearly 38 percent (St. Vincent) of the sub-region's people are poor -
i.e., living
below a locally-defined poverty line (the amount required to purchase a basket of basic necessities). The
depth of poverty, as measured by the poverty gap and severity indices, also varies by country, with poor
households in Grenada and St. Vincent suffering the greatest deprivation vis-a?-vis the local poverty line.
Income inequality in the sub-region is quite high, with gini coefficients ranging from about 0.4-0.5. This
explains in part the relatively high levels of poverty in the sub-region, despite high per capita income
indicators.

6. 
Of the total poor households in the sub-region, it is estimated that about a third (or about 10 percent
of the total population) is chronically poor -
i.e., belonging to groups not active in the labor market such as
the elderly, disabled persons, or members of certain ethnic groups (e.g., the Carib in Dominica). The
remaining two-thirds of poor households might be termed conjuncturally poor -
i.e., those unable to achieve
satisfactory incomes, due to low human capital and/or the economic environment, including internal and
external shocks. As alluded to at the outset, income insecurity/volatility as a result of shocks is particularly
important in the sub-region given the small size, limited economic diversification and high degree of
openness of the countries, and their extreme vulnerability to unfavorable natural phenomena (hurricanes,
severe storms and volcanic activity). One recent report6 analyzing some 122 countries, found that the
variability of per capita consumption growth is about twice as large for the Caribbean as it is for the Latin
America region. The Eastern Caribbean countries have even higher variability than the Caribbean average.
This extremely high aggregate consumption volatility is almost certainly transmitted to households at all
income levels, but its impact can be especially negative for the poor and near-poor who may not be able to
rely on savings to smooth consumption during times of hardship. It has also been suggested that many
Eastern Caribbean households cycle in and out of poverty, depending on the nature of the shocks(s) sustained
and availability of coping/recovery mechanisms, although this is not possible to verify empirically given the
absence of panel survey data.

7. 
As the preceding discussion highlights, despite relatively good overall economic performance in the
decades since independence, the countries of the Eastern Caribbean sub-region must still contend with
structural poverty and, especially, pervasive income insecurity at country and household levels due to their
high vulnerability to climatic and external economic shocks. Section II, which follows below, provides more
detail on recent economic and social developments in the OECS and Barbados, with a view to laying out the
specific challenges faced by the sub-region as it continues its development efforts in this new millennium.
These key development issues and challenges have been identified and discussed by the countries and sub-
regional organizations themselves, notably in recent work by the OECS Secretariat and the ECCB (see paras.
34-35).

II. Recent Trends, Issues and Development Priorities

A. Macroeconomic Developments and Medium-Term Prospects

8. 
As noted above, sub-regional growth performance over the second half of the 1990s was
satisfactory, averaging about 3 percent, although growth varied across countries from around 2 percent in

6 

World Bank: The Importance of Financial and Insurance Market Integration in the Context of High Consumption Volatility

in CGCED Countries, Discussion Draft, Report No. 20450-LAC, June 2000.

4

Dominica and St. Lucia to around 5 percent in Grenada (see Table 2 for key indicators of recent economic
performance by country). In per capita terms, GDP growth rates ranged from 6 percent in St. Kitts to
0.5 percent in St. Lucia. As has been the case historically, given the sub-region's currency arrangements
(para. 2), consumer price inflation remained relatively low (in the range of 1.3-4.2 percent in the OECS and
2.5 percent in Barbados), reflecting international levels. The monetary union is widely perceived to have
served the OECS well and overall monetary and credit management remains sound.
9. 
Unlike monetary policy which requires joint action by sub-regional governments via the ECCB,
fiscal policy is handled independently by each country. The long history of the common currency
arrangement has generally fostered fiscal discipline, but slippages have sometimes occurred, with countries
incurring sizable fiscal deficits, financed by borrowing from commercial sources in the face of limited access
to ECCB credit. In recent years, fiscal performance has deteriorated markedly in Antigua, Dominica and St.
Kitts (see Box A), indicating the need for swift corrective action to avoid repercussions on growth prospects.
On average across the sub-region, central government savings deteriorated over the period 1995-2000. In
Antigua, Dominica, and St. Kitts they have become negative and estimates for 2000 indicate that in Antigua
and St. Kitts negative savings were posted even for the consolidated public sector. Overall deficits (both
central government and consolidated public sector) have also widened in virtually all the OECS countries in
the past 1-2 years. Factors underlying this deterioration in the fiscal accounts include the impact of natural
disasters, growing unit costs and wage bills, rising interest payments, and high capital expenditures in
parallel with reduced aid flows. At the same time, revenue performance has been hindered at least in part by
a large number of tax concessions related to increasing incentives for tourism, manufacturing and
agribusiness. The associated increase in borrowing requirements has led to a sizable increase in public debt
in some OECS countries.

Box A- Sources of Current Fiscal Imbalances in the OECS
The Cases of Antigua & Barbuda, Dominica, and St. Kitts & Nevis

Amigua and Barbuda's fiscal imbalance has worsened over the 1990s. Unable to service its debt and stay current on
other obligations, the government accumulatd considerable arrears with foreign and domestic creditors, virtally
losing access to international financial markets. Although the situation has improved following recent external debt
resaturing workouts, full creditwotihiness has not yet been restored. The stability of fiscal revenues (17-18 percent
of GDP in 1995-99) contrasted starkly with rising central government current and capital expenditures, resulting in
increasingly negative savings and overall balance (averagig, respectively, -5.8 and -83%4 percent of GDP in 1998-2000).
With heavy reliance on tourism and offshore services, the ecnomy remnams vulnerable to extemal shocks and the weak
fiscal stance has contributed to a slowdow in economic performance.

Economic growth in Dominica has been sluggish in the recent past (annual average of 1 V2 percent during 1997-2000)
due to sharp retrenchment of the banana industry (export volume fell by over 30 percent while the number of active
growers halved). In an attempt to foster economic diversification and under mounting social pressure, the government
embarked on an amnbitious investment program while increases in the wage bill, spending on goods and services, and
debt service obligations weakened government saving. The resulting overall deficits, in the presence of declining
foreign grants, led to higher external indebtedness, imnreasingly on commercial terms. The autiorities recognize that
actions to redress the current imbalance would include: strengthening revenue collection, broadening the tax base (and
perhaps introducing a tax based either on value added or general consumption), reducing tax concessions, and
tightening control over the public sector wage bill, among others. However, the government has not made a definitive
commitment to such measures as yet.

Fiscal difficulties in St. Kitts and Nevis have stemmed mainly from two sources: the first is the frequent occurrence of
natural disasters, notably hurricanes, that have weakened economic growth and the fiscal position. For instance, since
1998, St. Kitts has suffered the impact of four hurricanes: Georges, Juan, Keith, and Lenny. The estimated damage of
huricane Georges alone was in the order of 140 percent of GDP and the central government's overall deficit nearly
doubled, to 6V2 percent of GDP, in 1998. The second source is the operations of the state-run and loss-making sugar
industry. Losses in 1999 amounted to 3% percent of GDP and during 199-98 averaged 2½ percent of GDP per year.
In addition, the overdraft of the sugar industry with the state owned National Bank reached an estimnated 17 percent of
GDP by September 2000. The government recently took the decision to phase out sugar production, which entails
short-run budgetary costs but which will, over time, reduce the pressure on public finances.

5

10. 
At the present time, ECCB in cooperation with member governments is developing a fiscal reform
program aimed at addressing issues related to public saving and improving the quality of public
expenditure. The objective is to develop fiscal regimes conducive to economic growth and development,
social equity and fiscal stability in the medium term. The program is promoting public savings targets in the
range of 4-5 and 7-8 percent of GDP for central governments and the consolidated public sector respectively,
which, in the medium term, would allow for public investment programs of about 12 percent of GDP without
undue recourse to commercial borrowing. As part of the program, the ECCB is also beginning to assist
member governments with the process aspects of fiscal management and has established a facility for
building up a fiscal reserve with portions of its profits. The targets established under the fiscal reform
program appear to be satisfactory, and their attainment will foster fiscal stability in the sub-region.

Table 2: Eastern Caribbean - Key Economic Indicators (averages 1990-1994 & 1995-1999) a/

Dominica Grenada 

Antigua 
St. Kitts 
St. Lucia St. Vincent & 
OECS 
& Barbuda 
& Nevis 
The Grenadines 
average
90-94 95-99 90-94 95-99 90-94 95-99 90-94 95-99 90-94 95-99 90-94 95-99 90-94 95-99 90-94 95-99

Barbados

Growth and Prices (%)
Real GDP growth 
Inflation rate (CPI, eop) 

Investment and Saving
Gross Dom. Investment 
Gross National Saving 

Consolidated Public Sector

Current Balance 

Overall Balance 

3.4 
3.8 

3.1 
3.0 2.0 
2.4 
1.3 3.1 
1.4 2.9 

5.1 3.9 
1.7 2.5 

4.1 
4.2 

2.9 1.9 
4.5 2.7 

2.7 
4.4 

4.4 
1.8 

3.1 
3.5 

3.2 
2.2 

-1.9 
2.9 

3.0
2.5

25.0 34.6 31.1 30.4 37.0 37.3 44.1 43.1 24.8 22.9 30.3 29.3 30.0 31.8 12.5 16.8
16.3 20.6 14.6 16.0 20.9 19.4 27.8 20.4 13.0 12.5 12.3 
11.4 16.6 16.7 16.9 16.8

-2.8 

-4.6 

-1.1 

-6.4 

2.9 

2.7 

3.2 

4.5 

5.0 

3.6 

9.7 

8.3 

7.7 

-3.5 -2.2 

-1.7 -2.8 1.2 

-3.3 0.7 2.8 

-1.9 

7.7 

0.3 

4.2 

4.2 

3.9 

-1.7 

-1.8 

-2.0 

5.9

0.0

External Sector
Exports ofG&S 
Imports of G&S 
Current Account Balance 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Gross Reserves of Mon. Auth. 
(months of imports of G&S)
Total External Debt 
TotalExternal Debt Service 
(percent of exports ofG&S)
al Data are in percent of GDP unless stated otherwise.

86.0 77.1 51.1 55.1 43.9 45.2 57.1 51.2 66.8 61.9 54.8 
83.8 87.8 67.9 64.0 62.0 65.9 73.6 72.8 75.6 68.8 72.6 
-8.7 
-14.0 -16.5 -14.4 -16.1 -17.9 -16.3 -22.7 -11.8 -10.4 -18.0 
7.2 
4.5 
8.8 10.0 7.3 10.6 12.9 13.5 9.6 8.6 
9.8 
1.3 
1.4 
1.6 2.0 
1.9 2.4 2.7 
2.7 
1.8 1.8 
2.1 

144.5 135.2 49.9 47.2 46.6 43.5 28.1 36.4 19.9 26.2 37.1 
7.3 
5.0 5.3 4.1 
7.0 
3.1 4.0 
5.4 
8.9 
3.9 7.6 

50.7 64.1 60.0 53.4 56.7
68.5 74.2 73.1 49.9 56.6
-17.9 -13.4 -15.1 4.4 
0.0
15.7 8.9 
9.5 
0.8 
1.2
2.2 
1.8 
1.9 
2.3 
3.6

45.7 60.8 61.7 37.3 27.3
7.6 
5.7 
5.1 
18.2 12.2

4 

.3 

5. Growth and Inflation 

4-- 

3--~~~~~~~~ 

2 

V 

2 6

Fiscal and External Deficits 

Investment and Saving

,2 -

~~~~~~~~~~~10 

i x 

.. 

4 

320- 

22 -

it. 

r 

.. 

.

0. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~112 

16~~~~~~~~~~i 

It 
14 

26

.25

.24

.23

22
21-

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 

|- 

'GDP% c 

PI%eop 

| 

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 
Ett Cur Awct 
Overrall,Publ Sector 

4

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
| 
GNS 

D

11. With regard to external balance, the Eastern Caribbean countries did not experience any major
difficulties during the second half of the 1990s, principally because the current account deficits that the
countries generated were compensated for by adequate capital inflows. Reversing the improving trend
registered over the first half of the decade, OECS member countries' current account deficits averaged
15 percent of GDP in the latter half of the 1990s and Barbados remained in virtual balance. Factors

6

underlying the deterioration varied across countries, and included, on the trade side, declining merchandise
export earnings (notably for bananas in the Windward Islands and sugar in St. Kitts and Barbados) and rising
import bills associated with higher levels of FDI. They also included higher interest payments on external
debt, as a result both of increased stocks and "harder" terms -
a reflection of the higher fiscal deficits
financed wholly or in part by borrowing on commercial terms. These factors were partially compensated for
by rising tourism earnings.7 Throughout the 1995-2000 period, the current account deficits experienced by
the OECS countries were more than covered by capital inflows -
a combination of FDI, external borrowing,
allowing for some accumulation of reserves.8 By and large, external public debt
and capital transfers -
stocks as a share of GDP have remained stable in the OECS and Barbados.9

12. 
External competitiveness does not appear to have deteriorated appreciably thus far, although the real
effective exchange rate (REER) has appreciated moderately in all the countries. REER appreciation over the
period 1995-99 ranged from about 6 percent in Grenada to about 13 percent in St. Kitts, the result mainly of
U.S. dollar appreciation vis-a-vis European currencies. In the area of trade liberalization, despite some
progress, Eastern Caribbean states still maintain relatively high protection levels in their trade regimes.
Tariff protection is similar to regional practice, although somewhat higher in a few countries. Average tariff
rates across all goods are close to 20 percent, but the dispersion of tariff rates is considerable, particularly in
Antigua, Barbados, St. Lucia and St. Kitts where maximum rates (principally for agricultural goods)
approach 70 percent.'0 This is also the case with some types of non-tariff barriers, particularly import
licensing applied to items such as foodstuffs and some consumer goods. Although maximum tariff rates
have fallen substantially in 1987-98, average rates have increased nearly two-fold for imports of agricultural
and manufactured goods, in sharp contrast with overall trends in emerging market countries.

13. Medium-Term Outlook. The medium-term outlook in terms of growth is relatively favorable,
provided sound fiscal and monetary management is pursued, and structural reforms are undertaken in further
promoting private sector development, strengthening public sector capacity, and deepening economic
diversification. Regional GDP is expected to grow in 2001-2005 at an aggregated average rate of 3.2 percent
(about the same as in 1995-2000). Higher average annual growth rates in St. Kitts and St. Lucia (at about 51/2
and 3/4 percent compared with 4 and 2 percent in 1995-2000) related to the expansion of tourism and other
services and non-traditional agricultural exports will likely be offset by lower growth in some other countries
due to slower growth in off-shore banking and agriculture. Reflecting fiscal deterioration in some countries,
higher growth in others, and lower merchandise exports (particularly bananas) the external current account
deficit for the OECS is expected to remain around 10 percent in 2001-02. The external deficit should narrow
to about 8 percent of GDP by 2005 due to gains accruing from the further restructuring of the banana sector
and telecommunications reforms, advances in trade and capital markets integration, and improved fiscal
discipline, which in turn would allow for increased fiscal saving and lower public deficits. Improved fiscal
management would also result in lower external indebtedness and continued accumulation of foreign
reserves, as well as sustaining FDI inflows." The ECCB-led initiative to deepen and further integrate the
OECS financial system (inter-bank markets and development of a regional securities market) is another
positive factor for the medium-term. By strengthening credit policy, these initiatives have the potential to
enhance savings mobilization and efficiency of intermediation, and foster the development of a stronger

7 

9 

In most countries, stay-over arrivals expanded rapidly, albeit from a small base in some cases, and cumulative growth in
travel receipts amounted to about 10 percent in US$ terms over the period.
a 
Over the period 1995-99, FDI averaged about 10 percent of GDP in the OECS (only about I percent of GDP in Barbados).
(It should be noted that FDI flows also drive part of the current account deficits through associated import requirements.) Public
sector borrowing and capital transfers together averaged about 5 percent of GDP. Capital transfers averaged 3.7 percent of GDP and
stemmed in large part from migrant transfers.
However, significant increases were recorded in St. Kitts, owing in part to hurricane damages, in St. Vincent, largely as a
result of public guarantees granted to the private sector, and (toward the end of the period 1995-99) in Dominica, mainly as a result of
increased capital expenditures. In Antigua, recent rescheduling of sizeable arrears has led to a decline in total debt.
Tariff protection at most-favored-nation (MFN) rates.
ECCB's external assets have increased by about 20 percent in 1995-99, reaching US$360 million by late 1999. Also, ECCB
has maintained a foreign exchange backing ratio (as coverage for its demand liabilities) in excess of 95 percent.

10 
tt 

7

private sector, provided fiscal discipline is maintained. Annex A shows the medium-term outlook by
country.

B. Structural Change

14. 
Increasing Economic Diversification. Given the context of high vulnerability to external shocks,
sub-regional Governments have emphasized economic diversification as one of the principal means of
coping with income insecurity and poverty and promoting stable, sustained growth. The now certain, albeit
phased, dismantling of EU trade preferences has further highlighted the need to diversify the sub-region's
economic base to avoid undue shocks to national and household incomes (Box B) -
especially in a context
where for many countries over 10 percent of exports have been accounted for by a single crop (e.g., sugar in
St. Kitts and bananas in Dominica, St. Lucia and St. Vincent). The effort has been successful, by and large,
with diversification away from agriculture, and towards tourism and financial services (banking and
insurance) increasing steadily over the 1 990s.

Box B: The Banana Industry in the Windward Islands

Banana production has been a dominant industry for over 40 years in all the Windward Islands (WI), except Grenada.
Historically, banana production has accounted for a substantial share of export earnings and rural employment of the
islands. Until recently, it was estimated that some 30,000 farmers were directly involved in banana production, and
some 70,000 people were employed directly and indirectly by the industry; this amounts to about a third of the WI
labor force. Although the relative importance of the banana industry has declined significantly over the last several
years, with tourism and other services gaining in importance, banana production remains an imporant industry in the
WI, especially in terms of its social contributions, including rural employmnent-creation and equalizing effects on the
distribution of income (because most of the growers are small-size farmers who own the land on which they firn),
which are difficult to quantify.

Banana production and exports from the WI have declined sharply in the 1990s. Between 1990 and 2000 banana
exports fell by 50 percent, to 140,500 tons. This retrenchment - due mainly to uncertainties surrounding the EU
import regime, declining world mawket prices, and rising costs of inputs - has created significant employment and
social fllout problems, including violent demonstrations by affected farmers in 1993. The critical issues are
displacement of labor and a near-certain increase in pockets of poverty as a result of income loss. According to a
1999 ILO study, Restwniwjng she Lass of Preference, no other economic activity in the Eastem Caribbean has
similar multiplier effects on employment levels and the development of other economic sectors. This suggests that
further decline of the banana industry could lead not only to the loss of livelihood for farmers and other workers
dectly involved in banana production and marketing, but also have a ripple effect in the broader rural community,
affecting businesses whose main customers are banana flirmers.

WI banana producers are at a competitive disadvantage in terms of topography, plantation size, and wage rates when
compared with Latin American producers. Survival of the industry since its inception has been predicated largely on
guaranteed market access regimes provided by European States (principally the United Kingdom). With the
establishment of the single European market, a common marketing structure came into effect on July 1, 1993. The
so-called EU Banana Regime maintained the traditional obligations of the EU member countries to African,
Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) producers by restricting imports from non-ACP suppliers through a system of tariffs
and quotas. Under this system, the quota for the ACP banana producers was 850,000 tons. The United States, joined
by Latin American producers, challenged the historical reference used for allocation of EU quota lioenses in a case
brought before the WTO in 1997. A WTO panel decision ruling against the EU banana regime was issued in April
1999, creating a standoff between the EU and the US. In April 2001, however, the US and the EU resolved their
dispute over bananas. The final agreement that was negotiated allowed the EU to keep the traditional obligation to
the ACP countries but reduced the inport quota from 850,000 tons to 750,000, while raising the quota for Latin
American bananas by the same amount. This new regime would remain in place until 2006, when the quota system
would be abolished and replaced by a flat rate tariff for all bananas, regardless of origin. This decision gives the WI
some breathing space to adjust to the new circumstances through a combination of modernizing their banana
industry, introducing safety nets as appropriate and moving faster on economic diversification efforts.

8

15. 
Economic diversification deepened in the 1995-99 period, principally in the OECS countries. For
the OECS as a whole, the contribution of agriculture to value added fell from about 10 to 7.7 percent
between 1995 and 1999, while sectors such as construction (mainly for tourism and public works),
communications and financial services expanded more than proportionally. On an individual country basis,
the largest reduction in agriculture was registered in St. Vincent, the largest increase in financial services in
Antigua, the largest increase in hotels and restaurants (proxies for tourism) in St. Lucia, and the largest
increase in transport and communications in Grenada. In Barbados, where diversification is more advanced,
the sectoral composition of GDP remained relatively stable over the same 5-year period, although industry
(notably construction) gained a slight share over services (which have represented about 75 percent of GDP
in recent years).

16. 
Private Sector. About half of new private investment in the sub-region is derived from private
foreign investors, who are better able to withstand external shocks given their relatively larger operations and
more diversified investments across and within countries. While active in a number of areas, the local
private sector thus far remains somewhat limited by its small scale of operations and higher degree of
vulnerability. Access to credit is relatively easy for the private sector in the OECS -
between 1990-1999
credit to the private sector increased 139 percent, or an average of about 9 percent per year, to
EC$5.3 billion. However, properly structured financing and equity capital is not always available, with
short-term financing frequently used to fund long-term assets, resulting in a financing mismatch. This,
coupled with (a) the limited human capacity of both the domestic financial institutions and the private sector
and (b) relatively costly administrative barriers and infrastructure, has hindered the creation of a resilient and
diversified private sector, thereby constraining dynamic adaptation of the economies. Initiatives geared
towards improving financial services, expanding infrastructure, improving the regulatory framework, and
creating better disaster mitigation mechanisms (including insurance/re-insurance), many of which are already
underway, should contribute to further development of the local private sector in the medium-term. In
addition, activities are underway to help strengthen skills and capacity in the private sector with support from
a number of external partners. For example, IFC's technical assistance for the development of Caribbean
Small Hotel Brands has led to a web-site which promotes training of small hoteliers.

17. 
Issues in Emerging Industries. The growing economic diversification, however, has brought its
own challenges associated with the high-potential, emerging ("sunrise") industries. Some of the key
emerging issues and sub-regional priorities in responding to them are discussed below.

18. 
Tourism is clearly critical in terms of its weight in the economy, its labor-intensity and capacity to
generate jobs for workers displaced from other sectors. At the same time, tourism growth is giving rise to a
host of environmental concerns and awareness about the dependency of the industry on sound natural
resource management. Environmental degradation resulting from unregulated tourism growth, poor
agricultural practices and inadequate waste water management could ultimately affect the viability of
tourism. As elsewhere, the environment is a key resource in the Eastern Caribbean not only as a productive
asset for fisheries and agriculture but also as a "sink" for the disposal of wastes (e.g., receiver of air and
water pollution), and, especially, as an amenity-based economic asset that supports tourism, an increasingly
important contributor to GDP -
accounting for over a quarter of GDP by some estimates. This latter
dimension is, of course, of particular significance, given that tourism provides the main source of livelihood
for a growing number of citizens and is replacing agriculture as the main foreign exchange earner in most
countries. Nonetheless, environmental resources have not always been managed in a sustainable way and
there is increasing evidence of threats to fragile ecosystems as rapid expansion of construction has threatened
beaches and coral reefs, banana production on hillsides has eroded forest cover and aggravated the effects of
hurricanes and storms and the increased pressure on water and production of liquid and solid waste brought
about by increases in visitors remains inadequately managed. In this context, the Eastern Caribbean states
have, in the last two or so years, placed increasing emphasis on strengthened environmental management,
culminating in March 2001 with the signing of the "St. George's Declaratio.i" on environmental management

9

by OECS members. Inter alia, the declaration calls for a consolidated legal, institutional and regulatory
framework for environmental management in the sub-region and the development of joint strategies/action
plans to address the most pressing environmental problems. The key challenge cited is to continue to support
growth in tourism, construction and agriculture while ensuring environmental sustainability.

19. 
The rapid growth in tourism and tourism-related investment has also drawn renewed attention to the
vulnerability of infrastructure to natural disasters. This linkage to tourism, coupled with the substantial direct
damage to local citizens' property, livelihoods and incomes, has highlighted the need for both improved
infrastructure standards and improved insurance mechanisms and related regulation. Because of the
catastrophic nature of many of the natural disasters (floods, hurricanes, volcanic activity, etc.) afflicting the
sub-region, considerable income and development opportunities are regularly forgone. The entire physical
environment, population and economy are affected -and 
the disaster often affects neighboring countries.
The occurrence of these phenomena might be expected to increase in the future, given threats from global
warming and changes in sea level/temperature (see Box C). To reduce the adverse impact (loss of lives,
infrastructure damage and high insurance costs) of these natural phenomena, there is a need, as yet unmet in
the sub-region, to complement the rebuilding of damaged infrastructure with comprehensive disaster
mitigation measures, 
such as 
regular maintenance, appropriate zoning, hazard mapping,
establishment/enforcement of construction codes and disaster information mechanisms. In addition to risk
minimization measures, there is a need for increased public sector portfolio diversification (e.g., in investing
national pension system resources) and improved availability of affordable catastrophe insurance, principally
through better risk pooling across the countries of the sub-region.

Box C: Climate Change and the Caribbean

Anticipated global waming and consequent changes in sea level, sea-surface tempatures, precipitation, and wind and
ocean currents will have a serious impact on the ssainable development of Small Iskand Developing States (SIDS)
such as the OECS countries, which depend on tropical coastal eoosystems for thir economic survival, physical
existence, and social viability. Global climate change will compromise the integrity of these ecosystems (coral reefs,
sea-grass beds and mangroves), undermining their ability to deliver the protection tat they offer to coastlines, bays,
beaches, buildings and ooastal infrastruture. It will also affect their ability to provide food (fisheries), employnent
(tourism, fishing, recreation) and building materials.

Climate Change and Sea-level Rise was first among 14 areas identified as threasm to small island states' sustinable
development by the Barbados Program of Action for SIDS (1994). Recent findings by the IneGovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) and other scientific organizations confirm that the most serious long-term environmental
challenge icing the Caribbean and low lying coastal states is tat of Global Clmate Change and its impact on the
socio-economic welfare of these nations. Coasal areas, their population and economic activities will be threatened by
the anticipated sea-level rise. Already faced with a aisis in managing limited feshwater resources, the OECS countries
will also have to contend with dcanges in rainfall patterns forecst under baseline climate change scenarios, which could
result in disastrous consequences affecting tourism, agriculture and health. Increasing climate variabiity is also
expected to lead to more frequent and intense tropical storms.

The traditional approach to disaster management in the Caribbean was characterized by an uncoordinated and ofen ad-
hoc response to rescue victims and repair damage. Preparedness planning was intouced during the 1980& Since then,
many regional and intemational development agencies (e.g., USAID, UNDP, OAS, PAIHO, IDB, CDB and the Bank)
have been active in assisting the region with specific aspects of disast preparedness and emergency recovery,
including coastal vulnerability, housing and infrastructure, health services response, impact assesment and adaptadion
planning. Notwithstanding these efforts, losses from natural disasters in the Caribbean continue to mount. The primary
cause is the rapid development conetated 
in highly vulnerable coastal areas, and the general lack of attention to
proper land-use planning and building standards. These losses are making it clear that present levels of effort will need
to be ratcheted up significantly to achieve a more acceptable capacity to prepare for and deal with naural emergencies.

The ongoing Caribbean-wide "Planning for Adaptation to Global Clinate Chane (CPACCr" project is helping to
address first stage adaptation issues in the region as a whole. Second stage adaation activities ar.- currently under
preparation.

10

20. With regard to financial services, the growing off-shore industry in several of the countries has
variously attracted criticism from such bodies as the Forum on Harmful Tax Competition, the Financial
Stability Forum, and the Financial Action Task Force for allegedly encouraging tax evasion in other
jurisdictions, operating within a weak regulatory and supervisory infrastructure, inadequate disclosure
policies, and/or abetting money laundering. Regarding the on-shore financial sector, the overall condition of
banking institutions (with a heavy presence of foreign-owned banks, especially British and Canadian) is
considered satisfactory, notably with respect to capital adequacy and portfolio performance, despite the
existence of problematic "pockets" among small domestic banks, and state-owned commercial and national
development banks.

21. 
Some of the main issues of concern are now beginning to be tackled by the sub-region, building on
the successful cooperation achieved via ECCB with regard to on-shore banking supervision. In particular,
the OECS countries are participating in an offshore self-assessment exercise, assisted by the IMF. Actions
are also being taken to strengthen anti-money laundering legislation and close selected off-shore banks
(Antigua) and extend ECCB regulatory/supervisory powers to off-shore banks (Dominica and St. Kitts). To
strengthen on-shore banking, the ECCB has proposed amendments to its charter and to the Uniform Banking
Act (enacted in all member territories) to ensure enhanced prudential standards and stronger compliance, and
broaden ECCB's scope for corrective actions. Over the coming year, the Eastern Caribbean countries expect
to undertake a wider assessment of their financial systems, with assistance from the joint Bank-Fund
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). This assessment will review medium- and longer-term
issues, including the efficiency and quality of banking services, supervision needs and modalities, and the
implications of tightened regulation of off-shore banking for the future growth of both off-shore and on-shore
banking. The key goal would be to define the best strategy for building/maintaining a healthy industry in
order to protect the employment that has already been created in banking in the sub-region and perhaps even
increase it. In addition, there are efforts, led by the ECCB, to further deepen financial integration. For
example, the OECS countries are in the process of enacting common legislation governing insurance12 and
securities markets - which, in turn, should support the development of a union-wide securities market.

22. 
As the demands of "sunrise" industries (tourism, financial and other services, agribusiness, and some
light manufacturing) for good quality and competitively-priced infrastructure increase, there is now
growing awareness that the current pattern of inadequately unregulated monopolistic provision of
infrastructure is not optimal, whether the provider is public, quasi-public or private. The overall dearth of
technically qualified staff makes the existing approach of differing legal frameworks and separate country-
based regulatory agencies difficult to sustain, despite some systematic efforts to promote private participation
in infrastructure provision. This, in turn, has led to a new willingness on the part of governments to explore
regional solutions. Recently, an important breakthrough has been made with a regional initiative in the
telecommunications market, including the introduction of coordinated, modern telecommunications laws in
five OECS countries and the formation of a regional telecommunications regulatory agency with support
from the Bank. The imminence of competition has already brought about a rate decline in communications
costs and the regional approach has both increased bargaining power vis-a-vis private providers and brought
together a "critical mass" of scarce skilled personnel in the regional regulatory agency. Similar approaches,
building on regional regulatory frameworks and pooling of technical skills, are being explored for other
infrastructure sectors (e.g., water and electricity) and in some aspects of environmental monitoring,
management and research.

23. 
Finally, there is a need for greater diversification within the agriculture sector especially in
countries where reliance on banana remains very high (St. Lucia, St. Vincent and Dominica). Available
analysis suggests that the prospects for improving the competitiveness of the banana industry in the three
main producing islands are very limited, due to low yields from small farms on sloping lands with very
limited potential for irrigation. At the same time, even with the restructuring of the industry, and assuming
no further decline in prices, there would be a two-thirds decline in existing employment from around 35,000

12 

This effort builds on the legislation that has been in effect in St. Lucia since 1995. Insurance sector penetration is
particularly high in the OECS by international standards, partly reflecting the vulnerability of the region to hurricanes.

11

to about 6,000 full-time and 6,400 part-time jobs. This means that 12 percent of the total labor force would
lose an important source of income, together with those who benefit indirectly from the industry. In the
absence of alternative livelihoods and social safety nets this could lead to increased poverty and the collapse
of the industry could result in a direct loss of up to 6 percent of GDP. Currently, considerable efforts are
being made with assistance from the EU STABEX fund and other donors to establish appropriate
diversification and safety net schemes on the islands, but progress has been slow, due principally to weak
local capacity to move forward alternative options.

C. Human and Social Development

24. 
As referred to earlier, sub-regional growth performance of the 1980s was accompanied by steady
social development, reflecting ongoing governmental commitment to investment in human capital, both as an
intrinsic human right and as a key element of the economic diversification strategy. This emphasis has
become even more critical as the sub-region continues to increase its integration with the world economy via
new industries including tourism and financial services. While the OECS countries and Barbados have
nearly universal primary education, completion rates, quality and access are still poor at secondary level and
the countries are still far from providing to all students the basic skills necessary to ensure their entrance into
an increasingly sophisticated economy. The completion of quality secondary education is now a minimum
pre-requisite for the acquisition of the core and special skills (e.g., foreign language, computer skills, and
communications capability) needed to take advantage of economic opportunities in the sub-region's service
sectors. Achievement of this objective will require increasing the efficiency of existing education spending
as a means of freeing up resources for high quality secondary education in demanded skills, as well as
increasing partnerships/networking with other educational institutions (regionally and abroad) to enhance
curriculum content, raise evaluation standards and improve teacher training. Effective cooperation with the
private sector to encourage on-the-job training and apprenticeship schemes is also needed, but remains
rudimentary in the sub-region at this stage.

25. While health status in the sub-region is relatively good and health care services broadly adequate,
shifting epidemiological patterns -
namely the emergence of "middle-income" health problems including
chronic diseases, trauma and cancers -
are increasingly placing additional burdens on the health system for
more sophisticated treatment and care, and concomitant pressures on health expenditure requirements.
Management of these pressures will require more attention to issues of health financing and efficiencies in
service provision, including improved referral services. In this regard, closer links between the OECS and
Barbados, which has some of the best treatment facilities in the sub-region, will become increasingly
important. In addition, a new, and potentially most destructive, threat is emerging in the form of rapidly
rising rates of HIV/AIDS infection. Official estimates -
undoubtedly low -
indicate that 360,000 people
are living with FHV/AIDS in the Caribbean as a whole and that the share of people aged between 15 and
49 years infected by the virus is around 2 percent. In parts of the Eastern Caribbean (Barbados, for example)
the epidemic has spread to the general population. In other Eastern Caribbean countries, the disease is still
concentrated among population groups engaging in high-risk behavior, but it is accelerating rapidly and is
poised to strike the general population. There is now growing recognition among the sub-region's
Governments of the broad developmental catastrophe that widespread HIV/AIDS infection can be, giving
rise to a sense of urgency about tackling the disease as a matter of priority, with assistance from external
partners (see Box D).

26. 
As in most countries, social development issues in the Eastern Caribbean are closely related to
problems of unemployment and income poverty, although implementation of the Core Labor Standards is
satisfactory (for example, child labor is not a significant problem in the sub-region, and the authorities
effectively discourage discrimination in labor markets). Notwithstanding the relatively successful economic
diversification efforts in the sub-region, unemployment remains high at about 19 percent of the population in
the OECS countries (nearly 22 percent in the Windward Islands) and at about 9 percent in Barbados. While
this is to some extent a reflection of the small sizes of the Eastern Caribbean countries, it is also attributable
to inappropriate labor market policies, regulations and programs. Some of the key measures which could

12

help alleviate unemployment include: (i) increasing job flexibility, especially through revision of regulations
restricting part-time and temporary work or requiring onerous compensation for economically-driven
dismissals, (ii) establishing better labor dispute resolution mechanisms (e.g., mediation, compulsory
arbitration, etc.): (iii) promoting microenterprise schemes and targeted public works programs; and (iv)
promoting skills training, including providing incentives for the hiring of apprentices and trainees. Unlike
many other countries in the LAC region, analysis of sub-regional labor market trends by gender does not
reveal systematic patterns of discrimination against women, although there is some evidence that occupations
dominated by women tend to be somewhat lower-paid. Overall, however, unemployment is higher among
men (xvho tend to have lower skills on average, due, in turn, to higher school drop-out rates among boys).

Box D: HIV/AIDS in the Caribbean

With HIV prevalence among Caribbean adults aged 15-49 years approaching 2 percent, the Caribbean region currently
has the highest HIV prevalence rate of any world region, barring AIDS-ravaged Sub-Saharan Africa. CARJCOM
iestimates that more new cases of HIV/AIDS were reported in the region between 1995-1999 than since the start of the
iepidemic in the early 1980s -
suggesting that the spread of the virus is accelerating rapidly. Based on official
estimates, the absolute number of HIV/AIDS-affected people in the Caribbean is about 360,000, but given widespread
underreporting the actual number could well be over 500,000. The primary mode of HIV transmission among adults in
the Caribbean is unprotected heterosexual intercourse, causing the incidence of HIV/AIDS among women to rise.
Available data indicate that over one-third of HIV-affected persons are women and there are now increasing numbers of
cases of HIV-infected children, due to mother-to-child transmission.

[Until recently, the seriousness of the HIV/AIDS threat to broad socio-economic development efforts was not well
understood. As a consequence, efforts to address the epidemic were fragmented along country lines, and generally
underfunded and understaffed. In 1999, however, representatives of Caribbean governments met in Antigua to discuss
a CARICOM-led draft strategic plan aimed at defining and mounting a regional initiative to combat HIV/AIDS.
Support for the regional strategy grew upon recognition that. (i) most countries in the region are too small and/or too
poor to support a national capacity to respond to the FHV/AIDS epidemic; and (ii) that the high rates of migration of
people among Caribbean countries makes a regional approach to the problem more viable and effective than disparate
country-based approaches. For the Eastern Caribbean sub-region in particular, it was recognized that the frequent
migration of people among the countries, generally with Barbados serving as a hub, and the specific epidemiology of
HIV/AIDS transmission modes, mak-e it vital to include Barbados in any serious sub-regional effort to address the
disease in the Caribbean. This view was fiurther reinforced by the leadership role Barbados has been playing with
regard to calling attention to regional HIV/AIDS issues, and the technical capacity and sophistication it has developed
to serve as an HIV/AIDS testing and referral center for the Eastem Caribbean.

Following the 1999 meeting, a final version of the strategy, the Caribbean Regional Strategic Plan of Action for
H-VA IDS, 1999-2004, was completed in April 2000. The document highlights six major areas for coordinated regional
action:
A Advocacy, policy development and legislation
Care and support of people living with HIV/AIDS
-
Prevention of transmission of HIV/AIDS among young people
* Prevention of transmission of HI V/AIDS among vulnerable, high-risk population groups
Prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV
t. Srengthening national and regional response capabilities

.

Implementation of the 5-year plan will be overseen by the Caribbem Task Force on HINV/AIDS, under CARICOM's
leadership. The activities called for in the plan will be financed largely through existing and new programs and
projects, with technical and financial backing from a wide range of intenational donor agencies.

27. 
Unemployment is especially high among youth with low skill levels. This factor -
combined with
limited access to secondary education, high rates of school drop-out among students (especially boys) from
disadvantaged backgrounds, and changes in family structure due to migration -
has resulted in a sharp
increase in the number of youth at risk throughout the sub-region, and. indeed, the Caribbean as a whole.
Moreover, unemployed school-leavers now face increasingly severe challenges, not least the temptations of a

13

growing sub-culture of crime and drugs and of early sexual activity with the concomitant risks of contracting
sexually transmitted diseases (including HV/AIDS) and/or, for girls, becoming pregnant while still in their
pre- and early-teens. In this context, reducing the number of adolescents at risk through improved access to
relevant secondary education, jobs and preventive health initiatives, as well as complementary social
outreach efforts (training in conflict resolution, self-esteem development, community involvement initiatives,
etc.) is now a high priority in all the Eastern Caribbean countries.

28. 
Given the high levels of income volatility/vulnerability, unemployment and poverty in the sub-
region, all the Eastern Caribbean societies have relatively well-developed traditions of family and
community self-help and mutual aid. Migration has also become an important coping mechanism, with
migration rates being among the highest in the world. Migration serves both as a safety valve for the many
people who move abroad to escape unemployment/poverty and as an informal "insurance" mechanism for
their family members at home, who count on remittances from overseas relatives to tide them over hard
times. However, the "brain drain" that migration implies negatively affects institutional capacity in the
private and public sectors and may have had adverse consequences for traditional family structures, hence
contributing to the youth-at-risk issues discussed above. Formal social protection schemes are relatively
limited in scope and coverage throughout the sub-region. While social insurance plays a key role in poverty
alleviation for the elderly, the real value of benefits has diminished over time and there is no coverage of
persons employed in the informal sector. Except in Barbados, unemployment insurance schemes are non-
existent in the sub-region, and such social assistance programs as do exist tend to have high administrative
costs in relation to the (limited) population covered. In recent years, the Eastern Caribbean countries, with
assistance from the EU, DFID, the Bank and other external partners are attempting to put in place
community-based rehabilitative or income-generating safety net programs to deal with unemployment and
poverty problems arising from changing conditions for agriculture (para. 23) and through social fund
schemes aimed at community-based solutions to poverty-related problems, involving local governments,
NGOs and the beneficiaries themselves in project design and implementation.

D. Governance, Institutions and Organizational Capacity

29. 
The effective operation of the public sector is extremely important in the Eastern Caribbean's effort
to address its ambitious agenda of poverty reduction measures, given the Government's key role in creating
the enabling environment for diversified economic growth and in the regulation/provision of social services
which equip the population to avail itself of employment opportunities. By and large, the systems of
governance in all the Eastern Caribbean countries allow for reasonably equitable access to justice, services
and resources and are thus well-suited to serving the interests of the population, including furthering the
poverty reduction agenda. As previously noted, the countries of the sub-region are all stable, parliamentary
democracies and are founded on constitutions which guarantee a wide set of fundamental rights and
freedoms to the people, that are enforceable through the high court. Transitions of power have been orderly
(except briefly during 1979-83 in Grenada) and respect for the rule of law and for the judiciary is perceived
to be high. Universal adult suffrage was introduced in the 1950s and elections are generally considered fair.

30. 
Surveys on perceptions of public sector performance in the six Bank-member OECS countries show,
however, that while a few key services are perceived as "very satisfactory" (notably schools, airport
management and electricity supply), and a few as "poor" (including hospitals and police), most other services
are seen to be "average". Deficiencies in performance are largely due to problems of organizational capacity
as discussed below, but they can also be attributed, in some degree, to weaknesses in the existing
institutional environment. A key issue, in this regard, is excessive centralization of power and authority in
a few officials (principally the political executive and a few, very senior, civil servants), leading to
bottlenecks in decision-making and disempowering line managers whose authority over operational,
financial and human resource management is very limited. A second area for improvements relates to
enhancing public sector accountability for results and client service, possibly along the lines of "new public
management" initiatives. By and large, the institutional environment in the Eastern Caribbean is one which
emphasizes adherence by public officials to the letter of the laws and rules governing propriety in public

14

financial management, personal conduct and political neutrality, rather than accountability for delivering
results. While helping to maintain relatively high personal integrity, this emphasis also encourages a
cautious attitude among civil servants, as well as unwillingness to think "out-of the-box" or risk
decisions/actions which might bring negative notice. The problem is exacerbated, to some extent, by weak
disclosure and oversight mechanisms limiting the ability of opposition groups and civil society organizations
(CSOs) to enforce accountability. Moreover, civil society participation in evaluating public sector
performance remains limited.

31. 
In general, organizational capacity in the sub-region is relatively weak. For all the Eastern
Caribbean countries, as with most states, sovereignty has implied the domestic provision of public goods and
services whose fixed costs must be spread across the population. However, given the small size of the sub-
region's countries, the per capita costs for public goods and services are particularly high. The need to
undertake the same scope of functions as much larger countries, has also meant that the smaller pools of
administrators and personnel in the Eastern Caribbean governments are required to undertake an excessively
wide range of activities and available public resources become too thinly spread over the multiple activities
performed. While management and technical cadres remain in short supply, high unemployment in the sub-
region has created political pressure to proliferate jobs at the lower levels in the public sector. The resulting
pressure on the wage bill has, in turn, led to wage compression, making it harder to attract the high-skilled
personnel crucial to effective public sector performance.

32. 
Besides investments in human capital to ameliorate skills shortages, it is clear that further
sub-regional integration has substantial potential to improve governments' efficiency and effectiveness in
providing (or ensuring fairly-priced provision of) goods and services to their people and businesses.
Functional cooperation has already been achieved in a number of specific areas -
including, for example,
financial sector regulation and supervision, external relations with trade partners, nutrition and agricultural
research, medicines procurement, school examinations, and regulation of telecommunications and civil
aviation -
either on a regional basis through CARICOM or on a sub-regional level, using the ECCB or the
OECS Secretariat as bases for operations. The scope of regional and sub-regional cooperation has not,
however, been exploited to its fullest potential and the Governments are conscious of the need to further
extend cooperative arrangements, including with external assistance. In this regard, it should be noted that a
crucial first step will be the continued strengthening of sub-regional institutions as needed. For instance, the
OECS Secretariat will likely need buttressing in several areas -
including recruitment and training of
specialized staff as well as strengthening of financial management and procurement procedures and
practices.

33. 
In addition to its potential for shoring up organizational capacity in areas of scarce skills, improved
sub-regional integration is a prerequisite for enhanced aid coordination, which, in turn, could both reduce
pressure on thinly-stretched country officials and have a positive impact on the mobilization and use of
official assistance. While effective coordination among external partners is important in nearly all countries,
it is crucial in the capacity-scarce Eastern Caribbean countries. Currently, the relationships between the
individual countries and external partners operating in the sub-region can sometimes be strained, inter alia,
by: (i) the high costs to external partners of maintaining separate dialogues despite relatively small programs
with each individual country and, by the same token, the extremely high cost to thinly-stretched government
officials of having to meet separately and repeatedly with different development agency representatives
(often on the same subjects); (ii) the absence (until very recently -
see para. 34 below) of a government-
owned sub-regional strategic framework to serve as a guide and umbrella for sub-regional and national-level
external assistance activities; (iii) the lack of established "rules of the game" to reassure each Government
that sub-regional cooperation would benefit each country in a fair, transparent manner rather than result in a
reduction of support for national programs; and (iv) the high degree of discord among development partner
procedures, requirements and timetables. Ameliorating this situation is a high priority for both sub-regional
governments and the development partners themselves and a number of joint workshops and meetings have
helped to develop a set of principles and key actions for improved coordination among the countries,
between development partners and the countries and among the development partners themselves.

E. The Eastern Caribbean Development Strategy

15

34. 
In recent years, as sub-regional Governments became increasingly aware of the need for concerted
action on a number of development fronts (e.g., infrastructure, education, health, environment, financial
market development, etc.) and improved aid coordination, a decision was taken to develop a long-term
strategic "vision" and medium-term development agenda for the sub-region as a whole. In 1999, the
Governments tasked the OECS Secretariat and the ECCB with developing the vision statement and
accompanying plan, via a broad, participatory process involving the Governments, parliaments, the private
sector, civil society groups, the media, donors and other stakeholders in all member countries -
along the
lies laid out in the Comprehensive Development Framework. In initiating this task, the OECS Secretariat
and ECCB first put together a rough, draft strategy, based on a number of recent strategic and analytical
documents prepared by the Eastern Caribbean countries themselves and/or in partnership with the larger
CARICOM community and external bilateral and multilateral partners, including the Bank. This draft was
then distributed to relevant parties in each country and discussed extensively at country-specific consultative
meetings, organized by the country's Ministry of Planning. The meetings were expressly designed to solicit
the views, comments and suggestions of a wide variety of stakeholders and led to some important revisions
of the original draft. As a second step, the revised draft was distributed to, and discussed with, key regional
actors (including major development partners) such as CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC, UNDP and selected
bilateral donors. Ultimately, following another round of consultations with member Governments at the
Cabinet level, the strategy was once again discussed with civil society representatives from each country who
came together at a forum held in St. Lucia.

35. 
At the conclusion of the 18-month-long consultation process described above, a three-volume
document was issued (in November 2000) which appears to enjoy wide support and a sense of ownership
from interested parties throughout the sub-region. The scope of the strategy contained in the document is
broad, and built around ten major programs ranging from management of the external environment to the
relatively detailed aspects of strategy implementation. The core socioeconomic development priorities
contained in the strategy -
both issues and Government proposals for addressing them -
have already been
described in some detail in the preceding sections (Sections A through D), and they forrn the framework
within which the Bank and other development partners will provide assistance to the Eastern Caribbean in
the medium term. Key elements of the strategy include the following:

* Enhancing economic cooperation and macroeconomic stability through concerted action on trade and
sound fiscal and monetary policies, focusing in the short to medium term on improving fiscal
discipline and public savings (paras. 8-10);

* 

Increasing private sector-led economic growth and diversification, including through direct support
to the private sector (para 16), and indirect support for growth through improved financial services,
infrastructure and maintenance of the environmental heritage (paras. 18 and 20-22);

* Reducing vulnerability to natural phenomena through better disaster information, mitigation
measures and catastrophe insurance options (para. 19);

* Developing human capital through continued investments in better quality health and education,
especially improved access to secondary and tertiary education (paras. 24-25);

* Addressing pressing social issues, particularly chronic unemployment and problems associated with
youth (paras. 26-27); and

* Building greater organizational capacity, through public sector reform, sub-regional integration,
better aid coordination (paras. 29-33) and private sector training (para. 16).

16

It should be noted, too, that the parameters set by the regional framework are now being reflected by each
member country in its country-specific medium-term economic strategy (MTES), which is regularly
updated in the context of the CGCED. These country strategies will also help guide the precise scope and
nature of external assistance over the next few years.

III. The Eastern Caribbean-World Bank Partnership

A. Objectives of Bank Group Assistance and CAS Development Process

36. Within the framework of the sub-regional vision and strategy developed by the OECS Secretariat
and the ECCB as well as the country-specific MTES papers, the central goal of the World Bank Group's
assistance to the Eastern Caribbean sub-region for the FY02-06 CAS period is to help reduce poverty
through: (i) reduction of income insecurity (volatility) and vulnerability at aggregate and household
levels; and (ii) human and institutional development. With regard to (i), the aim would be to assist the sub-
region's countries in their efforts to promote economic diversification, focusing on reducing vulnerability to
external shocks and creating an enabling environment (including improved environmental and infrastructure
regulation/management) for continued or increased private investment in sunrise industries. With regard to
(ii), the Bank's objective would be to assist the Governments in the direct provision of services to the
population (e.g., public health and education) where this is appropriate, and, in parallel, to help strengthen
the broader functioning of the public sector as it copes with the many legislative, regulatory and supervisory
issues arising from new economic and social challenges.

37. 
The objectives noted above (and the Bank assistance strategy itself) were identified via a process of
consultation with the OECS Governments, civil society, sub-regional organizations, and development
partners, following the issuance of the three-volume OECS vision and plan. Discussions with the various
stakeholders were centered around a CAS Concept Note prepared by the Bank, which laid out the basic
outline of a proposed strategy for the Bank in the Eastern Caribbean. Key inputs for the concept note were
the draft OECS Development Strategy, the country Medium Term Economic Strategy Papers, the Small
States Task Force Report, and analytical work undertaken for the last two CGCED meetings (June 1998 and
June 2000). In advance of drafting this CAS document, the Bank did three rounds of consultations around
the CAS concept note. The first round (December 2000) involved discussions with the Governments, the
sub-regional organizations and the main development partners. The concept note was revised based on their
inputs, and, in March 2001, a second round of consultations was held with the Governments (in almost all
cases at the Prime Minister level), civil society representatives, and sub-regional organizations. These
meetings were accompanied by a series of Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) meetings, one in
each OECS country, to refine lessons emerging from implementation of the ongoing program. Subsequently,
a final discussion with development partners and sub-regional organizations was held at an aid coordination
meeting in St. Kitts, also in March (see Annex C for more details on the consultation process). Through this
process, a general agreement emerged from the countries, sub-regional organizations, and other international
agencies on the Bank's strategic exercise for the Eastern Caribbean. All parties agreed that the Bank's
proposed CAS objectives, bases for selecting among the many possible areas of intervention pertaining to the
objectives (including past experience, areas of comparative technical advantage, the roles of other
development agencies, and operational efficiency considerations), and the broad outlines of the medium-term
assistance strategy were broadly appropriate, given the sub-region's priorities. These selectivity
considerations and the program itself are discussed further in the remainder of this Section.

B. Progress Since the Last CAS

38. 
Progress on overall goals. As already discussed in detail in Section II of this report, the OECS
countries' performance was satisfactory overall during the last CAS period -
FY96-2000. Growth, though
not as high as the rates achieved in the 1980s, was restored from the lowest levels recorded in the first years

17

of the 1990s; monetary and fiscal management was generally sound;13 economic diversification deepened;
greater attention began to be paid to infrastructure needs and environmental concerns (though much more
needs to be done in both areas); and continued progress was made in the provision of social services. Less
clear, given the absence of good quality and consistent household level data (among countries and over time
within countries) is the precise impact of these achievements on the incidence and severity of poverty in the
sub-region. While, in general, it would be reasonable to assume that poverty was reduced from its pre-1995
level as a result of improved growth and better human capital, this may not have been the case everywhere
and among all population groups due to the severe shocks sustained by some of the countries in terms both of
natural disasters and the changes in EU trade preferences for ACP producers of agricultural commodities. In
turn, this is at least part of the reason for the more focused attention on poverty and income insecurity
proposed in this CAS for the FY02-06 period.

39. 
Bank Assistance Modality. Although the substantive objectives of Bank assistance remained
basically unchanged over the last CAS implementation period, there was a significant shift in the modality of
Bank assistance to the OECS from the strategy contained in the original CAS document. The 1995 CAS
focused on a two-pronged programmatic strategy involving: (i) channeling the bulk of Bank assistance to the
sub-region via the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) in an effort to increase efficiency; and (ii) limited
direct lending to the OECS countries in areas where CDB's capacity was not fully developed. The Bank-
CDB arrangement was designed as a wholesale-retail partnership, with the Bank providing CDB with lines
of credit for on-lending to the OECS countries for a fixed administrative fee. The CDB was to have focused
principally on infrastructure projects as well as on key pieces of economic analysis with which it had already
gained substantial experience in the region.14 Direct Bank lending in the OECS was to have focused on sub-
regional projects in sectors where CDB's capacity was not fully developed -
primarily basic education,
flexible emergency response and preparedness, waste management and economic diversification.

40. 
In 1998, the Bank's OECS clients requested a greater direct Bank involvement in the region and
expressed concerns about the Bank-CDB arrangement, especially in view of slow commitments (and
disbursements) from the lines of credit provided by the Bank to CDB for on-lending to the countries. Indeed,
CDB V (US$32 million), which was approved by the Board in FY90, closed at the end of 1998 with
US$14 million remaining undisbursed and CDB VI (US$31 million), which was approved in FY94 had no
commitments in 4 years and was cancelled in June 1998. An OED evaluation of both loans15 also found that
performance had been less than satisfactory in terms of the Bank's development objectives in the OECS.
This finding, the need to be responsive to the Governments' wishes, and a growing recognition that future
involvement in infrastructure needed to become increasingly focused on the regulatory and institutional
aspects where the Bank has a relatively greater comparative advantage, led the Bank to agree to a change of
strategy. As a result, the Bank increased its direct lending to the OECS countries, while maintaining a strong
partnership with CDB. Direct Bank involvement was also facilitated by the creation of more flexible lending
instruments that have resulted in a reduction in the costs of lending (see para. 54). The change in strategy
from the original CAS was communicated to the Board via a short note entitled "OECS Economic
Developments and Bank Program Implementation" that accompanied the Project Appraisal Document of the
OECS Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management Program (December 2, 1998).

41. What worked well... In terms of project implementation experience in the OECS, successes were
registered in a number of areas of Bank involvement including: (i) education - with the successful
implementation and attainment of development objectives of three nationally-phased operations designed to
strengthen the quality of primary education and expand access to secondary education. These projects form

13 

Although, as previously discussed, fiscal slippages have emerged in Antigua, Dominica and St. Kitts in the past 1-2 years, a
reform program is being put in place under ECCB leadership.
At the time of the writing of the last CAS (in about February 1995) there were three active CDB lines of credit - CDB IV
(approved in FY87 for US$6 million), CDB V (approved in FY90 for US$32 million), and CDB VI (approved in FY 94 for US$31

14 

million).

'5 

Performance Audit Report, Caribbean Development Bank V (Loan 3200, Credit 2135) and Caribbean Development Bank
VI (Loan 3722, Credit 2640), Operations Evaluation Department, May 20, 2000.

18

the basis for a sub-regional follow-up project which 
is now well 
into 
its design phase;
(ii)telecommunications reform -
the passage of coordinated, consistent telecommunications laws in
five OECS countries and the steps taken to establish a single regulatory agency are already having a positive
impact on telecommunications costs; and (iii) waste management -
although implementation has not moved
as rapidly as anticipated, significant achievements have been made in terms of new legislation and
completion of work on physical infrastructure aspects. Solutions to problems of coordination and heightened
Bank supervision led to increasing disbursements after FY97, increasing the disbursement ratio from 3.7
percent at end-FY97 to 22.7 percent at end-FYOO (see Table 3). However, continued careful portfolio
monitoring will be needed to ensure that implementation risk levels do not increase and that the
implementation progress and development objectives of the projects are satisfactorily fulfilled. The
implementation of an IFC-financed capital market development project during the last CAS period was also
satisfactory. In particular, IFC's equity investment in the Eastem Caribbean Home Bank (ECHB) has been
performing well -
ECHB's purchases of mortgages from primary lenders are creating liquidity for
additional mortgages and its bond issues to support its portfolio are providing an asset class for long-term
investors, such as life insurance companies.

42. What went poorly... Despite adequate government ownership of the various Bank-supported
initiatives in the OECS, systemic and project-specific issues remain, which have hampered the
implementation of the portfolio. For many projects, the lack of capacity in the countries at the project level
has resulted in weak procurement and financial management practices. Moreover, overall weak project
management has led, inevitably, to slow implementation and increased the risk that the projects may not
meet their development objectives by their original closing dates. Three of the disaster management projects
are examples where delays in loan/credit effectiveness and weak day-to-day management is likely to
necessitate one-year extensions for the completion of project activities, with likely repercussions for the
timely development of follow-up interventions in the sector. The number of projects in the portfolio
decreased from 10 to 7 between FY96 and June 2001, whereas commitments at-risk, which spiked in FY98
and were reduced significantly following the closing of CDB V & VI, have increased again in the last two
years.

Table 3 - OECS: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance, a FY95-FY01

No. of projects under supervisionC 

Commitments (US$ millions) 
Commitments at-riskd (%) 
Average project age (years) 

Disbursement ratio' (%) 
Undisbursed amt. begin FY 
(US$ millions)
Disbursed in FY (US$ millions) 

Source: World Bank data

1995 

8 

110.2' 
2.8 
3.9 

12.5 
64.4 

8.0 

1996 

10 

126.3' 
15.2 
3.2 

9.2 
77.3 

7.1 

1997 

8 

114.2' 
56.3 
3.2 

3.7 
97.6 

3.6 

1998 

8 
11 4 .9 f 
70.1 
3.9 

9.8 
90.1 

8.9 

1999 

6 

70.1 
0.0 
2.9 

16.6 
42.9 

7.1 

2000 

8 

79.45 
17.0 
3.1 

22.7 
50.2 

2 0 0 1 b

7

82.5 
6.1
3.9

12.8
49.3

11.4 

6.3

a/ Indicators are year end unless otherwise noted.
b/ As of May 7, 2001.
c/ Projects that are part of sub-regional initiatives are grouped into programs and counted as one project (e.g., Disaster Management Program).
d/ Defined as commitments of projects with unsatisfactory development objective or implementation progress ratings and/or projects which, while
being rated as satisfactory, have been 'flagged' with three or more risk indicators.
e/ Disbursement Ratio: measures disbursements in the fiscal year (July I - June 30) relative to the outstanding undisbursed amount at the beginning
of the fiscal year.
f Includes ongoing lending through CDB V & VI for countries throughout the Caribbean region.
g/ Includes ongoing Climate Adaptation project for countries throughout the Caribbean region.

43. 
Summary of Lessons from Recent Portfolio Performance. The Bank's portfolio in the OECS is
fairly young, with an average implementation period of 3.9 years as of May 2001. Although no formal
evaluations of the projects have been completed, a number of systemic problems have been identified as

19

discussed above, through careful monitoring of the portfolio, consultations with the project Task Managers,
and recent Country Portfolio Performance Review meetings with project managers and senior officers in all
the OECS countries with ongoing Bank projects. A number of issues and lessons were drawn through this
process, which have helped shape this CAS and will be considered in future project design. These include
the following:

Implementation Capacity and Pooling of Resources: Throughout the OECS there are examples of
strong and weak implementation capacity and practices within each country, especially in terms of
procurement and financial management systems. One possible method to address implementation
capacity concerns is through pooling of the resources of different implementing units on a sub-
regional basis. This would establish a core capacity for consistent procurement and financial
management systems as knowledge is shared, duplication reduced, and capacity increased.

* Simple Proiects: Because institutional capacity amongst the Ministries and project implementation
units is limited, projects must be simple, clearly defined, and geared to achieving clear and targeted
policy objectives. In addition, well defined institutional strengthening components, including clear
procedures, need to be integrated into all new projects.

• Financial Management: Strengthening the financial management of projects is crucial. The
Dominica and Grenada Basic Education Reform Projects were successful in this area. Replicating
this experience in new lending operations will result in strengthened financial management
outcomes.

* Procurement: Procurement expertise is weak and important differences exist among countries in the
rules and procedures governing procurement - which should be reconciled if OECS-wide
approaches are to be successfully implemented. Sharing of experience among Project
Implementation Units (PIUs), training of procurement personnel and selective technical assistance
(preferably from within the region) should be considered key elements of project development to
avoid implementation delays downstream.

* Participation of stakeholders: Incorporating the active participation of all stakeholders including
municipalities, local governments and relevant Ministries from the earliest stage of the project is
critical to ensuring sustainability, especially with regard to the operation and maintenance of
physical infrastructure and facilities.

* External Assistance coordination: Since the Bank's program will remain selective, effective
coordination of external assistance is critical to achieving the sub-region's policy objectives.

C. Coordination with Development Partners

44. 
The Bank Group's program is only a small part of a complex mosaic of externally-assisted
programs supported by a large number of development partners (see Table 4). Besides the Bank, the CDB,
CIDA, DFID, the EU, the UN system and USAID have the largest assistance programs to the OECS and for
most of them, their programs are facilitated by regional offices based in Barbados.16 The CDB currently has
an ongoing lending program, targeted primarily to the individual OECS countries, of 44 projects totaling
US$282 million, of which US$177 million is undisbursed. In addition, CIDA (13 projects for US$50
million), DFID (18 projects for US$27 million), the UNDP (various projects totaling about US$10 million
per year) and USAID (six projects for US$17 million) have maintained a sub-regional focus in their
assistance efforts and operate through sub-regional and regional institutions to the extent feasible. Finally,
there are a number of regional and country-specific operations supported by the European Union. The total

16 

The development partners based in Barbados (CDB, CIDA, DFID and UTNDP) have formed several thematic groups
covering areas such as poverty, governance, disaster mitigation, and environment, etc. with the objective of coordinating their

interventions in the OECS.

20

amount of EU support is an estimated US$356 million, including the STABEX funds to the Windward
Islands, and the regional CARIFORUM program (Table 4 provides a listing by sector of the areas in which
the major donors are and/or will be active in the sub-region).

45. 
A broad consensus among the sub-regional organizations and the development partners active in the
OECS is that the coordination of the various assistance programs should be done according to three
principles: (i) coherence at the policy level; (ii) sub-regional integration; and (iii) harmonization of
procedures. The OECS development strategy (see paras. 34 and 35) could serve as the basis for achieving
this principle. In this context, a key aspect of the Bank Group's strategy will be to continue and reinforce
developing complementarities with other agencies involved in the OECS. More specifically, the Bank will
agree on a common set of emerging development priorities with the other partners and try to develop
mnechanisms for lowering transactions costs for clients and preparation costs for agencies. In turn, this will
involve harmonization of policies, procedures and requirements, to the extent feasible, and greater
selectivity and clearer division of labor in lending and non-lending services. Already, the Bank is
cooperating with some of the major bilateral and multilateral development partners in a number of ways: (i)
cooperation on a broad sectoral basis -for example, in education reform and development where the Bank
and DFID have a joint strategy for assistance to the education sector in all OECS members, or the water
sector in St. Lucia where the CDB and Bank have established a close partnership; (ii) co-financing of
selected projects -
for example, with CDB on the Catastrophe Insurance Project, or with the EU, EIB and
CDB otn the OECS Solid Waste Project; (iii) collaboration on up-stream analytical work -
for example with
the Eti on the study of Tourism and the Environment presented last year at the CGCED; and (iv) possible

participation in the Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance Center (CARTAC) initiative with the IMF and
several other partners. CARTAC wvould provide assistance to the countries in the sub-region (as well as to
other Caribbean countries) in three major areas: fiscal, including public debt, management; monetary and
financial sector policy; and compilation, processing and analysis of economic and social statistics.

46. 

Given the CDB's important regional role and in-depth local knowledge, the Bank remains committed

to partnering with the CDB in assisting the sub-region, while, in parallel, assisting the institution to develop

expertise in areas where the Bank is currently relatively stronger. The goal for the FY02-06 CAS period is to
achieve a closer partnership between the Bank and the CDB in place of the former sub-contracting
relationship. As such, the Bank and CDB propose to work in a collaborative fashion in all the main areas of
assistance activity as follows: (i) in lending -via 
co-financing or parallel financing in areas such as safety
net development, infrastructure reform, catastrophic insurance and other disaster mitigation measures; (ii) in
economic and sector work -through 
provision of joint support to the countries in the development of their
Medium-term Econonmic Strategy Papers and joint or complementary work on poverty; (iii) in aid
coordination -- especially through the steering committee for the CGCED and through the development of
joint background papers, agendas, etc. for the meetings themselves; and (iv) in training -through 
inclusion
of CDB staff in Bank staff training programs in Washington, organization of regional training courses at

CDB headquarters in Barbados, and CDB participation in the Bank-organized Executive Development

Program for its managers.

47. 

Regional and sub-regional external assistance coordination mechanisms. Apart from case-by-
case aid coordination and institutional partnering as described above, the Bank plays (and will continue to
play) an important role in the broader regional and sub-regional aid coordination effort via two main
mechanisms: (i) co-chairmanship with the region of the CGCED, historically a major forum for coordination
of assistance to all the Bank's member countries in the Caribbean which is held once every two years; and
(ii) participation in, and support to, formal sub-regional aid coordination meetings, held at least twice a year.
Created in 1977, the CGCED has evolved in line with changing needs in the region and has progressively
become a major policy forum to address challenges facing the region. It is supported by an active regional
policy dialogue and growing ownership by the Caribbean countries. The agenda for each meeting as well as
the background work is developed in close coordination with the main regional institutions (CARICOM,
CDB, and the UWI) and the Caribbean countries through the Committee of Caribbean Member Countries.
Sub-regional coordination, too, is being promoted in partnership with the main sub-regional institutions, 
the

21

Table 4t Current mtr,x 

of the OverallEfierte 

al Assistatce 

to the OECS* (USS thotas nds)

Antigua &S 

it 

& 

St Vincent

Specific 

Interventions 

arhada 
Barbuda 

Doiica 

Genada 

St Kitts & St Lucia 
Nevis 

& The 
Grenadines

OECS 

Development 

Partners

Stability-Growth 

INF, CDB,WB

Vulnerabilits 

Measures 

3 

5,l 14 

CDR, DFID, 

IriF, UNDP, WB

Di,etsification 

of the Production 

Base 

4,575 

6,01 3 

1,300 

1 9,640 

15,160 

CDB. CTDA. EU. 

lSIAID. Wt

, 

Private 

Sector Drvelepmc.t 

wntl 

trade) 

30,040 

C(IDA, 

PU. 

IFf

Industrial 

De,elopament 

4,400 

5,200 

CDB

F 

_ 

Fi nantat. 

sector 

Referna 

8,430 

1IDA, 

INI, 

UNDP, WI

Ge,r.enal 

lfrastructure 

(tnans 

, roads, 

etc 

I 

10,000 

11.510 

24,010 

25,253 

CDB, 

EU, France

E 

= 

5 
Tourismsr Natural 

Ei 

Resource Moongeerent 

2,786 

9,422 

3,660 

23 1 

66 

34,370 

all 

lenrlopment 

parlees

Sn 

E 

a S 

Solid Waste 

5,600 

5,100 

8,870 

6,590 

9,574 

8,330 

5,220 

CDt,. DFID, EU, WB

WaValef and Serage 

8,243 

11,620 

3,843 

3,254 

CDB, 

EU, Ffnce

mEacrgenc, Respnn,e 

1,000 

C'DB, 

"IDA 

)FtIP 

tYNDP, U'SAItD

= 

i- 

Disaster 

Nlatigation 

27,106 

19.500 

17,223 

9,805 

500 

1304 

Cl)B, DFID,T UNDP, 

tJSAID, WB

Catastrophe 

lnstarancc 

CDB, Wit

Rural 

Pevelonipmeot 

915 

25,100 

6,405 

28,405 

24,705 

CDDB. DFID. El 

, IFAD, UNDP

,2 

Education 

4Pra 

ary ar.d Secoodarvl 

12,760 

10,955 

7,700 

1 1,180 

13,390 

9,553 

12,575 

CDHI. CIDA, 

Dl IV. Et, 

S5 B

_7Ed-ation 

(Ternary) 

4,575 

915 

1,000 

5,490 

1 5,301 

CDIt. E

= 

t 

i 

General 

llealth 

1,125 

915 

5,490 

10,065 

1,830 

3,660 

DFID, 

1'1U

AIDS Prreentaon 

and 1 rearttent 

8,030 CIDA 

DFID. 

Fl. 

PAFO 

tlNA 

lDli. 

t'S,11., 

W B WIIO

S

i 

2 

.si 

Sacial Safet, Nets'Gender 

Fquanta 

10,0t5 

3,660 

)15 

910 

CIDA 

Ft'. 

INDP

s 

Comm-ailo 

D_ eloper.ten 

122 

8,235 

6,405 

6 

CDBl CIDA, DIFID. UNDP

7 

,i 

aiU 

Paiatc 

Sector D)cerloprent 

157 

2,745 

397 

5,400 

5,0,60 

15.284 

C IWa. DFID. EU, UNDP, WE

= 

c 

c 

NG0D Support 

1,802 

CIDA 

rDlID

E ______ 

_______- 

uviin 

Jdlicr31 Ref-o 

500 

5,170 

(IDA, 

U.SAID

, 

0 

unds 

Ea 

tr-no 

t

5

rcoramnrig c 

Ft(EI' 

2745 

1'.720 

4,575 

2.745 

24.705 

10,065 

Fl

L i ines 

of Credit 

., Nationa 

Itenclayns 

errp Banks 

4,225 

15,100 

0,500 

10,720 

26,625 

5,000 

CDP

S-cn 

Itl DeRparP ent to ahc CIt D 

2,020 

15FID

u .stand 

ing -Ol-li atInrDts 

for caraan 
-

pr- 

aJt, ard act-an 

ar ns 
, 

ttarch 

2001

22

ECCB and the OECS Secretariat. Following a successful sub-regional aid coordination meeting in March
2001 -on 
the occasion of the completion of the OECS development strategy and preparation activities for
this CAS -
participants expressed keen interest in a continuation of this forum on a twice-yearly basis as a
key building block of the effort to coordinate specific external assistance programs in a manner supportive of
country and sub-regional priorities.

D. Bank Group Assistance to the Eastern Caribbean in FY02-06

48. 
The Existing Program. Since 1998, with the start of the effort to foster a closer, more direct
partnership with its client countries in the OECS, the scope of the Bank's work program in the region has
expanded substantially in relative terms. From a relatively narrow focus on physical infrastructure projects
in the 1995-97 period, our current ongoing work program targets a broader range of the many sub-regional
and national challenges the countries face, such as health, secondary education, insurance, disaster
mitigation, environmental regulation, governance and institutions, and creation of a competitive
telecommunications market. New projects (discussed below) for upcoming fiscal years (FY02-06) will be
aimed at meeting new challenges (e.g., HIV/AIDS), and supporting the achievements obtained through
current activities, in line with the two general themes discussed in the preceding section.

49. 
In terms of AAA activities and knowledge services, the Bank has been working on several
analytical reports of direct relevance to the Eastern Caribbean. These can be divided into three categories.
The first covers the work on Small States, which has led to follow-up reports on catastrophic risk
management, consumption volatility, and information technology. The second comprises technical papers on
four key themes -tourism 
and the environment, risk diversification, governance, and education -
that
were discussed together with the broader-ranging "Caribbean Vision 2020" paper at the 2000 CGCED
meeting. The Bank will continue to look for ways to operationalize the recommendations of these technical
papers, in collaboration with other agencies. Still in the context of the CGCED, the Bank provided technical
assistance for the preparation of the Medium-Term Strategy Papers. The third consists of the OECS
Institutional and Organizational Capacity Review, which explores ways to enhance public sector institutional
arrangements and organizational capacity for provision of good governance and the delivery of high-quality
public services at the lowest possible cost. Also, in preparing the CAS, AAA resources were devoted to two
important activities for the sub-region: a Procurement Assessment (CPAR) and a Financial Management
Assessment (CFAA). See Annex B4 for a complete list of all relevant AAA activities (both OECS-specific
and Caribbean-wide).

50. 
Proposed Bank Lending Program and Terms. The proposed FY02-06 Bank lending program to
the OECS countries builds on the existing program and would entail total commitments of about US$100-
110 million, including about US$55 million from IBRD and about US$40 million from IDA and two GEF
projects for a sum of approximately US$12 million. Of the current five OECS borrowers, four are eligible
for IDA funds, blended at about /2-l/2 with IBRD resources, while St. Kitts is an IBRD-only country. For the
proposed HIV/AIDS operation, Barbados would likewise be eligible only for IBRD funds and no further
lending to Barbados is expected. While it is not envisioned that Antigua and Barbuda would have access to
Bank financing, this would not preclude the country's participation in one or more Bank-supported projects
under which it could receive resources directly from another development partner cofinancing the project. In
setting the parameters of the proposed lending program, the following factors, among others, were taken into
account: (i) limitations on IDA funds and the intense demand from low-income countries; and (ii) the
absorptive capacity on the part of sub-regional borrowers, bearing in mind that past lending limits for the
OECS were not reached. On a country basis, resources are allocated according to factors such as readiness
and responsiveness, need, and project design, and in processing the future lending program care will be taken
to ensure that the requisite support for project preparation is made available to the countries in order to offset
any capacity limitations in this regard. For the five borrowing OECS member countries and Barbados,
creditworthiness indicators -
net international reserves, debt-to-GDP, and debt service to exports of goods
and non-factor services -
have been, and are projected to remain, stable and within reasonable/comfortable
ranges. In particular, net international reserves (NIR) are expected to continue accumulating in virtually all

23

countries. However, despite the good overall economic and balance of payments prospects, creditworthiness
could be negatively affected by extraordinary natural-disaster-related losses or by larger-than-usual public
spending (often also a consequence of natural disasters) -
see paras. 58-59 below.

51. 
Bank Assistance Program Directions. The Bank's proposed assistance program for the sub-region
in the next five years would be clearly focused on the overarching goal of poverty reduction.17 As
described in the CAS objectives section (para. 36), objectives would be organized under the broad strategic
themes of: (i) reducing income insecurity and vulnerability, and (ii) human and institutional development,
consistent with the evidence and priorities discussed in Section II. Given the extensive assistance provided
by other development partners with substantial knowledge of the sub-region, such as the CDB, the EU,
CIDA, and the DFID, the specific areas of intervention included in the CAS program have been determined
selectively based on: (i) Bank expertise and comparative advantage; and (ii) areas not effectively covered by
other development partners. As a result, the Bank proposes not to become directly engaged in some
important areas which are being well-supported by other partners. For instance, despite their importance to
the overall development and poverty reduction effort, the Bank proposes not to focus on agricultural
diversification and rural safety nets given that these are amply supported by the EU (para. 23) and a number
of other donors. Similarly, the Bank proposes to defer to other donors' already-substantial presence in the
tertiary education area. Such selectivity is essential to avoid duplication of effort with other partners as well
as to ensure that Bank activities are complementary to and supportive of the private sector without replacing
it. As such, it is envisaged that the Bank would play a catalytic role, both in the provision of finance (where
this is needed), and in the provision of policy analysis and help with capacity-building. In this role, our
intention is to focus only on areas where the Bank Group has clear comparative advantage, and to seek,
wherever possible, to catalyze the efforts of others.

52. 
In general, the proposed program favors a sub-regional approach in our lending and AAA work for
the OECS countries, with implications for lending instrumentation (see para. 54 below). In addition, there
are some programs and initiatives whose impact and sustainability can be further improved by the
incorporation of other countries in the wider Caribbean region. In such cases, activities in the Eastern
Caribbean might be undertaken within the umbrella of a region-wide initiative, but would remain key
components of the Bank's assistance program for the Eastern Caribbean Overall, the focus on application of
the sub-regional (or regional) approach is predicated on the following rationale: (i) it would enhance the
overall impact and/or the design and implementation of a program; (ii) it would maximize the impact of the
scarce specialized human resources in the sub-region; (iii) it would improve the cost-effectiveness of Bank
services by spreading the fixed costs of preparing and monitoring projects or programs across a larger
number of beneficiary countries; and (iv) it would help the countries to move towards sub-regional
integration. Care would be taken in the design of regional or sub-regional projects to structure financing in a
way that would ensure that IBRD/IDA resources would not indirectly fund ineligible or non-borrowing
countries and/or that IDA resources would not indirectly fund IBRD-only OECS countries.

53. 
The main activities included in the assistance program are shown in Table 5, grouped in accordance
with the program objective they support. More information on program activities, especially their linkages to
strategic objectives, is given below. Proposed Bank-supported initiatives to reduce income insecurity and
vulnerability are grouped into two main categories as follows:

* The first of these -
creating/maintaining a suitable macroeconomic environment for growth and
poverty reduction -
has at its core a focus on improvingfiscalperformance in the OECS countries
via two AAA activities (FY02-03) aimed at analyzing public expenditure issues in each of the
countries. The proposed studies would complement the IMF's Article IV analyses by taking a more
detailed look at the composition of public expenditures and recommending improvements with the
overall aim of promoting higher public savings in a manner consistent with development goals. In

17 

Lending would be limited to five OECS countries (Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts, St. Lucia and St. Vincent) whereas the
coverage for selected AAA activities would extend over the whole sub-region.

24
Table 5: Proposed Base Case Bank Assistance Program a/ FY02-06
FY03 
FY04 

FY05 

FY02 

FY06

Public 
Expenditure 
Analysis IIStd

Business
Environmenit

Poverty 
Assessment I 

Poverty Assessment
11

Public Expeniditure 
Analysis I 

Improving Social 
Statistics (MECOVI) 

Financial Sector 
Assessments (i) 
OECS, and (ii) 
Barbados 

_t _ 

ti l 

(19 InCe~nagtjg. Technical 
Assistance to 
Water (SLC) 

Mtaet.asl 

My <4 a 0 i i X ... S 9 X > 

. g; 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~(OECS)

Mgt 

-: 

R 

Disaster 
e t Management 
(SVG) 

Regional 
Comprehensive 
Disaster Mitigation" 

Specially Managed 
Areas (GRN/SLC) 
(GEF) 
Catastrophic Risk 
Management/ 
Insurance Reform 
(OFCS)

Regional Env. 
Mgmt (OECS) 

Economic 
Valuation and 
Eiiv. Mgnmt. 

Stage 11: Adapt. To 
Climate Change 
(Caribbean) (GEF) 

Financial
Sector
Strengthening

(OECS)

Regional
Regulatory
Strengthening

Specially Managed
Areas (DOM/SKN/
SVG) (GEF)
Disaster
Management
Program 11 (OECS)

Education 
Development 
(DOM/SKN/ SLC) 

P 
rHIV/AIDS 
Programn 
(GRN/SKN/ SLC)

Youth and Social 
Development" 

Education 
Development 
(GRN/SVG) 

_______________ 

HIV/AIDS Programt 
(DOM/SVG)

Educational
Achievement
in the
Caribbean

______________ 

.

Review of Social
Security/Social
Safety Net
Mechanisms

Health Financing

, 

iWb iqB 
: 

.

,Mi 

z 

`5 

35.5 

Completion of OECS 
Inst. and Org. 
X : ............. 
Capacity Review
CGCED; and 
(2) MTES6 
(2) MTESd' 

~~~(1) 

_ 2 _~ ' 14.3 

9 

26.0 

11.4 

7 

Public Sector
Reform (OECS)

v 

18.0 

4.8 

9 

(1) CGCED; and 
(2) MTESv1

________ 

(I OE;and
()ME

12.0 

4.8 

10 

15.0

4.8

10

a, Project.s ths are poaf ostbgregionalinitivie 
(e.g. horiontialAPLs) are grouped ino programs atid counrted as -ote projeci (e.g. Edcation Reform Program). he l)isaDser Ma-agement project (FT02) ishe las phase of an ongoing snb-regiooalprojec appro ed in FY99.
bi Unless ,toiedotheruise. al 
actieiiies wouldfocus ot the sc Bank-membr GELScounies. Selected atiities 
(public expesidtureatd povertyan1alyses) w.old be undertaket in mo phases, coveringthree GECS couriesi 
each phase.
.' OECSstdes 
to be carried out as part of .ider Cariban regi.nal analysisforihe Caibban Groupfor Cooperation in EcomnmicDevelopmeti (CGCE'D).
d Medium Term Economic Strtegies

25

parallel with this effort, and in coordination with CDB, CIDA, and UNDP, the Bank would help
countries to better monitor and analyze poverty by strengthening capacity for monitoring social
indicators (via the "MECOVI" program) in FY02, followed by the conduct of Poverty Assessments
for each OECS country (with the countries grouped in two phases in FY04 and FY06). The
assessments, which would be undertaken in close cooperation with local partners, the CDB, and
other interested organizations (e.g., UNDP), would help provide a better understanding of the nature
and scope of poverty, the poverty impact of existing development priorities, and the main policy and
programmatic changes needed to accelerate poverty reduction. In parallel, as part of the continuing
effort to better understand and support the sources and dynamics of economic growth in the OECS, a
joint Bank/IFC/MIGA initiative is planned to study the sub-regional environment for private
business development (FY05) and recommend changes as appropriate.

* The second category under the theme of reducing income insecurity concerns supporting econonic
diversification including helping to ameliorate some of the emerging bottlenecks/issues related to
sunrise industries identified in Section II of this report (paras. 17-23). Taking into account the
activities being supported by other partners, Bank assistance would be targeted to four key areas of
public sector activity related to encouraging private sector investment. These are: (i)financial sector
development -
principally through the conduct in FY02 of financial sector assessments for the
OECS and Barbados respectively and a follow-up operation (in FY05) to help implement key
reforms in the OECS countries; (ii) increasing the efficiency of infrastructure provision -
specifically through two lending operations aimed at strengthening the regulatory framework (legal
and institutional) for water in St. Lucia in FY021 8 and for the establishment of a sub-regional
approach to the regulation and supervision of telecommunications, power, and water and sanitation
(FY05); (iii) improving the management of environmental resources both as a means of preserving
the natural heritage and supporting sustained tourism growth -
via two GEF-funded operations
(FY03 and FY06) to promote sustainable management of selected environmentally-sensitive marine
and terrestrial areas, conduct of a study on economic valuation and environmental management
(FY04), and Bank lending for the creation of a coordinated sub-regional legal, regulatory and
institutional framework for environmental management (FY04); and (iv) helping to mitigate disaster
risks -
by extending the ongoing OECS disaster management program to St. Vincent (FY02),
undertaking a detailed analysis of disaster mitigation needs (FY02) followed by a lending operation
to help implement recommendations (FY06), and supporting a catastrophe insurance operation
aimed at promoting risk-pooling across countries (FY03) as well as a GEF-funded operation to
strengthen the monitoring of climate change (FY04). Direct Bank Group financing to the private
sector would be channeled through IFC (see paras. 56-57). While diversification in agriculture is a
critical component of reducing poverty and income insecurity, the Bank would not seek to be
involved in this area given the substantial presence of EU and a number of other development
partners.

Proposed Bank activities in support of human and institutional development are as follows:

* 

In the area of human developnent, the Bank's activities can be grouped into three main categories.
The first involves continued support for education with a focus on improving quality and access at
the secondary level via lending operations in FY02 and FY03 and a policy note on educational
achievement in FY03. Activities in the second category, health, focus on lending for HIV/AIDS in
FY02 and FY03 in the first instance (given the urgency of the AIDS threat) but will be followed by a
study of health financing (FY06) in an effort to help improve the cost-effectiveness of the health
system as a whole. This work will be closely coordinated with WHO/PAHO, which is working to
build consensus to translate health systems and services research into policy development, as well as
to develop a framework for health financing reform. In the area of social development and social

18 

This would be the only project in the program which is not part of an OECS-wide approach, but is included due to past
Bank commitment to assist St. Lucia in privatizing its loss-making water company. Lessons from the operation will also help guide
the FY05 Regional Regulatory Strengthening Project.

26

protection, two AAA activities are planned on youth-at-risk and safety nets in FY02 and FY05
respectively. The first of these will be undertaken as part of a wider regional study, while the
second, which would cover labor market conditions, pension system design and social assistance
programs, would focus primarily on the OECS.

* The proposed program for institutional development focuses on helping to improve sub-regional
capacity in two ways: directly, through analysis of OECS public sector management issues via the
CFAA, CPAR, and Institutional and Organizational Capacity Review as well as the planned public
expenditure analysis (FY02 and FY03) and subsequent support for operationalization of
recommendations via a lending operation in FY04; and indirectly through support for improved
coordination of external support (in turn reducing pressure on limited organizational capacity) via
co-chairing of biannual donor coordination CGCED meetings and support for the preparation of
country-specific medium-term economic strategies to serve as a framework for assistance.

54. 
Bank Lending Instruments. In keeping with the emphases on sub-regional approaches, conserving
scarce institutional capacity and realizing efficiencies in terms of overall costs, the recent trend has been for
the Bank to group similar operations under sub-regional umbrella mechanisms, while still shaping each
project to meet the particular needs of each country. Implementing projects in this fashion encourages
cost-effectiveness and sub-regional integration, pooling resources from the member countries to allow them
to reach national and sub-regional priorities. The process has also involved some innovation to adapt the
Bank's new instruments to better suit sub-regional goals, as illustrated below:

* "Horizontal" Adaptable Program Loans (APL)1 9 that put forward a sub-regional strategy, but
address the particular needs of each country. Each country joins the program when it is ready.
Examples include the OECS Disaster Mitigation Program and the planned Education Reform
Program;

-

Investment projects (usually Learning and Innovation Loans) that address a certain problem in one
country and can be successfully applied "off the shelf' to other countries in the sub-region who
request it. An example is the St. Lucia Poverty Reduction Fund; and

* Truly sub-regional investment projects whose goal is to come up with a solution to a common
problem, e.g. creating a sub-regional regulatory agency or sharing the costs of catastropllic
insurance. Examples are the OECS Telecom Reform Project, the planned project to support a sub-
regional regulatory agency in water and electricity, and the Eastern Caribbean catastrophe insurance
project.

55. 
Sub-regional implementation (OECS Secretariat and ECCB). In the period of this CAS, the
Bank expects to implement some projects through the main sub-regional organizations (ECCB and the OECS
Secretariat), implying the need for continuing support to these organizations to enhance their capacitv.
Already, some Bank-assisted programs are managed by the sub-regional organizations. For example, the
regional component of the OECS Solid and Ship Generated Waste Reform Project and the OECS
Telecommunications Reform Project are currently managed by the OECS Secretariat. In the case of the
former project, instances of project mismanagement in the regional component have underscored the need to
strengthen the Secretariat's capacity for project implementation and oversight. Efforts are already underway
to help strengthen the capacity of the OECS Secretariat to take on a more effective coordinating role in the
sub-region via an IDF grant. During the CAS period, the Bank plans to continue to implement some projects
through the ECCB and the OECS Secretariat, implying the need for a well-coordinated approach to
supporting the capacity of these institutions (especially the Secretariat) with development partners (notably

19 

The APL is a World Bank lending instrument which provides phased support for long-term development programs with a
series of loans that build on lessons learned from the previous loans in the series. The term "horizontal" indicates that the instrument
will be applied sequentially across countries in the sub-region (rather than just over time for a given country), which permits
countries to join the program when they are ready.

27

CIDA and DFID) and, especially the OECS member countries, who will provide the sub-regional
organizations with the necessary human and financial resources to take on and successfully implement
increased responsibilities. This issue of support for sub-regional organizations will be a major focus of the
formal aid coordination activities described in para. 47 above. Coordination with other partners would also
help ensure that Bank resources would not indirectly be used for ineligible countries (para. 52) when sub-
regional approaches are adopted.

56. 
IFC. As indicated in para. 16, the local private sector in the OECS is characterized by small-scale
operations, higher degree of vulnerability than foreign firms, and unavailability of appropriate credit and
equity instruments for the funding of long-term assets. While this should create a role for long-term lending
institutions like IFC, the practice of taking shorter-term financing (with the project bearing the refinancing
risk) is now relatively entrenched in the OECS, making the private sector reluctant to move towards long-
term financing alternatives. This exacerbates the vulnerability of a private sector already being buffeted by
changes in the external environment. In this context, IFC has a two-pronged strategy. The first emphasis is
to address the possible financing needs of long-term projects through: (i) creating a "demonstration" impact
on local financial institutions and the private sector via selective initiatives with regional financial
institutions of sufficient market presence and organizational capacity to structure project finance
transactions; and (ii) providing assistance with structuring expertise through a field-based IFC Investment
Officer located in the region. The second focus is on increasing competitiveness and training through
Technical Assistance (TA) initiatives. Under the first strategic emphasis, three regional projects have
already been approved as follows: (i) an equity investment in the Eastern Caribbean Home Mortgage Bank,
(ii) the Caribbean Loan Facility (CLF) -
a US$50 million credit facility with The Bank of Nova Scotia; and
(iii) a US$40 million credit line to the Royal Merchant Bank Ltd. -
the merchant bank of the Royal Bank of
Trinidad and Tobago Limited. The second strategic emphasis has been supported via two TA projects. The
first, now completed, laid the groundwork for development of Caribbean Small Hotel Brands20 and promoted
training through a website (www.caribbeaninnkeeper.com) targeted to small hoteliers in the Caribbean.
Under the second TA initiative, a study to identify the major legal, regulatory and institutional barriers to
investment is ongoing and will be followed up by further work to propose and initiate the implementation of
solutions. Going forward, IFC will continue to support regional initiatives especially in the financial and
tourism sectors and will look for opportunities in sectors, such as infrastructure, that currently have limited
private participation, but are expected to open up as part of the Bank's proposed work in this area.

57. MIGA and FIAS. At this stage, MIGA and FIAS have relatively limited involvement in the Eastern
Caribbean countries. In previous years, MIGA has conducted a number of workshops on investment
marketing services in St. Lucia and St. Kitts. Consistent with the overall thrust of this CAS, the approach
highlighted at the workshops emphasized adoption of regional rather than individual country approach(es) in
marketing efforts to attract new investment. Over the coming CAS period, MIGA expects to follow up with
Governments in the sub-region to determine the feasibility and desirability of providing technical assistance
to further develop and implement a sub-regional investment marketing strategy. FIAS's past involvement in
the Eastern Caribbean has focused on the conduct of a study to identify constraints to investment. No further
activities are planned at the current time.

E. Risks and Low Case Scenario

58. 
Sources of Risk The main risks to the Eastern Caribbean economies -
and, by implication, to the
proposed base-case Bank assistance strategy -
stem from two sources which are not entirely independent,
namely, exogenous shocks and fiscal slippage (which itself could be the result of exogenous shocks).
Potential sources of exogenous shocks include: (i) weather-related shocks which could cause major
economic damage and necessitate unforeseen public spending -
for instance, the damage caused by
hurricane Georges in St. Kitts was about 140 percent of GDP and has been the primary source of St. Kitts'
present fiscal difficulties; (ii) the concentration of exports in a few goods and services (sugar, bananas,

20 

This was part of the larger OAS Caribbean Small Hotels Assistance Project.

28

tourism, and financial services) -
in turn, making the economies very vulnerable to further erosion of EU
ACP trade preferences and/or heightened criticism of off-shore financial services and possible actions
leading to a contraction in the scope of the industry (para. 20); and (iii) swings in prices of key commodity
imports (e.g., oil) -
fiscal performance in most OECS countries was affected by recent oil price rises due to
pressures to accept reduced yields from the consumption tax on petroleum products in an effort to maintain
lower prices for consumers. Fiscal slippage, in turn, could be caused by, inter alia, delays in addressing
existing imbalances, be it through the implementation of corrective measures and/or structural reforms. The
continued build-up of imbalances could also impose difficulties for the management of the currency union.,
which has its cornerstone in fiscal discipline. Finally, the countries have also been exposed to risks
associated with increased drug trans-shipment and money laundering.

59. 
Risk Mitigation. While in many cases exposure to the potential shocks cannot be reduced, the
Eastern Caribbean countries are taking steps to mitigate their negative impact. Indeed, the entire thrust of the
sub-regional medium-term strategy and longer-term vision is directed towards reducing the domestic impact
of exogenous shocks via improved macro-economic management and financial integration, increased
economic diversification, emphasis on disaster mitigation, efforts to strengthen the financial sector and in
particular regulation and supervision of the offshore sector (with assistance from the Bank and the Fund
under the Financial Sector Assessment Program), and investments in human and institutional capital. While
this strategy is fundamentally sound and likely to significantly mitigate risks if well-implemented, many'
actions within it are likely to need some time before they begin to bear fruit in terms of impact. In the
interim, it is vital that the OECS countries stay the course of prudent public sector finances, strengthening
fiscal savings and keeping indebtedness at a comfortable level, especially by exercising extreme caution and
judgment when borrowing on commercial terms. This would allow for the headroom needed to moderately
expand expenditures to mitigate exogenous shocks if/when they occur without triggering unacceptable
macroeconomic imbalances. Despite some slippage in some countries in this regard, the fiscal reform
program being promoted by the ECCB (para. 10) is a promising development which, if followed, should
promote increased public savings. An independent, but reinforcing initiative, is the proposal on convergence
criteria put forth by the ECCB (along the lines of the Maastricht Treaty) to support the monetary authorities'
policy-making process. The proposal, inter alia, includes the establishment of acceptable norms for the
behavior of monitorable variables, such as domestic prices, real effective exchange rate, and wages, as well
as variables in the area of public finances. In addition, well-defined criteria on reserve cover relative to
ECCB demand liabilities and relative to imports would also be established. These variables would help
signal to both the monetary authority and the member countries the consequences of their policies, monetary
and fiscal, on macroeconomic stability and external competitiveness, reducing the risk of building up
imbalances over time.

60. 
Low-Case Scenario. Given the multi-country scope of this CAS, defining a low-case scenario in
terms of the size of the overall lending envelope is both difficult to do and not especially meaningful, as
problems in one country will not necessarily be reflected in a neighboring country's performance. In general
terms, however, the Bank will seek to ensure that the individual borrowing countries (that is, the OECS
countries excluding Antigua and Barbuda) display on-track performance with respect to both overall fiscal
management and Bank portfolio implementation before proceeding with final project preparation and
approval as programmed in this CAS. To track the countries' fiscal performance, the Bank will monitor the
evolution of individual borrowing countries' central government savings to GDP ratio and public debt
service to current central government revenues ratio. To track portfolio implementation progress, the Bank
will monitor the percentage of the portfolio that is classified as being "at risk". Off-track individual country
performance on either fiscal management or Bank portfolio implementation (or both) would trigger a
deferment in project preparation and approval for that country until corrective measures are taken to put the
country's performance back on track. In addition, off-track fiscal or Bank portfolio performance by three or
more borrowing countries would trigger a deferment of new project processing for the entire sub-region until
an in-depth assessment can be conducted and corrective measures discussed and agreed upon with the
countries as a group. These provisions notwithstanding, even though off-track performance would trigger a
general deferment of Bank project processing for one or more countries, Bank engagement with these

29

countries (including project processing) on HIV/AIDS would nevertheless continue, given the vital
importance of this issue and the fact that success in combating it hinges critically on unified action.

61. While the judgment of whether or not a given country's fiscal and/or portfolio performance is off-
track would need to be based on a holistic view of the country's circumstances, two indicative triggers would
be used to signal problems. The first, regarding fiscal performance, is a significant deviation of central
government savings as a ratio of GDP and/or public debt service as a ratio of current government revenues
from the medium-term paths targeted by the countries. The target paths, as well as the extent of deviation
which would be considered "significant," would clearly vary by country, depending on the present strength
or otherwise of fiscal performance. In general, for those countries that presently (year 2000 estimate) have
significantly positive central government savings (St. Lucia at about 4.5-5 percent, Grenada at about
6 percent, and to a lesser extent St. Vincent and the Grenadines at 3 percent), the criterion would involve at
least avoiding any marked deterioration -
to less than 2 percent -
in the ratio, whereas for those countries
which presently exhibit negative central government savings (Dominica at 0.3 percent and especially St.
Kitts and Nevis at 3 percent), the criterion would involve gradual improvement over the CAS period to reach
positive levels of 1-2 percent of GDP or better over the medium term.2 ' With respect to the ratio of public
debt service to current revenue, the minimum criterion for each country would be to avoid any significant
increases (of more than about 5 percentage points) in the ratio.2 2 The second indicative trigger, regarding
Bank portfolio performance, would be a situation where over 30 percent of the portfolio is "at risk" for six
months or longer.

62. 
Consideration was given to the definition of a "high case" scenario in the event that one or more
OECS countries suffered unusually-high damage as a result of a natural calamity(ies) -
necessitating special
emergency assistance to the OECS during the CAS period. However, this option was not pursued given the
existence of a US$10 million contingency fund for emergency assistance within the framework of the
ongoing OECS Disaster Management Program (approved by the Board in FY99).

F. CAS Program Monitoring

63. 
The ultimate measure of success of the countries' development strategy -
and, by implication, of
Bank Group support for it - would be a lasting reduction in poverty as a result of sustained, less volatile
income growth, as well as improvements in living conditions more broadly for the people of the Eastern
Caribbean countries. Direct monitoring of poverty and living conditions faces serious handicaps, in light of
data and related informational constraints. However, the planned poverty assessments, as well as related
work by the Bank and other development partners in support of the countries, should allow some inferences
to be drawn on the state of poverty and living conditions, and on the broad direction of their evolution over a
multi-year period. Concerning the volatility of national income and (total and private) consumption,
sustained reductions in these can be meaningfully tracked only over very long periods of time. Nevertheless,
efforts will be made to track the extent to which these variables fluctuate over the CAS period. Given the
limitations on tracking broad poverty or income volatility outcomes for CAS program monitoring purposes,
however, specific program implementation benchmarks will be tracked in three areas of planned Bank
project support (see also Annex B11): (i) HIV/AIDS; (ii) education; and (iii) infrastructure regulation. A
focus on these areas, where concrete benchmarks can be established in the context of Bank projects, will
enable tracking of progress in key components of the CAS. Finally a key aspect of CAS program monitoring
will be general implementation progress in the Bank's portfolio, in particular the percentage of the portfolio
that is "at risk".

21 

22 

In Dominica, projections for 2001-02 indicate that central government saving may be in the range of negative
1-1.5 percent of GDP, which would provide the "baseline" from which improvements would occur.

Year 2000 estimates put the ratio at around 13 percent in Dominica, Grenada, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines,
22 percent in St. Kitts and Nevis, and 11 percent in St. Lucia.

30

IV. Concluding Remarks

64. While the countries in the Eastern Caribbean sub-region have made significant strides in developing
their economies and improving living conditions for their populations, they remain subject to major
vulnerabilities, many of which are inherent to small island developing states. In line with the significant
diagnostic and development strategy work already completed by the countries and sub-regional
organizations, this CAS has aligned Bank Group assistance to the overall development goal of supporting
poverty reduction through: (i) a reduction of income volatility and vulnerability (notably through private
sector-led diversification); and (ii) human and institutional development. Planned Bank Group assistance is
highly selective, based on comparative strengths and complementarities with on-going and planned support
from other development partners.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter Woicke

By:
Sven Sandstrom 

June 4, 2001

31

Annex A

Country Profiles
and Medium-Term Projections

By Country:

* Profile
* At a Glance

e Social Indicators

- Key Economic Indicators

e Key Exposure Indicators

32

ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA

Population: 
71,400 (2000)
GNI per capita: US$9,190 (2000 est. Atlas methodology)

1. 
Profile. Antigua and Barbuda are part of the Leeward islands. Antigua, the largest island, has a dry
climate and a large number of white sand beaches. The cultivation of sugar that started in the late 1600's was
abandoned in 1969. Aside from tourism-the 
island's most important industry-Antigua's economy depends
heavily on the service sector, particularly tourism and offshore services. The unemployment rate is estimated at
7 percent, poverty is relatively low, with a headcount index of 12 percent, and social indicators are strong. The
UNDP's 2000 Human Development Index ranks Antigua 3 7th' out of 174 countries.

2. 
Economic Developments and Prospects. Annual real GDP growth in Antigua and Barbuda averaged
over 6 percent during the 1980s as a result of the rapid expansion of tourism, which, in turn, was fueled by
foreign direct investment. However, tourism-related public enterprises recorded large deficits, financed by
commercial borrowing and latter the accumulation of external arrears. In the early 1990s, annual growth slowed
to less than 3 percent following a sharp decrease in public and private investment. Growth performance during
1995-2000 averaged 3.2 percent per year, despite the disruption caused by Hurricanes Georges, Jose, and Lenny
in the fourth quarters of 1998 and 1999. These hurricanes (especially Georges) had a devastating effect on
housing, physical infrastructure, and the environment, which together with the expansionary fiscal policies
pursued over the past five years, fueled fiscal deficits. Fiscal imbalances and high levels of external debt
(including arrears) are the main challenges facing the Government. Although the Government is considering
options to improve the tax structure and collection, including the introduction of a tax on value added, effective
measures are also needed to curtail the growth in expenditures. Moreover, some action should be taken
regarding distortionary tax waivers, which represent a large and growing revenue loss, thereby weakening the
fiscal position.

3. 

Main Issues and Constraints to Development

External Debt Management and Investment Financing. The accumulation of arrears on external debt service
has adversely affected the Government's access to external and domestic sources of funds. The Government has
approached creditors on a bilateral basis, and has been able to reschedule a substantial portion of its overdue
obligations, bringing external arrears to about 16 percent of GDP in 2000, down from 85 percent in 1996.
However, funding options continue to be extremely limited and in order to support further economic growth and
diversification of the economy the Government faces the challenge of stabilizing and strengthening the overall
fiscal position so as to ensure the required public saving can be generated.

Public Sector Reform. In order to help reverse the current fiscal imbalances a host of actions are called for.
Improvements are especially necessary in the areas of tax administration and collection, and expenditure
control-so 
that budget accountability and performance are ensured. It is also important to re-consolidate
government institutions which have become fragmented in their operations due to excessive earmarking of
revenues that previously accrued to the Treasury-in 1998, these revenues accounted for 8.5 percent of the total
tax revenue.

Offshore services. As in other OECS member countries, the process of economic diversification in Antigua
and Barbuda led to the development of offshore service centers. These activities have recently come under
increased international scrutiny and Antigua and Barbuda was listed by the Financial Stability Forum on
offshore financial centers, as having a "generally perceived" low quality of supervision and/or low level of
cooperation with other jurisdictions, and the OECD's Forum on Harmful Tax Practices as a jurisdiction meeting
tax haven criteria, even after having revised laws and regulations governing the offshore financial sector (as a
consequence, the number of offshore banks was reduced from 57 in 1997 to 25 in 2000). The country is
currently participating in the IMF-assisted offshore self-assessment exercise. This is expected to be followed by
a comprehensive review under the joint IMF-WB Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP).

33

Antigua and Barbuda at a glance 

5/W00.

Antigua 
Latin 
Upper.
and Armerica mlddte-
Barbuda & Carib. 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCtAL 

Development diamond'

1999
PopUlation, mid-year (mnilions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, tS$) 
GNP (Atlas nethoi7 USS bllibons 

0.07 
8,450 
0-57 

509 
3,840 
1 955 

Life expectancy

4900
2,1t

Ave,rae annual growth t993.99 

T

Population (%I 
Labor force (I%) 

0.7 

1 6 

1.4 
2.1 

,7

2.5 

GNP 

Gr-ss

Moat recent estimate (latest year available, 1993-99) 

capita 

eruroliment

Poverty (% of population below national poventy linme!
Urban populabon (Sf of total populabon) 
Lfe expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mcrtaFlty (per 1 000 live brths) 
Child mailnutrition (% of childten under 5i 
Access to improved water source (% of population) 
Iiliteracy (C otf population age 15+; 
Gross pnmary enrollment (% of scho&oae populalion) 
Male 
Female

37 
75 
16 

75 
70 
31 
8 
75 
12 
113 

76
70
27
7 
78
10
109 

Access to safe water

95 

-Antigua 
and Batrbuda
Upper-mioade-income gmup
Ua 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONC-TERM TRENDS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

Economic ratios

GOP (US$ bilions, 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

0 9 
24.3 
81.8 
30.6 
39.6 

0.37 
41.2 
81.0 
31.5 
23.1 

0.62 
324 
744 
22 9 
16.1 

0.65
32.8
75 9 
21.4
17.2

Trade

Current account oaance/GOP 
Inteest payments/GOP 
Total debVIGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debtUGDP
Present value of debtUexports

-21.1 
2.2 
133 6 
5 9 

-21.2 
24 
55.9 
4.5 

-16.3 
14 
681 
56 

-15.5 
17 
60.2 
7 0

Domestic 
Savigs

Investment

Indebtedness

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 19r-3

(average annual growrth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and sercess 

6.9 
50 
84 

3.2 
3.0 
1 2 

4.1 
-0.1 
0.8 

33 
2.7 
4.9 

3.3 
3.8 
2.4

-

AnfiguaandBatSuda
-------- Upper-midiles-incorne group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of investment and GDP (%)
in

(% of GDP) 
Agrculture 
Industry 
Manufactunng 
Services 

8 2 
15.8 
4.9 
76.0 

4.0 
220 
31 
740 

4.0 
189 
2.3 
77.1 

3.9
192
2.2
76.8 

o

O's 

go

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

51.0 
18.4 
75.5 

495 
19.0 
90.8 

551 
22.1 
83.9 

54.7 
23.9
87.4 

4

-Gr_ _ 

: Gr__

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(average annual gnov,fh)

Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

-2.3 
10.0 
5.0 
64 

0.9 
29 
-0 3 
3.2 

4.2 
7.7 
5.5 
2.9 

3 2 
6.2 
4.0 
4.2

s
40
20 .

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domesticinvestment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

5.5 

5 
5 9 
1.9 
2.6 
3 6 

7.5 
9.9 
3.7 
3.3 
6.2 

286 
11.8
3.7 
6 8 
2.8

9 

as 

a5 95 

9 

g

6 5 
104 
8.4 
5 5 

-40

-r 

Evorts 

wIomrts

Note. 1999 data are preliminary estmates.

'The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (In bold) compared with Ks income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond vill
be incomplete

34

Antigua and Barbuda

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)
1

Domesrtic prices 
(% change) 
Consumer prces 
lmplictGDP deflator 

:2

4.7 
3.9 

1.1
5.2

14.8 

4.2 

Govemment finance

(% of GOP, includes current grants)
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/defcit 

27.6 
0.6 
4.4 

27.4 
-1.8 
7 

-2 

94 

0 

98

.. 

.

-GDP 

deflator
e7

.

TRADE

(UIS$ millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Exportand mport lewls (US$ mill.)

Total exports (fob) 
Commodity 1 
Commodity 2 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Captal goods 

.

37 

36 

500

450
40 0 _*_
3o 

... 

.

*

395 

449 

250
200

..

150

.

.. 

.

io-

o..

Export prce index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100)

93 

94 

95 
96 
* Exponrs 

97 

98 
*lmpons

99

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ 

ilions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Current account balanceto GOP%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

50 
78 
-28 

289 
337 
48 

462 
521 
-59 

496 o
571 
-74 

on 

05

5*

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-2 
10 

-44 
12 

-40 

-45 

-10

-2 

18 7 1 1 ff

Current account balance 

-20 

-79 

-101 

-102

Finanang items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

.. 

.

I 
-10 

ill 
-9

-20

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locai/US$) 

.

60 
2.7 

70
2.7

27 

2.7 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of 1999 debt (USS mill.)

31 
0 
0 

209 
0 
0 

423 
0 
0 

394
0
0 

G:11

Total debt service 
iBRD 
IDA 

3 
0 
0 

13 
0 
0 

27 
0 
0 

36
0
0

Composion of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Prvate creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

D:176

3 
0 
0 

3 
0 
3 
.
0

F:195

0 
0 

0
8

.

0 

E:12

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Pnnapal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

A- IBRD 
B - IDA 
C - IMF 

E - Bilaleral
D - Other munilateral F - Private
G - shor-temm

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0
0
0

Development Economics 

5/812001

35

Antigua and Barbuda Social Indicators

POPULATION
Total populatIon, mid-year (nihns) 
Growth rate (% anrwal average forpeiod) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total ferility rate (bhlhs per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)
Nalional headcount index
Urban headcount 
index
Rural hadcount Index
INCOME
GNP per capta (US$) 
ConsumerpriceIndex(1995-100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTlON
GWrA 
index
Lowest quintle (% of inom orconsumprbinpJ.
Highest qtintUle (% of income or conasunplon)
SOCIAL INIICATORS
Pubkic expendt

Health (%otGOPJ 

Educatlon (% of GNP) 
Social aecuty and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net phimary school enrolkment raft
N% of a geup)
Totl 
Male

Female

Access to an knproved water source
(% of popLation)
Total 
Urban 

Rur 

Immunizatlon raft
(% under 12 months)

Meele. 
DPT 

Childmainutdtion(%under5yea/s) 
Llh expectancy at bht
(years)
Total 
Male 
Femde 

llorblky

Infant (per thousand ive biths) 

Under S (par thousand live blrft) 

Adult :15-81)
Mal (per 1,000population) 
Female (per 1.000 population) 
Matemal (per 100, 000 live births) 
Births attended by skited health al (%) 

Latot singb yar 

Same regionllncome group

1070-75 

1 S060-6 199340 

0.1 
-0.9 
34.2 
24 

0.1 
0.3 
35.0 
1.9 

0.1 
0.7 
36.6 
1.7 

Ladn 
America 
J Carib. 

Upper-
mIddle-
Income

508.2 
1.6 
74.9 
2.6 

571.5
1.4
75.4
2.4

3.010 

8.450 
108 

3.800 
140 

4,870
131

.. 

..

.. 

.. 

.o 

2.7 

.. 

.. 

.. 

91 
95 

88 

99 
99 

75 
72 
78 

16 
20 

135 
75 

95 

69 

100 
10 

73 
71 
75 

24 

0 
0 

..

83

87 
66 
69 

.. 

0 
0 

.. 

3.4 
3.6 
7.4 

91 

85 
93 
62 

90 

87 

9

70 
67 
73 

30 
38 

207 
122 

3.3
5.0
7.9

94

87
94

68

90
88

69
66
73

27
34

233
143

CAS Annex 85. Th tabble we produced from the CMU LDOB sytem. 
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or lose than half the unit shown. Net enrolment ,tios exceeding 100 Indicate discrepancies
between the estimates dof schol-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to an improved
water sour e dat Is 2000.

51W200i

36

Antigua and Barbuda - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product 
Agnculture 
Industry 
Services 

100.0 
3.9 
17.9 
78.3 

100.0 
4.1 
18.2 
77.7 

100.0 
4.0 
18.9 
77.1 

100.0 
3.9 
19.2 
76.8 

100.0 
3.9 
19.2 
76.8 

100.0 
3.9 
19.2 
76.8 

100.0 
3.9 
19.2 
76.8 

100.0 
3.9 
19.2 
76.8 

100.0 
3.9 
19.2 
76.8 

100.0
3.9
19.2
76.8

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic investment 

81.3 
35.5 

74.3 
32.8 

77.1 
32.4 

78.6 
32.8 

78.9 
29.9 

80.6 
26.7 

80.8 
26.2 

80.5 
25.0 

80.2 
25.4 

80.2
25.4

Exports (GNFS)5
Imports(GNFS) 

75.2 
92.1 

77.7 
84.8 

74.4 
83.9 

75.9 
87.4 

70.8 
79.6 

70.8 
78.1 

73.3 
80.3 

74.3 
79.8 

74.4 
80.0 

74.6
80.2

Gross domestic savings 
Grosssnationalsavings' 

18.7 
16.4 

25.7 
19.0 

22.9 
16.1 

21.4 
17.2 

21.1 
16.9 

19.4 
15.2 

19.2 
15.0 

19.5 
15.3 

19.8 
15.6 

19.8
15.6

Memorandum items 
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNPpercapita(US$,Atlasmethod) 

22.1 
541.1 

20.8 
580.4 

15.7 
620.7 

20.0 
653.7 

17.8 
688.5 

15.0 
721.9 

15.3 
753.9 

15.4 
786.6 

15.7 
820.8 

15.7
856.4

7,850 

8,240 

8,230 

8,450 

9,190 

9,554 

9,894 

10,236 

10,590 

10,957

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market pnces 
6.7 
Gross Domestic Income 
5.9 

5.0 
5.0 

4.1 
3.6 

3.3 
3.1 

3.6 
3.2 

2.5 
2.4 

3.0 
2.6 

3.0 
2.8 

3.0 
2.5 

3.0
2.8

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic productatmarket prices 
5.9 
4.1 
Total consumption 
19.8 
-5.0 
Private consumption 
26.9 
-8.2 

3.2 
7.2 
6.5 

2.5 
4.3 
1.7 

2.8 .
2.8 
1.8 

1.7 
3.7 
1.8 

2.2 
2.4 
1.8 

2.2 
1.7 
1.9 

2.2 
1.7 
1.9 

2.2
2.2
2.0

Balance of Payments (USS millions)
Exports(GNFS)5
Merchandise FOB 
Imports(GNFS)5
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net currenttransfers 
Current account balance 

407.1 
37.7 
498.1 
339.2 
-91.0 
30.8 
-103.3 

450.9 
37.9 
491.9 
325.8 
-41.0 
10.5 
-80.1 

461.9 
37.4 
521.3 
344.3 
-59.4 
-2.2 
-101.4 

496.3 
35.9 
570.7 
389.2 
-74.4 
18.2 
-101.6 

487.3 
39.8 
547.7 
375.0 
-60.4 
6.2 
-89.5 

511.0 
41.9 
566.3 
386.8 
-55.2 
-1.2 
-85.9 

529.2 
43.6 
582.7 
404.0 
-53.4 
2.4 
-85.9 

548.6 
45.5 
599.1 
421.5 
-50.5 
0.9 
-83.4 

568.6 
47.5 
616.1 
439.8 
47.5 
0.5 
-80.4 

589.7
49.5
634.0
458.9
-44.3
0.5
-77.9

Netprivateforeigndirectinvestment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Othercapital(net,incl.eno[s&onsiissimns) 
Change in reserves' 

18.7 
-2.7 
0.0 
-2.7 
74.6 
12.7 

23.5 
-3.0 
3.0 
-6.0 
63.4 
-3,9 

27.4 
1.7 
0.0 
1.7 
81.8 
-9.5 

26.5 
4.1 
0.0 
4.1 
80.5 
-9.4 

24.2 
8.7 
0.0 
8.7 
50.3 
6.4 

21.6 
-2.2 
0.0 
-2.2 
71.4 
-4.9 

21.2 
-1.2 
0.0 
-1.2 
68.0 
-2.0 

20.2 
-4.0 
0.0 
4.0 
68.2 
-1.0 

20.5 
-5.9 
0.0 
-5.9 
64.8 
1.0 

20.5
-7.1
0.0
-7.1
62.5
2.0

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-18.5 

-9.0 

-11.5 

-13.5 

-10.6 

-9.1 

-8.8 

-7.3 

-7.3 

-7.3

3.0 
1.0 

4.5 
-1.6 

3.6 
3.4 

2.8 
7.4 

3.9 
-1.5 

2.5 
1.6 

3.0 
3.0 

3.0 
3.0 

3.0 
3.0 

3.0
3.0

(Continued)

37

Antigua and Barbuda - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market pricea)
Currentrevenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2 (%) 
Privatesectorcreditgrowth/ 
total credit growth (%/6)

Price indiceas YR90 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandiseimportpriceindex 
Merchandise terms oftradeindex 
Realexchangerate(US$/LCU)' 

Real interest rates
Consumerpriceindex (%change) 
GDPdeflator (% change) 

27.8 
28.0 
-0.2 
4.5 
4.6 

70.2 
-1.9 
107.1 

27.2 
28.4 
-1.2 
7.4 
5.2 

70.8 
8.3 
81.9 

97.0 
98.0 
100.2 
100.4 

96.0 
97.6 
99.6 
101.5 

27.6 
27.0 
0.6 
6.8 
2.6 

76.3 
15.2 
56.4 

91.6 
99.7 
92.9 
98.5 

27.4 
29.2 
-1.8 
6.6 
3.9 

80.1 
10.6 
43.0 

29.5 
30.3 
-0.8 
7.4 
3.4 

79.4 
4.4 
43.0 

31.5 
31.7 
-0.2 
6.4 
-0.3 

79.4 
4.8 
43.0 

31.3 
31.6 
-0.3 
6.7 
-0.6 

79.4 
4.4 
43.0 

31.3 
32.8 
-1.5 
5.8 
-0.9 

79.4 
4.3 
43.0 

31.3 
33.0 
-1.7 
5.3 
-1.1 

79.4 
4.3 
43.0 

31.3
33.1
-1.8
4.4
-0.7

79.4
4.3
43.0

85.5 
105.0 
82.4 
99.5 

91.2 
102.7 
90.0 
101.5 

93.7 
104.2 
91.0 
102.4 

94.7 
105.7 
90.7 
103.0 

95.9 
107.0 
90.7 
103.8 

97.2 
108.4 
90.7 
104.5 

98.4
109.8
90.7
105.2

3.2 
6.1 

-1.1 
5.6 

4.7 
3.9 

1.1 
5.2 

0.0 
3.6 

1.1 
2.5 

1.4 
1.4 

1.3 
1.3 

1.3 
1.3 

1.3
1.3

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Central govemnment.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

38

Antigua and Barbuda - Key Exposure Indicators

Total public debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)

470.8 

467.8 

422.7 

393.5 

384.9 

379.7 

378.5 

374.4 

368.5 

361.4

Net disbursements (USSm) 

-2.7 

-3.0 

1.7 

4.1 

8.7 

-2.2 

-1.2 

-4.0 

-5.9 

-7.1

Total debt service (TDS) 
(USSm)'

40.6 

43.7 

26.6 

36.4 

30.2 

27.8 

28.6 

28.5 

29.6 

28.9

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)
TDO/XGSb 

115.6 

103.7 

91.5 

79.3 

79.0 

74.3 

71.5 

68.3 

64.8 

61.3

TDO/GDP 

87.0 

80.6 

68.1 

60.2 
7.0 

55.9 

52.6 

50.2 

47.6 

44.9 

42.2

TDSIXGS 

9.8 

9.6 

5.6 

6.2 

5.4 

5.4 

5.2 

5.2 

4.9

ConcessionaVTDO 

4.9 

4.9 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

IBRDDS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)O
IBRDDS/XGS 
IBRDTDO(USSm) 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0
0.0

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0
0.0

Ofwbich present value of
guarantees (US$m)

Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m) 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0
0.0

IFC (USSm)

Loans 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0
0.0

Equity and quasi-equity' 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm) 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt. private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. 'XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including worked remittances.

c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, die regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.

d. Includes present value of guarantees.

e. Indudes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

39

DOMINICA

Population: 
77,600 (2000)
GNI Per Capita: US$3,260 (2000 est. Atlas method)

1. 
Profile. Dominica, the most northerly and largest of the Windward Islands, is predominantly a lush
mountainous country with plentiful water resources, excellent for cultivating bananas, which together with
other agricultural products are the base of the economy and its largest source of employment. Mainstream
tourism was never developed due to the small number of white-sand beaches, high rainfall and poor air
connections; however, eco-tourism is promoted. Besides agriculture, Government and financial services,
commerce, and transport make significant contributions to Dominica's economy. While the unemployment
rate is estimated to be over 20 percent, and the poverty head count index is 33 percent, the social indicators
are reasonably good, ranking Dominica 5 1st out of 174 countries in the UNDP's 2000 Human Development
Index.

2. 
Economic Developments and Prospects. Rapid increases in the price and volume of banana
exports and high levels of aid flows during the 1980s enabled Dominica to grow rapidly, albeit unevenly.
However, a reversal of these factors led to lower annual growth-which averaged 21/2 percent during the
1990-99 period, compared to over 5 percent during 1980-89, and less than 2 percent-which 
in turn was
insufficient to bring about any significant reduction in unemployment. Inflation remains low (consumer
prices averaged 2.3 percent in thel990's) and broadly in line with Dominica's main trading partners,
reflecting the monetary discipline associated with membership in the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union.

3. 

Main Issues and Constraints to Development

Public finances and Private Investment In order to support an economic diversification program, the
Government of Dominica must increase public sector savings. Unfortunately, progress has been slow in this
area hindering Dominica's ability to fnance its Public Sector Investment Program without increasing the overall
fiscal deficit. For instance, in 2000 central government saving became negative, decreasing to -0.3 percent of
GDP (1.2 percent of GDP in the consolidated public sector). Besides its own direct investments, the government
must also ensure that an enabling macroeconomic and policy environment is in place so as to stimulate private
investment and accelerate the economic diversification process.

Banana industry. In the 1980s, agriculture (mainly bananas) accounted for about one-fifth of GDP, half of
the merchandise exports, and close to one-third of employment. Following the change in the European Union
banana regime of 1993, banana export earnings fell by an estimated 20 percent; the 1997 and 1999 WTO rulings
against preferential market access enjoyed by ACP countries, exacerbated the situation, with export earnings
falling an extra 28 percent. The banana industry is undergoing a significant restructuring (number of active
farmers dropped from over 9,300 in 1992 to about 2,800 in 2000) in an attempt to increase efficiency, improve
product quality, and become internationally competitive.

Oflfhore services. As in other OECS member countries, the process of economic diversification in
Dominica led to the development of offshore service centers. These activities have recently come under
increased international scrutiny and Dominica was listed as a non-cooperative jurisdiction by the Financial
Action Task Force and as a jurisdiction meeting tax haven criteria by the OECD's Forum on Harmful Tax
Practices. Since then, the authorities have amended legislation governing offshore services, and the country
became the first Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) member to hand over supervision of the offshore
banks to the ECCB. Dominica is participating, together with the other OECS member countries, in the IMF-
assisted offshore self-assessment exercise to be followed by the WB-IMF Financial Sector Assessment
Program (FSAP).

40

Dominica at a glance 

s18e200

Latin 
Upper-
America middle- 
& Carib. 
income 

POVERTY an SOCIAL 

-

Dominica 

Development diamond

1W9,

Popuatiorn, rind-year (nrtllions) 
GNP per caita (Atlas method, US$ 
GNP(Atflas metod,US$ hilions) 

0.07 
3,160 
0.23 

5 
3,840 
1,955 

7 
4,900
2.811

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993-99

Populadon I9%) 
Labrforce(%} 

0,2 

1 6 
25 

1A4
21 

,GNP 
per 
capita 

.

Gross
pnmary
enrollment

Most racairt etmae 

(latst year avaIlable, 1993.99) 

.

Poverty (% ot popoulation be/Dw nabonal poverty imne)
Urbn popa tiot 0 of total populaton) 
Ufa 
lxpedancy at brtth (years) 
tnfean mortatity iper f,000 five births) 
CNIId menutrition (9 of children under 5) 
Acaess to improved water source (% of populabion) 
9Nftracy (6 ofpopuLaton age 15+) 
Gross promary erro8ment (96 of school-age popraation) 
Male 
Female

71 
76 
14 

75 
70 
3' 
8 
75 
12 
113 

76
70
27
7 
78
10
109 

.

Access to safe water

s 

Dominica
Upper-miiddle-income group

KEY ECONOblIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

Economic ratios'

GDP fUSSidbfons) 
Gross domest icnvestment/GDP 
Exports goodrse and services/GDP 
Gross domestc s$vings/GDP 
Gross national svingsvGDP 

0.04 
35.2 
28.0 
-27.8 
-12.6 

0.16 
41.2 
47.1 
9.9 
15.0 

026 
22.2 
57.5 
16 9 
177 

026
251,
53.4 
8 8
10

Trade

CuntentacountrbatancavGDP 
Interest paymenWtaGDP 
Total debtbGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value ot debtVGDP
Presnt value of debtiexports

-32.2 

-31.5 
0.9 
50.5 
91 

-48 
1 0 
42 5 
6 9 

-151 
038 
56 4 
8A4

4

.

Domestic 
Savings 

I 
Investment

-

Indebtedness

1979-89 1989-99 

1988 

1999 

199943

(average annudal qromth)

GrDPatfactorcost 

5.7 
55 
13.6 

2.1 
14 
3.5 

2.4 
33 
75 

09 
-0 3 
-3.2 

12 
2 2 
0.4

Dominica
Upper-mddle-income group

GNPper capita 
Exports of goods and services 

1 

STRUCTURE ot the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of investment and GDP 1%.)

(36 of GDP) 
Agrculture 
Industry 
Manufactunng 
S7iies 

25

329 
14.7 
4.7 
52.5 

240 
18.5 
7.3 
57 5 

18.9 
22.1 
8.7 
59.0 

18.5 
22.5 
8 5 
59.0 

20 

A

15
10
s

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

93.9 
33 9 
91.0 

69.1 
20.9 
78.4 

61.7 
21.4 
82.8 

6997 
21 5
69.6 

, 

s 

97 

9

'GOi 

-GOP

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

GroMth or eaport. and imports (%)

(average annual gronah)
Agtculture 
Industry 
ManufactLring 
gervies 

4.2 
5.7 

-0.8 
3.2 
1.7 
3.3 

-2.0 
4.0 
16.8 
3 4 

-0.4 
-4.3 
-19.0 o
3.1 

10

D

7.5 

5.0 

4

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestc investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross nabonal product 

1.9 
1.0 
2.9 
2.8 
5.4 

-0.1 

-1 0 

11 6 

o 7 

5 

5

2.4 
-0.6 
0.0 
15 

7 3 
-5 1 
1 6 
16 

0.7

38 
7 
0 1

4e

Ep 

, 

m ports

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estmates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average If data are missing, tne diamond will
be incomplete.

41

Dominica

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1999 

1999 

Inflation I%)
7

Domestic prices 
(96 change) 
Consumerpnces 
Impliat GOP deflator 

6

16.2 
20.2 

7.6 
6.9 

1.5 
2.5 

0.0 
2.3 

s 
4

3
2

Government finance 
(6 of GOP, indudes cuffent grants)
Currentrevenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficlt 

.. 
.. 

31.0 
7.3 
-1.8 

280 
0.2 
-6.0 

29.1 
0.7 
-11 .8

71 
98 
: CPI

9 

9 

9

-

GDP deflator 

.

TRADE

(U.JS$ mrllions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)

Total exports (fob) 
Bananas 
Other Agncultural Exports 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

.. 
.. 

63 
14 
7 
37 
115 
26 
8 
26 

55 
13 
7 
39 
131 
29 
9
30 

D4D
r2n
o 
so
60
40

*

.. 

.

.. 
.. 
.

.

o

Export prce index (1995=100) 
Inport price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

.. 
.

92 
88 
105

9 

94 
95 
* Exports 

97 

go 
* Impols

99

-

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Currant account balance toGOP()

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services 
imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

19 
40 
-21 

70 
123 
-53 

147 
161 
-14 

141 
184 
43 

o
-2

-

Iin n ni 

in

Net incorne 
Netcurrenttransfers 

a 
7 

-7 
12 

-12 
13 

-14 
17 

6 

x10

Current account balance 

-14 

-48 

-12 

40 

-12

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

20 
-6 

47 
1 

16 
-4 

44 
-4 

1 
18

il 

14

memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, lcaloIS$) 

10 
2.7 

10 
2.7 

28 
2.7 

32
2.7

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IOA 

Composition of 1999 d 

(US mil

.. 

78 
0 
9 

109 
0 
14 

149
2
15 

0 
0 

B: 15

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

.. 

7 
0 
0 

10 
0 
0 

12 
0 
0

_

0 
0 

G:6 

9

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

7 
8 
0 

-
1
0

a 46

.. 
.. 
..

-1 
0 

-

0 

E:26

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Netflows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
2 
0 
2 
0 
2 

6 
2 
0 
2 
0 
2 

.

A-IBRO 
.- IDA 
C - IMF 

E - Eilateral

2 
0 
2
0
2

D- Other nmufiiteral F - Private
G - Shod-term

Development Economics 

58/2001

42

Dominica Social Indicators

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (miltions) 
GroAh rate (% annual average for penod) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (brths per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consuner price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100)

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintle (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Heaith (% of GDP) 
Education t% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source

(% of population)

Total 

Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth

(years)

Total 

Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per tousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100, 000 live births)
Births attended by saiuled heaith staff (%) 

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-99 

0.1 
0.7 
55.3 

0.1 
0.1 
66.0 

0.1 
0.2 
70.7 

Latin 
America 
& Carib. 

Upper-
middle-
income

508.2 
1.6 
74.9 
2.6 

571.5
1.4
75.4
2.4

420 
11 

1,220 
72 

3,160 
106 

3,800 
140 

4,870
131

89 

76 

.. 
.. 

14 

3.4 
3.6 
7.4 

91 

85 
93 
62 

90 
87 
9

70 
67 
73 

30 
38 

3.3
5.0
7.9

94

87
94
68

90
88

69
66
73

27
34

207 
122 

233
143

.

.. 

27 
,, 

72 
,, 

.. 

16 

, ..

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system. 
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimrkas of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to an improved
water source data is 2000.

5/812001

43

Dominica - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 

100.0 
19.9 

100.0 
19.4 

100.0 
18.9 

100.0 
18.5 

100.0 
18.0 

100.0 
18.0 

100.0 
18.0 

100.0 
17.0 

100.0 
17.0 

100.0
17.0

Industry 
Services 

21.7 
58.4 

21.9 
58.7 

22.1 
59.0 

22.5 
59.0 

23.0 
59.0 

23.0 
59.0 

24.0 
58.0 

24.0 
59.0 

24.0 
59.0 

24.0
59.0

Total Consumption 
Grossdomesticinvestment 
Govaenmentinvestment 
Privateinvestment 

77.4 
31.7 
10.2 
21.5 

81.4 
29.7 
6.6 
23.1 

83.1 
22.2 
7.5 
14.7 

91.2 
25.1 
11.7 
13.4 

97.4 
29.6 
12.2 
17.4 

98.7 
27.7 
8.0 
19.7 

94.1 
25.0 
6.0 
19.0 

94.4 
24.0 
6.0 
18.0 

95.1 
23.0 
6.0 
17.0 

95.1
23.0
6.0
17.0

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

52.2 
61.3 

52.4 
63.6 

57.5 
62.8 

53.4 
69.6 

52.3 
79.3 

52.7 
79.1 

53.1 
72.2 

53.6 
72.0 

54.1 
72.2 

54.1
72.2

Gross domestic savings 
Grossnationalsavings' 

22.6 
18.0 

18.6 
19.1 

16.9 
17.7 

8.8 
10.1 

2.6 
6.9 

1.3 
4.9 

5.9 
5.0 

5.6 
7.0 

4.9 
8.1 

4.9
8.9

Memoransdum items 
Gross domeasc product 
(USS million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

77.4 
236.4 

81.4 
244.1 

83.1 
256.2 

91.2 
264.4 

97.4 
268.6 

98.7 
275.4 

94.1 
283.7 

94.4 
293.7 

95.1 
304.1 

95.1
316.3

3,000 

3,070 

3,170 

3,160 

3,260 

3,333 

3,424 

3,536 

3,651 

3,788

Real annual grovwth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at fctor cost 
3.1 
Gross Domestic Income 
2.6 

2.0 
1.5 

2.4 
4.8 

0.9 
0.1 

0.5 
1.0 

1.0 
0.1 

1.5 
3.0 

2.0 
0.3 

2.0 
4.0 

2.5
0.3

Real annual per capita growth rates (°/, calculated from 1990 prices)
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprices 
2.6 
1.5 
Total consumption 
-0.9 
-1.9 
Private consumption 
-2.4 
-3.6 

4.8 
1.2 
-1.0 

0.1 
8.5 
11.6 

0.5 
7.4 
11.7 

0.7 
2.1 
11.8 

1.2 
-3.5 
11.9 

1.7 
2.1 
12.1 

1.7 
2.5 
12.3 

2.2
2.2
12.6

Balance of Payments (USS millions)
Exparts(GNFS)5
Merchandise FOB 
Inports(GNFS) 5
MerchandiseFOB 
Resource balance 
Netourrenttransfers 
Current account balance 

123.5 
52.5 
145.0 
100.2 
-21.5 
10.2 
-32.4 

128.0 
53.5 
155.2 
104.0 
-27.2 
10.5 
-25.9 

147.3 
63.1 
160.9 
106.9 
-13.6 
13.2 
-12.2 

141.1 
54.6 
184.1 
123.3 
-43.0 
17.4 
-39.8 

140.5 
48.9 
213.0 
129.1 
-72.5 
11.3 
-61.2 

145.1 
49.1 
217.8 
130.8 
-72.7 
15.1 
-62.8 

150.6 
49.5 
204.8 
134.8 
-54.2 
13.6 
-56.7 

157.4 
50.0 
211.5 
139.5 
-54.0 
12.0 
-49.9 

164.5 
50.6 
219.5 
144.4 
-55.0 
10.9 
-45.3 

171.1
51.0
228.4
150.3
-57.3
10.7
-44.6

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans(net) 
Official 
Private 
Othercapital (nelnindersmsanmnsom) 
Change in reservesd 

17.8 
0.0 
4.3 
-4.3 
15.4 
-0.8 

20.9 
-10.5 
-3.4 
-7.1 
16.2 
-0.7 

6.5 
0.7 
-1.3 
2.0 
8.8 
-3.8 

18.0 
0.8 
0.8 
0.0 
24.9 
-3.9 

13.2 
7.4 
5.4 
2.0 
43.7 
-3.1 

13.6 
8.4 
3.4 
5.0 
41.1 
-0.3 

12.3 
4.2 
0.2 
4.0 
41.3 
-1.0 

11.8 
4.1 
-1.9 
6.0 
34.5 
-0.5 

11.3 
9.0 
2.0 
7.0 
26.1 
-1.1 

11.3
5.8
4.0
1.8
28.5
-1.0

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Merchandiseimports(CIF) 

-9.1 

-11.1 

-5.3 

-16.3 

-27.0 

-26.4 

-19.1 

-18.4 

-18.1 

-13.1

4.4 
-2.9 

1.9 
3.8 

17.9 
2.8 

-13.5 
15.3 

-10.4 
4.7 

0.4 
1.3 

1.1 
1.5 

1.6 
2.0 

1.6 
2.0 

2.0
2.5

(Continued)

44

Dominica - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

lndicdor 

196 

19 

WS W 

9 

2*w) ~ 2oOl

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (-) or deficit)-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

26.7 
25.0 
1.7 
10.6 
-0.6 

29.1 
28.0 
1.1 
8.4 
-0.3 

28.0 
27.8 
0.2 
7.6 
0.7 

29.1 
28.4 
0,7 
13.3 
2.4 

65.6 
10.4 
20.5 

29.4 
29.7 
-0.3 
12.9 
12.2 

64.6 
0.6 
25.0 

28.6 
29.8 
-1.2 
10.3 
6.6 

63.9 
1.3 
25.0 

28.7 
30.0 
-1.3 
8.0 
4.6 

63.9 
3.0 
25.0 

29.0 
29.7 
-0.7 
70 
0.5 

63.9 
3.5 
25.0 

30.0 
29.0 
1.0 
7.0 
-2.3 

63.9 
3.5 
25.0 

30.0
29.0
1.0
7.0
-3.6

63.9
4.0
25.0

57.7 
2.0 
-109.4 

57.8 
3.5 
130.1 

61.3 
11.4 
131.8 

1000 
99.8 
96.9 
101.4 

100.0 
99.8 
100.5 
111.8 

100.0 
99.8 
100.5 
107.8 

100.1 
99.8 
101.4 
108.1 

100.0 
99.8 
101.3 
113.3 

100.0 
99.8 
101.3 
113.9 

99.7 
101.3 
99.5 
114.5 

99.3 
102.9 
97.6 
115.0 

98.8 
104.4 
95.7 
115.6 

97.6
106.0
93.2
116.2

2.0 
4.2 

2.2 
1.2 

1.5 
2.5 

0.0 
2.3 

1.1 
1.1 

1.5 
1.5 

1.5 
1.5 

1.5 
1.5 

1.5 
1.5 

1.5
1.5

Monetary indicators
M2!GDP 
Growth ofMM2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR90 =100)
Merchandise exportpnce index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU) 

Real interest rates
Consurnerprice index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

a GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
cI Includes net urequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Central govermnent.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

45

Dominica - Key Exposure Indicators

1ndintot 

J9* 

1 -

1 

t98 

1 9 

2000 

2001 

2002 

20 3 

2004 

2w00

Totaldebtoutstandingand 

114.2 

102.9 

108.8 

149.2 

163.8 

172.4 

1904 

190.1 

190.4 

1935

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

Net disbursements (US$m) 

12.2 

-7.2 

4.3 

43.1 

14.6 

8.6 

18.0 

-0.3 

0.3 

3.0

Totaldebtservice(TDS) 

6.8 

10.7 

10.2 

11.8 

13.0 

13.6 

15.1 

15.0 

15.1 

15.3

(US$m)'

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)
TDOVXGSb 

92.5 

80.4 

73.9 

105.7 

116.6 

118.8 

126.4 

120.8 

115.8 

113.1

TDO/GDP 

48.3 

42.2 

42.5 

56.4 

61.0 

62.6 

67.1 

64.7 

62.6 

61.2

TDS/XGS 

5.5 

8.4 

6.9 

8.4 

9.2 

9.4 

10.0 

9.6 

9.2 

8.9

Concessional/TDO 

77.0 

79.9 

75.8 

53.6 

56.2 

57.6 

60.7 

60.6 

60.7 

61.1

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

IBRDDS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

0.0 
78.0 

0.1 
58.8 

0.1 
57.9 

0.7 
62.4 

1.6 
75.6 

1.0 
62.0 

0.9 
60.0 

0.5 
59.0 

0.5 
59.6 

0.6
58.0

DS (%)C

IBRD DS/XGS 

0.00 

0.01 

0.01 

0.04 

0.09 

0.06 

0.07 

0.07 

0.08 

0.07

IBRD TDO (US$m)d 

0.0 

0.0 

0.4 

1.7 

2.4 

4.0 

5.0 

5.4 

6.8 

8.0

Of which present value of

guarantees (US$m)
Share ofIBRD portfolio i%) 
IDA TDO(US$m)d 

0.000 
11.7 

0.000 
12.3 

0.000 
14.3 

0.001 
14.5 

0.002 
13.6 

0.003 
16.4 

0.004 
17.8 

0.005 
20.0 

0.006 
22.4 

0.008
23.8

IFC (US$m)
Loans 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

Equity and quasi-equity' 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.

b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

46

GRENADA

Population: 
101,000 (2000)
GNI per capita: US$3,520 (2000 est. Atlas methodology)

1. 
Profile. Grenada, which includes the two smaller islands of Carriacou and Petite Martinique, to its
north, is the southernmost of the Windward Islands. Dubbed "Spice Island", Grenada is the world's second
largest exporter of nutmeg and mace. Agriculture, though not as prevalent as in the past, accounts for a
significant portion of gross domestic product and a major source of employment while tourism is the main
source of foreign earnings. The unemployment rate is 12.5 percent, and as in many of the OECS islands, the
poverty headcount index is high, about 32 percent. However, social indicators are relatively good, so that
Grenada ranked 54th out of 174 countries in the UNDP's 2000 Human Development Index.

2. 
Economic Developments and Prospects. In the first half of the 1990s, the Government of Grenada
implemented a number of economic reforms to reduce fiscal imbalances and promote growth. Those reforms
coupled with generally prudent macroeconomic policies resulted in improved economic performance in the
second half of the decade, with annual output growth averaging about 7 percent during 1998-2000. Economic
expansion, and the associated decline in unemployment, was supported by a pickup in tourism development,
public infrastructure, and housing construction. Fiscal strengthening in turn was evidenced by improvements in
central government saving (which rose sharply from -0.3 to 6.1 percent of GDP between 1997 and 2000) and the
overall deficit (which narrowed from about 6 to 3 percent of GDP in the same period. Following lower import
requirement, due to the completion of some large investment projects, and gains accruing from favorable
nutmeg prices and increased sale of electronic components to the U.S. market, the external current account
deficit narrowed from 25 to 15/2 percent of GDP during 1997-2000.

3. 

Main Issues and Constraints to Development

Economic Diversification. Diversification away from agriculture has deepened with expansion in tourism,
information-processing services (e.g., internet and telephone marketing), offshore financial services, and
manufacturing. The latter has recently expanded with the establishment of an export-oriented electronics
component plant and increased demand for paper products manufactured in Grenada. Nevertheless,
unemployment remains relatively high and the government is seeking to ensure private sector-led growth by
reorienting the priorities of its public sector investment program.

Human Resources Development The economic diversification process and the sustained development of
services (tourism, financial services, and information technology) requires continued improvements in education
and training. To this end the government increased its education budget in 2000 by 3 percent of GDP and in
collaboration with multilateral and bilateral agencies is making efforts to increase access to secondary education,
introduce computers in all schools, and establish skills-training centers, especially in the rural areas of the
country where the incidence of poverty and unemployment is higher.

Public Sector Reform. For the last three years, the government has been implementing a public service reform
based on a performance-based pay system for the civil service. The implementation of this reform thus far has
not been successful, with little differentiation among salaries, and with a large increase in the wage bill without
a corresponding upturn in efficiency. The government is committed to this reform and continues discussions
with the civil service unions on ways to achieve its objectives.

Offshore services. As in other OECS member countries, the process of economic diversification in Grenada led
to the development of offshore service centers. These activities have recently come under increased
international scrutiny and Grenada was listed by the OECD's Forum of Harmful Tax Practices as a jurisdiction
meeting tax haven criteria. As is the case with other OECS countries, Grenada is participating in an IMF-
assisted self-assessment of its offshore financial centers and, following completion of this in late 2001, will
participate in the World Bank/IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP).

47

Grenada at a glance 

51812001

Lattn 
Upper-
America mlddle-
Grenada & Carib. 
Incont 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development diamond'

19S9
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas method. US$ bilions) 

0.10 
3,300 
0.32 

509 
3,840 
1 955 

573 
4,900
2,811

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 199349 

t

Population (%) 
Labor force(%) 

0.6 

16 
2.5 

1.4 
21 

I

GNP 
per 
capita 

7/ 

Gross
pnmary
'enrollment

Most recent estimate (latet year available, 1993-99) 

Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population f ofltota/ population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infint mortality (per 1,000 live bitths) 
Ctitd malnutntion (% of children under 5) 
Access to improved water source (% otpopulation) 
Illiteracy (% of population age f5+) 
Gross primary enrolment (% of schod-age poputabon) 
Male 
Female

37 
72 
13 

75 
70 
31 
8 
75 
12 
113 

76
70
27
7 
78
10
109 

Access to safe water

85 

-Grenada
Upper-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1979 

19S8 

1998 

199S

Economic ratios'

GOP (US$ billions) 

0.08 
26.5 
51.8 
5.3 
22.5 

021 
34 1 
40.3 
14.0 
22.0 

0.34 
36A4 
51.5 
20.0 
131 

0.36
35.7
65.5 
21 5
27.3 

Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GOP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

Trade

J

Cuvrentaccountbalance/GOP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt servicelexpors 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debtexponts 

-14 
0.5 
21.8 
4.6 

-12.1 
0.6 
38.5 
3.5 

-23.4 
06 
55.4 
4 4 
46.6
80.3

-8A

0 5 
42.1 
3.4

Domestc 
Savings

Investment

Indebtedness

197949 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

199903

(average annVal growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and sernvices 

8.5 
5.1 
5.1 

2.4 
1,7 
5.9 

5.8 
1.6 
12.3 

6.2 
5.4 
20.1 

5.5 
680 
8. 

-Grenada
-- Upper-middle-income group

-

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of investment and GDP (%)
20

(% of GDP) 
Agrculture 
Industry 
Manufactunng 
Serces 

26.2 
14.2 
2.9 
59.6 

15.4 
18.0 
6 3 
66.6 

8.0 
21.9 
7.1 
70 1 

8.2 
22.7 
7.4 
69.1 o

1 5

to
5

-s f 
u10

4 

s 

97 

99 

99

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Importns of goods and services 

75.1 
19.6 
72.6 

63.5 
22.4 
60.4 

63.3 
16.7 
76.6 

62.8 
15.7
73.5 

-GD 

-O-GDP

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and imports t%)

(average annual gorowth)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturng 
Services 

-0.5 
7.0 
12.6 
6.0 

-1.9 
5.1 
5.2 
3.1 

-1.2 
13.2 
14.1 
4.6 

10.0 
9.1 
12.1 
4.7 

25

20
15
10+

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

2.9 
5.9 
6.0 
2.8 
5.4 

2 9 
-1.2 
2 9 
4.6 
2.1 

1.3 
8.4 
7 3 
11.6 
4 2 

-15 2 
-0.7 
5.5 
3.1 
5.1

-s 

57 

s 

vs

-

-i5

'-Exports 

-0-lmperts

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estmates.

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared wrh its income-group average, If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

48

Grenada

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)

Domestic prices
(% change) 
Consumer pnces 
Implidt GDP deflator 

1

21.7 
9 4 

5.5 
8,9 

14 
1.2 

0.5
1.9

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/defiit 

2 

7 

94 

95 

97 

98 

9

1.3 
-7 9 

4.7 
-6.0

denator C PI

TRADE

(USS millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and import levels JUSS mill.)

Total exports (fob) 
Cocoa 
Bananas 
MaLnuLfactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Focod 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

28 

46 
9 
3 
12 
204 
37 
11 
59 

74 
15
3 
33 
208
38 
12 
60 

250 T

200
so 

.

0

50

.

a

Export pnce index (1995=100) 
lmportpnceindex(1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

176 
108 
137 

252 
105 
205

93 

94 

95 

9 

97 

95 
Minperts

99

Ebperts 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Curmnt account balance to GDP (%)

(USS millions)
Exports of goods and services41 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

9 
136 
-43 

17 
257 
-64 

23 
265 
-29 

55 
-15 

I

t

Net ncome 
Net current transfers 

0 
13 

-9 
26 

24 
29 

-29
28 

-15

Current account balance 

1 

-26 

-78 

-30 

-20

Finanang items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

4 
-3 

25 
1 

83 
-4 

34 
-4 

-25
-30

Memo:
Reserves induding gold (US$ mdlions) 
Conversion rate (DEC. ioca/USS$) 

.
2 7 

47 
2 7 

51
2.7

2 7 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 
1 

1989 

1998 

1999 

(USS millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
I9RD 
IDA 

Composition of 1999 debt (US$ mill.)

17 
0 

82 
0 
4 

186 
0 
8 

152
0
9 

9 
9

G 29 

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

2 

3 

9 

9

0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Offcial creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

0 
0 
1 

6 
5 
0 

-
-1 
2 

9
-1

..

0 

0 

E 61

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Pnncpal repayments 
Netflows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 

1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 

.

A - IBRD 
B-IDA 
C- tMF 

E - Bilateral
D - Cther multilateral F - Private
G -Short-tem

2 
0 
2
0
2

Development Economics 

5182001

49

Grenada Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

Latin 
America 
& Carib. 

Upper-
middle-
Income

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-99 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year(miNons) 
Growth rate (% annual average forpenod) 
Urban populaion (% of population) 

0.1 
-0.7 
32.6 

0.1 
0.0 
33.3 

0.1 
0.6 
37.5 

508.2 
1.6 
74.9 

571.5
1.4
75.4

Total fertility rate (biiths per woman) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

2.6 

2.4

POVERTY
(% of populabon)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

.. 

..

.. 

..

.. 

..

INCOME

GNP per capita (USS) 
Consumerpriceindex(1995=100) 

.. 

1,280 
79 

3,300 
106 

3,800 
140 

4,870
131

.. 

Food price index (1995=100) 

.. 

..

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income orconsumption) 

.. 

..

.. 

..

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 

.. 
.. 
.

.. 
.. 
.. 

4.9 
7.3 
.. 

3.4 
3.6 
7.4 

3.3
5.0
7.9

Net primary school enrollment rate

(% of age group)
Total 

.. 

.. 

98 

91 

94

Male 
Ferale 

., 

.. 

99
97

.. 

.. 

Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total 

.. 

85 

94 
97 
93 

85 
93 
62 

87
94
68

Urban 
Rural 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

Immunization mte

(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

90 
87 

90

.. 

.. 

.. 

88

.. 

.. 

.. 

9

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Totdal 

.. 

.. 

72 

70 
67 
73 

69
66
73

Male 
Female 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

Mortality

Infant (per thousand l;ve births) 

.
.. 

.
.. 

13 

30 

27
34

Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 Inve births)
Births attended by skilled heath staff (%.

.. 

38 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

207 
122 

233
143

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system. 
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate dbcrepancies
between the estimates af schoci-age population and reported enrolment data. Latest year for access to an improved
water source data is 2000.

51/2001

50

Grenada - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)

Gross domestic producte 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100.0 
8.6 
20.0 
71.3 

100.0 
8.1 
20.7 
71.2 

100.0 
8.0 
21.9 
70.1 

100.0 
8.2 
22.7 
69.1 

100.0 
7.1 
23.0 
69.9 

100.0 
7.0 
23.0 
70.0 

100.0 
7.0 
23.2 
69.8 

100.0 
7.0 
23.5 
69.5 

100.0 
6.4 
24.0 
69.6 

100.0
6.4
24.0
69.6

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

79.5 
33.7 
9.5 
24.3 

80.9 
35.0 
9.2 
25.8 

80.0 
36.4 
13.7 
22.7 

78.5 
35.7 
13.7 
22.0 

76.8 
38.6 
14.2 
24.4 

76.6 
35.4 
13.5 
21.9 

76.4 
33.1 
13.6 
19.5 

75.8 
33.0 
14.0 
19.0 

74.5 
33.0 
14.0 
20.0 

74.5
33.0
14.0
20.0

Exports (GNFS)5
Imports (GNFS) 

44.6 
65.6 

45.0 
70.8 

51.5 
76.6 

65.5 
73.5 

64.5 
79.9 

65.0 
76.8 

65.7 
74.8 

66.2 
74.1 

66.9 
73.3 

71.8
78.1

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

20.5 
14.1 

19.1 
10.0 

20.0 
13.1 

21.5 
27.3 

23.2 
22.0 

23.4 
23.5 

23.6 
23.5 

24.2 
24.6 

25.5 
25.7 

25.5
26.2

Memorandum items
Grossdomesticproduct 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

294.7 

314.9 

335.5 

360.1 

386.9 

416.6 

444.0 

474.2 

506.9 

506.9

2,940 

3,080 

3,130 

3,300 

3,520 

3,752 

3,959 

4,186 

4,431 

4,388

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at factor cost 
2.9 
Gross Domestic lncome 
4.1 

4.2 
4.6 

5.8 
5.2 

6.2 
5.4 

7.5 
6.7 

5.0 
4.4 

4.5 
4.0 

4.5 
3.9 

4.5 
4.0 

4.5
3.9

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
3.5 
4.1 
Total consumphon 
13.2 
8.4 
Private consumption 
16.2 
9.8 

4.5 
1.8 
0.6 

4.5 
-13.2 
-15.9 

6.5 
4.2 
-16.9 

4.0 
3.7 
-17.6 

3.5 
3.2 
-18.2 

3.5 
2.7 
-18.9 

3.5 
1.7 
-19.5 

3.5
3.5
-20.2

Balance of Payments (US5 millions)
Exports(GNFS)5
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current traisfers 
Current account balance 

131.4 
24.7 
193.2 
147.4 
-61.8 
18.9 
-57.8 

141.7 
32.8 
223.1 
166.6 
-81.4 
19.9 
-78.5 

172.9 
45.9 
257.0 
183.0 
-84.1 
29.2 
-78.4 

235.8 
74.3 
264.8 
184.1 
-29.0 
28.0 
-30.3 

249.6 
84.3 
309.2 
217.4 
-59.6 
28.9 
-64.2 

270.9 
93.6 
319.9 
223.2 
49.0 
31.0 
-49.7 

291.7 
102.8 
332.0 
229.9 
-40.3 
31.0 
-42.5 

314.0 
111.8 
351.4 
242.8 
-37.4 
32.5 
-39.9 

339.1 
124.0 
371.7 
256.4 
-32.6 
32.0 
-37.0 

363.9
134.9
395.7
273.1
-31.9
33.4
-34.5

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-termloans(net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (na,indl. moms& ommissimos) 
Change in reservesd 

19.4 
-0.3 
5.5 
-5.8 
37.7 
1.0 

35.3 
4.8 
10.6 
-5.8 
45.4 
-7.0 

50.9 
3.9 
-1.3 
5.2 
27.7 
-4.1 

46.4 
11.4 
9.2 
2.2 
-23.5 
-4.0 

49.3 
11.5 
-3.3 
14.8 
-3.4 
6.8 

31.8 
11.5 
-0.7 
12.2 
1.9 
4.4 

29.9 
13.0 
-3.8 
16.8 
-4.7 
4.3 

28.4 
15.2 
-6.1 
21.3 
-8.3 
4.6 

27.3 
17.5 
-4.0 
21.5 
-12.7 
5.0 

27.3
6.7
-3.8
10.5
-3.5
4.0

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates (Data-YR99 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-21.0 

-25.8 

-25.1 

-8.1 

-15.4 

-11.8 

-9.1 

-7.9 

-6.4 

-6.3

6.0 
8.1 

6.2 
7.1 

9.1 
7.4 

13.2 
2.8 

15.4 
17.8 

7.4 
0.3 

6.1 
0.2 

5.5 
3.3 

7.6 
3.6 

5.6
4.5

(Continued)

51

Grenada - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Pubik finauce (as % of GDP at market prices)'

Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Currentaccountsurplus(+)ordeficit(-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary Indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2 (%/) 
Privatesectorcreditgrowth/ 
total credit growth (5/o)

Price indices (YR95 -100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandiseimportpriceindex 
Merchandise terms oftrade index 
Realexchangerate(US$/LCU)' 

Real interest rates
Consumerprice index (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

25.1 
23.0 
2.1 
9.7 
0.8 

75.5 
9.1 
75.6 

24.1 
24.4 
-0.3 
8.7 
0.5 

25.6 
24.3 
1.3 
9.4 
2.2 

27.5 
22.8 
4.7 
10.7 
2.9 

79.0 
11.8 
82.9 

82.9 
11.8 
126.1 

87.9 
13.9 
142.1 

29.8 
23.6 
6.2 
11.9 
1.9 

94.4 
15.4 
91.5 

30.0 
25.0 
5.0 
10.1 
2.3 

99.2 
13.1 
86.7 

30.2 
25.2 
5.0 
10.1 
2.3 

96.0 
3.2 
86.7 

30.3 
25.2 
5.1 
10.1 
2.3 

94.0 
4.6 
86.7 

30.2 
25.2 
5.0 
10.1 
2.3 

92.0 
4.6 
86.7 

30.3
25.2
5.1
10.1
2.3

95.0
3.3
86.7

110.0 
99.8 
98.4 
101.8 

137.5 
105.3 
104.8 
105.3 

176.4 
107.7 
137.2 
102.9 

252.4 
105.4 
205.5 
106.2 

248.2 
105.7 
198.7 
114.0 

256.5 
108.8 
199.4 
114.0 

265.5 
111.9 
200.8 
114.0 

273.5 
114.4 
202.3 
113.8 

281.9 
116.6 
204.6 
113.4 

290.5
118.9
206.8
113.1

2.8 
2.5 

1.3 
2.2 

1.4 
1.2 

0.5 
1.9 

2.2 
2.2 

2.0 
2.0 

2.0 
2.0 

2.2 
2.2 

2.3 
2.3 

2.3
2.3

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units.' An increase in USS/LCU denotes appreciation.

52

Grenada - Key Exposure Indicators

lndisator 

1996 

i997 

1-96 

1990 

2000 

2001 

2002 

200$ 

2004 7205

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

126 4 

127.6 

185.6 

151.5 

156.8 

168.3 

181 3 

196.5 

213.9 

220.6

Net disbursements (USSm)' 

10.4 

3.4 

56.7 

-33.4 

53 

11.5 

130 

15.2 

17.5 

6.7

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$mI)

7.2 

6.5 

8.5 

8.8 

9.1 

9.8 

10.5 

11.4 

12.4 

12.8

Debt and debt service indicators

TDO/XGS' 

82.3 

75.5 

95.3 

58.5 

62.8 

62.1 

62.2 

62.6 

63.1 

60.6

TDO/GDP 
TDS.XGS 

429 
4 7 

40.5 
3.8 

55.4 
4.4 

42.1 
3.4 

40.5 
3.6 

40.4 
3.6 

40.8 
3.6 

41.4 
3.6 

42.2 
37 

43.5
3.5

Concessional,TDO 

543 

55.3 

37.9 

50.0 

49.7 

46.2 

42.8 

38.1 

34.4 

32.2

IBRD exposure indicatoTs (%)

IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DSipublic 

0.1 
51.6 

0.2 
53.3 

01 
55.9 

0.2 
53.8 

0.2 
49.1 

0,2 
46.2 

0.2 
46.2 

0.3 
503 

1.1 
50.8 

2.6
56.0

DS (%)-

IBRD DSiXGS 
IBRD TDO (US5m) 

0.002 
0 0 

0.006 
0.0 

0.005 
0.0 

0.004 
0.4 

0.014 
2.6 

0.010 

0.010 
3.0 

0.010 
3.8 

0.040 

0.081

2.5 

5.7 

6.9

Of swhich present value of

guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (USSml) 

0.000 
72 

0.000 
7.1 

0.000 
8.2 

0.000 

0.002 
9.3 

0.002 
10.8 

0.002 

0.003 
14.9 

0.005 
17.6 

0.007

9.3 

12.7 

20.0

IFC (US5m?
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0
0.0

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of INF credits and net short-

term capital,
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.

c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the INlF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

53

ST. KITTS AND NEVIS

Population: 
45,400 (2000)
GNI per capita: US$6,420 (2000 est. Atlas methodology)

1. 
Profile. St. Kitts and Nevis is part of the Leeward Islands. The two islands are a federation: Nevis,
the smaller island, has a population of 9,600, and exercises autonomy in most areas, with the exception of
foreign affairs, defense, and certain aspects of economic policy. The economy is based on tourism with a
declining share of agriculture. Unemployment is the lowest among OECS member countries and the UNDP
Human Development Index ranks St. Kitts and Nevis 47h among 174 countries. Despite this positive picture
St. Kitts and Nevis has a poverty headcount index of slightly over 30 percent, which reflects the inherent
vulnerability of the country to natural disasters and, in particular, the impact of successive hurricanes in 1998
and 1999.

2. 
Economic Development and Prospects. This two-island economy has benefited from generally
sound economic management, which attracted foreign and domestic private investment, particularly in the
tourism sector, that have been important to sustain growth. Annual real GDP growth during the 1990's
averaged about 4 percent, compared to a growth rate of 6.2 percent during the 1980's. As a consequence of
the relatively high growth, the country's per capita income has risen rapidly during the last 20 years. The
four hurricanes that have hit the country since 1998 have caused severe infrastructure damage, including to
tourism facilities, slowing growth considerably (annual real GDP growth in 1998-00 averaged 21/2 percent,
compared to about 5Y2 percent in the three preceding years). The economy remains dependent on tourism
and other services, and some light manufacturing.

3. 

Main Issues and Constraints to Development

Public Finances. In recent years public finances have weakened, with the overall balance of the non-
fmancial public sector shifting from a surplus of about 2½/2 percent of GDP in 1995 to a deficit of more than
8½/2 percent of GDP in 2000, while central government saving fell from 3½2 percent of GDP in 1995 to -3
percent of GDP in 2000. The two main causes of such reversal were outlays associated with hurricane
damages and subsidies to the state-owned and loss-making sugar industry. Despite the measures taken by the
government in 2000 to strengthen the fiscal position (include a hiring freeze in the public sector, expenditure
reduction on goods and services and limits to capital outlays) the authorities' goal of achieving a balanced
budget by 2003 will require further measures on both the revenue and expenditure side.

Sugar. In January 2001, a government committee completed a report on the state-owned sugar industry
where its closure is contemplated due to its lack of competitiveness. Annual losses in 2000 are estimated at
about 3.5 percent of GDP, financed mainly through overdrafts at the government owned National Bank. By
late-2000 the overdraft of the sugar company was estimated at about 17 percent of GDP, rising to over 30
percent of GDP if the central government overdraft was included. The political fallout of closing the
industry would not be so drastic as employment in the industry has fallen considerably (by 1/3 in the past
five years, to 1,400 full-time workers or about 8 percent of the workforce). Nevertheless, a social safety net
for the sugar company workers will need to be put in place to reduce the hardship of the transition period.

Offshore services. As in other OECS member countries, the process of economic diversification in St. Kitts
and Nevis led to the development of offshore service centers. These activities have recently come under
increased international scrutiny and St. Kitts and Nevis was listed by the Financial Action Task Force, the
Financial Stability Forum, as having a "generally perceived" low quality of supervision and/or low level of
cooperation with other jurisdictions, and the OECD's Forum on Harmful Tax Practices as a jurisdiction
meeting tax haven criteria. The country is currently participating in the IMF-led offshore financial centers
self-assessment exercise, to determine actions needed for improved legislation, regulation, and supervision of
the sector and will participate in the upcoming Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) to be jointly
conducted by the WB and the IMF.

54

St. Kitts and Nevis at a glance 

5t820

St Ktl 
Latin 
and America 
liNevis a Caib. 

Upper-
nidlde-
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

1999 

Dev lopntdiamond'

199S
Population, mid-year (ifilons) 
GNP per capita (Attas method' US$) 
GNP(Allasnethod US$ tiions) 

0.04 
6,330 
025 

509 
3,840 
1,955 

573 
4,900
2811

Life expectancy

Aeage, annual growith 1913-99

Poputltlon(XJ 
Latbtor 
(%) 

42 

16 
25 

14
21 

GNP 
per 
capita 

Grosa
pnmary
enrollment

Moat recont 

tUmate (latet year avalable, 119349) 

Poverty (iX of poputioo beow nabondal povet 
Uran population (% of total population) 
ULf expedancy at btrth &a,es) 
infant mortality (per 1,000 
tive 
bfiths) 
CNid mduitribon t9 ochVldren under 5) 
Access to improvd water source 1% ofpopultorn) 
Ilteracy (5C o$poputation age 15+) 
Grosspnmaryenrolin nt (%9ofscho-gpo0Ption) 
Male 
Female

lne,)

34 
70 
21 

75 
70 
31 
a 
75 
12 
113 

76
70
27
7 
78
10
109 

Access to safe water

100 

-St. 

Kilfs and Nevis
group
p--Upper-mndddle-income 

KEY ECONOMIC RAIlOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1979 

"a8 

is" 

1999

Economic ralos'
Saigs +
Trade
Domestic 
Indebtedness

GDP (US$ bilions) 
Gross domestic investmentGODP 
ExpoitofgoodsandservicestGDP 
Gross domestic ssvings1GOP 
Gross naonal saving5/GDP 

0.04 
346 
597 
10.5 
25.8 

0.14 
58.1 
55.3 
30.1 
33.6 

0.29 
43.0 
53.8 
26.8 
26.5 

0.30
37.4
48.3 
15.8
113

Currentaccouit baance;GDP 
Interest pamentslGDP 
Total debtlGDP 
ToW dabt servicetexports 
Plteae value of debtUGDP 
Present value of deWexports 

22.6 
0.6 
25,5 

-16.4 
1.7 
44.6 
6 8 
312
88S

-26.0
2. 
452 
11.5

IrvesImeni

1979-T 

1fS-1 

1S98 

1991 

119943

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP pM capita 
Exponts of goods and services 

5.9 
680 
5.7 

4.3 
4.0 
3,0 

1.1 
.1.2 
1.7 

28 
6&9 
-2.6 

4.7 
7 9-- 
5.8

-St 

Kits and Nevis
Upper-iddteincoome group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth ofinvestmt 
30
20

and GDP(%)

(% of GDP) 
Agricuiture 
Industry 
Marsufacturng 
Services 

15.5 
24.9 
14.6 
59.6 

7.7 
27.8 
14.3 
64.5 

4.2 
24.4 
9.9 
71.4 

3.7 
25.7
10 3 
70.7 

1
1D 

go 

97 

s Ss

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

68.2 
21.2 
83.8 

52.4 
17.4 
83.3 

54.1 
19.1 
69.9 

62.7 
21.5
69.8 

-20

L"GDl 

GDP

1979-9 

1U89-19 

1998 

1999 

Growth of expoits and Imports (%)

(average annual growth)
Agncufture 
Industry 
Manufactunng 
Semces 

-2.0 
5.4 
2.6 
8,4 

1.5 
4.3 
2.9 
4.6 

-11.7 
3.6 
-0.9 
1.3 

-9.9
7.1 
8.0 
2.1 

20-
15

1D

Private consumption 
General govemmrnntconsumpton 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross nationai product 

2.8 
3.2 
9.6 
4.9 
5.3 

5.1 
6.3 
1.7 
2.8 
3.6 

0.6 
0.3 
0.1 
0.2 
-0.6 

19.2 
15.6 
-2.7 
2.8 
3.3

r
-4e
-10

-

Eporls 

*nInWort

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

55

St. Kitts and Nevis

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

199I 

1999 

Inflation (%)

Domestic prices 

1

(% change) 
Consumerpnces 
implidt GDP deflator 

e0
a 

5.0 
5.1 

3.7 
3.3 

3.5 
1.8

6.6 

Government finance 
(% of GDP, indudes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surpius/deficit 

2

0

.
.. 
.. 

30.6 
0.2 
-6.5 

30.9 
-1.4 
-5.7

0 

9 

95 

ff 

97 

98 

9

-

GDP deflator 

*oPt

TRADE

(US$ nwoilns) 

T1979 1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and import levels (USS mill.)

Total exports (fob) 
Sugar 
Beverages and tobacco 
Manuiactresa 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

.
.

49 
10 
1 
20 
142 
23 
7 
45 

48 
10 
1 
20 
145 
22 
9 
40 

t. 

140
120

.
.
.
.
.

100
80
60

40

2_

Export price index (1995=100) 
Import pnce index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100)

.. 

.

0 

.94 

95 

96 

97 

9 
Ulpourts

998

.

.. 

.E 

.iorts 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ mxiions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Cunrrnt account balance to GDP (%)

Exports of goods and services 
Importsotgoodsaandservices 
Resource balance 

.
.

81 
117 
-36 

154 
201 
-46 

145 
210 
-65

o

-5 

lMli

Net income 
Netcurrenttranslers 

-9 
13 

-31 
30 

-31 
18 

15
-20

Current account balance 

-32 

-47 

-78 

25

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

.. 

49 
-17 

39 
8 

76 
3 

so

35

Mmono:
Reserves induding gold (US$ n-libons) 
Conversion rate (DEC, )ocalaiSS) 

.. 

50 
2.7 

52
2.7

2.7 

2.7 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1999 

1998 

1999

(USS nmi7ons) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 

Compoaition of 199 debt (UlS$ mill.)

.. 

37 
0 

128 

136

0 

1 
2 

4 
2 

A:4 G:2B:2

IDA 

0 

0 

C 

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

2 
0 
0 

11 
0 
0 

17 
0
0

F:

0 
0 

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Otflcial credftors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

.. 

3
7 
3 

.. 
.. 
..

8 
8 

2
6

0 

E: 31

World Bank program

Commitments 

0 

0 

10 

.. 

A - IERD 

E - Bilateral

Disbursements 
Pnncipal repayments 
Netflows 
interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

3 
0 
3
0
3

8- IDA 
C - IMF 

D - Other mutilateral F - Private
G - Short-tem

Development Economics 

518/2001

56

St. Kitts and Nevis Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionlincome group

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-99 

0.0 
-0.6 
35.0 

0.0 
-0.8 
35.2 

0.0 
-0.2 
34.1 

.. 

Latin 
America 
& Carib. 

508.2 
1.6 
74.9 
2.6 

Upper-
middle-
Income

571.5
1.4
75.4
2.4

, 

1,700 
78 

6,330 
119 

3,800 
140 

4,870
131

6.2 

100 

100 

70 

.. 

21 

.. 

.

100 

100 
100 

64 

.. 

45 

3.4 
3.6 
7.4 

91 

85 

93 
62 

90 
87 
9

70 

67 

73 

30 
38 

207 
122 

3.3
5.0
7.9

94

87

94
68

90
88

69

66

73

27
34

233
143

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (minOns) 
Groth rate (% annual average forpeuiod) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of populabon)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumerpricehidex(1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100)

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Laoest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Higihest quintile (% of income or consumption)

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Sociai security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Totai 
Male
Femaie
Access to an Improved water source
(% of'population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child mainutrition (% under S years) 
Life expectancy at birth

(years)
Total 

Male 

Femaie 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per tousand lve bfths) 
Adult (11W9)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Femaie (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 ve births)
Births attended by skilled health staft (%)

CAS Annex 85. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system. 
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to an improved
water source data is 2000.

58/2001

57

St. Kitts and Nevis - Key Economic Indicators

AcO"s 

Ea1immw 

Projectd

Itdi, glor1996 

1997 _99 

199 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100.0 
5 2 
24 6 
70.2 

10000 
5.5 
23.8 
70.6 

100 0 
4.2 
24.4 
71.4 

1000 
37 
25.7 
70.7 

10000 
3.6 
26.0 
70.4 

1000 
3.5 
25.8 
70.7 

00.0 
3.3 
25.7 
71.0 

100.0 
3.2 
25.7 
711 

100.0 
3.1 
25.6 
71.2 

100.0
31
25 6
712

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Govemment investment 
Private investment 

83 1 
45 8 
4.9 
40 9 

73.7 
44.0 
5.1 
38.9 

73.2 
43.0 
6.9 
36 1 

84 2 
37 4 
4.5 
32 9 

82.4 
45.0 
5.8 
39.2 

77.6 
47 5 
4.8 
42.7 

74.4 
45.0 
4.7 
40.3 

72 3 
43 5 
4.6 
38.9 

70.6 
42.5 
4.4 
38 1 

71 0
42 5
4.4
38.1

Exports (GNFS)5
hnports (GNFS) 

49.6 
78 6 

53.2 
70.8 

53 8 
69.9 

48.3 
69.8 

52.0 
79.5 

55.6 
80 7 

58.4 
77 7 

59.0 
74.8 

597 
72.7 

59.7
72 7

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings 

16.9 
15.4 

263 
23.0 

26.8 
26.5 

158 
11.3 

17.6 
10.5 

22.4 
126 

25.6 
13.8 

277 
15.5 

29.4 
17.6 

29.4
20.6

Memorandum 

items

Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

2457 

275.2 

287.4 

300.9 

314.1 

3465 

378.7 

411.0 

442.5 

4726

5,670 

5,990 

5,920 

6,330 

6,660 

7,326 

7,985 

8,664 

9,331 

9,984

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1977 prices)
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprices 
6.5 
Gross Domestic Income 
6.5 

6.8 
6.8 

1.1 
0 9 

2.8 
2 6 

3.8 
2.9 

6.2 
5.6 

5.5 
4.0 

4.9 
4.2 

4.4 
3.0 

4.2
3.4

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1977 prces)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
69 
6.9 
Total consumption 
15.2 
-5.2 
Private consumption 
19.0 
-8.0 

1 1 
0.5 
0.6 

27 
18.1 
19 0 

3.5 
1 3 
19.7 

60 
-0.2 
20 8 

54 
1.1 
22.0 

49 
1.9 
23.0 

4.5 
2.0 
24.1 

4.3
4.9
25.1

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)

Exports(GNFS)" 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

1220 
34.5 
193.2 
131.9 
-71.2 
172 
-74 8 

146.1 
51.4 
194.8 
129.7 
-48.6 
15.9 
-57.9 

154.3 
48 9 
2008 
137.4 
-46.5 
30.4 
-47.1 

1452 
47.9 
210.0 
144.3 
-64.8 
17.7 
-78 2 

1634 
53 1 
2496 
174.7 
-86.1 
16.8 
-108.2 

192.6 
63.0 
279.6 
200.0 
-87.0 
18.1 
-120.8 

221.1 
69.3 
294.4 
203.7 
-73 3 
18.1 
-118.2 

242.6 
75.9 
307.4 
207.4 
-64.8 
18.1 
-115.0 

264.0 
82.6 
321.9 
214.4 
-57.9 
18.1 
-110 2 

264.0
82.6
321.9
214.4
-57.9
18.1
-104 7

Net private foreign direct investnent 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 

35.1 
8.8 
5.4 
3 4 

19.7 
50.4 
47.0 
3.4 

33.6 
17.4 
18.9 
-1.5 

77.3 
8.8 
12 9 
-4 1 

80.1 
19.2 
14.9 
4.2 
8.9 
0.0 

106.6 
7.7 
7.7 
0.0 

107.8 
4.1 
4 0 
0.1 

105.6 
3.5 
3.6 
-0.1 

106.2 
1.6 
1.7 
-0.2 

106.2
5.6
6.3
-0.8

Other capital (netc 

l enon &o-nassio-s) 

31 6 

-15.9 

-12.0 

-10.6 

0.9 

0.4 

-0.8 

-5.0 

-14.9

Change in reseTves' 

-0 6 

3.7 

8.2 

2.7 

5.6 

5.9 

6.7 

7.4 

7.8

Memorandum 
items
Resourcebalance(%ofGDP) 

-290 

-17.7 

-16.2 

-21.5 

-27.4 

-25.1 

-19.4 

-15.8 

-13.1 

-12.2

Real annual growth rates ( YR77 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Merchandise imports(CIF) 

10.0 
100 

39.2 
-11.9 

-4 9 
7.4 

4.0 
117 

12.2 
205 

15.4 
11.3 

5 7 
-0.7 

6.4 
-0.4 

5.9 
1.4 

5.9
1.4

(Continued)

58

St. Kitts and Nevis - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

indicator 

i76 

1l 7 

1 

MM M 
0 
20O 

8 

2W 

3 

2004 
* 

200

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Currentaccountsurplus(+)ordeficit(-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofMM2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR77 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)t

Real interest rates
Consumerprice index (%change) 
GDPdeflator(%change) 

30.2 
29.9 
0.3 
4.9 
0.9 

69.7 
5.5 
38.6 

30.0 
28.9 
1.1 
5.2 
8.1 

30.6 
30.4 
0.2 
6.9 
6.7 

70.7 
13.5 
260.4 

70.4 
4.0 
132.1 

30.9 
32.3 
-1.4 
4.5 
4.1 

74.8 
11.3 
38.6 

29.4 
32.5 
-3.1 
5.8 
3.2 

77.0 
7.4 
28.2 

30.8 
32.6 
-1.8 
4.8 
1.7 

77.0 
10.3 
39.3 

32.1 
32.4 
-0.3 
4.7 
0.8 

77.0 
9.3 
35.5 

33.3 
32.4 
0.9 
4.7 
0.1 

77.0 
8.5 
32.4 

33.7 
32,5 
1.2 
4,6 
0.1 

77.0 
7.7 
29.4 

33.7
32.4
1.3
4.5
0.1

77.6
77
29.5

85.8 
970 
98.9 
100.7 

91.8 
114.4 
98.8 
113.2 

91.9 
102.3 
100.6 
111.1 

93.7 
93.8 
98.5 
114.5 

92.6 
94.2 
97.6 
116.8 

95.2 
96.9 
98.6 
116.1 

99.0 
102.1 
99.4 
101.6 
98.8 
98.8 
114.7 113.6 

104.8 
103.6 
98.8 
112.6 

99,0
102 2
98.8
1116

2.1 
0.0 

8.7 
4.8 

3.7 
3.3 

3.5 
1.8 

0.0 
1.8 

2.6 
3.3 

3.2 
3.1 

3.0 
3.0 

2.9 
2.8 

2.9
2.8

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Central government.
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

59

St. Kitts and Nevis - Key Exposure Indicators

Totaldebtoutstandingand 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)0

,~~~~m 

,,9 

,~ 

1* 

EO 

_L__

64.5 

113.9 

128.1 

136.0 

155.2 

162.9 

167.0 

170.6 

172.1 

177.7

Net disbursements (US$m)' 

8.8 

50.4 

17.4 

8.8 

19.2 

7.7 

4.1 

3.5 

1.6 

5.6

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)

Debt and debt service indicators

(%/0)
TDO/XGS5
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
ConcessionaVTDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/publicDS 
PreferredcreditorDS/public 
DS (%/.)'
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m) 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
ShareoflBRD portfolio(%) 
IDATDO (US$m) 

IFC (US$m)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity' 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

6.9 

6.9 

10.7 

17.1 

20.4 

23.9 

27.6 

34.0 

38.8 

39.3

51.6 76.2 
26.2 
41.4 
5.5 
4.6 
80.6 
73.1 

1.1 
41.2 

0.1 
1.0 

2.8 
45.6 

0.1 
0.9 

81.2 
44.6 
6.8 
68.5 

1.4 
32.1 

0.1 
0.8 

91.4 
45.2 
11.5 
64.2 

94.9 
49.4 
12.5 
68.7 

1.6 
22.4 

2.3 
25.8 

0.2 
3.6 

0.2 
5.2 

84.6 
47.0 
12.4 
70.4 

7.0 
33.6 

0.5 
12.3 

75.5 
44.1 
12.5 
71.3 

13.4 
38.2 

1.0 
14.2 

70.3 
41.5 
14.0 
72.1 

13.6 
42.4 

1.0 
16.4 

65.2 
38.9 
14.7 
72.4 

14.9 
43.3 

1.0 
19.0 

67.3
37.6
14.9
73.6

16.9
46.6

1.1
20.2

0.001 
1.6 

0.001 
1.5 

0.001 
1.5 

0.003 
1.5 

0.004 
1.4 

0.010 
1.0 

0.012 
1.0 

0.014 
1.0 

0.017 
1.0 

0.019
1.0

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0°0 
0.0 

0°0 
0.0 

0.0

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed. use of INE credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IM, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

60

ST. LUCIA

Population: 
156,000 (2000)
GNI per capita: US$4,070 (2000 est. Atlas methodology)

1. 
Profile. St. Lucia is part of the Windward Islands. The interior of the island is mountainous, but there
is more flat land than in Dominica, Grenada, or St. Vincent. The soil is generally fertile and the banana industry
(and other agriculture products) makes St. Lucia the biggest exporter of agricultural products among the OECS
member countries. The pleasant climate and the sandy beaches have encouraged the development of tourism,
which has become the main foreign exchange earner in the economy in recent years. Despite relatively strong
social indicators-the UNDP Human Development Index classifies St. Lucia as 88th out of 174 countries-and a
well-managed economy, poverty and unemployment are still persistent problems. The poverty headcount index
indicates that 25 percent of the population lives below the locally defined poverty line while the unemployment
rate is around 18 percent.

2. 
Economic Developments and Prospects. Following average annual growth rates of over 6 percent in
the 1980s, output growth slowed to 3 percent in the early 1990s and to about 2 percent during the last five years.
This weak performance was mainly driven by the agricultural sector which, between 1996 and 2000, contracted
by about 26 percent (an annual average of about -6 percent), reducing its share in the economy to 8 percent in
2000, compared to over 141/2 percent in 1990. The slump in agriculture, in turn, stemmed from substantial
reductions in banana production which fell by 32 and 23 percent in 1997 and 1999, respectively. Growth,
however low, was maintained by the broadly satisfactory performances of tourism (proxied by "hotels and
restaurants"), construction, utilities, commerce, and the financial sector which together represent about half of
the GDP value added. Regarding public finances, sound fiscal management over the last several years has
allowed for the generation of strong public saving (averaging 8/4 percent of GDP during 1995-99) and overall
surpluses (averaging 2%/4 percent of GDP during 1995-99). Some deterioration has occurred in 2000 on account
of weak revenue performance coupled with rising expenditures. However, the government is expected to stay
the course of good fiscal management with a mix of revenue and expenditure measures.

3. 

Main Issues and Constraints to Development

Economic diversification. As in other OECS counties, the government is seeking ways to make St. Lucia more
competitive internationally and attractive to foreign investors. Investments in infrastructure and the changes in
the OECS telecommunications-sector regulatory framework, for example, are reducing the cost of doing
business in the sub-region, and in St. Lucia. The Government, with the assistance of several international
agencies, is also focusing on human development issues, which are essential for the achievement of increased
diversification. To increase economic efficiency, the Government is currently "corporatizing"-and considering
the privatization of-some public sector entities among which is the water company (WASCO). The company
is being restructured with the aim of achieving financial independency through a full cost-recovery system. To
this end, it has introduced "professional" management, streamlined its workforce, and increased tariff levels.
The government has also established the National Water and Sewerage Commission to regulate the sector. A
similar approach may also be extended to other utilities which could result in substantial improvements in the
quality of and cost reductions for these services.

Offshore services. As in other OECS member countries, the process of economic diversification in St. Lucia
led to the development of offshore service centers. These activities have recently come under increased
international scrutiny and St. Lucia was listed by the Financial Stability Forum on Offshore Financial Centers,
as having a "generally perceived" low quality of supervision and/or low level of cooperation with other
jurisdictions, and the OECD's Forum on Harmful Tax Practices as a jurisdiction meeting tax haven criteria.
St. Lucia is currently participating in the IMF-led offshore financial centers self-assessment exercise, to
determine actions needed for improved legislation, regulation, and supervision of the sector and will participate
in the upcoming Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) to be jointly conducted by the WB and the IMF.

61

St. Lucia at a glance 

58/2001

Latin 
Upper.
America middle-
St Lucia & Canb. 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development diamond'

1999
Population, mid-year (piriorS) 
GNP per capita (Atias mwtnodo, US$) 
GNO (Atlas method, USS brilhons) 

0tS 
173 
3,860 
0.60 

509 
3,840 
1,955 

Life expectancy

4,900

2,811

Average annual growth, 1993.99 

T

Population (%o) 
Labor force (%) 

1 6 

1.6 
2.5 

1 4 
2 1 

A 

GNP 
per 
capita 

Gross
Ipnma,ry
enrollment

Mort recant estimate (latest year available, 1993-99\ 

Poverty (%S of population eelow nationa povertry line)
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expecdancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,0000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15', 
Gross pnmary enrollment 1% ot ctool-age ppulation) 
Male 
Female

38 
72 
16 

75 
70 
31 
8 
75 
12 
113 

76
70
27
7 
78
10
109 

Access to safe water

100 

-
-

St Lucia
Upper-n7iddDe-mrcome group

KEY ECONOMIC RAMtOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1979 

1909 

1998 

1999

Economic ratios'

GDP (US$b,WlionoJ 
Gross1ormestic i'vestmentlGDP 
Exportsrofgoodsand servicesiGDP 
Grossdomesticsavings/GOP 
Gross nat=onal savings/GDP 

0.10 

0.31 
346 
802 
127 
13 5 

0.63 
23,9 
61.5 
174 
13 5 

0.67
25.8
562 
15.3
12.7

.

63.1 

Trade

.

.

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GOP 
Total debt servicelexports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/expons s 

-27 2 

-21 1 
0 8 
211 
2 0 

-10 3 
0 9 
26 1 
3 7 
25 4
38.6

-131 1
0 9 
27 1 
4 7

Domestic 
Savings

-

Investment

.

Indebtedness

1979-89 1989-99 

1999 

1999 

1999-03

(average annual growth,.
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goos and services 

5 8 

3.6 
1 0 
08 

2.9 
0.5 
25 

3 1 
5 7 
-2.2 

3.0 
4u9 
2.0

-St 
-

Lucia
Upper-middle-income group

10 5 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of investment and GDP (%)
20

(% of GDP) 
Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

15.2 
22.8 
8.2 
62.0 

133 
205 
8 3 
66 2 

71 
18.6 
5 9 
74 2 

80
19.2
5.6 
72 8 

a s 

s 

97 

93 

99

2 ]:
-20

Private consumption 
General govemmentconsumption 
Imports of goods and services 

69 4 
17.9 
1021 

68 0 
14.6 
67.9 

70.1 
14.6 
66.8

.30

.

-GDI 

G DP

101.9 

1979-89 1989-99 

1999 

1999 

Growth of exports and imports (%)

(average annual growth)

Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

7.6 
9.6 
11.8 
6.7 

-2.9 
2 9 
-02 
3 7 

1.4 
5 9 
-1 1 
2 3 

-16.3 
9.9 
4.2 
3 6

3

4 
2 

A

-2 
4.

_ 

s 

\9 

7 

98 5 

s

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

3.9 
4.9 
4 6 
7.2 

3 2 
3 0 
1 3 
0 1 
2 6 

1 4 
4 2 
2 2 
-0 4 
2 4 

6.3 
2 9 
5.0 
2 0 
4 3

3 

V

-r

-

Exprts 

_ 

imports

Note 1999 data are preliminary esbmates

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete

62

St. Lucia

PMCES nnd GOVEFtNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation [%)

(%dIJreng.B

Consigner pd1.es 

95 

4.0 

326 
22 

6.1 

6 

_

Implldt GDP defator 

4.3 

2 3 

4

Govwrnment 
finance

(% o(GDP indudes cunwt grants) 
Current revernie 
Current budget blance 
Overall Isurplusdeficit 

94 

a 

97 

r 

9

30.5 
6.9 
0.6 

25.4 
6.0 
1,8 

25 5
5 9
03 

-GDP 

deflator 

CPI

TRADE

(US$ 17VINs) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

ExportandImportlv 

(USSmill)

Ttaloeports(fob) 
Bcnrms 
Fruits and vegetables 
Manufactures 
Total imports (oi) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

109 
58 
1 
37 
275 
50 
16 
69 

70 
34 
1 
17 
335 
75 
26 
74 

61
32 
1 

&10
30 
25
200
1*0
1__
5

15 

344 
70 
22 
78 

Export prirdex 
(1995-l00) 
Importprice Index((195-1c10) 
Termsoftrade (1995=100) 

98 
92 
107 

98 
88 
111 

99 
B9 
112

S3 

94 

ss 
Elpods 

g 

S7 

go w

*pod

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(USS milkons) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Current account balance to GDP I%)

EVposofgoodsand services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resorceb balnce 

66 
105 
-40 

250 
318 
-68 

384 
424 
-40 

375
445 
-71 

-2

4

Net income 
Netcurrenttransfers 

0 
11 

-11 
14 

-44 
20 

-39 
22 

-*

-8 

-IIF 

flflflfl

Current account balance 

-28 

-66 

65 

-38 

D_

12-

Finncing items (net) 
Changes In not reserves 

30 
-2 

72 
-6 

74 
10 

91 
-4 

t4 

*4

16

Mem.o:
Reserves 
iwnudng gd 
(US$ millions) 
Comnerson rate (DEC, hacaM/SS) 

12 
2.7 

39 
2.7 

69 
2.7 

72
2 7

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(USS nItns) 

Composition of 1999 debt (US$ mlLI

Total debt outstandng and dsbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

66 
0 
0 

163 
5 
11 

181
6
12 

0 
0 

A 6 

s 12

Totd debt ervice 
IBRD 
DA 

5 
0 
D 

'4 
1 
0 

18 
1
0

G 5

0 
0 

CompositIon of net resouroflows 

Official grants. 

6

Offticia credtors 
PrlNtereditors 
Foreign direct investment 
PoFtfoto equity 

12 
0 

-1 
7 

-7 
7 

D 67

F:

_ 

.

E: 27

World Ba* program
Commitments 
Disbursements 

0 

0 

7 
3 

A - BRD 
B-IDA 
C - IMF 

E-at.1
0-OOthr,-1111.tnra1 F-Pdvade
G - Shot-tenn

0 

0 
0 

1 
0 

Principal repayments 

o 

0 

Net flols 
kntew.a petaerts 
Ne trsnsfers 

0 

0 
0 
0 

3 
0 
2 

1
0
1

0 

0 

Developmrent Economics 

518/2001

63

St. Lucia Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

Latin 

Upper-

America 
& Carlb. 

middle-
income

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-99 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (milons) 
Gro.wthrate(%annualaverageforpenod) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

0.1 
1.3 
38.6 

0.1 
1.5 
37.3 

0.2 
1.6 
37.7 

508.2 
1.6 
74.9 
2.6 

571.5
1.4
75.4
2.4

.. 

.. 

POVERTY
(% of populafion)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 

..
..

Rural headcount index 

.. 

..

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 

.. 

.. 

3,880 
109 

3,800 
140 

4,870
131

31 

68 

Fond price index (1995=100) 

.. 

..

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

.. 
.. 

5.2
48.3

.. 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Social securrty and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male
Female
Access to an Improved water source

.. 

3.4 
3.6 
7.4 

3.3
5.0
7.9

6.6 

.. 

.. 

., 

91 

94

(% of population)

Toted 
Urban 
Rural 

.. 

.. 

98 

85 
93 
62 

87

.. 

.. 

.. 

94
68

.. 

.. 

.. 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 

.. 

.. 

90 
87 

90
88

.. 

.. 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 

.. 

.. 

9

62 

69 

72 

70 

69

Male 
Female 

.. 

.. 

.. 

67 
73 

66
73

.. 

.. 

,. 

MortalIty
Infant (per thousand five births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (1 5-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 

22 

16 

30 
38 

27
34

.. 

.. 

207 

233

Female (per 1,000 population) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

122 

143

Maternal (per 100,000 lve births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

.. 

..

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced f rom the CMU LDB system. 
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to an improved
water source data is 2000.

51812001

64

St. Lucia - Key Economic Indicators

iV0L, 

fj 

;$,f,-S tiEi;iSi 
t, br8 

iit9 

-2 

-

E0.00 
r;f0oI 

002 

003 

'004 

2-iN00300

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100.0 
8.9 
18.8 
72.3 

100.0 
6.9 
18.6 
74.5 

100.0 
7.1 
18.6 
74.2 

100.0 
8.0 
19.2 
72.8 

100.0 
7.9 
19.6 
72.5 

100.0 
7.0 
21.0 
72.0 

100.0 
7.0 
20.0 
73.0 

100.0 
7.0 
20.0 
73.0 

100.0 
7.0 
20.0 
73.0 

1000
70
20 0
73 0

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

84.8 
21.4 
6.8 
14.6 

84.7 
24.6 
6.4 
18.2 

82.6 
23.9 
8.4 
15.5 

84.7 
25.8 
9.3 
16.5 

85.4 
24.5 
10.3 
14.2 

83.6 
26.0 
10.5 
15.5 

82.9 
27.0 
10.8 
16.2 

82.1 
28 0 
11.2 
16.8 

81.5 
28 7 
11.5 
17.2 

81 5
29 5
115
17.2

Exports (GNFS)5
Imports (GNFS) 

62.3 
68.5 

61.9 
71.2 

61.5 
67.9 

56.2 
66.8 

55.7 
65.5 

55.9 
65.5 

56J1 
65.9 

56.3 
66.4 

56.9 
67.2 

57.5
68.1

Gross donestic savings 
GTossnational savings' 

15.2 
11.2 

15.3 
11.0 

17.4 
13.5 

15.3 
12.7 

14.6 
.12.4 

16.4 
13.5 

17.1 
14.0 

17.9 
14.7 

18.5 
152 

18.5
15.2

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US5. Atlas method) 

566.4 

579.8 

625.0 

666.6 

707.1 

746 6 

7889 

836.9 

893.0 

953.7

3,680 

3,650 

3,670 

3,880 

4,070 

4,242 

4,436 

4,670 

4,957 

5.267

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at factor cost 
1.4 
Gross Domestic Income 
1.4 

0.6 
0.6 

2.9 
2.7 

3.1 
2.9 

2.0 
1.7 

3.0 
2.6 

3.3 
2.5 

3.7 
3.0 

4.3 
3.1 

4.3
3.3

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market pnces 
0.3 
-1.2 
Total consumption 
2.3 
-1.2 
Private consumption 
2.0 
-1.4 

1.4 
-1.2 
-0.2 

1.6 
4.2 
4.8 

0.5 
1.2 
4.8 

1.7 
-0.4 
4.9 

2.3 
1.4 
5.0 

2.9 
1.9 
5.2 

3.8 
3.1 
5.4 

3.8
3,7
5 6

Balance of Payments (US$)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)5
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

353.1 
86.3 
388.0 
267.4 
-34.9 
13.2 
-57.7 

358.6 
70.2 
413.0 
292.4 
-54.4 
13.0 
-79.1 

384.2 
70.4 
424.4 
295.1 
40.2 
19.5 
-64.5 

374.6 
60.9 
445.1 
312.0 
-70.5 
22.0 
-87.5 

393.8 
63.3 
463.5 
327.6 
-69.7 
21.9 
-85.8 

417 3 
64.6 
488.9 
347.4 
-71.6 
21.9 
-93.4 

442.4 
66.3 
520.2 
370.0 
-77.8 
21.9 
-102.6 

471.5 
68.2 
556.0 
395.9 
-84.5 
21.9 
-111 .6 

508.5 
70.2 
599.9 
427.6 
-91.4 
21.9 
-120.9 

548 8
70.2
649.1
427 6
-100,3
21.9
-132 0

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Othercapital(ne.t,i 
Change in reservesd 

16.9 
16.0 
11.4 
4.6 
17.9 
6.9 

15.0 
10.5 
3.4 
7.1 
58.6 
-4.9 

83.4 
16.0 
-1.0 
17.0 
-25.4 
-9.5 

94.1 
15.1 
-6.9 
22.0 
-17.8 
-3.9 

46.5 
32.8 
2.6 
30.2 
21.1 
-14.6 

49.3 
22.1 
1.4 
20.7 
29.8 
-7.8 

51.2 
137 
-0.6 
14.3 
42.4 
-4.7 

53.1 
12.4 
-4.2 
16.6 
50.3 
-4.2 

54.5 
14.0 
-4.1 
18.1 
56.9 
-45 

560
13.6
-49
18.5
672
-4.8

-omi&om,sss,o.) 

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR87 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-6.2 

-9.4 

-6.4 

-10.6 

-9.9 

-9.6 

-9.9 

-10.1 

-102 

-10.5

-8.9 
1.1 

-22.0 
18.7 

-4.7 
4.1 

-8.0 
1.4 

5.8 
10.1 

2.7 
3.2 

3.1 
3.7 

3.4 
4.1 

4.0 
4,9 

3.8
1.3

(Continued)

65

St. Lucia - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

1ww 

19I96 1997 1998 

... 19 .. 

,- 

209 

2,!003 'W 

200

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (- 
Capital expenditure 
Foreignfinancing 

24.2 
20.6 
3.6 
6.4 
2.5 

23.9 
20.2 
3.7 
6.0 
3.0 

25.4 
19.4 
6.0 
7 9 
1.0 

25.5 
19.6 
5.9 
9.1 
0.7 

24.6 
19.9 
4.7 
9.0 
2.1 

25.9 
20.6 
5.3 
9.0 
1.7 

26.5 
20.5 
6.0 
9.0 
1.4 

27.0 
20.5 
6.5 
9.0 
1.2 

27.0 
20.0 
7,0 
9.0 
1.1 

27.0
20.0
7.0
9.0
1.1

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2 (°) 
Pnvatesectorcreditgrowth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR87=100)
Merchandiseexportpriceindex 
Merchandiseimportpriceindex 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Realexchangerate((US/LCU)P YR95

=1° 

Real interest rates
Consumerpriceindex (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

54.2 
1.8 
130.4 

56.5 
6.7 
100.7 

58.6 
11.9 
300.0 

59.6 
8.4 
115.5 

61.2 
9.0 
125.3 

63.2 
9.0 
149.2 

63.2 
5.7 
149.2 

63.2 
6.1 
149.2 

63.2 
6.7 
149.2 

63.3
7.0
149.3

96.7 
115.3 
83.9 
96.6 

87.7 
106.6 
82.3 
102.8 

99.9 
103.0 
97.0 
103.3 

101.9 
104.4 
97.6 
112.1 

99.3 
102.5 
96.9 
116.8 

99.1 
102.6 
96.6 
116.2 

98.9 
102.8 
96.2 
115.9 

98.7 
103.7 
95.2 
115.5 

98.5 
104.9 
93.9 
115.2 

98.4
105.9
92.9
114.9

-2.3 
0.1 

1.6 
2.4 

3.6 
2.2 

6.1 
2.3 

2.0 
4.0 

2.5 
2.5 

2.3 
2.3 

2.3 
2.3 

2.3 
2.3 

2.3
2.3

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Central government.
f. "LCU' denotes "local currency units." An increase in US51LCU denotes appreciation.

66

St. Lucia - Key Exposure Indicators

Total debtoutstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (USSm)'

141.0 

147.3 

163.1 

180.6 

213.6 

235.9 

228.8 

225.5 

223.5 

217.6

Netdisbursements(US$m)' 

14.7 

6.2 

15.9 

17.5 

32.9 

22.4 

-7.1 

-3.2 

-2.1 

-5.9

Totaldebtservice(TDS) 

12.4 

13.6 

14.2 

17.6 

18.5 

25.0 

24.3 

23.9 

23.7 

23.1

(US$m)'

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)
TDO/XGSb 

39.9 

41.1 

42.5 

48.2 

54.2 

56.5 

51.7 

47.8 

43.9 

39.6

TDO/GDP 

24.9 

25.4 

26.1 

27.1 

30.2 

31.6 

29.0 

26.9 

25.0 

22.8

TDS/XGS 
ConcessionallTDO 

3.5 
58.1 

3.8 
57.0 

3.7 
52.6 

4.7 
44.0 

4.7 
37.0 

6.0 
32.8 

5.3 
34.0 

5.2 
33.3 

5.2 
33.4 

5.2
32.8

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

IBRDDS/publicDS 

3.3 

3.8 

3.1 

3.5 

2.4 

3.1 

3.5 

4.2 

3.3 

3.0

PreferredcreditorDS/public 
DS (%)c

66.7 

71.1 

66.9 

54.5 

32.8 

35.1 

33.0 

32.3 

34.8 

33.7

IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)a 

0.1 
3.9 

0.1 
3.7 

0.1 
5.4 

0.1 
6.2 

0.2 
5.9 

0.5 
8.0 

0.5 
9.0 

0.4 
9.4 

0.4 
9.8 

0.2
10.1

Of wbich present value of

guarantees (USSm)
Share ofIBRD portfolio (%) 

0.004 

0.003 

0.005 

0.005 

0.005 

0.006 

0.007 

0.008 

0.009 

0.010

IDATDO(US$m)d 

8.2 

9.7 

11.4 

11.6 

11.4 

14.4 

17.8 

20.1 

23.7 

25.4

IFC (US$m)
Loans 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

Equity and quasi-equity' 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

MIGA
NIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.

d. Includes present value of guarantees.

e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

67

ST. VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES

Population: 
115,080 (mid-2000)
GNI per capita: US$2,690 (2000 est. Atlas methodology)

1. 
Profile. St. Vincent and the Grenadines consists of 32 islands. St Vincent, the northernmost island, is
the country's commercial and political center, accounting for 90 percent of both the land area and population.
The volcanic island is lush and green, its deep valleys cultivated with bananas, coconuts and arrowroot. The
others belong to the Grenadines, a chain of about 800 islets extending between St. Vincent and Grenada, which
attract a large number of tourists. The economy of the country is based on services and agriculture. In terms of
sectoral contribution to GDP, however, agriculture represents about 10 percent (bananas about 3 percent)
whereas services total about 60 percent. St. Vincent and the Grenadines, the poorest country of the Eastern
Caribbean, has a poverty headcount index of about 38 percent and an estimated unemployment rate of about 22
percent (the last census was in 1991 and a new one is scheduled for this year). This notwithstanding, the
country has reasonably good social indicators and ranks 796 out of 174 countries in the UNDP's 2000 Human
Development Index.

2. 
Economic Developments and Prospects. The Government launched an economic diversification
program in the mid-1990's and strengthened measures to deal with the decline in the banana sector, which had
been the economy's mainstay for several decades. This initiative was supported by investments in agriculture,
transport, education, and health sectors. As a result, real GDP growth, which had averaged 2.3 percent during
1993-97 with significant volatility (reflecting changes in the banana sector), improved to 4.5 percent during
1998-2000, due mainly to tourism related activities, construction, and an increase in the production of bananas.
During 1990-99, inflation was low, averaging about 3 percent per year. Public finances are generally sound,
despite a substantial decline in external grants since 1992. Central government savings averaged 4 percent of
GDP in 1990-99 (3 percent of GDP in 2000), while the overall balance posted a small deficit (averaging slightly
more than 1 percent of GDP in 1995-99).

3. 

Main Issues and Constraints to Development

Economic Diversification. St. Vincent is implementing a restructuring of the banana sector (as other
Windward Islands) following the increasing uncertainty about preferential access to the EU market in the past
years. The government has also sought to encourage diversification-towards services, tourism in particular,
but also financial services and informatics, alternative agriculture products, and manufacturing-through, inter
alia, targeted fiscal incentives and public investment in.

Fiscal Management. To be able to increase public investment in physical and human capital and thus lay the
ground for sustained high growth and reductions in unemployment without resorting to increased indebtedness,
public sector saving needs to be strengthened. Higher saving would be achieved through improvements in the
efficiency of revenue collection and broadening of the tax base, and expenditure control, the latter especially
through limiting personnel costs. Public external debt is somewhat high, amounting to about 50 percent of GDP
(compared to the ECCB average of about 41 percent); however, the government is committed to keeping it from

increasing.

Offshore services. As in other OECS member countries, the process of economic diversification in St. Vincent
and the Grenadines led to the development of offshore service centers. These activities have recently come
under increased international scrutiny and St. Vincent and the Grenadines was listed by the Financial Stability
Forum on Offshore Financial Centers and the Financial Action Task Force, as having a "generally perceived"
low quality of supervision and/or low level of cooperation with other jurisdictions, and the OECD's Forum on
Harmful Tax Practices as a jurisdiction meeting tax haven criteria. St. Vincent and the Grenadines is currently
participating in the IMF-assisted offshore financial centers self-assessment exercise, to determine actions needed
for improved legislation, regulation, and supervision of the sector and will participate in the upcoming Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) to be jointly conducted by the WB and the IMF.

68

St. Vincent and the Grenadines at a glance 

5/812001

St Vince nt 
LAtin 
Lower-
and the America middle-
Grenadines & Carib. 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development diamond.

1999
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, US5) 
GNP (A.las method, US$ bllions; 

0.11 
2,620 
0 30 

509 
3,840 
1,955 

2,094 
1.200
2 5123

Life expectancy

Average annual growth 1993-99 

Population (%J 

07 

1 6 

1
12 

Labor force 6) 

2 5 

GNP 
per 
capita 

S 

' 

> 

Gross
primary
enrollment

Moat recent estimate (latest year available, 1993-99) 
Poverty (I% of populaion below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population) 
Ule expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 lve births) 
Chitd malnutrition (I% ot'chiltren under 5) 

\ 

53 
73 
I0 

75 
70 
31 
a 
75 
12 
113 

43
69
33
15 
86
16
114 

Access to safe water

Access to improved water source (Ye of poputaabcn 

Illiteracy (I% otpopulraion age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (,% of school-age population) 
Male 
Female 

=- StI Vincent and the Grenadines
-L Lower-middle-income group

11 

116

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1979 

1989 

199t 

1999

,Economie maties

GOP (USS bllions) 
Gross domestic investment/GOP 
Exports of goods and %ervcesIGDP 
Gross domestic saving/GOP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

0.05 
3258 
51 8 
-106 
17.9 

0 18 
28,8 
65 3 
115 
177 

0.32 
31 8 
50.1 
8 6 
856 

0.33
32 6
54 6 
14.1
127

Trade

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt servicelexporlx 
Present value of debt/GOP 
P'resent value of debtexports

-6 6 
0.4 
13 2 
0 6 

-15.1 
0.9 
29.7 
3.2 

-23 2 
1.0 
40.9 
5 9 

-19.5
19 
57.7 
6.1 

Domestic 
Savings

Investment

|Indebtedness

1979-89 1989.99 

199S 

1999 

19S9-C3

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per captta 
Exports of goods and services 

5.9 
4.5 
9.2 

3.3 
2.5 
0 7 

5.7 
3 6 
6.4 

4.0 
19 
6 5 

39 
4.2 
5 3

-

St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of investment and GDOP (l/%

(% of GDP)

Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufactunng 

15.7 
24.9 
10.7 

170 
24 7 
10.8 

10.8 
26 9 

10 4
25.8
5,8 

6 

Services 

59 4 

58 3 

62.3 

6338 

1

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

87 5 
23 1 
95.2 

69 3 
19 2 
82.7 

72.5 
18.8 
73.2 

67 5 
18.4
73.4 

7 

s9 

9

00I 

GOP

1979.S9 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and imparts F%)

(average annual grawth)
Agnculture 
Industry 

6.5 
5.7 

-2.8 
3 3 

8.3 
5 7 

-5. 
-0 4 

27

±+

Manufacturing 

5.4 

0.3 

-5 6 

-1 6 

iO..

Services 

5.3 

48 

53 

76 

T

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and senvices 
Gross national product 

1 9 
3.2 
4 7 
3 8 
5.5 

3 4 
2.8 
4.6 
1.8 
3.2 

0.6 
5.0 
7.9 
8.5 
5 6 

-0 1 
1 7 
4.6 
4.2 
2.8

-5
'i ° 

"'

L20 I

| 

Eipss 

-

-mports

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estmates

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its ncome-group average If data are missing, the diamond mill
be incomplete.

69

St. Vincent and the Grenadines

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)

Domestic prices

(Y. ctange) 
Consumer pnces 
Implicit GOP deflator 

5

15.5 
132 

2.8 
51 

2. 
23 

1.0
25 

2

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplusideflcit 

29 0 
5 8 
-6 2 

28 5 
4.3
-2.8

a94 
9

9I5 

99 

97 

a 

-

TRADE

1979 
1 

1989 

1998 

1999 

(US$ mDllions) 

Export and import levels (USS mill.)
250

Total exports (fob) 
Bananas 
Eddoes and dasheens 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

73 
33 
3 
23 
118 
29 
6 
22 

50 
21 
2 
22 
178 
44 
141 
42 

50 
20
2 
19 
201
41 
11 
49

2M
mc0

oo
so

Export price index (1995=100) 

.

99 
81 
122 

93 

94 

95 

90 

97 
t mlports

59 

99

Import pnce index (1995=100) 
Termsoftrade(1995=100) 

i2 Erorts 

100 

98

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 
Exports of goods and servces 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 
Net income 
Net current transfers 

1979 
33 
52 
-19 

19r9 
113 
151 
-38 

1998 
159 
232 
-73 

1999 
179 
241
42 

C.rrent account babnce to GDP 1%)
o

-s
i

7 
18 

1 
14 

1 
16

16 

Current account balance 

4 

-27 

-73 

-65

Finanong items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

7 
-4 

28 
-1 

66 
7 

58 
7 

-20
-2

Memo:
Reserves including gold (JS$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC. locallUS$) 

-
2.7 

42 
2 7 

49
2.7

2.7 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(USS millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of 1999 debt (US$ mill.)

7 
0 
0 

53 
0 
5 

129 
0 
8 

190
0
7 

| 

G:32 

B 7

Totaldebtservice 
IBRD 
IDA 

0 
0 
0 

4 
0 
0 

9 
0 
0 

11
0
0 

05

Composition of net resource flows

Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity 

5 
1 

5
6 

14 
0 

1
5e 

o 

o 

F

0 

0 

-

E: 35

Wortd Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Prncpal repayments 
Netfiows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

3 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 

1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

A- IBRD 

E - Bilateral

0 
0 
0
0
0

B- IDA 
C - IMF 

D - Other multilateral F . POvat.
G - Short-te

Development Economics 

51812001

70

St. Vincent and the Grenadines Social Indicators

uLtest single year 

Same regionrincome group

Latin 
America 
& Carib. 

Lower-
middle-
Income

1970-75 

198048 

1993-99 

POPULATION

Tota population, mid-year (milltns) 
Growthhrate(%annualaverageforperiod) 
Urban popuWon (% of population) 

0.1 
1.1 
20.6 

0.1 
0.9 
33.6 

0.1 
0.7 
53.5 

508.2 
1.6 
74.9 

2,093.0
1.1
42.9

Tota fertiity rate (births per woman) 

.

.

.. 

2.6 

2.1

POVERTY
(% of population)

Naticnal headcount index 
Urban headcount index 

.. 

..

.. 

..

Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumerpriceindex(1995=100) 

630 
31 

1,050 
74 

2,620 
106 

3,800 
140 

1,200
137

Food price index (1995=100) 

.. 

..

INCOMEiCONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Laosst quhtle (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintle (% of income or consumption) 

.. 

.

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Sociai security and welfare (% of GDP) 

.
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
6.3 
.. 

3.4 
3.6 
7.4

2.7
4.8

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

.. 

.. 

84 
.. 
.. 

91 
.. 
.. 

99
100
99

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

Access to an Improved vwater source
(% of population)
Ttal 

.. 

75 

93 

85 
93 
62 

80

Urban 
Rural 

.. 

.. 

.. 

94
69

.. 

.. 

.. 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 

.. 

.. 

.. 

90 
87 

87
87

.. 

.. 

.. 

Child mainutrition (%under5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 

20 

.. 

'' 

9 

9

63 

69 

73 

70 

69

Male 
Female 

.. 

67 
73 

67
72

.. 

Mortality
Infant (per thousand ivebirths) 

26 

20 

30 

32

Under 5 (per thousand Wive births) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

38 

40

Adult (15-9)
Maie (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 lve births) 
Births attended by skilled heath staff (%)

.
.. 

.. 
.
..

.. 
.. 

207 

191

122 

133

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system. 
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than halt the uni shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
beween the estimates of school-age population and reported enrolment data. Latest year for amcess to an improved
water source data is 2000.

5/8/2001

71

St. Vincent and the Grenadines - Key Economic Indicators

09 2W Mt 

~ 

4 

QO

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic produc? 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100.0 
12.5 
24.3 
63.1 

100.0 
10.1 
26.6 
63.3 

100.0 
10.8 
26.9 
62.3 

100.0 
10.4 
25.8 
63.8 

100.0 
10.0 
26.0 
64.0 

100.0 
9.5 
26.2 
64.3 

100,0 
9.2 
26.1 
64.7 

100.0 
9.0 
25.9 
65.1 

100.0 100.0
9.1 
9.2
25.5 
24.8
65.4 
66.0

Total Consumption 
Grossdomesticinvesrnent 
Government investment 
Private investment 

82.1 
28.3 
6.9 
21.4 

91.4 
29.7 
12.2 
17.5 

91.4 
31.8 
13.8 
18.1 

85.9 
32.6 
13.8 
18.8 

83.2 
28.6 
9.6 
19.0 

82.9 
29.3 
10.6 
18.7 

82.7 
29.5 
10.7 
18.8 

82.3 
30.1 
10.7 
19.4 

82.0 
30.6 
10.8 
19.8 

81.9
31.2
10.8
20.4

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

53.3 
63.8 

49.4 
70.4 

50.1 
73.2 

54.6 
73.4 

58.5 
70.3 

57.5 
69.9 

57.4 
69.7 

57.1 
69.5 

56.7 
69.3 

56.7
69.0

Grossdomesticsavings 
Gross national savings' 

17.9 
18.3 

8.6 
8.9 

8.6 
8.6 

14.1 
12.7 

16.8 
15.5 

17.1 
15.5 

17.3 
15.5 

17.7 
15.9 

18.0 
16.3 

18.1
16.3

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(USS million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

278.4 

293.8 

316.4 

328.6 

332.9 

352.5 375.2 

400.0 

427.4 

456.3

2,440 

2,480 

2,570 

2,620 

2,690 

2,827 

2,986 

3,159 

3,349 

3,548

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic productatfactor cost 
1.2 
Gross Domestic Income 
3.6 

3.1 
3.7 

5.7 
5.7 

4.0 
4.0 

3.7 
3.5 

3.7 
3.5 

3.9 
3.5 

4.1 
3.7 

4.3 
3.6 

4.4
3.7

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
3.0 
3.0 
Total consumnption 
2.0 
14.8 
Private consumption 
1.6 
20.8 

5.0 
0.8 
-0.2 

3.2 
-0.3 
-0.7 

2.9 
-0.6 
1.0 

2.9 
2.6 
2.8 

3.2 
2.9 
3.0 

3.4 
2.9 
3.2 

3.7 
3.2 
3.4 

3.8
3.7
3.7

Balance of Payments (US$ anllions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
MerchandiseFOB 
Imports (GNFS) 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

148.4 
145.1 
52.6 
47.4 
177.6 206.8 
127.8 
152.6 
-29.2 
-61.7 
11.9 
13.7 
-27.8 
-61.1 

158.5 
50.0 
231.6 
170.0 
-73.1 
14.1 
-73.3 

179.4 
49.6 
241.2 
177.0 
-61.8 
15.6 
-65.2 

194.7 
54.8 
234.0 
170.4 
-39.3 
16.3 
-43.7 

202.7 
55.2 
246.4 
178.9 
-43.7 
16.7 
-49.7 

215.4 
58.5 
261.5 
190.0 
-46.1 
17.0 
-52.5 

228A4 242.3 
61.9 
65.2 
278.0 
296.2 
203.0 
217.0 
-49.6 
-53.9 
17.8 
18.1 
-56.8 
-61.5 

258.7
68.1
314.8
232.2
-56.1
18.5
-67.1

Netprivateforeigndirectinvestment 
42.6 
Long-term loans (net) 
0.7 
Official 
0.3 
Private 
0.4 
Othercapital(net,incl.errors&ommissions) -15.9 
Change in reservesd 
0.4 

55.2 
5.9 
4.5 
1.4 
-1.1 
1.1 

61.5 
13.7 
14.3 
-0.6 
-9.3 
7.4 

44.4 
3.0 
0.6 
2.4 
10.8 
7.0 

36.3 
7.8 
1.3 
6.5 
-3.6 
3.2 

37.4 
8.5 
-0.6 
9.1 
-1.2 
5.0 

37.7 
8.3 
-4.0 
12.3 
1.4 
5.2 

38.4 
8.2 
-6.0 
14.2 
7.2 
3.0 

39.1 
6.7 
1.0 
5.7 
13.7 
2.0 

39.8
6.6
2.0
4.6
19.7
1.0

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates (YR87 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-10.5 

-21.0 

-23.1 

-18.8 

-11.8 

-12.4 

-12.3 

-12.4 

-12.6 

-12.3

-16.3 
2.8 

-12.9 
27.7 

-1.1 
19.3 

8.3 
10.5 

5.1 
1.0 

2.9 
3.3 

3.8 
3.8 

4.0 
4.2 

4.1 
4.3 

4.1
4.5

(Continued)

72

St. Vincent and the Grenadines - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Public finance (as % ofGDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
28.2 
Current expenditures 
24.2 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
4.0 
Capital expenditure 
4.7 
Foreignfinancing 
-0.6 

28-5 
24.2 
4.3 
10.3 
1.7 

29.0 
23.2 
5.8 
12.1 
3.7 

28.5 
24.2 
43 
7.0 
0.6 

28.8 
25.8 
3.0 
7.3 
1]2 

28.4 
25.5 
2 9 
7.5 
1.4 

28.4 
25.1 
3.3 
7.6 
1.3 

283 
24.7 
3.6 
7.7 
1.0 

28.4 
24.5 
3.9 
75 
1.2 

28.3
24.]
4.2
75
1.0

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2(%) 
Privatesectorcreditgrowth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR95 =100)
Merclandiseexportpriceindex 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandisetermsoftradeindex 

Realexchangerate(US$/LCU)r 

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

52.0 
4.4 
145.7 

56.1 
13.8 
127.6 

60.4 
16.0 
154.5 

65.5 
12.6 
113.8 

71.1 
10.1 
272.0 

73.9 
10.0 
117.1 

74.0 
6.6 
113.0 

74.0 
6.6 
112.7 

74.1 
7.0 
119.2 

74.2
6.9
117.6

101.0 
99.0 
98.2 

103.0 

104.5 
92.6 
97.9 

1100 

111.4 
86.5 
100.0 

102.1 
81.6 
98.3 

108.7 

108.6 

107.3 
77.7 
95.5 

110.1 

105.0 
79.0 
96.3 

110.0 

107.2 
80.9 
96.1 

109.1 

109.0 
82.9 
95.3 

108.3 

110.4 
84.9 
94.1 

107.4 

110.9
87.0
92.3

106.6

4.4 
4 0 

0.5 
18 

21 
2.3 

1.0 
2.5 

0.6 
0.8 

2.1 
1.4 

2.8 
2.5 

2.8 
2.8 

2.8 
2.8 

2.8
2.8

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Central govemment.
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

73

St. Vincent and the Grenadines - Key Exposure Indicators

Total debt outstanding and 

117.0 

117.8 

129.3 

189.6 

197.4 

205.5 

213.8 

222.0 

228.7 

235 3

disbursed (TOO) (US$m)f

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

2.3 

0.7 

11.5 

60.4 

7.8 

8.1 

8.3 

8.2 

6.7 

6 6

Total debt service (TDS) 

8.5 

10.0 

9.4 

10.9 

12.1 

12.8 

14.2 

16.4 

18.7 

20.4

(US$m),

Debt and debt service indicators

(%

TDO/XGS' 

78.9 

81.2 

81.5 

105.7 

101.4 

101.4 

99.3 

97.2 

94 4 

91.0

TDO/GDP 

42.0 

40.1 

40.9 

57.7 

59.3 

58.3 

57.0 

55.5 

53.5 

51.6

TDS/XGS 

5.7 

6.9 

5.9 

6 1 

6.2 

6.3 

6.6 

7.2 

7.7 

7.9

Concessional/TDO 

64.3 

670 

69.6 

46.9 

46.1 

44.9 

42.9 

39.8 

37.2 

34.3

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

IBRD DS/public DS 

1.7 

1.5 

0.9 

0.4 

0.3 

0.3 

0.3 

0.3 

0.5 

0.7

Preferred creditor DS/public 

73.6 

55.4 

65.7 

48.4 

51.1 

46.2 

46.2 

44.1 

39.7 

39.3

DS (%)'

IBRD DS/XGS 

0.10 

0.10 

0.06 

0.03 

0.02 

0.02 

0.02 

0.02 

0 08 

0.15

IBRD TDO (US$m)d 

0.3 

0.3 

0.2 

0.2 

0.1 

0.1 

1.0 

2.3 

4.7 

7.3

Of which present value of

guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)5

0.0003 

0.0003 

0.0002 

0 0002 

0.0001 

0.0000 

0.0008 

0.0019 

0.0042 

0.0069

7.8 

7.3 

7.6 

7.4 

6.8 

9.3 

12.7 

15.3 

18.1 

20.7

IFC (US$m)e

Loans 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

Isa. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a

Equity and quasi-equity 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

MIGA

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-

termn capital.

b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.

c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.

d. Incl udes present value of guarantees.

c. St. Vincent and the Grenadines is not a member of IFC.

f Includes equity and quasi-equity type of both loan and equity instruments.

74

BARBADOS

Population: 
270,000 (2000)
GNI per capita: US$9,930 (2000 est. Atlas methodology)

1. 
Profile. Barbados is the easternmost island in the Caribbean. Unlike most other Eastern Caribbean
islands it is not made up of volcanoes, but of coral reef. Like the other countries in the sub-region tourism is the
main industry, but the economy is relatively broad-based. Tourism and financial services are the most important
foreign exchange earners. Sugar, a traditional mainstay, is in decline and proving difficult to maintain
profitably. The unemployment rate is 9.3 percent, poverty is relatively low with a headcount index of 13.9
percent, and social indicators are good. The UNDP's 2000 Human Development Index ranks Barbados 30 'h
among 174 countries.

2. 
Economic Developments and Prospects. From 1984 to 1989, real GDP expansion in Barbados
averaged 3.2 percent, due mostly to growth in tourism, construction, and other services, while manufacturing
and agriculture experienced contraction. A downturn in the tourism sector plunged the economy into a deep
recession from 1990 to 1992. There was a modest recovery in 1993, spurred by an increase in tourist arrivals,
and in 1994 the expansion gathered pace, with growth reaching about 4 percent. A poor sugar harvest, sluggish
tourism, and rising inflation again slowed real GDP growth to 2.3 percent in 1995, but activity has since
accelerated on the back of a strong resurgence in tourism, construction, informatics, and the offshore financial
sector. Growth has averaged 3 percent over the last four years. Inflation for the 12 months to December 2000
remained low, estimated at 2.5 percent. The Government has pursued prudent fiscal management reflected in
the good performance of public finances while moderation in wage settlements has preserved the external
competitiveness of the economy. Barbados is the only Eastern Caribbean country with an investment rating
from Moodys (Baa) and Standard and Poors (A-). In June 2000, the country successfully issued US$100 million
in global sovereign bonds to cover public spending and increase the international reserve cushion of the
economy. However, interest spreads were higher than would normally be implied by the country's credit
ratings, reflecting the small size of its economy and consequent greater vulnerability.

3. 

Main Issues and Constraints to Development

Economic Development Strategy. The Government's strategy appears well-suited to the needs of the country,
and provides a framework for the successful ongoing transition from an economy based on agriculture exports to
preferential markets to one based on service exports. The medium-term strategy of the Government is to
maintain the near-balance of public finances, while increasing public savings to finance a public sector
investment program focused on economic and social infrastructure and environmental protection. The strategy
calls for structural reforms in education, health, and the public pension system; the regulation and supervision of
utility monopolies; and reform of the non-bank financial sector.

The sugar industry. Barbados' sugar industry enjoys preferential export regime by the EU. The 2001
production is estimated at around 50,000 tons (compared to over 60,000 tons as recently as 1997). The
Government is expected to make difficult decisions on the future of the sugar industry. The goals of increased
output and overall profitability appear elusive and the continued subsidy to the industry is being questioned.

Offshore services. In 2000 Barbados was listed by the Financial Stability Forum on offshore financial centers
(as a Group II country) as "perceived" to have lower quality of supervision and/or lower level of cooperation
with other jurisdictions than that of selected European countries, Hong Kong, and Singapore (Group I), but
better than those in other Caribbean countries (Group III). Barbados was also listed by the OECD's Forum on
Harmtful Tax Practices as a jurisdiction meeting tax haven criteria. In parallel, the authorities have drafted a new
offshore banking act, expected to be adopted by the end of 2000, that would be more in accordance with the

Principles for Effective Banking Supervision and are interested in enhancing legislation and supervision of

offshore financial centers. Barbados is expected to participate in the IMF-WB Financial Sector Assessment
Program (FSAP) starting in about FY02.

75

Barbados at a glance 

50200

LAtin 
Amerks 
& CatDb. 

Upper-
ntddcii-
ncoms 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

,atiardo 

Development dlamond'

1999
Poptuaticn, mid-ear (ntllons) 

0.27 

509 

523 

Ufa expectanry

GNP wpr c 

(8Attats method., USgJ 

8,660 

3,840 

4.900

GNP (Attns mthod, US$ tbitlons) 

2.4 

1,955 

2,811

Averasg annual growtb 1M49

Population I'%) 
Laborforce I(%) 

02 
08 

1.6 
2,5 

1 4
21 

GNP 

l<</ 

GrOS

per 

pttmury

Most recewm awt 

(latea year avaWsabl 1993-99) 

capita 

enrro1ment

Povaty (% opooAtkitn bel nabwonal povon(y 4ne)
Urbon popuaton (% of totad population) 
Life expectacy attotht &awa) 
tWat mortaly (pst 1,000 
ttve 
bSitths) 
CNhirimon 
t% o 
chlnwd under 5) 
Accs 
to Improved wteWr totce (% ofp*WtW 
Uttrsaq. (% ofpopuotIon age 15+.t 
Groseprilaryvenrolhment 
(9%hschagopoput-Iaon) 
maw 
Femal

4} 
76 
14 

75 
70 
31 
8 
75 
12 
113 
.. 

76
70
27
7 
78
10
109 
., 

Access to afe water

) 

100 

.. 

-
---

Barbados
Upper-riddeincome, goup

.. 

KEY ECONOMIC RATMS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1979 

1989 

1t99 

1999

Economic ntlos

GOP (=SS t480) 
Grosadomeatcinvestment/GDP 
Exports of good and servicesfGDP 
Gross domestcsavingaslGDP 
Grmabnaio n 
avinoGlDP 
Cwnt account bal*5WGDP 
Interest paymnWGDP 
Total de8tlGFP 
Totl dbtsrviceaxports 
Presnt vs 
of debttGDP 
Prewnt valu of debUSpoot 

0.67 
23.5 
65.4 
12.8 
15,9 

1.7 
192 
S0.3 
19.1 
17.4 

2.4 
1&6 
53.9 
18.3 
16.1 

2.5
19.4
50A 
14A
14.3

Trade

-. 1 
0.8 
23,3 
2,8 
.

-0.2 
2A 
37.8 
11,1 
.. 

-2.4 
1.2 
25.6 
6.9 
25.6 
45.0

-5.2
1.2 
23 7 
7,7
.

Domestic 
Savings

invIItmerA

.. 

.

Indebtedness

1979-89 1S89-9S 

1998 

1999 

1999-03

(averae eanmuas gol)
GOP 
GNPpercapita 

1t9 
1.3 

1.1 
0.8 
2.7 

4.4 
4.7 
1.6 

2.5 
4.9 
-1.0 

2.6 
4.8 
1.6

-Barbados
upper-mdwie-ncom group

-- 

Exports d goods and services 

.. 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Groh of Inveitmnint i CGDP %)
4

(% of GOP) 
Aggdculture 
Industry 
Manufeduing 
SerIces 

9.2 
21.1 
11.4 
69.7 

5.2 
18.5 
8.0 
76.3 

5.8 
21.6 
9.8 
72.6 

6.1 
21.5 
9.3 
72.4 A 

k0.

20

2

0

Private consumptlon 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

71.6 
15.6 
76.2 

63.0 
17.9 
50.3 

61.3 
22.5 
56.1 

63.0 
22.7 
55.4

ro 

U 

9 6
-Ga- 

GDP

1979-89 1989.99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of *xpet V an imports 1%)

(average annual growth)
Agricuture 
Indusry 
Mamnfaduing 
Services 

-1.6 
0.8 
-0.9 
2.1 

-0.6 
1.5 
0.5 
0.8 

-13.3 
10.3 
3.4 
4.4 

6.9 
2.1 
-2.4 
2.3 

4 T 

6

121 
10 

A

\ 
t\ 

/ 

A

8 

# 

/ 

X

Private consumption 
General govemment consumpbon 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

.
.. 
.. 
.. 

1.4 
7.9 
7.9 
4.8 
1.2 

0.9 
4.7 

4.1 
2.2 
3.5 
1.9 
2.5

4
2
-2 

6.2 

s 
--

iS 

ff 

07 

il 

ii

1.6 
4.2 

b4t 

_ao.pona

1.6 

Note: 1999 data are preliminary esimates.
The dcamonds show four key indicators In the country (in boid) compared with its income-group average. If data are misaing bhe diamond wFi
be incomplete.

76

Barbados

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

-nf-abe 

___

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer pnces 
Implicit GDP deflator 

13.3 
12,6 

61 
5,3 

17 
3.6 

2.9
3.4

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/defiat 

2

32 0 
4 2 
-1 2 

31 9 
4 0 
-1 3 

^ 

-

i

GDP ftfl.tCP

TRADE

1979 
1 

1989 

1998 

1999 

(USS milhons) 
Total exports (fob) 
Sugar 
Other Food and Beverages 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods20 

Export and import levels (USS mill.)

257 
29 
27 
107 
1010 
150 

262 
29
25
106
1 068
156 

2Do

oo*

20 

7 

230

29

Export price index (1995=100) 
Import pice index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995= 100) 

86 
112 
100 

883 
115 
99

9 

95 

6 

97 

go 

oExpons 

Ulmns

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

C(rresnt a..eunt balanev to GDP (%)

(USS mjillions)F

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and servtces 
Resource balance 

426 
475 
49 

897 
963 
24 

1,281 
1,333 
-53 

1,255 
1,330 
-125

1T

3

Net incomne 
Net current transfers 

-
22 

3 
3 

5 
53 

5
56 

2

Current account balance 

-34 

-3 

-56 

-128 5

Financng items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

39 
-5 

-40 
42 

52 
4 

165
-37

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locaIUS$) 

.

287 
2 0 

324
2 0

2 0 

2.0 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

r

(USS millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

! Composition of 199 debt 1Us$ mill.)

156 
0 
0 

644 
35 
0 

608 
18 
0 

589
17
0

Total debt service 
IBRDO 
IDA 

13 

102 

87 

96

:2

Composition of net resource flows 
Offcial grants 
Offidal aeditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity 

D 241

1 
9 
-5 

1
6 
-29 

38 
-23 

4
-30

0 

o 

F 89 

E 12

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Pnndpal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

8 
D 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
3 
6 
-3 
3 
-7 

| A - IBRD 
B - IDA 
c - IMF 

E -
ilatera
F - Pnvate

9 
4 
5 
1 
4 

2 
4 
-2
1
-3

D - Cteil millirirael 

G - Short-term

Development Economics 

51912001

77

Barbados Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

Latin 
America 
& Carib. 

Upper-
middle-
Income

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-99 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (mii&ns) 
Groth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertilty rate (births per woman) 

0.2 
0.5 
38.6 

0.3 
0.3 
42.5 

0.3 
0.2 
49.5 

508.2 
1.6 
74.9 
2.6 

571.5
1.4
75.4
2.4

.. 

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index

Rural headcount index 

.

..

INCOME
GNP per capita (USS) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
FoDd price index (1995=100) 

1,660 
31 

4,480 
72 

8,860 
108 

3,800 
140 

4,870
131

..

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

6.8 
44.0 

..
..

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 

.. 

.

.. 

3.4 
3.6 
7.4 

3.3
5.0
7.9

Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (56 of GOP) 

.. 

.. 

7.0 

.. 

.

.. 

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age goup)
Total 
Male
Female
Access to an Improved water source
(% of population)
Totdal 

.. 

.. 

100 

91 

94

.

100 

100 

85 

87

Urban 

.. 

100 

100 

93 

94

Rural 
ImmunIzatlon rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 

.

100 

100 

62 

68

.. 

.. 

.. 

90 

90

DPT 

.. 

,. 

.. 

87 

88

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth

.. 

6 

.. 

9

(years)
Total 

70 

74 

76 

70 

69

Male 
Female 

6. 
73 

.. 

.. 

67 

66
73

.. 

.. 

.. 

Mortslity
Infant (per thousand ive births) 

29 

13 

14 

30 

27

Under 5 (per thousand lve births) 

.. 

.. 

38 

34

Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled heath statf (f) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
..
..

207 
122 

233
143

.. 

,. 

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LOS system. 
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age populab'on and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to an improved
water source data is 2000.

5/8/2001

78

Barbados - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (es % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100 
7.2 
19.7 
73.1 

100 
7.0 
20.4 
72.6 

100 
5.8 
21.6 
72.6 

100 
6.1 
21.5 
72A 

100 
5.0 
22.0 
73.0 

100 
5.0 
22.0 
73.0 

100 
4.6 
21.9 
73.5 

100 
4.5 
21.8 
73.7 

100 
4.4 
21.4 
74.2 

100
4.4
21.4
74.2

Total Consumption 
Grossdomesticinvestment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

31.6 
14.3 
5.2 
9.1 

85.5 
16.7 
6.3 
10.4 

83.7 
18.5 
5.9 
12.6 

85.6 
19.4 
6.3 
13.1 

84.0 
19.5 
6.6 
12.9 

84.4 
19.5 
7.0 
12.6 

84.4 
19.6 
7.0 
12.6 

84.3 
19.7 
6.5 
13.2 

84.2 
19.8 
6.4 
13.4 

84.2
19.8
6.4
13.4

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

60.9 
56.7 

56.6 
58.8 

53.9 
56.1 

50.4 
55.4 

49.3 
53.0 

49.0 
53.0 

49.0 
53.0 

48.9 
53.0 

49.0 
53.0 

4S.9
53.0

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

18.4 
17.8 

14.5 
14.5 

16.3 
16.1 

14.4 
14.3 

16.0 
16.0 

15.6 
15.8 

15.6 
16.2 

15.7 
16.6 

15.8 
16.7 

15.8
16.7

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(USS million at current psices)
GNPpercapita(USS,Atlasmethod) 

1994 

2205 

2378 

2490 

2641 

2773 

2912 

3064 

3217 

3380

7410 

8070 

8450 

8860 

9330 

9758 

10208 

10703 

11197 

11720

Real anmual growth rates (%, calculated from 1914 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
2.5 
Gross Domestic Income 
1.8 

2.9 
6.4 

4.4 
4.1 

2.5 
1.3 

2.5 
2.3 

2.5 
1.3 

2.6 
2.4 

2.8 
1.4 

3.0 
2.8 

3.0
1.5

Real annual per capita growth rates (%I., calculated from 1974 ptices)
Grossdoxnesticproductat nsrketprices 
1.8 
6.2 
Total consumption 
4.9 
11.4 
private consumption 
5.6 
13.5 

3.8 
1.6 
0.7 

0.9 
3.2 
3.7 

2.0 
0.1 
3.7 

2.1 
2.6 
3.8 

2.2 
2.2 
3.9 

2.4 
2.3 
4.0 

2.6 
2.5 
4.1 

2.6
2.6
4.2

Balance of Payments (USS milliuns)
Exports(GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)5
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

1214 
287 
1130 
743 
84 
40 
71 

1248 
289 
1297 
S88 
-49 
47 
49 

1281 
257 
1333 
901 
-53 
53 
-56 

1255 
262 
1380 
954 
-125 
56 
-128 

1303 
254 
1399 
973 
-96 
63 
-92 

1360 
267 
1469 
1022 
-109 
66 
-102 

1425 
280 
1542 
1073 
-117 
69 
-98 

1499 
295 
1623 
1129 
-124 
73 
-97 

1575 
309 
1704 
1186 
-129 
77 
-99 

1651
325
1790
1246
-139
80
-101

Netprivateforeigndirectinvestsnent 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Othercapital(net,iwndamonzisssom) 
Cbangeinresevesd 

23 
-1 
34 
-34 
40 
-54 

32 
-45 
20 
-65 
80 
-17 

17 
25 
38 
-13 
10 
4 

76 
40 
4 
36 
S0 
-37 

136 
136.2 
33 
103 
-17 
-164 

59 
15.2 
21 
-6 
8 
20 

33 
12.3 
25 
-13 
33 
20 

20 
18.7 
16 
3 
53 
5 

20 
19.9 
15 
5 
65 
-5 

12
27.2
13
14
64
-2

Memorandwu items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR74 prices)
Mercbandise exports (FOB) 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

4.2 

-2.2 

-2.2 

-5.0 

-3.6 

-3.9 

4.0 

4.0 

4.0 

-4.1

1.5 
3.0 

1.6 
5.9 

2.1 
2.0 

2.2 
2.9 

1.6 
1.0 

2.5 
2.5 

2.6 
2.6 

2.8 
2.8 

3.0 
3.0 

3.0
3.0

(Continued)

79

Barbados - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

~~~~~~~~~~~ 

!,~- 

-,w 

7M 

, -pot 

,20' 

200 W7 

'W5

31.4 
27.2 
4.2 
5.5 
0.3 

58.4 
4.0 
86.9 

31.2 
26.5 
4.7 
5.4 
0.6 

57.9 
4.2 
85.0 

31.1 
26.1 
5.0 
5.3 
0.9 

57.7 
4.8 
89.8 

30.9 
25.9 
5.0 
5.3 
0.8 

30.5
25.4
5.1
5.2
0.5

57.6 
4.8 
90.6 

57.2
4.7
100.5

99.0 
113.0 
100.1 
100.0 

99.2 
112.8 
100.8 
105.1 

86.4 
112.2 
100.4 
103.9 

86.2 
115.5 
98.8 
108.2 

82.1 
116.6 
93.1 
107.7 

84.2 
119.4 
93.3 
107.2 

86.2 
122.2 
93.3 
106.8 

88.2 
125.1 
93.3 
106.7 

90.0 
127.5 
93.3 
106.7 

91.8
130.1
93.4
106.7

1.8 
4.7 

3.5 
3.9 

1.7 
3.6 

2.9 
3.4 

2.5 
2.6 

2.5 
2.6 

2.3 
2.5 

2.1 
2.2 

2.0 
2.0 

2.0
2.0

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Currentaccountsurplus(+)ordeficit(-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign fmancing 

29.7 
27.8 
1.9 
6.0 
0.6 

32.1 
27.5 
4.6 
5.6 
-0.7 

32.0 
27.9 
4.2 
5A4 
-1.1 

31.9 
27.9 
4.0 
5.4 
1.2 

32.2 
27.9 
4.4 
5.5 
4.8 

55.9 
11.1 
320.4 

54.2 
7.1 
115.2 

56.0 
11.5 
87.1 

59.5 
11.3 
123.3 

58.9 
5.1 
-139.9 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2 (%/) 
Private sector credit growth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR95=100)
Merchandise expor price index 
Merchandiseimportpriceindex 
Merchandisetennsoftradeindex 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU) (YR95=10( 

Real interest rates
Consumerpriceindex (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes" goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Central govemment.
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

80

Barbados - Key Exposure Indicators

sndea.e 

19 \ 

:0000 
1991 

U 096 

t9% 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2001 

2005

Total debt outstanding and 

5836 

571.9 

607.8 

589.2 

725.4 

740.6 

752.9 

771 1, 

7')1 5 

81866

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)S

Net disbursements (US$m) 

-73 

08 

30.6 

-166 

1362 

15.2 

123 

1i 

199 

27'

Total debtservice (TDS) 

101.2 

117.4 

885 

972 

847 

748 

760 

779 

799 

19 

(US$m)

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDOXGS' 

48.1 

45.8 

47.5 

47.0 

55.7 

545 

52.8 

51L5 

50 3 

496

TDO/GDP 

29.3 

25.9 

25 6 

23,7 

27,5 

26,7 

25.9 

25.2 

24 6 

24 2

TDS/XGS 

8.3 

9.4 

6.9 

7.7 

6.5 

5.5 

53 

52 

51 

5

Concessional/TDO 

11.2 

10.8 

12.4 

13.8 

12.5 

12.8 

129 

124 

114 

10 I

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

IBRDDS!publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

5.2 

5.5 

6.7 

61 

6.3 

56 

40 

45 

4" Q)

60.2 

43.9 

434 

440 

66.3 

68.2 

59.2 

57.9 

596 

55 1

DS (%)

IBRDDS/XGS 

04 

04 

0.4 

04 

0.3 

0.3 

02 

02 

02 

0)

IBRDTDO(USSn)i 

15.6 

13.7 

184 

169 

133 

125 

14.0 

160 

180 

160

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)

ShareoflBRDportfolio(%) 
IDA TDO (USSu)sd 

0.015 

0.013 

0.016 

0014 

0011 

0.010 

0.011 

0014 

0016 

0t)I-

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0( 

00 

00

IFC (USSmr)

Loans 

60 
t. I 

5.6 

4.9 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

Equity and quasi-equity 

1.1 

11 

I t 

1.1 

1.1

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0,0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed. use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers remittances
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral devclopment banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex Bi: Eastern Caribbean Program Matrix, FY01-06

81

Diagnosis 

.

Five-Year General 
evelopment 
Country Actions and Beachmarks 
.
.Strategic Direetions 
.Parters 
.
** Bank Group Benchmarks 
Over-arching objective: Support poverty reduction in the region through
reduced income insecurity/volatility and human and institutional development
1. Reducing Income Insecurity and Vulnerability

World Bank Group
Instruments

A. Macroeconomic Environment
(i) Stability/Growth

Improve fiscal management so as 
to assure higher public saving and 
lower overall deficits and extemal 
debt accumulation 

* Enhance the environment for 
private sector-led economic 
diversification and growth 

* Fiscal slippage in some countries has led * 
to low public saving, high overall 
deficits, and the accumulation of public 
debt. Particularly in light ofthe 
monetary union, overall macro discipline 
needs to be pursued at the country level 
through sound fiscal management 

* Need to further deepen the process of 
economic diversification, particularly 
through the identification of sustainable
sources of growth

(ii) Vulnerability Measures

.

Need to strengthen social statistical base, * Build capacity at the OECS 
including the use of more standard 
Secretariat and country Central 
methodology to make indicators 
Statistical Offices to produce
compatible/comparable across countries, 
high-quality/more reliable 
on a regional basis, and over time 
statistical indicators to be used, 
inter alia, in the monitoring of
poverty and income insecurity

* 

IMF Article IV 
consultations 

* ECCB Fiscal Reform 
Program 

* WB Public
Expenditure Analysis
and Business
Environment Study

. WB, IMF, CIDA, 
CDB, UNDP 

* Adoption of ECCB's proposed Fiscal Reform Program * 
which includes a set of "convergence" criteria for a 
number of mnacroeconomic-monitoring indicators, 
including fiscal variables

FY02 & FY03: OECS Public
Expenditure Analysis I & 11
(AAA)

* FY05: OECS Business
Environment Study (AAA)

* 

* 

FY02: OECS Improving Social
Statistics (MECOVI) (AAA)

FY04 & FY06: OECS Poverty
Assessment I & 11 (AAA)

B. Economic Diversification

(i) Financial Sector

* Need to undertake a comprehensive 
assessment of the financial sector (ois- 
and off-shore) to strengthen regulation 
and supervision practices in order for the 
financial sector to underpin sustained 
economic development 

* Strengthen regulatory and 
supervisory frameworks for both 
on-and off-shore financial 
institutions 

* 

.

IMF-assisted 
self-assessment 
exercise covering the 
off-shore sector; 

* Need to further integrate and strengthen 
OECS financial space to assure more 
efficient financial intermediation 

.

Further development of financial 
markets and instruments 

* ECCB action to implement the: (i) Regional 
Government Securities Markets (RGSM): (ii) private
money market: and (iii) fully integrate the interbank
market

Completion of offshore self-assessment and FSAP 
exercises; countries taking appropriate steps to amend 
legislation and reform practices where necessary to 
ensure not only that off- and on-shore financial sector
activities adhere to international best practices but also * FY02: FSAP for Barbados
that the sector as a whole be able to make a lasting
contribution to economic development 

FY02: Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP)
for the OECS countries

.

* FY05: OECS Financial Sector
Strengthening project
IFC regional investments.

* 

* 

IMF/WB Financial 
Sector Assessment 
Program (FSAP) 
* ECCB with technical 
assistance of the IMF 

82

Annex B1: Easternl Carilbbeanl Program Matrix, FYOI-06

1. Reducing Income Insecurity and Vulnerability

, 

Strengthen/establish regulatory 
framework in telecommunications, 
power, and water and sanitation. 

* CDB, EU, France, WB .

* Strengthening/establishment of regulatory 
authorities for utilities in the OECS on a 
sub-regional basis

B. Economic Diversification
(ii) Infrastructure

Monopolistic pricing in utilities. 
Cost of doing business is relatively high 
in light of diseconomies of small scale 
and the presence of unregulated 
monopolies. This situation hinders the 
deepening of private sector activities
and, thereby impeding to growth 

(iii) Environmental Management

* 

Increased utilization of natural resources * Consolidation of legal, 
for agriculture and tourism has put added 
institutional, and regulatory 
burden on environment 
framework for environmental 
management in the OECS 

* CDB, CIDA, DFID, 
EU, UNDP, USAID, 
France, WB 

. Adoption of legislation and establishment of 
associated enforcement mechanisms to protect 
natural resources and address climate change
adaptation issues 

* 

.

.

* 

* 

FY02: Technical assistance to St. Lucia
Water Sector project

FY05: OECS Regional Regulatory
Strengthening

IFC direct investments as opportunities
arise.

FY03 & 06: OECS Specially Managed
Areas project

FY04: OECS Regional Environmental
Management project; and Economic
Valuation and Environmental
Management (AAA)

(iv) Disaster Management

.

Exposure to natural disasters contributes * Strengthen early waming and 
to income insecurity and calls for 
response mechanisms, enforcement 
preventive actions to enable faster 
of building codes, preparation of 
recovery at lower cost 
hazard mapping, and increased 
insurance coverage 

.

CIDA, CDB, DFID, 
UNDP, USAID, WB 

* 

Implementation of national disaster management 
plans 

* FY 02: St. Vincent and the Grenadines
component of the Disaster Management
Program; and Regional Comprehensive
Disaster Mitigation (AAA)

* Consolidation of comprehensive country and 
sub-regional risk management, ex-ante finding
strategies to reduce fiscal, economic, and financial * FY03: Catastrophic Risk
instability in the wake of natural disasters 
Management/Insurance Reform (Eastem
Caribbean)

(v) Agriculture Diversification

.

Banana industry needs to increase its 
competitiveness through higher quality 
and yields; in addition there is need for 
diversification away from bananas within 
the agricultural sector 

.

Continue to consolidate the banana * EU, CDB, JICA 
industry, including incentives to 
improve quality; program to
support diversification toward
alternative crops

* Continuation of Banana Recovery Program,
including access to irrigation techniques

* FY04: Stage I: Adaptation to Global
Climate Change Program (Caribbean)

.

FY06: Disaster Management Program 11

Annex Bi: Eastern Caribbean Program Matrix, FYO1-06

83

Over-arching objective: Support poverty reduction in the region through
reduced income insecurity/volatility and human and institutional development
2. Human and Institutional Development

A. Human
(i) Education

Despite nearly universal primary 
education much still needs to be done to 
provide school-age population with the 
basic skills required for productive 
engagement in new sectors of economic 
activity 

* Build on recent Bank and other 
development partner education 
projects, including the 
implementation of the Bank's new 
sub-regional Education Reform
Program

.

CDB, CIDA, DFID, 
EU, WB 

* 

** Implementation of the Caribbean Education Reform * FY02 & 03: Education Reform
Strategy, including curriculum reform and expanded 
project; and in FY03
access to secondary education 
Educational Achievement in
the Caribbean (AAA)

(D) Health

* 

Incidence of HIV/AIDS in the Caribbean * 
region is among the highest in the world 

* Need to finalize and implement a plan of 
action to combat HIV/AIDS (including 

screening and treatnment)

* Need to improve quality of health clinics
and hospitals 
(iii) Secia

* Available indicators suggest poverty 
headcount index in the OECS (Antigua 
aside) in the range of 25-38 percent; and 
around 14 prcent in Barbados. 
In addition, higb and persistent 
unemployment rates have been a 
challenge for the governments in the
region

B. Institutional
(i) Public Sector Management

Institutionalize the HIV/AIDS plan * DFID, EU, CIDA, 
of action to: manage the epidemic 
PAHO, USAID, WB 
in the short and medium term, and 
make it sustainable in the long 
term. 

* 

* Implementation of HIV/AIDS regional program 

X FY02 & 03: HIV/AIDS
Program for the OECS

* Strengthen organizational capacity of the public sector
to deliver higher-quality health services 

.

FY06: Health Financing
(AAA)

* Reduce poverty rates by around 
five percentage points (depending 
on country) over the next five years 

* CDB CIDA, EU, 
UNDP, WB 

.

_ 

Pursue econonmic diversification in order to help reduce * FY02: Regional Youth and
poverty brought about by the decline of mono-crop 
Social Development (AAA)
agriculture and lack of alternative economie
opportunities 

* FY05: Review of Social
Security/Social Safety Net
Mechanisms (AAA)

.

In light of the small size of the OECS 
countries, the public sector undertakes a 
wide range of activities under 
diseconomies of small scale. Hence, 
there is a need for rtionalization of 

funetions, strengthening of 
owanizational capacity, and strenamining

of the institutional framwork to ensure
effective use of fiscal resources and
quality in s,rvice delivery

* Strengthen strategic planning and 
budget management procedures, 
including PSIP preparation; pursue 
efficient service delivery and
monitor outcomes 

.

CIDA, DFID, EU, 
UNDP, WB 

* 

Prepare comprehensive action plan to strengthen core * FY02: Completion of OECS
public sector institutions and organizational capacity as 
Regional Institutional and
a basis for coordinated external support in this area. 
Capacity Review (AAA)

l 

FY04: OECS Public Sector

Reform project

Diagnosis 

84

Annex B1: Eastern Caribbean Program Matrix, FYO1-06
J Five-Year Genera 

loCountry 

D 

Strategic 
DirectionsTirtnors 
**Banik Group Benichnmarks 
Over-arching objective: Support poverty reduction in the region through
reduced income insecurity/volatility and human and institutional development
2. Human and Institutional Development

Actions and Bk 

B. Institutional
(ii) Strategic Aid Coordination

Need for high-level aid coordination for * Besides the regional activities 
the OECS to enhance development 
entailed by the CGED, 
effectiveness in the sub-region 
aid-coordination meetings for the 
OECS member countries will be 
held twice a year, involving 
country representatives, sub- 
regional organizations, and 
international development agencies 

.

Ali development 
partners with 
substantial programs 
in the OECS 

* Endorse sub-regional development strategy as a 
rallying device for coordinated extemal assistance and 
pTovide means to strengthen sub-regional 
organizations for strategy implementation. 

'' 

J 

Ins$truntenti

rup

* FY02, FY04 & FY06:
Activities related to the
Caribbean Group for
Cooperation in Economic
Development (CGCED) and
preparation of the Medium-
Term Economic Strategy
Papers (MTESP) (AAA)

85

Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management: OECS**
As of 05/13/2001

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,C 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Managemnent
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousands) 
Average Supervision (US$ thousands/project) 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

8 
3.9 
50.0 
70.1 
50.0 
70.1 
9.8 

no 
289.6 
36.2 

6 
2.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
16.6 

no 
358.5 
44.8 

8 
3.1 
12.5 
17.0 
12.5 
17.0 
22.7 

no 
465.7 
58.2 

7
3.9
14.3
6.1
14.3
6.1
12.8

yes
n/a
n/a

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

8 
73 
13 
8 

8
43
50
79

a. Projects that are part of sub-regional initiatives are grouped into programs and counted as one
project (e.g. Disaster Management Program). The recent introduction of such projgrams accounts
for the increase in average supervision resources.
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
Includes lending through CDB V & VI for countries throughout the Caribbean region. Also included is
the ongoing Climate Adaptation project for countries throughout the Caribbean region.

86

Annex B3
Bank Group Program Summary

IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a/

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(HyM)L) 

Implementation b
Risks (H/IML)

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005 

Cafibbean Regionai HIV/AIDS Initiative 
(Grenada, St. KNfts, St. Luaa)
OECS Disaster Megement Program 
(St. ,ncent)
OECS Education Develprnent 
(Don"ncA, St. Ktts, St Ludi)
TA WaterSectorReornm 
(St. Lucia)

9.0 

6.0 

18.0 

2.5 

Subtotal FY02 35.5

Cafiboben Regional HIV/AIDS Inive 
(Dominica, St. VFncent)
Catstrophe Risk Management & Insurance 
(Eastem Cadbbean)
OECS Education Development 
(Grenada, St. Vincent)

6.0 

4.0 

13.5 

Subtotal FY03 23.5

Public Sector Reforn 
(OECS)
Regional Environmental Management 
(OECS)

6.0 

6.0 

Subtotal FY04 12.0

Financial Sector Strengthening 
(OECS)
Regional Regulatory Strengthening 
(OECS)

6.0 

6.0 

Subtotal FY05 12.0

2006 

OECS Disaster Managemrent Progran II 
(OECS)

12.0 

Subtotal FY06 12.0
Total 95.0

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

M

M

L

L

M

M

L

M

M

M

M

M

IFC & MIGA Program, FY 1998-2001

(US$m)

IFC approvals 
MIGA 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

0.0 
0.0 

6.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

40.0 **
0.0

*Includlng two GEF grants, the total would sum to US$107.0 million.

-Amount approved for the Cfibbean region, including the OECS.

87

Annex B4
Summary of Non-Lending Services

Product 

Completion (FY) 

Audience a 

Objective b

Recent completions
OECS Countries
Export Diversification (IDF) 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 
OECS Financial Sector Review 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 
Country Procurement Assessment Review 
Regional (including OECS countries)
Caribbean Economic Overview (every 2 years) 
Medium-Term Economic Strategies 
Poverty Reduction and Human Resource Development in 
the Caribbean

Prospects for Service Exports from the English-Speaking
Public Sector Modernization in the Caribbean 
Trade Policies in the Caribbean Countries 
Wider Caribbean Financial Sector Review 
Caribbean Education Strategy 
HIV/AlDS in the Caribbean: Issues and Options 
Managing Catastrophic Risks 
Small States Task Force Report 
The Importance of Financial and Insurance Market 
Integration in the Context of High Consumption Volatility in
CGCED Countries
Tourism and the Environment in the Caribbean: An 
Economic Framework

Underway

Realignment of Sub-Regional Develop. Strategy (IDF) 
OECS Institutional and Organizational Capacity Review 

Planned
OECS Countries

Financial Sector Assessment Program (OECS) 
Financial Sector Assessment Program (Barbados) 
Improving Social Statistics (MECOVI) 
Public Expenditure Analysis I & II 
Economic Valuation and Environmental Management 
Analysis
Poverty Assessment I & II 
Social Security/Social Safety Net Mechanisms Review 
Health Financing 

Regional (including OECS countries)

Caribbean Economic Overview (every 2 years) 
Medium-Term Economic Strategies 
Comprehensive Disaster Mitigation 
Youth and Social Development 
Educational Attainments in the Caribbean 

96 
97 
99 
01 
01 
01 

96/98/00 
96/98100 
96 

96 

96 
98 
98 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 

00 

02 
02 

02 
02 
02 
03 
04 

04/06 
05 
06 

02/04/06 
02/04/06 
02 
02 
03 

GIB 
G/B 
G/B/D 
GIB/D 
G/B 
G/B/D 

GIBID 
GIBID 
G/BID 

KG/PS/SS
PS
KG/PS/SS
KG/PS
PS
KG/PS

KG/SS
KG/SS
KG/PS/SS

G/B/D 

KG/PS/SS

G/B/D 
GIB/D 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/BID/P 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 

KG/PS/SS
KG/PS
KG/PS/SS
KG/PS/SS
KG/SS
KG/PS/SS
KG/PS/SS
KG/SS

G/B/D 

KG/PS/SS

G/B 
G/B/D 

KG/SS
KG/SS

G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 

G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 

G/BID 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 

KG/SS
KG/SS
KG/PS
KG/SS
KG/SS

KG/SS
KG/PS/SS
KG/PS/SS

KG/SS
KG/SS
KG/PS/SS
KG/PS/SS
KG/PS/SS

a. Govemment (G), Donor (D), Bank (B), Public dissemination (P).

b. Knowledge generation (KG), Problem-solving (PS), Strategy-setting (SS).

Stait S oIf 
s 0 

mnkl (a 

n 

r,G iop 

t 01)erations 
(OperationIs 
*.S, of 05..l3'20i)i'

P ortfolio)

ctliS C Pro cc ts 

tisfferevtse Bet, eeu
Expected and Actual
Disbursements 

_dst PSR 

Supervisiont Rating 

Original Ankt-It,t in U M,.ill,ion 

Project ID 

( ounrrv 

Project Name 

itnoML 
Objcctixcs 
S 

Implemnteation 
Pco01ress
S 

Fiscal Vea, 

IBRD 

IDA 

G( 

F 

Canedt. 

t idisb. 

Orig. 

Irm 

Res'd

P007617( 

(U'('S 

WASTF AND SHIP-GENERA'IED 
WA ASTI: M AN AF(;-MFNT

1995 

(. 80 

4.70 

1 7.50 

0.00 

1i : 

24.00 

0()0

1'03571.0 
(:IIES 
IP(006969 
DOMINICA 
1'0413923 GRENADA 
1'010739 
CARIBBlAN 

TELECOMMUNICATiONS 
REFORM 
BASIC' EDUCATION REFORM 
BASIC' I':UCA' 
ION REFORM 
PLANNING FOR ADAPI'A'ION TO 
GLOBAL CLIMATIE CHANGI-
DISASTER MANAGEM ENI' 
DISASi'ER MANAGEMEN'I' 
DISAS'II-R MANAGEMFNT 
POVER'Y REDUCTION FUND 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT 

S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 

1995 
1099 
1996 
1997 

.60 
310 
3 80 
00 

2.40 
3.10 
3.80 
0.00 

0 00 
0.00 
000 
6 30 

00 
0.00 
0 0 
0.00 

5.10 
0 W7 
I 40 
t1(( 

4.30 
0 091 
1 70 
90 4 

0o)
(1)0
I 1(
(10

1069633 
1'062668 
01'704.;( 
P054939 
P069922 

DOMINICA 
Sf. KITTS & NEVIS 
Si 
U('IA 
SF. LUCIA 
GRENADA 

S 
S 

tJ 
S 
S 
S 
S 

1 999 
19)) 
1999 
2000 
2001 

2 56 
8 50 
3 00 
1.50 
5.10 

2.50 
0.00 
3.1 
1.50 
5 10 

0 00 
0 00 
0 0 
0.00 
0.00 

()( 
01(0 
()( 
000 
0.00 

A ?(2 
4 30 

.(1 
2 80 
1.30 
060 
160 

1 20
0.80
2,3()
(.10
000

.S 

° 

° 

ils) 

S 
S 

270 
11 40 

'I'otal 

37.90 

26.10 

18.80 

0.00 

51.30 

36.20 

6.20

a. ltitciided disbursements to date mitius actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Loans/Credits Summary in USD As of March 31, 2001

OECS Countries 
Original Principal: 
Cancellations: 
Disbursed: 
Undisbursed: 
Repaid: 
Due: 
Boreower's Obligation: 
Sold 3rd Party: 
Repaid 3rd Party: 
Due 3rd Party: 

IBRD 
132.360,000 
31,411,311 
72,405,729 
28,542,960 
48,830,688 
23,575,042 
22,327,604 
0 
0 
0 

IDA 
104,120,000 
18,903,853 
72,615,038 
15,488,859 
3,657,751 
66,761,585 
66,761,585 
0 
0 
0 

Total
236,480,000
50,315,164
145,020,767
44,031,819
52,488,439
90,336,627
89,089,189
0
0
0

Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 08/31/00
(In US$ Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY
Approval 

Company 

Loan 

Equity 

Quasi 

Partic 

Loan 

Equity 

Quasi 

Partic

1996 
1997 

Eastern Caribbean Home Mortgage Bank 
Caribbean Loan Facility 11/1 
Total Portfolio: 

0.00 
25.00 
25.00 

0.37 
0.00 
0.37 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
25.00 
25.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

0.37 
0.00 
0.37 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

0.00
0.00
0.00

89
Annex B6
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

'erfoan 

Major issue 

Despite moderate to high growth, poverty 
remains very high (especially in the rural
areas) due to vulnerability to external shocks.
Three out of seven countries need to apply 
better fiscal management to their public
finances to reverse adverse debt dynamics.

Key issues are excessive centralization, need 
for enhanced accountability, and weak
oversight mechanisms.
Higher unemployment among women and 
increased poverty of female-headed
households. Marginalization of males.

Quality shortcomings at all levels and access 
issues at the secondary level. Educational
outcomes need improvement.
Key issues are quality of health clinics and 
hospitals (with the possible exception of St. 
Lucia), inadequate funding of the heath sector, 
and social health insurance.

onty 

High 

priority 

Reconciliation of country and Bank priorities

High

High 

High

High 

High

Moderate Moderate

High 

High

High 

Moderate 

Involvement by the European Union in
hospital infrastructure and equipment in St.
Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent.

* Poverty 
reduction 

Poor 

* Economic 
policy 

o 

Good (Poor 
2 countries) 

* Public sector 

Fair 

* Gender 

Fair 

* Education 

Fair 

* Itealth, 

nutrition and 
population 

Poor 

* HIV/AtDS 

Poor 

o .

4 

* Social 
Protection 

Poor 

a Rural 
development 

Fair 

* Environment 

Poor 

* Social 
development 

Poor 

t 

2 o 
0 ' 

2

X'i 

* Financial 
sector 

Fair 

* Private sector 

Fair 

o* Disaster 
Mitigation 

c 

Fair 

* Infrastructure 

Fair 

Bank experience in Africa shows that prompt
action to address HIV/AIDS before it spreads
is crucial. This is not always recognized by
the countries themselves.

Strong involvement by the EU, with the
STABEX and Special Framework for
Assistance funds.

High 

Moderate 

Need to take measures to slow down the 
epidemic. Improve the quality of health clinics 
and hospitals. Need for more efficient 
screening and treatment of HIV/AIDS. 
Limited scope of social development schemes. Moderate Moderate
No benefits for people in the informal sector
and unemployed. Lack of sufficient role of
communitv driven social orotection.
Need for diversification of the agriculture 
sector where reliance on banana remains too 
high. Restructuring of the banana industry and 
exit from the sugar industry (St. Kitts).
Need for management of natural resources, for 
sustainable development of tourism.
Inadequate land use planning, and soil
conservation. Regulatory frameworks for
water and sewage.
Need to address youth issues related to 
increased youth unemployment, at risk- 
behaviors and high school drop out rates. 

High 

Moderate 

High 

High

High 

Moderate Ongoing dialogue, PRF in St. Lucia and
AAA on youth-at-risk. Other development
partners (CDB, EU, UNDP, USAID)
supporting social development schemes,
youth programs and initiatives to strengthen
voice and participation.

Deepen sub-regional financial integration. 
Strengthen the regulatory regime and give the
right to ECCB to supervise the offshore banks.
Actions to reinforce the laws and regulations
regarding money laundering.
Reinforce the local private sector addressing 
issues of size and vulnerability. Reduction of 
transaction costs, increased access to credit, 
strengthening of the regulatory framework. 

Need to build disaster mitigation 
infrastructure, improve construction codes,
hazard mapping and strengthening the
emergency agencies. Develop mechanism to
improve availability of affordable catastrophe

insurance.

Need to liberalize infrastructure service 
provision and find sub-regional solutions. 

High 

High

High 

Moderate Ongoing dialogue and lending projects on
multi-sector regulatory agencies. Other
development partners (mainly CIDA and the
EU) are supporting the private sector
directly.

High 

High

Moderate 

High 

While the countries' focus is on direct
support to the private sector, the Bank's
experience shows that tackling enabling
factors for PSD can have more impact, albeit
indirectly.

90

Annex C
CAS Consultations

Background

The preparation of this CAS followed a continuous, detailed discussion process involving the Governments
of the OECS (and Barbados), sub-regional organizations, development partners, and representatives of the
private sector and civil society. The process entailed several rounds of consultations. At the "Concept Note"
level, two discussion rounds were held during Bank team visits to the sub-region in December 2000 and
March 2001. The latter, which included discussions at the Prime Minister level, benefited from the
comments and suggestions received during the first visit to the region and served to advance the discussions
towards the actual CAS document. During the March visit to the sub-region, a formal aid coordination
meeting was organized and provided an opportunity to discuss the details of the strategy among the
development partners actively involved in the Eastern Caribbean region. In addition, the Bank team held a
series of CPPR meetings in each of the OECS member countries, with the exception of St. Vincent. Lastly,
the countries provided comments/inputs on the draft CAS document to the CAS team.

The broader consultation meetings in March 2001 took place as follows (apart from more informal
discussions with Government counterparts):

* Grenada:
Meeting organized by the Ministry of Finance, including approximately 20 participants representing the
public sector, NGOs, labor organizations, and the private sector.

e St. Lucia:

Meeting organized by the Ministry of Finance, including approximately 35 participants representing the
public sector, NGOs, labor organizations, and the private sector.

* Barbados:
Meeting organized by the University of the West Indies, at the Cave Hill campus, including
approximately 25 participants representing the public sector, NGOs, labor organizations, the private
sector, and members of academia.

* Dominica:
Meeting organized by the Ministry of Finance, including approximately 30 participants representing the
public sector, NGOs, labor organizations, and the private sector.

* St. Kitts and Nevis:
Meeting organized by the Ministry of Finance, including approximately 25 participants representing the
public sector, NGOs, labor organizations, and the private sector.
In addition: aid coordination meeting including all development partners active in the sub-region.

* St. Vincent and the Grenadines. 23
Meeting organized by the Ministry of Finance and Planning, including approximately 20 participants
representing the public sector, NGOs, and the private sector.

23 

This meeting took place in May 2001 at the Govermnent's request, given the election of a new Govermnent in March 2001.

Summarv of Comments Received during the Consultation Process

91

The first part of each meeting consisted of a brief presentation by the Bank team, explaining the proposed
assistance strategy for the OECS, including lending and non-lending activities by areas of intervention; and
the rationale for selection of these areas. This was followed by questions and answers on the proposed
strategy as well as on broader issues and concerns. While a number of those issues were addressed in the
formulation of the CAS, others could not be immediately tackled through planned Bank Group interventions.
The latter will be handled by other development partners, or over the longer term by the Bank. Many
concerns related to issues beyond the expertise and comparative advantage of the Bank, and, for this reason,
were discussed with and passed on to other development partners. In fact, one of the concerns raised was the
need for improved donor coordination. This issue has since been discussed fully with other development
partners and new institutional arrangements put in place to strengthen substantive dialogue and coordination.

Sectoral Issues and Links

Agriculture, Tourism, and the Environment
* 
In the area of poverty reduction, there is need for a strategy (and partnerships) to revive and restore the
agricultural sector, in order to relieve the pressure of rural-urban migration.
* The important link between tourism and agriculture needs to be explored.
* Tourism is the major growth sector in region. However, tourism depends on the environment.
Therefore, there is need for increased focus on ways to make tourism environmentally sustainable.
* What is the scope for focus on cultural heritage?
* There is a link between environmental protection and public health. There is also a capacity-building
component to this link.
* The marine environment is an important dimension which needs to be considered.
* The vulnerability of the sugar industry in St. Kitts has tremendous social costs. There is a need to find
alternative uses for land, if sugar is on its deathbed. This requires a focus on land-use planning.

Education
i Management of the education sector is key.
e Could early childhood be integrated into the Bank's focus on education?
* Could the Bank's focus extend to tertiary education?

Infrastructure and Government
* 
Improvement of the regulatory framework for water and electricity, aiming at establishing a regional
regulatory authority, is a priority.
* There is a need for a Bank project to support the public sector institution - and capacity-building agenda.
* There is a need to assess what is required for capital market development.
* 
IT: Assistance is needed to get a plan drawn up and implemented and to put in place E-Govt.
* No expertise in procurement is available at the OECS Secretariat.

Private Sector Development
* To what extent are international and regional development agencies addressing and coordinating efforts
in the area of private sector development?
* Clarify what the CAS proposes to do in private sector development - knowledge sharing/transfer and
capacity building.
* 
Institutional Review for private sector (i.e., a Private Sector Assessment) needs to be done.
* There is a need to build bridges between the public and private sectors.
* Private sector capacity needs to be built up. What public agencies can help with this?
* How will strengthening the public sector assist the private sector? For significant impact, initiatives will
need to develop the private and public sectors in parallel.
* There is insufficient emphasis in the CAS on micro-enterprise development for poverty reduction.

92

* 
In what ways can the service sector be further promoted?
* According to the international financial community: concessions, tax holidays, etc. should not be
encouraged. But the countries need to be able to compete for foreign investment. Concessions are key,
as they increase the attractiveness of the region's countries.

Social and Safety Net Issues
* A strategy addressing the rising costs of health financing is needed.
* A pension systems assessment is required.
* There is a need to emphasize poverty reduction at the community level to engender some local capacity
building.
* Embracing the views of civil society and empowering people at the community level should be given
greater attention.

Sub-regional Issues

* Country-specific priorities vs. sub-regional approach: how much flexibility is there to implement projects
that are important at the country level but for which there is no regional readiness?
* The sub-region needs to strengthen its capacity for representation in international fora.
* 
Integration carries tremendous benefits for the sub-region; should this agenda not be pushed further in
the CAS?

World Bank Assistance StrateLv and Coordination amone Development Partners

• 

* 

Linkages among the programs of the various development actors are not always evident to the countries.
Implementation of WTO rules is of key importance for the countries, although it is not something that
can be resolved at the country assistance strategy level.
* Problems of low disbursement has been a disappointment to both the countries and the Bank. There is a
need to find ways of improving project implementation.
e Can the WB help raise with other donors what it cannot address in its CAS?
* Macro surveillance is largely left to the IMF. A WB presence is needed to give a longer-term
development perspective.
* The WB should see itself as a leader, for example in non-lending activities.
* The link between underlying strategy and proposed areas of intervention could be strengthened.
* Explain how aid coordination takes place: some areas are not covered in the CAS note.
* Have the countries decided on a strategy and put that before development partners?
* Was the Bank group engaged in the preparation of the OECS sub-regional strategy?

Conclusions and Lessons

The consultations provided the Bank team with a deeper understanding of the issues and challenges facing
the OECS countries both as a sub-region and as individual countries. There was broad agreement that the
proposed CAS focus on reducing vulnerability and building human capital and institutional and
organizational capacity reflected the concerns put forth in the OECS Development Strategy and the
countries' Medium-Term Economic Strategy Papers (MTESPs). Overall, the thrust of the proposed World
Bank strategy for the OECS was endorsed and well-accepted by the countries, sub-regional organizations,
development partners, and representatives of the private sector and civil society.

67P 

64 

65* 

64 

630 

62' 

6° 

600 

IBRD 26887
590

THE CARIBBEAN AREA 

ORGANIZATION OF EASTERN CARIBBEAN STATES
-

OECS MEMBERS

,19' 

- -

-

~WrginIsIands 

(UfSt and UK 

Puerto *io (US) 

w''tP 

1)0 

'< 

-

1:~~~Z~ Sao lNoth,}r 

AT AN
A T L A N T I C

O C E A N 

t.Moarten (Netht,

O (At51 St, Martin FR) 

Anguilla fUK)

aS. &rthelemy (FRI

St. Eustasius jNethf a> 

AND RARBUDA

ST, KtTTS on4 NEVIS 

) 

Montserrot (UK) 12

. -40 

--: C a r ib b e a n 

\ Guadeloupe 

(FR)

WDOMINCA

20'

19

18

7

15 

1' 

0 

130 

50 

100 .

MItES 

~~~~1a. 

I 

'~' 

Sea Martinique IFR)
4 ST. LUCIA
S~~~~~~~~~~~~~~T, 

VINCENT13

BARBADOS

c~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~nd 
fhe 
-$GRENIADINEA 

IGRENADA4 

15-

3

12

> 

5< 

< 

t 

tl~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~etnomnr.antiv 

any=

0 

_ 

_ 

5= 

TRINIDAD and

TOBAGO

= 9 

¢ 

ffi~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~te 

bowsolries, olos

-10° 

C 

W 

h 

i 

s 

mv 

hnot 

1oo

X XV ~~E N E4ZUE A 

,5 

617 

O 

66 

the World sank cop

aly jad f9\ on tuihe e°gao

=Y1==1.1o 
1

5,9,
6 ,6°e,,-d° 
APRIL 1 995

