Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No.: 21607 KZ

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN

January 16,2001

Central Asia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Last CAS Discussion: August 26, 1997
[R97-190-1 (IFC/R97-173)]

Currency Eauivalents
(Exchange Rate Effective December 4, 2000)

Currency Unit = tenge
I tenge = US$ 0.007
US$ 1.00 = 144.15 tenge

Weights and Measures

Metric system

Fiscal Year

January 1-December 31

IBRD 
Vice President: Johannes Linn 
Country Director: Kiyoshi Kodera 
Task Team: Arup Banerji 
Kristin Hallberg 
Fred King
Rossana Polastri
K. Tanju Yurukoglu

IFC
Assaad J. Jabre
Khosrow Zamani
Gorton de Mond
Andrew Baldwin

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Abbreviations and Acronyms

AAA 

ADB 

- Analytical and advisory activities

- Asian Development Bank

APPAP 

- Agricultural Post Privatization Assistance Project

CAS 
CEM 

CIS 

CPC 

CPPR 
CSAL 
EBRD 

EFF 
EU 
FBS 
FDI 

FEDL 
FIAS 

FSU 
FY 

GDP 
GEF 
IBRD 
IDF 
IFC 

IMF 
IsDB 

JBIC 
KLSS 
MIGA 

NBK 

NGO 
OED 
OEG 

PPP 
PSA 
PSD 

PSRMAL 
SME 

SOE 

SPRAL 

TA 

TAL II 
TACIS 

-
-

Country Assistance Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum

- Commonwealth of Independent States

-

Caspian Pipeline Consortium

- Country Portfolio Performance Review
- Consolidation Structural Adjustment Loan
- European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

-
-
-
-

-
-

Extended Fund Facility
European Union
Family Budget Survey
Foreign direct investment

Finance and Enterprise Development Loan
Foreign Investment Advisory Service

-
Forner Soviet Union
-
Fiscal year
- Gross domestic product

- Global Environmental Facility
-
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
-
Institutional Development Facility
-
International Finance Corporation

-
-

International Monetary Fund
Islamic Development Bank

-
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
- Kazakhstan Living Standards Survey
- Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

- National Bank of Kazakhstan

- Non-governmental organization
- Operations Evaluation Department
Operations Evaluation Group of IFC

-
-
-

-
-

-

-

Purchasing power parity
Private Sector Assessment
Private sector development

Public Sector Resource Management Adjustment Loan
Small- and medium-scale enterprise

State-owned enterprise

Social Protection Reform Adjustmnent Loan

-

Technical assistance

-
Second Technical Assistance Loan
- Technical Assistance for the CIS (EU)

UK 

- United Kingdom

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the

performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

Abbreviations and Acronyms

UN 
USAID 

- United Nations

- United States Agency for International Development

VAT 
WBI 

- Value-added tax
- World Bank Institute

This Country Assistance Strategy was produced by a team that included Arup Banerji, Kristin
Hallberg, Fred King, Rossana Polastri, and K. Tanju Yurukoglu, with assistance from Zhanar
Abdildina, Roman Solodchenko, Andrew Baldwin, Anthony Gorman, Jariya Hoffman, Carolyn
Jungr, Emestina Madrona, Gorton de Mond, and Van Roy Southworth. Other members of the
Bank-wide Kazakhstan Country Team also made valuable contributions throughout the process of
developing the strategy.

THE REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..............................................

I. 

KAZAKHSTAN'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES .1

II. RECENT MACROECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
A. External Shocks and Economic Growth 
.2
B. Poverty and Inequality 
.5
III. THE GOVERNMENT'S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 

.2

.

.

IV. THE BANK GROUP STRATEGY ..............................................
A. Reforming the Public Sector ............................................. 
B. Stimulating Broad-Based Private Sector-Led Growth ............................................. 
C. Social Services and Social Protection ............................................. 
D. Protecting the Environment ............................................. 
E. Fiduciary Framework ............................................. 
F. Applying Lessons from the Previous CAS ............................................. 
V. MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS AND PROPOSED LENDING PROGRAM .. 
A. Macroeconomic Simulations .25
B. Lending Program and Triggers .27

C. Non-Lending Services .30

D. Partnerships .31
E. Project Implementation .32
F. Performance Indicators .33
VI. RISK AND CREDITWORTHINESS .............................. 

I

7

9
10
14
19
20
21
22
24

34

ANNEXES

36
38

Annex 1: Kazakhstan at a Glance .................................................. 
Annex 2: Key Economic Indicators .................................................. 
Annex 3: Social Indicators ................................................... ,,.,.,,,,.40
Annex 4: Bank Group Portfolio .
41
Annex 5: Status of Bank Group Operations .................................................. 
43
Annex 6: Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management .......................... 45
Annex 7: Country Portfolio Performance Review 2000 ................................................. 46
Annex 8: Macroeconomic Simulations 2001-2003 .................................................. 
49
Annex 9: Proposed IBRD Lending program, FY 2001-2003 ......................................... 54
Annex 10: Non-Lending Services ................................................... 
55
Annex 11: Exposure Indicators ................................................... 
56
Annex 12: CAS Program Matrix 2000-2003 
......................................... 
57
Annex 13: Summary of Development Priorities 
...................................... 
64
Annex 14: Private Sector Development Strategy 
...................................... 
65
Annex 15: Poverty and Living Standards 
........................................... 
74
Annex 16: The Government's Development Program 
.................................. 
76
Annex 17: The CAS Consultation Process 
.......................................... 
82
Annex 18: Partnerships .................................................. 
85

MAP (IBRD 29325)

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. 
Kazakhstan was one of the leading reformers in Central Asia in the 1990s.
Nevertheless, growth in the non-extractive sectors has not yet taken off - partly because
many of the measures were taken too recently to yield results, and because stronger
reforms are needed to improve the environment for the entry and growth of private
enterprises. In fact, in some areas, the pace of structural reform has slowed down. The
privatization program for the large blue-chip companies has stalled, important fiscal
measures have been delayed, land and social sector reform has slowed down, and there
have been some reversals in trade policy with increased restrictions on exports of
petroleum and petroleum products.

2. 
In addition, the economy remains vulnerable to external shocks. Oil and metals
account for about four-fifths of total exports, so that changes in international prices for
key export commodities significantly affect year-to-year economic performance.
Economic growth may be fueled even more by oil revenues in the near future, as the
completion of the Caspian Pipeline Consortium (CPC) oil pipeline will substantially
increase oil exports and therefore fiscal revenues. The recent discovery of large oil
reserves in the Caspian area raises the possibility of an oil boom late in this decade.
Appropriate management of oil revenues will become critical, and avoiding Dutch
Disease impacts on the non-oil economy will be a challenge.

3. 
For the majority of the population, macroeconomic and structural reforms have
not yet translated into improved living standards. Real GDP in 1999 was only about 60
percent of its 1990 level, and real wages fell by over 75 percent between 1990 and 1997.
While Kazakhstan is better off in terms of absolute poverty than most of the other
countries in the former Soviet Union - only 6 percent of the population live on incomes
below US$2.15 per day (in 1996 Purchasing Power Parity value) -
there is some
evidence that poverty has increased in recent years as a result of low rates of growth of
GDP and employment as well as the decline in real wages and continuing wage arrears.

4. 
Thus, despite the prospects for oil-fueled growth in the future, Kazakhstan faces
two main challenges: avoiding the volatility inherent in commodity-led growth, through
careful management of oil revenues and promoting growth in non-extractive sectors; and
ensuring that growth is widely shared, thereby improving living standards for the
majority of the population and reducing poverty.

5. 
Consistent with the Government's priorities, the overarching objective of the
Bank Group's Country Assistance Strategy is poverty reduction and the improvement of
living standards. Key inputs to the process of developing the CAS came from
discussions with clients and stakeholders in Kazakhstan, the Bank's own analytical work,
lessons from the regional crisis, and diagnoses of the performance of the Bank's portfolio
in Kazakhstan. The strategy is also guided by the findings of a recent Country Assistance

i

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Evaluation that was prepared jointly by OED, OEG, and MIGA. The CAS focuses on
four main areas:

* Reforming the public sector so that fiscal resources are managed in a transparent
manner, and public services are effectively and efficiently delivered to the people.
One of the primary impediments to growth in Kazakhstan is the lack of public sector
institutional capacity. At the same time, the Government is falling behind in its
central role as a provider of public services. The Bank Group's strategy for public
sector reform has two main objectives: to help the Government reduce public sector

constraints to private sector development -- including corruption -- and improve the

efficiency of public services. The strategy focuses on assisting the Government in (i)
fiscal stabilization, (ii) strengthening transparency and accountability, and (iii) putting
in place the institutional and administrative mechanisms to improve the quality of
public services.

* Promoting broad-based private sector-led growth to increase employment
opportunities and incomes across a broad segment of the population. Kazakhstan's
prospects for stable and widely-shared growth hinge on generating employment
opportunities and incomes in the non-extractive sectors. Efforts must concentrate on
(i) improving the business environment through an improved legal and regulatory
framework, a more friendly environment for the creation of new enterprises, and
reducing the high cost of setting up and doing business that affects SMEs in
particular; (ii) continuing the privatization agenda in an open and transparent manner
and restructuring or closing non-performing enterprises; and (iii) addressing the
problem of declining productivity in the farm sector. The assistance of the Bank,
IFC, and MIGA are all directed to foster a dynamic private sector, particularly in the
non-extractive sectors.

- Supporting the most vulnerable through the enhancement of both temporary and
permanent programs of income support for the poorest. While improvements in living
standards are expected to result from increased growth and employment, there is still
a need for targeted assistance to the poor. Central to this strategy is reform of the
social assistance system. Improving the targeting of interventions will be supported
by regular monitoring of poverty and living standards. The Bank would support
additional measures to improve social protection, including an efficient public works
program, reforms in the health and education sectors, rural roads, and improvements
in the delivery of municipal and industrial water supply and sanitation.

* Protecting the environment, to reduce the damage to the quality of life for current
and future generations. Despite Kazakhstan's wealth of natural resources,
environmental problems could limit the country's growth potential. Addressing
environmental degradation will require cleaning up contaminated rivers and water
sources, restoring marginal lands, and improving management practices for water and
sewerage. The Bank's strategy concentrates on addressing industrial pollution in the
Northeastern industrial area and the marginal agricultural lands.

ii

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

6. 
Transparency, accountability, and effectiveness in the management of public
financial resources are central to the CAS. Particularly in an environment of increasing
fiscal resources from the oil sector the Government needs to pay more attention to overall
public financial management and hold itself accountable for the use of public funds.
Consistent with the recommendations of a recent review of the Bank's fiduciary
arrangements for adjustment lending, the Bank will assist the Government in improving
its public financial management arrangements, reducing the risks that these arrangements
may pose to Bank programs and funds. In addition, to guide the allocation of public
resources and to improve project design, more attention will be paid to monitoring and
evaluating the development impact of interventions.

7. 
To be most effective, the Bank's approach needs to be selective. The Bank will
focus its assistance on areas in which the motivation for reform is driven by the
Government, not the Bank, and where there is demonstrated commitment and consensus
for reform.

8. 
The Bank Group's assistance strategy for FYO1-03 depends on three critical sets
of issues:

3 The macroeconomic framework: 
the lending program is predicated upon an
appropriate macroeconomic environment. Transparency is required with respect to
the contribution of the oil sector to fiscal revenues -- to allow for due diligence in
fiscal analysis -- and with respect to the design and operation of the National Fund
(oil fund) to ensure the quality of expenditure and investment of oil-related revenues.
A sound macroeconomic framework would be evidenced by the satisfactory
completion of the IMF review of the current EFF. If the EFF is not in place,
satisfactory review of the macroeconomic framework under an IMF Staff Monitored
Program would be required.

* The reform agenda: the Government's commitment to a continuing agenda of
policy and institutional reforms. Bank Group support for some elements of the
reform program takes the form of investment operations, and for others - particularly
in social protection, public sector management reform, legal reform, and private
sector development - support is in the form of adjustment lending.

* Financing needs: The amount of adjustment lending in particular will depend upon
fiscal needs, which in turn depend upon the price of oil and the fiscal impact of
reforms.

9. 

The Bank lending program has three possible cases:

* A low case would occur if policy and institutional reforms are delayed, and there is a
continuing lack of transparency in the management of oil revenues. In this case, the
Bank lending strategy would focus on a small number of carefully-targeted
investment and technical assistance operations to achieve poverty, governance, and
environmental objectives. Given the current status of structural reforms, the starting
point for the CAS is the low-case scenario.

iii

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

* A base case is predicated upon sound fiscal management and would respond to a
moderate pace of reform. The lending program would contain a social protection
adjustment loan in the first year of the CAS period, but in outer years would shift
from adjustment lending to investment and technical assistance loans.

* A high case would be pursued if the pace of structural reform is accelerated, and the
management of oil revenues is sound - i.e., the National Fund is cast in a medium-
term fiscal framework and is subject to public accountability. Predicated upon
financing needs, the high-lending strategy includes a mix of investment, technical
assistance, and adjustment loans supporting policy and institutional reforms across
several sectors.

10. 
The level of IFC's investment operations and activities will be determined by
further strengthening of the macroeconomic framework as well as the extent to which the
country undertakes actions to reform the framework and environment for the private
sector activities, particularly for the development of SMEs.

11. 
The operations of the Bank Group will be guided by analytical and advisory
activities - studies of cross-cutting policy issues, sectoral studies, and rapid-response
notes. The World Bank Institute's services will include in-country and regional seminars,
workshops, and conferences.

12. 
Improved portfolio management will be essential to reach the objectives of the
CAS. To date, implementation of projects has been slowed by a lack of understanding of
Bank procurement and disbursement procedures and a lack of counterpart funds. The
Government and the Bank are determined to work together to improve project
implementation, and will improve the monitoring of projects by holding annual CPPRs
as well as semi-annual "mini-CPPRs".

Agenda for Discussion

13. Board members may wish to consider the following questions:

* Are the strategic priorities outlined in the CAS appropriate?

* Does the proposed mix of operations (adjustment, investment, and technical
assistance) and non-lending services adequately address the policy and institutional
reform challenges facing Kazakhstan?

* Do the proposed lending scenarios appropriately reflect the strength of the reform
program and the need for Bank financing?

iv

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN

I. 
KAZAKHSTAN'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
1. 
Kazakhstan was one of the leading reformers in Central Asia in the 1990s. Over
the past five years, the Government has stabilized the macroeconomy, liberalized the
financial sector, comprehensively transformed the pension system and streamlined the
public sector. Prices have been liberalized so that, on the whole, economic agents
respond to market signals. Most small- and medium-scale enterprises and farms are now
privately owned. Foreign investment per capita is high compared to the rest of the
region, although it has mainly been limited to the oil and gas sector. To most observers,
the process of market-oriented reform is now seen to be irreversible. Yet despite
impressive reforms, growth in the non-oil and non-mineral sectors has not yet taken off -
partly because many of the measures were taken too recently to yield results, and because
more reform is needed to improve the environment for the entry and growth of private
enterprises. In some areas, the pace of structural reform has slowed down - for example,
there have been delays in the privatization of blue chip companies, delays in important
fiscal measures, a slowdown in land and social sector reform, and reversals in trade
policy.

2. 
Institutional reforms have lagged behind macroeconomic stabilization and policy
reforms. The institutions and legal framework necessary for a market economy to
function are not fully developed; governance and accountability issues in the public
sector hinder the efficient allocation of public resources; and corruption and a lack of
transparency raise the cost of doing business, constraining private sector development.
Implicit subsidies to enterprises as well as wage and pension arrears create an
environment of "unpaid bills" that slows the process of transition.

3. 
The economy remains vulnerable to external shocks. Oil and metals account for
about four-fifths of total exports, so that changes in international prices for key export
commodities significantly affect year-to-year economic performance. Ongoing oil
exploration and the opening of export routes is likely to increase the economy's
dependence on oil in the next several years. The completion of the CPC oil pipeline,
expected in end-2001, will substantially increase oil exports and fiscal revenues, and the
recent discovery of large oil reserves in the Caspian area raises the possibility of an oil

1

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

boom late in this decade. Appropriate management of oil revenues will become critical,
and avoiding Dutch Disease effects on the non-oil economy will be a challenge. '

4. 
Thus, despite the prospects for oil-fueled growth in the future, Kazakhstan faces
two main challenges: avoiding the volatility inherent in commodity-led growth, through
careful management of oil revenues and promoting growth in non-extractive sectors; and
ensuring that growth is widely shared, thereby improving living standards for the
majority of the population and reducing poverty.

II. 

RECENT MACROECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

A. 

External Shocks and Economic Growth

5. 
Since independence in 1991, Kazakhstan has made significant progress in
macroeconomic stabilization and economic reforms: price liberalization, a reduction in
trade distortions, privatization of small- and medium-scale enterprises, and the
introduction of a new tax code and bankruptcy law. However, the collapse of the Soviet
system had caused severe disruptions in input supplies and production, as well as major
fiscal imbalances due to the loss of budgetary transfers from the Soviet Union. As a
consequence, the initial years of transition were characterized by a persistent decline in
output and living standards. By 1995, output had dropped to about 60 percent of its 1990
level (Figure 1). Industry and agriculture declined even further - to 47 percent and 55
percent, respectively, of their 1990 levels - compensated by growth in the services sector.

110 -

100 

70 -

50- 

40- 

Figure 1: Trends in Rel GDP 

6. 
Modest growth was
recorded for 
the first time

during 1996 and 1997 (0.5

2

percent 
and 
1.7 
percent
respectively). The short-lived
recovery was 
interrupted in
1998: output fell by 1.9 percent
due to the impact of the Russian
financial crisis and a severe

\ -

-

-

-

-' 

E 

.
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000e 

-

- MDP -E0- AgricWtm 

--A- Industry 4-- Semcstrong 

drought that caused agricultural

output to fall by 19 percent in
real 
terms. 
Growth was
restored in 1999 with the help

of higher oil prices, the
devaluation of the tenge, and a

grain harvest. Prospects
for 2000 are even more

The Dutch Disease hypothesis is that a positive shock (boom) to an important primary product causes an
appreciation of the real exchange rate. This results in a movement of resources to the non-tradeable sector
and the boom sector, and away from tradeable manufacturing and agricultural products. The exchange rate
shifts can cause problems in promoting competitive diversification into non-commodity sectors.
2 The previous CAS had expected a continuation in this trend, predicting real GDP growth of 4.6 percent
per year for 1998-2000.

2

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

positive: boosted by record high oil prices, the economy is expected to grow by 8 percent
in real terms. During the first nine months of 2000, industrial output increased by 15.5
percent in real terms, and agriculture by 5.5 percent.

7. 
The shocks to growth in 1998-99 resulted in a fiscal crisis. In 1998, the overall
deficit reached 7.7 percent of GDP. Fiscal contraction was achieved in 1999 by slashing
expenditures, including social sector spending and public investment, and by
accumulating arrears. Tax revenues in Kazakhstan remain low at 17.4 percent of GDP in
1999 (compared to 22 percent in 1993). External public debt rose to 25.3 percent of GDP
in 1999 from 17.9 percent of GDP in 1998, mostly due to the devaluation of the tenge.

TABLE 1: KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS

GDP growth 

GDP per capita (US$) ' 

Oil Production (000 barrels per day) 

PRICES 

CPI (% change Dec-Dec) 
Exchange Rate (tenge/US$, year avg.) 
Refinancing Rate (%, year-end) 
Oil export price (US$ per barrel) 

EXTERNAL SECTOR 
Exports FOB (US$m) 
o/w Oil exports (US$m) 
Imports FOB (US$m) 
Current Account Balance (% of GDP)2
External Debt (% of GDP) 
NBK Foreign Exchange Reserves 
(months of imports)

PUBLIC SECTOR
,Overall Balance (% GDP) 
|Overall Balance exc. Privatization 
revenue(% GDP)
1/ Includes effects of exchange rate changes.
2/ Includes under-invoicing of oil exports.

1996 
0.5 
1,351 
459 

28.7 
67.3 
35.0 
12.0 

__ 
6,292 
1,257 
6,617 
-3.6 
20.0 
2.0 

1997 
2.0 
1,446 
517 

11.2 
75.4 
18.5 
14.2 

6,899 
1,671 
7,176 
-3.6 
28.6 
2.3 

1998 
-1.9 
1,469 
518 

1.9 
78.9 
25.0 
13.1 

5,871 
1,650 
6,672 
-5.6 
37.5 
2.8 

1999 
2.7 
1,059 
602 

17.8 
119.9 
18.0 
18.1 

5,986 
2,318 
5,645 
-1.1 
47.4 
3.4 

2000p
8.0
1,031
676

l
9.0l
142.5
14.0
28.0

_
8,981
4,256
6,602
4.1
43.6
2.5

-3.1 
-5.3 

-5.6 
-8.9 

-3.3 
-7.7 

-3.4 
-5.2 

3.9
1.2

8. 
In 1999, the growing fiscal deficit and overvalued exchange rate caused delays in
reaching agreement on an economic program supported by the IMF, and in disbursement
of the Bank's adjustment loans. With capital markets also reluctant to lend, the 1999
cash deficit fell to 5.2 percent of GDP. The financing situation improved in late 1999

3

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

with a Eurobond issue of US$300 million, followed by another US$350 million in April
2000.3

9. 
To address the fiscal imbalance, the Government embarked on a fiscal adjustment
program supported by the IMF. The program attempts to lower the fiscal deficit until the
stock of public debt stabilizes (expected in 2002). During the first half of 2000, larger
than expected revenue collections (mainly due to high commodity prices) and low levels
of expenditures (around 40 percent of the initial budget allocation) contributed to a cash
budget surplus. However, this is a temporary improvement and does not reflect a
fumdamental change in the fiscal policy stance.

10. 
The previously tight monetary policy was relaxed in early 2000 through a
reduction of reserve requirements and lending rates. From a high of 25 percent, the
refinancing rate fell to 14 percent by June 2000. Inflation has been kept under control as
higher tax revenues reduced the need for deficit financing, and the increase in
govermnent deposits in the NBK acted as a de facto sterilization of capital inflows. In
addition, the NBK has intervened in the foreign exchange market to counter upward
pressure on the tenge from higher oil exports. As a result, the tenge has remained stable
in nominal terms at about 142.5 per U.S. dollar since March 2000. In real terms,
however, the tenge has appreciated against the U.S. dollar by about 5 percent since early
2000.

Figure 2: GDP Growth and Oil Prices

- GDP growth (left) 

-oil 

price (right)

10% 

8% 

60%

-2%

-4% 

-6% -
1996Q1 

-

2%~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~2

0%~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~2

Russian 
crisis-5

_ 

35

3

1 5

5

0

1997Q1 

1998Q1 

1999Q1 

2000QI

3The 1999 placement came at a high premium-825 basis points over US five-year Treasuries, compared
with only 245 basis points prior to the Russian crisis, as Kazakhstan became the first country in the region
to tap the market after the 1998 crisis. The April 2000 placement, however, was at 500 basis points over
Treasuries, reflecting both a reduction of the market's uncertainty about emerging economies and improved
prospects for Kazakhstan due to the commodity boom and its own economic adjustment.

4

Kazakhstan. Country Assistance Strategy

Figure 3: Poverty Incidence 

by Region, 1996 

20 _--- 

-

* 

-
-- --------

_ 

- -- --- -- --- -------- 

--- 

NaonalAverage 

851 

250 -

50 

-0 

_0 -

0 

------ 

- ------ -- 

-_ 

South 

East West Center North 

________________________- 
-

11. Kazakhstan's economy is
i highly dependent upon the export
of a few commodities, and thus
remains vulnerable to external

shocks. 

Since 

independence,

industrial production has become
diversified, with the two

main export commodities - oil

iless 

and semi-processed metals 

dominating industrial production.

-

The 

share of 

resource-based

industries accounted for about 65
percent of industrial production in

1999 and increased to an estimated 70 percent in 2000; more than half of this corresponds
to crude oil and derivatives production. As a result, fluctuations in international oil prices
have a strong impact on economic growth (Figure 2).

B. 

Poverty and Inequality

12. 
For the majority of the population, macroeconomic and structural reforms have
not yet translated into improved living standards. Real wages fell by over 75 percent
between 1990 and 19974, and per capita income (PPP) fell from $6,547 in 1989 to $4,372
in 1999. Average wages in 1998 ranged from US$50 per month for workers in
agriculture, forestry and fishery to US$180 for those employed in industry.5

13. Kazakhstan is better off in terms of absolute poverty than most of the other
countries in the former Soviet Union. Only 6 percent of the population live on incomes
below US$2.15 (in 1996 PPP value) per day. The Bank's last Poverty Assessment found
that, in 1996, about a third of the population lived below a "subsistence minimum"
income.67 More striking is the regional dispersion of poverty (Figure 3). The northern
part of the country, which is more industrialized and better endowed with natural
resources, has a much lower poverty rate than the south - whose residents are, for the
most part, extremely poor. Rural poverty is more severe than poverty in urban areas.
(Box 1).

14. Although data are scarce, anecdotal evidence suggests that poverty has increased
as a result of stagnant growth of GDP and employment as well as the decline in real
wages and increasing wage arrears. The problem is most evident in rural areas and in the

4ECA Labor Market Study. This measure puts Kazakhstan as the fifth worst among the former Soviet
countries in terms of real wage decreases.
These official figures only cover larger enterprises, and exclude payments in-kind on the one hand, while
obscuring delayed payments on the other.
6 Kazakhstan. Living Standards During the Transition. Report No. 17520-KZ, March 23, 1998. The
analysis was based on data from the Kazakhstan Living Standards Survey (KLSS), carried out in July 1996.
See Box 1.
7 This situation was better than that in Russia in 1995, but worse than in Ukraine. The depth of poverty,
however, while still better than in Russia, was comparable to that in Ukraine at the same time.

5

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Box 1: Poverty, Living Standards and Gender in Kazakhstan

Analysis of the data from the 1996 Kazakhstan Living Standards Survey (KLSS) found that over
a third of the population lived below a "subsistence minimum". Poverty varied greatly by region,
with two out of three poor people living either in the south or the east of the country. Rural
poverty was more severe than poverty in urban areas.

The study did not find that female headed households were more likely to be poor, but some
indicators of female well-being, such as maternal mortality rates have deteriorated. Female life
expectancy has also fallen in the last ten years, but less than that for males and male life
expectancy is more than ten years less than females. Anecdotal evidence has shown that while
gender-based discrimination in the formal labor market is not extensive, women may be
increasingly at risk of being excluded in access to credit and areas of public service delivery. At
the same time there is no evidence that girls school attendance rates are lower than boys.

While almost half the unemployed were poor, poverty was also marked among the self-
employed-demonstrating that in transitional Kazakhstan, employment itself was not a
guaranteed escape from poverty. As in other parts of the world, the poor are especially at risk of
receiving low levels of public services. A major factor affecting the quality of life for the poor in
Kazakhstan is the extensive environmental degradation in such areas as water supply that is its
legacy from the Soviet and early post-Soviet era.

A fundamental problem in accurately gauging the impact of recent socio-economic changes on
poverty in Kazakhstan is the poor quality of available data. The Government has committed itself
to implementing household surveys on a regular basis and using them as input to its policy
decisions.

southern part of the country, as many farm workers lost their ownership shares in farm
restructurings and face the threat of unemployment as labor shedding accelerates. In both
rural and urban areas, services previously provided by enterprises - including electricity,
heat, health facilities, and kindergartens - are no longer reliably available.

15. 
The provision of social services has also suffered from the fiscal constraints of the
post-independence years. However, the health sector has become more diversified and
decentralized, moving away from the Soviet system of centrally administered, hospital-
dominated, and inefficient health care. Yet the transformation that is taking place is often
driven at the local level by fiscal constraints, rather than a coherent strategy coordinated
among oblasts. Morbidity indicators have worsened, and while infant mortality has
declined -- from 28 per thousand in 1993 to 22 per thousand by 1998-the prevalence of
diseases, including sexually transmitted diseases and tuberculosis, has risen.

16. 
The well-developed, high-enrollment education system inherited by Kazakhstan
at independence is being challenged by the lack of funding and remaining inefficiencies.
Enrollment rates have declined, from 93 percent in basic education in 1990 to 89 percent
by 1997. Enrollment in secondary, vocational and technical education has also declined.
In higher education, however, enrollment has remained fairly steady, due to the rise of

8 The official infant mortality figures are contested by some international agencies, which quote figures up
to three times that amount.

6

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

private providers of higher education. Access to education by the poor is, however, in
question, as the drop-off in public funds for education have been accompanied by a
corresponding rise of formal fees in higher education and the existence of informal
charges in some schools. At the same time, the poorest sections of the population have
not been protected effectively by social assistance. In 1999, as a result of the fiscal crisis,
in 1999 the social assistance system paid out only a fraction of what was budgeted.

III. 

THE GOVERNMENT'S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY

17. Kazakhstan, like most former Soviet republics, has a political system dominated
by the president. President Nursultan Nazarbayev has been leading the country since
even before independence. The January 1999 presidential elections, won by the
incumbent, and the Parliamentary elections of fall 1999 were criticized by many outside
observers including the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, but they
have solidified the political landscape. With the Parliament and political process also
dominated by the pro-presidential Fatherland, Agrarian and Civic parties, Kazakhstan has
a political consensus, at the highest levels, on economic liberalization and reforms. The
stability of the President and Parliament is in sharp contrast to the frequent changes in the
Prime Minister and other cabinet officials in the Government. For example, in the last
three years there have been four ministers of finance. Almost all officials below the
national level are still appointed, but elections of local officials are likely to be introduced
in the near future. The Government of Kazakhstan remains committed to building a
democratic system and has continued discussions on this topic with internal and external
critics.

18. 
The Government's vision for the development of Kazakhstan, described in
Kazakhstan 2030-Prosperity, Security and Improvement of the Welfare of All
Kazakhstani People, is to "build an independent, prosperous and politically stable state
with its inherent national unity, social justice and economic welfare of all the

population." 9

19. Key goals were set in seven areas:

* National security: to ensure the development of Kazakhstan as an independent and
sovereign state with the maintenance of complete territorial integrity.

* Internal political stability and consolidation of society: to maintain and strengthen
the internal political stability and the national unity, enabling the country to achieve
its strategic goals.

* Economic growth based on an open-market economy with high levels of foreign
investment and internal savings: to achieve higher and more sustainable economic
growth.

9The detailed development agenda of the Government is presented in Annex 16.

7

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

* Health of the nation and citizen welfare: to improve the living standards, health,
education, and abilities of all Kazakhstan people, and to improve the environment.

* Energy resources: to efficiently use the country's energy resources through a rapid
increase in the extraction and export of oil and gas, in order to receive revenues
promoting sustainable economic growth.

* Infrastructure, particularly transport and communications: to strengthen national
security, political stability, and economic growth.

* Professional government: to create an effective and present-day corps of committed
civil servants in Kazakhstan capable to act as representatives of the nation while
achieving priority goals.

20. 
The medium-term priorities are determined in the Program of Actions of the
Government for 2000-2002. The main objective of the Government in the economic field
is to ensure sustainable economic growth through careful management of the exchange
rate, inflation, and external and fiscal balances. The Program projects real GDP growth
of 3 percent per year, a decline in the inflation rate to 5 percent by 2002, and a reduction
of the fiscal deficit to 1.2 percent of GDP in 2002.

21. 

To achieve these objectives the Government intends to:

* Maintain macroeconomic stability and strengthen sustainable economic growth with a
tight monetary policy, restrained fiscal policy, and a floating exchange rate.

* Ensure dynamic development of the real sector of the economy with an emphasis on
agriculture, energy and infrastructure.

* Continue improving the investment climate of the country in order to increase direct
external and internal investment into the economy.

* Reduce poverty by improving the provision of health care and rendering of social
assistance.

* Pay close attention to improving the environmental conditions in the country.

* Continue developing internal financial markets and capital markets for the
sustainability of the banking system of the country and expanded lending to economic
entities.

* Continue improving the public sector management system -- its transparency,
decentralization, and planning.

* Prudently manage public debt, including close monitoring and prioritization of the
public investment program.

8

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

22. Despite agreement on this overall development strategy, there are some areas
where the Bank Group and the Government differ:

* 

In private sector development, the Bank Group feels that a key obstacle that deserves
more emphasis is the unfriendly business environment, particularly the high incidence
of corruption and the underdeveloped legal and regulatory framework.

* While the Bank supports the Government's overall plans for the reduction of poverty
and unemployment, it is concerned about implementation issues in targeting of social
assistance and in development of a public works program. Moreover, given the
regional disparities in poverty, increasing employment and development of rural areas
will be necessary.

* The Bank is also concerned about some of the Government's investment priorities,
particularly some large infrastructure investments such as a proposed refinery in
Atyrau. Many investments are associated with the development of the new capital of
Astana and are seen by the Bank as being of lower priority compared to improving
the investment environment in general and investment in human capital in particular.

IV. THE BANK GROUP STRATEGY

23. 
The overarching objective of the Bank Group's Country Assistance Strategy is
poverty reduction and the improvement of living standards. (The proposed program of
lending and non-lending services are contained in Annexes 9 and 10, and highlighted
with underlining in the section below.) This section presents the issues and the Bank
Group strategy for assisting the Government in each of four areas:

* Reforming the public sector so that fiscal resources are managed in a transparent
manner, and public services are delivered effectively and efficiently.

* Promoting broad-based private sector-led growth to increase employment
opportunities and incomes across a broad segment of the population.

* Supporting the most vulnerable through the enhancement of both temporary and
permanent programs of income support for the poorest.

* Protecting the environment, countering environmental damage that has a negative
impact on the quality of life of current and future generations.

24. 
The current CAS period is a critical window of opportunity for the Bank to work
with the Government to support this reform agenda. The completion of the CPC pipeline
and the possibility of exploiting newly discovered oil reserves later in this decade create
opportunities for increased growth driven by the oil sector. However, there is also a risk
that the availability of increased oil revenues will slow the momentum of structural
reforms and make fiscal management more difficult. In addition, the possibility of Dutch
Disease effects of the oil boom may reduce the competitiveness of non-oil sectors. It will

9

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

be important for the Government to improve mechanisms for expenditure management
and financial accountability before increased revenues are available to be spent, and
continue to move on the reform agenda to ensure that barriers to investment and growth
in the non-extractive sectors are removed.

25. 
The Bank's strategy recognizes that ownership of the policy and institutional
agenda - by both the Government and civil society -
is critical for the success of
reforms.'0 Therefore the Bank will focus its assistance on areas in which the motivation
for reform is driven by the Government, not the Bank, and where there is demonstrated
commitment and consensus for reform. This implies that the Bank will be selective in
choosing specific reforms to support in the four main areas described above.

A. 

Reforming the Public Sector

26. 
The Bank Group's strategy for public sector reform has two main objectives: to
help the Government manage increased oil revenues in a transparent and efficient
manner, and to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public services. These will
require efforts to address the root causes of corruption and lack of transparency;
continuing administrative and civil service reform; restoring fiscal stability through tax
reforms and expenditure realignment; and increasing the efficiency of delivery of public

services -- health, education, water, and transportation -- to those who need them most.

Reforms are needed at both the national and local government levels.

27. Resource management. Macro-fiscal stability is a precondition for private
sector growth, reduced poverty and improved living standards. Fiscal stabilization,
through an improved revenue system, is key to this effort. It is also important how fiscal
stability is achieved: 
it can be temporary and illusory if achieved through ad-hoc
measures. In the past, expenditures were often reduced in response to lower-than-
expected revenues and budget targets. In the future, the Government needs to implement
a more strategic fiscal policy. The Bank's recent Public Expenditure Review (FY00)
identified key areas to help move in this direction (Box 2).

28. 
The Second Public Sector Resource Management Adjustment Loan (PSRMAL II)
in FY02 and an associated Technical Assistance Loan (TAL II) would support the
Government's policies on intergovernmental fiscal reform and tax reform issues, civil
service reform, and budget management at local levels. A Financial Infrastructure Project
in FY03 will help consolidate the financial stability of the country, by helping the
creation of long-term financial instruments, while addressing the pressing issue of
housing construction through improved housing finance. Once the legal and regulatory
framework is put in place through this project to support private sector investment in the
housing finance market, IFC would support experienced sponsors that undertake to make
investments in this field. Finally, analytical work done in the recent Public Expenditure
Review will be followed by a Note on Revenues in FY01 that will examine issues related
to the management of oil revenues.

'° Key inputs to the process of developing the CAS came from discussions with stakeholders in
Kazakhstan. The participatory process followed in shaping the CAS is summarized in Annex 17.

10

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

29. Managing increased oil revenues. A key component of public resources will
come from the oil and gas sector. At the end of 1999, Kazakhstan had proved oil
reserves of 8 billion barrels, including 6 billion in the Tengiz oil field. This compares
with 7 billion barrels in Azerbaijan, and 48.6 billion in Russia.' l A new discovery has
been made in the Kashagan structure in the Northern Caspian Sea. While it is too early to
determine the size of the reserves, the structure itself is more than twice the size of
Tengiz, suggesting that this could result in a significant addition to Kazakhstan's reserve
base.

30. 
The Government, through the state-owned oil company Kazakhoil, owns about 30
percent of current production, with the balance in the hands of foreign investors. The oil
sector has attracted over 80 percent of cumulative foreign direct investment since 1993.
Investor ownership is a mixture of joint venture/equity ownership (e.g., Tengizchevroil)
and production sharing agreements (e.g., Karachaganak, and the Offshore Kazakhstan
International Oil Co., or OKIOC).

31. Oil production in 2000 is projected to total about 34 million tons (Figure 4);
exports could exceed 27 million tons. Production and exports are forecast to increase to
77 million tons and 66 million tons, respectively, in 2010. The projected doubling of
Kazakhstan's production of crude oil and gas condensate implies that current proved
reserves could be depleted in 43 years.

32. Currently, Kazakhstan transports crude oil for export through the Atyrau-Samara
link with connects to Russia's Transneft pipeline network. Capacity is about 10 million
tons per year, but is expected to increase to about 15 million tons per year. The Caspian
Pipeline Consortium (CPC) pipeline is expected to come on stream in mid-2001 and
provide 28 million tons of additional capacity to the Russian Black Sea port of
Novorossyisk. Phase 2 of the CPC, expected by 2010, will increase capacity further to 67
million tons. Substantial volumes of crude oil have been exported by rail (more than 7
million tons in 1999). The start-up of CPC will cut the transportation costs associated
with these exports in half, from about $50 to $25 per ton.

Source: British Petroleum and Amoco, Gas and Oil Journal.

11

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Figure 4: Oil Production and Exports

6,000 0

5,00-0

4,00O0 

3.000 0

2,000 0

t 000.0

45,000 0 

40,0000 

35,000 0

30,000,0

25,000 0

15,0000 

1994 

t995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

projections (ba cas) 

e

UMVolume ofotl podcion 

i tons (left) 

-Oil 

Expons in millions of USS (right)

33. 
The oil sector is becoming more dominant in the Kazakhstan economy, reflecting
the increasing share of oil revenues in both foreign exchange earnings and fiscal
revenues. During the first half of 2000, exports of crude oil and oil products accounted
for almost half of total merchandise exports, up from 40 percent before recent increases
in oil prices. Fiscal revenues from oil (corporate taxes, royalties, and bonus payments)
may have been as high as 6 percent of GDP in 2Q00 (or about 26 percent of total fiscal
revenue), up from 1.7 percent of GDP before 1999. Even under conservative oil price
forecasts, the expansion of exports due to the CPC pipeline imply that oil-related fiscal
revenues will remain at over 5 percent of GDP for the next ten years.

34. 
To ensure that higher oil revenues do not become a mixed blessing for the
economy, the government faces several challenges. The first is to avoid the Dutch
disease syndrome: a loss of competitiveness of the non-oil sectors resulting from real
exchange rate appreciation. The second is to stabilize the impact of volatile oil prices on
fiscal revenues. And finally, recognizing that oil is a stock natural resource, the
government may choose to save part of the revenues from oil for future generations.

35. 
The Government has prepared a draft decree creating a National Fund for oil-
related revenues. In this current proposal, the objectives of the Fund are to ensure
sustainable social and economic development, reduce the negative impact of oil revenues
on the domestic economy, and provide for the welfare of future generations. It is not yet
clear what rules will govern the transfer of fund resources to the budget, and how
spending priorities will be chosen. The National Fund would receive all or a portion of
oil-related revenues and would transfer some of those funds to the budget for
expenditure. The central bank is responsible for managing the assets of this fund.

36. 
It is important that the National Fund be designed and operated in a transparent
way - i.e., that expenditures are subject to the budgetary process, cast in a medium-term
fiscal framework, and subject to public accountability. In addition, accurate fiscal
analysis and macroeconomic monitoring require transparency with respect to the
12

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Box 2: Public Expenditure Review

The recent Public Expenditure Review for Kazakhstan' identifies five priority areas for
fiscal and institutional reform:

Fiscal sustainabilitv and resource mobilization: The management of domestic resource
mobilization remains inefficient. Reforms should be geared towards achieving fiscal
sustainability by enhancing domestic resource mobilization without discriminating against
domestic savings, capital accumulation, and the development of non-oil sectors. Among the
policy options suggested are: focus on fiscal deficit reduction to stabilize the public debt to
GDP ratio at the current level; complete the implementation of ongoing structural reforms,
such as large scale privatization, public employment and wage reform, and financial sector
reform; adopt and implement a new Tax Code; and establish an independent and accountable
oil stabilization fund.

Role of Government and spending priorities: The involvement of the state in the economy is
still sizeable. The public sector share of the wage bill is large, and public debt is rising at a
fast pace. At the same time, capital investment and maintenance outlays are low, and social
expenditures are unstable. Reforms in this area should focus government intervention in few
areas of market failure and social equity.

Expenditure management: Both the formulation and execution of public expenditure suffer
from serious weaknesses: lack of coordination and clear definitions of functions; lack of
budget transparency; the accumulation of arrears, soft loans, and tax offsets; and lack of
accountability. Reforms calls for a new budgeting approach based on program outcomes,
multiyear budgeting, and performance evaluation.

Fiscal decentralization: The system of intergovernmental relations lacks formal central
coordination, and the tax sharing system is inefficient. Fiscal decentralization should
proceed by extending the scope of decentralization, but enhancing central control and
coordination of the process; clearly specifying funded mandates, increasing managers'
autonomy to perform, and making local authorities accountable for results; and adjusting tax
sharing and transfer mechanisms.

Social sector expenditures: Disparity in per capita social expenditure across regions in
Kazakhstan is a reflection of the inverse correlation between local fiscal capacity and social
needs. These disparities are felt on social assistance, healthcare, and education sectors.
Reforms should aim at increasing the efficiency of spending and the quality of service
delivery and access, while compensating for regional inequalities.

"Kazakhstan: Public Expenditure Review." Report No: 20489-KZ, June 27, 2000.

contribution of the oil sector to fiscal revenues. Both the Bank and the IMF have
underscored the importance of these transparency issues for sound fiscal analysis and
offered assistance to the Government in this area.

37. 
Transparency and accountability. The Government has begun to take measures
to improve performance, transparency, and accountability of the public sector - including
reforms in auditing, procurement, and civil service. PSRMAL II will build on PSRMAL
I to support the Government's efforts to provide the checks and balances, institutional

13

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

restraints, and accountability that constitute the central pillars of good governance. A
Governance and Service Delivery Survey, requested by the Government for FY01, will
(i) identify the main areas and causes of corruption; (ii) recommend public
sector/governance reforms to address more directly the underlying causes of corruption;
and (iii) identify ways to broaden the participation of civil society and other stakeholders.
These measures would complement other actions-preventive, 
educative, and
enforcement-oriented-aimed at addressing the phenomenon of high-level corruption.
These include the declaration of assets and incomes of civil servants to the tax
authorities. The adoption of these reforms would be supported by the second tranche of
PSRMAL II and by the proposed Consolidation Structural Adjustment Loan (CSAL) in
FY03. The TAL II would also support a follow-up survey to gauge progress made under
the first round of reforms. A public sector Financial Accountability Assessment will also
be included in the Bank's analytical work program in early FY02.

38. 
Institutional and administrative mechanisms. The Government is moving
public expenditures away from non-priority areas and towards investment in
infrastructure and social assistance, informed by the findings of the PER and supported
by the proposed Social Protection Reform Adjustment Loan (SPRAL) in FY01. Such
budget reforms, including intergovernmental finance reforms, will also be supported by
PSRMAL II. PSRMAL II will also support the continuing agenda of civil service reform,
including institutional reform at the local level, to improve the efficiency of the public
sector and to decrease waste and fraud. Moreover, it will support the extension of
administrative reorganization and realignment to local levels, and the strengthening of
resource management institutions, such as audit and procurement. The TAL II and
possible IDF grants will help finance the investment in institutional and human resources
needed for these reforms.

B. 

Stimulating Broad-Based Private Sector-Led Growth

39. Kazakhstan's prospects for stable and widely-shared growth hinge on generating
employment opportunities and incomes in the non-extractive sectors, even as the
potential Dutch Disease effects of increased oil exports make this objective more difficult
to achieve. Efforts must concentrate on continuing the privatization agenda and
restructuring or closing non-performing enterprises; improving the business environment
to encourage the entry and growth of efficient enterprises; promoting agricultural growth
and rural development; upgrading infrastructure through focused public investment;
improving access to financing; and fostering a flexible labor market.

40. 
Privatization and restructuring. The private sector accounts for 60 percent of
GDP, a share that about average for the region, but considerably smaller than that in the
Baltics or Central Europe.12 The privatization of small- and medium-scale enterprises
(SMEs) and farms is nearly complete, but about 100 large and 260 medium enterprises
remain under public ownership. In addition, the State has minority holdings in about
2,000 enterprises, is the most important shareholder among large transport, oil and gas
sector firms, and maintains considerable control in the industrial sector through
shareholding in joint ventures with foreigner investors.

12 EBRD Transition Report 2000.

14

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

41. 
The pace of privatization has slowed, due to a lack of political will and effective
bankruptcy mechanisms, corporate governance issues, and the availability of other
sources of budgetary expenditure financing. The slow progress in privatization of larger
enterprises has come at a cost to the economy and to society, since many of the large
state-owned firms are inefficient. While their assets are deteriorating, these enterprises
survive only by building up large arrears to their workers, creditors, and suppliers. The
privatization of "blue-chip" enterprises is likely to begin in 2001 as the environment for
foreign investment improves. 
Shares in Kazakhtelekom, electricity generation
companies, regional power distribution companies and other large and medium-sized
enterprises (mainly in the extractive sector) are planned for full or partial privatization.13
However, finding good strategic investors for these companies has been a challenge due
in large measure to the non-transparent privatization process, the absence of a good legal
and regulatory framework, and the hostile private sector environment. An improved
business environment and a more transparent privatization process should lead to more
IFC investment activity in projects outside the extractive industries, either through direct
lending or credit lines through financial intermediaries.

42. Although privatization of SMEs is more advanced, in many cases this has not led
to improved corporate governance, efficiency, and growth - a likely cause of the lack of
supply response to liberalization. Many enterprises sold under the mass privatization
program remain without a majority owner, and investment funds have been ineffective in
consolidating ownership and forcing improved efficiency on such firms. The need for
effective corporate control and monitoring of management is acute.

43. 
The Bank will assist the Government in designing and implementing a program to
manage state assets: a program for restructuring and privatization of Blue Chip
companies, sales of residual State shares, a program of divestiture of other large
enterprises, and accelerated sale of municipally-owned companies. Through the CSAL
and the TAL II, the Bank will support these reforms and help the Government devise
guidelines on the necessary sector restructuring and an appropriate regulatory framework.
These operations will also support measures to improve corporate governance and
facilitate the creation of an effective framework for bankruptcy and liquidation of non-
viable enterprises. They will also provide support for the development of transparent
procedures for the sale of SOE's as well as the remaining Government interest in
enterprises which have undergone partial privatization. If these reforms succeed in
improving the institutional mechanisms governing Kazakhstan's market, there would be
scope for increased IFC and MIGA operations involving loans to larger enterprises.

44. 
Business environment. New start-up companies, especially SMEs, have been
constrained by an unfriendly business environment arising from corruption, weak legal
enforcement, and high transactions costs. Pervasive licensing requirements and
regulatory practices increase immensely the cost of doing business and provide
opportunities for corruption. Licensing procedures are often complicated and involve

3 It was recently announced that the EBRD is planning to acquire a 30-percent stake in Kazakhtelecom --
15 percent from Kazakhstan's largest bank, Kazkommertsbank, and 15 percent from the Government's
share. As a result, the Government's stake will fall from 50 percent to 35 percent.

15

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

several state authorities. In many cases, the legislative framework for licensing has not
been followed up by promulgation of relevant implementing regulations. Where such
regulations exist, lack of dissemination enhances opportunities for corruption.

45. 
Licenses and the associated complexity of procedures also add greatly to
transactions costs, and a weak real estate system in many regions has led to high formal
and informal costs of acquiring premises for operating businesses. Moreover, the
application of the existing legal and regulatory framework is sporadic, with even the
administration and implementation of adopted legislation (including those for taxation)
depending greatly on the regional governors' attitude toward individual entrepreneurs.
While the key pieces of legislation needed in a market economy are in place and conform
with international standards, enforcement has been uneven because of the weak courts.
The quality of governance in Kazakhstan, as measured by EBRD indicators, is lower than
the region as a whole, and considerably lower than that in C'entral Europe and the Baltics.

46. 
The Government is making progress in reducing excessive and overlapping
licensing requirements to ensure greater transparency and accountability. A Justice
Ministry review of 6000 state enterprises to identify and remove the remaining regulatory
functions, both at the republican and local levels, has been completed and 284 entities
that have regulatory functions have been identified. A new labor law was approved in
late-1999 and came into effect in 2000. Judicial review of bankruptcy, leasing, and
collateral laws has been completed, but only the new leasing law has been approved by
parliament.

47. 
The Bank Group will assist the Government in its efforts to improve the business
environment through an improved legal and regulatory framework, a more friendly
environment for the creation of new enterprises, and reducing the high cost of doing
business that affects SMEs in particular.'4 In FY98, the IBRD, IFC, and FIAS carried out
a joint assessment of the policy environment and constraints to private sector
development in Kazakhstan. The document has provided valuable background for the
Bank's dialogue with the Government on business environment issues. In the future, the
Bank will work with the Government to diagnose remaining impediments to private
sector activity through a series of studies, beginning with the Growth Strategy Study and
a Governance and Service Delivery Survey, both in FY01. Some elements of the reform
package to remove these impediments-de-licensing, reduced interference from civil
servants, improving transparency in public procurement and reducing other public sector
impediments-will be supported PSRMAL II and TAL II. A second group of reforms,
pertaining more directly to the private sector environment--for example, financial sector
issues, the regulatory framework, and leasing laws-would be supported by the CSAL.
The Bank will work in partnership with the EBRD, USAID, and TASCIS in this area.

48. 
In the mining sector, which has suffered from the legacy of non-transparency in
early privatization efforts, the Bank will prepare a Mining Sector Note in FY01 to
provide recommendations on improving the investment climate. The IFC and MIGA will
also examine potential operations in the mining sector and will continue their support of
selected investments in the oil and gas sector both upstream and downstream.

14 See Annex 14 for a more detailed description of the PSD strategy.

16

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

49. Assistance to SMEs is most efficiently channeled through local financial
intermediaries. IFC has taken a leading role in the area of institution building in the
financial sector and this activity will continue during the next three years. It is expected
that IFC will provide investment and technical assistance to additional local banks in
order to strengthen their financial position and develop their management and lending
capacity to service SME borrowers. 
In addition, IFC will work to develop new
institutions and financial vehicles, such as leasing and equity funds, to open additional
opportunities for access to investment capital by SMEs. In the agricultural sector, the
Second Agricultural Post Privatization Assistance Project (APPAP II) in FY03 supports
financial services for rural enterprises.

50. 
The IFC will continue its ongoing activities in the SME sector, attempting to
alleviate the financial constraints faced by SMEs. Through a planned new SME project
facility, it will also provide technical assistance to SMEs to develop their business plans,
establish local consulting and training capacities, support overall Bank efforts aimed at
bringing about improvements in the business environment, support new information and
technology initiatives of relevance to SMEs, and attempt to forge linkages between SMEs
and large enterprises. Related to this, the Bank Group will discuss with the Government
the possibility of grant-financed programs that help in the diffusion of information and
technology and upgrading of technical and managerial skills.

51. 
Thus, IFC's investment program is likely to include one to two loans annually to
banks for on-lending to SMEs and the private sector, direct investment in additional
financial institutions, possible 
investments in leasing, an equity fund, and housing
finance, as well as one to two loans annually to medium/large sized projects in the private
sector, primarily in extractive sectors. As the legal and regulatory framework is
developed and reputable strategic investors express a desire to invest, IFC would also be
willing to support infrastructure projects, primarily those in telecommunications and
power. The IBRD will also consider activities to follow up on its KEGOC electrical
transmission project.

52. MIGA's on-line information services, IPAnet and PrivatizationLink. feature
information on the investment climate and investment opportunities arising from the
national privatization program in Kazakhstan. MIGA has also partnered with the OECD
and other donor agencies through the Private Sector Development Center in Istanbul to
provide training in investment promotion strategies and techniques to Central Asian
Republics. The key focus has been on attracting investment in mining and tourism and
the use of information technology for effective research and outreach.

53. 
Finally, the Bank Group will develop the Global Development Gateway Project to
increase access in emerging economies to knowledge and information, bringing these
economies into the world market and spurring economic growth. Kazakhstan is one of
15 pilot countries selected to participate in this initiative.

54. Agriculture and rural poverty. At independence, Kazakhstan inherited a state-
owned farm sector characterized by large rain-fed grain farms in the north and smaller,
largely irrigated, mixed farms in the south. Since then, the Government has launched
17

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

successive reforms in the sector-price and trade reform, privatization of farms and agro-
business, and the creation of land markets based on fully tradable long-term leases-
aimed at halting uneconomical farming and improving productivity and corporate
governance on the remaining farms. All too often, however, privatization was non-
transparent and led to poor corporate governance and declining productivity, exacerbated
by a lack of hard budget constraints.

55. During the past two years, the Government has imposed hard budget constraints
on farm enterprises by reducing subsidies and eliminating directed credit programs, and
has strengthened the management of the Ministry of Agriculture. It has also supported
financial restructuring through bankruptcy proceedings for non-viable farms and the take
over of badly managed, though potentially viable, farms by creditors or strategic
investors. The results of these initiatives are encouraging. The retreat from marginal
areas is nearing completion, corporate governance is improving, there are signs of
renewed investment in the sector (especially in the north), and there is hope that last
year's yield increases signal the beginning of agricultural recovery.

56. A significant reform agenda remains, with the greatest challenges in the northern
marginal lands and the irrigated southern farms. Land reform needs to be completed by
converting remaining certificates of entitlement to land into actual land titles. The
availability of farm credit, a key constraint especially for the smaller farms, must be
increased. For both the northern and southern farms, efficiency and profitability must be
improved by improving agricultural services (extension, marketing, and research). In
addition, the overall policy framework encouraging hard budget constraints and
aggressive use of bankruptcy needs to be maintained.

57. 
The Bank's strategy focuses on addressing the problem of declining productivity
in the farm sector. The first phase of the Agricultural Post Privatization Assistance
Project (APPAP I) supported the development of rural advisory services and financial
services for rural enterprises through commercial banks in Almaty (a smallholder area)
and Akmola (large farm) oblasts. The second phase of the project (APPAP II) will
expand program activities to additional oblasts, including oblasts in poorer areas. The
project also promotes the use of recently promulgated legislation on bankruptcy and
registration of liens on moveable property, especially important in the North. Additional
interventions in the second phase will focus on broadened support for development of
rural financial markets, including equipment leasing-an approach where the IFC also
has an interest-and microfinance, which will be particularly important for smallholders
in the south.

58. 
In addition, an Agricultural Services Project in FY03 will assist in delineating
public and private sector roles in the provision of services to farms and provide targeted
investment in infrastructure and training to demonstrate delivery of services to clients in
the areas of farm production and marketing. Although the Project will be national in
scale, it will provide support for selected agricultural services, the focus of which will
differ from region to region according to differences in farming systems. A pilot
Drylands Ecosystem Management Project, to be supported through a Global
Environmental Facility (GEF) grant, would seek to restore marginal dry lands to natural
vegetation and seek more sustainable uses of such lands. A proposed Rural Roads
18

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Project in FY03 would lower marketing costs in rural areas. Land registration is a critical
element in Kazakhstan's land reform program, and will be supported by a Real Estate
Registration Roll-Out Proiect in FY02, following the Real Estate Pilot Project initiated
during the previous CAS period. It will build on the lessons of the pilot, and aim to
improve the quality of services provided to clients. There is an on-going Irrigation and
Drainage Improvement Project and the Syr Darya and North Aral Sea Project in FY01
which would improve irrigation and water control along the river. In order to assist the
farm sector to increase yields and thus profitability, IFC will examine the possibility of
establishing a model leasing project which would provide farmers with access to
financing for needed farm machinery and equipment.

59. 
The work on this extensive program aimed towards restoring agricultural viability
and growth will be supported by analytical work, including (i) the completion of an
examination of the marketing infrastructure for grain; (ii) inclusion of Kazakhstan in a
Regional Study of Farm Debt; and (iii) an analysis of the efficiency of the various farm
structures emerging from the Government's farm restructuring as part of the Growth
Strategy Study. A Livestock Study in FY03 will examine the possibilities for growth and
development of the livestock industry in Kazakhstan on marginal farming lands.

C. 

Social Services and Social Protection

60. While improvement in living standards is expected from increased growth and
employment opportunities, there is still a need for targeted assistance to the poor. A key
objective of the social assistance strategy is improving targeting so that transfers reach
the poorest. Given the regional dimensions of poverty, attention should be focused the
poorer regions of the country. For the working poor, whose jobs in unrestructured
enterprises or self-employment are unable to provide them with support, "workfare"
programs could provide subsistence incomes until economic growth offers better
opportunities.

61. Reform of the social protection system. The PER and other studies have found
that the poorest do not receive the largest share of transfers, and social assistance
payments are often not made due to fiscal constraints at the local level. The Government
and the Bank have been developing a set of policies and reforms to improve social
protection of the poor for over a year. It would be supported by the SPRAL to help offset
the increased costs of the reforms. The SPRAL's objectives would include (i) developing
policies to provide the population with an adequately funded and well-targeted safety net;
(ii) ensuring that budgets for social assistance are adequate, are not transferred to other
uses, and account for regional differences in poverty; (iii) developing self-targeting
public works programs; (iv) improving both the efficiency and equity of social assistance
administration ; (v) instituting a comprehensive labor market policy that will increase
labor market flexibility; (vi) developing policies towards the private sector to facilitate
and rationalize business licensing and registration procedures; and (vii) developing
Government's capacity to monitor and evaluate poverty data, trends in household income
and consumption, labor market trends and efficiency and effectiveness of the
Government's social policies. In addition, PSRMAL II will support reforms to improve
the administrative structure to deliver social assistance.

19

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

62. Access to markets and jobs. To help the working poor through the process of
transition, the SPRAL would support an efficient public works program to provide
employment opportunities at minimum wages. The Rural Roads Project aims to increase
the access of the poor to employment opportunities, education, and health care, as well as
market access for buyers and sellers of agricultural products. The Poverty Assessment
and Labor Market Study in FY02 will also investigate the labor market opportunities
available for the poorest, and propose options for reform. The Livestock Study will
examine options for the improved living standards of the poor in some of the most
depressed areas. A proposed IDF Grant on the Silk Road in FY01 will attempt to
stimulate economic activity in economically depressed communities.

63. Health and education. The inefficient post-Soviet social structures will need to
be reformed so that critical services are delivered to the poor. In the education sector, the
lead has been taken by the Asian Development Bank, which currently plans a follow-up
lending operation in the sector. In the health sector, the ongoing first-phase Health
Project focuses on two pilot oblasts and addresses problems of under-funding and
inefficiencies. The project promotes better use of resources, supports health promotion
activities, strengthens the primary health care system, improves information systems,
provides training in new treatment protocols, improves clinical capability for general
practitioners, and upgrades practitioner skills. The second phase of the project (Health II),
planned for FY04, would extend reforms in health financing, primary health care, and
hospital restructuring to the cities of Astana and Almaty and six other oblasts. The
Poverty Assessment and Labor Market Study will also examine the central issue of
access to social services by the poor.

64. Water supply and wastewater services. Currently, water systems fail to deliver
services to those who need it because of poor institutional capacity, inefficient operations
of plants and networks, severe financial shortfalls due to low tariffs and collection rates,
undersized and unfinished wastewater treatment facilities, and limited access to
investment financing. The Northeast Vodokanal Proiect in FY02 will support reforms to
improve services by creating better performing institutions, putting the sector on a
financially viable footing, and ensuring cost effective utilization of the scare financial
resources available. Safety net arrangements will be developed to allow the poor to pay
for water and waste disposal. Concurrently, a Water Sector Strategy Note in FY02 will
examine this critical issue by identifying needs for reform and investment across the
nation.

65. Gender issues. Gender issues will be explored in the Poverty Assessment and
Labor Market Study and a proposed IDF Grant on Gender and Violence in FY01.
Participatory workshops may be used to identify gender issues and integrate a gender
perspective into the Bank's policy dialogue with the Government.

D. 

Protecting the Environment

66. Despite Kazakhstan's wealth of natural resources, environmental problems could
limit the country's growth potential. Addressing environmental degradation will require
20

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

cleaning up contaminated rivers and water sources, restoring marginal lands, and
improved management of water use and sewage practices. The Bank's strategy initially
concentrates on addressing industrial pollution in the Northeastern industrial area and the
marginal agricultural lands.

67. 
Industrial pollution in the Northeast. The Nura River Cleanup Project in FY02
will address the issue of mercury contamination of the river. Other outstanding issues,
which will be tackled by bilateral and multilateral partners, include mercury and kerosene
contamnination of the river Irtysh.

68. 
Pollution in the Northern Caspian Sea. The fragile ecosystem of the area is
suffering from oil spills and the encroachment of the Sea into numerous abandoned oil
fields. This poses a threat to marine life, especially the sturgeon, for which it is the only
remaining spawning ground. Technical assistance from TACIS, USAID, the GEF, and
others in the areas of bio-monitoring, development of hatcheries, etc. will continue to
play a critical role in addressing these issues.

69. Water shortages and water pollution in the South are caused by inefficient
irrigation and livestock practices as well as run-off of non-treated waste water from cities,
as well as a lack of coordination of water sector activities in the region. An acute water
shortage, contamination of the Syr Darya River, and an acceleration of desertification are
occurring in the Southern regions. These are likely to increase the tradeoff between
potable water for human consumption on the one hand, and irrigation, livestock, and
agricultural production on the other. The Syr Darya and North Aral Sea Project, which is
part of the transnational effort for the Aral Sea basin, is the Bank's primary new
instrument in this region. The Bank will also look for other ways to improve regional
coordination in water and energy issues.

70. Restoring marginal lands. In the marginal lands which are being taken out of
cultivation, reclaiming and restoring the lands will provide for a better ecosystem and
livelihood opportunities. The Drylands Ecosystem Management Project will pilot an
effort, with GEF funds, to support the Government's policy to restore marginal dry lands
that are agriculturally unsustainable back to natural vegetation and seek more sustainable
uses of such lands.

E. 

Fiduciary Framework

71. Assisting the Government to strengthen transparency, accountability, and
effectiveness in the management of public financial resources is a central objective of the
CAS. In an environment of increasing fiscal resources from the oil sector there is an
increased urgency to improve overall public financial management and accountable for
the use of public funds.

72. Consistent with the recommendations of a recent review of the Bank's fiduciary
arrangements for adjustment lending, 15 measures have been and will be taken to improve

5 "Fiduciary Framework for Adjustment Lending", OCS /PREM draft, September 13, 2000.

21

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

the Bank's dialogue on the Government's public financial management arrangements.
These include:

* The recently completed Public Expenditure Review (see Box 2), which identified
priorities for reform in the management of public expenditure. This report is now
being widely disseminated in the country and while still very recent, it has already
had an impact on the budgetary process, e.g., encouraging the move to a medium term
framework. It also has provided insights on the role and operation of a National Oil
Fund and helped the Government in their work on reforming the financial relations
between the central and local governments.

* PSRMAL I, a Country Procurement Review (FY00), and an IDF Grant on
Procurement (FY00) all contributed to recent improvements in the procurement law
and the establishment of a State Procurement Agency. It is estimated that improved
procurement practices saved the Government almost 5 billion tenge in 1999, about 5
percent of the total value of contracts passing through the agency.

-

A Financial Management Assessment (FY98) has contributed to strengthening of the
supreme audit authority in the country.

* The proposed public sector reform loan (PSRMAL II and/or TAL II) in FY02 will
support further reforms in public administration and civil service, public expenditure
management, accounting and internal/external audits, and tax and customs policy and
administration. In addition, in FY01 an evaluation of the auditing capacity of local
accounting firms will be carried out using Rapid Response funds.

* The Governance and Service Delivery Survey planned for FY01 will propose public
sector governance reforms to address corruption issues.

* A Financial Accountability Assessment in early FY02 is intended to be a complement
to the Public Expenditure Review.

73. 
In addition, the Bank will place more emphasis on monitoring and evaluating
development impact, particularly with respect to poverty and inequality, by strengthening
M&E components in individual projects and building institutional capacity to conduct
ongoing impact evaluations. The SPRAL provides for the establishment of periodic
household surveys to monitor poverty and inequality; PSRMAL II will support collection
of governance indicators, and it is expected that the CSAL will include measures to
evaluate improvements in the business environment and enterprise performance.

F. 

Applying Lessons from the Previous CAS

74. 
The CAS is guided by the findings of a recent Country Assistance Evaluation that
was prepared jointly by OED, OEG, and MIGA (Box 3). Looking at the period since the
last CAS, performance has been mixed. Lending targets were met in the early years, but
by the end of the CAS period lending slowed significantly as a result of changed
circumstances, fiscal difficulties, and policy differences. In some cases, reforms have

22

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

moved more quickly than the Bank anticipated, making components of projects obsolete
and leading to restructuring. Project implementation often has been slow. The
importance of economic and sector work was recognized in both the previous CAS and
the CAE, but the quantity and depth of the Bank's ESW has been limited by tight budget
constraints.

75. One of the key lessons learned from the previous CAS period is the need to
ensure sustained ownership in the Bank financed projects in an environment where the
changes in the government personnel are very often. First, it is critical that the projects
to be financed by the Bank are included in the Public Investment Program and widely
reviewed within the Government at various stages of preparation. In order to sustain
ownership and support, Bank task teams will also be expected to carry out periodic broad
based consultations during the project implementation. Second, the transition from the
Project Implementation Units (PIUs) to streamlining project management into the line
ministries - a decision taken by the Government last year which the Bank supported-
demonstrated the need to build capacity during the preparation phase by focussing on
financial management and procurement functions.

76. Another lesson learned is the importance of 
projecting and budgeting
disbursements and counterparts fund adequately every year. In Kazakhstan, the proceeds
of Bank loans run through the republican Budget and are subject to budget rules. If
adequate amounts are not budgeted, project implementation may run the risk of
suspended until the beginning of the next budget cycle. The annual consultation
mechanism to agree on next year's budget proposals will be strengthened to avoid
disruptions. Furthermore, 
a semi-annual review of emerging issues on project
preparation and implementation will be undertaken at senior levels.

77. 
Finally, there is a need to facilitate NGO participation in design and
implementation early on during the project cycle. This would involve developing with the
Government ground rules for increased NGO participation.

23

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Box 3: Country Assistance Evaluation

A Country Assistance Evaluation was recently prepared by OED, OEG, and MIGA to assess the
relevance and efficacy of World Bank Group assistance in Kazakhstan. l/ The report concludes
that IBRD adjustment lending since 1991 was successful in promoting policy reforms, and
project outcomes were rated satisfactory by OED. The Bank supported price and trade
liberalization, privatization, financial sector reform, and improvements in the legal framework.
Despite these achievements, per capita GDP dropped by 40 percent, poverty grew significantly,
major social indicators deteriorated, and public financial accountability remains poor.

In hindsight, the report notes, the Bank and other donors were overly optimistic in their
expectation that transition could be accomplished in a relatively short time and with low costs.
The Bank's assistance strategy did not focus enough on the protection of the poor and gender
issues. Although the Bank emphasized public sector reform, there is an unfinished agenda to
strengthen systems of public financial accountability that help ensure effective use of public
resources. The report finds that privatization outcomes were mixed, with poor corporate
governance contributing to decapitalization.

On the whole, investment projects have not fared as well as adjustment lending, some because of
weak commitment. Together, the outcomes of the Bank's adjustment and investment lending are
rated partially satisfactory. The role of the IFC, particularly in the financial sector, was found to
be generally timely and effective.

For the future, the report recommends that the Bank Group focus on the protection of the poor,

strengthening public financial accountability, and improving the environment for private sector
development. The Bank needs solid analytical work to focus its assistance, including periodic
reviews of public expenditures, a financial accountability assessment, and an updated poverty
assessment. The report recommends that the CAS incorporate lessons from IFC and MIGA
transactions experiences and exploit fully the mix of instruments available to the World Bank
Group.

1/ "Reoublic of Kazakshtan: Countrv Assistance Evaluation." CODE 2000-108 (December 2000).

V. MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS AND PROPOSED LENDING PROGRAM

The proposed lending program for FYO1-03 depends on three critical sets of

78. 
issues:

* The macroeconomic framework: 
appropriate macroeconomic environment. In addition, the program requires greater
transparency of the fiscal accounts, both with respect to the contribution of the oil

the lending program is predicated upon an

sector to fiscal revenues -- to allow for due diligence in fiscal analysis -- and with
respect to the design and operation of the National Fund (oil fund) to ensure the
quality of expenditure and investment of oil-related revenues.

* The reform agenda: 
the Government's commitment to a continuing agenda of
policy and institutional reformns. Some elements of the reform program are associated
with particular investment projects, and others - particularly in social protection,

24

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

public sector management reform, and private sector development - are associated
with adjustment lending.

* Financing needs: The amount of adjustment lending in particular will depend upon
fiscal needs, which in turn depend upon the price of oil and the fiscal impact of
reforms.

79. 

The Bank lending program has three possible cases:

* A Low Case would occur if policy and institutional reforms are delayed, and a lack
of transparency in the management of oil revenues implies that it is difficult to
understand how oil revenues are being used. In this case, the Bank lending strategy
would focus on a small number of carefully-targeted investment and technical
assistance operations to achieve poverty, governance, and environmental objectives.
The volume of lending would be $271 million over the three-year CAS period. Given
the current status of structural reforms, the starting point for the CAS is the low-case
scenario.

- A Base Case is predicated upon sound fiscal management and would respond to a
moderate pace of reform. The lending program would contain a social protection
adjustment loan in the first year of the CAS period, but in outer years would shift
from adjustment lending to investment and technical assistance loans. Lending
volume would total $566 million over the three-year CAS period.

* A High Case would be pursued if the pace of structural reform is accelerated, and the
management of oil revenues is sound - i.e., the National Fund is cast in a medium-
term fiscal framework and is subject to public accountability. Predicated upon
financing needs, the high-lending strategy contains a mix of investment, technical
assistance, and adjustment loans supporting policy and institutional reforms across
several sectors, totaling $816 million over the three-year CAS period.

Lending operations will be complemented by a program of non-lending services (paras.

90-91).

A. Macroeconomic Simulations

80. A macroeconomic consistency model was used to simulate the effects of different
combinations of oil price and policy reform assumptions, roughly corresponding to the
three lending scenarios described above. The assumptions and results of the
macroeconomic simulations are contained in Annex 8.

81. 
In the Low Case, it is assumed that policy and institutional reforms stagnate. The
unfavorable business environment results in a standstill of domestic and foreign private
investment (as a share of GDP), and slow growth of non-oil exports. Progress on
privatizing the remaining state-owned shares in blue-chip companies continues but at a
slow pace, and tax collection fails to improve. As a result, GDP growth is driven by the
oil sector. Under the assumption of continued strength in oil prices (US$25-30 per

25

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

barrel), the current account is in surplus through 2002, tuming to a deficit of -0.7 percent
of GDP in 2003. Fiscal account deficits are small, ranging from -0.4 percent of GDP in
2001 and 2002, to -1.1 percent in 2003.

82. 
The Base Case assumes a moderate pace of policy and institutional reforms, as
well as moderate oil prices. Fiscal deficits lie between the Low and High cases, at -1.8
percent of GDP in 2001 and -2.0 percent of GDP in 2003. The Bank's lending program
includes one adjustment loan (the SPRAL in 2001) with the remainder in investment and
technical assistance. While the projects in the first two years of the program are firm, the
lending program for FY03 is more tentative in nature and some of the projects may be
subject to change as the Government revises its rolling Public Investment Program. In
the event that there would be significant changes to the projects in the FY03 program, a
CAS update would be presented.

83. 
In the High Case, the pace of structural reforms accelerates: privatization moves
more quickly, improvements in the business environment lead to an increase in private
investment and non-oil exports; tax collection improves, and there is an increase in
capital expenditure for priority public investments. Under the assumption that oil prices
return to a historical average, the current account goes into deficit, and the fiscal deficit
rises to -3.2 percent of GDP in 2001 and 2003. External financing is assumed to include
three adjustment loans from the Bank (SPRAL, PSRMAL II, and CSAL).

84. 
The simulation results are particularly sensitive to oil price assumptions, which
are an important determinant of both export and fiscal revenues. Table 2 illustrates the
impact of oil price assumptions on fiscal revenues (corporate taxes, royalties, and bonus
payments). Using production quantities in the Base Case scenario, a US$1 decrease in
the price of oil results in a fiscal loss of US$97 to US$117 million each year.

Table 2: Fiscal Impact of Oil Price Assumptions

(US$ million)
2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

21.0 
38,544 

1,125.8 
586.3 
539.4 

20.0 
38,544 
109:0 
84.6 
24.4 

21.0
39,598

1,048.8
733.3
315.5

20.0
39,598
116.6
92.6
23.9

Oil price assumptions and fiscal impact

Oil price (US$ barrel) 
Production (tons) 

Oil-related fiscal revenues 
Tax 
Non-tax a 

28.0 
33,648 

1,288.6 
713.5 
575.1 

25.0 
36,626 

1,062.0 
704.3 
357.7 

Oil price (US$ barrel) 
Production Tons 
Fiscal revenue loss 

Impact of a US$1 per barrel decrease in the price of oil
24.0 
36,626 
96.7 
73.3 
23.4 
a Non-tax oil revenues include royalties and bonus payments.

Non-tax 

Tax 

26

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

B. 

Lending Program and Triggers

85. 
The program of loans in the three lending cases is detailed in Table 3. The triggers
for the lending cases relate to the macroeconomic framework, the reform agenda, and
project implementation (Table 4). The triggers shown are additive - in other words, all
triggers in the first column are required for the Base Case lending program, and all shown
in the second column are necessary for the High Case. In order to judge whether the
triggers are being met, the Bank will seek from the Government a statement of policy and
institutional reforms taken or underway, and evaluate the status of the reform program
against this plan.

86. 
The types of lending instruments chosen and the amount of lending are also
dependent upon overall and incremental financing needs. Even under an aggressive
reform program, the overall demand for external financing may be limited by external
developments (e.g., high oil prices). In the absence of financing needs, reforms will be
supported by investment and technical assistance loans (the Base Case) and by non-
lending services (in the Base and Low Cases).

87. 
The High Case supports an aggressive reform program - evidenced by significant
progress in public sector reform, private sector development, and social protection - as
well as the need for external financing. It requires a sound macroeconomic framework,
evidenced by (i) satisfactory reviews by the IMF under an EFF or Staff Monitored
Program, (ii) full and transparent accounting of the oil sector's contribution to fiscal
revenues, and (iii) operation of the National Fund such that it is a transparent part of the
budget, cast in a medium-term fiscal framework, and subject to public accountability.
Predicated upon financing needs, the High Case lending program includes three
adjustment loans: the SPRAL ($200 million) in FY01, PSRMAL II ($150 million) in
FY02 and the CSAL ($100 million) in FY03. These would be complemented by
investment loans in the areas of agriculture, health, tax reform, rural roads, housing
finance, financial infrastructure, and the environment.

88. 
The Base Case includes the SPRAL in FY01, triggered by significant social
protection reforms and financing needs based on increased social assistance expenditure.
After FY01, the Bank's lending program shifts toward non-adjustment lending
instruments. Policy and institutional reforms in public sector management and private
sector development are supported through a technical assistance loan (the TAL II in
FY02) and possible investment loans. The Base Case requires a satisfactory
macroeconomic framework and transparent management of oil revenues.

89. 
The Low Case excludes adjustment lending in all three years, and in addition
trims the number of investment loans in FY03. These projects focus on the priority areas
of environmental protection, rural development, governance, and financial infrastructure.

27

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Table 3: Proposed IBRD Lending Program, FY01-03
(US$ million)
Hi h Case 

Base Case 

Low Case

FY01 
Social Protection Reform Adjustment Loan 
(SPRAL)
Syr Daria and Northern Aral Sea 
Subtotal 

FY02
Northeast Vodokanal Water Supply 
Second Public Sector Resource 
Management Adjustment Loan
(PSRMAL II)
Second Technical Assistance Loan (TAL 
II)
Nura River Cleanup 
Real Estate Rollout 
Subtotal 

FY03
Agricultural Services 
Second Agricultural Post-Privatization 
(APPAP II)
Consolidation Structural Adjustment Loan 
(CSAL)
Financial Infrastructure 
Rural Roads 
Subtotal 

Total FY01-03 

_

200 

78 
278 

80 

150

10 

42 
16 
298 

40 
35 

100

15 
50 
240 

816 

200

78 
278 

80 

10 

42 
16 
148 

40
35

15 
50 
140 

566 

78
78

80

10

42
16
148

15
30
45

271

28

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Table 4: Lending Program Triggers

|High 

Lending Case

Base Lending Case 
Macroeconomic Framework
Sound macroeconomic framework evidenced 
Same as Base Case, pu: Operation of the
by the satisfactory completion of the IMF 
National Fund such that it is a transparent part
review of the current EFF. If the EFF is not in 
of the budget, cast in a medium-term fiscal
place, satisfactory review of the 
framework, subject to public accountability,
macroeconomic framework under an IMF Staff and invested professionally abroad.
Monitored Program.
Governance
Implementation of measures to tackle high- 
level and low-level corruption: (i)
implementation of annual declaration of assets
and incomes of civil servants to the tax
authorities; (ii) establishment of clear rules for
the interests of public sector officials and their
direct families in the private sector, and
development and enforcement of regulations
dealing with conflicts of interest; (iii) effective
enforcement of code of ethics for civil service;
(iv) public declaration of all significant new
government contracts (defined, e.g., by size,
procurement, privatization, etc.); and (v)
assessment of public financial accountability
by 2001 followed by implementation of
reforms.

Same as Base Case.

Same as Base Case, plus: Acceleration of the
sale of remaining state shares in privatized
enterprises; vigorous implementation of
bankruptcy and liquidation laws.

Private Sector Development
Revision of licensing, registration, and land 
acquisition rules/regulations and other 
bureaucratic barriers to entry, particularly for 
SMEs; limits on audits and inspections of 
private businesses.
Social Sector Reform
Improved poverty monitoring: (i) design of a 
household consumption survey and progress in 
its implementation on at least an annual basis; 
(ii) establishment of a poverty line; (iii) 
continuous monitoring of poverty levels and 
health indicators.
Project Implementation
Implementation of actions agreed during the 
Same as Base Case, plus: further
latest CPPR; adequate budgetary allocations for 
improvements in disbursement levels
project funding. Improvements in 
(indicative targets: at least 12% by end-FYOI,
disbursement levels (indicative targets: at least at least 15% by end-FY02, and at least 20% by
10% by end-FYO 1, at least 12% by end-FY02, 
the end of the CAS period).
and at least 15% by the end of the CAS period).

Same as Base Case, plus: Enforcement of new
labor and employment laws. Adequate
budgeting and improved targeting of social
assistance; implementation of a poverty-
targeted public works program.

29

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

C. 

Non-Lending Services

90. 
The operations of the Bank and IFC will be guided by the Bank's analytical and
advisory activities (AAA). Economic and sector work was identified as a key area in the
last CAS and some major work has been done, including a Public Expenditure Review
and a Poverty Assessment. Over the current CAS period, four types of AAA are planned:

* Major studies to analyze cross-cutting policy issues, prepare detailed sets of options
for the Government, and contribute to the design of adjustment loans. This group will
include the Growth Strategy Study in FY01, the Poverty Assessment and Labor
Market Study in FY02, and a Country Economic Memorandum in FY03.

* Studies which would inform decisions regarding the desirability and need for the
Bank to provide future lending, and help the design of future loans. These would
include the Note on Revenues in FY01 and the Water Sector Strategy Study in FY02.
The note on revenue issues, for example, would help define the extent and scope of
the planned Revenue Project. Due diligence requires the early conduct of a country
Financial Accountability Assessment jointly with the Government and the donors in
FY02. Other studies, as needed, would be carried out using grant funding.

* Sectoral studies to update the state of the client's knowledge on specific issues. This
will include a Governance and Service Delivery Surve and a Mining Sector Note in
FY01, and a Livestock Study in FY03.

* Specific focused notes produced on demand from the client, and informal reports on
trends in economic and financial sectors, social and environmental indicators,
institutional development and the like. In the past, the Government has found these
"rapid response" notes quite useful. In the low-lending case, more resources would
be devoted to these rapid-response policy notes.

91. 
The World Bank Institute's activities complement the rest of the Bank Group's
program by expanding knowledge and enhancing the capacity of Kazakhstan's
policymakers to best implement their development objectives. WBI will conduct in-
country and regional seminars, workshops, and conferences in close consultation with the
authorities in Kazakhstan and the Bank's country team. The thematic areas of WBI
training are aligned with the priorities of the CAS. The objective of private sector
development is supported by Corporate Governance and Business Ethics program and a
course on Global Integration and the New Trade Agenda. Health Sector Financing,
Pension Reform, and Poverty Analysis initiatives are aimed at social assistance reform
and capacity building to conduct poverty analysis and to link analytical work to policy
formulation. The continuation of Intergovernmental Fiscal Relation Prograrn will
support the envisaged reforms in the area of public sector and governance.
Environmental concerns will be incorporated in the newly developed Rural Development
and Natural Resource Management Program that will be launched in FY02.

30

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Policy 

Obiectves/

Partners 

Table 5: Areas of Activity of Principal Development Partners

Growth / PSD 

Public Sector Reform / Govemance 

Environment 

Social Sectors

Macro Financ- 
Legal 
Frame- | 
lial 
| Reform 
Note: 
| A 

PSDI 
Invest. 
Cliactivt 

Infrastr. 
ucture 

Fiscal Modem. 
Anti- 
Capaacty Environ.l Irrigatiorl Health Educa 
Refom ofState Corruption Building Forestryl Agrc 
tion 
S 
Water N Aition

Social
Protec-

92.tilsteral B 

L a c 

r 

w 

g 

o 

s

Bank GroupX_XX 

NGOs and 

X 

DBi Paertnrsip

Private X X 

/ 

T 

D. 

Partnerships

92. 

The Bank has a close working relationship with other donors in Kazakhstan.

Table 5 shows the major areas of activity of the partners in Kazakhstan's development
process, including the Government, the private sector and groups in civil society.

93. 
Four Consultative Group Meetings were held between 1992 and 1996. Since that
time there has not been a formal consultation forum, as Government has not felt the need
for such a meeting. Informal meetings and coordination among donors takes place in
Kazakhstan. However, there is a need for the Government to be more pro-active in
coordinating external assistance.

94. A central part of the Bank's strategy is to be selective in choosing the niches
where its support is needed and where the Bank has a comparative advantage. The Bank
will operate within areas consonant with each of the four objectives of the CAS.
However, within these areas, it will both complement and supplement the activities of
other foreign partners, including Japan, USAID, the IMF, ADB, EBRD, and other
bilateral and multilateral partners. Within social services, for example, the Bank will
concentrate on the health and social protection sectors, while the Asian Development
Bank will focus on investments and reforms in education. The Bank's partnership with
the IMF has major complementarities in the fiscal and banking sectors. While active in
some parts of the transport sector, the Bank has not been in the railways sub-sector,
where Japan (JBIC), ADB, EBRD and France are all involved. The EBRD has a major
role in private sector development and infrastructure provision, and other major actors
include the Islamic Banks and Funds, USAID, the UN System, ADB, the IMF and Japan.
In public sector reform, the Bank's work is harmonized with major inputs from USAID,
the EU and the UN. Finally in environment, the most active partners are the UN, the EU,

31

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

the UK, France and Japan, and the Bank is working with the Global Environmental
Facility on a number of activities. The Bank will not invest in areas where the private
sector is active (e.g., oil and gas). The Bank has played a limited role in the rest of the
energy sector, and has not been involved in urban development.

95. 
Technical assistance for Kazakhstan is increasingly being provided on a grant
basis by bilateral partners. Agencies such as EU/TACIS, UK Know-How Fund and
USAID, which provide targeted technical assistance through grant financing, have joined
with the Bank in supporting areas such as governance, fiscal reform (including
decentralization), legal reform, and private sector development. The mantle of providing
technical assistance, therefore, is increasingly moving to such bilateral aid agencies, and
away from IBRD loans.

E. 

Project Implementation

96. 
Improved portfolio management will be essential to enable the attainment of the
CAS goals. To date, portfolio performance has been disappointing. Implementation of
investment projects has been slow. Disbursement ratios, during the period of the last
CAS, FYs 1998-2000, have been from 8.5 to 10.6 percent per annum, well below the
expected rate of 15 to 20 percent. Annex 7 presents a summary of the latest Country
Portfolio and Performance Review (CPPR), which was held in Astana in July 2000.

97. While project specific issues affected individual projects, there were some over-
riding problems as well. Three recently held Country Portfolio Performance Reviews
(CPPRs) found that Government officials felt that Bank procurement and disbursement
procedures were cumbersome and poorly understood. However, the steady replacement
of Government officials and reorganization of Government structures have contributed to
this problem, resulting in the appointment of officials who are unfamiliar with Bank
procedures to implement Bank-financed projects. A major transitional cost has been the
elimination of project implementation units (PIUs) at the end of 1999, and the associated
mainstreaming of project management responsibilities to the ministries. Although this
move is a welcome increase in ownership and accountability structures for projects by the
Government itself, there have been implementation delays caused by the relatively slow
integration of project management responsibilities into the existing ministerial structures
and associated staff changes. Previously, reorganizations of the Government and
movement of the capital to Astana in 1998 also had an adverse effect on project
implementation.

98. 
Implementation of projects also has been slowed by the Government's budgetary
difficulties, which has reduced the allocation of counterpart funds. In addition, the
Government feels that in some cases Government agencies were not ready to implement
projects when they had been approved by the Bank's Board.

99. Delays in project effectiveness have continued during the last three years, with the
average time from board approval to effectiveness being 171 days. This is a high figure,
but still an improvement on the average of 197 days in the previous three years. In
addition, requirements of financial management systems being in place have delayed
effectiveness, given the serious lack of financial management skills within the country.

32

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Improved project preparation, including increased Government participation and putting
more conditions up front instead of at effectiveness should decrease these delays in the
future.

100. The Government believes that the Bank has at times been slow in processing
applications or giving no objections. In most instances Bank service standards have been
met, but there have been occasional failures. To deal with this issue, the Bank has
strengthened the capacity of the Country Office.

101. The Government and the Bank are determined to work together to improve
project implementation. CPPRs will continue to be held annually, but in addition semi-
annual "mini CPPRs" will be held to monitor implementation in between the annual
CPPRs. The role of the Country Office will increase as staff posted there receive
additional training. In addition, the Bank will work with the new Ministry of Economy to
improve the monitoring of projects, especially the attainment of development objectives.
Moreover, the Bank is taking concrete measures to address the problems identified
above:

* The Bank has conducted seminars and other training for Government officials and
also strengthened the Country Office to help with project processing, particularly with
the capacity for pre-screening of withdrawal applications in the Country Office with a
view to significantly reducing processing delays. Seminars on procurement,
disbursements and financial management will be repeated as necessary in FY01 and
beyond.

* A process has been in put place to review the financing requirements of projects for
the coming fiscal year during the budget preparation process. Bank staff will work
more closely with their Government counterparts to ensure timely availability of
counterpart funds.

* Processing delays will be reduced in the future, and more responsibility has been
given to Country Office staff who are most able to deal quickly and directly with
Government officials.

F. 

Performance Indicators

102. The Bank has agreed with the Government on a set of country performance
indicators which provide critical benchmarks towards achieving Kazakhstan's four-pillar
development strategy outlined in this CAS (Table 6). The set of benchmarks are closely
aligned with the set of Government, Bank and other donor initiatives planned over the
CAS period, and will be developed and adapted in line with the major initiatives in each
area.

103. 
Indicators to monitor progress in poverty alleviation will be taken from the
Household Budget Survey, now being reformulated. A feasible target would be a
reduction in the poverty rate by five percentage points over the next three years.
Macroeconomic growth and stability would be measured by targets agreed with both the

33

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Bank and the IMF. In the social sectors, targets would be agreed upon for primary and
secondary education rates, child and mother mortality rates, and life expectancies for men
and women. Governance improvements would be tracked by the regular Transparency
International survey. Progress on environmental goals would be measured by access to
clean water.

104. For its own portfolio, the Bank will continue the practice of annual CPPRs and
semi-annual "mini-CPPRs", and will condition future disbursement to an adequate
disbursement ratio, as shown in the triggers in Table 3 above. The Bank will also
continue the process of regular consultations with other donors and members of civil
society, and incorporate the feedback from these parties as well as the Governnent to
update the strategy as the socio-economic milieu and outlook for Kazakhstan evolves
over the CAS period.

Table 6: Performance Indicators
Government benchmarks 
Bank benchmarks
Poverty head count ratio-reduce by Poverty Assessment completed;

5%; One quarter of those in extreme poverty monitoring system in place
poverty escape that level by 2003; 
and results publicly disseminated.

Improved macro-monitoring and data
systems developed and data made
available publicly.
TB infection rate monitoring and
mortality rates; reduce latter by one-
third by 2003.

Successful implementation of
Governance and Service Delivery
diagnostic recommendations
Increase population with access to
clean water by 2 percent.

M&E systems in place-development
objectives met; disbursement targets
met

Poverty 

Macro 

Social Sectors 

Governance 

Unemployment rate-reduce by one-
fifth
Growth rate of 5% per annum and 
inflation rates averaging less than 
10% 
Primary and Secondary School 
enrollment rates-(gender 
disaggregated) return to 1990 levels 
by 2003
Maternal, peri-natal and Infant
Mortality rates-reduced by one-
quarter by 2003
TI and other annual surveys show 
annual improvement 

Environment 

Environmental assessments carried 
out for all major projects 
Half of NEAP projects underway
Implementation Agreed funds budgeted and spent; 
effectiveness times reduced to Bank 
average 

VI. 

RISK AND CREDITWORTHINESS

105. The macroeconomic scenario underpinning 
the Bank's assistance strategy is
predicated on: 
(i) sustained strong policy performance, 
laying the foundation for
realizing the full potential of the country's resource base and for encouraging growth in
the non-extractive sectors; and (ii) a relatively benign external environment. Slower than
envisaged progress on policy reforrns and/or unfavorable external shocks could therefore

34

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

result in less favorable macroeconomic outcomes and adversely affect Kazakhstan's
creditworthiness.

106. There are a number of key risks in terms of policy performance. There is, for
example, a risk that the government may slow the pace of fiscal adjustment and
stabilization, including delaying fiscal consolidation, failing to clear budgetary arrears,
and reversing the commitment to liberalization of trade and the exchange rate. Such a
policy stance would increase vulnerability of the economy to external shocks. Similarly,
on the structural side, slower progress on privatization and restructuring would imply
lower growth, constrained access to needed foreign investment, and would add to
government financing costs. Development of the non-extractive sectors is also important.
Failure to stimulate growth in the non-extractive sectors and to limit Dutch disease would
reduce the potential for broad-based economic development. In the extreme, the oil and
gas sector could be reduced to an enclave industry, with adverse consequences for
income distribution and poverty alleviation.

107. On the external side, Kazakhstan is highly vulnerable to adverse commodity price
and volume shocks and this vulnerability is expected to increase over the medium term
with the growing dependence on hydrocarbon exports. As borne out by recent
experience, an adverse oil price shock directly impacts the government budget and
balance of payments position, and can therefore lead to sharp increases in the country's
financing needs. Kazakhstan's current foreign exchange reserves and debt profile also
suggest limited capacity to withstand exogenous shocks. The current level of foreign
exchange reserves (equivalent to 3.5 months of imports) provides only a limited liquidity
cushion in the event of financing difficulties. The government has already built up a
relatively high external debt burden (debt to GDP exceeds 30 percent) and a sustained
improvement in the trade balance--which would, over the CAS period, mostly come from
a growth in commodity exports--will be required to reduce the stock of external debt to a
more manageable level.

108. Delays in completing oil export pipelines would slow progress towards debt
sustainability and imply a heavier fiscal burden. Even if oil revenues increase as
projected, a large external financing requirement will persist over the medium term
owing to large amortization payments falling due and persistent capital flight. While
Kazakhstan can meet its current financing requirement by attracting significant inflows of
foreign direct investment and by borrowing from private and official sources, access to
international capital markets in the future is not assured and could be constrained by
global economic conditions or by a loss of confidence in prospects for the Kazakh
economy.

By:
Sven Sandstrom 

Washington, D.C.
January 16, 2001

James D. Wolfensohn
President

35

Peter L. Woicke

Kazakhstan at a glance 

1/16/01

Europe & Lower-
Central middle- 
Asia 
Incorme Development diamond'

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Kazakhstan 

1999
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNPpercapita (Atas method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas method, US$billions) 
Average annual growth, 1993-99
Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 
Moat recent estinate llaten year available, 1993-99) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Ufe expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 

14.9 
1,300 
19.4 

475 
2,150 
1,022 

2,094 
1,200
2,513

Life expectancy

-1.7 
-1.5 

0.1 
0.6 

1.1
1.2 

GNP 
per 
capita 

Gross
pnmary
enrollment

35
56 
65 
20 
8 

67 
69 
22 
8 

43
69
33
15 

Access to safe water

Access to improved water source (% of population) 

.. 

.. 

86

Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Grossprimaryenrollment (%ofschool-agepopulation) 
Male 

1 
98 
97 

3 
100 
101 

16
114 
114 

Kazakhstan
Lower-middle-income group

Female 

98 

99 

116

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

Economic ratlos

GDP (US$ billions) 

.. 

.. 

22.1 
14.3 
30.3 

16.9
14.6 
42.5 
16.9
14.7

Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

Trd

rade

9.8 
8.8 

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 

-5.4 

-1.0 
1.8 
47.4 

Dom0tic
Somes gsInvestment

t1.1 

25.8 

S 

I

Total debt service/exports 
Present valus of debVGDP
Present value of debt/exports

13.0 

18S9

Indebtedness

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 1999-03

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 

-0.2 
-1.5 

-1.9 
-1.8 

2.7 
7.5 

4.9 
5.1 
8. 

Kazakhsfan
Lower-middle-income group

Exports of goods and services 

5.8 

10.1 

12.7 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)

(% of GDP) 

40

Agriculture 

9.1 

10.5 

20

Industry 

.

.. 

31.2 

34 

20

Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

-20

59.7 

54.6 

40 -9

79.4 
10.8 
34.9 

72.5 
10.6 
40.1

-0e-

_ 

G01 

-

-GDP

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(average annual growth)

Agriculture 
Industry 

-2.9 
-0.7 

-18.9 
-0.1 

21.6 
3.6 

w
s

Manufacturing.40 

-4

Services 

0.5 

-0. 

-1.0 

20

Private consumption 

-4.8 
-4.9 
-13.0 
2.3 

-7.0 
-14.5 
-11.4 
-2.6 

-24.1 
77 
12.6 
-18.3 

General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

20 t 
40 -

97

-Exports 

-*Imports

Gross national product 

-2.9 

-2.4 

2.0

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete

36

Kazakhstan

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domnestic prices 
(% chanqe) 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)

2,500

Consumer prces 
Implicit GDP deflator 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

7.1 
5.7 

8.3 

2.000

13.3 

1.500

Government Hmm0e 
(% of GDP, includes current qrants) 

s00
0 s 

, 

---

Cunrent revenue 

.. 

.. 

18.0 

17.8 

-500 

94 

95 

96 

97 

9s 

U9

Current budget balance 

.. 

.. 

-5.1 

-2.5 

-",.,--GDP deflator @'-CPI

Overall surplus/deficit 

.. 

.. 

-7.6 

-5.2

TRADE

IUSS mil/ions) 
Total exports (fob) 
Commodity 1 
Commodity 2 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cifl 
Food 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and Import levels (US$ mil.)

5 839 
2,068 
771 
1,356 
6)780 
617 
61 

5 989 
2,288 
886 
1377 
5,645 
893 
341 
127 

sooo
7000
6oo 0
so 0

2000

.

.. 

200

Fuel and enerqy 

1000

Capitalgcoods112 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

9e 

go

Export price index (1995-=100) 
Import Drice index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995-100) 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

100 
118 
85 

0
0 
106 

U Exports 

o Imports

.. 

.. 

I

BALANCE 

of PAYMENTE_

(USS millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

6735 
7,716 

6,921 o
6,749 

i|

Resource balance 

-981 

172 

2

Net income 

-9 

50 

-

Net current transfers 

.. 

.. 

78 

157 

.4

Current account balance 
Financing items (net) 
Chanqes in net reserves 
Memo:

-1,201 
778 
423 

-171 
247 
-76 

5
5
-7

Reserves includinq gold (USS millions) 

.. 

.. 

1901 
78.3 

2Q003

Conversion rate (DEC, localWlS$) 

.. 2.10E-3 

119.5

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(USS millions) 

Composition of 1999 debt (USS mill.)

Total debt outstandinq and disbursed 

.. 

.. 

5,715 

7,934
1,136 

IBRD 
IDA 

899 
0 

G 

1

.

.

0 
1326 

A: tl6

Total debt service 

884 

C 509

IRD 

.. 

.. 

44 

95

Composkion of net resource flows
Official grants.. 

.

.. 

*

Official creditors 

.. 

.. 

339 
925 

226

Private creditors 
Foreiqn direct investment 

.

.. 

-573

..
-

Portfolio equity 

*- 

*- 

* 

| 

D: 4,157

World Bank proqram
Commitments 
Disbursements 

.
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

315 
211 

0 
256 

A- IBRD 

E - Biateral

B- IDA 
C -IMF 

D - Other multilateral F - Private
G - Short,term

Principal repayments 

0 

20 

Net 

flows 

.. 

.. 

211 

236 

__1

Interest payments 
Net transfers 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

44 
167 

75
161

Development Economics 

1/16/01

37

ANNEX 2: KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agnculture 
Industry 
Services 

100 
13 
27 
60 

100 
12 
27 
61 

100 
9 
31 
60 

100 
10 
33 
52 

100 
9 
35 
56 

100 
8 
37 
55 

100 
8 
39 
53 

100
8
38
53

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Govemment investment 
investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)' 
Imports (GNFS) 

87 
17 

87 
16 

87 
17 

84 
15 
2 
13 

72 
15 
2 
14 

74 
15 
2 
14 

77 
16 
2 
14 

77
16
2
14

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

Private 

33 
36 

35 
37 

31 
35 

41 
40 

59 
45 

57 
46 

56 
48 

54
47

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

13 
13 

13 
12 

13 
12 

16 
14 

29 
22 

25 
18 

23 
16 

23
15

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

21035 

22166 

21979 

16870 

17423 

18062 

19366 

20644

1270 

1340 

1320 

1260 

1250 

1160 

1210 

1280

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1993 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
Gross Domestic Income 

1.7 
3.2 

-1.9 
-11.9 

2.7 
3.3 

8.0 
16.7 

4.0 
2.9 

4.5 
2.3 

4.0
4.0

-1.3 

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1993 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
Total consumption 
Private consumption 

2.5 
3.6 
4.5 

-1.3 
-10.5 
-10.4 

7.2 
-9.3 
-14.8 

8.4 
9.4 
7.1 

4.2 
5.5 
4.0 

4.5 
3.7 
3.7 

4.0
3.6
3.4

7.8 
10.6 

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)5
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)5
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

6966 
6292 
7546 
6618 
-580 
50 
-750 

7741 
6899 
8300 
7176 
-559 
75 
-794 

6735 
5839 
7716 
6589 
-981 
78 
-1201 

6921 
5989 
6749 
5645 
172 
i05 
-171 

10225 
9265 
7906 
6698 
2319 
140 
1082 

10249 
9246 
8394 
7129 
1856 
140 
490 

10751 
9619 
9250 
7599 
1502 
140 
9 

11137
9953
9697
7923
1440
135
-91

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions) 
Change in reserves' 

1320 
713 
434 
279 
-749 
-490 

1149 
632 
339 
293 
-1004 
423 

1583 
114 
234 
-53 
-416 
-76 

1400 
182 
218 
175 
-1190 
-1083 

1300 
-158 
241 
165 
-1197 
-185 

1500 
88 
283 
-394 
-1104 
-133 

1500
136
72
-587
-787
-157

335 
334 
1 

-54 

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR93 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-2.8 

-2.5 

-4.5 

1.1 

13.3 

10.3 

7.8 

7.0

.. 

.

.. 

..

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

38

Kazakhstan - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'

Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

indicators

Monetary 
M2/GDP 
Growth of M42 1%1 
Private sector credit growth I 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR93 =100)

Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$!LCU)5

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (", change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

13.2 

.. 

.. 

.. 

2.6 

9.5 
13.8 

13.2 
18.4 
-5.2 
2.1 
2.7 

18.2 
23.3 
-5.1 
2.8 
2.8 

10.2 
27.6 

8.6 
-13.1 

17.8 
20.3 
-2.5 
2.4 
2.4 

13.5 
83.4 

24.7 
'1.3 
3.5 
3.3 
2 7 

14.4 
30.5 
78 8 

21.9 
22.0 
-0.2 
3.1 
0.7 

15.1 
16.5 
75.5 

22.6 
21.8 
0.8 
3.0 
-1.0 

15.3 
11.3 
76.3 

21.4
21.6
-0.2
2.7
0.2

15.1
7.9
74.0

.. 

142.3 

.

162.4 

..

175.5 

250.4 

261 2 

266.7 

274.9 

282.3

-

-

39.3 
38.9 

174 
16.1 

7.1 
4.9 

8.3 
13.3 

4t) 
13 7 

6.5 
6.5 

5.5 
5.5 

5.0
5.0

a. GDP at factor cost.
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

39

Annex 3: Social Indicators

Latest single yvar 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-98 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(°/ ofpopulation)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS

Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(%/o of age group)

Total 

Male 
Female 
Access to safe water
(% ofpopulalion)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(lo under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

15.6 
-0.9 
56.4 
2.0 

34.6
30.0
39.0

1,340 
175 
150

35.4

6.7

42.3

2.1 

4 4 

.. 

.
.. 

97 
96 

8

65 
59 
70 

22 
29 

382 
167 
70

14.1 
1.5 
52.2 
3.3 

15.6 
1.0 
55.9 
3.1 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.

.

.. 

.
.. 

.. 

.

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

69 
64 
73 

30 

312 
140 

.. 

.

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.
.. 

318 
149 

.. 

40

Same regionrincome group
Lower-
middle-
income

Europe & 
Central Asia 

474.7 
0.1 
66.2 
1.6 

886.5
0.9
57.7
2.5

2,200 
155 

1,740
131

4.0 
5.1 

8.8.

100 
100 
99 

91 
89 

69 
65 
74 

22 
26 

283 
120 

3.0

4.9

94
95
93

89
89

68
65
72

35
44

244
137

Annex 4: Bank Group Portfolio

IBRD: Ongoing and Recently Closed Projects

Projects 

Fiscal 
Year 
Approved 

Total 
Amount 

USS (M) 

Disbursed
as of
Dec. 31, 2000

us$ (M)

Technical Assistance Loan 
Petroleum Technical Assistance Loan 

Finance & Enterprise Development Loan
(FEDL)* 
Social Protection Loan* 

Irrigation & Drainage Loan 

Uzen Oil Field Rehabilitation Loan* 
Treasury Modernization Loan 
Pilot Water Supply Loan 
Real Estate Registration Pilot Loan 

Public Sector Resource Management
Adjustment Loan (PSRMAL) 
Agriculture Post Privatization Loan (APPAP) 
Pension Reform Adjustment Loan (PRAL) 

Road Transport Restructuring Loan 
Health Restructuring Loan 
Legal Reform Loan 
Atyrau Pilot Water Supply Loan 

1994 
1994 

1995 
1995 

1996 

1997 
1997 
1997 
1997 

1998 
1998 
1998 

1999 
1999 
1999 
1999 

38.0 
15.7 

62.0 
41.1 

80.0 

109.0 
15.8 
7.0 
10.0 

230.0 
15.0 
300.0 

100.0 
42.5 
16.5 
16.5 

Electricity Transmission Rehabilitation Loan 

2000 

140.0 

* These loans have been restructured recently

37.1
13.4

12.5
19.9

29.0

22.2
8.6
6.5
5.7

230.0
4.1
200.0

10.9
2.2
0.9
1.9

1.9

41

IFC and MIGA Programs, FY97-00

IFC approvals 

Sector:

Mining & Extraction of Metals & Other Ores 
Cement & Construction Materials 

Financial Services 

Industrial and Commercial Services 
Infrastructure 

MIGA guarantees 

1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
Total
USS (M) USS (M) USS (M) USS (M) USs (M)

9.1 

30.7 

49.6 

19.5 

108.9

-
-

9.1 

-

-

-

30.7 
-

-

-
-

-

-
1.1 

17.5 

11.0 
20.0 

-
-

15.0- 

4.5 
-

30.7
1.1

41.6

15.5
20.0

14.3 

-

14.3

42

Annex 5: Status of Bank Group Operations
As of January 9, 2001

Closed

Projects: 

7

Board Date 
Fiscal Year

Active Projects 

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 
Develonment 
ImDlementation 
Obiectives 
Progress

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Orieinal Amount in US$ Millions 
IBRD 
IDA Cancel. Undisb. 

Disbursements SI
Orig. Frm Rev'd

1995 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1997 
1997 
1998 
1998 
1999 
1999 
1999 
1999 
2000 

P008508 
P008506 
P008510 
P045303 
P037960 
P008507 
P008503 
P050780 
P008500 
P046499 
P046046 
P008499 
P065414 

FINANCE & ENT. DEVEL 
SOCIAL PROTECTION 
IRRIG. & DRAINAGE 
PILOT WATER SUPPLY 
TREASURY MODERNIZATION 
UZEN OIL FIELD REHAB 
AG POST PRIVATIZATION ASST. 
PENSION REF SAL 
ATYRAU PILOT WATER 
HEALTH RESTRUCTURING 
LEGAL REFORM 
ROAD TRANSPORT RESTRUCT. 
ELEC. TRANSMISSION REHAB. 

S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 

S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
U 
S 
S 

a! Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

62 
41.1 
80 
7 
15.8 
109 
15 
300 
16.5 
42.5 
16.5 
100 
140 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
14.2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

49.5 
6.9 
51.0 
0.5 
7.2 
86.8 
10.9 
100 
14.6 
40.3 
15.6 
89.1 
138.1 

49.5 
17.1 
21.8 
0.5 
7.2 
64.8 
5.5 
100 
4.9 
9.7 
4.8 
22.1 
3.1 

31.4
0
0
0
0.2
3.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

43

Kazakhstan
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of June 30, 2000
(In US Dollars Millions)

IFC Held 

IFC Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1994/95/98/00 ABN AMRO Kazak 
1999 
Alautrangas 
1998 
Ispat Karrnet 
1994/96 
Kazgermunai 
1997/98/99 Kazkommertsbank 
1999 
Rambutya LLP 
1999 
SEF Const. Mat 
1999 
TuranAlem 
2000 
SEF LP-GAZ 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.00 
4.57 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.57 
0.00 
0.00
20.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
29.60 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
29.60 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.68 35.30 
0.00 
0.00 
0.38 17.25 
0.00
9.7 
1.00 
0.00 
0.00 
9.7 
1.00 
0.00 
0.00
11.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
11.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.88 
0.25 
0.00 
0.00 
0.68 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
15.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
15.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
2.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00

Total Portfolio: 

86.18 

6.50 35.30 

0.00 

5.95 17.25 

0.00

65.98

Approvals Pending Commitment

FY Approval 
2000 
2000 
2000 
2000 
2000 

Project Name 
ABN Amro Standby 
Agrokaz 
FIOC 
Sazankurak 
SEF-Helios 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
15.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
3.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.01 
0.00 
0.00
15.00 
0.00 
5.00 
0.00
2.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00

Total Pending Commitment: 

36.00 

0.01 

5.00 

0.00

44

Annex 6: Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects Under Implementation' 

Average Implementation Period (years) b 

Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management

CPPR-during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000

11 

1.8 

9.1 
10.4 
9.1 
10.4 
18.1 

No 
820.5 
74.6 

13 

2.3 

23.1 
19.4 
23.1 
19.4 
9.4 

Yes 
857.0 
65.9 

16 

2.4 

12.5 
13.7 
12.5 
13.7 
10.6 

15

3.0

6.7
4.1
13.3
14.2
8.0

Yes 
1067.9 
66.7 

No
1735.0
115.7

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
6 
6
822.36 
822.36
0 
0
0 
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

45

Annex 7: Country Portfolio Performance Review 2000

Government of Kazakhstan and the World Bank
Fourth Country Portfolio Performance Review
July 4-5, 2000

The Fourth Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) for Kazakhstan was held in
Astana on July 4 and 5 of 2000. The meeting was co-chaired by Mr. E. Utembayev, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Republic of Kazakhstan and Mr. Kiyoshi Kodera, Director of the Central Asia
Country Department of the World Bank.

It was stressed that improving project implementation was a major goal of the Government.
The current budget situation required that projects were effective or they be closed. The
Government plans to finalize the revision of the current portfolio by the end of July and will
officially inform the Bank on the proposed changes in the program. It was agreed that the last year
had been disappointing and frustrating with project implementation poor with low disbursements
and therefore limited development impact. It is likely that the portfolio is starting to stabilize at a
level of about 15 projects, a challenging, but manageable number. The need to go beyond
disbursements and do more work on developing effective Monitoring and Evaluation systems to
track development indicators was stressed,

Figures for the low disbursement rates were given. It was stated that now factors such as
changes in Government personnel, organization and procedures have been overcome and
disbursements should pick up as the increase in the fourth quarter seemed to portend. It was
pointed out that there had not been enough follow up on last year's review of budget cycle and
project allocations. Bank staff should be more proactive in working with Government on realistic
budget allocations. There has been an improvement in the number of problem projects, but some
projects now rated "Satisfactory" are in danger of falling into the "Unsatisfactory" category unless
corrective actions were taken.

The change in project implementation arrangements was very detrimental to 3rd quarter
results, but things were seen to be picking up. The Bank fully supports the rationale for these
changes and there was general agreement that the system had led to better Govemrnent controls,
more ownership and improved implementation. To help the new implementation groups, Ministry
of Finance has approved by the Minister's Orders the Standard form of contract, roster and salary
scale for consultants as well as Instruction for opening the special account. At the moment these
documents are pending registration by Ministry of Justice and will become effective right after
that. The Bank has asked the Government to send the Standard form of contract for Bank's "no
objection" to simplify clearance of the individual contracts in the future.

The rules on special accounts were discussed and it was explained that their placement was
agreed during loan negotiations. The use of commercial banks was found to be the most efficient
way to get funds disbursed, but Government could request other arrangements during negotiations.
The Department of State Borrowing, which has taken over from the previous Committee on
External Loans explained its organization and role. Similarly, the organization and roles of the

46

Ministry of Economy were explained. In addition to medium term planning and budgeting,
(including the development of the Public Investment Program) the ministry had an important role
in project monitoring and evaluation. This meant the development and tracking of better indicators
than were now available. The PIP should include all loans, grants and Government guarantees.
Projects could be initiated by sector ministries, local governments, corporations and others. In the
end the MOE would be sure that a consistent program that fit within the macro-framework was
developed. It was agreed that it was important for all visiting Bank missions to keep the Ministries
of Economy and Finance involved in their work.

There was agreement that there was insufficient dialogue between the Ministries of Finance
and Economy and the sector ministries and agencies on budget allocations. The Ministry of
Finance stressed that this year they were sending many more questions and clarifications to the
sector ministries and the tight budget ceiling will require some projects to be restructured and cut.
The Government agreed to investigate making changes in procedures which would allow re-
allocation of the loan funds from one project to another at least within one sector.

Bank courses on procurement and disbursement were welcomed and regular presentations,
both by local staff and by HQ staff were agreed to on a regular and more frequent basis, especially
by Country Office staff. The Bank explained the rationale and some examples of Bank rules and
procedures on procurement. It was pointed out that a recent study showed that ICB saved on
average 20% for borrowers. It was recognized by the meeting the Government's concern about
using more local firms and contractors, but this can be done without changing Bank rules. Project
design and TORs for consultants often excluded local participation. Qualifications should be the
criteria, not foreign or local registration.

In order to speed up the disbursement process and reduce the number of withdrawal
applications that are rejected, the role of the Country Office has been increased and they will help
by pre-screening applications and conducting periodic workshops. Increased use of e-mail and
other electronic means should help to accelerate processes and improved use of special accounts
would be encouraged.

A review of developments in financial management since the last meeting showed that only
limited progress has been made. Both the Bank and the Government need to improve the overall
financial management situation and implement some of the more important activities identified at
last year's CPPR. A practical seminar involving accountancy staff will be carried out and
increased use of local auditing companies will be investigated.

A detailed review of each of the projects in the portfolio was carried out and a detailed
Action Plan was drawn up.

In summing up, the Government expressed a better understanding of each of the projects in
the portfolio. This would help as the country moved to a three year rolling budget. A whole range
of procedures would be reviewed to improve the budgeting and implementation process. More
involvement of the Ministries of Economy and Finance would take place as projects were
developed. The overall portfolio must fit within the ever changing budget limits and Government
priorities.

47

The Bank expressed its view that the negative impact of recent changes was now behind us
and improved implementation could be expected. The number of problem projects was dropping
and should be kept down. It was agreed that the Government and the Bank will work jointly on
restructuring or canceling projects if this is needed. The Bank will work with the Government to
increase the use of local consultants and contractors, but ICB was in the best interest of the
borrower. It was agreed that a mini-CPPR would be done in six months and another full CPPR
would be held next year.

48

Annex 8: Macroeconomic Simulations 2001-2003

1. A macroeconomic consistency model (RMSM-X) was used to simulate the effects of
different oil price and policy reform scenarios:

* 

In the Base Lending Case (B), it is assumed that the Government continues to move
forward on its policy reform agenda at a moderate pace. Oil prices remain relatively
high, based on World Bank price forecasts. In this scenario, there is little financing
need for adjustment lending in outer years. Bank operations include investment and
T.A. loans but only one adjustment loan (the SPRAL in 2001).

* The High Lending Case (C) assumes that world oil prices fall gradually from current
high levels to a historic average, resulting in larger fiscal deficits. The reform agenda
is pursued more aggressively, and is supported by adjustment lending over the entire
CAS period.

- The Low Lending Case (A) assumes high oil prices and that policy reforms are
delayed or insignificant. In this case, there is no adjustment lending from the Bank.
In addition, the number and volume of investment loans are smaller than in the Base
Case.

2. The assumptions made in the three scenarios are shown in Table A8. 1, and the
simulation results in Table A8.2. In all three scenarios, it is assumed that the CPC
pipeline becomes operational as scheduled (mid-2001), non-tax oil revenues (royalties
and bonuses) are captured in the fiscal accounts, and domestic consumption of oil is
driven by economic growth. In addition, it is assumed that the National Fund
accumulates part of each year's oil revenues to reach 10 percent of annual oil exports by
2004. As modeled in the simulations, the National Fund as included in the model plays
the role of a price stabilization fund only, and does not include further savings for future
generations or revenues (and associated fiscal expenditures) for development projects.

3. The Base Case assumes a moderate pace of policy and institutional reforms:
compared to the High Case, privatization is slower, moderate improvements in the
business environment lead to smaller increases in private investment and non-oil exports,
and tax revenue increases are less significant. Oil exports increase somewhat, but less
than in the Low Lending Case, and the current account moves into deficit in 2002. The
fiscal balance is in surplus until 2003. The Bank's lending program includes one
adjustment loan (the SPRAL in 2001) with the remainder in investment and technical
assistance.

4. In the High Lending Case, privatization moves more quickly, resulting in greater
fiscal receipts; improvements in the business environment lead to an increase in private
investment and non-oil exports; improved tax collection raises tax revenues; budget
discipline leads to a reduction in current government expenditure, but this is balanced by
an increase in current expenditure on social protection programs; and there is an increase
in capital expenditure for priority public investments. However, under the assumption

49

that oil prices return to a historical average (i.e., from $28 per barrel in 2000 to $18 per
barrel in 2003), the fiscal take from oil rises by only about $200 million between 2000
and 2003. There is a fiscal deficit in years 2001 and 2003. Oil exports actually decline
between 2000 and 2003, and the current account moves into a deficit between 0.4 and 1.4
percent of GDP. External financing is assumed to include three adjustment loans from
the Bank.

5. In the Low Lending Case, it is assumed that policy and institutional reforms stagnate.
The business environment remains unfavorable, with the result that both domestic and
foreign private investment do not increase as a share of GDP, and non-oil exports grow at
a relatively low rate of 2 percent per year in U.S. dollar terms. Progress on privatizing
the remaining state-owned shares in blue-chip companies (valued at approximately 5
percent of GDP) continues but at a slow pace, and tax collection fails to improve. Higher
rates of GDP growth are driven by the assumption of continued strength in oil prices and
increased dominance of the oil sector in the economy. High oil prices also result in a
current account surplus throughout the period, as well as a fiscal surplus until 2003.

6. The simulation results are particularly sensitive to oil price assumptions, which are an
important determinant of both export and fiscal revenues. Table A8.3 shows the impact
of the three sets of oil price assumptions on fiscal revenues. A continuation of current
high oil prices results in a fiscal take between $1.3 and $1.7 billion per year. Compared
to the high-price scenario, moderate oil prices lower oil-related fiscal revenues by $266
million to $566 million per year during 2001-03, and low oil prices cost the fiscal budget
$658 million in 2001, falling to $606 million in 2003.

50

Table A8.1: Simulation Model Assumptions

T Assumption
Variables
Affected

I 

Base Lending Case 
(B) 

Low Lending Case 
(A) 
Overall Description:
High oil prices, delayed Moderate oil prices, 
policy reform, lack of moderate polirelicrespoy 
transparency 
transparency 
Oil Sector Assumptions:
* Oil prices remain 
* Oil prices remain 
high and stable in 
relatively high 
2001-03 

High Lending Case 
(C) 

Low oil prices, faster
reform,
transparency

* Oil prices

* Capital
expenditure/GDP

* Oil prices 
gradually drop to
levels consistent
with historical
averages
* Higher oil revenues * Higher oil revenues * Due to lower oil 
allow a significant 
allow a moderate 
revenues, public 
increase in public 
increase in public 
investment remains
investment 
investment 
at current levels
Policy Assumptions:
* Slow progress on 
privatization 
* Continuation of 
unfavorable 
business 
environment 
* No reforms in 
public sector 
management 

* Faster progress on 
* Faster progress on 
* Privatization
privatization 
privatization 
receipts/GDP
* Moderate 
* Significant 
* Private
improvement in 
improvement in 
investment/GDP
business 
business 
* Non-oil export
environment 
environment 
growth
Improved fiscal 
Improved fiscal 
* Current
discipline 
discipline 
expenditure/GDP
* Greater investment * Greater investment * Capital
in public goods 
in public goods 
expenditure/GDP
* Moderate 
* Significant 
* Tax revenue/GDP

* 

* 

improvements in 

tax collection 

improvements in

tax collection

* Moderate increase * Slower economic 
in growth rates 
growth due to
driven by oil sector 
lower oil prices

Growth Assumptions:
* Higher rates of 
economic growth 
driven by oil sector 
Financing Assumptions:
* No adjustment 
* Adjustment lending * Adjustment lending * External borrowing
lending 
in 2001 only 
in 2001-03 
Interest on external
* Reduced 
* Full investment 
* Full investment 
debt
investment lending 
lending program 
lending program

* GDP growth

* 

51

Table A8.2: Simulation Results
1999 
2000 
2001 

2002 

2003

Oil Prices (US$ brl) a
Low lending case (A) 
Base lending case (B) 
High lending case (C) 
GDP Growth a
Low lending case (A) 
Base lending case (B) 
High lending case (C) 

Inflation a

Low lending case (A) 
Base lending case (B) 
High lending case (C) 
Per Capita Income
Low lending case (A) 
Base lending case (B) 
High lending case (C) 
Current Acct./GDP
Low lending case (A) 
Base lending case (B) 
High lending case (C) 
Oil Exports (US$m)
Low lending case (A) 
Base lending case (B) 
High lending case (C) 
Fiscal Balance/GDP b
Lowlendingcase(A) 
Base lending case (B) 
High lending case (C) 
External Debt/GDP
Low lending case (A) 
Base lending case (B) 
High lending case (C) 

a: Assumed values.
b: Includes privatization receipts.

18.1 
18.1 
18.1 

2.7 
2.7 
2.7 

8.4 
8.4 
8.4 

1,133 
1,133 
1,133 

-1.0 
-1.0 
-1.0 

2,318 
2,318 
2,318 

-3.5 
-3.5 
-3.5 

47.4 
47.4 
47.4 

28.0 
28.0 
28.0 

8.0 
8.0 
8.0 

9.0 
9.0 
9.0 

1,170 
1,170 
1,170 

6.2 
6.2 
6.2 

5,020 
5,020 
5,020 

3.5 
3.5 
3.5 

43.8 
43.8 
43.8 

28.0 
25.0 
22.0 

6.5 
4.0 
3.5 

6.5 
6.5 
6.5 

1,247 
1,217 
1,212 

4.9 
2.7 
-1.8 

5,382 
4,806 
4,229 

-0.4 
-2.0 
-3.4 

40.7 
41.6 
43.8 

25.0 
21.0 
20.0 

5.5 
4.5 
4.0 

5.5 
5.5 
5.5 

1,352 
1,308 
1,295 

3.7 
0.2 
-0.2 

6,114 
5,136 
4,891 

0.1 
-0.9 
-1.4 

35.5 
39.2 
42.1 

24.6
21.0
18.0

5.0
4.0
3.5

5.0
5.0
5.0

1,455
1,394
1,374

3.4
-0.4
-2.7

6,222
5,311
4,552

-1.1
-1.7
-3.6

32.7
36.6
42.5

52

Table A83: Fiscal Impact of Oil Price Assumptions
(US$ million)
2000 

2001 

2002 

28.0 
1,288.6 
713.5 

575.1 

28.0 
1,288.6 
713.5 
575.1 

28.0 
1,288.6 
713.5 

575.1 

0.0 

0.0 

28.0 
1,356.4 
904.3 

427.7 

25.0 
1,682.7 
928.7 

637.3 

25.0 
1,062.0 
704.3 
357.7 1 

21.0 
1,125.8 
586.3 
539.4 

21.0 
697.9 
433.7 

264.9 

294.4 

658.5 

20.0 
1,014.8 
499.8 

515.0 

556.9 

667.9 

2003

24.6
1,315.8
1,045.4

401.8

21.0
1,048.8
733.3
315.5

18.0
709.2
465.6

243.6

266.9

606.6

High oil prices (A)

Oil price (US$ barrel) 
Oil-related fiscal revenues 
Tax 

Non_tax a 

Moderate oil prices (B)

Oilprice(US$barrel) 
Oil-related fiscal revenues 
Tax 
Non-taxa 

Low oil prices (C)

Oil price (US$ barrel) 
Oil-related fiscal revenues 
Tax 

Non-taxa 

Difference in fiscal 
revenues (A-B)

Difference in fiscal 

revenues (A-C)
a Non-tax oil revenues include royalties and bonus payments.

53

Annex 9: Proposed IBRD Lending program, FY 2001-2003

Proposed IBRD Lending Program, FY01-03
(US$ million)
High Case 

BaseCase 

Low Case

FYO1

Social Protection Reforn Adjustment Loan 
(SPRAL)
Syr Daria and Northern Aral Sea 
Subtotal 

FY02
Northeast Vodokanal Water Supply 
Second Public Sector Resource 
Management Adjustment Loan
(PSRMAL II)
Second Technical Assistance Loan (TAL 
II)
Nura River Cleanup 
Real Estate Rollout 
Subtotal 

FY03

Agricultural Services 

Second Agricultural Post-Privatization 
(APPAP II)
Consolidation Structural Adjustment Loan 
(CSAL)
Financial Infrastructure 
Rural Roads 
Subtotal 

Total FYO1-03 

200 

78 
278 

80 

-- 

10 

42 
16 
148 

40 
35

-- 

15 
50 
140 

566 

--

78
78

80

--

10

42
16
148

--

--

15
30
45

271

200 

78 
278 

80 
150 

1 0 

42 
16 
298 

40 
35 

100 

15 
50 
240 

816 

54

Annex 10: Non-Lending Services

Product 

Recent Completions

Completion Costa Audienceb Objectivec
(US$ 000)

FY 

Rapid Response Policy Notes 
Private Sector Assessment 
Living Standards Study 
Farm Restructuring Study 
National Environmental Action Plan 
Public Expenditure Review 
Procurement (IDF) 
Financial Sector Study (FSAP) 

1998-00 
1998 
1998 
1999 
1999 
2000 
2000 
2000 

252 
146 
161 
125 
520 
448 
75 
350 

G,B 
B,G,D 
G,D,B,P 
G,B,D 
G,B,D,P 
G,B,D,P 
G,B, 
G,B,D 

PS
KG
KG,PD
KG,PS
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS

Underway

Growth Strategy Study 
Wheat Seed Industry (IDF) 
Mining Sector Study 

Planned

2001 
2002 
2001 

366.4 
47.6 
250 

G,B,D 
G,B 
G,B,D 

KG,PS,PD
KG,PS
KG

Policy Notes 
WBI courses 
Governance Survey 
Note on Revenue Reform 
Silk Road (IDF) 
Gender and Violence (IDF) 
Financial Accountability Assessment 
Poverty Assessment/Labor Market 
Water Sector Strategy Study 
Livestock Study 
Country Economic Memorandum 

Upon Request 
Upon Request 
2001 
2001 
2001 
2001 
2002 
2002 
2002 
2003 
2003 

375 
n/a 
159 
32 
25 
25 
150 
200 
200 
150 
250 

G 
G 
G,B 
G,B,D 
G 
G 
G,B,D,P 
G,P,B,D 
G,B,D 
G,B,D 
G,B,D,P 

PS
PS,KG
KG,PS
KG,PS
PS
KG,PS
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS,PD

Notes:

a. Figures forfirst seven items are direct costs, all others are full costs
b. G=Government; B=Bank; D=Donors; P=Public Dissemination
c. KG=Knowledge Generation; PD=Public Debate; PS=Problem Solving

55

Annex 11: Exposure Indicators

Total debtoutstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)-

Net disbursements (US$m)- 

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)'

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TO 

UIRD exposure indicators (%)
IERD DS/public DS 
PreferredcreditorDS/public 
DS (%)
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)e 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of EBRD portfolio (%) 
1DA TDO (US$m)' 

IFC (USSm)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity /d 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

2922 

4078 

5715 

7934 

7662 

7662 

7231 

7169 

7513

730 

322 

41.6 
13.9 
4.6 

.. 

9.1 
31.6 

0.3 
490 

0 
0 

0 
4.6 

1214 

1379 

238 

-386 

0 

-431 

-63 

343

483 

885 

1376 

1618 

1076 

1291 

846 

1282

52.1 
18.4 
6.2 

.. 

9.9 
21.1 

0.4 
648 

1 
0 

0 
0 

83.7 
26.0 
13.0 

.. 

8.5 
34.3 

0.6 
899 

1 
0 

0 
0 

112.6 
50.8 
19.5 

4.9 

8.5 
35.0 

1.0 
1082 

1 
0 

8.1 
1.0 

80.2 
48.4 
16.9 

6.4 

9.8 
58.3 

1.0 
1234 

78.4 
45.9 
11.0 

7.8 

23.1 
33.5 

1.5 
1408 

74.1 
41.2 
13.2 

9.0 

18.6 
26.0 

1.7 
1578 

69.8 
39.3 
8.2 

9.5 

43.1 
59.7 

2.0 
1658 

71.7
39.6
12.2

9.0

23.9
32.6

2.2
1729

1 
0 

1 
0 

1
0 

0 

0

30.7 
0 

49.4 
0.25 

19.0
0.5

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.
d. Includes equity and quasi-equiity pes of both loan and equity instruments.

56

Annex 12: CAS Program Matrix 2000-2003

Llf TFr-/tTric, 

(j , Ir: r, I F'3fi 

Trrrr. 

rr I * 

rz r 
ii ,i 
,F f 

rfr4iP-Id [ 

l[r--Tr7 

i rtsr T!- 

THr:rt.
Irri"ir

/ 

V 

V 
V 

/ The operational 
/ Establishment of an 
/ Removing or simplifying 
Improved 
Lendina 
Lendinq
environment for small 
enabling environment for tax, regulation, licensing and business 
/ PSRMAL II 
/ EBRD
and medium enterprises, post privatization 
control burdens. 
environment 
/ CSAL 
Te_hnical
even when pnivatized, is 
restructuring and SME 
/ Ensuring a competitive 
shown in follow- 
v TA loan 
Assistane
extremely diffmult. 
development, 
environment. 
up survey under 
IFC loans 
V Tacis
/ Reforming the bankruptcy TA loan. 
IFC equity 
V UNDP
and liquidation process, and 
/ Number of 
IFC support V USAID
establishing functioning 
new enterprises 
- general leasing
capital markets. 
registered per 
IFC support
year increased 
- equity funds
by 10 percent. Guarantees:
/ MIGA
Nohnjagding.
/ Growth
Strategy
Study
/ Note on
Revenues
V Govemance
Survey
v CEM
V WBI
seminars
IPAnet &
Privatization
Link (MIGA)
SME Dept.
CASSS

V New enterprises are 
not being formed in great 
numbers. When they 
are, they have large 
incentives to remain in 
the informal sector. 
Constraints to their 
growth need to be 
identified and removed. V Accelerating the 
/ Some large and 
privatization process 
medium enterprises 
with an emphasis on 
which are funcftonally 
improving the quality of 
bankrupt need to be 
privatization. 
closed or restructured. V Deciding on the 
Others need improved 
appropriate methods to 
corporate governance. attract and maintain 
quality owners. 

v 

/ Privatization of the 
V Bankruptcies 
remraining large and medium effected for loss- 
enterprises and the Minority making medium 
shareholdings of the State in 
and large firms 
about 2,000 privatized 
more than four 
enterprises. 
years old. 
Instituting clear policies 
on financial discipline, 
restructuring prior to 
privatization, liquidation of 
non-privatizable enterprises, 
natural monopolies, property 
rights and adjudication of 
contractual disputes. 

/ 

57

Current labor laws 
may prove to be too 
restrictive once the 

economy expands, 

v Amend laws to 
make them more 
flexible. 

V Identify constraints as 
Passage of a Lending:
they manifest themselves and new Labor Law 
/ SPRAL
institute appropriate 
acceptable to the Non-lending:

Bank 

amendments. 

/ Poverty
Assessment
and Labor
Market Study
$ Agricultural growth is / Make agricultural 
v Continue concentration I 
Increase in 
Lendina: 
Lending
constrained by low credit support services, 
on rural finances, including 
rural credit by 20 
/ APPAP II 
v ADB
availability and lack of 
including credit, more 
increased commercial bank 
percent a year 
I Real Estate 
/ 
IFAD
access to technology widely available to those financing and development of 
from 2001. 
Rollout Proj. Technical
and marketing 
who need them, 
micro-credit 
initiatives. 
V Agricultural Assistance
opportunities. 
including non-farm rural V Help provide marketing 
Services 
/ Tacis
enterprises. 
services. 
Project 
v FAO/UNDP
V Germany
/ Find alternative 
v Devise measures to 
I Household 
/ CSAL 
sources of rural income mitigate the social impact of 
survey results 
IFC lending V UK
generating activities. 
the transition on rural 
shows declining 
for agric. 
Knowhow Fund
communities. 
rural poverty. 
equip. leasing V Israel
I Marginal agricultural v Alternative uses and V Restore drylands back to V Successful Grant:
land is being taken out of employment 
natural vegetation and seek 
implementation / Drylands
cultivation, 
opportunities need to be sustainable uses for such 
of proposed GEF 
Ecosystems
developed there. 
lands. 
project on 
Mgmnt. Proj.
marginal lands. Non-lending:
/ Devise procedures / Follow up on lessons from / Land reform 
/ Growth
pilot land registration 
law acceptable 
to 
Study
to have efficient, low- 
cost land registration. exercise, including more 
Bank is passed. X Reg. farm
affordable fee structure. 
debt study

/ Weak land rights do 
not provide a source of 
collateral. 

X There is very little 
non-agricultural 
rural 
development. 

v Livestock st.

/ Towards the end of 
V Ensuring adequate X 
Identify options for reform I Agreed plan Lending: 
n
the CAS period, greater reform of the mining 
of mining sector 
on reform of the V CSAL 
v EBRD
oil revenues need to be sector. 
Identify options for use mining sector 
Non-lending: 
/ Japan
managed and redirected V Ensuring that oil 
and management of oil 
v Agreed plan X Mining 
Technical
towards sustainable 
flows are used in a pro- wealth, e.g., offshore funds. on use and 
Sector Study Assistance
uses. 
development manner. V Advise Government on management of X Growth 
v/ Tacis
v Prevention of an 
best use of increased public oil revenues 
Strategy St.
enclave economy. 
resources. 
CEM

/ 

58

preconditions 
for growth, reformns-(below). 

reduced poverty and 
improved living 
standards. 

/ Support the 
deepening of the 
financial sector. 

X 

v Public debt is rising 
I Support the 
to unsustainable levels. Govemment's fiscal 
Medium-termn 
fiscal 
reforms, as the primary 
sustainability is only 
component of its 
possible through 
macroeconomic 
lowering the fiscal deficit. stabilization program. 
Increasing the 
/ Support reform of 
efficacy of the tax and 
the policy, procedures 
customs system is 
and administration of 
essental to attain this 
revenues. 
goal. 
/ Public expenditures 
will need to be realigned 
away from non-priority 
areas and towards 
investment in 
infrastructure and 
people, so as to improve 
delivery of public 
services.

/USAID

X 

LeInding:
IMF
Techni-a
Assistance
v Tacis
V UNDP
V USAID

IMF 

project 

Non-lendina:
/ Growth
Strategy Study
V Revenue note
/ CEM
/ Analyze and help to 
V Tax and 
Lending; 
implement inter-governmental custom collection I SPRAL 
fiscal reforms, to enable better levels increased 
/ PSRMAL If 
sharing of resources and 
by 0.2 percent of 
/ CSAL 
improved financing of locally GDP per year. 
I Revenue 
delivered services. 
Mobilizn. project 
I Provide options for more 
Non-lendinc: 
efficient integrated tax and 
X Growth
customs system. 
Strategy Study
/ Provide support for 
/ Revenue note
overhaul of tax and customs 
/ CEM
systems. 
o Support public 
expenditure rationalization 
goals through sectoral 
operations, especially in 
social sectors. 

/ Public
Expenditure
levels and mixes
agreed with the
Bank, monitored
through SPRAL
and PSRMAL It
operations.

59

/ orruption in the 
public sector, at all 
levels-local and 
Republican-is a key 
barrier to private sector 
growth. 

V 

vCSAL 

PSRMAL 11 Assac
-/ UNDP
/ USAID

Tendinnicae

V TA loans for 
PSRMAL 11 and
CSAL
Non-lending:
V Governance
Survey

Identify major areas 
Conduct survey of private V Follow-up 
and causes of 
sector and civil society to 
survey shows 
corruption. 
identify key areas of 
improvement 
in 
V Extend institutional intervention. 
level of 
reforms at Republican v Build commitment 
from 
corruption. 
levels to local 
the Govemment 
to address 
governments, 
significant problems. 
V Tailor public sector 
/ Devise policy actions for 
reforms to continue to 
the public sector that increase 
address the underlying accountability and institutional
causes of corruption. 
restraints.
V The quality of 
Esus re adequate 
V Help to implement inter- V Successful Lending: 
Lending:
delivery of public 
fiscal resources at the 
govemmental 
fiscal reforms, implementation V SPRAL 
V ADB
services in Kazakhstan local level are found to with a particular emphasis on of PSRMAL 11. V PSRMAL 11 
(possible in
is declining, due to both assure the quality of 
an adequate funding formula V Improvement V Health 11 
education)
fiscal constraints and 
social services, including for social services. 
in life expec- 
(FY04) 
V France (in
lack of institutional 
health and education. V Ensure more equitable 
tancy, child 
V Northeast water)
reforms. 
cost and tariff structure of 
mortality, 
Vodakanal proj. V Germany
services. 
enrollment rates. Non-lending: 
(KFW-in water)
V PER 
V Kuwait
Improve the quality V For water, improvement V Survey of 
V Poverty 
Fund (in water)
of municipal and 
of institutional arrangements, water customers Assessment and Technical
industrial water and 
introduction of commercial and others using Labor Market 
Assistance
wastewater services. 
principles and systems, and 
social services Study 
V Tacis
adoption of safety net 
shows improved V Water Sector V Germany
arrangements. 
quality of service. Strategy note 
(GTZ)
V UK
Knowhow Fund
V UNDP
V USAID

60

Many of the poor in 

tfProvide income 

Devise guidelines for a 

XSuccessful 

Lendina:

employed, 

transition to more 

program, with appropriate 

of agreed public Non-lending:

Kazakzhstan are already support to cushion the Poverty-targeted public works implementation v SPRAL
remunerative 
(below-market) minimum 
works program. V Labor market
employment 
wage. 
component of the
opportunities. 
Poverty Assess-
ment and Labor
Market Study
Income transfers 
v Use poverty as the 
/ Support the setting up of X Successful Lending: 
legal and administrative 
implementation V SPRAL 
need to be re-oriented sole criterion for 
towards the poorest 
determining eligibility for 
framework to give social 
of SPRAL 
/ PSRMAL II 
assistance to the neediest. 
Non-lendin: 
/ There needs to be 
social transfers. 
adequate budgeting for 
-' Ensure adequate 
V Ensure that local budgets 
V PER
V Poverty
social protection, both at public finances are 
allocate sufficient "non- 
local and Republican available for social 
sequester-able" 
funds to 
Assessment and
Labor Market
levels. 
assistance, 
social assistance. 
~~Study 
Lendi
V One effect of the 
V In both sectors, work V Devise a planned sector V Poverty 
Lending: 
in out efficient mechanisms rationalization strategy in 
survey questions V SPRAL 
V ADB
transition experience 
(possible in
the social sectors is that of targeting assistance health, so that the poor are 
on poor's access V PSRMAL II 
critical public health and and discounted fees for adequately protected. 
to social services V Health II 
education)
Technical
education services do 
the poorest. 
V Work with the Asian 
shows improved (FY04) 
Development Bank in the 
access between Non-lending: Assistance
not always reach the 
poorest. 
education sector to ensure 
2001 and 2003. V PER 
V Tacis
that access by the poor is 
V Poverty 
V Germany
protected as well. 
Assessment and (GTZ)
Labor Market 
v UK
Study 
Knowhow Fund

Technical
Assistance
v UNDPIILO
v USAID

_ 

_

_ 

V 

V UNDP

V USAID

61

~'Tepoor in remote V Incres access by 
Identifyb bilding and 
V/ Successful Lendina:
areas may not be able to selectively renovating or 
rehabilitation needs in poorest initiation of Rural / Rural Roads
access employment 
building rural 
regions. 
Roads Project 
project
opportunities and public transportation systems. / Support construction and
services. 
repair of these roads.

62

Tivf-~~ 

rlt /a7 

r,, 

r'T 

.i:Ir

V 

In the Norheast, 
/ Cleaning 
X Clean mercury from the 
/ Periodic 
Lending: 
Lending
industrial pollution has 
contaminated rivers and Nura river, 
surveys on water V Nura River 
V France
raised the contamination water sources, thereby 
V Work with partners to 
quality in the 
cleanup project Grant
level to a point where it 
providing sustainable 
address mercury and 
river systems 
V North-east 
V GEF
threatens to limit the 
sources of water supply. kerosene contamination of the show 
Vodakanal 
Technical
future growth potential of 
Irtysh river. 
improvement in 
Project 
Assistance
the area and poses a 
water quality. 
V Syr Daria 
V Tacis
public health threat. 
Project 
v UK
X In the South, 
v Clean up 
Knowhow Fund
ineffcient irrigation and 
contamination while 
V UNDP
livestock practices as 
ensuring better water 
V USAID
well as run-off of non- 
use by farmers and 
treated waste water from other consumers. 
cities are creating an
acute water shortage,
and contamination of the
Syr Darya river.
V The Northem 
V Work on preserving V Provide technical
Caspian Sea is suffering the habitat for sturgeon assistance in the areas of bio- V Development
from oil spills from 
and other marine life, 
monitoring, development of 
of suitable
offshore oil exploitation, V Clean up oil-related hatcheries etc. 
technical
posing a threat to marine damage. 
V Work with private sector 
assistance
life, especially the is the 
to clean up oil spills and 
projects.
sturgeon. 
prevent future damage.

V Clean the Syr Daria river 
and promote better water 
management and irrigation 
practices in the region. 

V Successful 
implementation 
of Syr Daria
Project

63

Annex 13: Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
performance 

Major Issue 

Country 
priority 

Bank 
priority 

Reconciliation of country and Bank
priorities

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management

Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 

Public sector 

Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 

Health, nutrition & population 

Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development 

Environment 

Social development 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private sector 

Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

Fair 

Regional Poverty 

Good 

Good 

Fair 

Fiscal contraction, management of oil 
funds
Improving governance, civil service 
reform
Intra-household violence 

Medium 

High Dialogue in context of CAS, proposed
SPRAL and Poverty Assessment

High 

High 

High

High

Low Medium Dialogue spurred by IDF on gender
and violence

Fair 

Fair 

Restructuring sector for improved 
efficiency and service delivery
Restructuring sector for improved 
efficiency and service delivery
Poor/Fair Targeting social transfers to the poorest Medium 

Medium 

Medium 

Low Dialogue led by the ADB

High Dialogue in context of Health APL

High Dialogue in context of proposed
SPRAL and Poverty Assessment

Fair 

Providing adequate and accessible 
agricultural services
Fair/Good Realizing the National Environmental 
Action Plan
Poor/Fair Building community-level management 
resources

High 

High 

Low 

High

High

Low

Good 
Fair 

Deepening the financial market 
Improving corporate governance and 
ease of entry and exit
Improving governance in the mining 
sector
Fair/Good Building adequate and reliable 
transportation and energy network 

Fair 

High 
High 

High
High

Medium Medium

High 

Low 

Infrastructure projects from the EBRD,
ADB and bilateral donors.

64

Annex 14: Private Sector Development Strategy

Introduction

1. 
The private sector in Kazakhstan has about a 60% share of GDP compared to the 70-
80% share in the more advanced reformers in the ECA. But enterprise restructuring
performance in Kazakhstan has not progressed as much, hindered by a poor corporate
governance framework. Since 1990, there has been major changes in the structure of GDP,
notably the fall in the share of agriculture from 34% to around 10% between 1990 and 1999
and the doubling of the share of the trade sector.

Privatization, Governance, and Restructuring

2. 
Privatization. Kazakhstan has utilized multiple methods of privatization since 1991,
including mass privatization, agricultural and small scale privatization, and case by case
privatization. In the process, some 13,000 small establishments were transferred to private
owners, about 1,700 enterprises were included in the mass or voucher privatization, and shares
in about 1,600 companies were sold in cash auctions or negotiated sales. Under the "blue chip"
program, the Government planned to sell shares in 56 large enterprises in the stock market, but
this program has stalled, first due to unfavorable market conditions and then due to a
reassessment of the privatization experience. The Government also entered into management
contracts covering 94 large enterprises and trust management contracts for about 21 enterprises,
but these contracts will not be renewed due to negative experience with this initiative.

3. 
Despite the above accomplishments (including the completion of small scale
privatization and most of farm privatization) about 100 large and 260 medium SOEs were yet
to be privatized by end-1999 and this has changed little in 2000. These large and medium
SOEs account for about a third of GDP. In addition, the State has minority holdings in about
2,000 enterprises. Completing the privatization process remains a major task for the
Government, and while the Agency for State Property and Privatization has been developing a
program for selling state holdings in these enterprises, progress has been very slow. The
Agency is also reviewing plans for privatizing some of the so-called "national companies" in
the infrastructure, transport, energy, and telecommunications. The Government is now
proceeding to initiate consultant contracts for preparing a sub-set of the blue-chip enterprises
for privatization.

4. 
The method and preconditions for the privatization of the remaining SOEs are critical to
ensuring good governance, restructuring, and investment after privatization. In the case of the
privatization of the "national companies", there may need to be a review of the respective
sectors to determine whether prior sector restructuring is necessary (e.g. the break-up of a
monopoly operator and sale of all or part of the separate pieces) and whether there is a need to
put in place a legal and regulatory framework that enables private ownership/participation and
ensures improved sector efficiency. The large enterprises and perhaps some of the medium
SOEs may require investment bankers to handle the case by case privatization, although some
SOEs may be placed in privatization pools where each pool is handled by one investment
banker or privatization agent who may recommend breaking up certain enterprises prior to sale.
Sale to foreign investors would most likely be the preferred route for most of large enterprises.

65

The smaller enterprises and the minority holdings could be sold in cash auctions or through the
stock market. Of critical importance with regard to any privatization is that the process be very
open and transparent. This has not been the case with large scale privatizations in the past and
has precluded involvement of IFC.

5. 
With the exception of the national companies, the Bank recommends that the
Government privatize the remaining SOEs within a reasonable period of time (e.g. 18 months)
and to possibly liquidate (i.e., sell the assets separate from the liabilities - a form of
privatization) these enterprises if the sale of the enterprise as an ongoing concern does not
occur. The organization of the privatization process is also important - in many countries,
decentralizing the privatization to the line ministries have resulted in delays since the ministries
do not have the proper incentives to pursue privatization. Fragmenting the privatization
process also causes problems with respect to the provision of technical assistance.

6. 
Given that it will most likely take up to two years to complete the privatization process,
the Government will need to formulate an explicit policy to manage the SOEs in the interim.
The most important consideration is the maintenance of financial discipline. As discussed
later, in the section on industrial policy, initiatives by sector ministries to subsidize losses and
restructure SOEs are worrisome. These initiatives tend to worsen the fiscal situation, weaken
the banking system, and delay the privatization process.

7. 
The Bank, in coordination with IFC, could send its top experts on privatization to assist
the Agency for State Property and Privatization design the program for completing the
privatization process. This would enable Kazakhstani officials to receive the benefits of the
recent lessons of experience. The remaining funds under the existing Finance & Enterprise
Development Loan (FEDL) for the privatization component could be used to design and
partially fund the implementation of the program.

8. 

Corporate Governance. Corporate governance has been identified as a major issue in
Kazakhstan. The EBRD rates governance and enterprise restructuring in Kazakhstan as a 2-
indicating "Moderately tight credit and subsidy policy but weak enforcement of bankruptcy
legislation and little action taken to strengthen competition and corporate governance." Many
enterprises sold under the mass privatization program remain without a majority owner.
Investment Funds have been ineffective in providing governance to privatized firms. Many
enterprises have complained that the State has been blocking important decisions through its
minority ownership. In a survey of firms in Central Asian Republics and Russia in 1998,
Kazakh firms have the highest share of non-insider ownership. This requires effective
mechanisms for corporate control and monitoring of management. Improving corporate
governance mechanisms would also encourage foreign investment which has been absent in
most privatizations to date.

9. 
One of the building blocks for good corporate governance is the establishment of good
accounting and auditing (internal and external) systems to ensure the provision of information
on a timely basis that adequately reflects the financial condition of an enterprise. The laws and
regulations on corporate governance should ensure that stockholders and board members have
access to appropriate information and that there exists a mechanism for independent reviews or
audits.

66

10. Once major gaps in governance have been identified, the Government could address
them with Bank support. Funds available under the capital markets component of the FEDL
could be used finance implementation of recommended reforms, and policy reforms could be
supported by the CSAL. Better accounting and auditing standards, improved corporate
governance , and a more developed legal and regulatory framework will improve the business
environment and lead to a greater involvement of the IFC in the development of Kazakhstan's
private sector.

11. 
Bankruptcy and Liquidation. The process of bankruptcy and liquidation in Kazakhstan
is long and arduous. Many bankrupt SOEs have not been liquidated which prevents the sale of
the assets to those who can make best use of them. In the meantime, these assets are
deteriorating. There are two areas of reform. First, the relevant laws, procedures, and
institutions need to be reviewed and analyzed as a basis for defining fundamental reforms to the
bankruptcy and liquidation framework. Second, an interim fast track process should be
introduced to deal with existing bankrupt or nonprivatizeable SOEs.

12. Over the past few years, the Bank has developed expertise and experience in bankruptcy
and liquidation, mainly due to the work in East Asia. Reform of bankruptcy and liquidation
laws is also under way in some ECA countries, notably Bulgaria and Macedonia. In Bulgaria,
the Bank made the assessment and provided the conceptual design, while donors funded the
more detailed design work and implementation. In the case of Kazakhstan, the Bank could
send its experts to evaluate and develop recommendations for improving the legal framework
and the FEDL could finance the implementation of the Bank recommendations, which would
then be supported by the CSAL.

Small and Medium Enterprises

13. 
SMEs today play a much less important role in Kazakhstan compared to developed
countries or advanced transition economies. The potential contribution of SMEs to growth is
well recognized by the Govemnment, and for the past few years there have been two Presidential
Decrees, four laws, ten Government decrees, and seven regulatory acts that deal with SME
development. In November 1998, the Government approved the "National Program for the
Development and Support to Smaller Businesses in Kazakhstan, 1999-2000". The new
program recognizes that in the past, substantial financial resources have been expended by both
the Government and donors, with little impact on SME development. The new program tries to
focus on establishing an entrepreneurship mentality, building business skills, and encouraging
SME creation. The new instruments include developing the franchising of existing businesses,
increasing the availability of consulting services, simplifying the tax system (e.g., the use of the
patent system), and introducing a mechanism for certifying goods. While all of these potential
instruments are beneficial, little progress will be made on stimulating SME growth without
substantial improvement in the private sector business environment.

14. 
There is considerable scope for increasing the number and contribution of SMEs,
especially in non-trade sectors of the economy. However, maximizing the contribution of
SMEs requires innovative organization arrangements to allow for the formation of linkages
among SMEs and with larger enterprises, such as the program being developed by IFC with
Ispat Karmet - the experience in countries such as Italy Denmark and South Africa are also

67

worth noting. In addition, SME programs should also focus on other determinants of SME
growth, such as diffusion of information and technology and upgrading of technical and
managerial skills. Programs such as the Central Asian Business Support Services being
developed by the Bank Group SME Department should support this effort.

15. Access to medium- and long-term financing is also very important for SME growth.
Generally, SME access to financing is most efficiently channeled through financial
intermediaries. IFC has taken a leading role in the area of capacity building in the financial
sector to support the financing of SMEs and this activity is expected to be expanded during the
next three years.

16. 
The Private Sector Assessment (PSA) recommended the development of leasing as a
means of increasing the flow of financial resources to SMEs. Unfortunately there has been
little investment in leasing due to the weak civil code provisions pertaining to leasing
activities. The PSA recommendation to develop a leasing law was finally implemented with
the adoption of the leasing law, drafted by the National Bank, on July 5, 2000. The passage of
this law should give impetus for the development of leasing companies in Kazakhstan, once
implementing regulations are adopted. Development of leasing is an area of focus for IFC
activity in Kazakhstan which will be developed together with foreign technical sponsors. There
is also a need to review the legal and institutional framework for secured lending.

17. The most pervasive constraint to SME development continues to be the high transaction
cost resulting from the difficult business environment. Licensing requirements and regulatory
practices in Kazakhstan increase immensely the costs of business activities and provide
opportunities for corruption. A wide range of activities require licensing before an
entrepreneur can commence activity. The procedures are often complicated and involve several
state bodies. The approval process is lengthy and some state bodies charge significant fees for
their services. Interviews at the Congress of Entrepreneurs'6 suggest that there are currently 26
different state bodies authorized to supervise business activities (State Committee for
Standards, Fire Inspection, Tax Inspection, Energy Inspection, Sanitary Inspection, etc.). By
some accounts a business can be subjected to 20 inspections a month and more than one
hundred agencies can control, inspect and monitor SMEs. Several attempts have been made to
limit the number of supervisory bodies that deal with the private sector in order to shield
entrepreneurs from excessive interference and rent seeking (including the Presidential Decree
of June 14, 1996 on SME Regulations, the "Law On State Support to Small Entrepreneurship"
of June 19, 1997, the April 27, 1999 Presidential Decree "On the Protection of Rights of
Citizens and Legal Entities to Freedom on Entrepreneurial Activity", and the "Law On the
Introduction of Changes and Amendments to Some Legislative Acts of the Republic of
Kazakhstan Concerning Questions of Protection of November 29, 1999). Unfortunately these
laws and decrees have failed to bring tangible results, in many respects due to the lack of
implementation at the regional level.

16 Two additional sets of issues were identified. First, the administration and implementation of adopted
legislation depends greatly on the regional governors' attitude towards them. Second, dissemination of
information on new regulations and entrepreneurs' rights is not adequate, and often comes with a significant lag
after a law is actually implemented, resulting in penalties for businesses.

68

18. 
The licensing regime needs to be streamlined by reducing the range of activities for
which licenses are required, simplifying filing procedures, and shortening the time involved for
licensing approval. Business regulations should be reviewed with the goal of eliminating
unnecessary regulations and simplifying those that are required. Work done by the Bank in
conjunction with the Growth Strategy Study and PSRMAL II will present, in a systematic
manner, a more detailed analysis together with recommendations as to which licensing
requirements should be eliminated and with regard to the licensing that remains, which
procedural steps or procedures could be eliminated. PSRMAL II will then support the reform
of the licensing and regulatory regime.

Foreign Direct Investment

19. Due to the low levels or private and public savings in Kazakhstan, growth prospects in
the short and medium term, outside the oil and gas sector, are dependent on the level of foreign
investment.. While the level of FDI in Kazakhstan on a per capital basis is higher than that of
its neighbors such as Russia, Uzbekistan, and Azerbaijan, more than 80 percent of such
investment has been in oil, gas, minerals and metallurgy. In 1998, Kazakhstan attracted $1.2
billion of FDI compared to a $1.4 billion annual average during the period 1994-97, due in
great measure to the financial crisis' in Asia and Russia. South Korea, a major investor in
previous years, significantly reduced its investment flows in 1998. The US, Japan, and the UK
have increased investment activity in Kazakhstan, however, very little is invested in activities
outside natural resources.

20. 
The survey of foreign investors conducted by the International Tax and Investment
Center in 1997 identified the important factors influencing investment decisions and the
investor perceptions of the investment climate in Kazakhstan. Investor interest was driven by
access to raw materials and natural resources, market potential, a desire to preempt competitors,
and Kazakhstan' s strategic location. The study noted that while many investors considered the
changes in the investment climate as generally positive, about a third of the respondents viewed
the investment climate as negative. The most significant barriers to investment were identified
as: excessive bureaucracy and corruption, complex and burdensome tax regime, the absence of
good legal infrastructure, and poor physical infrastructure. The PSA and FIAS reports of 1998
both identified the immediate and high priority FDI issues as the improvement in the legal and
regulatory regime and the elimination of rampant corruption. These findings were further
confirmed by the Bank/IFC/MIGA OED/OEG team during their March 2000 mission. They
surveyed foreign firms operating in Kazakhstan and found that the significant problems with
the business environment included: (I) a weak regulatory framework with a lack of clarity
combined with constant amendments and changes in policies, personnel and responsibilities;
(ii) arbitrary tax laws including an overlapping of taxes; and, (iii) ad-hoc decision making due
to the absence of a well structured legal and tax framework. The active and unrestrained
intervention of Akims (Regional Governors) in the investment process and the operation of
private firms was also mentioned as a major impediment.

21. 
In order to attract more foreign investment, Parliament passed the "Law on Foreign
Investments" which provides guarantees for foreign investors against changes in legislation,
expropriation, illegal action by state agencies and officials, as well as guarantees of unrestricted

69

use of income and currency convertibility for dividends and other specified uses. In addition to
the guarantees, the promotion of FDI basically uses two types of incentives. First, the "Law on
the State Support of Direct Investment" grants state assets and concessions, income, land and
property tax holidays for five years with an additional period of reduced rates, as well as duty
and VAT exemption on imported machinery and raw materials, for varying periods. Second,
the "Decree Concerning the Creation of Economic Zones" reduces the corporate income tax
rate by 10 percentage points. In both cases, the incentives are granted on an arbitrary and non-
transparent case by case basis and are included in a contract signed between the investor and
the granting authority. There is a list of priority sectors that include electricity and
telecommunication, domestic market oriented manufacturing, advanced technologies in
agriculture, and development of special economic zones. The 2000 revision of the Tax Code is
expected to take a fresh look at these tax incentives..

22. 
The Bank will engage the Government in a dialogue to rationalize the incentives, define
the role of the Agency for Investments, and assist the Agency in designing a set of instruments
to support FDI promotion. Reform should move away from discretionary incentives which
distort the market and instead focus on improving the overall investment and business climate.
It should also be directed toward development of programs that provide support and assistance
to investors in the form of facilitation services and the dissemination of information.

Financial Sector

23. 
Banking. Banking reform over the past five years has focused on: (a) establishment of
the legal and regulatory framework for the banking system; (b) upgrading of supervision
capacity; (c) consolidation of the banking system; (d) privatization of banks; and, (e) entry of
foreign banks. The legal and regulatory framework for banking is basically in place,
supervision capacity is continually being upgraded with technical assistance from the Bank and
USAID. The consolidation of the banking system has resulted in the reduction of banks
froml84 in 1995 to 70 in March 1999.

24. 
There has been significant progress in bank privatization. In 1998, two large banks -
TuranAlemBank and Zhilstroibank - were sold to private investors. While EximBank has been
on the market for several years, there has been no success in selling the bank after discussions
with Bank Bumiputra of Malaysia collapsed due to the Asian crisis. There are continuing talks
on the merger of Kazkommertzbank and Savings Bank, which would result in a bank with more
than 50% of banking assets and more than 60% of total deposits (but more than 80% of
household assets) if the merger materializes. With respect to Eximbank, the liquidation route
should be seriously considered.

25. 
The banking system seems to have withstood, at least in the short term, the 1999
floating of the tenge. However, the impact on the portfolio will not be evident for some time to
come. A major problem for the large banks (about 80% of the banking system) is the
concentration of the loan portfolio. The top ten borrowers account for 30 to 50 percent of the
loan portfolio of five of the largest banks; the top twenty borrowers account for 40 to 75
percent of the loan portfolio. A review of the impact of the floating of the tenge on the banks'
portfolio is necessary to determine what actions the National Bank of Kazakhstan (NBK)
should take if the review projects a high increase in bad loans. The table below already

70

indicates a deterioration of loan portfolios during 1998. On a more fundamental level, a
vulnerability analysis is recommended to identify the risks to which banks are exposed and to
recommend appropriate risk management measures.

Standard 
Substandard 
Unsatisfactory 
High Risk 
Loss 
Total 

Table 1: Loan Classification (in percent)
As of December 31, 1997 
As of December 31, 1998
72.5 
63.7
15.1 
25.6
4.7 
3.4
1.7 
2.6
6.0 
4.7
100.0 
100.0

26. Capital Markets. There have not been any new initiatives or activities in the area of
capital markets development. The Blue Chip program, which envisioned the listing of 56
companies, has stalled, and equity market activity is basically dead. While the problem one
year ago was an absence of securities available for purchase, the problem this year also
includes a absence of demand - there is little interest from foreign portfolio investors in
Kazakh securities. The lack of movement in the development of capital markets is of concern
for the success of the pension reform program. However, should there be progress in the
privatization of large and medium size firms, including the national companies, coupled with
corporate governance reform, such actions would lay the foundation for further development of
capital markets. The Bank's role in capital markets development, should the Government
request assistance, would be undertaken through its activities under the FEDL and CSAL.

Industrial Sector

27. 
Background. The industrial sector accounts for about 22 percent of GDP and 12 percent
of employment. Power, oil, gas, and coal account for more than 50% of GDP, with mining and
agriculture/food processing each having a 21% share. There are about 9,400 enterprises listed
as being in the industrial sector, of which about 7% are state owned and another 7% with
foreign participation. Only 515 industrial enterprises are classified as large. An analysis of
performance of industrial enterprises showed that for the first nine months of 1998, the
consolidated financial statements of the enterprises showed losses, compared to profits during
the years 1995-97.

28. 
Industrial Policy. The policy initiatives being envisioned by the Government to
restructure the industrial sector are disturbing. Three initiatives are being contemplated or
implemented which will focus on three major sub-sectors - chemicals, machine building, and
light industry. First, a credit program is being developed where funding from the Government
will be provided to commercial banks which will choose worthwhile projects, subject to
approval by the Ministry of Energy, Industry, and Trade. Second, protectionist measures in the
form of high tariffs and quantitative restrictions were imposed on some products, although most

71

of these have been eliminated after the floating of the tenge. Third, the Ministry of Industry
plans to propose VAT and other tax holidays for selected sub-sectors and enterprises.

29. Government policies to promote industrialization can be divided into two types: (a)
those that influence the factors that would facilitate industrial growth without prejudging the
resulting industrial structure; and, (b) those that attempt to target a certain industrial structure.
The former uses general or functional incentives such as tax measures to encourage savings and
investment, public investment in education, general FDI promotion, etc. The latter utilizes
industry-specific (and sub-sector specific) incentives and subsidies, such as the ones currently
being envisioned by the Ministry of Industry, Trade, and Energy. In the case of Kazakhstan,
there should be a strategic shift in the focus of government policy from industry specific
targeting towards general incentives. This shift should take place not only because the mixed
performance of current industrial targeting, but also due to the lack of institutional capacity
and the absence of transparency which had led to significant corruption.

30. 
The proposed shift to general incentives would change the role of the Industry
Department of the Ministry of Industry, Trade, and Energy to one of promotion and advocacy,
rather than the design of industry specific policies. In addition, there may be a role for the
Ministry in the: (i) setting of product quality standards (e.g. introduction of ISO 9000 ); (ii)
dissemination of information related to new technologies, information exchange and marketing
(e.g., trade fairs, MSTQ, etc.); and, (iii) fostering of industry wide organizational arrangements
(clusters, improved transport logistics, etc.). Pursuant to such a revised focus, industrial
structuring would be driven by market forces that could be supplemented by improved
economy-wide polices to support privatization and post-privatization activities.

PSD Strategy for Kazaklhstan

31. 
The recommended PSD strategy focuses on the completion of structural reforms and the
establishment of policies and institutions that would facilitate restructuring, increase
investment, and improve productivity. The components of such a strategy would include the
following.

(i) Privatization of the remaining large and medium size enterprises as well as the
Government's divestiture of its minority shareholdings in about 2,000 privatized enterprises.
Such action would require decisions on the most appropriate methods and organizational
arrangements to maximize the potential for strategic ownership positions in such privatized
enterprises. Clear and transparent policies on financial discipline, restructuring prior to
privatization, liquidation of non-privatizable enterprises, and natural monopolies must be
developed. A framework for the regulation of property rights and the adjudication of
contractual disputes must be developed if foreign investors are to be encouraged to participate
in the privatization process.

(ii) Establishment of the enabling environment for post privatization restructuring.
This could be accomplished by ensuring a competitive and transparent business environment,
improving corporate governance, reforming the bankruptcy and liquidation process, as well as
the establishment of functioning and active capital markets. An important building block of

72

corporate governance reform is the adoption by enterprises of international accounting and
auditing standards.

(iii) Sustaining the current pace of banking sector reform with special emphasis on: (i)
the privatization of Halyk Bank: (ii) liquidation of the Exim Bank: (iii) upgrading of
supervision capacity;, (iv) elimination of current restrictions on the share of foreign banks in
the banking system; and, (v) encouraging institution and capacity building in the banking
sector, especially in the area of risk management. A vulnerability analysis of the general
banking system together with a review of the impact of a floating tenge on the portfolio of the
banks' should also be implemented.

(iv) Improving the business environment by reforming the licensing, regulatory, tax
and customs procedures as well as the institutions which administer these areas in order to
reduce the high transaction costs and reduce the opportunities for corruption. Specific reviews
should result in the elimination of many of the existing licensing and regulatory requirements
as well as simplify current tax and customs procedures.

(v) Defining the role of government in the design and implementation of programs
that would upgrade the structural determinants of competitiveness. Apart from reinforcing
sound macro economic policies, there are four areas that need attention: (i) skills development
(education, training, etc.); (ii) information and technology diffusion (intellectual property
rights, MSTQ, etc.); (iii) physical infrastructure and logistics development; and (iv)
organization (clusters, etc.).

73

Annex 15: Poverty and Living Standards

The last accurate and comprehensive survey of living standards in Kazakhstan was
undertaken in July 1996, with the Kazakhstan Living Standards Survey (KLSS). Analysis of
the data, summarized in the report Kazakhstan: Living Standards During the Transition
(1998), found that over a third of the population lived below a "subsistence minimum ". The
most striking difference in poverty incidence in Kazakhstan is its variance by region (Figure 2
in the main report). In terms of the number of poor, two out of three poor people lived either in
the south or the east of the country. Rural poverty was higher, deeper and more severe than
poverty in urban areas. There was not much differentiation in poverty across gender, although
any difference may have been obscured due to methodological issues.

While almost half the unemployed were poor, poverty was also marked among the self-
employed-demonstrating that in transitional Kazakhstan, employment itself was not a
guaranteed escape from poverty. This is because employment in traditional enterprises often
provided low and delayed wages, while incomes from self-employment or start-up businesses
were fraught with uncertainty. Alleviating poverty will entail the creation of broad-based
remunerative employment for the population, and a more efficient public sector to facilitate the
provision of fundamental social infrastructure and social protection. Once again, growth will
need to be diversified-away from dependence solely on a dynamic extractive sector and
including rural development-to provide increased incomes for the poor in the most vulnerable
regions, which have little mineral wealth.

As in other parts of the world, the poor are especiallv at risk of receiving low levels of
public services. Access to education and health services are worse among the poor. This is
compounded in parts of Kazakhstan by the enormous distances that they may need to travel to
reach facilities, and the increasing cost of the services due to the ongoing fiscal crisis, which
has resulted in both de facto and de jure privatization of provision. Public delivery of health
and education in Kazakhstan will need to improve, to enable the poor to best avail of income
opportunities in Kazakhstan's growing economy. Part of the solution is to build better access
systems. Another is to ensure a more effective andfocused public sector delivery system, that
the poor are assured of an affordable minimum package of services, and targeted social
protection.

A major factor affecting the quality of life for the poor in Kazakhstan is the extensive
environmental degradation that is its legacy from the Soviet and early post-Soviet era.
Chemical contamination of rivers in the industrial zones, and inefficient irrigation and livestock
practices have created a problem with both the quantity and quality of water in the northeast, as
well as in the south, where much of the poor live. Oil exploration and production practices
have made the Caspian Sea region vulnerable to possible major environmental catastrophes.
The cleanup of toxic wastes and efforts to manage drylands and control desertification are
imperative to improve the quality of life for the poor.

74

A fundamental problem in accurately gauging the impact of recent socio-economic changes
on poverty in Kazakhstan is the poor state of available data. For example, the poverty head-
counts mentioned above, from the KLSS, are substantially lower than poverty estimates based
on the existing and ongoing Family Budget Survey (FBS) in Kazakhstan, due to problems in
measuring income correctly in the FBS. The Government, with help from the Bank, is
intending to address this problem with immediate effect. In 2000, it has begun designing and
intends to implement a new Household Budget Survey. The Government has also committed
itself to processing and analyzing the data from the survey, and, by early 2001, disseminating a
profile ofpoverty in Kazakhstan on a regular basis and using it as input to its policy decisions.

75

Annex 16: The Government's Development Program

A. The Long-Term Development Vision to 203017

1. The longer term vision for the development of Kazakhstan is embodied in Kazakhstan 2030 -

Prosperity, Security and Improvement of the Welfare ofAll Kazakhstani People. This vision was
articulated by the President, Nursultan Nazarbayev on October 6, 1997, and it declared "building an
independent, prosperous and politically stable state with its inherent national unity, social justice and
economic welfare of all population" as Kazakhstan's longer-term mission.

2. Developments were foreseen in seven areas, in order to ensure:
* National Security. To ensure the development of Kazakhstan as an independent and
sovereign state with the maintenance of complete territorial integrity.

* Internal Political Stability and Consolidation of the Society. To maintain and strengthen

the internal political stability and the national unity which will enable Kazakhstan to realize
the national strategy during the present and following decades.

* Economic Growth Based on the Open Market Economy with High Level of Foreign

Investments and Internal Savings. To achieve real, sustainable and increasing economic
growth.

* Health of the Nation and Welfare of Kazakhstani Citizens. To improve the living

standards, health, education and abilities of all Kazakhstan people, to improve the
environment.
* Energy Resources. To efficiently use the energy resources of Kazakhstan by rapid
increase in extraction and export of oil and gas in order to receive revenues promoting the
sustainable economic growth and improvement of the life of the nation.

* Infrastructure, in Particular, Transport and Communications. To develop these key

sectors so that to help to strengthen the national security, political stability and economic
growth.
* Professional State. To create an effective and present-day corps of committed civil
servants in Kazakhstan capable to act as representatives of the nation while achieving
priority goals.

B. 

The Medium-Term Program

3. The medium-term priorities are determined in the Program of Actions of the Government for 2000-
2002 approved by the Decree of the President. The implementation of this Program, developed on the
basis of"Kazakhstan-2030" Strategy, is supported by international financial organizations, agencies and
donor countries. The main objective of the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan in the economic
field is to ensure sustainable economic growth whilst maintaining a balance of the most important
macroeconomic parameters: exchange rate of tenge, inflation and deficit of the international balance of
payments of the country. The Program provides for achievement of annual three-percent growth of the

17 This section was written by the Government of Kazakhstan.

76

real GDP, decrease in the inflation rate to 5% in 2002 and reduction of the deficit of the Republican
budget to 1.2% of the GDP in 2002.
4. To achieve the objectives set forth the Government intends to:

* maintain the macroeconomic stability and strengthen the principles of sustainable
economic growth;
* ensure dynamic development of the real sector of the economy;
* continue improving the investment policy of the country and active attraction of direct
external and internal investments into the economy of Kazakhstan;
* switch over to targeted rendering of social assistance based on the poverty criteria; and
transfer the core work on rendering social assistance to the regions;
* continue developing internal financial markets and capital markets for the sustainability
of the banking system of the country and expanded lending to economic entities;
* continue improving the public sector management system, its transparency,
decentralization, and strengthening of the planning system.
5. In the monetary field, the policy will be aimed at maintaining low inflation and stability of
the financial market, further consolidating of the banking system, developing of the insurance
market and creating conditions for increased lending to the real sector of economy. The
authorities of Kazakhstan intend to follow the policy of floating exchange rate of tenge and
maintain the financial sustainability of operations in the open market, regulation of official
rates and two-tier bank refinancing as the key instruments. Special attention will be given to
the actions related to creation of new types of financial institutes such as investment funds and
agencies authorized to have transactions with corporate bills. Also assistance will be given to
creation of an organized real estate market and development of mortgage lending. Particularly,
the system of obligatory collective insurance of individuals' deposits, which is being created by
the National Bank, is designed to raise confidence of the population in banks and increase the
funds attracted to the banking sector as the ensuing consequence. The consolidation of the
banking system will be continued. The two-tier banks should be transferred to international
standards by the end of 2000. The prudential supervision will be made stricter including active
use of check-ups on sites and improvement of the risk evaluation system. Active development
of financial leasing instruments is planned to expand lending to small and medium-size
enterprises including in rural areas. The stock market will be highly stimulated by a security
mechanism for banks' assets and expansion of activities of banks with corporate securities.
The state intends to create necessary conditions for increased supply of non-state securities on
the Kazakhstani organized stock market. Special focus will be made on increasing information
transparency of activities of organizations- issuers of non-state securities and organizers of
security sales.
6. In fiscal policy the actions of the Government will be aimed at increasing the revenues to
the state budget, and equitable distributing of the tax burden between the population and
economic entities. Provided the stability of taxation, the transparency and comprehension of
the tax legislation will be improved, tax privileges will be regulated and eliminated in the
perspective, and the tax legislation administration will be controlled stricter. In the near future,
with the participation of international and domestic experts and active discussions with all
interested parties, the Government of the country will develop and submit a new Tax Code to
the Parliament, which will become a single codified legal act reflecting all issues of relations

77

between the budget and a taxpayer at the same time strengthening its role as of the Law of
direct effect. While ensuring continuity in the structure of basic taxes and payments, the world
experience in the tax practice will be taken into account as well as the current economic
situation in Kazakhstan. Special significance will be given to the improvement of tax
administration procedures with a clear-cut regulation of relations between fiscal bodies and
taxpayers as well as promotion of small business. The main purpose of the Tax Code is
moving away from the practice of giving tax privileges to special categories of taxpayers and
creation of equal conditions for taxation. The budgetary policy of the Government in the
medium term will be aimed at deepening budgetary system reforms on the basis of perspective
budget planning, transferring inter-budgetary relations between the center and regions to the
principles of mid-term stable norms, increasing the efficiency of state borrowings, managing
state expenditures on the basis of budgetary programs and strict regulation of the budgetary
process, priority financing of socially significant budgetary programs, applying stricter
approaches to the recovery of budgetary loans by borrowers within the current legislation,
steady reducing the deficit of the budget and stabilizing the state debt to the GDP correlation.
7. In the field of state debt management, during the period of gradual reduction of the deficit of the
Republican budget, the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan intends to:

* expand and improve the lending tools in operation in order to reduce the liabilities of the
state and promote direct investment flows into the economy of Kazakhstan;
* ensure the development of criteria and strict observation of the procedure for selection and
control of investment projects funded within the Public Investment Program as well as
further monitoring over fulfillment of obligations by borrowers;
* ensure strict agreement of the Public Investment Program funding with the Republican
budget of a relevant year;
* create a centralized system of monitoring and management of loans and debts of local
bodies, and to exercise stricter control over issuance of governmental guarantees.

8. The Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan will undertake measures to complete the
program of privatization of the Republican state property, to increase their efficiency and to
ensure full transfer of dividends to state share packages while implementing a single policy
aimed at increasing the discipline of organizations-issuers of non-state securities regarding
charges and payments of income on shares and bonds.
9. The investment climate will be improved and direct investments will be increased through
further improvement of the legislation, development of the private sector, development and
introduction of mechanisms ensuring effective use and protection of deposited investments, and
transparency of investment tenders. The state investment policy will be determined by the
Public Investment Program within the annual limits of the Republican budget. In addition to
that the work will be carried out to develop mechanisms for attraction of investments with no
direct participation of the state, including through active development of the Kazakhstani
insurance and stock markets.
10. In regard to the stock market the policy of the state will be focused on its development as an
effective mechanism for mobilization and re-distribution of internal savings and funds of
potential foreign investors with creation of necessary conditions for attraction of portfolio
investments into the real economy. Issuance of shares and bonds by Kazakhstani

78

organizations, issuers of non-state securities should become one of the key mechanisms for
attraction of investments into the economy of Kazakhstan.
11. The policy in the agricultural sector will be developed through promotion of competitive
industries. For the purpose of comprehensive development of industries of the agroindustrial
complex, the agrarian policy will be planned and coordinated with the Program of development
of the light, food processing, pharmaceutical industries, and the agricultural machinery building
industry and the industry of construction materials. The Government will continue land reform
aimed at improvement of the land legislation and land relations in the Republic, development
of the land market, creation and improvement of the normative and legal framework and the
system of state registration of rights for real estate, and development of mortgage lending
against pledged land and land titles. The process of technical demarcation of lands of farming
units will be completed followed by registration of land titles in the justice bodies.
12. In the field of housing construction the authorities of Kazakhstan intend to develop new
methods of mortgage lending to the population and commercial builders including provision of
housing for long-term lease with the right of subsequent purchase. Pilot projects will be
developed and introduced to create a system of construction savings.
13. The regional policy in the medium-term perspective will be aimed at ensuring effective
interaction between the central and local management bodies in implementation of the social
and economic reforms, development of the principles of territorial self-government with
corresponding legal and financial provisions. The Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan
is to improve the current system of formation and execution of the budget at all levels whilst
strengthening the power of local executive bodies. It is expected to expand the competence of
Akims in regard to determination of the size and types of social assistance. To solve the social
problems of the population of the least developed districts the Government will continue the
microcrediting program using grants and loans of international financial agencies. The
Government also intends to increase the interregional competition on the financial markets, on
the markets of labor and investments by promoting free movement of labor, capital and
investments.
14. In the field of social protection and fight against poverty the Government of the Republic of
Kazakhstan will pursue the policy aimed at stabilizing the living standards of the population by
effective realization of the labor potential, timely payment of salaries, pensions, allowances and
targeted social assistance to the poor. The social assistance will be targeted to the really needy,
and the poverty level will be the only criteria for its provision. The Government of the
Republic of Kazakhstan confirms its commitment to the Pension Reform started in 1997 and
absolute and timely fulfillment of its obligations on payment of pensions and allowances. The
fully-funded system will be strengthened through improvement of the pension asset recovery,
strengthening of prudential control over activities of pension funds based on internationally
accepted accounting standards, and expanded supplies of first-rate assets for investments,. One
of the most important conditions for successful implementation of the Pension Reform is
creation of a sustainable and stable insurance market capable to ensure life annuities for the
participants of the fully-funded pension system and creation of a system for payment of
allowances on disablement and loss of a bread-winner.
15. In the employment field the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan intends to establish
permanent monitoring of the poverty and unemployment levels, to improve the system of

79

public works with an allowance to the change of their payment system and source of financing;
to improve and develop the system of microcrediting to the poor unemployed citizens; develop
and implement a number of measures aimed at encouraging employers who create jobs,
especially in rural areas as well as promote business in the Republic in order to provide
employment for the unemployed. A social insurance system will be developed.
16. In healthcare the efforts of the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan will be focused
on the implementation of the State Program "The Health of the Nation"; introduction of cost
recovery mechanisms for medical assistance and restructuring of the sector in order to develop
a free market of medical services and keep the healthcare affordable to large groups of the
population.
17. The main aspects of the activities include:

* stage-by-stage transfer from in-patient to out-patient principles of treatment through
arrangement of day-time in-patience, at-home in-patience and further introduction of the
institute of family doctors;
* as well as further development of the non-state healthcare sector and stage-by-stage
privatization of treatment-and-preventative institutions.
18. In the field of environment the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan intends to
optimize the nature management system, to expand the participation of the state in international
environmental programs, to create conditions to transfer to ecologically safe technologies and
increase the level of recycling. The work will be continued on creation of an effective system
of nature management, subsurface use and environmental control on the Republican and local
levels. Within this work it is expected to modernize the production of cartographic and
topographic and land-surveying products with the help of international financial institutions.
19. One of the key priorities of the authorities of the country in the real sector of the economy
is development of the transport infrastructure, reduction of the transport component in the cost
of the domestic production and further development of the transit capacity of the Republic. For
this purpose the Government will improve the legislative framework for carriers and operators
on the transport and communications market of the country and will continue its policy of
sectoral reform implying narrowing of the sphere of activities of natural monopolists and
transfer of special functions to the private sector.
20. The energy policy will be aimed at developing a competitive and technologically connected
fuel and energy complex. For this purpose active measures will be undertaken for the
development of the fuel and energy complex of the country to ensure energy independence and
delivery of energy resources to the world consumption markets. The Government intends to
determine its position with the layout of export gas and oil pipelines and proceed to the design
and construction of its separate parts taking into account creation of multi-optional ways of
energy resource transportation. For the purpose of further reformation of the energy sector, the
Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan intends to complete privatization of energy
producing capacities by 2002, and create a competitive wholesale energy market. In 2002, the
Government will develop and introduce a new tariff policy which will fully cover the cost and
aimed at reducing the independence of the tariff on electricity transmission distance which will
create stricter competition between energy sources in distribution of the generated energy and
ultimately will reduce energy prices.

80

21. The Government will continue improving the public sector management system, inter-
departmental and inter-sectoral coordination; will undertake further steps to restructure the civil
service and increase professionalism of the central and local executive bodies. For this purpose
a Program will be developed and introduced on decentralization of the functions of state
bodies, functional analysis of each central state body and further functional codification of state
bodies and civil service positions; improvement of the civil service law and increase in the
efficiency of the state decision-making procedure.
22. Within the Anticorruption Program the work will be carried on disclosure of corruption,
and acts will be developed and adopted to regulate the procedure for imposition of disciplinary
penalties, taking oath by civil servants and observation of the ethic code. The Government of
Kazakhstan is assured that the measures proposed in the Program will help to put the economy
on the path of sustainable economic growth. The implementation of the Program will help to
correct the existing imbalances in the economy, to create conditions for the development of
domestic commodity producers, to expand the taxable base and expedite solution of social
problems on this basis.
23. The cooperation with the World Bank Group will be implemented on the principles of
partnership and active involvement of financial, administrative and intellectual capacity of the
Group in solution of urgent issues related to the development of the economy of Kazakhstan.
The authorities of the Republic will specially focus on optimization of the current credit
portfolio of the country, the balance of investment and adjustment loans and improvement of
the management and implementation of the projects both on the level of individual borrowers
and the level of the Government on the whole.

81

Annex 17: The CAS Consultation Process

Between November 1999 and June 2000, several rounds of consultations took place with
different members of the civil society in Kazakhstan. These included non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), focus groups of citizens in Kostanai, Ust Kamenagorsk, Astana, Karaganda and Zhambul
oblasts of the country, the donor community, Parliamentarians, and representatives from the private
sector.

The following table is a summary of the comments raised by the groups, and Bank staff
responses to the comments and issues as it relates to the strategy.

Comments from Civil Society 

Bank Staff Response/Proposals

A. 

1. Address the problems dealing with a lack of 
credit in the economy, especially for longer 
than 9-12 months. This is especially true for 
agriculture, but also for small and medium 
enterprises. 

Stimulating broad-based private sector led growth
1. The Bank would address these issues in
agriculture through the APPAP II and
agricultural services projects. The Financial
Infrastructure project would also help deepen
the market for financial instruments. IFC would
continue to support medium and long term
credit lines for on-lending to SMEs.
2. The APPAP I will explore lending through

cooperatives and the Real Estate Registration

2. Collateral requirements of the commercial 
banks are too strict and limits credit to 
agriculture. Land registration and re-
registration is too expensive to be affordable 
for farmers, specifically the issue is vital for re- 

settlers. 

Project would roll out the infrastructure for
registri 
pope 
rightst 
theetire

country. Work carried out under the Rapid

Response to help design a "warehouse
receipts" scheme would help address the
collateral concerns.

cis 

Continued implementation of the Pension
Reform Loan by pushingforward the "blue-
chips" privatization and the Financial
Infrastructure project would help develop new
instruments such as mortgage.

rvtzto 

n h 

iaca

3.Braernents 

3 .
Broader instruments 
areneededforthe3 
investments of the Pension Funds to make 
efetv 
us doesi 
fiaca 
saig. 

ren Fned fo the 

4. Services needed for development of rural 
businesses such as transporting products to 
market, procurement of elite seeds, accessible 
veterinary services, business consulting for 
beginning farmers and managers of fanning 
entities are weak or not available.

4. Agricultural Support Services Project would
focus on streamlining delivery of services to the
farmers, including the seed sub-sector and
veterinary services Rural Roads project is
expected to help ease transport constraints.

5. Lack of legal knowledge and unaffordable 
consulting services discourage many people 
from their own business. 

5. Public information component of the Legal
Reform project which is under implementation
wouldfocus on disseminating basic legal
information. The Bank Group SME Dept. is
working on the development of CABSS to
provide pre- and post-project support to SMEs.

82

B. 

Enabling a reformed public sector

1. Local officials are not accountable, and need 
1. The civil service reforms supported by
to be made so. Activities of akimats (provinces) PSRMAL II are aimed to increase the system of
are to be transparent, open to public scrutiny. 
accountability for local officials.

2. Doing business is made difficult because of 
numerous licensing, auditing requirements 
imposed by Government officials Lack of 
transparency and impunity of government 
officials lead to bribery and corruption 
especially in getting licenses or credits. Abuse 
of power by government officials lead to 
collapse of some businesses.

2 Survey on Governance and Service Delivery
is expected to identify impediments to the
private sector development originating from
excessive controls and audits.. Streamlining
excessive controls would be addressed under
the programs supported by SPRAL, PSRMAL
11 and CSAL.

3. Stability of legislation is critical. Very often 
laws are adjusted to convenience of the 
government officials. Vague parameters allow 
free interpretation of legal and normative acts. 
No consistency and little public knowledge of 
legislation. 

3. Training ofjudges and improvements in the
c
court administration as well as elimination of
inconsistencies in the legislation are handled
under thejudicial strengthening and legislative
drafting components of the Legal Reform
Project respectively.

4. Though petty corruption is more visible, it 
can not be dealt separately from high level 
crptn. 
corruption. 

C. 

Supporting the most vulnerable
1. The income to pay for social services, such 
as health and education, were lacking. 

2.Health indicators and the quality of health 
sevie ar deeirtn 
rail 

3. The quality of education is in the decline. 
There are concerns about the coverage, decline 
in enrollment rates, relevance of the curricula. 
4. Unemployment is very high in rural areas. 

Young people leave for cities, old people have 

83

4. Actions agreed by the Government as CAS

tions agredab the Governmen as CAS
triggers such as the public declaration as well
as clear separation ofprivate sector activities
by government officials would help set
examples. Further actions such as public
disclosure of all government contracts will be
discussed with the Government during
PSRMAL preparation.

1. The Health 1l project would take special
care to make essential services affordable to
the poor. The policy conditionalities
associated with SPRAL would allow better
targeting of social protection expenditures to
the poorest.

2 The restructuring effort of the primary care
Thi wastiatunder 
the Healt 
care
which was initiated under the Health I project
in two oblasts will be expanded by six more
oblasts under the proposed Health llproject,
covering more than 60 percent of the
population.

3. The Bank is in dialogue with the Asian
Development Bank which is taking the
leadership in providing external assistance to
the sector.

4. Discussions are underway on the
development of a sensible public works

to let out their land under crushing terms. 

program in the context of the SPRAL
preparation. The proposed Rural Roads project
would be designed with a view to providing
jobs in the rural areas for the rehabilitation
and the maintenance of rural roads. Housing
Finance component of the proposed Financial
Infrastructure project would be, inter alia,
creation of employment in the construction
industry.

5. Pension payment is regular, however, the 
assigned amounts are discriminatory. Earlier 
retired are under unfair payment. 

5. Agreements under the Pension reform Loan
provide for indexation ofpensions from the old
system to cost of living changes.

D. 

Protecting the environment

1. There is a need to coordinate the array of 
activity by donors on various environmental 
projects. 

. .
2. Degradation of land is a problem. In dry 
years the areas of alkali soil are growing fast 

2. Derdto f adi 
rolmndy 

3. Water and sewerage systems are a threat to 
environment and health of people. 

1. The Bank has, and will continue to, work
closely with other donors to ensure that our
efforts are complementary to those by the
others, and provide added value.

~~~~~~2. 

The proposed GEE grant for Drylands

2 h 
rpsdGFgatfrDyad
Management wouldpilot conversion of virgin
lands taken out ofproduction 
to pastures in two

rayons in Northern Kazakhstan.

3.Reform of the urban water sector would be
undertaken in a number of cities under the
proposed Northern Vodocanal project based on
the experience developed though the Atyrau
Pilot Water Supply project.

4. Solid waste and dumping sites including 
disposal of poisonous chemicals are a problem. 
It also has impact on water in rivers. 

4. Nura River Clean-up project will address the
issues of pollution of water bodies together
with the multi-donor financed projects in Zone
B

. Semipalatins 
test.siteproblemhasnoe 

5. Semdpalatisk test site problem has not been 
resolved. 

5. A UNDP/Japan led multi-donor program
(including a component of the Health I project)
is underway to address the issues of

Semipalatinsk.

84

Annex 18: Partnerships

World Bank Grou_ 
UN 
Kuwait
IBRD IFC MIGA WBI IMF ADB EBRD EU Syste IsDB Franc Germ Japa Fund UK USAI Other

Macroeconomic Framework 
Fiscal Policy and Management 
Legal Framework 

-

-

.,k 

A3, 

-

-

-

-

-

-

_ 

_= 

=GTZ 

_

Adminstrative- Civil Service Reform * -

-

_ 

-

_ 

_ 

-

Governance - Anti-Corruption 
Social Protection 
_ 
Agriculture and Rural Development * 
Other Economic Management 
Irrigation 
Financial Sector 

UNDP 

_K

3 .

UNDPALO

* 

-

TA 

UNDP 

-

_A 

, 

FAO 

I. 

KHF 

_ 

-AEL

i 

__CA

hA 

" 

-

-

-

-

Js 

I

Small And Medium Enterprises/PSD 

T A__ 

-

=_ 

-

-

_ 

UNDP 

==SW 

TURKE_

Industry 
Transport/Telecommunications 

M 

L

-

-

-

_ 

r 

-

-

UCANADA

Oil and Gas 
Power 

A 

_ 

CANADA

C 

_=ANADA

Water 

UNDP 

= 

S 

ML_

Environment 

_ 

BGR 

KHF

Health 

-

T2W 

KHF

Education 

-

-_ 

-

-

GTZ 

KHF 

T 

I

3 Past Investment Lending 
3 PastAdjustmentLending 

Planned Investment 

Past Technical Assistar 

Planned Technical Assistance

PlannedAdjustment Lending I Guarantees

85

MAP SECTION

Tyween a 

60n 

g 

- tS- 

/80° 

0 

100 

200 

300 

400 Kilometers

rO Samora 
~~~~ Chapoevo 

~ ~~~~~~~~~~ToC~lb,, 

>~~~~T T. Borau- 
O 

> \> 

ToChelyabinsk 

/ 

K 

u 

r 

g 

a 

n 

FoOmsk Novosibjfsk gg 

1 1 

200Miles~~~~~~~~~~~~tq-i~' 

00 

ile

KAZAKHSTAN ~~~~S AN 

XE D E R 

A T I 

A 

N 

A 

Zi, 

-R>-- 

t 

g 

S 

p 

+ 

v 

\ 

y 

/

ToMNGHS TA-- 

ouoos. 

KZLR 

A 

l~RD

-P' Chapaevo 

UZBKO STANA 

PA LO A

KAZAKHSA 

A 

AKB 

-E

t Kf ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~B E 

ZA 

T |>,;- 

AD 

A 

S 

Ei 

r\ 

o 

KARAHA

4§6~~~~~~~~~coos 

dono,sonon 

ad 

/te

3 ;/ATYI 

YSAU 

koNks 

W 

Y 

Y O Yo 

De' 

ZA 

BL 

wMn 

HN

O REIO CAITL 

-L ooy ete 

-'
1990LEVELOFARALSEA 

0 o5 tO 

5h oykih 
y, o 

-

hN

Q 

;Zv) 

\ 

! 

'-' 

| 

/ 

-

);-

Osoop, oo jo 

\o 

t-halkr

0

--

Li

A 

Zhezk 

I -ji-KAZ STA N 

>*,j4

BeinROADS 

Tstotta 

map 

reermstoy 

'

O~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4 SELCTE 

CITE hCpH oTh 
N s _ a
°Id°ah 

-. -w 

- REGION BOUNDARIES 

oga ooyl of any oote orl y, 

_ 

</'\ 

-

_ 

I'J 

_ 

aa 

._. 

INTERNATIONAL 

BOUNDARIES 

aboepdoneof 

suh- 

AFGHANISTAN 70G 

- 1 

80° 

'0 

I 

/ 

1 

1 

1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~bR)

