Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIA1 USE ONLY

Report No. 21580-IND

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

INDONESIA

January 4, 2001

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last Country Assistance Strategy for Indonesia was discussed
on July 7, 1997 (R97-152[IFC/R97-53]).

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency unit: Rupiah (Rp) as of December 1, 2000
$1 = Rp 9,420

FISCAL YEAR

Until March 31, 2000: April 1 to March 31
Until December 31, 2000: April 1 to December 31
From January 1, 2001: January 1 to December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
ADB 
APL 
BPS 
CAS 
CGI 
CFAA 

CPAR 

CPPR 
CSO 
DFID 

EU 
FDI 
FY 
GDP 
GEF 
GOI 
GTZ 

IBRA 

IBRD 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
Asian Development Bank 
Adaptable Program Loan 
Central Bureau of Statistics 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Consultative Group for Indonesia 
Country Financial Accountability 
Assessment 
Country Procurement Assessment 
Report 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 
Civil Society Organization 
Department for Intemational 
Development (United Kingdom) 
European Union 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Fiscal Year 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environment Facility 
Government of Indonesia 
Gesellschaft Fur Technische 
Zusammenarbeit (Germany) 
Indonesian Bank Restructuring 
Agency 
International Bank for Reconstruction
And Development

JITF 
LOI 
MIGA 

IDA 
IFC 
IMF 
JBIC 

International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Japan Bank for International
Cooperation
Jakarta Initiative Task Force
Letter of Intent
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
MPR 
People's Consultative Assembly
NGO 
Non-governmental Organization
OCS 
Operational Core Services
OED 
Operations Evaluation Department
PROPENAS GOI five-year plan-FY2001-05
PRSP 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
SME 
Small- and Medium-size Enterprise
SOE 
State-Owned Enterprise
SSNAL 
Social Safety Net Adjustment Loan
UNHCR 
United Nations High Commission for
Refugees
United States Agency for International
Development
World Bank Group
World Health Organization

USAID 

WBG 
WHO 

The World Bank
Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Manager 

: Mr. Jemal-ud-din Kassum
: Mr. Mark Baird
: Mr. Oscar de Bruyn Kops

The International Finance Corporation
Vice President 
Director, East Asia and Pacific Region 
Task Managers 

: Mr. Assaad Jabre
: Mr. Javed Hamid
: Mr. Dileep Wagle/Mr. Stoyan Tenev

- i -

CONTENTS

1. COUNTRY CONTEXT .....................................................

1

Political Transition .....................................................
Fragile Economic Recovery ....................................................
Poverty Continues to be a Central Issue ............
Governance is the Weak Link ....................................................
Policy Response Has Been Uneven .....................................................
Economic Outlook and Risks .................................................... 

1
2
5........................................5
6
7
0

2. BANK GROUP RESPONSE AND PRIORITIES ................................................... 

14

Progress Since Last CAS .................................................... 
14
Lessons from the Crisis ................................................... 
16
Feedback from Consultations .................................................... 
16
Bank Group's Comparative Advantage ................................................... 
18
Development Challenges and Priorities for the Bank Group ................................................... 19
Sustaining Economic Recovery and Promoting Broad-based Growth ....................... ......... 20
Building National Institutions for Accountable Government ............................................... 24
Delivering Better Public Services to the Poor ................... 
................................ 
26

3. 

IMPLICATIONS FOR THE BANK GROUP PROGRAM ........................................... 30

Partnerships and Selectivity ................................................... 
Portfolio Management .................................................... 
Analytical and Advisory Activities ................................................... 
Lending Program, Triggers and Instruments ................................................... 
Civil Society Outreach .................................................... 
Progress Monitoring ................................................... 
Bank Exposure and Risk Management .................................................... 

32
34
37
38
43
43
44

ANNEXES:
1: 
Summary of World Bank Group Private Sector Development Strategy
A2: 
Indonesia at a Glance
B2: 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
B3: 
Bank Group Program Summary - Proposed Lending program
B3: 
Bank Group Fact Sheet - IFC and MIGA Program
B4: 
Summary of Non-lending Services
B5: 
Social Indicators
B6: 
Key Economic Indicators

-

ii 

-

B7: Key Exposure Indicators
B8: 
Operations Portfolio
B8: 
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
B9: 
CAS Program Matrix
BIG: CAS Summary of Development Priorities

TEXT TABLES

Table 1.1: Indonesia Key Economic Indicators: Projections and Actual, FY98/99-FY2000 ......... 3
Table 1.2: Indonesia: Key Economic Indicators-Base and High Case Projections .......... ......... 12
Table 2.1: Bank Lending: Changes since CAS Progress Report, FY98-00 .................................. 14
Table 2.2: Bank Portfolio: Changes since CAS Progress Report, FY98-00 ................................. 15
Table 3.1: Bank Group Instruments and Major Partners by Bank Group Program Area ............. 31
Table 3.2: Bank Portfolio Quality Targets, FYO1-03 .................................................................. 34
Table 3.3: Lending Scenarios, FY01-03 ................................................................. 
39
Table 3.4: Minimum Conditions and Up-front Actions for Poverty Reduction in a Base
Case and High Case Lending Scenario ................................................................. 41
Table 3.5: Possible Poverty Reduction Goals .................................................................. 
44
Table 3.6: Bank Exposure Indicators .................................................................. 
45

TEXT BOXES

Box 1.1: Main Features of the Decentralization Program ..............................................................2
Box 1.2: Profile of Indonesia's Poor and Vulnerable in 1999 ........................................................6
Box 1.3: Gender Inequalities Persist in Indonesian Society ..........................................................7
Box 1.4: Ten-Point Economic Recovery Program ..................................................................
8
Box 1.5: Main Elements of Indonesia's National Statement on Poverty Reduction Strategy
for the CGI ..................................................................
9
Box 2.1: Recent Anti-corruption Efforts in Bank-Financed Projects ........................................... 15
Box 2.2: Summary Feedback from Civil Society Consultations .......................... ........................ 17
Box 2.3: Labor Policies in Transition ................................................................. 
21
Box 2.4: Getting The Right Level of Government Is Critical For Effective Service Delivery:
Examples from Irrigation, Roads and Environmental Management ............ 
................. 27
Box 2.5: Encouraging "Demand-Responsive" Service Delivery in Basic Education and Health 28
Box 3.1: Fiduciary Environment and Bank-Financed Projects ............................... ..................... 36

FIGURE

Figure 1.1: Indonesia's Fragile Recovery ..................................................................

4

MAP

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
Indonesia is striving to emerge from a severe economic crisis, complete its transition to a
democratic society, and embark on an ambitious program of decentralization. Each one of these
challenges would test any country. Together, they constitute a highly complex agenda for
Indonesia. Yet, Indonesia's move to democracy and decentralization also hold its only promise
of building the institutions necessary for sustainable growth and development. The future for
Indonesia, therefore, holds enormous opportunities, but also immense risk. The stakes are high-
not just for Indonesia but also for the international community. This mix of opportunity and risk
forms the recurrent background theme to this Country Assistance Strategy for the World Bank
Group.

ii. 
The new Government of President Wahid inherited an economy with deep structural
flaws, weak institutions, and an entrenched bureaucracy. Corruption is still rampant and infects
the very institutions (the police and judiciary) that are supposed to tackle it. Regional unrest,
growing nationalism, and political and ethnic tensions threaten national unity and continue to
preoccupy the Government. Poor implementation of the far-reaching decentralization program
may threaten fiscal stability and disrupt the delivery of public services. Investors remain wary of
political uncertainty, the weak legal and judicial system, and uneven policy implementation.

iii. 
Yet the very process of political transition and decentralization, while creating acute
uncertainties in the short term, also provides Indonesia greater hope for sustainable progress on
poverty reduction in the long term. There is now much more open debate in Indonesia over key
development issues such as debt, corruption and the participation of civil society in public policy
formulation. Greater transparency in politics and government is building pressure for reform. A
free press keeps a watchful eye on the political process and on the courts. If properly managed,
decentralization can help build local democratic institutions and give people greater control over
their lives.

iv. 
The Bank Group sees Indonesia's future with excitement-and 
concern. In a
democratizing and decentralizing political and economic system, the opportunities for
sustainable development are immense, but so are the risks and constraints. Despite the Bank's
association with the past, the new Government still sees the Bank Group as an important
development partner going forward-and has asked for an expanded International Development
Association (IDA) program. And despite reduced lending levels, the Bank plays an influential
role in key policy areas of the economic recovery program-in close association with the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Asian Development Bank (ADB). Many other donor
agencies are committed to supporting Indonesia, and the Bank has developed close partnerships
with them across a broad spectrum of development priorities.

v. 
This CAS has also been informed by public consultations with civil society
organizations. They expressed serious concern with high levels of debt and corruption. They
recommended the Bank to focus on poverty reduction through "bottom-up" community
development, and to involve civil society more actively in future programs. The private sector
strategy (distributed along with the CAS) also benefited from consultations with private sector
representatives. They pointed out the main weaknesses in the current investment climate in
Indonesia, which are holding back recovery and job creation for the poor.

-

ii -

vi. 
The overarching goal of the World Bank Group in Indonesia will be to support efforts to
reduce poverty and vulnerability in a more democratic and decentralized environment. The
number of poor has fallen from crisis levels, but half of all Indonesians remain vulnerable to
poverty. Accordingly, the Bank Group's strategy will focus on the following three broad priority
areas:

* Sustaining economic recovery and promoting broad-based growth. In the short run, this
requires macroeconomic stability and accelerated bank and corporate restructuring. In the
medium term, it will involve policies and public expenditures aimed at poverty reduction,
efficient private sector growth, and human capital and infrastructure development to improve
competitiveness;

* Building national institutions for accountable government, which includes legal and judicial
reforms, civil service reforms, better public financial management and procurement, effective
decentralization, and close attention to sustainable management of the rapidly depleting
natural resource base of the country; and

X Delivering better public services to the poor, which involves assistance to help define
government roles and responsibilities as functions are decentralized, support for improved
public service delivery by sub-national governments which have demonstrated pro-poor, pro-
growth reform, as well as promoting community development and selective assistance to
post-conflict areas.

vii. 
The "base case "-considered 
to be the most likely scenario-presumes 
the current
"muddle-through" situation will continue, with some slippage in structural reforms, but with
continued macroeconomic stability that would help sustain poverty reduction. This is not a
desirable scenario, providing a fragile foundation for external support to Indonesia, and even
harbors risks to the Bank's portfolio as fiduciary standards may slip in a decentralized system. At
the same time, the Bank is one of Indonesia's long-term development partners and cannot
disassociate itself from this fledgling democracy. The CAS base case program is expected to be
robust to most downside risks, while at the same time positioning the Bank for possible upside
opportunities. Minimum conditions for the base case would be maintenance of macroeconomic
stability, including prudent debt management and progress on asset sales and privatization,
minimum fiduciary safeguards for delivery of public services with decentralization, and
establishment of organizational arrangements, scope, process, and schedule for developing a
broad-based poverty reduction strategy. The key elements for fiscal years (FY) 01-03 are as
follows:

* The Bank's portfolio will continue to shrink and stabilize around 50 to 55 projects by FY03.
Portfolio management will focus on continued quality improvement and further
strengthening of fiduciary controls. The Bank will also step up its support of government
efforts to strengthen procurement and financial management, which is at risk of deterioration
as public service delivery is decentralized.

* The Bank's Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) program will continue to emphasize
advisory services, supported by a small but growing body of analytical work, and increased
attention to regional issues. This will include its leading role in bank and corporate

-

iii 

-

restructuring and sectoral reforms. The balance of AAA work will shift from crisis response
to longer-term development concerns over the CAS period. The Bank will continue
assistance in development and implementation of Government's broad-based poverty
strategy.

* A core Bank lending program of up to $400 million a year-less than one third of pre-crisis
levels (around $1.3 billion a year during FY90-97). The average IBRD/IDA blend would be
65:35 over the CAS period. This is consistent with Indonesia's current IDA-12 allocation.
IBRD exposure would be reduced from $11.8 billion at the end of FY00 to $10.7 billion by
the end of FY03.

* The lending program will focus on projects supporting social services and basic
infrastructure for the poor, working increasingly with local governments and communities in
regions where the leadership supports open and accountable government, promotes growth,
and adopts pro-poor policies. No adjustment lending is foreseen in the base case.

viii. The high case signals the Bank's willingness to provide more support if policy
performance improves. If reforms accelerate, and in line with the Government's request, the
CAS foresees raising lending to about $1 billion a year from FY02. This would include a
temporary increase in access to IDA resources, as discussed with the IDA Deputies in Lisbon.
There could also be a small amount of adjustment lending, if needed. The program anticipates a
move toward programmatic lending in support of governance and sectoral programs as capacity
and fiduciary controls improve at the sub-national level. Key up-front actions include: prudent
monetary, fiscal and debt management; accelerated bank and corporate restructuring and
privatization; agreement on a policy framework for rice; progress on agreed actions to reform
procurement and financial management systems; and initial steps on preparation of a broad-
based poverty reduction strategy. Regular semiannual policy assessments will be made to
determine continued eligibility for the high case and to set performance targets for the next six
months.

ix. 
Unfortunately, there is also a significant possibility of a crisis scenario. A breakdown in
the Government's Extended Arrangement with the IMF as a result of major policy slippage,
including inadequate progress on bank and corporate restructuring, could lead to a rapid erosion
of market confidence and deterioration in economic conditions. A similar outcome could result
from political instability or a widespread breakdown in law and order. In such adverse situations,
the Bank would cease all new lending but undertake more crisis-related AAA work. In the event
of another macroeconomic shock, the Bank may be asked to contribute to an international rescue
effort. But the Bank's response this time around will be limited by the Government's high debt
burden and risks associated with IBRD's high exposure to Indonesia.

x. 
The CAS also outlines the current plans of IFC and MIGA in Indonesia, and how they fit
into the overall Bank Group strategy. The recently prepared private sector strategy, together with
joint management of Bank and IFC private sector activities, allow for considerable synergies
between the Bank Group's policy and transactions work (e.g., on SMEs), while carefully
managing potential conflicts of interest. Beyond the restructuring of its existing clients, IFC will
focus on interventions with strong demonstration effects and positive impact on market
perceptions. It will also support SME development, resource-based industries and private

- iv -

participation in infrastructure. MIGA has suspended its guarantee activities in Indonesia, pending
settlement of an outstanding claim by the Government.

xi. 

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

* 

* 

Is the assistance program responsive to Indonesia's major development challenges?

Is the Bank Group's response appropriate for an important partner country going through a
major political and economic transition?

* Do the lending scenarios, including a relatively small, poverty-focused base case program,
the proposed lending triggers and increased IDA in the high case, and a possible crisis
scenario, respond well to the country conditions?

* Are the partnership arrangements and proposed AAA appropriate?

* Have the risks been appropriately identified and addressed?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT,
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR INDONESIA

1. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT

POLITICAL TRANSITION

1. 
Indonesia is in the midst of a major political transition toward a democratic society.
The country held its first free and open elections since the 1950s in June 1999. Moderate Muslim
leader Abdurrahman Wahid emerged as the new President from a multiparty post-election
negotiation process-overtaking Megawati Sukamoputri who became Vice-President after her
party had won a plurality of seats in the legislature. Much has been achieved in the first year of
the Wahid government. It has begun to restore democratic freedoms and civil rights and tackle
the tough issue of the role of the military in politics. The new parliament ceded independence to
East Timor in November 1999. The Government has started a dialogue with a number of regions
pressing for greater autonomy. Preparations are under way for a major program of
decentralization-due 
to go into effect in January 2001, designed to reverse the extreme
centralization of government in Jakarta. Parliament is no longer a rubber stamp, there is a lively
and free press, an increasingly vocal and active civil society, and a growing free trade union
movement. The forthcoming regional autonomy makes local governments increasingly active,
and local legislatures are starting to control their executive branches.

2. 
But the transition is beset with tensions and uncertainty. The initial governing
coalition did not hold and a new more unified cabinet was announced following the annual
August session of the People's Consultative Assembly (MPR). But the President has a tenuous
relationship with Parliament-as reflected by two recent attempts at his impeachment-which
affects Government's ability to maintain the momentum of reform. The military retains a
political role, albeit a limited one, and a constitutional amendment has reduced chances of them
being prosecuted for past wrongdoings. Public impatience and cynicism are being fed by
inefficient law enforcement and the slow prosecution of corruption cases, stymied by an
entrenched and corrupt bureaucracy, police and judiciary. The new freedoms have brought to the
surface long suppressed ethnic divisions, a deterioration in law and order, and communal
violence, particularly in Maluku. Secessionist movements have become increasingly active in
Aceh and Irian Jaya. While greater autonomy is contemplated for these regions, tensions have
mounted as local aspirations for self-rule are met by determination of the central government and
military to maintain Indonesia's territorial integrity. These issues have absorbed most of the
Government's energy, leaving policymakers little time for developing policy and strategy.

3. 
And the far-reaching decentralization program will have major implications.
Decentralization is a strong political imperative to counter the centrifugal forces within the
country. It also makes good economic sense, as Indonesia is unusually centralized for a country

2

of its size and diversity. But if managed badly, the transition to a decentralized Indonesia could
not only derail macroeconomic stability, but also seriously affect the delivery of government
services. And with implementation scheduled to start in January 2001, much needs to be worked
out (see Box 1.1 for main features of the decentralization program).

Box 1.1: Main Features of the Decentralization Program

Administrative aspects: Law 22 of 1999 devolves most functions of government to Indonesia's regions-28
provinces and over 350 districts and cities. The key exceptions are national defense, international relations, justice,
police, monetary, development planning, religion, and finance. The districts must perform important functions,
including health, education, environmental and infrastructure services. The province has only a minor role, mainly in
coordination, and backstopping districts and cities that cannot yet perform their functions-which may be an
opening for an expanded provincial role. The province will also continue to perform deconcentrated central tasks.
Implementing regulations further specify the remaining roles of the central and provincial governments, including
setting standards for service delivery. The central government can annul regional bylaws and regulations that
conflict with national laws and regulations, but the regions can appeal to the supreme court against the center's
decision. The intergovernmental regional autonomy advisory board with representatives from the center and the
regions is to advise the President on issues concerning decentralization.
Fiscal aspects: The legal framework (Laws 22 and 25 of 1999) will drastically increase the regional share of general
government spending. Preliminary estimates suggest that when decentralization is fully implemented, the regions
will spend some 8 to 9 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), or well over 40 percent of general government
spending, and over double what they spend now. The bulk of this will be controlled by the districts and cities. The
center will share some of the resource revenues with the regions-for 2001 amounting to some 1.3 percent of
GDP-but this will only benefit a few regions with natural resources.

For most regions, the general grant will be the main source of revenues. This grant will be a rninimum of 25 percent
of central government revenues-some 4 percent of GDP for 2001. The general grant will be distributed by a
formula that has some equalizing elements, but guarantees a grant at least equal to the recurrent and development
grants received in the past-irrespective of other income. The equalization formula does not adequately consider
expenditure needs for minimal service provision and thus, poorer regions could be shortchanged. Furthermore, the
center can grant special grants but the amounts are small given the current budget enviromment and their allocation
has been given little attention so far.

Regional governments will also be allowed to borrow, but borrowing will be limited by a formula for total debt, by
individual Ministry of Finance (MOF) approval for foreign loans, but without the guarantee of central government.
The Government can put further limits on regional borrowing, and plans to prohibit regional borrowing for FY2001,
except from the central government. Bank and other donor lending to the regions will for now be able to make use
of an existing onlending mechanism.

Government has issued regulations on financial management and procurement of the regions. These regulations
would allow the regions to largely deterrnine their own financial management, accounting, and procurement system
within (broad) guidelines from the central government. This arrangement risks a weakening of the country's
fiduciary environment, and a fragmentation of the market for government procurement, as local procurement
regulations could favor local suppliers.
To strengthen local own revenue sources the Government has revised the Law 18 of 1997 on regional taxes and
levies. The revised law allows regions to establish taxes as long as they obey certain principles. While these
principles are sound, the weak monitoring and enforcement capacity of the center risks a return to the pre- 1997 days
in which local taxes became a serious barrier for internal trade.

FRAGILE ECONOMIC RECOVERY

4. 
The nascent recovery from the crisis gained strength during the past year.
Indonesia's economy fared better than expected at the time of the CAS Progress Report. Growth

3

rebounded earlier than expected, and inflation came down more rapidly, and the country
generated a higher than expected current account surplus (see Table 1.1). GDP growth in 2000 is
expected to be in the 4-5 percent range. The recovery is becoming broader based, with
investment growth overtaking consumption as a leading contributor. Exports are still growing
rapidly, benefiting from the strong depreciation of the Rupiah and buoyant world trade.
Encouragingly, non-oil exports did particularly well. Inflation, although accelerating somewhat,
remains under control (see Figure 1.1).

Table 1.1: Indonesia Key Economic Indicators: Projections and Actual, FY98/99-FY2000

GDP growth 

(%) 

Inflation (% increase in GDP deflator) 

Y9/ 
Projection° 
-13 
Actual 
-14.1 
Projection 
80 
Actual 
75.3 
Projection 
4.7 
Actual 
4.6 
'Actual 00/01 is preliminary actualfor FYOO, because of a change in Indonesia 'sfrscal year.
b Projectionsfrom the CAS Progress Report, February 1999.
Source: BPS, Bank Indonesia and StaffEstimates.

Current Account (US$ billion) 

FY9W 
-1 
3.5 
20 
3.1 
5.5 
6.6 

FYOO101
3
4.0
10
6.8
4.4
5.3

5. 
But Indonesia's recovering economy was not reflected in improved financial
markets. The Rupiah exchange rate has continued to see wild gyrations over the last year. The
capital markets fared little better. The Jakarta stock exchange drifted off its post-crisis peaks in
October 1999, and one year later had dropped by 30 percent. Similarly, Indonesia's risk premium
in international markets reversed its decline, and spreads on Indonesian US dollar denominated
bonds are now more than 700 basis points over US treasury bonds. In contrast with other
recovering Asian countries, private capital outflow continues. FY99/00 saw a $9 billion net
private capital outflow from Indonesia, of which $4 billion was foreign direct investment (FDI)
outflow.

6. 
Bank and corporate restructuring needs to be accelerated, because without new credit
or investment the recovery will run out of steam. There is some promising progress: the first
stage of bank recapitalization has been completed, non-performing loans are falling, new lending
has resumed, albeit hesitantly, and a return to bank profitability is near. The Indonesian Bank
Restructuring Agency's (IBRA's) governance has improved, and its recovery operations have
started in earnest. Voluntary settlements on debt through the Jakarta Initiative Task Force (JITF)
and between debtors and creditors have started to pick up. To nurture these tenuous beginnings,
Government must complete bank recapitalization while continuing to restructure state banks,
strengthen the banks' governance, develop a credit culture, and upgrade risk controls and
systems. IBRA asset disposition should be accelerated within a transparent and competitive
process to maximize returns, and minimize opportunities for corruption. And legal, regulatory
and tax impediments against restructuring should be removed. Over time, Government needs to
develop and implement a medium-term strategy to strengthen the entire financial sector. High on
this agenda is the privatization of state banks.

4

Figure 1.1: Indonesia's Fragile Recovery

Indonesia's real recovery is taking hold ... 
(GDP growth. YoY) 

... and the recovery is broadening 
...
(Contribution to GDP growth by expenditure category
percentage point)

10 

.

5~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~15 

Ng T.*

Pd.*. 

, 

...

inladn emansundr 
ontol................... 

Food ~ ~ ~ 

oo.-

-~~~~ 

(Percentage change in CPI andJfood Price Index. YoY) 

IVt:Changes 
in inventory include statistical discrepancy

20Fb 

.. and incomes are rebounding.

(Manufacturing wages and consumption.
Index 1996Q =100))

1151 

,..~~~~~~~~~~s 

130 

-

J19 

97 

Jm.U 
.1 
7 
1W~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~2

Ja 

00I0 

J 

157 

J-(a J 

0, 

2M7

But poliaics stin jt 

her markt 

... 

(PSE Index and US per Rp Index 10-1 -99 =100) 

.and 

outpit remains well below pre-crisis levels.

(actual pre-crisis and projected output at pre-crisis trend

growth)

130-*, 

40 

110 

70~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~9

.

70051

140,0^01

e,os 

.

Price 

0

130E¢ 

Source: BPS, BI, CEIC data, World Bank (2000) Towards a poverty strategy, Staff estimates

5

7. 
And Government faces a major challenge in maintaining fiscal sustainability. The
crisis left the Government deeply in debt. After completing bank recapitalization, government
debt will add up to a towering 100 percent of GDP, up from 23 percent of GDP before the crisis.
And debt service, together with politically sensitive fuel subsidies and the wage bill take up more
than four-fifths of government revenues. This puts severe pressure on the budget, and threatens
to crowd out development spending. This pressure could well increase with the onset of
decentralization next year. Reducing it will involve tough policy choices to raise revenues
through better tax administration, phase out inefficient subsidies while protecting the poorest,
improve fiscal management, and accelerate privatization and asset recovery.

POVERTY CONTINUES TO BE A CENTRAL ISSUE

8. While poverty rose sharply in the crisis, the recovery has been decidedly pro-poor.
The crisis dramatically illustrated how much economic growth and stability matter to Indonesia's
poor. In the two decades leading up to 1996 poverty levels fell from over 60 percent to less than
12 percent of the population,' though many hovered just above the poverty line and remained
vulnerable to shocks. So when the economic crisis hit in 1997 following two drought years, and
per capita GNP was halved to US$580,2 the expenditure poverty rate shot up-at 
least doubling
from its pre-crisis low (in August 1997) to the peak 27 percent3 in late 1998/early 1999.
Indications are that poverty has since fallen substantially from the crisis peak, helped by
increasing real wages and improving employment, and the sharp decline in food prices-
especially rice. Box 1.2 provides a profile of the poor and vulnerable in 1999.

9. 
But despite crisis recovery, various dimensions of poverty still affect half of all
Indonesians. Despite the good news on reductions in expenditure poverty from its crisis peak,
Indonesians face startlingly high vulnerability to poverty. The Bank's recent poverty report4
shows that over a three-year period between 30 to 60 percent of all Indonesians face a greater
than 50-50 chance of periodically experiencing extreme poverty. And poverty takes many forms
in addition to material poverty (those living in households with expenditures below the poverty
line). Lack of access to basic education and adequate nutrition or of recourse to medical services
makes people poor, as do inadequate or nonexistent basic infrastructure (safe water, adequate
sanitation, transport and roads, electricity). People who are excluded from social community life
or discriminated against experience yet another form of poverty. Important gender differences
persist (see Box 1.3). When poverty is expanded to include all these dimensions of vulnerability
and human well-being, then poverty in Indonesia is still an issue that concerns about half the
population. Tackling poverty therefore will require that all policies, expenditures and programs
are evaluated for their impact on the livelihoods of those struggling to escape poverty or who risk

I Using head count index and national poverty line from East Asia: Road to Recovery, World Bank, 1998.
In 1999, using the Atlas method, compared to US$1,097 in 1997.

2 

3 The calculation method used by BPS, which also adopts a new poverty line to better match current consumption
patterns (i.e., different from the national poverty line used in 1995), results in a lower estimate for the portion of
the population living in poverty in February 1999 (23.5 percent).

4 Poverty Reduction in Indonesia: Constructing a New Strategy, September 2000 (Draft).

6

Box 1.2: Profile of Indonesia's Poor and Vulnerable in 1999
Characteristics of those in expenditurepoverty and where they live...

• 

87 percent of the poor live in households in which the head of household has only a primary education or less-
only five percent of the poor have a secondary education or better.
• 
For almost 60 percent of the poor, agriculture provides the main source of income (whether from labor or land).
* More than 75 percent of the poor live in rural areas.
* Most of the poor (61 percent) live on Java.
* The poorest regions, all rural, are scattered and include parts of the eastern islands (Irian Jaya, East Nusa
Tenggara, Maluku and West Nusa Tenggara), but also other areas (Southeast Sulawesi, East Java, Lampung, West
Kalimantan, and Central Java).

Other ways in which poverty is experienced...

* Expenditure poor households are also much more likely to be "human investment" poor, but a significant share of
the non-expenditure poor households also lag in human investnent: 22 percent of poor children between 6 and 18
years who have yet to complete basic education are not enrolled in school, while for non-poor households the
share is 9 percent.
* 78 percent of the poor, and 51 percent of non-poor, lack access to "improved" water sources. Access to sanitation
is even more linited.
* When people are asked to define who are "the poor" in open-ended tenns, the breadth and variety of responses is
striking; from the common idea of not having enough to eat, to not having enough participation in community life,
to being despondent or "having lost faith in God" (from Consultations with the Poor in Indonesia, 1999).

falling into it. And during.the transition to decentralization special attention must be paid to the
way it is carried out or the poor could well be left behind.

GOVERNANCE IS THE WEAK LINK

10. 

Governance 

is Indonesia's key medium-term development 

challenge. Weak

governance has, if not caused, at least aggravated the economic crisis out of which Indonesia is
just emerging. The crisis brought to the surface the lack of accountability, transparency and rule
of law in Indonesia, compounded by weak institutions unresponsive to the population at large,
and the poor in particular. Indonesia scores consistently low in surveys on rule of law,
corruption, and business environment. Illegal gains from corruption have mainly benefited the
rich, and were a major factor in the downfall of the Suharto regime. Bad governance has affected
the poor across the board, from lack of basic law and order, lack of mechanisms to influence
budgetary choices, poor quality of services, and lack of transparency and accountability in the
use of funds.

11. 

The task of governance reform is huge. The judiciary, civil service, government

financial management, and the role of the state all affect governance. Under the New Order, the
judiciary functioned largely as an instrument of the executive. The court system, from the judges
down, was fundamentally corrupt, while prosecutors were considered facilitators of extortion and
bribery. The lack of performance monitoring and sanctions on non-performing judges, lack of
transparency of judgments, and absence of systemic jurisprudence all contribute to the perceived
absence of rule of law. The slow process in corporate restructuring can at least partly be
attributed to the questionable judicial process. The civil service suffers from the same lack of
transparency, accountability and performance. Corruption has been widespread. It delivered top-

7

Box 1.3: Gender Inequalities Persist in Indonesian Society...

.

.

Female illiteracy is still considerably higher than male (20 percent and 9 percent) although the gap has
narrowed considerably and primary and junior secondary enrollments are nearly gender balanced. Still,
stereotypical gender roles are reinforced through school books and the curriculum.

As for jobs, women are concentrated in low-skill, low-paid employment-71 percent of workers officially
recorded as "unpaid family workers" are women, and only 7 percent of the senior administrators and managers
are women. Home based workers and those working overseas, both predominantly women, are deprived of
basic rights, benefits, or job security, and wages are usually extremely low.

. Women are heavily underrepresented in public life-Parliament has only 10 percent women; women make up
35 percent of civil servants, but only 4 percent are in the highest two echelons; and just 2 percent of village
heads are women.

. Women are often victims of violent crime (including State violence)-rape, harassment, or domestic violence,
although the real incidence of these crimes is still unknown.

But these statistics do not give the full story. The inequalities are more deeply embedded and have been
institutionalized. The main issue facing women in Indonesia is one of visibility and voice. Although the Constitution
gives equal rights to women, successive state policy documents have defined separate roles for men and women:
men as the heads of households and women as mothers and caretakers. And there is a concem that decentralization
may reverse Government's attention to gender issues.

down services to the public, which are now out of step with the new democratic realities. And
decentralization will create a further challenge as up to 2.7 million civil servants will have to be
reassigned, with major risks of disruptions in service delivery. The lack of sound financial
management and procurement systems have contributed to the weak traditions of accountability
in the public sector. There is no properly functioning system of checks and balances, and lack of
transparency makes external performance monitoring virtually impossible. The forthcoming
decentralization is likely to make things worse rather than better in the short run as there is little
evidence that regional governments will have in place adequate fiduciary controls on local
spending.

12. Weak corporate governance affects the private sector. Investor surveys show that
Indonesia has among the worst corporate governance in East Asian countries. There is a lack of
transparency and financial disclosure, accounting and auditing systems are weak, rights of
minority investors are insufficient, and interlocking ownership between banks and corporates
have contributed to the collapse of the bank and corporate sector during the crisis. Lack of
transparency and weak regulatory frameworks also continue to impede private investment in
infrastructure and other public services.

POLICY RESPONSE HAS BEEN UNEVEN

13. Market confidence is affected by weak policy performance. President Wahid's first
administration was quick to commit to reforms in January 2000 as part of its new three-year

8

SDR 3.6 billion Extended Arrangement with the IMF, supported by the World Bank and ADB.s
But implementation of agreed reforms has been slow. Among others, the Government hesitated
on actions to accelerate bank and corporate restructuring, postponed the fuel price increases and
phase-out of tax exemptions, and reversed its stance on rice and import tariffs. Foreign investors
were further taken aback by policy decisions to restrict foreign investment in a number of
sectors. These decisions have since been reversed but at the expense of investor confidence.

14. Government's medium-term policy directions emphasize the importance of
improved governance and addressing social inequity and poverty as part of a sustainable
and just economic recovery. The State Policy Guidelines, adopted by the MPR after the June
1999 general elections, underline the supremacy of law and the protection of fundamental human
rights. It promotes the development of a "people's economy" relying on fair market mechanisms
and "empowering" small- and medium-size entrepreneurs and cooperatives linked to improved
people's welfare through access to basic needs, thus moving away from the strong central
authority and monopolistic business practices enjoyed by a privileged set of cronies in the
Suharto era. Rather than the earlier top-down approaches, the intent is to empower communities
as main agents of development. The Government's Propenas five-year plan (GOI FY2001-05)
builds on these guidelines and is organized around five major priority areas: (1) building a
democratic political system while maintaining national unity; (2) realizing the supremacy of law
and clean governance; (3) accelerating economic recovery and building a sustainable and just
development platforn; (4) improving the development of people's welfare and cultural
resilience, and (5) improving regional development. President Wahid underlined these principles
in his MPR accountability speech in August 2000.

15. Building on these principles,
the new Cabinet has started to put in 
place its economic recovery program. 
The economic team of President 
Wahid's second Cabinet appointed in 
began 
strongly, 
developing a Ten-Point 
Recovery Program that is the first 
statement of comprehensive economic 

Economic 

August 

2000 

policy 

in the new Indonesia 

(see Box 

1.4). In September, the program was 
smoothly integrated in Government's 
Letter of Intent 
related to its 
Extended Arrangement with the IMF 

(para. 13). But for now the program is 

(para. 13. But 
fornow 
the pogram 

(LOI) 

is 

more a statement of objectives rather 

Box 1.4: Ten-Point Economic Recovery Program

.

.
.

a Create stability in the financial sector;
* 
Increase revenue levels from non-oil exports;
Increase agricultural productivity and the welfare of
farmers;
. Accelerate banking and private sector restructuring;
Place priority on equity-based rather than loan-based
recovery;
Carry out a value-creation approach to privatization of
state-owned assets;
* Meet economic decentralization target through an orderly
and phased transition;
* Optimize utilization of natural resources;
Expand the development of micro-, small- and medium-
scale enterprises;
Increase employment generation, particularly in the rural
areas.

.
.

The Bank currently works very closely with the IvtIF and the ADB in preparing the Letter of Intent (LOI) for the
Government's Extended Arrangement with the IMF. Consistent with our respective institutional mandates, the
IMF takes the lead on macroeconomic policy, the ADB on privatization and SMEs, and the World Bank on
most other institutional, structural and social dimensions of development. The IMF, World Bank and ADB
share joint responsibilities for fnancial sector issues.

9

than a plan, and much effort is required to underpin the objectives with a strategy and-more
importantly-to take those actions that lend credibility to the program. In the short run, two
issues are crucial to accelerating the recovery: intensifying bank and corporate restructuring, and
maintaining fiscal sustainability. In the medium term, Government faces two critical issues. First,
it must shift the focus of poverty reduction efforts from crisis response social safety nets to a
broad-based strategy for attacking poverty and vulnerability in Indonesia. Second, to consolidate
democracy, and to set the conditions for sustainable growth, it must change the way Indonesia is
governed.

16. The Government has also initiated steps to develop a comprehensive poverty
reduction strategy. Based on the
Propenas plan, 
the Government 
tabled a national statement on poverty 
reduction at the Consultative Group 

Box 1.5: Main Elements of Indonesia's National
Statement on Poverty Reduction Strategy for the CGI
(1) Promoting opportunities for the poor:

for Indonesia (CGI) meeting held in 
Tokyo in October 2000.6 The 

* Achieving rapid, sustainable growth
* Strengthening local governance

statement's poverty reduction strategy * Providing effective core public services (health, education)

is based on three pillars: promoting * Building community infrastructure

economic opportunities, empowering
the 
poor, 
and 
enhancing 
the 
effectiveness of the social safety net 

(see Box 1.5). The statement also lays 

out 

the approach for high-level

coordination of the poverty strategy: 
the Vice-President will have 
responsibility, supported by a task 

(2) Empowering the poor:
* Strengthening community organization

a Promoting sustainable rural development

P Revitalizing small- and medium-size enterprises (SMEs)

(3) Enhancing social security for the poorest:

* 
Improving core social safety nets
* Accelerating development in remote areas

force headed by one or both
Coordinating Ministers comprising members from Government, Parliament, civil society and
donors. A separate stakeholder forum will be set up to monitor poverty reduction efforts.

17. But it needs to follow-up with implementation suited to local government control of
service delivery. The Government will need to follow-through quickly on its ambitious plans to
coordinate poverty programs and monitoring, and expand its CGI statement into a poverty
strategy with broad-based buy-in from regional governments and civil society. Social sector
spending shortfalls were pronounced during the crisis, while inefficient fuel subsidies increased
their share dramatically and remain greater than the entire development budget in the draft 2001
budget. To make matters worse, recent funding for basic infrastructure and maintenance has been
woefully inadequate-undermining Government's poverty efforts. Going forward toward
decentralized public service delivery-when over 350 local governments will take charge of
planning, budgeting and implementation-the central government will need to redefine its role to
keep a national focus on poverty reduction, including a fiscal transfer framework that allows for
rewards to sub-national reformers-those 
that are actively accountable and pro-poor-and
targeted support to communities so that those with weaker governments are not left behind. The

6 Poverty Reduction Strategy In Indonesia, prepared by the Government of Indonesia for the Consultative Group

for Indonesia, Tokyo, October 2000.

10

central government will also need to revitalize monitoring, agree with regions on minimum
service standards and poverty reduction goals, and support ways for local governments to learn
from each other so that growth and development are broad-based. Once Government
organizational arrangements for developing a broad-based poverty strategy (para. 16) are in
place, the Bank will review with Government the preparation of a poverty reduction strategy
paper (PRSP) to be completed in FY02.

18. 
Similarly on governance and anticorruption, the initial steps have been tentative
and insufficient. While the State Policy Guidelines call for a comprehensive reform program
embracing the judiciary, civil service, corporate governance and reform at all levels of
government, commitment to reform is at best uneven, and at worst weak, and hence the reform
process in this area suffers from lack of coherent management, coordination and leadership. Yet
public demands for reform are strong and its impatience is growing. The Government's
credibility is increasingly at risk as the number of initiatives announced in response to such
pressures outpaces its capacity to deliver. Government has, for instance, moved on a wide front
of anticorruption measures, many of which were initiated under President Habibie, including an
anticorruption law, establishment of a joint investigation team focusing initially on corruption in
the judiciary, a national ombudsman commission, as well as preparations for an independent
anticorruption agency. But these initiatives have been largely ad hoc and often overlap, some
have faltered for lack of budget, and for most others the progress is slow. On the legal reform
side, the initial efforts by the Law Reform Commission has found little resonance in
Government. Considerable mistrust persists due to the failure to indict-until 
recently-any
judge suspected of bribe-taking. Corruption in the Attorney General's office and the police is
compounded by lack of capacity to carry out successful prosecution. On the civil service side,
there is as yet little effort to address the longer-term issue of civil service reforms.

ECONOMIC OUTLOOK AND RISKS

19. 
Indonesia's external environment is likely to become less favorable over the CAS
period than it was in the year 2000. World GDP growth is expected to gradually slow down
from over 4 percent in 2000 to somewhat above 3 percent in 2003. Growth in the USA,
Indonesia's largest trading partner, is to slow down more rapidly, but that of Japan-the second
largest trading partner-will retain a modest 2 percent pace. Growth in world trade is likely to
come down as well-from over 11 percent in 2000 to some 8 percent for the rest of the CAS
period. This will put pressure on Indonesia's export-led recovery, and on the current account.
The expected decline in oil prices-from $28/barrel (bbl) in 2000 to under $20/bbl in 2003-will
further reduce Indonesia's current account surplus over time. While international interest rates
are not expected to rise, Indonesia's risks premium-at present more than 700 basis points over
US Treasuries-reflects continued negative sentiments of international investors towards the
country.

20. 
Several macroeconomic risks could affect Indonesia's prospects. The high domestic
and foreign debt, a weak banking and corporate sector, and a growth rate that is much lower than
before the crisis make Indonesia particularly vulnerable to such risks. The key risks are a more
rapid decline in oil prices, a further depreciation of the currency, and an increase in domestic
interest rates. The Government's ambitious decentralization plan will exert fiscal risks as well.

11

* A more rapid decline in oil prices than that assumed in the economic base-case scenario (see
below) would put pressure on the current account of the balance of payments. But because oil
revenues will in future be shared with the regions and oil subsidies are still paid by the
central government, the initial impact on the budget is fairly modest. For every dollar decline
in oil price, the central budget deficit increases by about $50 million, or less than 0.05
percent of GDP.

* A further depreciation of the Rupiah would hurt the budget more: although oil revenues will
rise in Rupiah terms, the increase is shared with the regions, and the central government
would face higher spending on foreign interest payments and imported goods. On a net basis,
an exchange rate depreciation of 1,000 Rupiah/US dollar would add some 0.15-0.2 percent of
GDP to the budget deficit. Equally, banks and corporations will both remain vulnerable to
external shocks in exchange rates and interest rates, in view of the slow progress in financial
and corporate restructuring. A weakening of their position may add to the bank
recapitalization costs, and reduce revenues from IBRA recoveries.

* But the largest macroeconomic risk stems from the Government's high domestic debt, which
is largely in the form of floating rate bonds. Higher domestic real interest rates-triggered
by, for instance, political turmoil could cause fiscal havoc: a one percentage point increase in
real interest rates would cost the Government some 0.3 percent of GDP, or $500 million
equivalent.

- And, despite safeguards, there are considerable risks to fiscal discipline associated with the
decentralization program. For next year, the Government has included a contingency reserve
of some 0.6 percent of GDP in the budget, and it aims to disallow regional borrowing for
now (except from the central government). However, failure to decentralize the civil service,
strong regional demands for extra resources, and a weakening of the no-borrowing rule could
trigger fiscal pressures and macro-instability.

21. 
The fragile political environment and its associated risks to the ongoing reform
effort are reflected in the current economic outlook for the "muddle-through" base-case
scenario. Prospects for a sustainable recovery in Indonesia critically depend on progress in bank
and corporate restructuring, smooth fiscal decentralization within a framework of overall fiscal
consolidation, continued monetary stability and improved governance. But these are complex
and far-reaching reforms which require effective government implementation and a sound legal
environment-and so expectations of progress must be modest. The "muddle-through" base-case
scenario-which 
represents our assessment of the most likely outcome-assumes 
that
macroeconomic stability is maintained, but that structural reforms are implemented slowly, with
frequent slippages and some policy reversals. Investor confidence and private investment
(domestic and foreign) revive barely enough to keep GDP growth at about 4 percent a year
during the period of the country assistance strategy (CAS, FY01-03). In the absence of decisive
policy action, the fiscal position remains marginally sustainable, and the government debt-GDP
ratio is expected to decline only modestly to about 88 percent by 2003.7 External debt to GDP

7 Further debt restructuring is not assumed beyond what has already been obtained recently from the Paris Club
and London Club.

12

will also marginally decline, because lackluster investment activity would limit pressure on the
current account of the balance of payments. Table 1.2 shows key economic indicators for the
base case and high case scenarios.

Table 1.2: Indonesia: Key Economic Indicators-Base and High Case Projections
Ruse case D-;ject4ss 

H!gh c as 0i 

.1

T g2 0 0 

2001 2002 2w00

-___ 

L_______ P O 

GDP Growth (%) 

Inflation (% change in GDP deflator) 

Current Account Balance ($ billion) 

Govermnent debt (% of GDP) 
Total Extemal Debt (% of GDP) 

4 

6.8 

5.3 

100 

102 

4 

8 

4.4 

99 
99 

4 

8 

4 

8 

3.4 

94 
94 

2.7 

88 
89 

4 

5 

3.0 

95 
92 

5 

5 

2.8 

86 
82 

6

5

-0.2

76
73

'Preliminary (see Table 1.1).

Source: Staff estimates.

22. A high-case ("performance") scenario would result from greater political stability,
and more aggressive implementation of structural reforms. This involves an acceleration of
bank and corporate restructuring, careful management of the ongoing fiscal decentralization
program, and appropriate monetary and exchange rate policies (as agreed in Government's
Extended Arrangement); as well as key actions on legal and judicial reforms, civil service
reforms and toward improving financial management and procurement practices. These reforms
will help improve investor confidence and raise investment to pre-crisis levels which, in turn,
could drive higher GDP growth from 2002 onward. Higher investment demand would reduce the
surplus on the current account more rapidly than in the base case. Higher growth, lower interest
rates in light of better inflation performance, more asset recovery, and an appreciating exchange
rate will accelerate the decline of Government debt to GDP to some 76 percent of GDP by 2003,
while external debt to GDP also declines more rapidly to 73 percent of GDP by the same year.

23. Unfortunately, there is also a not insignificant possibility of a "crisis" scenario. A
key risk is a breakdown of the Government's Extended Arrangement with the IMF as a result of
major policy slippage, including inadequate progress on bank and corporate restructuring. This
could lead to a rapid erosion of market confidence and deterioration in economic conditions. A
similar outcome could result from political instability or a widespread breakdown in law and
order. In both cases, the turmoil would be reflected in a further deterioration in financial
markets-especially interest rates and the exchange rate-which would cause a deterioration in
the fiscal and balance of payment position. Yet another crisis scenario could result from external
shocks such as a more rapid decline in oil prices, a more rapid slow-down of the global economy
and global trade growth, or a rise in world interest rates, which could trigger renewed
macroeconomic imbalances. Although the consequences are likely to be a far cry from the 1997-
99 crisis, the impact of a macroeconomic shock could severely hit a more vulnerable Indonesia,
facing a much higher debt burden

24. 
The external financing position is likely to remain fragile in any scenario. The
current account surplus is likely to decline as demand recovers and imports grow while oil prices
decline and non-oil export growth slows. New private equity inflows through direct or portfolio
investment are likely to remain modest as long as governance reforms, corporate restructuring
and privatization remain hesitant. Indonesian companies' access to new external private

13

borrowing is likewise expected to be limited as long as their debts are not resolved and their
balance sheets remain weak. Despite debt rescheduling by the Paris Club, debt-service on the
Government's liabilities will continue to impose a heavy burden on government revenues-and
more so after March 2002 when the current Paris Club agreement ends. Further debt
rescheduling by official bilateral and private creditors is unlikely, and the Government is
correctly reluctant to incur new debt from commercial sources. The Government's debt burden
places a premium on concessional sources of external finance. It has, therefore, requested the
Bank to blend its International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) lending with
additional International Development Association (IDA) resources. In 
the high case,
disbursements from the additional IDA conimitments, as proposed in the CAS (see para. 78),
would begin to benefit the budget mainly in the year 2002 and beyond. This higher external
financing would also support the emerging current account deficit caused by the higher
investment level in the performance scenario. Additional IDA funds would be contingent on
Government's strong performance on governance and poverty, which in turn will help boost
investor confidence and prospects for an early recovery and enable Indonesia's rapid return to
the international capital markets.

25. Moving forward, the challenges are enormous. In any future scenario for the short to
medium term, there is likely to be considerable political turmoil, stop-go policies on reforms, and
capacity constraints impeding the Government's ability to carry through on its commitments.
The probability is high that Indonesia will "muddle through". The challenge for the Government,
and for Indonesia's development partners, will be managing this uncertainty and helping reduce
the associated risks. But there is also a real possibility-given 
Indonesia's past impressive
development record-that 
from this process of muddling through will emerge enough
momentum around a subset of reforms that it will be possible to lay the foundations for a more
sustained development effort. Indeed the challenge for Indonesia's development partners will be
to encourage and to help bring about this latter outcome.

14

2. 

BANK GROUP RESPONSE AND PRIORITIES

PROGRESS SINCE LAST CAS

26. 
In accordance with the CAS Progress Report the Bank focused on social safety nets,
economic recovery, and governance reform. The Bank continued its strong social impact
monitoring, and prepared a comprehensive poverty report which now forns the basis for the
poverty focus of the CAS. The Social Safety Net Adjustment Loan (SSNAL) helped protect and
rationalize budgets for critical crisis response programs, improved designs and targeting, and
helped open the way for civil society involvement in program monitoring. Investment lending
focused on projects in health and education. In support of economic stabilization and recovery,
the Bank continued its intensive participation in the Government's Extended Arrangement with
the IMF (para. 13), with responsibility for the major structural and social reform components-
besides social safety nets, the Bank focused on bank and corporate restructuring, along with
sectoral reforms in agriculture and energy. A second policy reform support loan was approved in
May 1999. The Bank stepped up its work on governance and anti-corruption in close
collaboration with partners. It helped establish the Partnership for Governance Reform in
Indonesia, which brings together Governnent, civil society, private sector, and donors to
facilitate a national dialogue on governance. The Bank is leading similar donor groups in other
areas (para. 62). It chaired three CGI meetings since the last Progress Report in which
Government and donors discussed progress on the economic programn and governance agenda.
Representatives of civil society now attend as observers.

27. 
Lending fell short of the CAS Progress Report base case scenario. During FY98-00,
the Bank committed a total of $3.6 billion, or $1.3 billion below the base case scenario in the
Progress Report (see Table 2.1). The shortfall in 
Table 2.1: Bank Lending: Changes
adjustment lending was caused by delays in key policy 
since CAS Progress Report, FY98-00
reforms, as well as 
the Governmnent's reduced 
($ million)
borrowing needs 
for budget 
support. Lower
investment lending reflected both new government Adifstent 
priorities (leading to reforrnulation of the lending 
program) and reluctance of the new Government to 
borrow, particularly on IBRD terms, in view of the Total 
increase in public debt and Parliament's direction to
reduce dependence on foreign borrowing. As a result of these trends, IBRD debt outstanding has
been held to about $11.8 billion (end-FYOO).

2,40
1,177
(255)

Investment 

3A,20 

1,695 

o/w IDA 

(310) 

4,895 

3,577

28. 
The Bank's project portfolio has started to recover from the crisis impact, and
fiduciary controls have been strengthened although risks of "leakage" remain high.
Economic recovery and the Bank's portfolio restructuring efforts have substantially reduced
portfolio risk and improved performance in line with our earlier plans (see Table 2.2). As part of
restructuring, the Bank canceled over $1.6 billion of undisbursed funds. Indonesia was removed
from the Bank's "priority country list" for portfolio improvement plans. The Bank has begun to

15

Table 2.2: Bank Portfolio: 
Changes since CAS Progress Report, FY98-00 
Indicators 
Fyi 
FY90 
2% _ 
CAS Plan Actal* 
54% 28% 

FYO 

54. 

% Projects at risk (no.) 
% Actual problem projects (no.) 

Realism index 

Proactivity index 

Disbursement ratio 
14% 13% 
20% 
* includes Global Environment Facility (GEF) operations. 

25% 26% 

47% 95% 

71% 

78% 

20% 
15% 

75% 

85% 

21%
18% 

83% 

83% 

21% 

strengthen fiduciary controls and
staffing to address allegations of
misuse of project funds, through
tightening 
of 
procurement

reviews, follow-up on allegations

of 

irregularities, 

enhanced

monitoring of accounting and

auditing compliance, additional
procurement 
and 
financial

management staff in the Bank's
Jakarta office, protection of supervision budgets, and beneficiary involvement in monitoring of
implementation and use of funds in a number of new projects (see Box 2.1 on recent anti-
corruption efforts in Bank-financed projects). The Bank's portfolio was subjected to a number of
audits, which acknowledged the stronger management controls while recognizing the challenge
of addressing corrupt practices in projects in Indonesia. This challenge is expected to grow as the
Bank's portfolio shifts increasingly to "soft" sectors involving smaller procurement contracts and
implementation takes place in a newly decentralized administrative and political environment.

Box 2.1: Recent Anti-corruption Efforts in Bank-Financed Projects

While it is not possible to insulate Bank-frnanced projects from the country environment in which they are
implemented, a number of steps have been taken to strengthen fiduciary controls including:
* Tightening of reviews of implementing agencies' procurement financed by the Bank and paying more
attention to procurement issues at early stages of project preparation.
* Conducting assessments of the capacity of executing agencies to carry out procurement and financial
management, and intensifying ex-post reviews of those contracts that are not subject to prior review by
Bank staff under the Bank's procurement guidelines. This also led to a declaration of misprocurement
totaling $4.1 million in FYOO.
* Maintaining a database of complaints on procurement.
* Enhancing monitoring of compliance with accounting and auditing requirements, and following up on
significant audit findings with executing agencies.
* Protecting resources allocated to project supervision despite pressures on the overall administrative budget.
* Promoting beneficiary involvement in the design and implementation of Bank projects, particularly by
building relations with civil society and local communities to help prevent misuse of development funds.
Additionally, the Bank prepared a portfolio brief (in English and Bahasa Indonesia) to inform civil society
about the Bank-financed projects.
In collaboration with Government and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Bank carried out a country
procurement assessment (CPAR, FYOO) and country financial accountability assessment (CFAA, FY01)
which made recommendations for reform. These were followed by a mission of senior Bank staff to review
the fiduciary environment, which made recommendations to strengthen the public procurement and
financial management systems and to further strengthen the fiduciary oversight of Bank-financed projects
(see para. 68).

* 

16

LESSONS FROM THE CRISIS

29. 
The lessons from the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) review of the
Bank's role leading up to the crisis were absorbed in the Bank's program.8 The reorientation
of the Bank's program toward poverty alleviation and governance reform addresses the major
criticism that the Bank paid insufficient attention to these aspects. This includes efforts to absorb
the political, institutional and social dimensions more fully in our country assessments and areas
for future assistance. The Bank's relationship with Government has become more candid as we
speak out publicly on areas of concern. It has opened up vis-a-vis civil society and strives for
enhanced disclosure of its activities. The Bank also speaks out more in the media. The recent
shift toward a more open and democratic Indonesia provides a more favorable environment for
popular participation in government programns, and engagement with civil society. But it does not
ensure that past concerns (e.g., on corruption) will be addressed. And the Bank is expected to
remain the target of civil society criticism for its association with the past regime (see paras. 31-
33 below).

30. At the program level, the Bank is including important lessons from the crisis as it
repositions its future operations. The Bank's poverty work has generated important findings on
the multidimensional nature of poverty in Indonesia, and developed a deeper understanding of
the non-material aspects of poverty. It has learned from the work on the effectiveness of local
institutions and communities, as well as from input from civil society during consultations. The
lessons from the two recent village infrastructure projects and the ongoing Kecamatan
development project underlined the strengths of local-level institutions and the importance of
"bottom up" planning to better match needs and aspirations with resources. These in turn are the
basis for our focus in the CAS on demand-responsive approaches in delivery of public services,
which will be absorbed in our future lending for social sectors and basic infrastructure. At the
same time, the Bank recognizes the limitations of its recent crisis adjustment lending in
Indonesia. The SSNAL, while pioneering program safeguards for more transparency and
accountability which improved the effectiveness of crisis programs for the poor, also brought out
the difficulty of seeking fundamental institutional reforrns in the operations of government
programs through an adjustment lending instrument. The crisis social safety net programs also
revealed the difficulty of reaching the poor with govermnent programs. In fact, the poor mostly
coped by relying on their ingenuity, sacrifices and hard work. Success of the Water Sector
Adjustment Loan (WATSAL) underlined the importance of "ownership" of reform by the
agencies involved. Through the crisis, the International Finance Corporation's (IFC's) portfolio
benefited from its policy of not supporting projects promoted by sponsors with close affiliation
to political leaders. In IFC's future operations, it will be particularly careful in selecting credible
sponsors, who are transparent, professional and capable.

FEEDBACK FROM CONSULTATIONS

31. 
The CAS has been informed by a series of public consultations with civil society
organizations (CSOs). A total of about 400 organizations took part, over a three-month period,
through interviews, seminars, and focus group discussions held in four different locations in

8 OED Country Assistance Note, February 1999.

17

Indonesia. The recommendations were compiled and discussed at a national roundtable held in
Jakarta in August 2000. They focused on the following themes: economic recovery and poverty
alleviation, decentralization of development and regional authority, education, labor issues and
employment, improving governance and combating corruption, debt, and community and non-
governmental organization (NGO) participation in Bank projects. Consultations also took place
with a cross-section of private sector interests and the results of these consultations are outlined
in the Bank Group Private Sector Strategy for Indonesia, prepared along with the CAS (para. 43).
A summary of civil society feedback is shown below (see Box 2.2).

32. 
The consultations took place in a very constructive atmosphere, although the Bank
was reminded of concerns about its association with the past regime, particularly where it
concerns debt and corruption (see Box 2.2). While it was recognized that a number of
recommendations from the consultations were directed more toward Government than the Bank,
particularly where these involve changes in policy, many recommendations are reflected in the
Bank's strategy. The types of projects in the CAS lending program are much closer to civil
society preferences with their decentralized, community-based approaches. The Bank plans to
involve civil society representatives more upstream in the design of future projects, and to make
optimal use of disclosure to disseminate information on its activities and projects. It also
strengthened anti-corruption controls in its projects, and intends to involve beneficiaries and civil
society groups more closely in monitoring. As a follow-up to the national consultation meeting,
the Bank plans to support joint Bank-CSO working groups on selected topics (e.g., civil society
involvement in Bank projects, micro-finance), provided there is enough interest on the part of
CSOs. A full list of recommendations from the consultations, together with the Bank's response,
is covered in a separate report on the CAS civil society consultations.9

Box 2.2: Summary Feedback from Civil Society Consultations

* The recommendations from civil society representatives called for the Bank to focus on its core
development mission of poverty alleviation. This would entail support to the productive sectors, assistance
to micro and small business, and support for a people-centered approach to development. Projects that
promote access by the poor should be promoted. Privatization should be slowed down to ensure faimess
and transparency.
* Civil society organizations suggested that the Bank provide assistance in the decentralization process,
working with both regional and central governments.

* Participants saw value in the Bank working on curriculum and teacher training improvements in the
national education system, and in developing links with labor groups.
* The Bank was asked to emphasize grassroots activities, involving communities in all aspects of the project
cycle and to facilitate the active participation of civil society organizations that are better placed to assist in
bottom-up planning of community initiatives. Further dissemination of Bank information was called for.
* The debt issue remains controversial with many CSOs calling for debt reduction, a halt to new lending, or
lending at highly concessional terms only. They asked that loans for technical assistance should be
minimized, and adjustment loans phased out.
* Feedback indicated that the Bank had paid insufficient attention to the use of its funds, and should share
responsibility -for corruption in Indonesia. The Bank was asked to promote anti-corruption reform,
investigate suspected cases of corruption, support establishment of CSO watchdog groups, and intensify
attention to environmental and social safeguards.

9 The report is made available on the Bank's Indonesia website (www.worldbank.or.id).

18

33. 
There remain areas where the Bank differs from the recommendations of the CSOs.
Debt is probably the most important one. The Bank has explained that Indonesia is not eligible
for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) program, and that it cannot
accept the arguments put forward that part of Bank debt should be canceled as it would have
been subject to corruption and should be considered "criminal" or "odious." At the same time,
the Bank has worked in different ways to address Indonesia's debt problem. It has (a) provided
assistance on Indonesia's debt management options, (b) responded positively to Government's
requests to cancel undisbursed loan balances (over $1.6 billion) and reallocate funds to higher-
priority activities (about $1 billion), and (c) sought greater access to highly concessional IDA
resources. The Bank has also strengthened its fiduciary controls to address any misuse of funds
in Bank-financed projects. There are other areas where the Bank may differ from the civil society
feedback. The Bank would be more positive than CSOs on proceeding more rapidly with
privatization in the interest of efficiency improvement, although it strongly agrees with the need
for transparency and fairness.

BANK GROUP'S COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE

34. 
The Bank Group remains a high profile player in Indonesia. The Bank Group plays
an important coordinating role among donors in its role as chair of the Consultative Group for
Indonesia (CGI). And key bilateral donors look to it to take the lead on the development policy

agenda. The Bank also co-leads donor efforts in governance reform (with special focus on legal,
anti-corruption and civil service reforms), competition policy, water resource management, and
forestry. Even where it is not in the lead, Government and donors rely on it for strong analytical
and advisory support (decentralization, SMEs, corporate governance, privatization). The Bank
plays a key role in Government's Extended Arrangement with the IMF, working closely with the
IMF and ADB. And its relationship with key policymakers continues to be good-although
where it differs on policy it tends to do so more openly than in the past. The Bank's comparative
advantage is based on a strong presence in Jakarta which allows a fast response, a good
analytical base on the economy, sectors, and key development issues (poverty, governance,
public expenditure management), a good understanding of the implementation environment
through the Bank's large and varied project portfolio, a capacity to channel considerable
financial resources through lending and trust funds, and its ability to draw on global knowledge
through the Bank's networks.

35. 
Indonesia is also supported, with technical expertise and financial resources, by a
wide range of development partners. These includes more than 20 bilateral and over 10
multilateral governmental organizations and several UN agencies, with programs of various size
and focus. Indonesia also counts many non-governmental organizations, such as the Ford
Foundation and World Wildlife Fund, and private-sector partners among its supporters. In the
context of the CGI meeting in October 2000, donors pledged up to $4.8 billion of official aid for
2001 -contingent on budget needs-and an additional $530 million in technical assistance
grants and financial support for non-governmental organizations. This level of support is in
proportion to Indonesia's scale, diversity and development challenges. There is room for donors
to specialize in their areas of expertise, for example the UN takes the lead on humanitarian relief,
while the World Bank Group and the ADB focus on longer-term development policy support and
investments. At the same time, there are may common interests and a need for close
collaboration as all partners work to best meet Indonesia's requirements.

19

36. This argues for a selective, flexible approach by the World Bank Group, building on
past successes, learning from others and collaborating whenever possible. The Bank will
focus on areas where it can have the greatest impact on poverty and where there is strong local
ownership and capacity to deliver. Its program will aim for resilience to shifting local conditions.
Most of the Bank's new poverty-oriented, community-based programs have these features. Civil
society has also asked the Bank to focus on these areas. At the same time, the Bank will need to
look opportunistically for areas where possible breakthroughs in policy are possible and provide
the necessary support to facilitate change. These opportunities are likely to shift during the CAS
period, underscoring the need for flexibility. This also calls for greater reliance on analytical and
advisory services, and for proactive management of the portfolio. Where the Bank is less
effective in responding to development challenges, it relies on other donors to take the lead in
partnership fashion (see para. 62).

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND PRIORITIES FOR THE BANK GROUP

37. 
Support for Indonesia's political and economic transition in a highly uncertain
environment. The CAS Progress report provided a road map for responding to the crisis. This
CAS attempts to spell out a Bank Group strategy during the forthcoming period of political and
economic transition, and to help it manage the considerable risks associated with the large
uncertainties in Indonesia today. This implies a two-pronged approach for the Bank Group. First,
the Bank Group will need to provide continued support for efforts to sustain the stabilization and
structural reform objectives under the economic recovery program and help the Government
manage the considerable risks associated with the impending decentralization program. Second,
the Bank Group will need to help Indonesia lay the foundations for a sound medium-term
development strategy focused on reducing poverty and vulnerability for the bottom half of
Indonesia's population.

38. 
The overarching goal of the Bank Group's CAS will be to reduce poverty and
vulnerability in a more open and decentralized environment. This will require attention to
government policies that promote broad-based economic growth as a key requirement for
poverty reduction. At the same time, the quality of growth matters to make it sustainable and
genuinely pro-poor. But it is not just what government does, not just how much the government
spends, but how well its services are provided. Strong improvements in governance will be
critical to winning back confidence from private investors and giving voice to the poor. With the
far reaching decentralization of government functions just around the corner, actions will be
required to build strong governance both at the national and local levels to ensure effective
public service delivery to the poor. Accordingly, the Bank Group's strategy will focus on
working closely with its donor partners on the following three broad priority areas which are
closely related to Government's priorities in its economic recovery program and its medium-term
development plan:

* Sustaining economic recovery and promoting broad-based growth. In the short run, this
requires macroeconomic stability and accelerated bank and corporate restructuring. In the
medium term, it will involve policies and public expenditures aimed at poverty reduction,
efficient private sector growth, and human capital and infrastructure development to improve
competitiveness;

20

* Building national institutions for accountable government, which includes legal and
judicial reforms, civil service reforms, better public financial management and procurement,
effective decentralization; and close attention to sustainable management of the rapidly
depleting natural resource base of the country; and

* Delivering better public services for the poor, which involves assistance to help define
government roles and responsibilities as functions are decentralized, support for improved
public service delivery by sub-national governments which have demonstrated pro-poor, pro-
growth reform, as well as promoting community development and selective assistance to
post-conflict areas.

Sustaining Economic Recovery and Promoting Broad-based Growth

39. Accelerating bank and corporate restructuring. In the short run, the core agenda in the
financial sector focuses on restoring profitability to the banks, improving supervision, and
moving firmly forward with the restructuring and divestiture of the state banks. In the medium
term, Government must develop a strategy to reduce the state's involvement in the financial
sector-and 
then 
implement it. Moving ahead on corporate restructuring 
involves
implementation of the enhanced corporate restructuring framework,'0 adopting further means to
force cooperation of recalcitrant debtors, remove tax and regulatory impediments to corporate
restructuring, and accelerate IBRA's asset disposal.

40. 
Bank assistance in this area will remain a high priority, and it will continue to work
closely with the IMF and ADB as part of Government's Extended Arrangement (para. 13). In
bank restructuring, the Bank will retain its leadership role for work on state banks (excluding
Bank Mandiri) and IBRA, while the Fund will work with Bank Indonesia (the central bank),
Bank Mandiri, and private banks' restructuring. The Bank will lead a joint effort with the other
international financial institutions to help Government develop a medium-term financial sector
strategy. In corporate restructuring, the Bank's focus will continue to be on creating and
supporting the enabling framework for effective resolution including the support for the
corporate restructuring activities of IBRA's two asset management units, the Jakarta Initiative
Task Force (JITF), and for improving the commercial court and bankruptcy process. The
immediate priority is to establish a clear, transparent and consistent set of principles to govern all
large debt restructurings by IBRA. IFC's priority is to focus on strengthening existing financial
institutions through investments, attracting strategic investors where possible. In addition to
individual restructuring transactions with its existing clients, IFC will explore opportunities to
leverage its limited resources at wholesale level through specialized investment funds for urgent
equity funding needs of corporates.

41. Maintaining macroeconomic stability and fiscal sustainability. A key challenge will
be to maintain fiscal sustainability as Government manages the high debt burden and complex
decentralization program, while at the same time protecting essential development spending.

10 The enhanced framework 
involves improved coordination, allowing IBRA to apply discounts, strengthening
JITF's 
leverage 
for referral of uncooperative debtors 
to the Attorney General, 
time-bound mediation
procedures, and removal of regulatory irnpediments.

21

Important steps involve raising fiscal revenues, phasing out anti-poor fuel subsidies, improving
fiscal management, and accelerating privatization and asset recovery. In support of the
Government's Extended Arrangement with the IMF, the IMF leads the effort on macroeconomic
policies, the Bank focuses on structural and social policies, the ADB leads on privatization and
SMEs, while the IMF, the World Bank and ADB have joint responsibility for financial sector
issues (para. 13).

42. 
Promoting pro-poor policies and public expenditures. For the most part, families and
individuals will escape poverty and reduce their vulnerability through their own efforts. To help
foster an environment in which individuals can make progress, the Bank will focus on the
following areas:

* Supporting broad-based poverty reducing economic growth by keeping rice prices
affordable and internal trade open, and supporting rural development through
provision of basic infrastructure, credit, research and extension services. Affordable rice
prices matter to the poor because they are net rice consumers. Import controls or higher
tariffs on rice would hurt the poor by raising rice prices. The Bank will continue to provide
policy advice in this critical area. Since over 70 percent of incomes in rice-growing regions is
from non-rice sources, the emphasis of the Bank's rural development support-through
analytical work and project support-lies 
in greater attention to the foundations of rural
economic activity.

* Helping to empower the poor through access to secure possession of land and natural
resources and increasing the availability of financial services to them. The Bank is
working to encourage stakeholder dialogue on forestry and land policy. It is also undertaking
analytical work and supporting preparation of a second land administration project to help
reverse past practices of land allocation and distribution which disadvantaged the poor,
including their community held lands. The Bank's support for micro-finance will focus on
increasing access by the poor and institutional strengthening, rather than credit subsidies. A
micro finance project is foreseen for FY03. Sound labor market policies are equally
important for raising the economic prospects of the poor, as they are helped by a
development strategy that favors a rapidly expanding demand for labor and fosters equitable

Box 2.3: Labor Policies in Transition

The broader political changes have opened up labor policies. In 1998, the Government ratified the ILO
convention on freedom of association and issued a regulation opening up trade union registration. As a result,
new labor unions have sprung up, challenging the only union allowed in the Suharto era. But there are questions
about the capacity of business and labor to handle the changes and concerns that implicit alliances between
Government, employers and even military and police may persist. Moreover, breakdown of law and order in
parts of Indonesia have adversely affected labor relations. Law and order and fair economic relations will require
cooperation among Government, employers and employees, and reform of the legal and judicial system, the
police and the military. Issues for medium-term consideration involve: (i) further development of the labor
relations framework covering the formation of trade unions, collective bargaining, and settlement of industrial
disputes; and (ii) regulations goveming employment standards, covering issues such as working hours, wage
determiination, and job security. Longer-term reform will also involve a sustainable system of social protection,
including reform of the inefficient government-run Jamsostek social insurance scheme.

22

and just labor conditions (see Box 2.3). Among donors, the ILO has the lead in this area.
Helping to keep a poverty focus in public expenditures, including looking hard at what
subsidies can be eliminated, and supporting poverty reduction by local governments.
The Bank will continue to support the Government's policy of reducing fuel subsidies which
at Rp 36 trillion in 2001 cost more than the entire development budget, and redirecting funds
to fund pro-poor programs. How best to encourage poverty agendas at the local level-
through budget transfer-is a question the Indonesians are debating and its resolution will
equally apply to large donors whose funds pass through the central government. This would
involve piloting of different approaches to find what works best. It will also involve tracking
of social and poverty indicators. The Bank will focus on the fiscal transfer framework, as
well as the minimum standards of service delivery. These will be addressed through policy
advice and technical assistance, and in the context of proposed projects in health, education
and basic infrastructure.

43. 
Enabling competitive private sector development. The Bank Group's private sector
development strategy is integrated across the Group's activities. It involves a combination of
policy reform and institutional strengthening to address: (a) an inadequate business environment
resulting from poor public governance and corruption, a weak legal and judicial system with
poor enforcement, inadequate corporate governance, and continued red tape and burdensome
regulations, particularly on SME activities; and (b) a concentrated corporate ownership structure
and continued dominance of the state in key sectors combined with an underdeveloped SME
sector which in other countries has been the driving force for growth and employment
generation. The Bank Group's private sector development strategy, including an elaboration of
the respective roles of the Bank, IFC and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
(MIGA), is elaborated in a separate report prepared in connection with the CAS,11 of which a
summary is shown in Annex 1. The private sector agenda focuses on:

* helping Indonesia accelerate and complete the recovery from the crisis through banking and
corporate restructuring (para. 39);

* addressing structural weaknesses in the economy through technical assistance, policy advice
and partnerships, as well as ongoing Bank Group projects, to (a) improve public governance
and reducing corruption, (b) improve corporate governance; (c) reform legal and judicial
systems, (d) develop a modern competition policy framework, (e) promote foreign direct
investment; and (f) reduce the role of the state through privatization of state-owned
enterprises; and

* promoting long-term sustainable growth through (a) development of the SME sector,
including provision of policy advice on the business environment, piloting innovative
programs, helping establish SME support services, and building financial intermediaries,
through IFC investment and capacity building initiatives; (b) promoting the role of the
private sector in rural and urban development, through ongoing investment projects and
planned adaptable program loans (APLs) in water and urban sectors; (c) promoting private

" 

Indonesia: World Bank Group Private Sector Development Strategy, January 2001 (Report No. 21581-IND).

23

delivery of infrastructure and services in health and education, initially through analytical
work on the potential for private provision of health services; (d) promoting sustainable
private development of Indonesia's forest and mineral resources, and (e) preparing Indonesia
for the knowledge economy by helping create the legal, institutional and regulatory
framework for the new information and communications technologies, in part through
assistance from an ongoing information technology project.

44. Human capital development for competitive growth. Development of human capital at
all levels is critical to both the near and medium term efforts to sustain economic recovery and
growth in Indonesia. Decentralization of the delivery of most government services makes
capacity building at all levels a priority. Training programs, whether for district officials, local
health service administrators or SME managers, have been chronically weak, but the needs will
be far greater with decentralization. In the near term, the challenges of delivering basic education
at the province and district levels and increasing access to quality basic education and health for
Indonesia's children will take first priority in Bank assistance, and will be supported by ongoing
and proposed projects in education and health, and analytical and advisory activities (AAA). In
the medium term, attention must be given to skills development and modernizing safety nets, so
that skill shortages and the continuing vulnerability to risks such as catastrophic income loss or
prohibitive curative health costs will not impede Indonesia's competitive growth. The Bank's
assistance in these medium-term areas will be directed in part at the restructuring of Indonesia's
senior secondary and higher education and training sectors, both public and private-initially
with analytical work and policy dialogue and then, if appropriate, with lending support. Support
would be focused on sub-national and regional networks of education and training delivery
systems, both public and private. In addition, the Bank, in collaboration with the University of
Indonesia, is engaged in establishing a Global Development Learning Network (GDLN), which
will provide opportunities for decisionmakers and others to access a global network of peers to
share ideas and experience in the main development challenges. Furthermore, assistance will
focus on assisting in the design and implementation of situation-relevant health insurance
approaches, through ongoing AAA and project work.

45. Addressing infrastructure bottlenecks. As economic recovery takes hold, more
infrastructure bottlenecks are expected to appear and become a drag on economic growth.
Particularly as public spending on maintenance and preservation (especially in roads, water
supply and sanitation) have declined over the past few years, and the implementation of
infrastructure projects requires long lead times. Decentralization is expected to complicate
management of infrastructure, as responsibilities need to be clarified, service standards and
investments may further deteriorate, and interregional linkages may suffer. The Bank Group
strategy is aimed at: (a) providing assistance for essential investments in maintenance and
rehabilitation through ongoing projects and proposed investment projects in eastern Indonesia
roads and irrigation systems; (b) improving the policy and legal framework of key sectors (e.g.,
water, energy) to facilitate competitive private sector investment, including better cost recovery,
phasing out inefficient subsidies, development of regulatory capacity, and restructuring sector
entities (e.g., state electricity company PLN); and (c) facilitating the implementation of agreed
government reforms through joint action by the donors and contributing to financing of future
infrastructure needs, by mobilizing co-financing from ADB, the Japan Bank for International
Cooperation (JBIC) and United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and
others, and, where appropriate, using the Bank Group's various instruments-including possible

24

guarantees. Focus will increasingly be at the regional level to work with receptive local
governments in improving local capacity and supporting basic investments in preservation and
upgrading of existing facilities and services, and addressing key bottlenecks. IFC will seek
opportunities to encourage private investment in infrastructure in sectors where a suitable
regulatory framework is emerging, by seeking to engage commercial and technical partners who
will transfer international practice to management and operations of utilities and other
infrastructure service companies.

Building National Institutions for Accountable Government

46. 
Strong improvements in governance will be critical to winning back investor
confidence, giving voice to the poor, protecting the environment, and a key requirement for
long term stability. At the national level, action is required on legal and judicial reforms, civil
service reforms, improving public financial management and public procurement, and helping
the central government better manage its planned major decentralization program. Success
depends on strong leadership and ownership from Government for a set of key actions which
would bear results over the medium to long term, while looking for a few "quick wins" to build
political support for the agenda. A key priority is reducing opportunities for corruption, by
strengthening accountability and transparency in the public sector through better procurement,
financial management, and audit. At the regional level, decentralization provides an opportunity
for Government to becoming truly accountable to the people. A high priority will be ensuring the
emergence of sound public economic and financial management at the local level with a
particular focus on fiduciary controls. At both national and regional levels, the Bank will also
approach national environmental policies from the prism of good governance, focusing on
forestry and water management. The Bank's involvement in this area is at two levels.

47. 
First, through the Partnership for Governance Reforms in Indonesia-an
Indonesian-led body that brings together Government, civil society, the private sector and
Indonesia's major development partners-the Bank together with its two co-sponsoring
partners (UNDP and ADB) is supporting the promotion of a national policy dialogue on
selected areas of governance. This dialogue would be underpinned by strategic funding of key
governance initiatives aimed at pushing important reform efforts and helping strengthen the
demand for governance reforms. These initiatives are funded by a Governance Fund financed by
donors. An active Indonesian governing board has identified three cross cutting issues as
priorities for the Partnership: anti-corruption, decentralization, and an information outreach on
good governance. The Bank's role in the Partnership is to take the lead in coordinating donor
support in two areas of governance reform: legal and judicial reforms and civil service reforms.
In addition, the Bank is playing a key role in bringing its global knowledge to bear on the work
on anti-corruption and decentralization, particularly through active support from the World Bank
Institute (WBI) and the Public Sector Board. It helped the Partnership run a successful anti-
corruption workshop and is working towards helping develop a national anti-corruption strategy.

48. 
Second, the Bank is attempting to advance the agenda for governance reforms
through direct support to Government in the following areas:

* 

legal and judicial reforms: The Bank's objective in this perhaps most critical area for
strengthening the underpinnings for Indonesia's nascent democracy and helping win back

25

investor confidence, is to assist Government to develop and implement a time-bound
program of action drawing on the promising work of the Law Reform Commission. For such
a program to succeed it will need to be reinforced with decisive action to reduce corruption in
the judiciary as a signal of the Government's commitment to such reforms. This will be a
major focus of the Bank's dialogue with Government in 2001, drawing heavily on the
resources of a multi-donor team.

* civil service reforms: The Bank has pursued this issue for over a year through analytical and
advisory work, with an initial focus on pay and employment policies and the decentralization
of civil service functions. A new report on this issue will be shortly discussed with
Government to test the waters of reform. Drawing on this report and on further planned
work, the Bank will assist the Government in developing and implementing a civil service
strategy.

* decentralization: The Bank is working with the IMF, the ADB and donors to help
Government contain the risks from the impending decentralization focusing on fiscal
decentralization, including measures to support poorer areas and encourage poverty reduction
efforts by sub-national governments (para. 42), and the implications for the civil service.

* 

the Government's fiduciary controls: The Bank mounted a strong diagnostic effort in this
area, including preparation of a country procurement assessment review (CPAR, FY00) and a
country financial and accountability assessment (CFAA, FY01). A fiduciary mission from
the Bank visited Indonesia in October 2000 to help develop an agenda of action. This was
discussed at the CGI meeting in Tokyo and Government undertook to pursue this agenda
(para. 69). Progress in this area will be critical to a successful transition to a high case in
Indonesia.

49. 
Sustainable natural resource management and environmental protection.
Indonesia's environment and natural resources are deteriorating at a considerable cost to society.
Decentralization will make this worse as inexperienced sub-national agencies are inheriting
management responsibilities. Actions are required to reach sustainable management of the most
precious resources-forests, farmland, fisheries, marine ecosystems, water and urban air. The
Bank's focus will be on the governance dimensions, since the principal constraint to sound
policies in this area are weak institutional capacity and pervasive corruption. The Bank will
concentrate on forestry and water resource management, where it is leading multi-donor efforts.
In forestry, the main issues involve illegal logging, the large imbalance between sustainable log
supply and industry requirements, poor management of production and protection areas, and ill-
conceived forest conversion. Policy dialogue is in support of Government's formulation of a
National Forest Program involving all stakeholders. In water, the Bank aims for more integrated
management on river basin scale and for control of domestic waste water. In addition, we
support selective environmental management capacity building of local governments, and
development of a coral reef policy and strategy.

50. 

The Bank's focus in the governance area has relied heavily on analytical and
advisory activities, but lending support is being contemplated to help strengthen central
government's capacity in the post-decentralization era. Reforms will only succeed if there is
strong government ownership and support. If this materializes, and the Bank's dialogue and

26

involvement in the Governance Partnership are all intended to bring about such an outcome, the
Bank would consider the possibility of a public sector reform loan/credit in a high case scenario.
Such an operation would support a program of public sector reforms and the proposed
decentralization, over a three to five-year period, covering support for reform in many of the
areas outlined above along with improvements in public expenditure management. A key priority
will be to strengthen the central government's capacity to deliver on its residual responsibilities
in a post-decentralization era, particularly in setting standards, establishing development
priorities, monitoring performance and enhancing accountabilities. Thus such an operation would
attempt to provide an umbrella for the provincial level reform operations envisaged in the CAS
(see below). Such an operation could also provide matching grant support for sub-national
governments by establishing criteria that would create incentives for local governments to pursue
good governance strategies.

Delivering Better Public Services to the Poor

51. 

In the words of the Government, "The overriding objective of decentralization is to
bring the government closer to the people. This enhances local government transparency
and accountability as well as community participation."12 Indonesia is just beginning to
decentralize and de-concentrate public service delivery, and there is still much to get right-from
finalizing regulations and achieving broad agreement with the regions on the implementation
timing and strategy, to ensuring civil servants get transferred and paid. As local governments
take up their new responsibilities, Government and donors can best support poverty reduction by
rewarding those that demonstrate pro-poor reform through matching grants or other resource
transfer vehicles. The Bank has started to rebuild its lending pipeline to selectively support
creation of capable, demand-responsive sub-national government institutions, and to eventually
target a limited number of provinces (2-4) and/or districts, including cities, which have
demonstrated reform. Support will focus on services from which the poor benefit most, including
basic education, health and basic infrastructure in rural and urban areas. Where district/provincial
governments are reluctant to undertake reform, central government and donors could directly
support community driven development. The Bank will thus continue to foster "bottom-up"
reform by building on its extensive experience with community development in Indonesia. As all
donors are affected by the newly decentralized environment, the Bank is also reviewing with
Government and other donors how best to coordinate the approach to sub-national assistance.

52. 
In the short run (at least through 2002), the Bank will support the Government in
specific sectors and regions to maintain service delivery through the transition, while at the
same time helping to lay the groundwork for the Government and other donors to direct
assistance where it can be most effective in reducing poverty. Because responsibility for
decentralization of administrative functions lies with line-ministries and guidelines have been
very general or wanting, sectors are at different stages of preparation and taking different
approaches. There is a real risk of service disruption, declining governance standards, and local
decisions contrary to national interests. Some district governments appear to be taking steps to
protect services and are looking for opportunities for administrative and budget efficiencies. To
support the transition, the Bank's assistance will target three priority areas: (1) helping to define

12 Poverty Reduction Strategy In Indonesia, prepared for the Consultative Group for Indonesia, October 2000.

27

sectoral roles and responsibilities across levels of government; (2) supporting a selected number
of local governments, which have put reform into practice, to improve the design and
implementation of service delivery; and (3) continuing to help directly empower communities in
poor regions (rural and urban). In addition, the Bank will provide selective assistance to areas in
conflict.

53. 
First, the Bank will help Government define roles and responsibilities for each level
-center, province, district and below, and for private sector involvement Getting these
roles and responsibilities right during the transition period and re-orienting the civil service to
become responsive to those it is meant to serve will have long-term implications for the quality
of service delivery. For each sector, specific technical issues must be taken into account (see Box
2.4 for examples in irrigation, roads and environment). Thus, the Bank will give priority to
supporting Government to identify, give authority to, and build capacity at the appropriate
administration level, and help create openings for the private sector where appropriate. Primary
sectors of focus include: basic education, health, basic infrastructure (roads, irrigation, urban
services, and energy), and environmental management. This will be done in connection with
supervision of on-going projects, and as a particular focus in the preparation of new ones,
including eastern Indonesia roads, second provincial health, strengthening local education

Box 2.4: Getting The Right Level of Government Is Critical For Effective Service Delivery:
Examples from Irrigation, Roads and Environmental Management

Irrigation: Part of the sector is best served through "highly" decentralized arrangements (at the district level),
such as operations and maintenance (O&M) and water allocation in irrigation systems at the tertiary and
secondary canal levels. However, where externalities and economies of scale demand a more aggregated
approach, such as in river basin management (pollution control, O&M, erosion abatement, etc.), decision-
making at an intermediate level is required with a larger involvement of provinces. Other functions are best
performed at the central level, such as development of policy and regulatory systems and standards, databases,
and support for large infrastructure such as dams. However, the picture is complicated as institutional
arrangements follow hydrological and not administrative boundaries. Thus, water user associations and river
basin corporations require close cooperation-between local governments and non-governmental entities as
well as among provincial and district governments.

Roads: If responsibility for all aspects of national/provincial roads are decentralized to the district level,
Indonesia risks degradation of service on its road network. Overall network planning-planning, programming,
and budgeting of a program of works (where national/provincial responsibility is needed) should be
distinguished from design and implementation of individual packets of works (where local responsibility is
appropriate). "Local" interests could put "local" projects before national/provincial ones, and roads in poorer
provinces could deteriorate rapidly. Moreover, if design and construction is decentralized before adequate
technical staff, competitive procurement (nationwide), and independent quality assurance or oversight are in
place, there is a risk of poor quality work, and deterioration of roads and bridges.

Environmental Management: Decentralizing the majority of environmental management authority to the
municipal (district) level is not appropriate; it is not a successful model in other countries, and most that have
tried it have recentralized partially or completely. As conceived, decentralization will shift resource
development decisions (industrial plant siting, major land development, and exploitation of natural resources)
to district control. Environmental assessments (EAs) will be reviewed by provincial commissions. But, where
provincial capacity is weak, or where there is no EA required, districts will give the approvals, and there are
many incentives for the district to exploit their resources in the short run and ignore longer-term consequences.

28

capacity (1&2), and improving quality and responsiveness of community-oriented healthcare, as
well as sectoral AAA work.

54. 
Second, the Bank will support selected local governments who have put reform into
practice with the basics of effective service delivery and work toward identifying promising
provinces and districts for future support. Government commitment is the prerequisite to
effective aid. The Bank aims to help a limited set of provinces and districts (including cities)
which have demonstrated reform to develop the basics of transparent, accountable, and demand-
responsive public service delivery (see Box 2.5), and to position the Bank to increase sub-
national programmatic and investment lending-both within and across sectors-once
conditions permit. The Bank will seek to support reform-minded, pro-poor leaders and
performing governments, through on-going supervision, project preparation, and sub-national
dialogue. Selection criteria and a short-list of areas would be reviewed with the central
government, to seek agreement on 2-4 provinces in which the Bank could initiate deeper
engagement through consultations with local governments and civil society, and through
provincial public expenditure reviews. Adjustable Program Loans (APLs) are being prepared for
water management-following 
reforms supported by 
the Bank-financed Water Sector
Adjustment Loan-and 
for urban services, which will support sub-national governments which
have taken concrete reform measures.13 The Bank is also assessing the feasibility of establishing
3-4 regional public information centers to expand its sub-national presence.

Box 2.5: Encouraging "Demand-Responsive" Service Delivery in
Basic Education and Health

Prior to the crisis, the Government mobilized a sizable corps of public employees to deliver education and health
services. These services were expected to reach the poor by virtue of broad coverage. While impressive gains were
made, large gaps between the education and health attainments of the rich and poor remained. For example, the poor
have much higher incidence of certain diseases, higher infant and child mortality, poor nutrition and their children
lag in school. These discrepancies can be traced back to inadequate performance of teachers, doctors, nurses and
other health care providers who lack skills, environment and incentives to address the needs of the poor.

During the crisis, emergency programs, including those supported by the SSNAL, helped to prevent sharp
reductions in education and health status common to crisis-hit countries and brought important institutional changes
which improved transparency and accountability - complaints were independently monitored and communities had
more information and involvement. These "demand-responsive" service delivery mechanisms should be retained in
future programs. Bank policy dialogue and projects will also work to help:
* 
Improve capacity-raise the quality of civil servants (teachers and health workers) in terms of training and
capabilities;
* Provide workers more flexibility to structure services based on local needs;

* Provide adequate compensation for those that perform (which will almost certainly require substantial reduction

in the numbers);
* Promote private provision of education and health services where appropriate;

* Develop feedback mechanisms and accountability for adequate services to the poor; and
* Create a "broker" or "facilitator" function that works to help the poor articulate their voice.

13 The final approach to APLs will depend on the fiscal transfer framework ultimately agreed.

29

55. 
Third, the Bank will continue to help empower communities so that poor
everywhere have an opportunity. Building on the successes of recent community-driven
development projects, the Bank will continue to focus on approaches in which project selection
and implementation are in the hands of communities, and which support civil society monitoring
of project implementation budgets and expenditures.14 This approach has shown to better match
community investments with local needs, and to build local social capital. In future projects, the
Bank will support the Government to retain and enhance the direct fund channeling mechanisms
and monitoring systems in these projects, which have yielded 20-40 percent savings over
standard public sector delivery of basic infrastructure. These projects would target poorer urban
and rural areas, on and off-Java, and will seek to further improve fiduciary controls, quality of
outputs, and links with district governments. Proposed new projects include Kecamatan
development project (supplemental), second Kecamatan development project, NTB poverty
(pilot), and community-based urban development.

56. Assistance to areas in conflict. At least five provinces are involved in serious violent
conflict, while others are affected by large numbers of people displaced by violence. About 15
ongoing Bank projects have components in four of these areas (Maluku, Central Sulawesi, Aceh,
West Timor). The Bank may have comparative strengths in dealing with post-conflict situations,
as it already deals with many of the underlying economic causes (economic disparities,
governance issues, weak government and civil society), and has developed innovative
approaches to community development and demand-responsive program design. The Bank's
Kecamatan Development Project (KDP) appoach provides a possible avenue for assistance to
post-conflict areas. But the Bank is not well placed to provide emergency assistance. And risks
are high as donor involvement may exacerbate divisions while there are possible reputational
risks to the Bank. The Bank therefore does not foresee taking a leadership role among donors in
this area, but will seek to get better integrated into the United Nations system for monitoring
conditions in violence prone areas and sharing Bank experience in successful poverty approaches
that may apply to such areas. Besides, the Bank will (a) develop a more systematic response to
the impact of conflict on ongoing projects to ensure continued development impact and
protection of project resources, and to create flexibility for possible refocusing of assistance on
reconstruction and development in post-conflict areas; and (b) selectively pilot innovative
approaches in violent prone areas that address critical needs of the poor (e.g., recent support for
widows in Aceh) as the basis for learning and possible wider application in other areas.

14 The community development model of the two completed village infrastructure projects and the Kecamatan
development project is now also applied in various other new projects-Urban Poverty Project, Water and
Sanitation Supply for Low Income Communities II, rural area development projects, and the school building
components in basic education projects.

30

3. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE BANK GROUP PROGRAM

57. 
The Bank Group's assistance program will require flexibility and adjustments as
circumstances change. The base case-considered to be the most likely scenario-presumes
that the current "muddle through" situation will continue, with some slippage in structural
reforms, but continued macroeconomic stability (para. 21) that would help sustain poverty
reduction. On the downside, there is the possibility of increasing political turmoil, further major
policy slippage or external shocks that may further delay implementation of the economic
program. At the same time, the change in government offers significant opportunities for
fundamental reform that have eluded Indonesia in the last three decades. The Bank Group's
program should be ready to respond and move to a high-case scenario in case reforms accelerate.

58. The Bank Group's conservative base case program is expected to be reasonably
robust in the face of most downside risks, while at the same time positioning the Bank
Group for possible upside opportunities. The "muddle through" base case scenario provides a
tenuous base for Bank Group support to Indonesia. This is not a desirable scenario to undertake
much new lending and even harbors risks to our portfolio as fiduciary standards may slip in the
newly decentralizing environment. At the same time, the Bank is one of Indonesia's major long-
term development partners and cannot disassociate itself as the country moves through its
historic democratic transition. The base case program takes account of these factors and provides
for a conservative Bank lending program of up to US$400 million per year with an average
65:35 IBRD/IDA blend over the CAS period. This is less than one third of pre-crisis lending
levels, and would result in a gradual reduction of the Bank's high exposure in Indonesia (para.
89). The focus will be on poverty and community development projects which are expected to be
reasonably robust in such an uncertain environment. The minimum conditions for the base case
scenario would be the maintenance of macroeconomic stability, minimum fiduciary safeguards
for delivery of public services with decentralization, and establishment of organizational
arrangements, scope, process, and schedule for developing a broad-based poverty reduction
strategy. A continued strong AAA program in the base case would assist Government in
enhancing policy performance, which in turn may lead to a possible high case assistance
scenario-including 
enhanced IBRD and IDA lending. On the other hand, a possible
deterioration from the "muddle through" base case scenario could lead the Bank to cease all new
lending.

59. 
The country's decentralization move will reshape the Bank Group's operating
environment. The Bank has begun to prepare for working in a decentralized environment. But
during the transition to such an environment, the Bank can expect significant difficulties to its
program. It has devoted significant resources to advising the Government on how to minimize
the associated risks. Decentralization also presents important medium-term opportunities for the
Bank. As explained in the previous section, the Bank has started a consultative process to
develop new ways of doing business in this new environment. Much of the Bank's future new
lending will be to assist sub-national governments.

31

60. 
Indonesia's weak fiduciary environment poses continued risks for the Bank's
portfolio and lending activities. As noted, Indonesia suffers from weak traditions of
accountability in the public sector which has led to widespread corruption and misuse of public
funds. This affects donor funds in equal measure. The forthcoming decentralization of a large
share of public expenditures to regional governments will compound existing weaknesses. While
the Bank has made considerable progress in strengthening fiduciary controls (para. 28), the
challenge will be to further enhance protection of its portfolio and lending resources in a context
of greater risk. Protecting Bank-financed projects in a sustainable manner can be effective only if
there are systemic reforms to Indonesia's accountability, procurement and financial management
framework. Government has indicated its commitment to take steps in this area (para. 69).
Besides strengthening its own fiduciary controls, the Bank will condition its lending levels and
access to additional IDA on progress in strengthening of public procurement and financial
management systems.

61. The Bank Group program involves close cooperation with the Bank's development
partners based on comparative strength, proactive portfolio management with enhanced
fiduciary controls, a high-quality program of analytical and advisory activities focused on
key areas of reform and risk management, and a flexible lending program with strong
poverty focus. The CAS program, instruments and assistance scenarios are elaborated in the
following sections. Table 3.1 provides an overview of the CAS program components and related
Bank instruments and lead partners. A CAS program matrix is shown in Annex B9.

Table 3.1: Bank Group Instruments and Major Partners by Bank Group Program Area
Baik Protram A*a 
lank Jitrufnts 
Major li* 
)
Natlovalevel 
SuI 
:o.lev
Ecenmk rcovery & quaty rw*h
* bank & corporate restructuring 

* legal & judicial reform 

* civil service reform 

* public procurement & financial mgt. 
* managing decentralization 

* natural resource management 
ics to th ooor: 

Oeheug bttr¢ pli 

AAA 

AAA

AAA, SPN 
LEN, AAA 

AAA 

Netheerlands, ADB, USAID

AAA, SPN 

AAA 

______

ADB, Japan
IMF, ADB, GTZ

EU, DFID

* defining roles and responsibilities for
each government level 
AAA 
ADB
* demand responsive service delivery 
LEN, SPN 
ADB, Netherlands
* community development 
LEN, SPN 
ADB, Japan
* assistance to (post) conflict areas 
AAA, SPN 
UNDP, UNHCR
Note: AAA = analytical and advisory services (policy advice, economic and sector work-ESW); LEN = lending;
SPN = supervision of ongoing projects

AAA 
AAA 

* macroeconomic stability 
* pro-poor policies 
* private sector development 
* human capital development 
* addressing infrastructure bottlenecks 

BFi ou itunat< i,#ittins: 

AAA, SPN, IFC 
AAA 
LEN, AAA 
AAA, IFC, MIGA 
AAA 
AAA, IFC, MIGA 

AAA 
AAA, LEN 

AAA 

AAA, LEN 
AAA, LEN 

..

_____1_1.1 

_

IMF, ADB
IMF
DFID
ADB
ADB, WHO
ADB, Japan

32

PARTNERSHIPS AND SELECTIVITY

62. 
The Bank Group is increasingly pursuing partnership arrangements based on
strategic fit and comparative advantage. This allows the Bank Group much greater selectivity
in terms of areas of concentration, while drawing on its partners' skills and expertise to provide
the broad overview of the development process that is supported by the Bank's central aid
coordination function. In Indonesia, as elsewhere, the Bank Group continues to pursue a multi-
layered partnership strategy. Managing these partnerships is resource-intensive, but the payoff
for the Bank Group is a leveraging of its resources, and the sharing of knowledge and expertise,
and access to civil society that the Bank Group on its own would find difficult to achieve.

63. As chair of the CGI, the Bank works closely with most of Indonesia's major
development partners who rely on the Bank's analytical work and its close relation with
Government to provide them the framework for assistance. In the rapidly changing development
context of Indonesia, this implies not just the annual CGI meeting but also regular meetings in
Jakarta, including a mid-year informal review of progress on CGI commitments. The CGI itself
has evolved into a focused discussion on a range of key issues (e.g., structural reform, poverty
reduction, governance, decentralization, forestry), typically led by donor partners with the Bank
facilitating, but not leading, the process.

64. 
In support of the Government's economic recovery program, the Bank works closely
with the IMF and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in the context of Government's Extended
Arrangement with the IMF. The IMF takes the lead on macroeconomic policy, while the Bank
takes the lead on structural and social policies (including corporate restructuring and sectoral
policy). ADB is the lead agency on privatization and state-owned enterprise (SOE) reform, and
SME development. All three institutions share joint responsibility for support of bank
restructuring and financial sector reforms. The Bank works closely with the IMF and ADB in
preparing the LOI for the Extended Arrangement.

65. 
In support of the Government's medium-term development program, the Bank Group
partnerships are again multi-layered:

* Sectoral partnerships: A range of partnerships have emerged in a number of areas, such as
governance, decentralization, SME development, competition policy, water resource sector
reform and forestry. Each has lead donors and a concerted effort to coordinate donor program
and policies in support of a common set of objectives agreed with and sometimes led by
Indonesian stakeholders. Perhaps the most ambitious and innovative of these is the
Indonesian-led Partnership for Governance Reform in Indonesia, an initiative of the UNDP,
the World Bank Group and the ADB, which is intended to support Indonesia's transition to a
democratic decentralized society by facilitating a national dialogue on governance issues

33

aimed at bolstering the demands for reforn, with funding to support innovative governance

reform.15

* Major lenders: Official lending in support of Indonesia's development priorities is
dominated by three agencies: Japan's JBIC, ADB and the World Bank Group. These three
agencies work closely together to ensure consistency in approach and policy stance. The
Bank has pulled back from areas where it no longer has a comparative advantage and
strategic fit, such as parastatal-led infrastructure investment projects in power and
telecommunications, which were a big part of the Bank Group's pre-crisis lending. Japan is
still a player, while the Bank Group complements this role through advice to Government on
its policy and regulatory framework for infrastructure. The Bank and ADB work together on
joint sectoral approaches and in some cases joint documentation (e.g., basic education). The
Bank, ADB and JBIC work closely on the period Country Portfolio Performance Reviews
(CPPRs) with Government, and the three lenders are coordinating closely to manage the
fiduciary risk reviews posed by decentralization.

* Policy dialogue: The more important, established bilateral donors look to the Bank Group to
take the lead on the overall policy dialogue and seek to complement the Bank Group's role
through strategically directed technical assistance on grant terms, thus filling a gap in the
Bank Group's arsenal. They support the Bank Group's policy work through consultant trust
funds and occasional secondment of staff to the Bank Group office in Jakarta.

* Cofinancing: Some donors (most notably the United Kingdom and the Netherlands) do not
wish to maintain a large aid presence in Jakarta but are conscientiously choosing to co-
finance, on grant terms, the Bank Group's operations, thus softening the overall terms the
Bank Group offers. These donors work particularly closely with the Bank Group and have
been most supportive in stretching the Bank Group's AAA resources.

* Partnerships with smaller agencies: The smaller agencies, such as UNICEF, see the Bank
Group as a partner who allows them to marry their local knowledge and expertise with an
ability to scale up their activity. These agencies and foundations are keen to work with the
Bank Group because they see us amplifying their voices on policy issues and providing them
a framework within which they are able to operate.

66. 
The CAS program will more systematically exploit synergies within the Bank
Group, particularly in private sector development. Bank and IFC activities in Indonesia are
now managed by a joint Director who coordinates private sector development activities. This
provides for greater scope in exploiting synergies between policy and transactions, such as
applying the lessons from IFC's corporate experience in the Bank's work on developing the
policy and regulatory frameworks across the sectors in which the Bank is active, for example in

15 Under the partnership, a Facility houses a small number of national and intemational experts who facilitate an
Indonesian-led national dialogue on issues of governance that is informed by surveys, strategic thinking and
research, and sharing of international best practices; A Governance Fund, which has attracted bilateral donor
support ($25 million) for innovative governance reform proposals from civil society and governmnent agencies.
These two vehicles function under the direction of an Indonesian-led Board of Governors shared by two
prominent advocates of governance reform.

34

banking, legal reform, corporate restructuring and governance, infrastructure and the social
sectors. While the Bank will focus on policy and institutional reforms, IFC will invest in priority
areas-taking steps to avoid any conflict of interest that may arise. Financial sector, SMEs and
mining are good examples. IFC may invest in existing and new financial institutions and
strengthen management, credit analysis, risk management. In SMEs, IFC is looking for
opportunities to help set up a decentralized SME facility for SME services, and to invest in
financial intermediaries serving SMEs. In mining, based on its experience with the Business
Partnership for Development, the Bank is looking at strengthening capacity at local and regional
levels to develop and enforce environmental regulations, and facilitating partnerships and
procedures to set up mechanisms for dispute resolution. IFC in turn could invest in
environmentally and socially sustainable mining operations. Within the Group, the Foreign
Investment Advisory Group (FIAS) and MIGA focus on strengthening foreign investment
services at the regional level in the context of decentralization.

PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT

67. 
Portfolio management will focus on continued quality improvement and further
strengthening of fiduciary controls. The Bank's portfolio will continue to decline in size as
more projects are closed than are added. By FY03, we expect our portfolio to stabilize at around
50 to 55-Aown from 66 projects at end-FYOO (including GEF operations). In view of
decentralization, the Bank will be adjusting implementation arrangements with related capacity
strengthening in ongoing projects that will operate in the newly decentralized government
structure (e.g., basic education and health projects). The Bank will continue to seek quality
improvements and emphasize fiduciary oversight in its portfolio through: (a) proactive
management of problem projects; (b) restructuring of projects to maintain relevance and improve
performance; (c) increased thematic supervision to review systemic issues and enhance cost-
effectiveness of supervision work across projects in a sector or region; (d) improved readiness
for implementation to avoid start-up delays;16 and (e) attention to fiduciary controls related to
procurement and financial management. The Bank will intensify its work with ADB and JBIC on
common approaches to portfolio management as an extension of the joint CPPR work started in
FY00. Improvements in portfolio perfonnance during the CAS period are expected to be modest
because of the fluidity of the overall environment and uncertainty and challenges caused by the
forthcoming decentralization. The portfolio quality targets are shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Bank Portfolio Quality Targets, FYO1-03

InDdiato-¢r- 

% Projects at risk (no.) 
% Actual problem projects (no.) 
Realism index 
Pro-activity index 
Disbursement ratio 

FY0 

21% 
18% 
83% 
83% 
21% 

FY01( FY0 

FY03

18% 
16% 
85% 
85% 
20% 

17% 
15% 
90% 
85% 
20% 

16%
14%
90%
90%
20%

16 

Implementation readiness is judged by a combination of factors, including (1) performance indicators being in
place; (2) firm arrangements in place for implementation funding; (3) completion of plans and financing
arrangements for any land acquisition and resettlement; (4) establishment and staffing of project
implementation units; (5) procurement and financial management/audit arrangements in place; (6) completion
of procurement documents for first-year implementation.

35

68. Actions to strengthen fiduciary controls in procurement and financial management
include steps at the national level and at the level of the Bank's portfolio. Portfolio
management in Indonesia will remain challenging because of continued downside risks
associated with macroeconomic performance, inadequate project management and governance,
limited monitoring and evaluation capabilities, ineffective fiduciary functions (procurement,
financial management, internal controls and reporting), and the huge decentralization agenda.
The Bank also realizes that the deep-seated nature of corruption in Indonesia will make
strengthening of fiduciary controls a long-term challenge and managing large fiduciary risks to
Bank-financed projects will require constant attention. Also, decentralization if not well
managed on fiduciary standards at the local level can pose fiduciary fragmentation and
divergence, which will pose severe control risks and result in unnecessary costs. Building on the
results of the CPAR and CFAA work in FYOO-01 and of a recent high-level Bank mission to
review Indonesia's fiduciary control environment, the Bank will support Government efforts
toward the preparation and implementation of action plans to strengthen the weak financial
management and procurement systems.

69. At the CGI meeting in Tokyo, the Government made specific commitments to
reform the public procurement and financial management systems along the lines of the
CPAR and CFAA. These steps are outlined in Box 3. 1, along with an overview of the fiduciary
environment and the strategy to protect Bank-financed projects. Satisfactory progress in reform
of these systems has been built in as triggers for future Bank lending (see para. 80). This includes
immediate steps to ensure for the base case lending program that same fiduciary standards for
public procurement and financial management are applied at provincial and district levels, as at
the national level. Maintaining uniform standards for procurement and financial management
will require a revision of current government regulations related to implementation of the
decentralization program. In order to develop a sound fiduciary environment, these actions will
need to be complemented by reforms in the overall governance system, including reforms in
legal and judicial systems, civil service reform and the overall accountability structure. These
efforts are supported by the Bank's work on governance reform (para. 46).

70. 
IFC has been able to turn around its portfolio hit by the crisis, by way of intensive
restructuring and recapitalizing of its existing client companies. As in other crisis-affected
countries, IFC has worked on restructuring of its existing client companies. IFC's portfolio
included 14 problem projects with total exposure of $364 million ($138 million A loans, $43
million equity, and $183 million B loans), representing about 43 percent of IFC's total exposure
in Indonesia. IFC completed four major restructuring projects for a total $135 million, or about
42 percent of the problem loan portfolio. Only one portfolio company has been put into
liquidation proceedings as a result of other creditors taking legal action. IFC will continue to
follow up on these efforts in protecting its portfolio.

71. MIGA's portfolio in Indonesia was affected by a claim from one of its projects. As a
result, MIGA has -suspended its guarantee activities in Indonesia. As soon as it has settled
handling of the claim with Government, MIGA will resume cover in Indonesia.

36

Box 3.1: Fiduciary Environment and Bank-Financed Projects
The overall fiduciary environment in Indonesia is weak. The findings of the recent CPAR and CFAA confirmed that the public
procurement system does not function well and the internal control environment remains inadequate. Practices vary widely from
the formal rules and procedures, enforcement is weak and sanctions are rare. There are concerns about the value of money and
accountability for public funds. The main problems are:
* Weak compliance with existing procurement rules and procedures; lack of internal controls, oversight and enforcement;
uneconomic packaging, inadequate advertising; use of restrictive bidding practices; prevalence of collusive practices; and
lack of capacity.
* Lack of clarity in important policy and procedural requirements for public procurement, with an effect on the level of
transparency and enforcement
* Absence of a single agency with a mandate for formulation of procurement policy, and monitoring compliance, and for
ensuring clear and enforceable sanctions and enforcement mechanisms.
* Absence of strong enforcement when procurement irregularities are discovered and mishandling of funds is reported.
* Unclear roles, responsibility, and authority of various external and internal audit functions.
* 
Inadequate parliamentary oversight and delays in timely public reporting of financial information.
Decentralization and the increasing shift to new lending to social sector projects, which involve thousands of small-value
contracts at the sub-national government level that are generally not subject to prior review by Bank staff and where capacity for
implementation and monitoring is generally weak and the accountability issues are significant, would increase fiduciary risks in
Bank-financed projects.
Despite the Bank's best efforts, it is simply not possible to fully insulate Bank-financed projects from the systemic problems in
the country's environment in which they are implemented. A recent mission of senior staff from Operational Core Services
(OCS) recommended further strengthening of accountability and fiduciary oversight in the use of public funds, including those
under Bank-financed projects. Building on the outcome of the OCS mission and the CPAR and CFAA, the Bank's strategy to
help reduce opportunities for corruption and thereby help ensure that proceeds of Bank loans are used for the intended purposes
with due attention to economy and efficiency, has the following four components (besides our broader work on governance
reform and anti-corruption):
* Prevention-Reducing opportunities for corruption in new projects through strengthened project design: the Bank
will pay close attention to the fiduciary environment and capacity of the implementing agencies and incorporate adequate
safeguards in the design of new projects. It will give priority in new projects to the provinces and districts that demonstrate
concerns for economy, efficiency and transparency in the use of public funds. The Bank will insist on the installation of
planning, budgeting, and project management reporting systems, and on additional legal provisions to make the national
competitive bidding procedures acceptable to the Bank. It will promote greater beneficiary and civil society involvement in
the design, implementation and monitoring of projects to enhance transparency and prevent misuse of funds, and third party
verification as a feature of new projects.
* Strengthening existing mechanisms of fiduciary monitoring and supervision of ongoing projects: the Bank will
intensify efforts for requiring updated and satisfactory annual procurement and financial plans and insisting that they are
used for guiding implementation and supervision, conducting regular ex-post procurement and SOE reviews, strengthening
capacity of the implementing agencies, and ensuring that procurement complaints and audit findings are followed up.
Projects with increased fiduciary risks will receive special attention. The Bank will increase the number of selective site
visits to review procurement by sub-national governments and physical progress to match with fiduciary risks.
* Enforcement-Investigating cases of alleged fraud and corruption: the Bank will rely on its Corruption and Fraud
Investigation Unit (CFIU) to investigate cases of alleged fraud and corruption, and apply sanctions where called for. The
first visit of CFIU to Indonesia was in November 2000, and a follow-up mission will take place in early 2001.
* Supporting Government efforts to reform the public procurement and financial management systems: This support
will follow up on the recommendations of the CPAR and CFAA and the recent OCS fiduciary mission. Full implementation
of reforms of the overall systems at all levels of government will take time. At the October 2000 CGI meeting in Tokyo,
Government made specific commitments along the lines of the CPAR and CFAA. The Bank's immediate priority will be to
support Goverrnent efforts to (1) ensure that the same fiduciary standards are applied at national, provincial and district
levels; (2) establish a National Public Procurement Office (NPPO) to formulate procurement policy, and enhance and
monitor compliance; (3) revise draft laws on State Finance, Treasury and Audit, which been submitted to Parliament
already; and (4) support NPPO in the formulation of a public procurement law.

37

ANALYTICAL AND ADVISORY ACTIVITIES

72. The Bank is rebuilding its AAA program with heavy emphasis on advisory
activities, a small but growing body of analytical work, and increased attention to regional
issues. The main components of the program are shown in Annex B4. In the "muddle-through"
base-case scenario, the Bank will retain a high level of advisory activities on immediate policy
issues in:

* Bank and corporate restructuring: The Bank's intensive involvement in this key area
must be maintained. Not to do so would invite a large reputational risk for the Bank Group.

* Development of a poverty strategy: The Bank's draft paper contributing to a Govermment
poverty strategy will feed into the development of a poverty strategy backed by a multi-
stakeholder consultation process. This would also involve assistance for Government's
preparation of a PRSP in FY02 (para 17).

* High-priority public procurement and financial management reforms: Based on
ongoing work in public procurement and assessment of the government financial system, the
Bank will advise on key initial steps in setting up a public procurement agency, on revisions
of the draft Laws on State Finance, Treasury and Audit, currently in Parliament, and on
safeguarding public finances in a decentralized environment (para. 69).

73. 
The Bank's AAA program will also include components of a medium-term nature,
such as:

* Governance: The Bank's recent work on fiscal decentralization, civil service reform,
financial management, and corporate governance should be considered only the first step in a
long-term engagement with these issues-involving advisory activities supported by
analytical work.

* Implementation of the poverty strategy: Preparation of the poverty strategy in the short
term will need to be followed up with support for its implementation, especially at the
regional level. The Bank will also continue its agricultural policy dialogue, which it
considers a key component of a broad-based poverty strategy.

* Analytical work at the regional level: Work will be undertaken to develop a better
understanding of local institutions, local capacity, public expenditure programs, fiduciary
environment and the quality of public service delivery to the poor. This work will be
undertaken by cross-sectoral teams that engage with sub-national governments, civil society
groups , the private sector, and local communities. It will be aimed at developing a new
generation of lending operations at sub-national level that embody demand-responsive
policies and public service delivery as outlined in the previous section (para. 51).

* Design and implementation of a long-term financial sector strategy: The current focus
on bank restructuring will now need to make way for a broader and more medium-term
reform of the entire financial sector, including non-bank financial institutions, the capital
market, rural financial intermediation, and micro-finance.

38

Long-term development prospects: The Bank intends to initiate a joint work program with
Indonesian policy and research institutions and its international development partners to help
Indonesia prepare a long-term view of its development prospects focusing, among others, on
agriculture, environment, health, education, urban and spatial issues. The Bank's role will
primarily be one of facilitator and intellectual interlocutor, while the leadership will come
from Indonesian institutions supported by trust funds.

74. 

The Bank is building a strategic partnership with the World Bank Institute (WBI)
focused on governance and capacity building but also including poverty and forestry. WBI
will support the Bank's substantive agenda in a few key areas (governance/anticorruption,
decentralization, forestry reform), help access the new technology-based global learning
networks that the Bank is developing, and access learning programs for external audiences (such
as parliamentarians, think tanks, civil society).

LENDING PROGRAM, TRIGGERS AND INSTRUMENTS

75. 
The base case lending program could return investment lending to less than one
third of pre-crisis levels. In the "muddle-through" base-case scenario, lending would be up to
$400 million a year, as compared with average lending of about $1.3 billion a year during FY90-
97. This would include Indonesia's current IDA-12 allocation of SDR300 million (about $400
million), and assumes continued IDA access beyond FY02. If Indonesia's IDA allocation were to
be maintained at the level of IDA-12, this would result in an average 65:35 IBRD/IDA blend
during the CAS period. Any proposals for an IDA allocation beyond the IDA-12 period (FY00-
02) would be considered within the context of the IDA-13 replenishment. Minimum conditions
for the base case would be maintenance of macroeconomic stability, including prudent debt
management and progress on asset sales and privatization, minimum fiduciary safeguards for
delivery of public services with decentralization, and establishment of organizational
arrangements, scope, process, and schedule for developing a broad-based poverty reduction
strategy. Specifics of these minimum conditions are shown in Table 3.4 below. Lending would
be for projects in health, education, basic infrastructure, and community development. The types
of poverty-oriented projects in the base case are expected to be reasonably resilient as long as
macroeconomic conditions remain stable. No adjustment lending is foreseen in the base case.

76. The CAS also anticipates possible "crisis" scenarios. As indicated above, the base case
scenario is expected to involve considerable volatility in policy and institutional performance. A
breakdown in Government's Extended Arrangement with the IMF as a result of major policy
slippage, including inadequate progress on bank and corporate restructuring, could lead to a
rapid erosion of market confidence and deterioration in economic conditions. A similar outcome
could result from political instability or a widespread breakdown in law and order. In these
adverse situations, the Bank would cease all new lending until base case conditions have been
restored. In the event of another macroeconomic shock, e.g., from lower world oil prices, slower
global growth, or volatility in international capital markets, the Bank may be asked to contribute
to an international rescue effort with additional adjustment lending or support to crisis-response
programs. However, the Bank's response this time around would be limited by Indonesia's high
debt burden, as well as IBRD's high exposure in Indonesia (para. 89).

39

77. The Bank is prepared to move to a higher lending case, if policy performance
improves ("performance" scenario). The change in government has offered significant
opportunities for fundamental reform. The Bank is working with Government in the various
areas of structural and governance reform, and in developing a poverty strategy. In case reforms
accelerate, and in line with Government's request, the Bank is prepared to raise lending to about
$1 billion per year from FY02. In such a scenario, increased investment financing needs for basic
infrastructure services (urban and rural) are envisaged as economic activity accelerates, besides
an accelerated expansion of community development and social sector programs given the higher
prospects for sustainability with a broad-based poverty strategy. A high performance
environment would allow for an earlier move toward programmatic lending-as early as FY02
for sectoral interventions (APLs for water and urban services). Indonesia would be eligible for
adjustment lending in the high case, although it is unlikely to be needed given current budget and
balance of payments projections. The high-case program includes a small indicative amount of
adjustment lending in FY01 -02 (about $200 million a year) before it is phased out in later years.

78. As part of the high case, the Bank would temporarily increase Indonesia's IDA
allocation. At the recent IDA Deputies meeting in Lisbon, Deputies broadly agreed that the
processes of reform and improving governance in Indonesia should be strongly supported,
including through enhanced IDA allocations as elaborated in the background note from staff.17 In
the meantime, Government has taken initial steps in the areas of poverty reduction and
governance reform. Based on adoption and sustained implementation of coherent action
programs in these areas, the Bank would increase Indonesia's current IDA share by about
US$200 million a year over the period FYO1-03. In the high case, the average IBRD/IDA blend
would be about 60:40 over the CAS period. The lending scenarios in the base case and the high
case are shown in Table 3.3.

Table 3.3: Lending Scenarios, FY01-03

FYO0 
(al) 

I 

Y01 

FY0 

I 

FY03 

IY*00)

CA- Ped.d 

(FY0103) 

f.-12PtrfNd

( 

IBRD: 
.

-- investment 
-- adjustment 
Subtotal 
IDA 
Total 

IBRD: 

-- investment 

-- adjustment 

Subtotal 
IDA 
Total 

13 

-

13 
120 
133 

13 

-

13 
120 
133 

.

I

.

238 

-

238 
160 
398 

158 

200 

358 
240 
598 

280 

-

280 
120 
400 

400 

200 

600 
400 
1,000 

265 

-

265 
135 
400 

600 

-

600 
400 
1,000 

783 

-

783 
415 
1,198 

1,158 

400 

1,558 
1,040 
2,598 

| 

| 

531

-

531
400
931

571

400

971
760
1,731

79. 
Indonesia's IDA eligibility would be on a temporary basis. The reforms supported by
the higher IDA allocation would boost prospects for an accelerated economic recovery and

17 Staff paper entitled "Indonesia-Recent Developments and Issues That Will Underpin the FY01-03 Country
Assistance Strategy," circulated to the deputies on May 24, 2000.

40

enable Indonesia's return to full market access. Indonesia is expected to phase out from IDA as
economic growth gains momentum and its per capita GNP surpasses again the IDA threshold
($885 for IDA-12). Based on current projections this is not likely to happen for another four to
six years. Using current market sentiments as a guide and the increased uncertainties, Indonesia
is more likely to surpass the IDA threshold before it regains the status of a high-creditworthy
borrower with full market access.

80. 
The high-case lending scenario is conditioned on a set of upfront reform actions plus
continued progress in key reform areas monitored by regular policy performance
assessments. For the high case, upfront actions involve a set of key Government actions in two
broad areas-macroeconomic stability and structural reforms, and governance and poverty
strategy. In the first area, Government will need to take actions aimed at improving
macroeconomic performance, accelerating bank and corporate restructuring, implementing its
privatization plan, and setting a medium-term direction of rice policy. The Bank will continue to
use the LOI as the primary instrument to assess progress on macroeconomic stability, bank and
corporate restructuring, and privatization (also see para. 81). Upfront actions in these areas will
comprise agreement on the appropriate policies and targets in the LOI. In the second area, key
conditions for the high case involve Government actions to strengthen public procurement and
financial management systems, and to initiate preparation of a broad-based poverty reduction
strategy based on multi-stakeholder consultations. These upfront actions for the high-case
lending scenario are elaborated in Table 3.4 below.
81. The Bank will undertake regular semiannual policy assessments with Government
to determine continued eligibility for the high case and to set performance targets for the
next six months. Given the difficulty of setting upfront annual lending triggers for the CAS
period in Indonesia's uncertain environment, these semiannual policy assessments will provide
the basis to judge whether Indonesia qualifies for the high case scenario. The findings of the
review would be made available to the semi-annual CGI meetings for review by the Government
with the donor community. A satisfactory outcome of the review would mean that Indonesia
would be eligible for enhanced financial support from IBRD and IDA. Alternatively, if policy
actions fall short of agreed targets, Indonesia's eligibility will be revisited after six months.
These semiannual reviews provide the Bank and the Government a benchmark against which to
judge progress and a regular vehicle to discuss structural and social reforms. As part of these
reviews, the Bank will continue to use the LOI as the primary instrument to assess progress in
the areas of macroeconomic performance, bank and corporate restructuring and privatization.
Over time, as the scope of the LOI narrows, the Bank will review with Government the
feasibility to move toward a letter of development policy which would outline Government's
agreed commitments for social and structural reform not covered in the LOI.

82. The Bank lending program foresees a mix of investment projects that respond to its
poverty focus and that would provide flexibility to respond to changing circumstances. The
program's core investment projects would support delivering better public services to the poor
through local governments that have demonstrated reform and community empowerment to
reach the poor. Project focus would include: (1) comnmunity-based development programs (the
recent Kecamatan development and urban poverty projects provide good exarnples); (2) human
development (sub-national programs in health and education); and (3) basic infrastructure (urban
and rural). In addition, investment projects would support pro-poor policies for quality growth,

41

.

,,,mI4y 

Table 3.4: Minimum Conditions and Up-front Actions for Poverty Reduction in a Base Case and
High Case Lending Scenario
imddle-Tbrow S&euirioi) 
A Mel 
*a 

manee Swtario)

Base Case (" 

(' 

d

Maintain macroeconomic stability: 
Improve macroeconomic stability:**
1. Prudent debt management, and progress on asset 1. Government debt below 100% of GDP (2001); 90%
sales and privatization, to keep government debt 
(2002) and 80% (2003)*
below 100% of GDP* 
2. Base money growth program consistent with inflation
2. Base money program consistent with inflation below 
below 10%
15% 
3. Primary (norninterest) surplus of at least 1.5% of
3 Primary (non-interest) budget surplus at least 1% of 
GDP
GDP

Accelerate bank- and corporate restructuring:**
1. Agreement on corporate restructuring principles
2. IBRA cash recovery Rp 27 trillion during 2001
3. Complete privatization of BCA, Bank Niaga

Implement privatization plan:**
1. Receipts > Rp 6.5 trillion in FY2001

Set medium-term direction of rice policy:
1. Establish and operationalize interdepartmental
working group on rice policy
2. Adopt agreed strategy for future rice policy,
including price and trade policy, the role of BULOG,
and productivity enhancing measures for farners

Provide fiduciary safeguards for delivery of public Strengthen public procurement and 
services with decentralization: 
management:
1. Restrict local government borrowing in FY01 
1. Establish and operationalize two high-level
2. Apply national standards to local government 
committees to guide reform of procurement and
procurement and financial management 
financial management systems;
2. Adopt and publish satisfactory action plan to reform
the organizational structure and legal framework for
procurement;
3. Submit acceptable laws on state finance, treasury and
audit to Parliament.

financial

Establish organizational arrangements, scope, process, Prepare broad-based poverty reduction strategy:
and schedule for developing a broad-based poverty 1. Draft agenda on poverty reduction strategy to
reduction strategy based on multi-stakeholder 
facilitate consultations;
consultation. 
2. Initiate multi-stakeholder consultations.
* At projected prices and average exchange rate; debt includes debt to IMF.
** Upfront actions will comprise agreement on appropriate policies and targets in the LOI.

where appropriate (land administration and access to micro-finance). Particularly in a high case
scenario, the Bank intends to use Adaptable Program Loans (APLs) increasingly at the sub-
national level, rewarding those regions which undertake pro-poor reforms-both sectoral and
broad-based public sector reforrn toward 
transparent, accountable government. Such
programmatic lending is expected to have the largest poverty reduction impact by targeting
provinces and districts whose leaders have already taken pro-poor, pro-growth reform measures
(para. 54). This would require sub-national administrative institutions to be functioning in a
satisfactory manner-including maintenance of minimum fiduciary standards. A possible public

42

sector reform loan/credit is contemplated at the national level to help strengthen central
government capacity in a post-decentralization era.

83. As decentralization proceeds, Bank funds will be increasingly onlent to sub-national
governments. Although the Bank is still discussing the regulatory framework with Govermment,
it is likely that its lending will continue to be to the central government. Onlending will probably
take place on terms that reflect the borrowing costs to the central government as well as the
financial capacity of the local government. The average cost-sharing ratio in future projects
(three-year rolling average) would be kept at the 75/25 ratio for IDA blend countries. The Bank
will consider front-loading of disbursement percentages in individual projects if necessary in
view of possible counterpart funds constraints at local levels in the early stages of
decentralization.

84. Beyond the restructuring of its existing clients, IFC will focus on interventions with
strong demonstration effects and positive impact on market perceptions. IFC has
commissioned a study to identify candidates for restructuring assistance. These projects typically
combine financial, operational and managerial restructuring, using a variety of instruments
loan/equity, quasi-equity and technical assistance. In addition to individual transactions, IFC is
exploring ways to leverage its limited resources at wholesale level through specialized
investment funds to respond to the urgent needs for equity capital in the corporate sector. As part
of IFC's crisis response, the Corporation will explore opportunities to help the restructuring
process with the recapitalization of private banks, establishment of restructuring funds or other
specialized institutions, investments in individual financial institutions, attracting strategic
partners where possible, and complementing its investments with capacity building through
technical assistance and twinning arrangements. A longer-term objective is to assist the
deepening of the Indonesian financial sector through institution building in housing finance and
mortgage-based securities products, securitization, corporate bond markets, and e-banking. In
addition, IFC is preparing a second trade enhancement facility to respond to urgent needs.

85. 
In support of SME development, IFC intends to mobilize donor funds to finance a
decentralized SME facility to provide a range of services, and build financial infrastructure for
SMEs such as credit bureaus. It is looking for opportunities to invest in financial intermediaries
focusing on SMEs and micro-enterprises. It is also exploring investment opportunities in
resource-based industries, particularly oil and gas, and mining. Finally, IFC is interested to
promote private participation in infrastructure in areas where regulatory structures are
developing and where development needs are acute, such as water and transport. In a base case
scenario, IFC's new business in Indonesia is expected to be in the order of $140 to 180 million a
year for IFC's own account. In a high case, the level could be in the order of $220 million a year
for IFC's own account.

86. 
IFC's investment scenarios would be affected by progress in key reform areas. IFC
activity level would depend on: (a) progress on developing the bankruptcy and legal regime for
protecting creditor rights; (b) progress on corporate governance (transparency and minority
investor rights); (c) further openings in the FDI regime; and (d) the depth of corporate
restructurings in terms of meaningful financial and operational restructuring taking place. A
satisfactory resolution to the issue of IFC's tax immunities will be critical to its ability to
continue operations in Indonesia.

43

CIVIL SOCIETY OUTREACH

87. The Bank will continue to extend efforts to engage civil society. Since the crisis, the
Bank has engaged a much more active and vocal civil society. It had to answer to persistent
questions that its association with the previous regime contributed to high levels of debt and
corruption. Considerable time was spent with members of the NGO community to review aspects
of the Bank's program and discuss their concerns. The recent CAS consultations provided a good
forum to discuss the Bank's role in Indonesia and explain its position on these issues (para. 31).
Following the Kecamatan Development Project and social safety net adjustment loan models, the
Bank is also building in civil society monitoring of project implementation. The new generation
of demand-responsive projects would create much greater scope for involvement of all
stakeholders in project design and implementation. The Bank has 
invited interested
representatives to look at a sample of projects for ways to reduce possible corruption. Following
up on the civil society consultations, the Bank is open to an arrangement for a consortium of
"anticorruption" NGOs to act as watchdog over the use of funds in Bank projects, and to work
with regional councils comprised of civil society and local government and civil society, to
monitor projects during both planning and implementation. In view of the diversity of the NGO
community in Indonesia, it may take some time for such a consortium to emerge. The Bank has
also increased its disclosure of information and has recently launched a new external website.
The Jakarta-based Public Information Center is becoming more proactive in dissemination and
outreach, and the Bank is considering establishment of small regional information centers in
selected provinces. The media are used more actively in explaining the Bank's position, and the
Bank speaks out more openly when it differs from government positions. The Bank has also
developed closer ties with an active Parliament and its relevant committees. If anything, these
efforts will need to be intensified to maintain the Bank Group's relevance in the new Indonesia.

PROGRESS MONITORING

88. The Bank intends to monitor country progress against poverty reduction indicators
once they are agreed in the Government's broad-based poverty reduction strategy.
Indonesia's historic approach to poverty overemphasized numerical targets, leaving many
important dimensions of poverty and well-being unaddressed (para. 9). But giving up on goals
would not be appropriate: without goals consensus in measuring progress would not be possible.
To help ensure that progress is being made on the broader concept of poverty, the Bank's draft
poverty report suggests a new set of objectives, but emphasizes that goals should be set as part of
the process of creating a poverty strategy which should be open to dialogue and debate among
the stakeholders. Table 3.5 gives details of these possible poverty reduction goals to be attained
by 2004. On the headcount of expenditure poverty, the proposed goal would reduce the
headcount to a slightly lower level than that achieved pre-crisis-halving the headcount from the
peak reached during the crisis. Based on CAS review feedback, the goals for "human
investment" and "infrastructure access" poverty measures have been scaled back somewhat from
the poverty report -given likely setbacks in these areas during the transition to decentralization.
These possible goals aim to advance by 2004 the bottom fifth of Indonesian's population (below
the 20t percentile by wealth or expenditure) to levels of human investment and access to basic
infrastructure, which have been achieved by the those in the lower-middle income strata (20t to
40 th percentiles). The Bank is also working with the Government to find ways to measure and

44

track "social poverty," including the number of poor and women who participate fully in
community life and in local political decisions that affect their lives.

Table 3.5: Possible Poverty Reduction Goals

Half

37 
109 

Infrastructure Access 

Material standard of living Headcount of expenditure poverty (1999) 
Human Investment 
Completion of basic education of bottom quintile
(1999) 
Infant mortality rate of bottom quintile (1997) 
Children in the bottom quintile with acute
respiratory infection treated medically (1997) 
Access of bottom quintile to "improved" water
sources (1999) 
Access of bottom quintile with "adequate"
sanitation (1999) 
Vulnerability to material Vulnerability to expenditure poverty (1999) 
poverty
Notes: Current Poverty Rate is from Pradhan, et al. (2000), Vulnerability is from Suryahadi et al. (2000), two of
the Human Investment measures are from Gwatkin et al. (2000) based on the 1997 DHS. Infrastructure
Access and Basic Education Completion are from SUSENAS data.
*Goals are set to the level currently achieved by those in the 20'-40'h percentiles by wealth (DHS) or
consumption expenditures.

23*
Half

52 

22 

13 
50 

27 

45*
77*

68*

33*

BANK EXPOSURE AND RISK MANAGEMENT

89. 
Bank exposure. By end-FYOO, Indonesia's outstanding debt to IBRD was about $11.8
billion-one of IBRD's three largest. This is lower that had been foreseen in the CAS Progress
Report, but remains close to the Bank's concentration limit of $13.5 billion for single large
borrowers. Net IBRD disbursements, which are likely to be positive this year, will turn negative
in the years to come, offset at least partly by net IDA flows (see Table 3.6 below). Even in the
high case this will be so from FY03. This is appropriate in view of the authorities' desire to limit
Indonesia's indebtedness, the Bank's greater focus on IDA lending and the sharp deterioration in
Indonesia's creditworthiness for IBRD borrowing compared to before the 1997/98 crisis. In the
base case, IBRD's exposure will fall to around $10.7 billion by the end of FY03 and in the high
case would reduce only marginally to $11.2 billion. Indonesia's continued high level of exposure
would pose very serious costs to IBRD's net income and balance sheet in the event that
Indonesia's precarious creditworthiness led to non-accrual during the CAS period.

90. 
Financial risks. The financial risks to EBRD in Indonesia remain substantial during the
CAS period. By end-2000, total external debt service was estimated to be 40 percent of exports
of goods and services, and is projected to exceed 30 percent throughout the CAS period-even
after the reschedulings so far agreed, particularly by the Paris Club. Also at the end of 2000,
Indonesia's total external debt to both GDP and exports-at an estimated 102 percent and 278
percent, respectively-was considerably higher than the average for other IBRDIIDA blend
borrowers-74 percent of GDP and 199 percent of exports respectively, leaving the country

vulnerable to new shocks. Further details of key exposure indicators are shown in Annex B7.
Debt service to IBRD is projected to breach the exposure guideline of 20 percent of total debt

45

service to preferred creditors in 2003. The share of preferred creditors as a whole in public debt
service is also projected to remain high and to breach the guideline of 35 percent in 2001-03,
reflecting large payments coming due to the IMF.18 It should be noted that these ratios in
Indonesia's case are sensitive to oil prices. The generally high level of prices in the past year will
have been helpful, but Indonesia remains vulnerable to any renewed slippage in oil prices,
especially if this results from a more general slowdown in world trade growth, which would hurt
Indonesia's non-oil exports at the same time and shrink the current surplus more quickly.19

Table 3.6: Bank Exposure Indicators
($ million)

Debt outstanding and disbursed: 
* IBRD 

* IDA 

Net disbursements: 
* IBRD 

* IDA 

IBRD debt service as % of public
Debt service a 
IBRD debt service as % exports a 

Debt outstanding and disbursed: 
* IBRD 

* IDA 

Net disbursements: 

* IBRD 
* IDA 
IBRD debt service as % of public

debt servicea 
IBRD debt service as % exports 
'Based on government fiscal year.

12,457 
11,755 

702 

221 
201 

20 

15.5 
2.2 

12,457 
11,755 

702 

221 

201 
20 

15.5 
2.2 

12,589 
11,857 

732 

124 
100 

24 

14.0 
2.3 

12,705 
11,967 

738 

240 

210 
30 

14.0 
2.4 

12,237 
11,460 

777 

(352) 
(397) 

45 

15.6 
2.5 

12,615 
11,794 

821 

(89) 

(173) 
83 

15.8 
2.5 

11,517
10,673

844

(721)
(787)

67

21.7
2.6

12,155
11,183

972

(460)

(611)
150

22.0
2.6

91. Country risks. As elaborated in the CAS, the Bank Group's assistance strategy in
Indonesia is subject to high uncertainty and risk. Broadly, the following major country risks may
be foreseen: (1) increasing political turmoil that may lead to a disintegration of the current
government and possible further moves to impeach the President; (2) increasing political
interference in the reform process, particularly in bank restructuring and sale of state assets; (3)
increasing limitations in administrative capacity and government leadership-in part brought on
by the complex decentralization program-which would result in further delays in the economic
program and reform, and would adversely affect the implementation environment of Bank Group
projects; (4) an escalation of regional demands for independence, which may lead to further
social turmoil and would affect the ability for coherent macroeconomic (especially fiscal) and

18 These ratios are upwardly biased since they take fully into account the proposed Bank lending program and debt
service thereon, but project debt service of other creditors based on existing loans and credits.

19 The CAS economic scenarios assume a reduction in oil prices from $28/bbl in 2000 to $20/bbl in 2003 (para.

19).

46

structural policies; (5) growing nationalistic sentiments, which may affect policies and lead to
political pressure for limiting Bank Group involvement; and (6) a less favorable external
environment caused by more rapid decline in oil prices, or slowdown in world trade. These risks,
individually or in combination, may threaten more broadly the prospects for restoring
macroeconomic stability and growth by jeopardizing companies' ability to increase output and
investment, by leaving banks weak and unable to provide financial intermediation, and by
undermining fiscal and monetary control which could leave debt levels high, discourage inflows
of private foreign capital and lead to fresh strains on the rupiah, reserves and debt-servicing
capacity.

92. 
The CAS takes account of these risks. The CAS is built around uncertainty and risk.
The base case is based on conservative lending levels compared to earlier years, and the Bank
would be ready to cease all lending in case macroeconomic or political stability is threatened or
fiduciary standards deteriorate. The Bank would focus lending on poverty-oriented projects,
which are expected to be more resilient to changes in macroeconomic and political conditions.
Adjustment lending is only foreseen in a high-case scenario and would be phased out by FY02.
AAA is focused on areas where risks are the highest and the potential to lower them the
greatest-such as fiscal decentralization, civil service reforms, judicial reforms, government debt
management, and public expenditure management. The Bank would also strengthen other risk
mitigating measures, such as: (a) continued intelligence gathering on social and political risks;
(b) more emphasis on regular contingency planning; and (c) improved risk analysis in new loans.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter Woicke

By:
Sven Sandstrom 

Washington, DC
January 4, 2001

CAS Annex I
Page 1 of 5

INDONESIA

SUMMARY OF WORLD BANK GROUP

PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY'

Overview

The level of poverty in Indonesia and the vulnerability of the poor will not be
permanently reduced without sustained, broad based economic recovery and growth. This growth
can only be generated and sustained by private activity. But past patterns of development
contributed to the onset, the severity and the length of the financial and economic crisis.
Indonesia's potential will not be realized without a pattern of private sector activity that is very
different from the past. Indonesia cannot afford to miss the opportunity offered by the crisis to
make fundamental changes in the business environment and in the way business is done.

Indonesia's large corporations account for 60 percent of GDP. But 99.5 percent of
employment is in enterprises with less than 100 employees. The small and medium enterprise
sector is highly underdeveloped. The result of this is a lost productive potential from a "missing
middle" group of enterprises that in more economically developed countries is the driving force
for development. With the top ten families owning more than 60 percent of the corporate assets,
ownership concentration in Indonesia is higher than in other countries in the region. Close
relationships between corporations, banks and government, poor oversight by the regulators,
insider control and pervasive state ownership of economic assets have all acted against the
openness to competition and transparency that are necessary for sustainable growth and resilience
to shock.

The first priority should be for the banking and corporate sectors to speed up the
resolution of the corporate debt overhang so that financial flows for investment and working
capital can resume. Secondly, the many structural inefficiencies that led to the crisis and made it
deeper and longer lasting in Indonesia than elsewhere in Asia need to be overcome. Reforms are
needed to enable Indonesia to become a modern market economy and avoid future crises. This
means fighting corruption in the public administration and ensuring the rule of law through the
court system, reinforcing property rights and dispute resolution mechanisms, ensuring open and
transparent transactions through more competition and better corporate governance, and creating
a business environment where following the rules rather than crony capitalism is the norm. The
state needs to withdraw transparently from its over-extended ownership of productive assets and
allow the private sector to realize its potential as the driving force for growth. But at the same
time the state has to step up and take on its legitimate oversight role by strengthening the rules,
and the institutions that enforce them. This means improving supervision of the banks and
financial markets, creating independent regulators for public monopolies, developing and
enforcing competition law, and enforcing financial disclosure and audit of financial institutions
and public corporations. Thirdly, measures to ensure that the necessary growth is broad based
and sustainable will be necessary. This means firstly removing the current obstacles to small and
medium enterprise activity and promoting SME development. It also means building the
necessary physical and social infrastructure and ensuring that growth is environmentally
sustainable, particularly for Indonesia's forests, mineral and marine resources. Finally, Indonesia
will need to create the infrastructure and regulatory environment necessary to take full advantage
of the new information and communications technologies.

' The strategy is elaborated in a separate report prepared in connection with the CAS entitled Indonesia:

World Bank Group Private Sector Development Strategy, January 2001 (Report No. 21581 -IND).

CAS Annex I
Page 2 of 5

The private sector was hit hard by the crisis

The crisis had a devastating impact on the corporate sector, particularly in construction,
financial services and manufacturing. The corporates had depended excessively on foreign
borrowing and very little on equity finance. In late 1997 a large part of the corporate and banking
sector became insolvent. Small enterprises, the majority of which are in agriculture, suffered less
than the corporate sector as they were not as exposed to the devaluation of the rupiah. They did,
however suffer from the decline in aggregate demand resulting from the crisis.

GDP recovered and grew by 4-5 percent over the year to the third quarter of 2000. The
incipient recovery was relatively well spread across the sectors, with investment gaining
importance over consumption, and non-oil exports contributing substantially. But the financial
markets have not yet recovered, due mainly to continued concerns about political instability and
regional violence and delays in corporate restructuring. The stock market in December 2000 had
lost one third of its value since December 1999. Since the start of the crisis 68 out of 237 banks
have been closed, and another 12 banks nationalized in an effort to stabilize the banking system.
As the banking sector begins to emerge, the Government is directly in control of 70 percent of the
deposits in the banking system, compared to 40 percent in Korea, and 23 percent in Thailand. The
bank recapitalization program has been extremely costly. A total of about Rp 650 trillion of
sovereign bonds have been issued and this to recapitalize the banks only to a capital adequacy
ratio (CAR) of 4 percent. Bank lending is resuming, up just under 6 percent in the first half of
2000 compared with the previous year, but lending is mostly for short term working capital rather
than for investment. Large non-performning loan portfolios are still holding back bank
profitability.

Indonesian corporate debt in late 2000 is around $117 billion - 70 percent of this is for
large private corporations and 30 percent for state-owned enterprises and SMEs. Of the total, 48
percent is owed to foreign creditors and more than 70 percent is denominated in foreign
currencies. Around 49 percent of corporate debt is distressed. Of the large corporate debt, three-
quarters is distressed and in need of restructuring. After a very late start, corporate debt
restructuring began to pick up towards the end of 1999. Around $15 billion in distressed
corporate debt has been restructured since the crisis began, and most of that during the year 2000.
A number of large debt restructuring deals are imminent and both creditors and debtors are
cautiously optimistic that, barring unforeseen problems, the momentum will continue.

There are many impediments to robust recovery and sustainable growth

Banking and corporate restructuring. Sustainable economic growth cannot begin until
banking and corporate debt restructuring have made substantial progress, and there is a long way
to go. The Indonesian Bank Restructuring Agency's (IBRA) intemal governance needs
improvement and IBRA's last two annual audits included disclaimers of opinion. Following
some recent high profile transactions involving well connected conglomerates, the quality of
IBRA's restructuring deals is currently being questioned and there is an urgent need for IBRA to
adopt transparent debt restructuring principles, especially for its largest obligors. The slow speed
of divestiture of IBRA's assets is also causing concem not only because of the consequent delay
to the restructuring of the economy and but also because of the acute need for revenues from asset
sales to cover the cost of bank recapitalization. There are doubts about IBRA's and Govemment's
willingness to accept that realization from the assets to be sold will likely be much less than their
book value. The restructuring and privatization of Indonesia's state banks is an urgent priority for
the creation of a healthy banking system, but progress to date has been very slow.

CAS Annex 1
Page 3 of 5

In addition to the high profile cases, there are also concerns about the quality of many of
the other corporate restructuring deals concluded to date. They have relied excessively on term
extensions and debt equity conversions. Little real operational restructuring has taken place and
the risk is that many corporates could remain vulnerable to future crisis even after restructuring.
The bankruptcy process in Indonesia does not pose a credible threat to recalcitrant debtors and
much effort has gone into devising ways of getting around this, including granting IBRA
extraordinary powers to seize assets and giving the voluntary debt restructuring agency, JITF,
additional leverage to refer non-cooperative debtors to the Ministerial Committee, FSPC, for
referral on to the Attorney General. These measures have yet to be seriously tested, however and
it remains to be seen whether they will be effective. Meanwhile some progress has been made in
offering tax and regulatory incentives to parties concluding debt restructuring deals. Further
implementing rules are needed to make these measures fully effective.

Structural weaknesses. Restructuring the banks and resolving the debt overhang are only
the first steps. Action needs to be taken to remove a formidable range of structural impediments
and constraints to sustainable and equitable economic growth. These cannot be resolved
overnight but action to deal with them needs to begin and be sustained over time. These
impediments fall into several broad categories:

* Poor governance and corruption in the public sector;
* The uncertainties surrounding the forthcoming decentralization process;
* The absence of an effective court system and the longstanding need for legal and judicial
reform;
* Poor corporate governance, particularly lack of information disclosure or enforcement
against offenders;
* The need for effective rules and institutions to implement competition policy;
* A less than welcoming climate for foreign direct investment; and
* The extended role of the state and its crowding out of private sector activity.

Impediments to long term sustainable development. Broad based growth cannot happen
without development of the SME sector. At present SMEs face a number of impediments
including market distortions acting against them, excessive regulation, corruption and red tape,
ineffective support systems, low skills development and a banking system that lacks the capacity
or skills to lend to SMEs. Rural areas in particular remain underdeveloped as public sector
delivery systems have not provided farmers with effective services or access to micro-finance.

The effectiveness of attempts to privatize physical infrastructure in the 1990s were
limited by lack of independent regulation, by lack of competitive market structures and by lack of
transparency in many of the deals that were concluded. One consequence is the frequency of
high profile contractual disputes between the public utilities and their private partners.
Government policies do not yet favor transparent privatization of infrastructure and frequently act
to crowd out new private investors. Similar considerations apply in the health and education
sectors where private providers frequently are able to reach poorer sections of the population that
the public providers do not reach, and in other cases are able to provide better quality services at
lower cost. But government policies have discriminated against private providers.

In forestry, the distorted incentive framework, irresponsible behavior by timber
companies and lack of enforcement of regulations against offenders has led to a crisis of illegal
logging which is threatening the very existence of Indonesia's forests.

Finally, Indonesia is lagging behind neighboring countries in embracing the new
information and communications technologies. The legal and regulatory framework for e-

CAS Annex 1
Page 4 of 5

commerce does not yet exist. Government itself has not used the new technologies to advantage.
Important opportunities are being missed, in terms of the possibilities of making existing business
more effective, of opportunities for creating completely new businesses, and of the benefits from
increased transparency that would accrue to the population from putting government on line and
using new electronic and communications applications in education and other public services.

World Bank Group Private Sector Development Strategy

The World Bank Group's (WBG's) vision and strategy for development of the private
sector responds closely to that recently elaborated in Government's ten point economic recovery
program. It is based on solid analysis of the conditions on the ground in Indonesia and
continuous dialogue with and feedback from beneficiaries, our partners in the private sector, in
government, and among the donors. To sharpen up the relevance and focus of this private sector
development strategy, the VVBG held discussions during its preparation with focus groups of
private entrepreneurs, and also commissioned a business environment survey of private
businesses in Indonesia.

The medium term vision is one in which, firstly, the immediate aftermath of the crisis will
have been resolved, with a healthy restructured banking sector lending again for corporate
investment and working capital. Secondly, progress will have been made in resolving the
structural impediments to private sector led growth mentioned above. Private activity would be
based mainly on competition and effectiveness rather than on protective relationships between
government, the banks and the corporate sector. Thirdly, the private sector will be playing the
leading role in generating growth and fiscal resources and providing the public infrastructure and
services needed for sustained poverty reduction. The ownership pattern would be less
concentrated than in the past, but more broadly based on accelerated development of SMEs and
broader share ownership in the large corporations.

The role of the WBG. The WBG is taking advantage of the synergies resulting from the
recently implemented co-management of Bank PSD and IFC activities in the East Asia Region
and the joint WB/IFC Global Product Groups. We are being selective in our interventions,
operating in catalytic mode, supporting activities for which there is a strong government or
partner commitment, a demonstrated country need and where we have a comparative advantage.
The WBG is maximizing opportunities to leverage its scarce resources with those of other
donors and investors and taking care to avoid duplication of activities. Private sector
development is a cross-sectoral objective and, where possible, PSD activities are being
mainstreamed through the Bank's sector projects and other interventions. In a few cases, such as
banking and corporate restructuring, corporate governance, competition policy, SME
development and information and communications technology, the WBG is implementing free
standing projects, trust fund grants or advisory activities.

Crisis response activities. The Bank has worked closely with the IMF and the ADB since
the onset of the crisis, in supporting government's banking and corporate restructuring program
and will continue to do so until the crisis is over, with technical assistance, lending, trust funds
and analytical and advisory activities (AAA). 
IFC is supporting corporate restructuring by
actively restructuring problem projects in its own portfolio and seeking out candidates for
demonstration restructuring transactions.

Addressing structural weaknesses. 
In the areas of public sector governance and
decentralization, the Bank is leveraging donor resources through the multi-donor Govemance
Partnership and through trust funds to provide advice to government and we propose to continue
this assistance as a priority. In legal and judicial reform the Bank is playing the role of

CAS Annex 1
Page 5 of 5

coordinator of donor activities in response to a request from the Government. Trust funds and a
component of a Bank project will also support training activities for Commercial Court personnel.
In corporate govemance, the Bank through its AAA is sponsoring seminars and other best
practice dissemination events. The Bank also proposes to complete a benchmarking exercise of
Indonesian corporate govemance practices during the coming year. IFC is applying corporate
govemance best practices through its role as a shareholder in a number of Indonesian
corporations. The Bank is taking the lead and coordinating among the donors in providing help to
the new competition agency. 
In promotion of foreign direct investment, FIAS has provided a
number of missions and is ready to respond to further requests. MIGA's operations in Indonesia
were affected by a claim from one of its projects. As a result, it has suspended its guarantee
activity in Indonesia, but it is accepting applications of interest and is keen to support the
resumption of FDI in Indonesia. In privatization, the Bank has played a key advisory role in the
past but there is little receptiveness from Govemment at present. The ADB now has the lead in
this area.

Promoting long term sustainable development. SME development in Indonesia is a
priority area of assistance for the new Joint Bank/IFC SME Unit. The WBG has supported a
variety of SME programs and projects over the years in Indonesia. The focus at present is on
policy advice, improved delivery of business development services through a decentralized SME
facility, and the building of capacity within banks to lend to SMEs. 
In rural and urban
development, the Bank will continue to promote private sector development through its sector
projects and IFC will work through investments in agribusiness. In infrastructure, the Bank will
continue to promote privatization and private participation through its ongoing sector projects in
telecommunications, power and transport. 
IFC is looking for opportunities to invest in the
transport and water sectors. The Bank will seek means of promoting the private provision of
social services in health and education through its sector projects and AAA advisory activities. In
forestry, the Bank has supported reforms through its policy based lending and is leading the forest
policy dialogue with government and other partners. The WBG is ready to invest in the oil, gas
and mining sectors, based on sound policy and regulatory frameworks. In mining, the emphasis
will be on small scale mining activities in a decentralized environment. In information and
communications technology, the Bank is supporting preparation of a national networking strategy
including upgrading of the regulatory framework for e-commerce and supporting government on
line initiatives.

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

1999
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions) 
Average annual growth, 1993499
Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 
Most recent estimate (ltest year available, t993-99) 
Poverty (% of population below natfonal poverty line) 
Urban population (9 of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (yeats) 
Infant mortality (per 1, 000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross pnmary enrollment (% of school-age population) 
Male 
Female 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 
1989 
55.1 101.5 
24.8 
29.1 
30.6 
25.1 
32.8 
32.8 
28.6 
-1.1 
3.3 
58.5 
38.4 

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goos and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/exports 

1.9 
33.8 
-
.
,, 

.. 

.. 

1.5 
2.5 

24 
39 
66 
46 
30 
67 
12 
98 
97 
98 

.
.. 

1.2 
1,3 

-
34 
69 
35 
22 
84 
15 
119 
121 
121 

1998 
98.8 
15.5 
51.2 
24.9 
20.8 
4.1 
5.7 
152.7 
34.8 
148.4 
263.8 

1.9
2.3 

31
60
77
43 
64
39 
96 
102 
86

1999
142.5
20.8 
34.9 
28.8
23.1
4.1
5.0 
105.3 
36.9
105.1
268.3

GNP 
per 
capita 

7 

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to safe water

|

|ndonesia

Low-income group

Economic ratios*

Trd
rade

Somest> 
Savings

Investment

Indebtedness

Indonesia
Low-income group

Indonesia at a glance 

CAS Annex A2
Page I of 2

1/4/01

East
Asia & 
Indonesia Paciftc 

Low-
Income 

206.5 
600 
124.9 

1,837 
1,000 
1,833 

2,417 
410
988

Development diamond*

Life expectancy

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

197949 1989-99 

1998 

1999 199903

6.0 
3.9 
1.4 

5.3 
3.3 
6.9 

-13.0 
-17.9 
11.2 

0.3 
0.9 
-31.6 

4.3 
9.1 
3.3

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP) 

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

(average annual growth) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross natonal product 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of investment and GDP I%)

27.3 
37.7 
11.7 
35.0 
57.6 
9.5 
22.6 

21.7 
38.3 
19.7 
40.0 
58.5 
8.7 
21.4 

1979-89 1989-99 
3.4 
2.5 
6.5 
7.2 
8.2 
13.0 
7.0 
4.7 
6.5 
7.2 
5.3 
0.8 
6.7 
3.4 
1.8 
8.5 
5.9 
5.1 

17.6 
44.9 
24.1 
37.5 
69.6 
5.5 
41.7 

1998 
-0.7 
-14.0 
-11.4 
-16.4 
-1.6 
-15.4 
-45.2 
-5.3 
-16.7 

19.5 
43.3 
25.4 
37.3 
65.1 
6.2 
26.9

1999 
2.1 
1.2 
2.6
-1.4 
-0.1 
0.7 
-12.1 
-40.7 
1,9

20

20

o 

-20 

.40

n0o

m 

_O

94 

96 

9n

-

GDl 

*GDP

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

30

10

-10 

.20O

.30

.40

-so

94 

95 

9 

Exports 

t mports

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.
**Central Bureau of Statistics figure. There is a dicrepancy with the Balance of Payments figure as recorded by Bank Indonesia.

CAS Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Indonesia

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)

Domestic prices

(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

100
30
0AX

.. 

6.4 
10.0 

57.7 
81.2 

20.5 
12.8 

33.6 

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 

20

0 

--

.. 
.. 
.. 

17.1 

13.9 

16.3 

94 

95 
93 
GDP deflator 

97 
*CPI

98 

99

Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

-3.9 

3.1 
-2.0 

2.8 
-1.5

.. 

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 
50,371 
7,868 
1,010 
34,593 
27,337 

1999 
51,242 
9,765 
855 
33,332
24,003 

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

Total exports (fob) 
)23,833 

s

Fuel 

.. 
.. 
.. 

8,678 
952 
11,028 
19,624 

50,

Rubber 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cifl 

,000

.. 

30.0

Food 

.. 

521 

1,167 

1,625 

20,000 g Ii1 k

Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

.. 
.. 

1,205 
5,904 
83
87 
95 

2,671 
9,048 

3,705 
4,959 

10,000
03

Export price index (1995=100) 

Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

*Exports 

Imports
.__.__

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$millions)1979 

1989 
24,849 
21,749 
3,100 

1998 
54,850 
43,903 
10,947 

1999 
55,811 
42,151 
13,670 

m 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

.. 
.. 
.. 

5 r

4

3-

Net income 

.. 

-4,547 

-8,189 

-7,283 

1e

Net current transfers 

.. 

339 

K. 

i,

Current account balance 

.. 

-1,108 

4,096 

5,785 

1 

93 

99

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

.. 
.. 

1,603 
-495 

-7,789 
3,693 

-3,813 
-1,972 

-3
-4

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$) 

..

623.1 1,770.1 10,013.6 

7,855.2

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS 

___

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

-

(USS millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of 1999 debt (USS mill.)

18,624 59,402 
739 
8,542 
525 
854 

150,884 150,096
11,692 
11,553
683 
683 

G:20,113 

A 1 if

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

3,065 
95 
4 

9,833 
1,134 
15 

19,967 
1,445 
26 

21,397
1,583
29

D: 19.547

Composition of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

1 

: 

3

137 
555 
99 
226 
0 

214
2,935 
80 
682 
199

2,694 
-1,651 
-400 

2,428
-10,527 
-2,817 

F 57,239

1,871

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

815 
229 
24 
205 
76 
130 

2,007 
1,258 
481 
777 
667 
109 

1,672 
1,207 
754 
458 
718 
-260 

1,692 
1,506 
789 
720 
826
-106

A-IBRD 
. B - IDA 
C - IMF 

E - Bilateral
D - Other multilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

L

Development Economics 

1/4/01

CAS Annex B2 - Indonesia
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date 11/30/2000

CAS Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

Indicator* 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001**

71 

3.3 

25.4 

28.8 
53.5 
54.6 
14.1 

69 
3.4 
26.1 
26.6 

27.5 

26.9 
12.8 

63 
3.8 
18 
14.4 
21 
16.6 
21 

61
4.2
13
10.8
16.4
12.6
14

yes 
5141.00 
58.00 

no 
4924.00 
60.00 

yes 
6772.00 
81.00 

no***
est. 5466
est. 89.00

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 
Last Five FYs
198 
36
17565.6 
4372.7
20.7 
27.8
16.5 
24.2

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
** FY98/99 supervision costs do not include indirect costs, FYOO/OI supervision costs include indirect costs.
*** Interim Portfolio Review December 2000

INDONESIA - BANK GROUP PROGRAM SUMMARY, FY 2001-2003

Proposed IBRD/IDA Lending Program, FY 2001-2003

CAS Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

Project 

Fiscal Year 
2001 Base Case
West Java/Jakarta Environmental Management
(APL, plus GEF component) 
Kecamatan Development Project (supplemental) 
Provincial Health 2 
Basic Education 4 (stand-by) 
Eastern Indonesia Roads (stand-by) 
Library Development (LIL) 
Subtotal 

High Case
West Java/Jakarta Environmental Management
(APL, plus GEF component) 
Kecamatan Development Project (supplemental) 
Provincial Health 2 
Basic Education 4 (stand-by) 
Eastem Indonesia Roads (stand-by) 
Library Development (LIL) 
Policy Reform Support Loan III** 
Subtotal 

2002 Base Case
Land Administration Project II 
Strengthening Local Education Capacity II 
Kecamatan Development Project II 
NTB Poverty (pilot) 
Improving Quality and Responsiveness of
Community Oriented Health Care 
Subtotal 

High Case
Land Administration Project II 
Strengthening Local Education Capacity II 
Kecamatan Development Project II 
NTB Poverty (pilot) 
Improving Quality and Responsiveness of
Community Oriented Health Care 
Water Resource Management (APL) 
Energy (APL/SECAL)** 
Community Based Urban Development 
Subtotal 

USs(M) 
IBRD DMA* 

Strategic Rewards 
(H/M/L) 

Implementation
risks (H/M/L)

18 

20 
200 

238 

18 

140 

200
358 

50 
65 
80 
20 

65 
280 

50 

200 

150 
200 

600 

55 
60 
40 

5 
160

55 
60 
60 
60 
5 

240

120 

120

65 
100 
20 

65 

150 
400

M 
H 
M 
H 
H 
M 

M 
H 
M 
H 
H 
M 

H 
M 
M 
M 

M 

H 
M 
M 
M 

M 
H 
H 
M 

H
M
M
M
M
M

H
M
M
M
M
M

H
M
M
M

M

H
M
M
M

M
M
H
M

Proposed IBRD/IDA Lending Program, FY 2001-2003 cont.

CAS Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Project 

Fiscal Year 
2003 Base Case
Water Resource Management (APL) 
Energy (APL) 
Community Based Urban Development 
Coral Reef Management (APL 2nd tranche, plus
GEF component) 
Micro Finance 
Subtotal 

High Case
Water Resource Management (APL) 
Energy (APL) 
Community Based Urban Development 
Coral Reef Management (APL 2nd tranche, plus
GEF component) 
Micro Finance 
Rural Area Development (APL) 
Urban Local Governance Reform (APL) 
Public Sector Reform Loan 
Subtotal 

US$(M) 
IBRD 
IDA* 

Strategic Rewards 
(H/M/L) 

Implementation
risks (H/IM/L)

120 
100 

35 
10 
265 

100 
200 

35 
60 
60 
85 
60
600 

105 

30
135

50 

125 

50
75 
100 

400

H 
M 
M 

M 

H 
M 
M 

M 

H 
H 

M
M
M

M

M
M
M

M

M
M

* IBRD/IDA breakdowns are indicative and subject to discussion with the Government of Indonesia.
** Possible adjustment loans.

CAS Annex B3 (IFC/MIGA)
Page 1 of 1

Indonesia - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1998-2001

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

IFC approvals (US$m) 

14.00 

83.50 

31.37

Sector (%)

Financial Services 
Industrial & Consumer Services 
Infrastructure 
Manufacturing 
Mining & Metals 
Textiles 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other 

Total 

60 

40 
100 

36 
4 

60

100 

26
100

126 

82 
18 

0 

100 

16
4

80
0
100

48
26
26

100

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

80.40 

74.69 

74.69

CAS Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Non-lending Services - Indonesia
(FYOO-03)

Product 
Summary of Recent Completions
CGI Note 
Public Expenditure II 
Debt Management 
Environment Report 
CGI Note 
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment 
Country Procurement Assessment
Report 

Key Activities Underway
Corporate Restructuring/FSPC 
Corp. Restructuring
Poverty Report and follow up 
Govemance Strategy 
Delivering Public Goods & 
Services at the Sub-National Level
Policy Notes on Health 
and Education
Fiscal Decentralization Strategy 
Power Demand and 
Investment Planning
Land and Forest Policy Dialogue 
Civil Service Reform 
Competition Policy 
Social Capital & Local Governance 

Completion FY Cost (US$000)a Audienceb 

Objectivec

2000 
2000 
2000 
2001 
2001 

2001 

2001 

2001 

2001 
2001 
2001 

2001 

2001 
2001 

2001 
2001 
2001 
2001 

$112 
$143 
$102 
$425 
$75 

$177 

Government, donors, public 
Govemment, donors, Bank 
Government 
Government 
Government, donors, Bank 

Government, Bank, donors

$121 

Government, Bank, donors

$378 

Govemment 

$350 
$303 
$245 

Government 
Government, donors, Bank 
Government 

$140 

Government, donors 

$100 
$75 

$130 
$50 
$40 
$30 

Govemment 
Govemment 

Government, donors 
Govemment 
Government 
Govemment 

KG
PD
PD
PD
KG

PS

PD
PD
KG

KG

PS
KG

PS
PS
KG
KG

2002/3 
2002/3 
2002/3 
2002/3 
2002/3 
2002/3 
2002/3 
2002/3 

Key Activities Planned
Long Term Development Prospects 
Provincial Public Expenditure Reviews 
Civil Service Reform (cont.) 
Fiscal Decentralization 
Public Financial Management (cont.) 
Debt Management (cont.) 
Financial Sector Strategy 
Land and Forest Policy Dialogue (cont.) 
Sectoral Studies in Decentralized
Environment 
-
Policy Performance Assessments (2) 
Support for Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Paper (PRSP) 
a. Estimates for planned activities
b. Govemment, donors, Bank, public dissemination.
c. (KG) Knowledge Generation, (PD) Public Debate, (PS) Problem-Solving.

2002/3 
2002/3 

2002 

$350 
$300 
$100 
$250 
$150 
$120 
$100 
$130

$600 
$350 

$250 

Govemment, donors, Bank 
Govemment, donors, 
Govemment 
Government, donors, Bank 
Govemment 
Govemment 
Government, donors, Bank 

Government, donors, Bank 
Govemment, Bank 
Govemment, donors, Bank,
Public 

KG, PD
KG
PS
KG, PS
KG
PS
KG, PD

KG, PS
KG, PS

PD, PS

CAS AnnexB5

Indonesia Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionlincome group

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births perwoman) 

POVERTY*
(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 

Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 

Education (% of GNP) 

Social securty and welfare (% of GDP) 

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to safe water
(I% of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrtion (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 

Male 
Female 

Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100.000 live births) 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1999 

132.6 
2.4 
19.4 
5.4 

163.0 
1.9 
26.1 
4.1 

206.5 
1.6 
39.4 
2.6 

.. 
.. 
.. 

230 
15 

.. 

.. 

6.8 
52.0 

.. 

2.8 

.. 

71 
75 
66 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

49 

48 
51 

114 
172 

478 
405 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

530 
46 
40 

33.0 

8.0 
42.1 

.. 

2.0 

.. 

89 
90 
87 

39 
60 
32 

15 
15 

.. 

56 

55 
58 

80 
125 

368 
308 
450 

27.1
16.3
34.1

600 
219 
260

32.0

7.5
43.4

0.7 

1.2 

2.2

94 
95 
93 

67 
84 
53 

65 
83 
30 

66 

.. 
.. 

46 
60 

.
.. 

373

East
Asia & 
Pacific 

1,817.1 
1.0 
33.9 
2.1 

Low-
income

3,536.4
1.4
30.5
3.1

990 
130 

520
136

1.7 

2.9 

99 
99 
99 

84
89
82

93 
93 
20

69 

67 
71 

35 
43 

188 
145 

1.3

3.2

86
89
82

80
82

63

62
64

68
92

235
208

These are derived by the SMERU iterative method. The BPS method yields different values: national at 23.55%, urban at
19.98% and rural at 25.85%.

Indonesia - Key Economic Indicators

CAS Annex B6

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Govemment investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

Gross national savings' 

------------ Actual -------------- 
Estimate 
---------- Projected-----------
FY97/98 FY98/99 FY99/00 9 m 2000 CY2001 CY2002 CY2003

100 
17 
42 
42 

69 
27 
4 
23 

42 
38 

27 

100 
20 
44 
36 

78 
21 
4 
17 

49 
38 

15 

100 
20 
45 
35 

75 
16 
3 
12 

40 
29 

18 

100 
18 
45 
37 

72 
17 
3 
14 

47 
35 

20 

100 
18 
46 
36 

74 
16 
3 
13 

48 
39 

21 

100 
18 
46 
36 

76 
16 
3 
13 

48 
41 

20 

100
18
46
36

75
17
3
14

44
42

19

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product (US$ million at current prices) 
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1993 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 

149,896 
960 

106,913 
620 

151,669 
680 

110,956 
650 

156,648 
740 

162,914 
760 

173,563
840

2.1 

-14.1 

3.5 

4.0 

4.0 

4.0 

4.0

Real annual per capita growth rates
(% calculated from 1993 prices)
Gross domestic productatmarketprices 
Total consumption 

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Extemal debt/GDP (%) 

Memorandum item
Resource balance (% ofGDP) 

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Budget surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure and transfers 
Foreign financing 
Govemment debt/GDP 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 

Price indices( YR93 =100)
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)d 
Consumer price index (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

0.6 
3.9 

-15.3 
-7.9 

2.0 
2.4 

2.5 
0.7 

2.6 
2.5 

2.6 
5.6 

2.6
5.7

62,302 
56,162 
57,643 
42,704 
4,659 
463 
-1,700 
92 

52,722 
48,354 
41,060 
30,707 
11,662 
1,013 
4,609 
139 

60,011 
55,200 
43,285 
32,551 
16,726 
753 
6,648 
97 

52,499 
48,437 
38,313 
29,142 
14,186 
-105 
5,290 
102 

72,343 
66,653 
57,337 
43,539 
15,005 
-753 
4,371 
95 

74,647 
68,664 
61,274 
46,272 
13,373 
-148 
3,422 
90 

78,330
72,022
66,579
50,164
11,751
923
2,730
84

3.1 

10.9 

11.0 

12.8 

9.6 

8.2 

6.8

15.4 
10.8 
-0.5 
5.2 
0.2 
38 

65 
53 

6.7 
25 

13.8 
10.9 
-2.0 
5.0 
2.0 
81 

60 
34 

100 
57.7 
75 

16.8 
13.8 
-1.5 
4.5 
1.5 
92 

61 
9 

137 

20.5 
3.1 

19.8 
18.7 
-3.4 
4.5 
2.0 
100 

60 
9 

126 
5.1 
6.8 

17.0 
16.3 
-3.6 
4.4 
2.6 
99 

61 
8 

120 
8.0 
8.0 

17.0 
14.6 
-2.4 
4.8 
0.7 
94 

61 
8 

118 
8.0 
8.0 

17.4
14.3
-2.1
4.8
-0.3
88

61
8

115
8.0
8.0

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Consolidated central govemment.
d. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

CAS Annex B7

Indonesia - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator 

Total external debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a 

--------------- Actual ---------------- Estimate 
---------- Projected -----------
FY97198 FY98/99 FY99/00 9 m 2000 CY2001 CY2002 CY2003

137,363 148,906 147,626 150,984 149,123 147,131 144,969

Net disbursements (US$M)a 

20,291 

15,758 

13,828 

17,894 

17,957 

15,120 

13,464

Total external debt service (TDS) (US$m) 

19,588 

19,672 

24,148 

21,826 

29,280 

26,668 

24,869

External debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDOIXGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

214.1 
91.6 
30.5 
18.2 

272.6 
139.3 
36.0 
18.8 

237.9 
97.3 
38.9 
19.4 

278.3 
102.1 
40.2 
19.5 

198.6 
95.2 
38.9 
19.8 

189.7 
90.3 
34.2 
19.2 

178.2
83.5
30.4
18.4

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%) 
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)c 
IDA TDO(US$m)c 

IFC (US$m)
Loans (A + B loan)d 
Equity and quasi-equity' 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

14.2 
22.5 
2.2 
9,891 
711 

16.2 
25.1 
2.9 
10,993 
689 

15.2 
27.0 
2.6 
11,608 
682 

15.5 
28.6 
2.2 
11,755 
702 

14.0 
40.2 
2.3 
11,857 
732 

15.6 
48.6 
2.5 
11,460 
777 

21.7
49.7
2.6
10,673
844

316 
170 

333 
176 

313 
167 

299
168

80 

80 

75 

75

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.
d. Disbursed and outstanding.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

CAS Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Indonesia: Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
As of 11/30/2000

Closed Projects: 234

Active Projects 

Project Name 

Project 
ID 
P004019 ACCOUNTANCY DEV II 
P003972 AG. RESEARCH II 
P055755 BANKING REFORM ASST. 
P040061 BENGKULU REG DEV 
P049051 BEPEKA AUDIT MODER P 
P034080 BIODIVERSITY COLLECT 
P036048 CORAL REEF MGM REHAB 
P040062 CORAL REEF MGMT REHA 
P063732 CORPORATE RESTRUCTRG 
P004010 DAM SAFETY 
P059930 DECENT AGR/FOR EXT 
P003945 HIGHWAY SECTOR 11 
P003968 
ID-BOOK&READINGDEV 
P003987 
ID-CENTRAL INDONESIA SEC. EDU. 
P037097 
ID-E.JAVA SEC.EDUC. 
P036049 
ID-EARLYCHILDDEVELOPMENT 
P003967 
ID-FIFTH HEALTH PROJECT 
P003965 
ID-HEALTH IV:IMPR HEALT 
P004004 
ID-HIGHER EDUC SUP.(DUE) 
P041896 
ID-HR CAPACITY BUILDING 
P042540 
ID-IODINE DEF. CONTROL 
P045337 
ID-KECAMATAN DEV FUND 
P003988 
ID-PHRD 11 
P049545 
ID-PROVINCIAL HEALTH I 
ID-QUALITY OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUC (QUE) 
P040195 
P036956 
ID-SAFE MOTHERHOOD 
P004003 
ID-SECONDARY SCHOOLTEACHER DEVT 
P063939 
ID-SOCIAL SAFETY NET AL 
P041895 
ID-SULAWESIBASICEDUC. 
P040196 
ID-SUMATRA BASIC EDUC 
P041894 
ID-SUMATRA SEC EDUC 
P003914 
ID-THIRD COMM HEALTH & 
P039644 
ID-W. JAVA BASIC EDUC. 
P059477 
ID-WSSLIC II 
P048715 
IIDP 
P003978 
IND'L TECHNOLOGY DEV 
P036047 
IND-BALI URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT 
P039312 
IND-EASTJAVAUDPII 
P003951 
IND-KALIMANTAN UDP 
P056074 
IND-MUNCIPAL INNOVATIONS PROJECT 
P003890 
IND-SEMARANG SURAKARTA UDP 
P036053 
IND-SULAWESI UDP II 
P039754 
IND-TAP41-2 
P055821 
IND-URBAN POVERTY PROJECT 
P003954 
JAVA IRR IMP & W R M 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

Development 
Objectlves 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
HS 
U 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

Implementation Fiscal Year 
Progress
S 
S 
S 
U 
U 
S 
U 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 

1995 
1995 
1998 
1998 
1997 
1994 
1998 
1998 
1999 
1994 
2000 
1994 
1995 
1997 
1996 
1999 
1999 
1995 
1996 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1995 
2000 
1997 
1998 
1996 
1999 
1999 
1999 
1997 
1993 
1998 
2000 
1998 
1996 
1997 
1996 
1995 
1999 
1994 
1997 
1995 
1999 
1994 

Orieinal Amount 

in USS Millions 

IBRD 

IDA GRANT 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

25.0 
63.0 
20.0 
20.5 
16.4 
0.0 
6.9 
0.0 
31.5 
55.0 
13.0 
350.0 
132.5 
104.0 
99.0 
21.5 
44.7 
88.0 
65.0 
20.0 
28.5 
225.0 
69.0 
0.0 
71.2 
42.5 
60.4 
600.0 
47.9 
54.5 
98.0 
93.5 
103.5 
0.0 
34.5 
47.0 
110.0 
142.7 
136.0 
5.0 
174.0 
155.0 
28.0 
0.0 
165.7 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
5.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
38.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
15.9 
20.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
77.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
7.2 
0.0 
11.6 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

4.3 
22.1 
0.9 
0.0 
0.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
6.1 
19.8 
0.0 
46.0 
36.5 
0.0 
3.6 
0.0 
5.0 
39.0 
6.9 
12.1 
9.0 
0.0 
12.0 
0.0 
9.9 
8.0 
30.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
19.7 
3.0 
0.0 
8.5 
8.5 
30.1 
53.0 
15.0 
0.0 
38.7 
67.0 
3.0 
0.0 
34.0 

2.0 
15.2 
6.4 
19.1 
10.6 
0.3 
5.4 
2.6 
20.0 
5.8 
16.9 
69.9 
43.1 
64.4 
51.4 
20.0 
33.4 
4.5 
13.9 
5.9 
12.1 
129.6 
9.8 
35.7 
35.4 
23.8 
3.1 
300.0 
55.7 
60.0 
39.9 
1.3 
62.9 
77.4 
20.9 
10.6 
63.7 
18.3 
20.8 
3.4 
34.9 
36.5 
11.7 
48.0 
30.8 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements 
'

Orig. 

6.3 
33.4 
7.3 
6.0 
7.3 
0.6 
4.1 
1.8 
23.5 
25.2 
1.6 
116.6 
64.8 
36.3 
20.3 
11.8 
9.8 
34.6 
-2.9 
18.0 
10.8 
41.3 
18.4 
0.9 
11.8 
11.7 
31.6 
300.0 
14.3 
8.7 
-4.7 
21.1 
-23.3 
0.0 
20.2 
18.4 
30.8 
72.0 
36.2 
1.9 
73.6 
88.9 
15.2 
-2.4 
65.6 

Frm Rev'd

1.2
0.3
0.0
0.0
5.2
0.0
3.4
1.3
0.0
13.6
0.0
10.2
28.4
0.0
0.0
11.8
0.0
8.8
-5.8
14.4
10.0
0.0
10.6
0.0
3.4
8.7
-3.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.1
0.0
0.0
17.0
11.5
10.6
-8.6
8.2
0.0
9.9
-16.8
4.9
0.0
43.6

a. Intended disbursements 

to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Active Proiects 

Pro 

etjeectv 

ID 
Project Name 
P004014 KERINCI SEBLATICDP 

P003699 KERINCI SEBLAT ICDP 

P037095 MALUKU REG. DEV 
P004008 NUSA TENGGARA DEV. 

P003701 ODS 1- UMBRELLA 
P004021 POW.TRANS&DISTII 
P004026 RLWY EFFICIENCY 
P035544 SOLAR HOME SYSTEMS 
P003700 SOLARHOMESSYSTEMS 
P004016 STRATEGIC URB. RDS I 
P004011 SULAWESI AGRI AREA 
P003910 SUMATERA&KALIMANP 
P003993 SUMATRAREG.ROADS 
P003997 TELECOM IV 
P004001 TELECOM SECTOR MODER 
P064118 WATSAL 
P004017 UNIV.RES.GRADUATE EDUC 
P003984 LAND ADMINISTRATION 
102020451 BIODIVERSITY STRATEGY 

Grand Total: 

CAS Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

Oriinkal Amount in USS Millions 

OmntImleet 

Derveem 
S 

S 

U 
S 

HS 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

Ito

Fiscal Year 
1996 

1996 

1998 
1996 

1995 
1996 
1997 
1997 
1997 
1996 
1996 
1994 
1998 
1992 
1995 
1999 
1994 
1995 
2000 

S 

S 

U 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

IBRD 
19.1 

0.0 

16.3 
27.0 

0.0 
373.0 
105.0 
20.0 
0.0 
86.9 
26.8 
260.5 
234.0 
375.0 
325.0 
300.0 
58.9 
80.0 
0.0 

IDA GRANT 
0.0 
0.0 

Cancel. 
3.0 

0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

15.0 

0.0 
0.0 

27.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
24.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 

0.0 

4.5 
4.9 

0.0 
110.0 
20.0 
19.5 
0.0 
10.0 
3.7 
46.0 
50.0 
81.0 
69.7 
0.0 
20.6 
33.9 
0.0 

Undisb. 
12.1 

10.0 

1.0 
8.3 

14.9 
78.4 
79.9 
0.5 
19.2 
32.8 
7.3 
80.4 
161.1 
7.8 
98.8 
250.0 
0.0
0.0
0.4

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements

Orig. 
9.8 

4.6 

4.4 
6.4 

4.9 
184.3 
69.6 
16.0 
11.7 
33.5 
1.7 
133.9 
17.5 
88.8 
t69.7 
150.0 

Frm Rev'd
0.0

0.0

0.0
-0.9

0.0
15.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.4
-3.7
121.9
-5.5
47.2
119.7
0.0

5,836.5 

256.4 

85.1 

974.9 

2,420.0 

2,196.4 

508.5

Summary as of November 30, 2000

Active Proiects 

Closed Proiects 

Total

Original amount 
Total disbursed (IBRD and IDA) 
of which has been repaid 
Total now held by IBRD and IDA 
Amount sold 
of which repaid 
Total Undisbursed: 

5,958.26 
2,231.84 
0.62 
4,694.2S 
0.00 
0.00 
2,465.88 

22,297.95 
20,022.12 
9,566.31 
10,367.75 
88.08 
88.08 
0.00 

28,256.21
22,253.96
9,566.93
15,062.03
88.08
88.08
2,465.88

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

CAS Annex B8 (IFC)
Page 1 of 1

Indonesia - Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio as of 10/31/00
(In US Dollars Millions)
Held 

Disbursed
Equity 
Quasi 
-
-
1.14 
-

FY Approval 
Company 
2000 Ciluluk Village 
1994 KDLCBali 
1991 LYON-MLF-lbis 

Loan 
0.04 
2.08 
2.01 

Equity 
-
1.14 
-

Quasi 
-
-
-

Partic 

Loan 
0.02 
2.08 
2.01 

Partic

-

-

-
2.01 

-

-

-

2.01

1985 Manulife 

-

0.32 

-

-

-

0.32 

-

-

1995/96 POF 
1994 Prudential Asia 
1995 PT ABS Finance 
1997 PTAdeSAlfindo 
1989 PT Agro Muko 
1997 PTAlumindo 
1991 PT Argo Pantes 
1989/91/94 PTAstra 
1997 PT Astra Graphia 
1997/98 PTAstraOtopart 
1995 PT Bakrie Pipe 

5.14 
-
-
10.29 
0.00 
18.88 
9.38 
-

1.93 
4.80 
1.31 
3.53 
2.20 
-
13.00 
12.16 
2.00 
1.07 
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9.50 

6.00 
-
-
17.64 
0.00 
16.00 
11.36 
-
-
-
-

5.14 
-
-
10.29 
0.00 
18.88 
9.38 
-

-

1.93 
2.24 
1.31 
3.53 
2.20 
-
13.00 
12.16 
2.00 
1.07 
-

-

6.00

-

-

-

-

-
-
-
-

17.64
0.00
16.00
11.36

-

-

-

-

-

-

-
17.14 

-
17.14 

-

-

9.50 

-

1997/00 PTBankNISP 

5.71 

-

-

-

5.71 

-

-

1993/96 PTBBLDharmala 
1997/98 PT Berlian 
1995 PTBunasFinance 
1996 PTDharmala 

11.43 
9.29 
5.54 
20.00 

-
20.00 
-
-

-
-
-
-

21.54 
27.38 
1.45 
10.00 

11.43 
6.72 
5.54 
20.00 

-
16.65 
-
-

-
-
-
-

21.54
19.44
1.45
10.00

1997 PTGrahawita 

-

-

5.00 

-

-

-

5.00 

-

1995 PT Hotel Santika 

3.78 

-

-

-

3.78 

-

-

1991 PTlndaci 

-

-

1.83 

-

-

-

1.44 

-

1990/91/93/95/99 PTIndo-Rama 
1997 PTKalimantan 
1992/94/96 PTKIAKeramik 
1995 PTKIA Serpih 
1997/98/00 PTMakro 
1998 PT Megaplast 
1993/98 PTNusantara 

39.82 
20.00 
17.19 
15.00 
-
8.75 
3.18 

12.22 
15.00 
9.12 
6.35 
3.90 
2.50 
-

-

24.10 
6.00 
57.13 
49.50 
-
-
10.38 

39.82 
15.56 
17.19 
15.00 
-
8.75 
3.18 

11.80 
15.00 
8.99 
6.24 
3.40 
2.50 
-

-

24.10
4.67
57.13
49.50

-

-

-

-

-
-
-
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

10.38

1994 PT PAMA 

-

0.71 

-

-

-

0.71 

-

-

1996 PTPramindolkat 
1991 PTRIMBA 

25.00 
2.56 

8.18 
0.60 

25.00 
-

59.50 
0.74 

25.00 
2.56 

3.91 
0.60 

25.00 
-

59.50
0.74

1993 PT Samudera 

-

5.00 

-

-

-

5.00 

-

-

1997 PT Sayap 
1992/95 PT Viscose 
1997 PT Wings 
1991 SEAVI Indonesia 
1980/85/87/94/95 Semen Andalas 

10.00 
28.76 
8.68 
-
6.44 

-

-
-
-
-
-

14.00 
34.05 
14.92 
-
5.83 

10.00 

-

-
-
-

14.00
34.05
14.92

-

28.76 
8.68 
-
6.44 

-

-
1.43 
10.02 

-
1.43 
10.02 

-

-

-

5.83

Total Portfolio 

306.11 

138.49 

41.33 

389.52 

299.08 

127.16 

40.94 

380.25

Approvals Pending Commitment
FY Approval 
Company 
Loan 
Equity 
2000 NISP Equity 
5.00
2000 PTPetrosea 
1.80 

Quasi 

Partic

15.00 

8.20

Total Pending Commitment: 

15.00 

6.80 

8.20

CAS Program Matrix

CAS Annex B9 Page 1 of 10

CAS Objectives, Sub-Themes:
* Sustaining economic recovery and quality growth
* Building national institutions for accountable govemment
* Delivering better public services for the poor

Diagnosi; 

StrategyJActions 

Bank Group Instruments 

Sustining Ecotonmic Recovery and Quality Growth

Other Donor 
in afr 

Progress Indicators/
benchmarks

Bank and Corporate

Restructuring
* Excessively high govt. 
ownership of banking 
sector 

* Weak oversight by the 
state as owner of state 
owned banks 

* Orderly, expedited 
privatization of state owned 
banks 

* Strengthen and empower MOF 
Monitoring Unit 

a AAA (BFR Technical Assistance) 
* Corporate Restructuring Technical 
Assistance Project (CRTAP) 
* Banking Restructuring Assistance 
Project 
* PHRD TA Grants 
IFC liquidity facilities

* 

* 

IMF LOI 

* USAID corporate and 
financial sector 
restructuring 

* By end of CAS period
less than 40% of banking
assets in state ownership
* Routine governance
actions exercised by
MOF, M&G Unit

* 

IMF LOI and TA 
* ADB lending and TA 

* 

* 

* 

IFC investments to recapitalize 
select banks 
IFC investments in restructuring 
funds or other specialized 
institutions targeting development of 
an active distressed debt market. 
IFC corporate restructurings 

* 

Inefficient Bank 
supervision by BI 

* 

Strengthen supervision in BI or 
in the new FSA 

* Slow disposition of assets 
* Expedited asset disposition 
by IBRA, poor 
with agreed upong targets 
implementation of IBRA's * Empower IBRA's OC and 
governance, risk of less 
management for independent 
than optimum quality 
decision-making 
corporate debt 
IBRA to adopt transparent 
restructuring deals by 
corporate restructuring 
IBRA 
principles. 

* 

* 

Ineffectiveness of 'sticks' 
to enforce corporate debt 
restructuring 

* Tax and regulatory 
impediments to voluntary 
corporate debt 
restructuring still remain

* 

* 

IBRA and JITF to make full 
use of their powers or leverage 
to accelerate and facilitate debt 
restructuring deals 
Fully implement the incentives 
that are already planned or
drafted

* 

* 

Inst. Strengthening
program in place for
supervision in BI/FSA.
Transition plan in place.
* Disposition schedule for
all IBRA assets set and
followed
Improved disclosure and
transparency in IBRA's
operations and audit
* Corporate restructuring
consistently in
accordance with agreed
upon CR principles.
* Build up in momentum
in the number of CR
deals completed

IFC institution building to help 
deepen and diversity financial 
markets; micro finance, NBFIs and 
life insurance, e-banking, brokerage
firms and pension fund management
companies, provision of greater
liquidity to bond and swap markets
via partial guarantees, and support to
housing finance via long-term local
currency funding, credit information
bureau.

* AAA - TA, policy advice 
ESW - Debt Management, Public 
Financial Management 

* 

* 

IMF LOI 

Macroeconomic stability
Fragile as reflected in:

* High govemment debt 
reserve, weak Rupiah, 
uptick in inflation, high 
interest rates 

* 
* 

* Adhere to LOI 
Implement agreed budget 
Ensure fiscal decentralization is 
budget neutral 
* Manage fiscal risks actively 
* Observe agreed monetary 
policy targets 

:Diagnosis 

XX 

StrategylcUtions 

Bank Group Instrueots 

Other Donor 

Progrs Indivators

2 

CAS Annex B9 Page 2 of 10

L_____X_____._____:__ nainstroments 

* Lack of comprehensive 
medium to longer term 
financial sector strategy 

* Draft and implement a medium 
to longer term financial sector 
strategy 

* AAA on financial sector strategy 

* Underdeveloped NBFI 
sector and capital markets 

* Market development and 
enabling actions for NBFI 
sector 

* 

ben6hmarks

* Medium to long term
Financial Sector Strategy
and Implementation Plan
agreed and followed

* Market and NBFI
development in
accordance with FSF

* 

* Ongoing LOI
performance
benchmarks/targets.
* Budget outcome close to
plan
Formulate a "road-map"
(with key outcome-based
milestones) for capacity
building and information
systems upgrading in the
Debt Management Unit
and proceed with its
implementation.
* Monitor existing public
contingent liabilities and
limit new ones (including
borrowing by sub-
national govemnments).
* Monetary indicators
close to plan

Diagnosis 

Pro-poor policies

* Open intemal trade 
threatened 

* Rice price policy changes 
may hurt poor 

* Land policy - insecure 
access to and constrained 
management authority 
over natural resources 

3 

CAS Annex B9 Page 3 of 10

StrategylAgtions 

Bank Group Instruments 

Other Donor 
Instruments 

Progress Indfcators/
benchmarks

* 

Encourage local revenue 
options that limit deterioration 
to the business environment. 

* Raise awareness of rice price 
impact on poor and altematives 
for helping farmers
a Discourage import controls and
higher tariffs

* Land: (i) establish a national 
forum on land policy reform; 
(ii) strengthen decentralized 
capacity to provide land 
administration services; (iii) 
strengthen and accelerate 
application of the framework 
for providing community titles 
to agrarian land. 

* Monitoring (ASEM grant), policy 
advice 

* 

Policy advice/condition (trigger for 
high case) 

* AAA - focus on facilitating the 
national-level, multi-stakeholder 
definition of land policy reform 
LEN - Second Land Administration 
Project 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Internal trade barriers
limited
Farm gate prices of
commodities

Price of rice to
consumers

* 
* 

* 

Land-titling proceeds
Establishment of national
forum
Improved local capacity

* AusAID is preparing a 
second phase of 
technical assistance in 
support of land 
administration.
USAID is providing
ongoing support
through its National
Resource Management
project for
strengthening
community mapping
and rights
identification for
forestry land

* Access to micro finance 

* 

Establish a strategy that focuses * 
on developing a sustainable 
market-based financial system, 
and decreases reliance on 
subsidized programn credits 

* 

* Complete BRI's reorientation 
to focus on micro- and small- 
scale finance 

* 

ESW/TA - review of micro-credit 
SPN - focused review of existing 
portfolio of community driven 
projects (e.g. UPP, KDP, NAATP, 
SAADP, BRDP) that involve 
revolving microcredit activities 
LEN - possible loan to support
expanded access in rural areas, 
ongoing support for revolving 
micro-credit in community driven 

* ADB - leadership on 
SME finance via TA 
and lending;
supervision of ongoing 
microfinance and P4K 
projects 

* GTZ ongoing PROFI
project supporting BI
in strengthening the

* 

Public promulgation of a
strategy

* Reduction of budget
support for subsidized
program credits

Diagnosis 

itkategy 

tions 

Bank Group Instrou e=tsOther 

iDoor 

Prog"ress Indicators

4 

CAS Annex B9 Page 4 of 10

* 

Strengthen regulatory and 
supervisory framework 

* 

projects 
IFC support to micro-finance 
institutions; SME facilities, and 
SME-focused banks.

regulatory framework
for Bank Percreditan
Rakyat (BPR)

* 

Insufficient poverty focus 
to public expenditure 
budgeting 

Competitive PSD
* Corporate govemance 
widely perceived to be 
worse than in any other 
country in the Region 

* 

Inadequate 
implementation of 
competition law 

* Use of 'benefit incidence" to 
guide public spending to 
programs which benefit poor 
and women and away from 
inefficient programs and 
subsidies, including fuel prices. 

* Develop approach to encourage 
poverty reduction by local 
govemments through the fiscal 
transfer framework

* 

* 

Strengthen regulatory and 
enforcement capacity in 
BAPEPAM and other 
regulatory agencies 
Develop public awareness of 
need for good corporate 
governance and promote self 
regulation by the private sector 

* Create and fully staff and fund 
the new competition agency 

* 

* AAA/ ESW - Poverty Report and 
follow up, Hydrocarbon Sector 
report, Energy policy discussions, 
budget discussions
LEN -possible Energy APL/SECAL 
* AAA - TA to GOI on 
decentralization framework, ESW -
Provincial PERs 
LEN - possible Public Sector
Reform Loan to support

* 

.

IMF LOI - phasing 
out inefficient 
subsidies 

a Benefit incidence for
bottom quintiles of
programs/subsidies in
central budget

* Benefit incidence for
bottom quintiles of
programs/subsidies in
local budgets

* AAA, PHRD Grant 

* Technical assistance through PHRD 
and AAA 
ESW - Competition Policy 

* 

* ADB corporate 
govemance reforms 
* CIDA - policy for 
private sector 
development 
* Netherlands corporate 
govemance capacity 
building

* Many donors 

* 

* 

Improved investor
confidence as measured
by improved investment
flows
Increase in the number of
effective enforcement
actions against offenders

* 

* Agency fully staffed
Policies and regulations
in place
Successful actions
brought against offenders
who abuse market power

* 

* 

Poor climate for foreign 
direct investment 

* Rationalize FDI policy, laws 
and regulations 

* Advice from MIGA and FIAS 
* AAA 

* UN agencies labor 
market monitoring 

* Privatization has stopped 

* Adopt a rational privatization 
policy, fund, create and staff an 
effective privatization
institution

* AAA for policy advice 

* 

Increased investment
flows
* Privatization begins
again and makes steady
progress

5 

CAS Annex B9 Page 5 of 10

Diagnosis 

StrategylActons 

Bank Group Instruments 

Other fDonr 
lnstruments 

* Many constraints to SME 
development 

* Rationalize government 
policies and interventions to 
support SMES 
* Develop effective, market
based support systems and 
skills development 
* Develop capacity in banks to 
lend to SMEs 

* 

* 

IFC to pilot innovative support 
programs through a decentralized 
SME facility 

* ADB non-bank 
financial institutions 
and many others 

IFC investments in private education * UNIDO small business
and health, internet-related 
development
investments, e-commerce.

* 

Indonesia not ready to take 
advantage of the new 
information and 
communications 
technologies 

Human capital development
for competitive growth

* Human capital 
development necessary for 
sustainable economic 
recovery. 
* Risk of decentralization 
having negative effect on 
human capital 
development. 

* 

* Privatize telecoms fixed line 
service providers TELKOM 
and INDOSAT 
Prepare a National Networking 
Development Plan 
* Develop a regulatory 
framework for networking and 
e-commerce
* Put government on line

* 

* 

* 

Improve basic education at 
district level 
Increased access to quality 
basic education 
Improve skills development, 
professional management, 
training 

* 

SPN - Information Infrastructure 
Development Project (IIDP) 
* AAA 

* 

JBIC 

* 

LEN - sub-national projects 
including Basic Education IV, 
Strengthening Local Education 
Capacity 11, Improving Quality And 
Responsiveness Of Community 
Oriented Health Care, Provincial 
Health 11 
SPN - supporting restructuring of 
secondary and higher education 
sectors 
* AAA - policy notes on health and 
education 
* Global Development Leaming 
Network initiative with University 
of Indonesia 

* 

* ADB decentralized 
education support in 
quality improvement
and to strengthen
poverty targeting
* UNICEF basic
education performance
monitoring and pilot
projects
Japan - vocational and
technical education
* Australia - education
and employment,
technical and
vocational training
* Canada - human
resource development

* 

. Pr 

Inlicators
benchmark s

* Growth in number and
output of SMEs
Increase in bank lending
to SMEs

* 

* 

* 

Increase in the use of the
internet, in particular an
increase in the volume of
e-commerce
Effective delivery of
government services
such as distance learning
and procurement using
the new technologies

* 

School enrollments
* Quality indicators

. agnos .is::; 

Stratte::gy0 0; 00 a/Actions 

Bank2 0Group Instruments 

:kOther 

Dn 

Prgrs 

Iu di:t./

6 

CAS Annex B9 Page 6 of 10

Addressing infrastructure
bottlenecks
* Declining public spending 
on maintenance/ 
preservation (roads, water 
supply, sanitation, 
irrigation and urban 
services) 

* Slow private sector 
participation, inefficient 
public sector entities, and 
distorted pricing 

* 

* 

* Minimal domestic 
financing capabilities 

* 

Strengthen domestic capital 
markets 

* 

Infrastructure bottlenecks 
in power, roads and water 

* Mobilize cofinancing for 
infrastructure needs, 
emphasizing equity
investments

Provide assistance for essential 
investments for maintenance/ 
rehabilitation, improve capacity 
of local government 

* 

LEN: Eastern Indonesia Roads, 
Water Resource Management 
(APL), Community Based Urban 
Development, Kecematan 
Development 11 and 111, Energy 
APL/SECAL 

Improve policy/legal/ 
regulatory framework, 
restructure sector entities, 
phase out price subsidies 

* AAA - Road Maintenance Strategy, 
Power Demand and Investment 
Planning 
* Possible policy-based guarantees 
IFC - Possible investments in water 
and transport. 

* 

* ADB focus on local 
road and small ports 
development, rural and 
outer islands needs 

* 

.

Japan - urban 
infrastructure 
development and 
housing development 

* ADB Power Sector 
Program Loan 

* ADB and JBIC 
lending for gas sector

* No disruptions to the
supplies of essential
services
* Maintenance improved
* Oil and gas sector
deregulated
New oil/gas/electricity
laws and regulatory
bodies established
PLN financial health
restored and restructured
Fuel and power subsidies
phased out
Energy APL/SECAL

* 

* 

* 

implemented

* 

* Govemance strategy in
place by June 2001.
Interministerial team in
place by January 2001.
Govemance Partnership
launches anti-corruption
survey and position
papers in January 2001.

.

Governance Strategy
* Lack of overall strategy on 
governance and no 
champion within 
government to lead 
govemance reform efforts. 

* Develop and implement 
governance and anti-corruption 
strategy led by high powered 
inter-ministerial team. 

* Ongoing advisory activities. Close 
interaction with Governance 
Partnership. 

* 

Indonesia led 
Govemance 
Partnership sponsored 
by UNDP and World 
Bank. 

Legal and judicial reforms
* Total public mistrust of 
legal and judicial system 
due to corruption in 
judiciary and in law 
enforcement agencies, 
poor quality of legal 
profession and weak 
infrastructure. 

* Adoption of a comprehensive 
and time bound law and 
judicial reform action program 
drawing on work of Law 
Reform Commission, and fill 
the institutional vacuum in 
managing legal reform process 

* Ongoing AAA activities - Civil 
Service Reform, Legislative 
Transparency 
Coordination of donor activities 

.

* USAID legal and 
judicial reform support 
* ABD support to 
Attorney General's 
office 
* Netherlands, Australia, * 
USA, ADB, Canada 
* Governance 

* National program on
legal reform adopted
early in 2001; Lead
person for legal reforms
designated.
Selection of reformist
judge for head of
Supreme Court.

Diagnosis 

Stratt/Actions 

Bank Group Instrunxents 

.______________ 

7 

Oalher Donor 
Instrum_ts 

Partnership to take the 
lead on increasing 
demand for law 
reforms. 

CAS Annex B9 Page 7 of 10

Progress lndicators/

benchmarks
* Allocation of adequate
budget resources for
National Law Reform
Conmuission,
Ombudsman, Anti-
Corruption Commission.

Civil service reforms
* Decentralization poses 
risks to service delivery 
and without redundancy 
policy, could result in 
large numbers of civil 
servants unwanted in 
regions 

* Civil service compensation 
may have been raised too 
much; no long term 
strategy for civil service 
reform. 

* GOI to prepare civil service 
reform strategy under IMF LOI 
* GOI should prepare 
redundancy plan, and develop 
clear implementation plan 
including making sure civil 
servants get paid, civil servants 
transferred to regions carry 
their budgets with them.. 

* Avoid further increases in civil 
service pay and develop exit 
program for redundant 
employees; GOI should build
capacity and institutional
infrastructure for ongoing pay
policy formulation

Public procurement and
financial management
* 
Procurement and financial 
management systems weak 
and corruption ridden. 

* 

* Govemment established a 
Steering Committee to 
guide reforms of public 
procurement system. 

Implement recommendations of 
the Country Procurement 
Assessment and Country 
Financial Accountability 
Assessment, particularly in 
relation to the establishment of 
the National Procurement 
Office, and revisions of the 
draft State Finance, Treasury 
and Audit bills. 

* 

IMF LOI 

a Ongoing analytical and advisory 
activities including report on civil 
service reform 
* Ongoing analytical work on civil 
service reforms 
If govermment is keen, public sector 
reform loan 

* 

* 

* 

Seamless transfer of civil
servants to region, and
redundancy plan in place
* No pay increases.
Establish Pay
Commission with TOR.
aimed at broad reforms
of system and
development of
methodology for pay
detemmination.
* Civil service strategy in
place

* Ongoing AAA and fiduciary control 
work by Bank. 
* CPAR, CFAA 

* Asian Development 
Bank participated in 
CPAR and CFAA 
work and will work 
with Bank on these 
issues. 

* National Public
Procurement office
(NPPO) is up and
running with a clear
mandate to formulate
national public
procurement policy and
monitor compliance.
* New laws and
regulations enacted
consistent with
international practice on
State Finance, Treasury
and Audit.

Thagnoelapub 

Straegy/Actions 

BaskGr X Instrumnts 

O_ier D_nor 

r 

Indl%ts./

8 

CAS Annex B9 Page 8 of 10

Management of
decentralization process 

Sustainable Natural Resource
Management and
environmental protection

* Deterioration in 
environment and lack of 
adequate NRM including 
impacts on global 
environment 

* 

* 

Potential for further 
degradation following 
decentralization 

Forests - illegal logging, 
inefficient industry, poor 
forest management, ill 
conceived conversion. 

* 

Poor Urban Air Quality 

* AAA, TA, fiscal decentralization, 
provincial public expenditure 
reviews. 
* LEN - possible Public Sector 
Reform Loan/Credit 

* GTZ decentralization
and local capacity
building
Japan - addressing
regional development
disparities,

* 

* 

* 

Implement CGI forestry 
commitments 
Follow through on global 
environmental treaty 
obligations drawing on 
international funds for support 

* Public participation in effective 
forest and protected area 
management 

* AAA/Donor Coordination 
* DFID Secondment 
* GEF - update biodiversity strategy -
long-term support if political 
commitment demonstrated 
* Montreal Protocol - grants for phase 
out of ozone depleting substances 
* AAA - Decentralized 
environmental management, 
Forestry, Land Policy 
TA - possible component for sub- 
national lending project 
SPN - Kerinci Seblat ICDP 

* 

* 

* Urban air quality improvement
* 
Strengthen and improve 
implementation of pollution 
regulation and licensing 

* 

LEN - Decentralized, demand- 
driven projects, 

* 

TA loans and grants 
and institutional 
strengthening 
programs (EU, JICA, 
DFID, USAID, GTZ, 
others) 
* Australia -
environmental impact 
assessment 
* GTZ forest resource 
management 

* 

TA (SwissContact, 
USAEP) 
* Air quality monitoring 
equpment (Austria) 
* CIDA "CEPI" 
programBAE 
* USAID Urban Env. 
Management 

* 

IDCF operational
a National Forest Program
formulated
* Urgent actions taken
a 
Improved access to
resources

* 

Secure tenure for
* Removal of non-forest
land from "fornst estate"
for use in agroforestry,
social forestry
Intensive replanting
progra 
ens

* 

regulaeons for
rons 
for
Environment Law
* Adequate budgeting and
BAPEDALDA
LD
* Clean fuel specifications
Effective vehicle
emissions testing and
enforcement
Energy APL/SECAL
implemented

* 

* Degradation in marine 
resources 

* 

Strengthen marine resource 
management 

* 

* 

SPN and LEN - COREMAP (APL) 
IDF Grant to DKP 

* ADB COFISH Project, 
Marine Resources 

* DKP fully operational
* COREMAP Phase I

*Di, u sis 

.

StrategylAcfins 

.

.

-

9 

Gn oup 

.

.

Otherfonor 

.

.____________ Ins truwients 
Loan 
* COREMAP (ADB, 
AusAID) 
Proyek Pesisir
(USAID)
JICA coral reef project

* 

* 

* 

Inadequate water resource 
management and potential 
negative effects of 
decentralization. 

* Water - establish and 
implement policy framework 
for river basin management and 
for irrigation management 
Follow through with 
investment to support reforms 
at subnational level 

* 

* 

* 

SPN - Piloting of new approaches 
through the JIIWRMP 
LEN - National Water Resources 
Management Program consistent 
with the WATSAL framework 

* A post-WATSAL 
investment phase is 
being closely
coordinated through a
local donors group that
includes: ADB, EU,
JICA, JBIC, FAO,
GTZ, Netherlands.

Effective public service
delivery to the poor

* Centrally controlled 
public service delivery: 
provisions don't match 
needs and resources are 
wasted 

* Govemment needs to 
define roles and 
responsibilities for each 
level - center, province, 
district and below, and 
possible private sector 
involvement 

* 

Forging new social 
contracts between local 
govemments and citizens 
should precede donor 
support. 

* Despite abilities, 

* 

* 

Improve incentives for demand 
orientation of public good 
providers through civil service 
reforn and introduction of 
competition through use of 
non-govemment providers. 
Sector-by-sector analysis and 
stakeholder consultation to 
work out right level of 
govemment for planning and 
administration of services, 
particularly health, education 
and basic infrastructure. 
* Reward reformers. Create local 
govemment networks, share 
best practice and lessons. 
Involve communities, including 
poor and vulnerable, in 
development planning and 
implementation. 

* 

* 

* AAA/ESW - Delivering Public 
Goods and Services at Sub-National 
level, Provincial Public Expenditure 
Reviews, Sectoral Studies in 
Decentralized Environment, Policy 
Notes on Health and Education 
SPN - Modification of existing 
projects to cope with new risks and 
seize new opportunities raised with 
decentralization 
LEN - sectoral and cross sector 
programmatic investment and TA 
supporting basic education, health 
and infrastructure through sub- 
national governments, communities, 
or both: Basic Education IV, SLEC 
II, Provincial Health 11, W.Java/lJkt 
Environmental Management 
Kecamatan Development Project 11 
and 111, Improving Quality And 
Responsiveness Of Community 

* 

* 

Local Govemment 
Capacity Building: 
ADB is addressing via 
a community 
development project; 
GTZ/USAID/CIDA 
study is supporting 
analytical work and 
strategy formulation
for local capacity
building.
* Germany - health
sector infrastructure
financing
Participatory planning:
many donors are
using, including IFAD,
ADB.
* ADB provincial
projects.
* UNICEF, WHO health

* 

CAS Annex 139 Page 9 of 10

Progr- mndictoru/

bealdne_tk
satisfactory
* COREMAP Phase II
goes ahead

* Completion of WATSAL
agenda

* Quality of local
government services.
* Health and education
status indicators.
* Accountability
mechanisms
Fiduciary controls at
local level improved

* 

Di agni7osisSrtglcln 

communities ignored as 
development partners 

Vulnerability of 
communities in conflict 
areas 

* Develop systematic response to 
impact of violent conflict on 
ongoing projects 
Selectively pilot approaches in
violence prone areas addressing
critical needs of the poor

* 

10 

CAS Annex B9 Page IO of IO

an ru 

ntue 

OtbUr Donor 

Mrg.sIutaos

Oriented Health Care, Eastern 
Indonesia Roads, Community Based 
Urban Development, Urban 
Governance Reform (APL), Water
Sector (APL) and possible Rural
Area Development (APL)

care pilot projects and
communicable disease
controls.

* AAA - Post-conflictVwidows study, 
Post-conflict strategy 

* UN agencies providing * Community development
emergency response 
approaches adopted in
post-conflict areas.

CAS Annex Bl0
Page 1 of 1

INDONESIA - CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Poverty Reduction &
Economic Management
Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 

Public sector 

Gender 

Human Development
Department
Education 

Health, nutrition & 
population 
Social protection 

Environmentally &
Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development 

Enviromment 

Social development 

Finance, Private Sector &
Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private sector 

Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

Country performancea Major issueb 

Country priority' Bank priorityc Reconciliation of
country and Bank
priorities d

Good 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Good 

Fair 

Good 

Fair 

Poor 

Fair 

Poor 
Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Develop and adopt 
broad based poverty
strategy
Structural reform; 
macrostability
Governance/anti- 
corruption
Voice and visibility 

High 

High

High 

High 

Moderate 

High

High

High 

Community
development, social
projects

Quality of basic 
education
Quality of health 
services 
Effectiveness of 
social safety nets

Rural incomes and 
infrastructure
Forests, water 

Community 
development 

Bank restructuring 
Corporate 
restructuring, SMEs
Sector policies and 
restructuring
Preservation, 
bottlenecks 

High 

Moderate 

High

High 

Moderate 

Moderate

Policy dialogue,
projects

High 

Moderate 

Moderate 

High

High 

High 

Forestry sector
dialogue
Community
development projects

High 
Moderate 

High
High 

Policy dialogue

Moderate 

Moderate

Moderate 

High 

Policy dialogue,
projects

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary completion;"
for environment , "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

MYANM4 

\ 

B 

rIAm~A 

AII 

INDONESIA

MYANM? / V 

I 

___P MAIN ROADS

A4ndamon Cy'>' 

' 

*. 

r' 

° 

SELECTED CITIES AND 
TOWNS
t - ¢, 2 >1 * 

Sa * I! G o 

J 

*,,,ng 

O C EAN 

PROVINCE HEADQUARTERS

JQ ' .>etiali czfi d 

v 

r . ' ' 5 

N 

ATION AL CAPITAL

SuII. 

-

- -

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

WA;L, 

.
D 

.

Sea 

PROVINCES: --- 

INTERNATIONAL 

BOUNDARIES

'I'.- 

j A-li 

2 ~~~~~~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~D.I.ACEH 

I IJAWA BARAT 
1 JAA ENGH 

21 SULAWESIUTA
2 SLAESITEGA

,) * > 

, <, 

S lf 

2 SUMArERAurARA 

12 JAWATENGAH 

22 SULAWESITENGAH~~~~~~~~~~S 

MTEA TAR 

) 

-, 

3 RLAU 
-~ 
AN 
4SUMATERA BARAT 

) 
13 D.I. YOGYAKARTA 
IA JAWATIMUR 
1BL5AIANA 
4TAWA TMUR 

23 SULAWESI TENGGARA
24 SULAWESI SELATAN
25 KAUMANTAN 
2

B<lidz, 
N 

i 

.>e*, 

* 

_] 

se 

- 1 
_ 
-SJAMBI 

-

Aceb ~ ~ ~ 

F 

EAA

A A Y 

S 

BRUNEI- 

/ A 

6 BENGKUW 

16 NUSA TFNGGARA BARAT 26 KAUMANTAN SELATAN

1 SUMATERA SELATAN 17 NUSA TENGGARA TIMUR 27 KALIMANTAN TENGAH

42' N 

/ 

Celebes 

S ~~~~~~~ ~ ~~~~~~~~ ~ 

~~~~~~~~~~~~LAMPUNG 

IS TIMOR 

28 KAIJMANTAN BARAT

NfJedqn 

-

* 

X 

, 

lI 

, 

S 

Is 

9 DLlCelebes 

h. 

K.3 . JAKARTA 

19 PAPUA 

29 RIAU ARCHIPELAGO'

F6wlq A io&1
eet 
:0 
i-f 

4

./ 

2\ 

-i 

I 

3] 
.5 

S e a 

}0 BANTEN 
lB/ 

20 MALUKU 

30 BANGKA-BELITUNG

J 

SeaoS

SimAiie-. 2' 

9 

Mwnado 

/ 

r135; 

?+ 

ehl 

Proposild pt:5

.o 

S 

Nia s -A~NTV 
Pe ksqnboru-v 

i 

; 

, 

' 

ct: 

t 

O~tnrontdp 

9o 

-

SIGAOR 

> 

pougkrqqESi 2 

S 

e 

_Aha. 

->akOAT 

, 

25 

2L

>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
~ k6. 

YVoBe 

Pi4+<fn< 

t 7R \ 

.

ir~; 

;m91\ 

X 

-i

orn

/PaoJo N 

28 

O2l 

N TA2 

22 

-

/2~&pepen 

* 

l 

#5 

-

~ayap
corpengkuia 
~. 

1

C -kETN 

Jafura

Brp ff 

,,R, 

,i,, 

, 

,> 3_, 

_ 1 

5!t 

\ 

0 

2 

/6,*

o ., 

4 

._ .

-

1. i 

PAPUA

Java Sea 

U5.) 

*a at 

ado1,

IN D 0 N E' S 

IAs-

DeBpb~~~~r) 

mm 

~ 

~ 

4 

EAST TIMORIa/r 

Se 

-

7Kupanig

INDIA 

N OCEAN

I 

1 

I 

I 

I 

.- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ G~~ulf of

Thin onep -e proc 

by Ise Map fleslgn (Soi of TA4 Work) Sin).0

10 

no this orepdo not i,epIy~ no shepoddn Th. World. Sek rop,- 

-

8 

105' ~~~±~~~z

1t0z!ZZZooY 

Inonlol5toreny endonsoorot 

120' 

/ t' 

A U S T R A L I A 

'-~A 

U 

T R A L IA 

C,

