Document of
The World Bank

For Official Use Only

Report No. 22163-EGT

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

June 5, 2001

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of

their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency unit: Egyptian Pound (LE) as of May 9, 2001
US$1 = LE 3.87

FISCAiL YEAR
July 1 - June 30

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
BOT 

CAS 

Analytical and Advisory Assistance 
Build, Operate, Transfer 

Country Assistance Strategy 

CBE 
CEDAW 

CG 

Central Bank of Egypt 
Committee for the Elimination of all Discrimination 
Against Women
Consultative Group 

COMESA 
CPPR 
DFID 
ECD 

Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 
Department for International Development 
Early Childhood Development 

EHDR 
ESW 

EU 
FDI 
FIAS 

FSAP 
FY 
GDP 
GDLN 

GDI 
GEF 
GOE 

Egypt Human Development Report 
Economic and Sector Work 

European Union 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Foreign Investment Advisory Service 

Financial Sector Assessment Program 
Fiscal Year 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Distance Learning Network 

Gross Domestic Investment 
Global Environment Facility 
Government of Egypt

HSRP 
IBRD 

ICT 

IDA 
IFC 

Health Sector Reform Program
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
Information & Communications
Technology
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation

IFPRI 

International Food Policy Research
Institute
ILO 
International Labor Organization
IMF 
International Monetary Fund
MDF 
Mediterranean Development Forum
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
NBI 
Nile Basin Initiative
NCCM National Council for Childhood and
Motherhood
NGO 
Non-governmental Organization
OED 
Operations Evaluation Department
PBDAC Principal Bank for the Development of
Agricultural Credit
SFD 
Social Fund for Development
SME 
Small- and Medium-size Enterprises
UNDP 
United Nations Development Program
USAID United States Agency for International
Development
World Bank Institute
World Food Program

WBI 
WFP 

IBRD
Vice President 
Country Director 

IFC
Vice President 
Director 
Task Manager 

Jean-Louis Sarbib
Mahmood A. Ayub

Assaad Jabre
Sami Haddad
Tarek Allouba

EGYPT COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................ 
.............................................. 
1. 
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND POLICY OPTIONS .1

A. 

B. 

Political Context 

Recent Economic Developments .

C. More Recent Economic Challenges. 
D. 
Poverty and Social Indicators. 

II. 

EGYPT'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA. 

.I

A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 

Achieving Sustainable High Growth and Reducing Poverty. 
Social and Human Development .11
Agriculture, Rural Development and Water .13
Removing Obstacles to Private Sector Development .14

111. EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND MACROECONOMIC OPTIONS .17

A. 
B. 

External Environment .17
Macroeconomic Constraints and Policy Options .17

TV. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

.

.19

A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 

Implementation of the Previous CAS: What Worked, What Did Not .19
Lessons Learned and Benchmarks for Future Assessments .20
Changing Relationship: Mix of Lending and Non-Lending Services .22
Base Case Assistance Program ..................... 
: 
.
................................ 
Alternative Scenarios and Contingencies .26
IBRD Portfolio Management and Performance .27
IFC Portfolio Management and Performance ....................................................... 
MIGA's Involvement in Egypt ................................................................. 
Experience with the Decentralization of the Bank Group Country Management to the Field 

V. 

VI. 

COORDINATION WITH DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS .............. 

............................. 

BANK EXPOSURE AND RISKS 

...................................................................... 

BOXES

Box A: 
Box B: 
Box C: 
Box D: 

TABLES

Table 1: 
Table 2: 
Table 3: 
Table 4: 
Table 5: 

Incidence and Dynamics of Poverty in Egypt ...................... 
................................ 
Implementation of Previous CAS: What Worked, What Did Not ......... 
..................... 
OED Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) ....... 
............................................... 
Major Donors in Egypt .
...................................................................... 

Egypt's Key Economic Indicators ................................................................. 
Outlook for Economic Indicators Under Three Scenarios .............. 
.......................... 
Base Case Bank Assistance Program, FY02-04 ........................ 
............................ 
Triggers and Main Assumptions for the Lending Program ............. 
.......................... 
Sector Distribution of IFC's Egypt Portfolio ....................................................... 

i

3
4

5

6

22

28
30
30

31

33

5
20
21
32

2
18
24
27
29

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

ANNEX TABLES
1: World Bank Group Private Sector Strategy
2: World Bank Institute (WBI) in Egypt
A2: Egypt at a Glance
B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
B3: Bank Group Program Summary
B4: Summary of Non-lending Services
B5: Social Indicators
B6: Key Economic Indicators
B7: Key Exposure Indicators
B8: Statement of IBRD/IFC Operations Portfolio
B9: CAS Program Matrix
B10: CAS Summary of Development Priorities
MAP General Map of the Arab Republic of Egypt. Map IBRD 27759

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 

During the second half of the 1990s, Egypt's growth performance strengthened in

quantitative terms, but it showed some qualitative weaknesses. Following the stabilization efforts

of the early 1990s, macroeconomic policy provided a stable environment for private sector activity,
with particular success in reducing inflation. Stabilization was accompanied by the implementation
of a series of structural reforms in the areas of capital markets, tariff reduction, reforms of the
insurance industry, privatization of more than half of the designated public enterprises with assets
worth almost US$4 billion, and improvement in the targeting of the social safety net. This resulted in
higher GDP growth, but the impact in terms of poverty reduction remains to be assessed. In addition
a number of concerns have emerged as to the sustainability of this economic performance. First,
there is the short-term concern regarding the macroeconomic framework. Despite the roughly 12
percent depreciation of the currency since January 2000, the effective exchange rate remains
appreciated. There has also been a reversal of the fiscal stance since 1999. Resulting balance of
payments pressures have led to significant loss of reserves. Second, with the exception of
manufacturing, the fastest growing sectors have been generally non-tradable, focused on domestic
demand. Perhaps most significantly for the medium term, growth sectors in Egypt have not been
technology-intensive, nor associated with large improvements in productivity. In particular, the
construction boom that occurred during 1995-99 was a significant component of the increased
investment and growth effort. The issue is to what extent the draft Mortgage Law -- expected to
improve housing affordability through longer amortization periods -- can resuscitate this sector,
which has witnessed a major slowdown in 2000-2001. Third, despite a recent rebound, merchandise
exports practically stagnated during the 1990s, a period during which world merchandise trade
expanded by an average of 5.6 percent per annum.

ii. Egypt possesses many advantages that can allow it to achieve a growth rate high enough
to result in a sustainable reduction in poverty. It has a relatively large domestic market with
rising purchasing power. It has a relatively cheap labor force and incomparable cultural and touristic
attractions. It has proven natural gas reserves of over 40 trillion cubic feet, compared to its current
annual domestic consumption of only 17 billion cubic feet. 
It boasts social stability with
exceptionally crime-free urban centers.

iii. For Egypt to exploit these comparative advantages and to tackle the problem of
increasing unemployment, it would have to pursue policies that engender a strong and
sustained growth. This will depend essentially on two factors. First, the country will need to
address more aggressively its unfinished agenda of structural reforms. This will entail reactivating
the recently sluggish privatization program; further reducing tariffs and other trade barriers;
implementing tax reforms; undertaking changes in the legal system to make investment easier and
commercial disputes quicker to settle; and developing a financial system that is prudentially sound,
provides medium- and long-term resources at lower cost, and responds more rapidly to the needs of
small businesses. The second factor is the level of investment and borrowing needed to achieve the
current Five-Year Plan's growth objective of 7.0-7.5 percent. Even if the Government succeeds in
doubling foreign direct investment during the decade from its present level of US$1.5 billion per
annum, it is almost certain that the anticipated higher growth rate will not materialize without
increased foreign capital flows, including from less concessional sources. While Egypt's reduction
of its external debt from 130 percent of GDP in 1989 to 30 percent of GDP in 2000 is commendable,
the continuation of this excessively conservative external borrowing strategy will restrict GDP
growth to around 5 percent, not sufficient to absorb the 550,000 new job entrants into the labor

ii

market and to make inroads into the current backlog of unemployment. Avoiding external public
borrowing for projects with high social rates of return carries a real-and probably sizeable-penalty
in the form of foregone productive investment.

iv. 
In important respects, the Bank's role in Egypt is similar to that in most lower middle-
income countries. The Bank is by no means the major partner in the country. USAID and the EU
have larger assistance programs. Moreover, given the country's cautious external borrowing strategy
and Egypt's graduation from IDA about two years ago, the Bank cannot anchor its role in its
financial contribution. On the other hand, despite some progress in negotiations with foreign
financial institutions to float a Eurobond, Egypt does not yet have sustained access to private
international markets. Taken together, these factors have several implications for the Bank's
involvement in Egypt:
* The Bank's lending role in Egypt is limited to a modest level. This is the Government's
prerogative, and determines the nature of the Bank's overall involvement in the country.
However, the downside is that, should the Government decide to have the Bank play a larger
lending role commensurate with Egypt's size and importance, we will not be able to respond
quickly, simply because the Bank lacks the solid analytical base that is a prerequisite for a rapid
response. This weak policy dialogue is particularly apparent in two critical areas: (a) analysis of
the nature and incidence of poverty in Egypt, which prevents the Bank from developing a truly
effective poverty alleviation strategy; and (b) an assessment of the financial sector, which would
help the Government better understand, and respond to, the weaknesses of the financial system
and its vulnerability to economic shocks.
* Within this constrained relationship, selectivity in Bank's involvement becomes critical. In
particular, the Bank's focus will be in areas where (a) Government commitment to projects is
unequivocally strong; (b) the Bank has a long and positive experience (water sector and
irrigation; human development); (c) it can bring knowledge management and experience of other
countries to guide Egypt's policy reforms (mortgage market development; information and
communications infrastructure; poverty and gender analysis; and community-based
development); and (d) it can serve as a catalyst for mobilizing financing packages 2-3 times that
of Bank loans for well-designed and high priority projects. Given the important programs of
other development partners, the Bank will have minimal direct involvement in energy, industrial
restructuring, and environment.
In view of the Government's requirement that all new operations should have a grant element of
at least 40 percent, it will be critically important to ensure even closer cooperation with
development partners that have softer lending terms than those of the Bank.
* Over time, and as the size of the Bank's portfolio decreases, a greater share of administrative
budget resources will be allocated to knowledge-based, non-lending activities which are high
priority for the Government or which are necessary for due diligence.

* 

v. The role of IFC has increased considerably over the past three years and is expected to
expand further. IFC's committed portfolio is now US$328 million. This makes it IFC's largest
portfolio by far in the Middle East and North Africa.

vi. The over-arching objective of the Bank Group's country strategy in Egypt is to reduce
poverty and unemployment. Working closely with the authorities and other development partners,
the Bank Group will focus on three types of interventions: (a) interventions that support higher and

iii

sustained growth (supporting macroeconomic stability; phased restructuring of the bank and
corporate sectors; and improved infrastructure for greater competitiveness). Given the important and
active involvement of USAID and the EU in this broad area, the Bank's lending, at least under the
base case scenario, will be limited; (b) targeted interventions for poverty reduction (basic education
and health; social protection and safety net; and rural poverty); and (c) interventions with indirect
poverty reduction impact. These include interventions that may have major indirect benefits for the
poor in terms of promoting broad-based growth, development of poor areas, initiating dialogue on
governance and community development issues, and building effective institutions.

vii. The "base case"--considered to be the most likely scenario-presumes a continuation of
the current pace of growth (5.0-5.5 percent per annum) and policy implementation. The
scenario is characterized by no significant shocks or reversals of policy reforms, but also no major

structural reform breakthroughs. The base case strategy will be implemented through the following

instruments.

* The Bank's portfolio is expected to shrink to about 14 operations by FY04, compared to 19 at
present. Four considerations will dominate the Bank's portfolio management: 
(a) closer
management of closing dates to ensure speedier delivery of project benefits; (b) greater effort on
the part of the Government and the Bank to reduce effectiveness delays; (c) a special effort to
reduce the use of project management units (PMUs) to ensure sustainability of project outcomes;
and (d) while early indications of parallel financing with development partners for the Bank's
proposed new operations are positive, discussions will be initiated with the Government to move
away from the project-by-project requirement of meeting the 40 percent grant element toward a
more macro or sectoral approach to debt concessionality.

T The Bank's Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) program will focus on: (a) studies and
activities that provide the intellectual underpinning for operations and technical advice in human
development, rural development and water management; (b) core diagnostic work on poverty,
public expenditure review, financial sector assessment, and gender analysis and mainstreaming.
The recently completed Social and Structural Review provides a solid base for deepening policy
dialogue between the authorities and the key development partners. WBI is expected to play an
important role in disseminating world-wide best practice and bringing focus on high priority
development issues. Over time, the share of analytical and capacity building work in the
program is expected to increase. Most critically needed AAA will be funded out of the Bank's
administrative budget. However, arrangements will be explored with other donors and possibly
the Government to share costs for additional on-demand AAA or capacity building services. A
review of the effectiveness of the Bank's AAA will be undertaken toward the end of the CAS

period to guide our future analytical and capacity building work in Egypt.
* New lending of 2-3 projects a year amounting to a total of US$450-500 million during the period

FY02-04.

* Selective expansion of IFC and MIGA activities. IFC's priorities, closely coordinated with those
of the Bank, will focus on developing private-financed infrastructure; providing support to the
services sector, including tourism; supporting internationally competitive and export-oriented
ventures; supporting the privatization effort through both advisory services and providing
financing to privatized ventures; providing support to small and medium enterprises; developing
financial markets; and possibly participating in building pipelines to export Egypt's large natural
gas reserves to Eastern Mediterranean countries.

iv

* The use of Bank guarantees, alongside MIGA and IFC investments, will be explored to attract
private capital into areas where performance risk remains a major bottleneck.

viii. In terms of alternative scenarios, a "high case" assistance scenario would apply if there is
a major deepening of the structural reforms or in the case of a severe deterioration in the
external environment which may lead the Bank to step up its assistance in support of a credible

program. Under this scenario, the Bank could increase total lending over the three years to around
US$1.5 billion of which about a half could be in the form of quick-disbursing loans. As indicated
earlier, the rapidity of the Bank's response will be determined to a large extent by the existence of a
sustained dialogue between the Government and the Bank on the key structural issues. Alternatively,
if the implementation of policy reforms and Bank portfolio deteriorate considerably (deepening
controls, halting structural reforms, and deteriorating Bank portfolio), a "low case" lending scenario
would be envisaged, under which Bank lending for the whole period would be limited to about
US$100 million for one or two projects in the social sectors. Triggers for the scenarios are outlined
in the main text.

ix. There are risks attached to the proposed country strategy. These are summarized in

Section VI of the CAS, and relate to external exogenous shocks, the risk of fiscal unsustainability,
and delays in the implementation of macroeconomic and structural reforms. However Egypt is
unlikely to face a major risk of balance of payments crisis in the short run, thanks to the adequate
international reserves (US$14 billion, about eight months of imports), and cautious attitude to new
borrowing, which has resulted in low debt service ratio and a relatively small short-term debt (at 6.5
percent of total debt). Egypt has continued to maintain a very good track record in servicing its debt
to the Bank Group. Bank exposure is moderate, and expected to remain so under the base case
lending proposal. IBRD's share of Egypt's overall external debt service would be a comfortable 6-7
percent, as compared with the guideline of 20 percent.

x. The following issues are suggested for Board consideration:
* 

Is the proposed Bank Group program sufficiently selective, taking into account the role of other
development partners?

* Does the proposed mix of lending and non-lending services reflect the changing relationship
between Egypt and the Bank Group?

* Are lessons learned from the implementation of the previous CAS sufficiently taken into account
in the design of the present assistance program?

* 

Is there sufficient flexibility in the proposed lending program to respond to downside risks?

I. 

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND POLICY OPTIONS

A. Political Context

1. 
Following President Mubarak's re-election for a fourth six-year term in 1999, a new
government was formed in October 1999, with an ambitious reform agenda. This was followed by
Parliamentary elections during October/November 2000. While the ruling National Democratic
Party (NDP) retained its parliamentary dominance, its majority was reduced from 94 percent of
parliamentary seats in 1995 to 85 percent. The number of opposition deputies in parliament
increased from 13 to 54, and many prominent NDP legislators lost their seats.

2. While voter apathy is still quite high (turnout in the election ranged from 14 percent to 40
percent across the country), the election process has been widely perceived as a step in the right
direction. In particular, for the first time the legislative elections were supervised by the judiciary.

3. With parliamentary elections completed, the pace of policy reforms will be determined to a
large extent by the Government's commitment to reforms and its ability to pass through Parliament
several pieces of important legislation (e.g., Mortgage Law, Anti-Trust Law, Financial Leasing Law,
Intellectual Property Rights Law, Labor Law, NGO Law).

4. 
Egypt is an important player in the Middle East peace process and recent developments in the
area have been detrimental to prospects for political stability and economic development in the whole
region.

B. Recent Econonic Developments

5. 
Egypt's economic growth performance during the second half of the 1990s has been robust.
The stabilization efforts of the early 1990s resulted in lower growth (averaging 3.8 percent during
1990-95). However, they set the stage for sustained GDP increase during the past five years
(averaging about 5.5 percent during 1996-2000)1. Macroeconomic policy provided a stable
environment for private sector activity by maintaining external and internal balances stable for most
of the period (see Table 1), with particular success in reducing inflation.

6. During the last two to three years, however, concerns have emerged about the sustainability of
this economic performance, in particular with regard to the external accounts. These concerns are
focused on two key areas:
* First, there is an issue regarding the structural and productivity underpinnings of growth. Egypt
remains an inward looking economy, with a lukewarm performance of non-oil manufacturing
exports both in terms of growth and composition, as well as not being a major recipient of
foreign direct investment (FDI). Other growth sectors, in particular services and construction,
while creating new employment, are also not contributing to improving productivity and the
economy's competitiveness.
* Second, there is a shorter-term concern regarding the macroeconomic framework. Despite the
roughly 12 percent depreciation of the currency since January 2000, the real effective exchange
rate remains appreciated, while productivity has not strengthened as much as hoped for. Balance
of payments (BOP) pressures began in 1997, which led to a significant loss of reserves and to the

This average could be lower once the final GDP data for 2000 are revised downward to about 5.0 percent, as has been indicated by
govemment sources. It is also important to note that the growth rate of non-oil GDP has been more variable. In 1999/00, non-oil GDP is
estimated to have grown at 4.3 percent, down from 8.1 percent in 1998/99.

abandonment of the fixed nominal dollar peg during 1999-2000. The Government has taken
action but continued pressure on reserves suggests that investors continue to have concerns.

2

TABLE 1: EGYPT'S KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS

(percentages unless otherwise stated)

1990-1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000*

6.0 
4.3 
22.8 
14.4 
9.2 
12.8 
96.8 
-1.9 
-4.2 
0.7 
88.8 
33.7 
9.5 
3.8 
10.2 
26.2 

6.4
4.7
24.2
19
7.0
9.4
107.3
-1.2
-3.6
1.6
84.7
30.0
8.7
2.8
8.6
21.7

(A 
Inual
Average)
GDP, market prices, real growth rate 
3.8 
GDP per capita, real growth rate 
1.6 
Gross Domestic Investment, ratio to GDP 
19.7 
Gross Domestic Savings, ratio to GDP 
13.6 
Exports of GNFS, real growth rate 
5.7 
Imports of GNFS, real growth rate 
2.6 
Merchandise Terms of Trade Index (1992=100) 
98.5 
Current Account Balance, ratio to GDP 
3.5 
Overall Fiscal Balance, ratio to GDP 
-7.1 
Foreign Direct Investment (Billions of US$) 
0.9 
Total Government Debt, ratio to GDP 
116.9 
External Debt (DOD), ratio to GDP 
69.6 
Debt Service, Ratio to Exports of GNFS 
17.4 
Inflation Rate (CPD 
14.4 
Gross Reserves (months of imports) 
7.5 
Reserves/M2 
28.9 
* Provisional. All figures are for fiscal years, i.e., 2000 means 1999/2000.
Source: World Bank Live Data Base (LDB). Data for 2000 are govemment estimates, and could be revised.

5.5 
3.6 
17.7 
13.0 
2.4 
1.9 
114.4 
0.2 
-0.9 
0.7 
92.6 
40.1 
9.7 
6.2 
12.0 

5.0 
3.1 
16.6 
10.8 
1.6 
1.6 
95.8 
-0.3 
-1.3 
0.6 
96.9 
46.8 
13.2 
7.3 
11.9 
37.8 

5.6 
3.8 
20.5 
14.0 
-7.7 
1.1 
97.4 
-3.0 
-1.0 
1.0 
88.4 
36.7 
8.5 
3.8 
10.6 
32.4 

35.9 

1 

7. 
Investment, both public and private, has been one of the main driving forces behind the robust
GDP growth in the post-stabilization period. Gross Domestic Investment (GDI) increased to 24.2
percent of GDP by 2000, up from 16.6 percent in 1996. This increased investment has been mainly
driven by high domestic credit growth, high public investment expenditures and privatization.
Annual credit growth, in particular credit to the private sector, has been very high during most of the
post-stabilization period: indeed during 1994-99, nominal credit growth to the private sector was
more than double the nominal GDP growth. Government capital expenditure also increased from 5.4
percent of GDP in 1998 to 8.2 percent and 6.8 percent in 1999 and 2000, respectively. Privatization,
which was particularly intense during 1996-99-averaging some 24-29 transactions annually for an
average value of 1 percent of GDP per annum-was 
likely another factor behind the increase in
private investment. Foreign direct investment (FDI) has played a more modest role. During 1996-
2000, it averaged some US$1 billion annually (roughly 1 percent and 5 percent of GDP and GDI,
respectively). More than half of the FDI flow into Egypt during the past decade has been in three
subsectors: chemicals, food and beverage, and engineering. If tourism were added to them, they
would represent some 70 percent of the total.

8. 
An analysis of the sources of growth in Egypt during the past few years additionally suggests
that, while the country's growth performance was strong in quantitative terms, it was less so in

qualitative 

terms.

* First, except for manufacturing (which grew at almost 10 percent during 1998-2000) the fastest
growing sectors have been primarily non-tradable, mainly focused on domestic demand. 
In
particular, the services sector has been the largest contributor to GDP growth. While tourism
explains part of the sector's expansion, much of this growth was linked to domestic demand. In
addition, the construction boom that occurred during 1995-99 (with the sector recording double-
digit growth rates during this period) was a significant component of the increased investment
effort. The issue is to what extent the draft Mortgage Law -- expected to improve housing

3

affordability through longer amortization periods -- can resuscitate this sector, which has
witnessed a major slowdown during 2000-2001.

* Second, merchandise exports practically stagnated during the 1990s, a period during which world
merchandise trade expanded by 5.6 percent per annum on average. Between 1990 and 1998,
Egypt's merchandise exports declined from 15 percent of GDP to merely 6.2 percent, and their
share in total world merchandise exports declined from 0.15 percent in 1990 to 0.1 percent in
1998. The recent rebound in export growth most likely reflects the response to the depressed
domestic market. Constant market share analysis reveals that Egypt failed to take advantage of
buoyant world trade because it did not trade enough in products for which world consumption
was growing fast (large and negative world consumption switching effect) and because it lost
market shares in its traditional exports products (negative competitiveness effect).

* Third, and perhaps most significant for the medium-term, growth sectors in Egypt are not
technology-intensive, except perhaps manufacturing, and they are not usually associated with
large improvements in productivity. For example, while part of the boom in construction may
reflect upgrading of key infrastructure, it also suggests that a significant share of investment
constituted new buildings rather than re-tooling or investments in high-tech sectors. In this
regard, FDI has not been a source of technology to upgrade Egypt's competitiveness and
productivity. Given the large role of state banks in the financial system, financial intermediation
may have suffered from interference and weakened the quality of the investment being financed.
And as suggested by the negligible importance of net exports in aggregate demand and the rather
disappointing composition of exports, even manufacturing growth seems to have been
concentrated in satisfying local demand, and has been in relatively low technology sectors such
as textiles. In short, growth in Egypt has been driven largely by factor accumulation rather than
by total factor productivity gains.

C. More Recent Economic Challen2es

9. 
Since early 1998, an important macroeconomic issue has been the pressure on the balance of
payments (BOP). The current account swung significantly from a surplus in 1997 to a deficit
equivalent to 3 percent of GDP in 1998, before gradually improving to a deficit of about 1 percent of
GDP in 2000. In 2000 and the first quarter of 2001, the capital account also showed a significant
deficit mainly because of net outflows from the domestic banking system. To ease the demand for
foreign exchange, the authorities imposed import restrictions, and in 1999 the Central Bank of Egypt
(CBE) started to draw down reserves to meet the growing demand for foreign exchange and to
defend the exchange rate peg. 
In total, net international reserves declined from US$20 billion in
1998 to US$14.3 billion by December 2000 (equivalent to nine months of imports). The authorities
relaxed the peg and allowed the nominal exchange rate to depreciate gradually, from US$/LE3.40 in
January 2000 to US$/LE3.85 in January 20011. In early 2001, 
the authorities put in place a new
exchange rate system that, depending on how it is implemented, may allow for more flexibility in the
nominal exchange rate.

10. The main exogenous factor behind the pressure on the BOP was the decline in tourism receipts
following the attack in Luxor on tourists in late 1997. An additional important factor was the
continued appreciation of the real exchange rate after 1997, mainly as a result of the sharp rise in the
value of the US dollar to which the Egyptian pound was pegged. This trend in the pound must have
contributed to the poor export performance as well as the reduced confidence in the sustainability of
the peg, especially in conjunction with the relatively weak productivity performance.

I 

The weighted average of market rates during the last three weeks of January 2001.

4

11. The impact of these unfavorable shocks was initially exacerbated by the macroeconomic
policy mix of the authorities. Perhaps concerned with the decline in tourism in 1998, the authorities
continued to implement expansionary fiscal and monetary policies during 1998-99, despite emerging
symptoms of overheating, and only moved to tighten monetary policy during 2000. This policy
reversal, in turn, led to a domestic liquidity squeeze, particularly in the private sector, which was
exacerbated by the accumulation of payment arrears by the government. As a result, overnight inter-
bank interest rates rose from 11.5 percent in October 1999 to 14.6 percent in February 2000. As
fears and complaints about the impact of the lack of liquidity on domestic activity grew, the
authorities once again eased monetary policy, as indicated by the decline in the inter-bank rate to
below 11.5 percent during April-December 2000.

12. On the fiscal front, while the authorities were successful in containing the budget deficit during
1995-98, it increased significantly in 1999 and 2000 (4.2 percent of GDP in 1999 and 3.6 percent in
2000). The sudden reversal in the fiscal stance can be explained partly by improved reporting of
fiscal data by consolidating into the budget the expenditures financed by the National Investment
Bank (NIB). It also partly reflects the Govemment's decision to clear the arrears to the private sector
to spur the slowing economy. However, there has also been an increase in public investment in mega
projects. The Government has announced that it will tighten control on public investment spending,
and is making a concerted effort to identify private investors in the Middle East for some of the
larger projects. However, preliminary data on the 2000/2001 fiscal deficit suggest little success so
far.

D. Poverty and Social Indicators

13. Poverty analysis in Egypt has been severely hampered by the absence of a rigorous and
systematic assessment of poverty incidence and the Government's reluctance to allow access to
primary data. However, based on investigations undertaken since 1995 (Box A), the incidence of
poverty in mid-1990s was in the range of 22-48 percent of the total population with about 7-10
percent of the population ultra-poor'. Poverty is concentrated in the rural areas and urban-female
headed households. It is the worst in rural Upper Egypt.

14. The extent to which the recent high growth performance in the second half of the 1990s
translated into poverty reduction remains to be assessed. But continued sustainable high growth will
be essential for achieving significant poverty reduction in Egypt. Given that poverty in Egypt is
relatively shallow, policies that encourage labor-intensive growth are particularly important in
bringing a relatively large number of households back above the poverty line.

15. Egypt has made important strides in improving several of its social indicators during the past
decade. Between 1990 and 1998, life expectancy has increased from 63 years to 67 years; fertility
rate has declined from 4.0 to 3.3; and infant mortality rate (per 1000 live births) has declined from 69
to 49. Population growth has slowed to slightly under 2 percent, compared to 2.5 percent two
decades ago. However, some outcome indicators, such as literacy, infant mortality and maternal
mortality do not reflect the high levels of inputs. For example, the net primary enrollment ratio is
around 93 percent, yet illiteracy is still about 45 percent. Moreover, despite almost universal access
to health care, which is higher than in most countries at similar income levels, infant mortality is
higher than in comparator countries. Similarly, although the proportion of GDP spent on education
and health is similar to or greater than in comparator countries, the efficiency of service delivery in
these sectors clearly needs improvement. Finally wide disparities persist between Upper Egypt and
Lower Egypt and between the rural and urban populations especially in terms of fertility rates and
infant and child mortality rates.

These figures are not endorsed by the Govemment, and a detailed household survey has just been completed.

5

16. 
In tenns of achieving the International Development Goals (IDGs) by 2015, prospects are good
for meeting these goals. The two main areas that will need special attention are (i) reducing by half
the number of malnourished children between 1990 and 2015 (the number of underweight children
under the age of five remains at almost 12 percent compared to 10.4 percent in 1990; and (ii) making
progress toward gender equality and empowering women (at roughly 80 percent, the ratio of girls to
boys in primary and secondary schools has not improved much during the past decade; and literacy
rates among girls 15-24 years old, while improving, lag behind boys). The Bank's assistance
strategy, with its focus on social development and elimination of gender disparities, takes account of
these challenges (see section IV).

Box A: INCIDENCE AND DYNAmiCS OF POVERTY IN EGYPT

Poverty analysis in Egypt is handicapped by a lack of systematic assessment of poverty incidence and the
emovirnent 
reluctance to provide access to survey data. UNDP's Egypt Human Development Report (EHDR), IFPRI
and some Egyptian institutions undertook poverty assessments in the 1990s. Their results varied considerably according
to survey data used and estimation of different poverty tines. The Government has just completed a large household
survey, from which data will become available in mid-2001. A thorough assessment of poverty in Egypt in the late 1990s
cannot be undertaken beforc such survey data become available.
Incidence of Poverty: Recent estimates put the incidence of poverty in the mid-1990s in the range of 220/%-48% of the
total population, while the ultra-poor have becn estimated at 7%/610% of total population. The range of the poverty
incidence is wide because a large proportion of the Egyptian population lies near the estimated poverty lines and smaU
changes in the estimation of poverty lines vield significant changes in the incidence of poverty.
Dynamics of Poverty: There are few comparable surveys to assess the evaluation over tirme of poverty in Egypt. The
1996 EHDR shows that the incidence of poverty (using upper poverty line estimates) increased from 30% in 1981/82
to 39% in 1990/91 and further to 48% in 1995/96.
Geographical Concentration of Poverty: Approximately two-thirds of the poor (and three-quarters of the ultra-poor)
live in rural areas. EHDR's lieadcount Index estimates the incidence of poverty in 1995/96 at 34%/4 in urban
Governorates while in rural Governorates it ranged between 48% in Lower Egypt and 604/o in Upper Egypt. The depth
of poverty is estimated to be markedly worse in rural Upper Egypt.
Characteristics of the Poor: Recent poverty assessments confirm that poor people tend to live in larger households
and support more children per adult. The poor and non-poor tend to have similar rates of male labor force participation
but females' participation rates are much lower for the poor. Poverty is highly concentrated in female-headed
households (50% more poverty compared to male-headed households in urban areas and 29% more in rural areas
according to IFPRI). IFPRI's survey also shows that, on average, the poor have 2.6 fewer years of schooling than the
non-poor and their literacy rate is 27% lower than the non-poor.
EGYPTIAN PARTICIPATORY POVERTY ASSESSMENT (JEPPA): An interesting exercise was undertaken in 1999 by the
Egyptian Social Fund for Development (SF1D) in collaboration with the UK Departmnent for International Development
(DFID) in nincteen communities across five Govemorates. The EPPA aimed to find out from the poor themselves
what they saw as key issues and constraints preventing them from playing their full role in economic, political and social
life. Similar to the general findings in other countries of the Bank's "Voir af the Poo?' study, the Egyptian analysis
concluded that the poor do not see povertv simply in financial terms but associate it with social status, control over
assets such as land, access to housing, health and education and with the ability to gain a secure livelihood. The poor also
linked their poverty to issues of social recognition, status, dignity and autonomy. At the conmmunity level, poverty is seen
by the poor to be associated with lack of access to resources (safe water, sanitation, transport, quality land and social
services). There is a strong sense among the poor in Egypt that poverty is self-perpetuating. Levels of political and social
exclusion affected the ability of individuals and communities to access assets and resources.

Sources: IFPRI (i 998A, SFD /DFID (1999) and Handoussa (2000) EHDR (1996)

II. EGYPT'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

17. The Government's twenty-year plan covers the period 1997-2017 within which it implements
five-year plans. The current five-year plan covers the period 1996/97-2001/02. The Government's
over-arching objective, as expressed in these plans, is to achieve a private sector-led growth rate of
7.0-7.5 percent that would create gainful employment opportunities and reduce the incidence of
poverty. The agenda for achieving sustainable high growth and poverty reduction calls for
significant deepening of structural reforms, as well as addressing specific cross-cutting issues of

6

increasing relevance to Egypt's economic and social development, such as external openness,
governance, financial sector reform, environment, and gender. 
The authorities' strategic
development agenda addresses also the following high priority areas: (i) accelerating social and
human development; (ii) promoting rural development as an effective poverty alleviation mechanism
and addressing critical water sector issues; and (iii) removing obstacles 
to private sector
development. Egypt intends to continue its internal program of reform with particular emphasis on
strengthening institutions. Fostering regional integration, particularly in the context of the Common
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) is also an
important area, but this has not yet evolved as a strategic priority, although in the future it most likely

will.

A. Achieving Sustainable High Growth and Reduciny Poverty

18. Apart from its success in stabilizing the economy, Egypt has implemented a series of structural
reforms during the past few years in the areas of capital markets, tariff reduction, reforms of the
insurance industry (e.g., amendment of the Insurance Law to permit foreign investors to own shares
in Egyptian insurance companies), privatization of more than half of the Law 203 public enterprises,
joining of COMESA, initialing the EU Association Agreement', the recent introduction of a more
flexible exchange rate mechanism, and the strengthening of the social safety net (improved targeting,
reduced subsidies).

19. However, if the country is to achieve the desired 7 percent growth rate, it would need to
continue upgrading its human capital, remove obstacles to private sector development, particularly
with regard to small and medium scale enterprises, and address the critical policy issues of
agricultural development and water resource management. In addition to these sectoral policy issues
(discussed more fully below), Egypt will need to address a number of critical constraints on growth
and poverty reduction which are broad and cross-cutting. The cross-cutting issues relate to increased
openness, governance, the financial sector, environment and gender.

Increased Openness

20. 
In contrast with the strong growth in domestic demand during the 1990s, the performance of
merchandise exports during the last decade has been generally weak. As noted above, merchandise
exports as a share of GDP declined from 15 percent in 1990 to 6.2 percent in 1998, and Egypt has
lost market share in world markets. A recent joint Government of Egypt/World Bank task force
concluded that exporters face highly negative price incentives as well as cumbersome customs
procedures and other administrative barriers.

21. Success in improving the performance of non-oil merchandise exports will be largely
determined by removal of the anti-export bias in trade policy and a more flexible management of the
exchange rate. With regard to trade policy, the key reform is to reduce the level and dispersion of
import tariffs. The recent initialing of the EU agreement is a key step to integrate Egypt successfully
into the world economy, providing a framework for reduced protection. In addition, the authorities
would need to improve the responsiveness of the public administration in developing an export-
friendly environment, strengthen infrastructure, streamline and modernize customs procedures,
including updating and harmonizing product standards and quality control, and facilitating export
finance.

I 

Egypt initialed the Association Agreement with the EU in January 2001. It is part of the wider Euro-Med framework that also covers
cooperation in cultural, human rights and other areas. On the trade side, the objective is to dismantle tariffs within a period of 17 years after
ratification. The Agreement also provides European market access (quotas) to Egyptian agricultural commodities.

Governance Issues

22. Egypt's key economic governance issues relate to tax policy and administration; civil service
reform; legal and judicial reform; greater involvement and participation of civil society in service
delivery and decision-making; and corporate governance.

* 

• Tax policy and administration: Surveys in many countries suggest that petty corruption and, more
generally, ineffectiveness by tax officials increases business costs and distorts competition. In
addition, tax incentives tend to offset each other out and have little incremental effect. A good
business environment requires improvements in administration as well as in the tax code itself.
With regard to the former, the joint Government/World Bank task force report recommended
setting public performance standards that can be easily monitored through management
information systems in all major functions of revenue collection'. A start could be made with the
duty drawback and sales tax rebates for exports. With regard to the tax code, the task force
suggested revision of the code and abolishing most tax incentives. Such a system would reduce
distortions, limit discretion and facilitate tax administration.
Improving the civil service: Egypt faces a major problem of a large, inefficient and underpaid
civil service with weak professional incentives and performance. The civil service not only
stands out for its enormous over-staffing (the government employs roughly one-quarter of the
total labor force of about 22 million) and weak productivity, but also for its immense political
influence in resisting efforts to reform it.2 Interviews in Egypt suggest that dramatic reforms of
the civil service, or of particular portions of it, are not considered politically feasible. Under
these circumstances, the above-mentioned GovernmentlWorld Bank task force report identified
three types of short-term actions. These actions are similar to those already proposed above in
the tax area and include: establishing and publicly monitoring performance standards; setting up
institutional formal complaint mechanisms linked to internal management and disciplinary
processes; and contracting out activities to private companies (for example, pre-shipment
inspection of imports).
* Commercial legal system: While the courts in Egypt are well respected by the private sector and
are trusted to uphold contracts and property rights, the system is seen as too slow and
cumbersome in resolving commercial legal disputes. The "clearance rate" for commercial
dispute resolution (percentage of filed cases actually resolved) was reported in the mid-1990s to
be 36 percent (compared to 80-100 percent in most developed countries). Cases that were
cleared averaged over six years to resolve. The main reasons for this poor performance appear to
be the limited number of judges and their low remuneration, the extensive use of court experts
(civil servants), the lengthy and inappropriate procedures (including the lack of effective case
management), and poor court facilities.
* Greater participation of civil society: Experience from other countries confirms that promoting
citizen consultation in strategy preparation for public service delivery, involving civil society in
the monitoring of public sector performance, and decentralizing more decision-making to
communities increases transparency and accountability. The Government has started to involve
civil society--service users, think-tanks, private sector, women's groups, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and other groups of citizens--in planning and decision-making. Recent
examples are the participatory process of preparation of the next Five-Year Plan, the intense

The joint report "Egypt: Action Plan for improving the Business Environment, Civil Service and Business Linkages" was one of five
reports prepared by joint Govemment-World Bank Task Forces during 1999-2000. The other four areas covered were: export promotion; social
safety nets; employment and training; and private financing of infrastructure.
For details on interactions between Egypt's civil service and business, see FIAS: "Egypt - Reform nvestment Administration and
Strengthen Investment Servicing," Washington D.C., April 1998.

2 

8

consultations with civil society on the draft Mortgage Law and other pieces of legislation. The
Government has also expressed interest in innovative uses of the internet and other forms of
information and communications technology (ICT) to enhance the efficiency, transparency and
accountability of government (e-Government). There is, however, a great deal more to be done
in this whole area, especially in terms of effective decentralization of decision-making, and
facilitating the role of the more than 14,000 NGOs in Egypt in providing social services and
serving as part of the country's social safety net. 
In this context, it is important for the
Government to ensure that the new draft NGO law is supportive of civil society.

Corporate governance: Just as public governance issues discussed above are important for the
public sector, so corporate governance is important in the private sector. With Egypt's increasing
exposure to globalization and its need to tap domestic and international capital markets, corporate
governance standards will need to improve to give investors the protection required to encourage
them to provide capital. Increasingly, individual investors, funds, banks, and other financial
institutions base their decisions not only on a company's outlook, but also on its reputation and
its governance. Corporate governance comprises those aspects of the economic environment,
laws, regulations, procedures and common practices that provide an incentive framework for
companies to maximize long-term value of shareholders, while respecting the interests of
stakeholders and society at large. Given the depth and size of the capital markets in Egypt, a
corporate governance assessment would be a useful tool for the country.

Financial Sector Issues

23. Despite a steady reduction in the importance of the public sector in the financial system, its
role remains dominant, especially through its ownership of large banking and insurance institutions.
Though good progress has been made in revitalizing the capital markets in the last few years, banks
still constitute the bulk of the financial system. The dominance of the publicly owned institutions in
the Egyptian economy and their inability to match the performance of their international and private
counterparts has limited the scope and depth of the financial markets and its development. The range
of products available in the financial markets is insufficient to meet the needs of private sector, and
access of small- and medium-size enterprises (SME's) to the financial products is constrained.
International experience indicates that banking systems dominated by state banks can be reformed
effectively through a well-designed and well-managed program of privatization that focuses on
improving governance and introducing market discipline. The four state-owned banks in Egypt
(National Bank of Egypt, Bank of Alexandria, Banque du Caire, and Bank Misr) account for more
than half of all loans and advances outstanding. Any program for the development of the financial
markets would need to address the effect of their public ownership on the development of the
financial markets.

24. Access to financial sector data has been limited, making judgements on the health of the
financial system difficult. However, based on data provided by the authorities, Egypt's prudential
standards conform to the international standards. While capital adequacy requirements meet the
minimums established by the Basle Committee, and regulations regarding loan classification and
provisioning are in line with international standards, the disclosure practices need further
improvement. Non-performing loans have risen slightly as share of total portfolios (according to
Central Bank of Egypt data, from 9.6 percent at the end of 1999 to 10.5 percent at the end of 2000).
International experience indicates that rapid credit growth of the type seen in Egypt during the past
decade is likely to be associated with a decline in lending standards. Banks may, therefore, be
vulnerable to a deceleration of economic activity. Under these circumstances, a further strengthening
of regulation and supervision standards needs to be accorded priority. This should be done in parallel
with the extensive training effort being undertaken by the Central Bank of Egypt to upgrade banking

9

skills across the board. The Government understands the importance of these issues and is
considering participation in the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). This exercise would
help the authorities to assess better the vulnerabilities and development needs of the country's
financial system.

25. There are also issues related to the non-bank financial sector, such as implementing a well-
designed mortgage law to facilitate better housing finance; developing the corporate bond markets;
reforming the insurance sector; introducing new financial services; introducing new instruments (risk
management instruments are particularly lacking); and assuring more market-based rural credit.
However, in terms of strategic priority, the issue of the health of the banking system and
modernization of the regulatory framework for the capital markets need more emphasis.

Environmental Issues

26. Egypt's high population density and concentration of industry along the Nile Valley and the
Delta have led to an increased burden on the country's natural resource base and have adversely
affected public health. The main environmental issues faced by the country are:

* Acute water scarcity and declining quality: Per capita water availability is expected to fall from
the current level of about 950 cu.m per year to about 670 cu.m by the year 2017. Water quality
in the Nile river and the canals deteriorates in a northward direction due to the disposal of
municipal and industrial effluents, agricultural drainage as well as decreasing flow. Drainage
canals are heavily polluted. While access to sanitation in urban areas is 20 percent of the total
urban population of 45 million, the comparable figure for the rural population is only 5 percent.
Public health is, therefore, seriously affected, with water-borne diseases a major cause of death,
and a predominance of the shallow wells in the Nile acquifer being contaminated.
* Land degradation: Annual loss of agricultural land due to urban encroachment is estimated
between 15,000 and 30,000 feddans (1 feddan = 0.42 hectares). The major causes of land
degradation are poor irrigation drainage, soil salinization, inadequate crop rotation and selection,
fragmented land tenure and soil erosion.
Increasing pollution and untreated urban and hazardous waste disposal: The major sources of
outdoor pollution are hazardous air emissions and water discharges from the heavy metallurgical
industries, refineries, cement and power plants, as well as from a very aging transport sector. In
addition, some 15 million tons of municipal solid waste are generated annually, of which about
2.5 million tons remain uncollected and no appropriate sanitary landfills exist for their disposal.
Hazardous waste, agricultural and hospital waste are also mixed with municipal waste in open
dumps where burning is the most common method of disposal. Air and water pollution are not
surprisingly sources of respiratory and allergic ailments, especially among children.
* Poorly protected cultural and natural heritage: Air pollution, wastewater, uncontrolled urban
encroachment and a large influx of tourists are the major causes of the poorly preserved cultural
and historical monuments. The issue is not one of legislation; there are many sectoral laws
regulating the environment in Egypt. The problem is the poor enforcement and compliance
under those laws.

* 

27. 
It will be extremely important to assess more systematically the economic damages from
environmental degradation to raise public awareness. Egypt has witnessed a rapid surge of more
than 200 NGOs in the field of environment, and these, together with an increasingly environment-
conscious media, can be catalysts in orchestrating public debate on environment management.

Gender Issues

10

28. The Government has consistently expressed its commitment to integrating women fully in
development. Gender is an important component in its current Five-Year Plan, and the Government
has requested Bank support in mainstreaming gender in the next plan through a well-tailored gender
assessment. It is a signatory to the Committee for the Elimination of all Discrimination Against
Women (CEDAW), and its commitment to greater gender equality was well articulated at the UN's
Beijing +5 meeting. Women are increasingly gaining equal access to legal protection under the law
and improvements in access to education and health care over the past two decades have had a
particularly positive impact on women. However, as the Government itself realizes, more needs to
be done to bridge the gender gap, as summarized below.

* 

In the area of education and training, the Government is rightly focusing on (i) addressing issues
that would increase girls' retention in schools; (ii) combating illiteracy, which affects 50 percent
of all female adults, compared to 29 percent of all male adults; (iii) increasing women's training
opportunities in science and math as well as technological and vocational training; and (iv)
enhancing women's educational opportunities, particularly at the university level and in non-
traditional fields. To overcome these challenges, more focus will be needed on the curricula side
to ensure that text book content remains updated and does not include any gender-discriminatory
material. Equally important is to focus on teacher caliber and teacher training needs.

* Official unemployment statistics indicate that female unemployment is twice or three times that
of men, the highest rate being for young and educated women in rural areas. The ILO's latest
World Employment Report indicates that women's participation in the labor force increased five
times faster than men's during 1980-1996, and yet the participation rate in 1996 was 25 percent
for women compared to 73 percent for men. Since agriculture employs some 40 percent of
working women, gender considerations need to be borne in mind in any agricultural reforms.
The same is true for public sector employment, where women constitute one-third of the
employees. Facilitating women's access to micro credit, providing the relevant training,
establishing vocational training centers that respond to women's needs, simplifying procedures
for small projects and encouraging local banks and NGOs to combine micro credit with relevant
training for women are some aspects of a viable strategy. Finally eradicating discriminatory
hiring practices and other kinds of workplace discrimination, especially in the private sector,
needs to be supported.

* 

In the area of health, despite progress in lowering population growth during the last two decades,
more attention needs to be given to reproductive health services and the introduction of new
methods of birth control. With regard to female genital mutilation (FGM), the Ministry of Health
has issued a decree forbidding this practice in public and private centers and punishing the
perpetrators. However, the practice continues and more is needed to educate and disseminate
information as well as to improve the capacity of social and health workers and NGOs to address
this issue. Early marriage is another area of concern. Despite the legal marriage age being 16,
early marriage persists, adversely affecting women's health conditions. Legal measures to
prevent this practice, which typically occurs because a good number of women are not registered
at birth, must be implemented and supported by a national campaign to encourage and ensure
registration of girls at birth.

* The Government is fully cognizant of the need to raise women's awareness of their legal and
social rights as spelled out in the Constitution and in the conventions to which Egypt is a
signatory. Apart from addressing the discriminatory hiring practices referred to earlier, the

11

Government has rightly identified as an important strategy tool to provide identity cards, which
determine women's right to access services and to participate fully in the development process'.

29. The Government expects the Bank and other development partners to play an important role in
these areas through planned work on gender assessment and a public expenditure review, and, more
generally, ensuring the mainstreaming of gender in all developmental activities.

B. 

Social and Human Development

Education Sector Issues

30. To remain competitive 
in the increasingly globalized economy, Egypt will require a
sophisticated education system that can generate graduates with problem-solving and technological
skills for the fast-changing, information-oriented environment. The attention and resources devoted
to the sector by the Government have been significant, especially at the basic and secondary levels.
The share of education in total expenditures increased from 12 percent in 1991 to about 20 percent at
present. The share of pre-university expenditures in total education expenditures also increased from
72 percent in 1997/98 to 76 percent in 1998/99. However, these increased resources have not
translated into producing quality students needed for the increasingly complex and demanding
economy. Interventions at the higher education levels, including initiatives for improved science and
technology programs, have yet to be launched, although a clear strategy is in place. And the
Government has yet to start investing at the pre-basic level to establish a firmer foundation for
human capital formation. The following are the key issues needing Government attention during the
next few years.

* At the basic and secondary education levels, access has improved considerably: the net
enrollment ratios for girls and boys at the basic level are 88 percent and 98 percent, respectively.
The remaining challenge is to focus more on the quality of education, where only a small dent
has been made in the retraining of some 700,000 teachers in technology and modern pedagogy.
Similarly, professional development for about 80,000 school managers remains to be carried out
to enable them to manage in a more decentralized system. Moreover, achievement testing and
performance assessments need to be mainstreamed.

* The expansion of access at lower levels combined with a higher growth rate in the 18-24 years
age cohort, has placed severe pressure on the higher education system. Per student expenditure at
this level has declined by roughly 8 percent annually in real terms, leading inevitably to a drop in
quality. Reforms are needed to facilitate greater involvement of the private sector, more use of
information technology and greater cost-efficiency. While national consensus for the reform of
higher education is strong, intensive technical assistance and financial support will be needed to
undertake the reforms.

* 

International research confirmns that relatively small investments in early childhood development
(ECD) yield high returns in the long run for both individuals and saciety. ECD interventions, at
both nursery school and kindergarten levels, have been shown to enhance nutritional and health
status of children, improve their intelligence scores, increase school enrollment, and reduce
repetition in, and dropout from, schools. Studies also show that, in general, the benefits of early
interventions are especially high for disadvantaged children and their families. The Government
will need to focus more on this area.

An Egyptian NGO won a Bank Development Marketplace grant to develop work in this area.

12

31. The authorities have been working closely with some 1200 stakeholders, including several
donors, to develop a vision and an evolving strategy for all levels of education, drawing on
international experience. This has resulted in the Government's 20-year framework for Education
and Training, which is serving as the basis for cooperation with the key development partners in a
coherent way.

Health Sector Issues

32. Over the last two decades, Egypt has achieved significant improvements in the health status of
the population. Between 1980 and 1998, infant mortality rate declined from 120 per 1,000 live births
to 49; and total fertility declined from 5.1 to 3.3. The country has invested extensively in health
service infrastructure, and has provided good access to safewater, sanitation and basic public health

programs.

33. Notwithstanding these achievements, wide inequities persist in the availability and quality of
health care services and health outcomes: the infant child mortality rate is three times higher in the
poorer rural governorates than in the urban ones. There are also significant inefficiencies in the
system, exemplified by very low hospital occupancy rates (37 percent average occupancy rate in
public hospitals), and by excessive prescription and use of drugs. There are 1.3 physicians per
occupied hospital bed, one of the highest ratios in the world, while Egypt's medical schools are
turning out more physicians than required, further exacerbating the existing surplus. At the same
time, there is an uneven distribution of resources, with a surplus of physicians and hospital beds
concentrated in urban areas and a dearth in the rural areas. Finally, while the incidence of HIV/AIDS
in Egypt remains very low (at end 1999, the number of adults and children in Egypt with HIV/AIDS
was estimated to be 8,100 cases, or just under 0.02 percent of the total population), there is need to
maintain vigilance, especially among intravenous drug users'. There is also need for encouraging
prevention and safe practices.

34. 
In 1997, total health spending in Egypt represented 3.8 percent of GDP (lower than the 5.3
percent average for lower income countries) of which 50 percent was out-of-pocket spending by
households. As Egypt enters into the middle income transition, it faces a dual burden, requiring a
response to (i) the disease burden of the poor (high infant and maternal mortality) and (ii) the
emerging problems associated with health transition, namely an increase in risk factors such as
obesity, smoking and hypertension leading to a rise in chronic disease and injuries from road
accidents.

35. 
In 1998, the Government embarked upon an ambitious Health Sector Reform Program
(HSRP), designed to be a blue-print for a comprehensive reform of Egypt's health sector over the
next two decades. The HSRP represents a major shift away from more traditional health programs
that focused on vertical programs for a defined disease or health problem. The reform begins to
consolidate the fragmented health financing system within the framework of a national health
insurance program, which will provide the basis for ensuring risk-pooling and equitable distributions
of resources. It also aims to reduce duplication and wastage of resources among the many providers.

36. Embedded within the concept of family health, promoted under HSRP, is a call for greater
participation of families and communities in health promotion and preventive care. Thus it represents
increased importance given to integrating health care services with other social development
programs. For example, the Bank-financed Population Project (FY96) fosters active collaboration
between the Ministry of Health and the Social Fund for Development (SFD) to generate demand for

I 

UNAIDS, 2000 Update.

13

family planning services in low demand areas through a variety of community development projects.
This approach is particularly effective in reaching the most vulnerable and hard-to-reach population.

37. While the Government's strategy moves the sector in the right direction, the implementation of
the strategy has proven to be challenging: despite the acceptance of the overall objectives and
strategic framework for reform, the administration, in its day to day decision making process,
continues to exhibit tendencies toward centralized control. This could undermine the intention of the
reform strategy.

Social Protection Issues

38. Social insurance and unemployment schemes and labor market protection are only available to
those employed in the formal sector. A better targeted social protection system is of paramount
importance for the bottom two deciles of the population: the present social protection system,
accounting for roughly 2 percent of GDP (food subsidies: 85 percent; Social Fund programs: 13
percent; and cash transfers and related programs: 2 percent) supports many non-poor. More
generally, reforms need to be undertaken in key areas which have the potential to become drains on
public resources (health insurance, food subsidies, social insurance/pensions, etc.). Moreover,
institutional weaknesses are serious and impede the translation of policy into effective programs.

39. An emerging area of concern in Egypt is child protection as the country starts to exhibit
symptoms of break-down of the traditional family networks and rise in urban slums. There has been
a drop in school attendance for children belonging to the lowest quintiles of income. The
establishment of the National Council for Childhood and Motherhood (NCCM), and the launch by
President Mubarak of the second decade (2000-2010) for the protection and welfare of children has
sharpened the focus on this area, making the approach more comprehensive and community-based.

C. Agriculture, Rural Development and Water

40. Egypt's agricultural sector pioneered the economic reform process that was then extended to
the rest of the economy during the early 1990s. During the last two decades, substantial success was
achieved in price liberalization of inputs and outputs, and the elimination of land-use controls for
most crops. During the 1990s, the focus has been on increasing agricultural productivity of land and
water through more efficient use of these limited resources. In response to these measures, the
performance of the agricultural sector improved considerably: the average annual growth rate of
agricultural production increased to 3.0 percent in the 1990s from 2.8 percent in the 1980s, and the
food gap narrowed significantly.

41. Notwithstanding this progress, much more needs to be done to harness the full potential of the
sector in increasing rural incomes and alleviating poverty. Greater openness in the markets of
Egypt's significant trading partners would, of course, help. The following three issues appear most
relevant for the coming years.

According to a 1998 survey by the International Food Policy Research Institute (IPRI), 63
percent of the poor and 74 percent of the ultrapoor in Egypt live in rural areas. Increasing the
productivity of agriculture remains an important prerequisite for increasing the incomes of the
rural poor in a sustainable manner. More effort needs to be made to develop new crop varieties
and agricultural techniques to enhance small holder access to basic services, information,
technology and extension. In addition, increased emphasis on non-agricultural sources of rural
employment and income from rural handicrafts and industries will be needed for rural poverty
alleviation. Improving the performance of financial services to the rural population remains an

14

important issue. Finally, in a country where 95 percent of the population lives on only 4 percent
of the land, pressures are building on the government for horizontal expansion to new agricultural
areas. Land reclamation efforts are underway in the Western Delta (through the Nasser Canal),
the Eastern Delta and Sinai (Es Salam Canal) and more recently in the South of the New Valley
area (Toshka) and East Al Aweinet on the border with Sudan. The costs and benefits of
investments in the new lands will need to be carefully assessed.

* There is need for a more systematic approach to the development of agricultural exports.
Revenues from agricultural exports during the 1990s have remained low and volatile (agricultural
exports, excluding cotton, account for only 5 percent of total merchandise exports) owing to
incomplete liberalization of prices and marketing mechanisms for some products. In sub-sectors
such as cotton, this could threaten the existence of the whole sub-sector: on average, cotton
exports in the 1990s reached only half of their 1980s volume. Other reasons, especially for the
horticulture sub-sector (identified as the most promising sub-sector for exports) are shortages of
adequate technical and managerial skills, lack of reliable supporting infrastructure (land, water
and warehousing) and other services to allow private sector competitive involvement in the
sector .

* Water scarcity will be a critical challenge for the future of Egypt. Per capita water availability in
Egypt is about 950 cu.m. per year, lower than even the regional average of 1200 cu.m. per year.
Compounding the problem of water quantity are issues related to the quality of water because of
water-logging, salinity and degradation by pollution. Some water usage savings can be expected
from the reuse of drainage water, rainwater harvesting and watershed management (mainly along
the Mediterranean coast), limited desalination, reduction of Nile water flows to the sea and the
continuation of irrigation and drainage improvement. The Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) should also
help (see para. 74). However, increased investments will be needed for the operation and
maintenance of the drainage and irrigation systems in the new and old lands, which will make the
institution of a viable cost recovery program critical. Moreover, the increasing demand for
limited water resources will put pressure on the Government to formulate policies and programs
to improve water allocation among various water users. Since agriculture uses more than 80
percent of available water, a key option will be to reallocate water within agriculture, by moving
gradually out of water-intensive crops such as rice and sugarcane. Finally, while substantial
investments of over US$ 4 billion have gone to urban waste water management, rural sanitation
and water pollution have remained relatively neglected.

42. The Government has adopted a rural development strategy that addresses many of the above
issues. However, it is critically important that during the next few years the focus remain on water
management issues, promotion of agricultural exports and a concerted effort to eradicate rural
poverty.

D. Removing Obstacles To Private Sector Development

43. Despite considerable progress during the past decade, Egypt's private sector is saddled with a
number of constraints that have thwarted opportunities for a much more vibrant private-sector-led
growth (for a detailed discussion, see Annex 1). In addition to the trade and competition policy
framework, and a financial sector that is dominated by the public sector and does not support small
and medium enterprise (SME) development, the following are the main barriers to private sector
development: unfavorable business environment; weak and inefficient infrastructure services; and a

'World Bank: "Toward Agricultural Competitiveness in the 21P Century: Egypt's Agricultural Export-Oriented Strategy," July 2000.

slowdown of the privatization process. In addition, the economy needs to take advantage of the
information and communications technology (ICT) possibilities opened up by the "new economy".

15

Business Environment Related Issues

44. Private operators frequently identify the tax system and customs administration as a primary
constraint. The system imposes uncertainty, delays and excess costs on Egyptian businesses,
particularly on SMEs. The commercial legal system is also regarded as too slow, expensive and
cumbersome in resolving commercial legal disputes. This limits the development of impersonal and
complex contracting and raises the cost of business transactions. Labor regulations, while formally
cumbersome, are not widely enforced. However they may deter large companies from investing
and/or distort their investment decisions toward more capital-intensive, less employment-creating
technologies.

45. The business environment is even less supportive of SMEs and micro enterprises.! There is
little incentive for them to join the formal sector; formalization does not necessarily lead to a better
access to land, capital and know-how. This implies a loss of growth potential in a potentially
dynamic sector, loss of fiscal revenue for the government, and, when SMEs do choose to locate
within the formal sector, unfair competition from larger firms.

Infrastructure Issues

46. 
In the past two decades Egypt has invested significantly in upgrading its physical
infrastructure. Whereas twenty years ago businessmen would fly to Athens to make an international
call and there was only one dual highway in the country, today telephones work well, roads are
adequate, electric power is uninterrupted and water supply in urban areas is of generally good
quality. Problems remain, of course. City transport, especially in Cairo, is congested and the
railways and water services do not cover their costs. After a long investment boom, maintenance is
an increasing concern. Moreover, the shift in budget expenditures to human resource development
(especially education and health) have meant reduced resources available for infrastructure.

47. 
In order to cope with the need for continued infrastructure investment in a constrained budget
environment, the Government is embarked on a massive effort to attract private capital to public
infrastructure. Two power BOTs are under construction and two others are planned. Port handling
has been concessioned out in one port and new airports and toll roads are being built on a BOT basis.
Progress in mobilizing private funds is, however, slow in light of the fact that the concepts behind
private investment in public entities is still relatively new to Egypt and problems of cost recovery and
contractual agreements remain. Under the circumstances foreign investors approach such projects in
Egypt cautiously. In addition, certain kinds of investment (for instance, rural water and sanitation
and certain roadways) are not likely to attract private finance and the Government will need to step
up investments in these particular areas. In parallel, funds for maintenance of existing investments
are short.

48. There remains scope for further privatization in telephones, power and water services and a
number of ventures are under negotiation. More aggressive marketing of such possibilities should be
undertaken, however. In addition, Government needs to address difficult questions of cost recovery
and adequate maintenance. Pricing of water is particularly sensitive in this regard. Finally, as

I 

Egyptian enterprises employing less than 10 workers are estimated to contribute 80 percent of private sector value added and some 75
percent of employment.

greater private participation in infrastructure occurs questions of regulation and legal efficiency will
become more important.

16

Privatization

49. After an impressive privatization drive during 1994/95-1999/00, when some 130 enterprises
with assets worth about US$3.8 billion were privatized, there was a marked slow down in the process
during most of 2000 in the run-up to the legislative elections in October/November 2000 and the
volatile political situation in the Middle East. Other reasons for delay were related to valuation
problems and a decision to undertake restructuring of a number of poorly performing companies
prior to their privatization.

50. Despite progress made, the public sector still accounts for a remarkably high share of
economic activity, at around 30 percent. Acceleration of the privatization process will be essential to
revitalize the investment climate and to help sustain the momentum of growth. The Government has
indicated its plans to divest most of the remaining enterprises during the next 2-3 years. The most
imminent activities are the sale of 20 percent of Egypt Telecom, the privatization of the gas
distribution network, and the sale of the public sector's share of joint venture insurance companies.
Recent developments in the gas sector, where Egypt has a very significant resource, illustrate what is
possible in terms of private sector involvement.' Since March 2000, major deals have been struck
between the government and the private sector, with BP Amoco, Shell and British Gas.

ExDloitinm Information and Communications Technologv (ICT) Possibilities

51. Egypt is one of the fastest growing information technology markets in the world, growing by
some 35 percent annually. It is a major priority of the Government to capitalize on the country's
relatively cheap pool of skilled labor. The recently established Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology is in the process of setting up an enabling environment and developing
programs in which ICT industries can continue to grow.

52. Government's initiatives are focusing on empowering the private sector and stimulating
national demand for communication and information technology through education programs and
public projects; establishing partnerships with global industry; and modernizing Egypt's
telecommunications and postal infrastructure. In order to upgrade Egypt's infrastructure and develop
the workforce, the Government has signed agreements with many global IT companies, notably IBM,
Cisco Systems, Oracle, Network Solutions, and PSINET (adding to the cooperation agreement with
Microsoft ).

53. The number of internet users in Egypt continues to increase and is currently close to 500,000
subscribers, a market penetration of about 0.7 percent. The number of Internet Service Providers has
grown to over 60, and the cost of internet access has fallen dramatically from an average of US$30
per month as a flat charge to less than $10 per month. Annual revenues from internet related services
are estimated at about US$23 million. Additionally, market penetration for wireless and fixed line
communication is growing and estimated to be currently around 3 percent and 10 percent,
respectively.

54. While Egypt is a leader in the Arab World in terms of the "new economy", much remains to be
done. Access to technology and internet in schools and universities at affordable prices needs to be

I 

Egypt has proven reserves of 43 trillion cubic feet and potential reserves of 120 trillion cubic feet. Current domestic consumption of
only 17 billion cubic feet indicates the major potential for export.

17

assured. Telecommunications and in particular internet infrastructure needs greater attention. E-
Commerce infrastructure, the heart of ICT, requires strengthening of the financial services sector and
in particular greater use of credit cards.

55. There is also need for developing the regulatory environment for telecommunications and
postal services, and for protecting intellectual property, financial regulation and the development of
new cyber-laws. In addition, specific work is required to create awareness, promote Arabic content
on web sites, encourage markets and develop and retain human resources. Without a focus in the last
area, Egypt will continue to lose its best and brightest ICT professionals abroad.

III. EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND MACROECONOMIC OPTIONS

A. External Environment

56. As indicated earlier, Egypt's economic growth during the 1990s has been largely driven by the
domestic market. A decomposition of economic growth into its domestic and foreign components
indicates that in the second half of the 1990s, some three-quarters of economic growth was a
consequence of domestic demand. Nonetheless external factors do have important implications for
the growth of the Egyptian economy in several ways.

- Egypt's terms of merchandise trade are expected to register a 4 percent increase in 2001,
followed by a decline of about 3.4 percent per annum during 2002-2004. The merchandise
export price index is expected to increase in 2001, in line with price increases for oil,
manufactured exports and cotton, and to fall thereafter. The expected decline in terms of trade is
also attributable to a modest projected increase in the price of imports.

* With the gradual decline of the oil sector in Egypt during the 1990s (the share of oil in GDP
declined from a peak of 18 percent in the early 1980s to about 6 percent in the late 1990s) and the
near balance between exports and imports of oil prices, the net impact of oil prices in the future
will be insignificant.

* A slowdown in economic activity in Egypt's main trading partners (in the 1990s the shares of the
EU countries, US and the Middle East were 48 percent, 13 percent and 12 percent, respectively)
would affect demand for Egypt's major merchandise exports, particularly textiles and agricultural
products, and tourism. With the projected improvements in the economies of the Gulf countries,
worker remittances can be expected to remain high (US$3.7 billion in 2000). However a
deterioration of the Middle East crisis could severely affect tourism and Suez Canal revenues.

* Given the country's manageable external debt (about 30 percent of GDP) and very small short-
term debt, as well as expected declines in international interest rates, the cost of servicing
external debt can be expected to decline.

57. 
In short, the external environment for Egypt presents a mixed picture, which could, however,
be significantly negative in the case of further deterioration of the Middle East situation. The extent
to which the country can exploit the positive external factors and prepare itself against the negative
ones will be determined by the depth and pace of structural reforms.

B. Macroeconomic Constraints and Policy Options

58. The Government's key medium-term objective is to provide jobs for Egypt's growing
population through labor intensive fast growth. Since the mid-1970s, labor has been mainly

18

absorbed by migration (about 2.7 million jobs), government (2.6 million) and the informal sector (3.7
million). Prospects for job creation in the first two areas seem dim, and most jobs would need to be
created through the development of productive activities in the formal and informal private sectors.
Indeed, to absorb new entrants (about 550 thousand per annum) and reduce unemployment (widely
believed to be above the official estimate of 9 percent), the economy would need to expand annually
at a minimum by 7 percent.

59. To achieve a growth target of at least 7 percent would entail changes in the medium-term
macroeconomic framework generally followed by the authorities in the post-stabilization period. It
would entail investment levels of about 5-6 percentage points of GDP above the 1999-2000 average
level of about 24 percent (see Table 2). Since gross national savings, which averaged about 22.0
percent during 1999-2000, cannot be realistically expected to be above 25.0 percent during the
decade, the country will require annual foreign inflows of around 5 percent of GDP to achieve the 7
percent growth rate. The Government expects that net private investment (FDI and portfolio
investment) would double during the decade from its level of about US$1.5 billion in 2000. This will
require a major improvement in the business environment. However, even if this level of private
investment were attracted, Egypt would still need annually at least US$1 billion additional inflows,
after taking into account medium and long term borrowing at the present levels.

60. The three prospective macroeconomic scenarios illustrate the implications for growth of a
more intense structural reform program, as well as continued macro stability. The most likely
scenario shows a gradual increase in the investment to GDP ratio, as in the recent past, without a
major increase in domestic savings. The current account deficit increases over the 5-year projection
period, but remains financeable, especially if Egypt attracts additional FDI. The scenario also
presupposes a sustained improvement in export performance. While national savings as a ratio to
GDP is not projected to increase significantly, the public sector is presumed to increase its savings
efforts gradually over the period, as shown by the slow decline in the fiscal deficit, to the benefit of
private consumption. The other two scenarios differ from the most likely scenario mainly with
regard to the presumed savings and investment effort. In particular, non-government saving as a
share of GDP is projected to increase modestly under the most likely and High Case scenarios, and to
deteriorate by about three percentage points of GDP under the Low Case scenario.

TABLE 2: OUTLOOK FOR ECONOMIC INDICATORS UNDER THREE SCENARIOS

lndicttor 

GDP growth rate (O/) 

Current Account/ GDP (%o) 

Overall Fiscal Deficit/ GDP (/) 

Gross Domestic Investment/GDP (0/i) 

See rio 

Most-Likely 

Low Case 
High Case 

Most Likely 
Low Case 
High Case 
Most Likely 
Low Case 
High Case 
Most Likely 
Low Case 

High Case 

Export of Goods and NF Services, Real Most Likely 
Growth Rate (%o) 
Low Case 
_ High Case 

2000 

2001 

2002 

6.4 

6.4 
6.4 

-1.2 
-1.2 
-1.2 
-3.6 
-3.6 
-3.6 
24.2 
24.2 

24.2 

7.0 
7.0 
7.0 

5.5 

4.0 
6.0 

-1.8 
-1.8 
-1.7 
-4.4 
-4.8 
-3.6 
25.0 
23.9 

25.6 

8.4 
5.8 
10.9 

5.6 

3.3 
6.9 

-2.1 
-2.8 
-2.9 
-4.3 
-4.6 
-2.7 
25.1 
23.6 

27.2 

9.6 
6.7 
11.4 

2003 

5.7 

2.9 
7.2 

-2.0 
-3.5 
-3.5 
-4.1 
-4.6 
-2.2 
25.4 
23.5 

28.1 

10.4 
6.4 
11.7 

2004 

2005

5.9 

3.1 
7.5 

-2.0 
-4.1 
-4.2 
-4.0 
-4.5 
-2.1 
25.8 
23.2 

28.9 

9.5 
7.0 
12.0 

5.9

3.1
7.8

-1.8
-4.2
-4.8
-3.9
-4.4
-2.0
26.0
22.9
29.4
9.9
6.5
12.3

61. Additionally, the most likely scenario (as well as the High Case) is based on three key strategic
actions by the Government:
* Ensuring macroeconomic stability. Despite recent actions by the authorities, there is still
considerable uncertainty whether these will suffice to reduce BOP pressures. Actions to reduce

19

the fiscal deficit do not seem to have had the expected results, and the 2001 outcome may
represent a deterioration over the previous year. The recently introduced exchange rate system,
basically an adjustable peg with a narrow band, is more flexible than the peg that was in place
until 2000. The concern is whether in practice the new system will be managed in a flexible
manner. Overall, the current combination of expansionary financial policies with a peg may lead
to continued pressures on reserves.

* Undertaking the necessary measures to increase productivity. In addition to the maintenance of
macroeconomic stability, this would entail second generation structural reforms, such as
institutional strengthening, reduction of high effective protection, technological upgrading,
promotion of FDI, considerable improvement in the services sector, including increased
efficiency of service delivery, and enhancing technical skills of the labor force. Given the
importance of banks 
in the financial system, actions to improve the efficiency of the
intermediation are critical to improve growth performance.

* Creating an export push. More rapid economic growth cannot be achieved without a doubling of
the growth rate of exports from the annual average of less than 4 percent during the last decade.
Increase in non-oil merchandise exports will be largely determined by removal of the anti-export
bias in trade policy, the responsiveness of the public administration in developing an export-
friendly environment, better infrastructure, streamnlined and modernized customs procedures,
updating and harmonizing product standards and quality control and facilitating export finance.

62. Achieving a higher growth rate is also likely to imply, depending on the response of private
capital flows, that the public sector will have to increase its foreign borrowing. Thanks to the highly
favorable Paris Club debt and debt service reduction in 1991, workers remittances, Suez Canal
payments, high aid flows, and appreciable economic growth, Egypt was able to reduce its external
debt to GDP ratio from more than 130 percent in 1989 to about 30 percent in 2000. To maintain this
favorable performance, the Government requires that total external debt should not increase in
nominal terms (implying further reductions in the debt burden as a share of GDP and exports), and
that all public foreign borrowing should be restricted to loans with a grant element of at least 40
percent. Given the increased external borrowing needs, the Government may have to begin to tap
less concessional sources of financing and increase its nominal debt stock.

IV. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. 

Imrplementation of the Previous CAS: What Worked, What Did Not

63. The Board discussed the previous CAS for Egypt in May 1997. Overall, the Bank Group's
lending and investment activity was in line with the CAS base case proposals. For the period FY98-
00, the CAS foresaw 11 IDA/IBRD operations for a total of US$450-600 million. Actually 10
operations were approved by the Board for about US$580 million.' Similarly, IFC's investment flow
- which depends on the investment climate, the availability of suitable transactions and partners, and
the level of competition in funding from local banks - has increased' steadily during this period.
IFC's committed portfolio increased from about US$196 million at end FY97 to US$250 million at
end of FY00. FY01 has witnessed a marked rise in the level of approvals and commitments. In the
first 10 months, IFC approvals were US$177 million in loans, equity investments and guarantees in 8
different projects and a total of US$305 million for the account of participants to two power projects.
IFC's committed portfolio at end-April 2001 stood at US$328 million. This is by far IFC's largest
portfolio in the MENA Region.

i 

However, of these 10 operations, five were approved in one fiscal year -FY99-which was the last year of IDA-eligibility for Egypt.

20

64. 
In terms of specific aspects of the CAS, however, success in implementation has been mixed
and sustainable institutional development has been less than expected. Box B provides an
assessment of what worked well and what did not.

BOX B: IMPLEMENTATITON OF PREVIOUS GAS: WHAT WORKED, WHAT DID NOT

What Worked Well 

I 

* 

* 

* Despite some remaining problems, the overall quality 
of Bank/IDA portfolio has improved over the CAS 
period, in terms of numnber of problem projects, 
dropped projects, etc. (see paras. 78.83). 
In two of the four areas of focus recommended by 
the CAS - human resource development and rural 
development - Bank intervention has been effective, 
"Bank support to irrigation and drainage has been 
relatively successful, with satsfactory outcomes and 
likely sustainability" (OED). The Bank's technical 
expertise and policy dialogue is greatly appreciated. 
Simiarly in the education and health sectors, there 
has been a significant improvement in the quality of 
the policy dialogue, in close coordination with other
developtnent partners.
IFC activities during the CAS period were broadly 
consistent wxith the strategy articulated, with 
investments in infrastructure, financial sector, oil and 
gas, tourism and industrial sectors.
* Bank's involvement, together with other development 
partners in the Social Fund for Developmenit (one of 
the largest such funds in developing countries), has
been instrumental in maintaining social stability
during the reform process.
Several knowledge-based activities (analytical work, 
workshops, etc.) were undertaken, which have been 
gready appreciated by the Egyptian authorities. These 
sector activities focused on education, health, social 
safety nets, water sector, renewable energy and urban 
transport. Even m-iore effective has been the 
preparation of the five Task Force Reports, carried 
out jointly by the CGovemment and the Bank, aimed 
at providing the authorities with plans of action in:
export promotion; improving business environment;
training and skills development; social safetv nets; and
private provision of infrastructue.

* 

* 

* 

What Did Not Work So Well

Projects continue to encounter effectiveness delays. CAS
had set a target of a maximum of nine months lapsed
time between Board and effectiveness. In practice, delays
have been longer (about a year).
In the other two areas of proposed focus of the CAS --
export push, and private sector development 
-
the
Bank's policy dialogue role was marginal, and planned
projects 
(Export Development Project, planned 
for
FY98; Private Sector Finance of Infrastructure, planned
for FY00), did not materialize. More generally, the Bank's
role 
in policy dialogue has been circumscribed.
Moreover, the CAS had recommended the use of several
partial risk guarantees, none of which materialized.

^IFC 
needed to develop innovative ways to provide
finance and skills to the SME sector. IFC set up a leasing
company to finance SMEs, but more needs to be done.

* Despite its overall achievement, the issue of sustainability
of the Social Fund iremains.

* Because of lack of access to data, the Bank has niot ben
able to undertake analytical work in two areas that the
1997 CAS correcdy considered important poverty
assessmiernt, and financial sector analysis. Under that
CAS, two poverty related studies were planned Neither
was undertaken. Even in the case of the five Task Force
Reports, there has been little follow up on the policy
dialogue uwth the Bank.

B. Lessons Learned and Benchmarks for Future Assessments

65. Based on the experience with the implementation of the previous CAS, and drawing on the

conclusions of OED's Country Assistance Evaluation 
(see Box C) the following 
drawn, which are being incorporated 
into the design of the new country strategy:

lessons can be

* 

IBRD lending to Egypt will be strongly demand-driven and will, therefore, 

inevitably fluctuate

from year to year. The Bank Group should stand ready to respond with quick-disbursing lending

in case of external or domestic shocks. However, for the Bank to respond rapidly there would

need to be a deeper and more sustained policy dialogue based on solid analytical foundation.

21

* 

IBRD lending should be limited to areas where Government commitment to the projects is
unequivocally strong and where the World Bank has had a positive experience. The Bank should
be more realistic in the number of projects to be prepared. During FY98-00, 10 projects were
presented to the Board. During FY02-04, no more than 6-7 projects should be planned under the
base case scenario. Under this scenario, the size of the portfolio would decline from 19 projects
at present to about 14 at the end of FY04.
* Given the Government's requirement that all new operations should have a grant element of at
least 40 percent, it will be critically important to ensure that cofinancing (or parallel financing)
from donors with softer lending terms than the Bank is in place before proceeding too far with
preparation of projects. This indicates the need for even closer partnership with other donors.
This should be accompanied by efforts to move away from a project-by-project fulfillment of the
"40 percent rule" to a more macro or sectoral one.
* As the size of the portfolio decreases, a greater share of administrative budget resources should
be allocated to knowledge-based non-lending activities for which the Government has expressed
great interest, or which will be necessary for due diligence.
* Clear benchmarks should be established to enable future assessments of the Bank Group's
involvement in Egypt.

BOX C: OED COUNTRY ASSISTANCE EVALUATION (CAE)

In Januarv 2000, OED completed a Country Assistance Evaluation for Egypt, which was discussed by the Committee
on Development Effectiveness. The report focused in pafticular on the period since 1990, although it included an overview
of Bank assistance to Egypt since the 1950s. The following is a summary of the report's key findings and recommendations.

* 

* Egypt has done a commendable job of significant structural reform, achieving macroeconomic stability and realizing
strong growth, without major social unrest, in the past five years.
Some social indicators, such as chAd malnutrition and life expectancy, have improved markedly. Others, including
literacy, particularly among women, and infant mortality, although improved, have not achieved gains commensurate
with good access to social services.
* The Bank's role in Egypt has been modest, although it was actively involved in the early 1990s in supporting structural
adjustment and in helping Egypt with major debt rescheduling.
* An important gap in Bank assistance has been the absence of work on poverty alleviation.
* Because of the large amounts of concessional funding available to Egypt, the Bank should forge closer partnerships
and cofinancing arrangements with other donors.
* The Bank should continue to lend in areas where the Government is interested, and where the Bank has had positve
results, such as in irrigation and drainage.
* The next CAS should propose clear guidelines to link the administrative budget to the size and complexity of the
pottfolio, and the likely effective demand by the Egyptian Government for the Bank's lending and non-lending
services.

66. Based on the above lessons, 

the following benchmarks will be-used not only to guide the

Bank's lending and non-lending involvement in Egypt but also to determine the allocation of country
administrative budget for Egypt. Clearly judgement would need to be used in taking into account the
overall observance of these benchmarks, rather than mechanistically requiring the fulfillment of each
one of them.

* Success of the Bank Group in being able to complete substantive analytical work in the areas of
poverty alleviation and financial sector.
* Sustained policy dialogue between the Government and the Bank.

22

* Fewer dropped projects and lower average cost of those dropped. Average cost to be aligned
with Bank average during FY02-04.
* Delays in effectiveness reduced from an average of about a year now to about eight months.

C. Chaneing Relationship: Mix of Lending and Non-Lendin2 Services

67. Owing to the availability of sizeable grant resources, the country's graduation from IDA, and
its conservative borrowing strategy, new Bank lending to Egypt is expected to be modest in relation
to the country's size and importance. IEFC commitments should, however, expand, as should
MIGA's. In addition, the Government places a very high value on Bank Group advice, global
knowledge sharing, training, and its capacity to work in partnership with other development partners.
Looking ahead, the share of non-lending services in the Bank's assistance to Egypt would increase
over time. This is expected to happen as the size of the Bank's portfolio gradually shrinks from 19
projects at present to about 14 projects by the end of FY04. The objective should also be to move
gradually toward cost sharing and eventually reimbursable services, in consultation with the Egyptian
authorities. In the interim, the strategy would be to projectize technical assistance requests where
feasible, and to seek collaborative arrangements with other development partners in which their
resources would be used to leverage Bank knowledge and experience.

68. Notwithstanding the increasing importance of non-lending services, Bank lending in selected
high priority areas will continue. The Government views Bank lending as important more than for its

financial transfer aspect: it is valued for its technical excellence and for serving as a catalyst for

mobilizing financing packages 2-3 times that of Bank loans for well-designed and high priority
projects. Given the important involvement of USAID, EU and other development partners in Egypt,
strict selectivity in Bank involvement will be observed. In particular, the Bank's focus will be in
areas where (i) Government demand for and comrnmitment 
to projects is unequivocally strong; (ii) the
Bank has a long and positive experience (water sector and irrigation; human development); and (iii)
it can bring knowledge management and experience of other countries to guide Egypt's policy
formulation and implementation (information and communications infrastructure; mortgage market
development; and community-based activities). Given the important involvement of other
development partners, the Bank will have minimal involvement in energy, industrial restructuring,
and environment.

D. Base Case Assistance Proeram

69. The underlying assumption for the base case is a continuation of the current pace of growth
and policy implementation. The economy would grow around 5.5 - 5.9 percent annually, and is not
subjected to any major external and domestic shocks. There is no substantial increase in private
domestic or foreign investment. The government gradually improves its current fiscal and monetary
stance and the current exchange rate policy. In short, the scenario is characterized by no significant
shocks or reversals of policy reforms, but also by no major structural reform efforts.

70. CAS instruments. The Bank Group's proposed base case assistance strategy will be
implemented through several instruments:
* Steadily improving the performance of the existing Bank portfolio of ongoing operations (see
paras. 78-83), especially in terns of institutional development and sustainability.
In terms of knowledge-based services, priority in AAA and capacity building work will be given
to studies and activities that provide the intellectual underpinning for operations and technical
advice in human development, rural development, water management and selected areas of
infrastructure development. Priority will also be given to core diagnostic work on poverty,

* 

23

public expenditure review and financial sector issues, as well as to gender analysis and
mainstreaming, on the assumption that access to information is granted by the Government in
these areas. The recently completed Social and Structural Review provides a solid basis for
deepening policy dialogue between the authorities and the key development partners'. WBI is
expected to play an important role in disseminating world-wide best practice and bringing focus
on development issues identified as priority. Increasingly opportunities will be sought to partner
with local think-tanks and other agencies in the conceputalization and dissemination of analytical
work. A good recent example was the dissemination of the World Development Report
2000/2001 jointly with two local think-tanks. Most critically needed AAA will be funded out of
the Bank's administrative budget. However, arrangements will be explored with other donors
and possibly government to share costs for additional on-demand AAA or capacity building
services. At the end of the CAS period a review of the effectiveness of the Bank's AAA will be
undertaken to guide our future analytical and capacity building work in Egypt.
* 2-3 projects a year are included in the Bank's lending program in carefully selected areas where
demand from Egypt is strong and where the Bank has a comparative advantage. This would
amount to US$450-500 million in new lending during the period FY02-04. The lending
program, as outlined below, is not yet programmatic, although the objective is to move gradually
in that direction. Planned work on public expenditure review and continuing effort on improving
financial management will help steer the process in that direction (see para 82 for fiduciary work
related to Bank operations). In the interim, several ongoing and planned operations are of a
sectoral and/or APL nature, especially in education, health and water sectors, involving a
comprehensive sectoral approach, government ownership and close coordination with
development partners.
* Selective expansion of IFC and MIGA activities (see para. 72).
* Exploring the use of IBRD guarantee instruments to attract foreign capital into areas where
performance risk remains a major bottleneck.

71. Focus of Bank Group Assistance. The over-arching objective of the Bank Group's country
assistance strategy in Egypt is to reduce poverty and unemployment. Working closely with other

development partners, the Bank Group will focus on three types of interventions: (i) interventions
that support higher and sustained growth; (ii) targeted interventions for poverty reduction; and (iii)
interventions with major indirect poverty reduction impact. Table 3 summarizes the various Bank

instruments to be employed under the base case assistance program.

72. Interventions that support higher and sustained growth: This entails providing support for
macroeconomic stability, phased restructuring of the bank and corporate sectors, and improved

infrastructure for greater competitiveness. 
It also involves the gradual integration of Egypt into
global markets, particularly in the context of the recently initialed Association Agreement with the
European Union (EU).

* Given the important and active involvement of USAID and the EU in this broad area, the Bank's
lending will be limited to two projects where it has the knowledge base and comparative
advantage: 
the Agricultural Exports Project and the Information Technology Infrastructure
Project. In the case of the former project the objective is to support all aspects of promoting

horticulture exports, especially in the context of the agreement with the EU. The project will

draw on the findings of the recently completed report on agricultural exports. The Information

Technology Infrastructure Project would support the authorities' efforts to develop the regulatory

framework for the telecom sector and to modernize the strategy, structure, processes and systems

Egypt: Social and Structural Review, World Bank, June 2001.

24

of the Egyptian postal services in order to enhance its market orientation, internal efficiency and
financial performance.

* On the analytical side, the Bank will work closely with the IMF and other development partners
to undertake work on the Financial Sector Assessment Program (should the Government request
it), capital market and mortgage market development, strengthening public debt management,
improving the efficiency of public expenditures, and corporate governance, all consisting of high
priority activities for more rapid and efficient growth. The Bank will also ensure an effective and
continuous monitoring of the economic situation, and provide the authorities with guidance and
advice through flagship economic reports such as the follow-up Social and Structural Review.
WBI is expected to play a prominent role in disseminating information to the civil society .

TABLE 3: BASE CASE BANK ASSISTANCE PROGRAM, FYO2-04

FY02 

I 

Poverty Assessment 
* Early Childhood Development 
* Analysis of Social Health 
Insurance 
* Nile Basin Initiative 
* Corporate Governance 
Assessment 
* Gender Assessment 
* Economic Monitoring 

* CPAR Update

* 

* Cairo Traffic Bureau 
* Environmental Training for 
Local Admin. 
Primary Market for 
Government Securities 
Integrating Global into Local 
Environment (17F) 
Project Appraisal, Monitoring 
& Evaluation (IDF/WBI) 
* Health Sector Reformn &
Financing Workshop (WBI)

* 

* 

FY03 

* 
* 

ANALYTICAL WORK
Public Expenditure Review 
Irrigation Improvement Sector 
Review 
* Drainage & Wastewater Reuse 
* Nile Basin Initiative 
* 
Financial Sector Assessment 
(FSAP)
* Economic Monitoring
* CFAA

* 

CAPACITY BUILDING (INCL. wsn)
* Mortgage Market Development 
* Global Conference on Endemic 
Disease Control 
Strengthening Public Debt 
Management 
* Governance Issues (WBI) 
* 
Public Expenditure Review 
Workshop (WBI) 
* Agricultural Trade & WTO (WBI)

FY04

* CAS
* 
Social and Structural Review II
* Nile Basin Initiative
* Evaluation of Health Sector Reform
* Economic Monitoring
* 
Informal Policy Notes!/

* Wind Energy (GEF)
* 
Solar/Thermal Energy (GEF)
* Biodiversity (GEF)
* Conference on Urban Management
(WI)
* Conference on Water Issues (WBI)
* Other demand-driven capacity
building needs will be identified

* 

LENDING
* Natural Resource Management 
Project (US$50m) 
Early Childhood Development 
(US$50m) 

* H4igher Education Project 
(US$50m) 
Skills Development Project 
(US$50m) 
Information Infrastructure: 
Telecom, Post, e-Commerce 
(US$1 Om) 
.
Informal policy notes will be produced in various areas on client demand and identified need.
This project is for FY04/05

1/ 
2/ 

* 

* 

* Health Sector Reform II (US$100m)
* 
Irrigation/Drainage Improvement
(US$100m)
* Agricultural Exports (US$40m)
* Rural Water/Sanitation Project
(US$50m)2

* 

IFC's priorities, closely coordinated with the Bank's activities, will emphasize more rapid job
creation through private sector use of natural resources for sustainable development. 
In
particular, IFC will focus on (i) developing private sector financed infrastructure. Egypt has

I 

For more details on WBI involvement in Egypt, see Annex 2.

25

already made headway in attracting private investment in infrastructure projects, especially in the
power sector (Sidi Krir, Suez and Port Said power generation plants). IFC has been involved in
all three power projects awarded to the private sector. With the Bank providing policy advice
and technical assistance, IFC will identify opportunities for investments in other infrastructure
sectors; (ii) providing support to the services sector, including tourism. IFC has been financing
tourism projects in Egypt with focus on integrated developments on the Red Sea coast. With the
number of tourists expected to double during this decade, IFC will continue to seek selective
investments in the sector; (iii) providing financing to internationally competitive and export-
oriented ventures; and (iv) supporting the government's privatization effort through both
advisory services to particular transactions and providing financing to privatized ventures. Other
areas of future EFC involvement include supporting small and medium enterprises (SMEs),
developing financial markets, and possible participation in building pipelines to export Egypt's
large natural gas reserves to Eastern Mediterranean countries.

* The Bank guarantees could also help, alongside MIGA and IFC investments, in catalyzing
private finance for infrastructure improvements. As in other countries, partial risk guarantees
(PRGs) can be an element in attracting private financing for new investments on sustainable
terms. Inclusion of a PRG in a project also has the effect of improving bid responses, increasing
investment commitments, and stabilizing tariff requirements. Possible uses for guarantees
include toll road projects, the Third Line of the Cairo Metro, and urban water and sanitation.

73. Targeted interventions for poverty reduction. Reflecting the over-arching objective of
poverty reduction, most of the Bank's focus, planned lending operations, and IBRD administrative
budget will be devoted to activities in this category. This is also the area where the Bank has a solid
experience in Egypt and the analytical underpinnings for deepening our involvement.

* Work on basic education, social protection and social safety net will continue through the Bank's

ongoing operations in education and the Social Fund for Development, in very close coordination
with other development partners. Analytical work on early childhood development, followed by
a well-designed project, is a new area of emphasis to improve the educational attainment of the

Egyptian population, especially its disadvantaged segments.

* 

In the health sector, the Bank will build on its ongoing efforts at reforming the health sector,
including a strengthened insurance system, continued improvement of management and

decentralization, through both analytical and project involvement.
* Since poverty in Egypt continues to be mainly rural-based, the Bank will prepare a follow-up
Natural Resource Management project that will increasingly encourage community-based

development. A Rural Water/Sanitation project will address the critical needs of the unserved,
mostly poor population.

* Water and sanitation is also an area of focus for the IFC. This will allow the Bank and IFC to
jointly pursue a strategy of increased private sector participation in receptive urban governorates.

* On the analytical side, apart from the work aimed at supporting operations in health and early
childhood development, the focus will be on (i) filling the major knowledge gap on the extent
and nature of poverty in Egypt, through a comprehensive Poverty Assessment; (ii) ensuring
greater equity and efficiency in the allocation of public resources to the social sectors, through a
Public Expenditure Review (PER); and (iii) a Gender Assessment aimed at addressing the key
gender-related issues, and, at the request of the authorities, developing mechanisms to
mainstream gender in the country's next Five-Year Plan (2002/2003-2007/2008). WBI is

expected to organize workshops/seminars on the experience of other comparator countries on

health reform and financing, endemic diseases and PER.

26

74. 

Interventions with major indirect poverty reduction impact. Bank Group's assistance in

this area supports interventions that may have major indirect benefits for the poor in terms of
promoting broad-based growth, development of poor areas or building effective institutions.

* Three 
lending operations are planned: 
Higher Education, Skills Development and
Irrigation/Drainage Improvement. The first two are aimed at making higher education more
relevant to the needs of the economy and to establish a viable mechanism for training in
entrepreneurial, technical and managerial skills. The Irrigation/Drainage project will build on the
considerable work done so far in Egypt to improve the efficiency of irrigation and water use.

* 

In the area of analytical and capacity building work, several activities are planned. Sector work
on irrigation improvement, and drainage and wastewater reuse would provide the analytical base
for the Irrigation/Drainage Improvement Project.

* The Bank will continue to play a facilitating role in the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI). This
initiative is led by ten riparian states of the Nile River Basin, and its goal is to develop the river in
a cooperative and beneficial manner, overcoming decades of dispute'.

* 

* 

In the energy sector, GEF-financed activities are planned for wind, solar and thermal energy, as
well as in biodiversity.

In the environment area, many development partners (USAID, Germany, Italy and others) are
already very active. Bank's technical assistance will, therefore, focus on areas such as
integrating global into local environment, and environmental training for local administration.

* Finally, exploratory analytical work will be undertaken in the area of governance, focusing on
linkages with economic efficiency, competitiveness, and service delivery to the poor. It would
also include providing guidance and international experience on judicial and civil service reform
as well as experience in community development activities. 
In the context of our ongoing
projects (Matruh and Population) community participation in the design and implementation of
projects has already begun. For example, the Matruh Natural Resource Project helped tribes
improve the management of water resources. The follow-up Natural Resource Management
Project will expand this process to other activities and areas.

E. Alternative Scenarios and Contingencies

75. The key assumptions underlying the base case and the corresponding Bank Group lending and
non-lending activities are summarized in Section D above. A high case lending scenario could be
envisaged under two possible eventualities: 
(i) a significant deepening of the structural reform
(accelerated privatization; significant trade liberalization; credible policy measures to improve
business environment; and effective export promotion policies); and improvement in the Bank's
portfolio; or (ii) a major deterioration in the external environment during the course of
implementation of a strong reform program (see Section V for possible risks), which may require the
Bank to facilitate Egypt's access to IBRD resources in larger volumes. Under this scenario, the
Bank could increase lending to around US$1.5 billion over the three years, of which about a half
could be in the form of quick-disbursing loans. As indicated earlier, the rapidity of the Bank's
response will be determined to a large extent by the existence of a sustained dialogue between the
Government and the Bank on the key structural issues.

I 

The ten riparian countries are: Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania and
Uganda. The first meeting of an Intemational Consortium for Cooperation on the Nile (ICCON) is planned for June 26, 2001, to raise donor
support and funding for the cooperative programs put forward by the NBI.

27

76. Alternatively, if the implementation of policy reforms and Bank portfolio deteriorate
considerably (deepening controls, halting structural reforms, and deteriorating Bank portfolio), a low
case lending scenario could be envisaged, under which Bank lending for the whole period would be
limited to about US$100 million for one or two projects in the social sectors.

77. Based on the above, there are four main triggers that will determine the level of Bank lending
in Egypt: macroeconomic framework; structural reforms; the quality of the overall policy dialogue;
and portfolio management. Details are provided in Table 4.

TABLE 4: TRIGGERS AND MAIN ASSUMPTIONS FOR THE LENDING PROGRAM

BASE CASE ASSUMTIONS 
* Gradual improvement in current 
monetary and exchange rate 
policies. Significant move 
towards fiscal sustainability. 
Fiscal deficit declines gradually
from a level of 4.4% in 2001.
Elimination of tariff surcharge. 

.

.

.

.

Progress toward reforms in the 
financial sector. FSAP 
completed. 

Improvement in the quality of 
policy dialogue. Full access to 
poverty data. 

Steady improvement in the 
Bank's portfolio. Problem 
projects in the 10%-35% range. 
Delays in effectiveness gradually 

reduced to about eight months. 

HIGH CASE TRIGGS 

* Significant progress in achieving 
fiscal sustainability. Fiscal deficit 
of 3.6% achieved in 2001, and
reduction in following years.

Low CASE TRIGGERS

* Controls deepened, fiscal
deficit unsustainably high.

* Average unweighted tariff 
reduced to 22%. 

* Acceleration of financial sector 
reform. FSAP completed. At 
least one of the 4 large public
commercial banks privatized.
* Significant improvement in the 
quality of policy dialogue. 
Poverty Assessment completed as 
a joint product with the
Government.
Significant improvement in the 
Bank's portfolio. Problem 
projects below 10%. Delays in 
effectiveness reduced to about six 

.

months.

.

.

No progress in structural
reforms, especially in trade
liberalization.
No progress in financial sector
reform.

* No improvement in policy
dialogue, and problems of
access to data persist.

* 

Significant deterioration in the
Bank's portfolio. Problem
projects over 35%. Effective-
ness delays in excess of a year.

F. 

IBRD Portfolio Mana2ement and Performance

78. Historically, implementation of Bank projects has been good in Egypt (84 percent satisfactory
compared to a Bank wide average of 74 percent). The current portfolio is of medium strength. At
present the portfolio comprises 19 active operations of which 2 are at risk (about 10.5 percent).
Sustainability and Institutional Development of Bank operations, as measured by OED have,
however, been below Bank wide averages, reflecting the resistance of Egyptian institutions and
procedures to change and the fact that the Bank is not a significant financial player in Egypt.
Consistent with the overall good performance of projects in Egypt, there are some notable ones with
strong results on the ground. Two such examples are Schistosomiasis Control Project, which has had
a major impact on the incidence of bilharzia in Egypt, and the National Drainage Project, which has
reduced the problem of a rising groundwater table, that leads to waterlogging and salinity.

79. Gross commitments from the Bank and IDA have swung widely over the years. For example,
in FY99, the final year of IDA availability, US$550 million was committed, while during the two
subsequent fiscal years only US$50 million was committed. This reflects Egypt's fluctuating
financial needs, as well as availability of grant funds from other development partners. The average

28

size of the Bank's portfolio has been decreasing. The Egypt portfolio, nevertheless, remains large
(18h largest in the Bank and second largest in MENA Region).

80. Three overarching issues have affected portfolio performance in Egypt: bureaucratic delays in
loan and credit effectiveness; systemic problems in agriculture credit; and project-level requirement
for minimum credit concessionality. Effectiveness delays reflect partly the Government's cautious
approach to borrowing, although it is also the case that internal approval procedures are heavy. The
Government and the Bank have agreed on the composition of the base case lending, and this should
help reduce effectiveness delays. The Bank and Egypt are also exploring ways to streamline, if
possible, the various steps of Ministerial and Parliamentary approval. Problems of agriculture credit
are serious, affecting two operations with PBDAC, the Agriculture Bank, as well as the agriculture
credit components of rural development projects. The Private Sector Agriculture Development
Project, which recently became effective, has a strong institution building component which is
designed to tackle the weaknesses of PBDAC. Finally, the current government requirement that each
project should have a minimum grant element of 40 percent is complicating the preparation of IBRD
projects. Debt concessionality needs to be monitored at the macro or sectoral level, rather than on a
project-by-project basis.

81. Accuracy in supervision reporting is a central priority and ratings for Egypt are 100 percent
realistic. The Country Team is committed to their remaining so. Proactivity has fluctuated in light of
implementation difficulties with the Health Sector Reform Project, which is now satisfactory. At the
end of this FY the proactivity index is forecast to be 100 percent.

82. 
In general, accounting standards and contracting and procurement arrangements are good. A
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) was completed in 1997, and a desk update is
currently under review. The last Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR), which was done
in 1994, was updated in 1998. A CPAR update and a full CFAA are planned for FY02 and FY03,
respectively. Moreover, as part of the Government's effort to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of public investment and budgeting, Bank assistance has been requested for improved
investment analysis, monitoring and evaluation (M & E) and results-based management. Egypt has
been selected as the region's pilot for intensive M & E support. So far, WBI has delivered course
material, an economy wide diagnostic of M & E capacity has been carried out, and an IDF grant
planned to support the basic institutional development.

83. For the future, four considerations will dominate the Bank's portfolio management: (i) closer
management of closing dates to ensure speedier delivery of project benefits; (ii) greater success on
the part of the Government and the Bank to reduce effectiveness delays; (iii) a special effort to
reduce the use of PMUs to ensure sustainability of project outcomes, and (iv) while early indications
of parallel financing with development partners for the Bank's proposed new operations are positive,
discussions will be initiated with the Government to move away from the project-by-project to a
more macro or sectoral requirement of meeting the 40 percent grant element.

G. 

IFC Portfolio Mana2ement and Performance

84. 
IFC had a record year in FY01 with approval of eight projects for US$177 million for IFC's
account and an additional US$305 million for participants. As a result, as of April 30, 2001, IFC had
outstanding committed investments of US$328 million in Egypt in 19 companies, plus an additional
US$305 for the account of participants.

85. 
IFC's investments are in the sectors of general manufacturing (steel, cement, paper),
infrastructure, extraction of fuels, hotels, financial markets and chemicals (see Table 5). On a

29

volume basis, the highest level of IFC's investments has been in general manufacturing. The largest
number of projects are in the financial sector where IFC has invested in the equity of companies
engaged in commercial banking, leasing, life insurance, investment banking and in an offshore fund
that invests in listed equities.

TABLE 5: SECTOR DISTRIBUTION OF IFC'S EGYPT PORTFOLIO

(Projected Shares by End FY-O1)
Percenta e of Committed Portfolio

Sectot 

of Fuels 

Manufacturing 
1nfrastructure 
Financial Services 
Mining/Extraction 
Hotels & Tou_rism 

Chemicals & Petrochemicals 

43%
24%
14%
8%
7%

40/o

86. As of April 30, 2001, 15.9 percent of IFC's disbursed loan portfolio in Egypt was in non-
accrual status compared to 13.2 percent for IFC as a whole. All the non-accrual is on account of one
investment, Misr Compressors.

87. 
IFC's activities in Egypt over the FY97-01 period have been consistent with the country
strategy articulated in the previous CAS which indicated that IFC's investments would continue to
focus on infrastructure, the financial sector, oil and gas, tourism, and key industrial activities.

88. 
In infrastructure, IFC approved and committed investments in FY01 of US$96 million for its
own account and up to US$305 million under the "B" loan program in two investments to build and
operate power plants at Port Said and Suez Gulf. In the financial sector, IFC focused on the creation
of new specialized financial institutions and approved investments in a life insurance company, an
investment bank, and a regional credit rating agency that launched a subsidiary in Egypt becoming
the country's first rating company. IFC also helped mobilize capital for Egypt's burgeoning stock
market by establishing an offshore closed-end fund investing in listed Egyptian equities. Total
approvals in the financial sector in the period FY97-01 amount to US$44 million, all for IFC's own
account.

89. 
In the industrial sector, IFC approved investments in nine companies producing steel, cement,
carbon black, industrial gases, corrugated boxes and autoparts in the FY97-FY01 period totaling
almost US$279 million of which US$199 million was for IFC's account and US$80 million under
the "B" loan program. In tourism, US$26 million in loans and equity was approved mostly to expand

an integrated tourist resort on the Red Sea coast.

90. 
IFC advisory activity since the last CAS included: conducting the financial and technical
assessment of an integrated steel mill and arranging the financing for the company's investments to
produce flat products; and providing advice on removing impediments to local bond market
development, with financing from the Technical Assistance Trust Funds (TATF). In addition, the
Foreign Investment Advisory Services (FIAS) was involved in several advisory assignments to:
recommend reforms of investment procedures and institutions inhibiting FDI; and develop an FDI
database and a general investment promotion strategy.

30

H. MIGA's Involvement in E2vpt

91. Egypt has been a member of MIGA since 1988. As of December 31, 2000, MIGA has not yet
provided any guarantees for investments into Egypt. However, it has covered three Egyptian
overseas investments ipito sub-Saharan Africa for a total amount of US$14.7 million. In the second
quarter of FY00, MIGA conducted a marketing trip to Egypt in recognition of the country's potential
both as a host country for investments and as a source of foreign direct investments. The Agency
received considerable interest from both Egyptian and foreign companies, the latter primarily for
investments in the infrastructure sector. MIGA's per-project limit of up to US$200 million, its
ability to syndicate additional insurance on the private market, as well as providing guarantees
against Breach of Contract, which it provides on a case-by-case basis, position the Agency well to
facilitate infrastructure projects and other types of investments. In the years to come, this is expected
to translate into real applications and projects covered by MIGA for both inward and outward
investments.

92. 
In FY00, MIGA's Investment Marketing Department assisted the Ministry of Public
Enterprises in establishing a marketing presence on the Internet for the Egyptian privatization
program through the Privatization Link. MIGA initially concluded a Memorandum of Understanding
with the Ministry and has since provided technical assistance in mobilizing information on state-
owned enterprises being divested, as well as the sales procedures and intermediaries being employed.
Current efforts are underway to mobilize additional enterprise information from the Ministry of
Economy and other ministries that are supervising the privatization of utilities, joint venture
participation, and other state-owned assets.

1. Experience with the Decentralization of the Bank Group Country
Management to the Field

93. The previous CAS was presented to the Board immediately prior to the decentralization of the
Bank's Egypt Country Management Unit (CMU) to Cairo. Almost four years into the process of
decentralization, many of the expected benefits from this move have been realized. Among these,
the most noteworthy are: (a) closer dialogue with the clients on sectoral issues, especially with
ministries and agencies such as education, health, rural development, water resources, and
environment. This has undoubtedly increased the effectiveness of Bank interventions; (b) improved
quality of portfolio management, with the CMU playing a critically important role in financial
management, procurement, disbursement and other portfolio follow up; (c) significant improvement
in the development and maintenance of partnerships with other donors (see paras. 97-100), private
sector, academia, press and NGOs; and (d) a greatly enhanced comprehension of the political, social
and economic realities of the country, which has made Bank interventions based more on realities on
the ground.

94. Overall, there has been an improvement in country dialogue, although it needs to expand to
certain important areas such as private sector development, financial sector reform and targeted
poverty alleviation.! The expansion of the Bank's role in these areas would serve as triggers for the
base and high cases in the present CAS.

95. Until about a year ago, the management structure of the CMU consisted of the Country
Director in Cairo, a Deputy Resident Representative in Cairo, and a Country Coordinator at

I 

OED Country Assistance Evaluation of January 2000 notes: "The general dialogue with Government has markedly improved over the
last several years, and this should be recognized as an important accomplishment, but it may have been at the cost of broadening that dialogue
into other areas."

31

Headquarters. As of July 1, 2000, the position of Country Coordinator for Egypt was abolished, and
as of January 1, 2001, as part of the overall reorganization in the MENA Region, a new CMU was
established, still based in Cairo but also covering two additional active IDA countries - Yemen and
Djibouti. Apart from improving client effectiveness for Yemen and Djibouti, this arrangement will
also spread overhead costs in a much more affordable manner.

96. 
IFC also decentralized to the field, with the Regional Director now based in Cairo, and
covering the entire MENA Region. In addition to the Regional Director, the IFC Cairo Office has six
professional staff, including a lawyer.

V. COORDINATION WITH DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

97. Owing to its size and geopolitical importance, Egypt receives relatively high levels of ODA,
and Cairo houses representatives of almost all bilateral and multilateral development organizations
(many of which operate on a regional basis). Effective partnership among and between donors and
government is therefore vital. On a per capita basis net ODA flows to Egypt since 1990 have been
among the highest in the world. FY91 (the time of the Gulf War) was an especially exceptional year
in which Egypt received almost US$7.5 billion of ODA in one year. In the current FY the amount is
lower (US$4.7 billion) but still significant.

98. The US and the EU are the predominant assistance providers to Egypt. Development
assistance from the US has averaged about US$1 billion per year, but is now slowly diminishing
(below US$800 million this year). EU assistance, aggregating that of the Community and the
individual bilateral programs, also amounts to about US$1 billion per year. In addition, the regional
development banks and Japan are all actively providing low cost resources. In this context, Egypt
has maintained a strategy of maximizing grant funds and borrowing cautiously.

99. Donor coordination takes place at three levels for Egypt. The Consultative Group, chaired by
the Bank, is held every three years (next scheduled for October 2001). In addition, a Donor
Assistance Group (DAG), currently chaired by the Netherlands, meets monthly in Cairo. The DAG
in turn has four sectoral subgroups, which meet as needed. Finally, under the leadership of the UN
Resident Coordinator, there is a UN Heads of Agency Group which meets quarterly. The IMF
representative and the Bank Country Director consult regularly in addition to the above. The Bank
participates actively in the DAG and Heads of Agency Group and the subgroups of the DAG in
human resource development and agriculture. All DAG meetings are periodically attended by
representatives of government. These meetings are useful in articulating linkages between the
extensive technical assistance and analytical work of bilateral donors with Bank Group work.

100. During the CAS preparation process, donor programs (lending, TA and analytic work) were
reviewed to identify gaps and complementarities. Overall, the results show a high degree of
complementarity and cooperation among donor programs, although there are some gaps as well. The
Netherlands, Germany, Japan and the Bank are the major donors working on water management
issues. The EU, USAID, the Bank and the rest of the UN family are working jointly to develop
human capital. Italy, Germany and Canada have programs on small enterprise development, and the
EU and USAID actively support privatization and industrial restructuring. The Arab Funds are
playing an important role in infrastructure and land reclamation. Italy and the US are both working
on cultural heritage issues. Gaps in the development effort are both analytical and operational.
Analytically, knowledge about the incidence of poverty, public expenditures and financial system is
very weak. Operationally, agriculture and rural development receive modest attention, as does water
treatment and sanitation. Civil service reform is a high priority area which is not being tackled, and
the various donor and government initiatives on women and children lack coherence. As part of the

preparation for the Consultative Group meeting, prioritization and allocation of responsibilities
among the development partners will be firned up, in close coordination with the Egyptian
authorities.

32

Box 1.0 MoJR DoNORS iN EGYPT

The United States
The United States is the most significant contributor of development assistance to Egypt. Between 1975 and 2000 Egypt
received about US$25 billion in ODA from the U.S. Current annual assistance is slightly below US$800 milhon and is
diminishing at about US$40 million per year. U.S. :Assistance is concentrated in four areas: I) econonuc growth, which is
essentially a cash transfer against policy reforrn, with an emphasis on privatzation 
2) human resource development
which compnrses projects in health ei 
and population; 3) scAence and technology which is a new initiative to
strengthen Egypt's capacities in IT; and 4) environmental protection. USAID has existing programs in power,
telecommunications, agriculture and water, aU of which will be phased down. In addition to the above, USAID provides
significant amounts of technical assistance, analytical support and traning.

The European Union
Th.e major EU instrument for assistance to Egypt is the MEDA grant program in support of the Euro-Med partnership.
There are four large programs underway, valued at Euro 615 million: 1) education enhancement; 2) health sector reforn;
3) the Social Fund for Development; and 4) industrial modernization. Tere are additional programs in private sector
development, public enterprise reformn and privatization, banking sector reform and family planning. The EU provides
additional support to Egypt through some of its regional programs and through the EIB. With the recent initialing of an
Egypt/EU Association Agreement there could be increases in the amount and scope of EIU assistance.

Germny

Current annual commitments 
to Egypt amount to, about US$70 milion equivalent, comprising loans, grants and
technical assistance. Grants and loans are focused on the environment (industial pollution and wind energy), water
supply and water managenment, urban development and the SFD, Technical assistance programs support vocational
education (KohW ubarak Iniative), agculture and solid waste management. Current assistance levels by Germany are
expected to remain stable over the foreseeable future. Future German developmnent cooperation will be concentrated on
three areas: water (water supply & sanitation, irrigation & drainage), social market economy (financial system,
employment creation, small and medium enterprises, vocational training) and environment (renewable energy, solid
waste management, industrial environmental protection, sustainable use of natural resources).

j:sa
Japan provides grants and soft loans to Egypt. Cunulative grants amount to about US$1 billion and the current most
significant one finances the first brid 
spanning the Suez Canal. After a decade-long moratorium on lending, Japan
reopened its soft loan awindow 
in 2000 and will focus on the environment, technology, human development and small
and medium, enterprises. On 
the technical assistance side, Japan supports 
transportation planning, improved
management of the Suez Canal, water supply, environmental monitoring, water management in irrigation, pediatric
emergency care and metal processing technology.

Arab Fuuds: IsDB. and AfDB
The Abu Dhabi Fund for Development, the Arab Fund for Econouic and Social Development, the Kuwait Fund for
Development, the Saudi Fund for Development and the Islanmic Development Bank are all signiicant donors to Egypt.
Total comnnitennts from them since they began operations in Egypt cumulate to about US$2.8 billion, concentrated in
industry, infrastructure, housing and the Social Fund. AfDB commitments to date are about US$1.3 billion and it has
programmed a lending ceiling of about US$500 milion per year for Egypt over the comiing three years. The emphasis is
on private sector development through credit programs and direct investments in human development.

0 

0 

q ~Others 

Although less important in terms of financial flows, other bilateral -and multilateral agencies contribute significantly,
especially in terms of technical assistance and trainng. Among the bilaterals, Canada, Denmark, Finand, Italy, the
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK are important. Among the multilaterals the main partners are
IFAD, UNDP, UNICEF and World Food Program (WFl).

33

VI. BANK EXPOSURE AND RISKS

101. Egypt has continued to maintain a very good track record in servicing debt to the Bank Group.
Bank exposure in Egypt is moderate. At end-2000, Egypt had IBRD debt outstanding and disbursed
of about US$639 million, accounting for 2.2 percent of its external debt. If Egypt were to borrow
from IBRD at the base case level of US$450-500 million during the period FY02-04, IBRD share in
the total external debt is likely to remain around the same level. Within this framework, Egypt's debt
service to IBRD as a share of its exports is expected to decrease to around 0.4 percent. At the
average borrowing level of US$150 million a year, Egypt's debt service to IBRD as a share of its
overall external debt service would be around 6-7 percent as compared with the guideline of 20
percent. Egypt's preferred creditor debt service relative to external debt service would decline from
about 29 percent currently to around 27 percent by 2004, compared to the guideline of 35 percent.

102. Despite recently emerging economic difficulties, Egypt is unlikely to face a major risk of BOP
crisis in the short-term. The country's reserves, despite their recent decline, remain adequate, at
about US$14 billion, or more than eight months of imports. The authorities are expected to continue
with their cautious attitude to new foreign borrowing, which has allowed the debt service to export
ratio to decline to 8 percent. Short-term debt is also relatively small, at 6.5 percent of the total debt
and 12 percent of reserves. The gradual depreciation of the pound since the summer of 2000 should
also ensure reduced pressure on reserves and the balance of payments. However, the ability of the
new exchange rate regime established by the Central Bank in January 2001 in dealing with any
further pressure remains to be tested. And beyond exchange rate management, further trade
liberalization would be required to improve the competitiveness of Egyptian exports and to reduce
pressure on the current balance, as the short-term vulnerability of the balance of payments to
domestic and external shocks remains high, as demonstrated in 1997-98.

103. In the medium-term, the implementation of the Bank Group's proposed assistance strategy
faces two main risks: deterioration of the external environment and a slowdown in the pace of
structural reforms.

104. At the international level, there is a risk that new disturbances in international markets may
reduce private capital inflows that Egypt counts on to finance a sizeable portion of its investments.
Egypt's foreign exchange earnings are also highly vulnerable to regional political developments and
shocks. Workers' remittances, tourism, Suez Canal receipts, oil proceeds and foreign assistance are
all susceptible to international developments, and particularly to the Middle East peace process. The
untapped peace dividend in the region is huge, but the eruption of serious regional hostilities could
lead to devastating effects on the Egyptian economy. While the gradual integration of the country's
economy in the global economy should open up new opportunities and gradually reduce the overall
volatility of foreign exchange receipts, it will also demand a much more proactive and vigilant
management of the economy.

105. At the domestic level, Egypt faces the risk of fiscal unsustainability, notably if the
expansionary financing of the mega projects were to continue with little improvement in tax
revenues, or if the government were to assume some contingent liabilities (e.g., banking system,
social security, guarantees to private sector). Under the most likely scenario, the fiscal deficit would
remain in the range of 4.0-4.5 percent of GDP during 2001-2005. However, a liquidity crisis in
some banks could represent a significant downside risk on public finance. In this latter regard, it is
believed that the intermittent shortages in liquidity during the past two years, both in foreign and
local currencies, have strained credit quality of the banks' portfolio, while the overall operating

34

environment of the banking sector has deteriorated in the context of lower GDP growth performance
and declining real estate prices. Foreign currency borrowings by some large borrowers might also
have been insufficiently hedged.' Although loan loss provisions have been built up and the Central
Bank of Egypt maintains close monitoring, some public banks may remain significantly under-
provisioned and under-capitalized.

106. The World Bank Group will work closely with the Egyptian authorities and other development
partners to monitor the situation and help minimize these risks. Monitoring the macroeconomic
situation is an important element in the Bank's policy dialogue. In the event of a major shock, the
Bank would stand ready to support an agreed upon reform program through appropriate instruments.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter L. Woicke

By:
Shengman Zhang 

Washington, DC
June 5, 2001

1 

Further insight on the stability of the financial sector is critically needed. A Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) report is
under consideration by the Government for FY03.

Annex 1
Page lof 16

World Bank Group Private Sector Strate2v

Introduction

Private Sector Development (PSD) is critical for improving living standards and sustainable
job creation as well as promoting Egypt's successful integration into the global economy. For the
poor in particular, security, opportunity and empowerment will accrue primarily through job creation
while access to infrastructure is becoming a critical need. The private sector can play a major role in
not only providing this infrastructure but moving the economy to a more productive and globally
competitive level. The World Bank Group (WBG)1 will continue to support PSD as it remains a key
element in the WBG's current CAS objectives.

Kev Challenges

Egypt's key challenge is to sustain and accelerate growth in order to alleviate high
unemployment and to pursue successful integration into the global economy. Overcoming both these
challenges requires an expanded role for the private sector which is increasingly viewed as the motor
of growth and raising competitiveness.

While private sector investment and growth have improved following the stabilization
period, the pace of investment and productivity are significantly lower than what is needed to
accommodate rapid labor force growth and demographic pressures. Continued and accelerated
progress on improving private sector incentives through trade liberalization, privatization, public
sector reform, and financial sector development are becoming critical. In today's global economy
however, rapid technological change, shorter product cycles and developments in the IT sector have
combined with privatization, trade and foreign investment liberalization to produce a very different
business environment. The private sector will therefore need to adapt and respond to new ways of
doing business-increased rates of innovation, new modes of competition, shorter process and
product cycles-which are emerging from the global-wide diffusion of e-commerce and IT.

The Government of Egypt has embarked on a set of policies to accelerate "second
generation" reforms to create a business environment conducive to private investment by enhancing
public-private dialogue and cooperation, promoting a sound business environment and momentum
on the privatization program, upgrading external competitiveness and technological capacity and
boosting SME sector. These reforms are crucial for Egypt's ability to improve its economic growth
performance and to compete successfully in the global market.

WBG Activity Since the Last CAS

The Bank Activity in PSD since the last CAS has been modest as Egypt has been able to
maintain high reserves and therefore has not required Bank assistance. In the period under review,
the Bank has carried out the following main activities in the PSD sector: (i) preparation of a financial

' WBG refers to IBRD, IFC and MIGA.

Annex 1
Page 2 of 16

sector credit (PBDAC), (ii) participation in a joint World Bank/Government of Egypt business
environment task force, and (iii) sector policy advice on Private Provision of Infrastructure.

IFC has had an active pipeline in Egypt, with equity and loan investments in manufacturing,
financial and infrastructure sectors, including participation in the first private sector power
generation projects.

MIGA has not provided any guarantees to Egypt. The principal reason has been the
reluctance of the government to provide counter guarantees.

The Government is looking to (i) develop an effective partnership with the Bank that enables
it to access the Bank's knowledge resources on PSD topics and (ii) if the need arises, access to
financial resources.

Vision

There are five inter-linked themes to Egypt's vision for the private sector:

* Redefining how the public and private sector work together and reorienting the public sector -
Collaboration

* Promoting an enabling environment for private sector development to eliminate constraints and
meet international standards of service and cost - A sound business environment.

* Allowing the private sector to take complete control of all productive sectors in the economy
over time - Privatization.

* Creating an environment that nurtures Small and Medium Enterprises (SME's) and allows them
to fully develop their potential as well as to ensure access to markets, resources and
infrastructure - Nurturing.

* Ensuring full participation in the global market and striking a balance between the "old" versus
"new economy" - Globalization.

Overlaying these themes is the need to: (a) reform the financial sector, and (b) strengthen
infrastructure.

Private Sector Development Priorities

Redefining the public and private sector so they can work together in a collaborative
manner.

The agenda for private sector growth in Egypt has been clear for many years -discussion of
ways to create an improved business environment that leads to better competitiveness, privatization,
support for SME's, and financial sector strengthening have occurred many times. Why hasn't more
progress been made in implementing this agenda? In large part the answer lies in the way the public

Annex 1
Page 3 of 16

sector and private sector interact or do not interact. It is generally recognized there is substantial
room for improvement in this relationship.

The lack of mutual understanding and trust between public and private sectors dates back to
the state-building period and today reflects the fact that neither party has clearly articulated its roles
and responsibilities in a modern economy.

Moving forward on this issue requires three main initiatives:

* Defining clear lines of trust and responsibility between the public and private sectors.

* A concerted effort to strengthen private sector's voice - through the creation of stronger business
agencies, and a willingness on the Government side to consult.

* Civil service reform that discourages rent seeking, improves accountability and moves the civil
service towards greater efficiency and effectiveness is clearly important.

The first and second initiatives are designed to promote a more collaborative overall
partnership between the public and private sectors that will include: (i) finding a way for the public
and private sector to work together on a case by case basis in resolving and streamlining the many
business environment concerns; (ii) developing stronger business to business dialogue and linkages
to supply industry and market specific information as well as provide a forum for lobbying on
industry specific concerns; and (iii) bringing the informal sector into the fold, and at the same time
giving it voice.

Civil service reform is central to every aspect of economic reform in Egypt and is extremely
important to the successful implementation of the PSD agenda. Strengthening approaches to
privatization, reducing red tape for the informal sector, reforming the financial sector, promoting the
"new economy," and creating effective public private partnerships all require sustained civil service
reform. However the reform process itself is dynamic and interactive--all of these policies will
interact with and shape the reform process itself. New applications arising out of Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) provide mechanisms to reduce and automate aspects of the civil
service, privatization reduces its power and size and sends powerful signals. Thus a push-pull
approach needs to be developed where one reform leads to another and then another.

Promoting an enabling environment for private sector development to eliminate constraints
and meet international standards of service and cost.

To be the main engine of growth and employment generation. in Egypt, the private sector
requires: (a) a stable and liberal policy and incentive framework; (b) a business environment
conducive to private sector activity where the rules of the game are transparent and clear, and
transactions costs are minimized; (c) easy access to key financial, technical and information
resources, and to markets; (d) low cost and high quality infrastructure services and (e) a first class
labor resource.

> 

Incentive Framework. The current policy environment inhibits competition and distorts the
incentives for firms to become more efficient and internationally competitive. Many sectors

Annex 1
Page 4 of 16

continue to enjoy high rates of effective protection from imports, an issue of particular concern
with respect to the EU Association Agreement, and has the effect of re-deploying resources
toward protected sectors during the interim period. In spite of progress on privatization,
continued state dominance in a number of sectors impedes private entry and access to resources.
Finally, Egypt lacks a Competition Law and a regulatory agency to limit anti-competitive
behavior in markets.

> Business Environment Related Issues. Private operators often indicate the tax system and
customs administration as a primary constraint. The system operates in a way that imposes
uncertainty, delays and excess costs on Egyptian businesses, particularly small and medium
enterprises (SMEs). Officials continue to exercise considerable discretion in the application of
tax and trade-related regulations, raising compliance costs and evasion'. There may be scope for
streamlining tax incentives for new investments to make them more effective. The commercial
legal system is also regarded as too slow, expensive and cumbersome in resolving commercial
legal disputes and therefore is not heavily relied on by businesses. This limits the development
of impersonal and complex contracting and raises the cost of business transactions . Secondary
issues that emerge from recent work, include (a) business and investment licensing; and (b) labor
regulation.

2

> Access to Resources. The financial system, is characterized by a low level of competition,
relatively high intermediation costs and a low level of innovation. This set-up has limited the
access to credit for new firms and in particular emerging private SMEs. Human resources that
have appropriate vocational and technical training are central to meeting the demands of the
private sector and the new economy.

> Infrastructure. Infrastructure services impose excess costs on Egyptian firms both exporters and
non-exporters, limiting their competitiveness and discouraging investment. Port services are
slow and costly. Evidence also suggests that there are constraints in domestic transport (in part
due to the limited road density), telecommunications and reliable electric power supply. Finally
access to land or industrial sites also presents a constraint to private sector activity.3 (A fuller
discussion can be found below).

Privatization to ensure full participation by the private sector in all productive sectors in the
economy.

Despite launching one of the most successful privatization programs around the world during
the 1990s,4 the overall contribution of the public sector to GDP has remained virtually unchanged in

3A 

' It also appears that considerable administrative delays in releasing customs (duty drawback related) letters of
guarantee is choking off the access to credit for exporting medium sized firms.
2 A new Commercial Law has been under preparation for some time and is expected to be presented to Parliament in
the coming months.
recent FIAS study has highlighted business incorporation procedures, access to land and constraints on site
development as key constraints to FDI. Labor regulations, while formally cumbersome, are not widely enforced, but
may deter large companies from investing or distort their investment decisions towards more capital-intensive, less
employment-creating technologies. Also it increases reliance on short term, sometimes informal employment which
in turn leads to insufficient investment in staff training.
4 Measured in percentage of GDP privatized per annum.

Annex 1
Page 5 of 16

the last decade. Most infrastructure activities and large financial institutions are controlled by
Government, which also retains substantial holdings of public enterprises. This share of
participation - at around 25% - is very high relative to other non-transitional economies and SOE's.

This high share of public activity has significant negative impacts:

* 

It crowds out the private sector and likely contributes to low productivity.

* 

It perpetuates an environment which is not conducive for private provision of infrastructure and
the public sector has difficulty addressing the investment needs of the infrastructure and social
sectors.

* Key providers of financial and infrastructure inputs to the private sector are neither efficient nor
effective, which reduces the private sector's overall competitiveness .

To resolve these problems the following is required:

* Strengthening the management of the privatization program.

- Effective "commercial" corporatization of state-owned enterprises and economic activities that
continue to be held at both the central government and municipal levels.

* Attention to investors' risk concerns through the development of financial instruments such as
guarantees.

* Ensuring a level playing field as between foreigners and local investors on matters such as
withholding taxes. This stands at 32% on interest payments to foreign lenders and is a major
obstacle to foreign financing. I

* Developing a coordinated regulatory and policy regime that is consistent with the needs of a
privately held infrastructure sector.

* Provision of substantial financial and other supportive resources to deal with restructuring and
commercialization costs.

Creating an environment that nurtures SME's and Microenterprises and allows them to filly
develop their potential.

SMEs and micro enterprises are a significant force in the Egyptian economy. Enterprises
with less than 10 workers are estimated to contribute 80% of private sector value added and account
for 75% of private sector employment.

1 In the Sidi Krir BOOT, investors were able to minimize the impact by taking advantage of the double taxation
treaty with Switzerland.

Annex 1
Page 6 of 16

SMEs receive little support from Government and are faced with a complicated and opaque
tax and business regulatory regime. Moreover there is little incentive for them to join the formal
sector; formalization does not necessarily lead to better access to land, capital and know-how and it
is costly from the vantage point of tax reporting. This has the following unfortunate consequences:

* SMEs that are the future growth poles of the economy opt out of the formal sector, which means
that growth and employment potential is lost.

* Rent seeking associated with allowing continued informality from within the administration is
encouraged, which reinforces the problem.

* Those businesses that do chose to locate within the formal sector suffer from unfair competition
- their competitors have a significantly lower cost structure.

Helping SMEs revolves around the following four areas:

* Providing access to finance, through the general strengthening of the financial sector mentioned
above.

* Reducing and simplifying the bureaucratic red tape that overwhelms Egyptian businesses but
particularly SMEs.

* Strengthening marketing channels, to ensure better information and support is available.

* Reforming the taxation system so that it 
administer.

is not unduly onerous, and is fair and simple to

Micro enterprises would benefit from the encouragement of (i) micro financial institutions
that are managed by private sector or non Governmental entities, and (ii) the availability of basic
business know how (business administration and management, preparation of financial records,
marketing).

Ensuring full participation in the global market, striking a balance between the old and
"new economy".

To take advantage of globalization, Egypt needs to: (i) improve its export performance in
non-oil sectors; and (ii) develop a strong "new economy" capability. A recent survey of private
manufacturing firms suggests that the most binding constraints to firms include high tariff rates on
imported inputs, lack of marketing and distributing companies, ineffective duty drawback regimes,
cumbersome export procedures and absence of export credit and insurance services, particularly for
SMEs. The severity of these constraints appears to be high in industries where Egypt appears to
have a revealed comparative advantage: textiles and food products.

Competition in global markets is further hampered by a lack of managerial expertise with
respect to exporting and high unit costs created by low capacity utilization. Egyptian firms also tend
to lack internal facilities for international market promotion and appear to be caught in a cycle of

Annex 1
Page 7 of 16

high domestic process for inputs, low domestic demand, low utilization of plant capacity and lack of
incentives to expand output for world markets. Redundant labor was also reported to be a negative
factor affecting competitiveness primarily from public sector firms. (Cassing et al 2000).

Export Processing Zones have not lived up to their potential in terms of generating foreign
exchange earnings, employment and attracting FDI. Data on the performance of the EPZs is
inadequate to monitor performance, objectives are unclear and there are few if any requirements
regarding exports for firms registering in the zone.

Adopting a strategy to improve export competitiveness will require the following:

* A concentrated move towards a lower, more uniform tariff schedule.

* Overhaul of customs procedures to allow automatic clearance of products. Adoption of
harmonized international standards and procedures to place producers on equal footing with
international competitors. Streamline duty drawback and temporary admission procedures.

* Export finance focused particularly on SME sector.

* Better monitoring of EPZ sector, ensure that exporters have access to duty free inputs and benefit
from infrastructure, tax, labor and environmental regulations in the zone. Enhanced role of
private sector in management and operation of EPZs and overseas marketing of EPZs.

While Egypt is without a doubt the leader in the Arab world in the new economy (the main
area being Information and Communications Technology (ICT)) and has demonstrated a
comparative advantage in this sector, much remains to be done if Egypt is to expand these capacities.
Globalization trends are facilitating new and innovative uses of ICT which further reinforces an
accelerated pace of globalization. This implies that the costs of delayed upgrading technological
capacity are rising, as demonstrated by the fact that in many developing countries, ICT-based
approach is outperforming the traditional approach in accelerating economic and employment
growth and contributing towards the quality of life.

Adopting a strategy in this area mutually reinforces many of the themes in generally
strengthening the business environment.

* The heart of ICT is the e-Commerce infrastructure which requires strengthening the financial
services sector and in particular promoting the widespread use of credit cards and automatic
payment systems.

* Telecommunications and in particular internet infrastructure is also very important through links
with overall infrastructure reform.

* Strengthening the general legal environment in terms of protecting intellectual property, financial
regulation and the development of new cyber-laws.

Annex 1
Page 8 of 16

In addition specific work is required to create awareness, promote Arabic content on
websites, encourage market niches in this area and develop and retain human resources. Without a
focus in this last area Egypt will continue to lose its brightest and best ICT professionals abroad.

Reformin2' the Financial Sector

From a strategic perspective, inefficiencies in the Egyptian financial sector system are the
major issue, i.e. the total costs involved in the intermediation process. These costs are being
incurred by the GOE (though perhaps not immediately realized) through the explicit and implicit
subsidies (in terms of capital depreciation) and by the private sector (through the relatively high cost
of funds - real interest rates to medium borrowers now probably approach 10% - and lack of access
to credit).

Egyptian authorities feel that this problem can be resolved through a gradual program of
institutional and policy reforms, with a particular focus on the state banks, while allowing greater
freedom for the private sector to increase its share of the market. But, while some of these measures,
in particular improved accounting and auditing standards and an enhanced supervisory regime, are
essential and should be expedited, international experience, in widely different economic contexts,
shows consistently that: a) sound financial systems cannot be built on or around dysfunctional
banking systems; and b) banking systems dominated by state banks can only be reformed effectively
through an aggressive program of privatization that is designed to change ownership, governance and
introduce market discipline. Such a program has to be complemented with other measures to
enhance regulation, supervision and competition and diversity in the system. Of course there are
other issues, ranging from the need to build up the debt markets at one end and for better and more
accessible housing finance and more market based rural credit at the other-to provide the diversity
of products/institutions needed to support a more dynamic economy and ensure a stronger financial
system. But in terms of strategic priorities the issue of the health of the banking system needs to be
emphasized.

Strenetheninz the Infrastructure Sectors

The overriding infrastructure issue in Egypt is finding adequate levels of investment to both
maintain existing assets and provide for new projects. Every infrastructure sub-sector is under-
capitalized. Government revenues are not enough to support the level of investment required, and
only the participation of the private sector can ensure adequate funds. BOTs have been attempted in
energy, ports and roads, and some small concessions granted for water and wastewater services.

The main tool to involve the private sector and expand access to infrastructure is the
promotion of entry and competition into the infrastructure sectors. This in turn would require
adapting the regulatory framework to an environment with more numerous, and more diverse,
players, and to the objective of expanding access. This might imply, for example, removing barriers
to entry, adapting quality standards to willingness to pay, establishing targeted subsidy systems
compatible with opening of sector to competition, and simplifying regulatory processes to enable
small, less sophisticated operators, to participate.

Infrastructure issues to be addressed might include: the need for cross sectoral policies which
encompass complementary or inter-related activities (e.g. gas and electricity); cross-sector

Annex 1
Page 9 of 16

considerations on tariffs and subsidy mechanisms; and a consideration of whether regulatory
institutions could/should be set up on a cross-sector basis.

World Bank GrouD Assistance Strate2y

Overview

Egypt is fortunate in that it enjoys strong donor support from a wide variety of institutions
including USAID, the EU, UNDP, AfDB, Kuwait Fund, KfW and the Islamic Development Bank.
In broad terms the WBG strategy is to work in partnership with other donors to provide the
following support:

The Bank will; (i) facilitate knowledge sharing on the implementation aspects of the agenda
and (ii) provide financial resources to fund the significant implementation and restructuring costs
arising from privatization and financial sector reform. The primary area where the Bank can help is
facilitating the public/private partnership dialogue which is seen as the starting point for meaningful
reform. In parallel, specific technical assistance can be provided in areas that will accelerate the
forces for change, such as privatization, PPI and civil service reform.

To deliver on this agenda the Bank will work closely with the Govemment and other
members of the donor community to develop innovative "low cost" financing packages and develop
mechanisms for the provision of reimbursable technical assistance by the Bank.

IFC will focus on; (i) supporting PPI initiatives with either guarantee, capital or advisory
services as the case may require, (ii) assisting the development of new financial sector institutions
and instruments for the private sector, (iii) catalyzing new private sector investment in both the
traditional (manufacturing, oil and gas and tourism), social sector and new economy sectors, (iv)
supporting SME initiatives.

MIGA will remain available to provide guarantee instruments to facilitate new private sector
investment, if required.

The Bank will work closely with the IFC and MIGA to develop projects incorporating public
policy and institution building components that support direct lending to the private sector. Matrix A
summarizes the complementarity of the Bank Group PSD assistance. Such projects could include
privately supplied housing and infrastructure services and municipal finance.

Detailed Proposals

The following is a list of detailed proposals based on the five themes discussed above-
namely collaboration, business environment, privatization, nurturing of SMEs and boosting
globalization and integration of the new economy-all of which support the broader goals of
improving growth performance, employment generation and competitiveness while enhancing
Egypt's integration into the global economy.

Matrix A: Complementarity of the Bank Group PSD Assistance

Bank 

IFC

Annex 1
Page 10 of 16

Financial sector
The Bank Group would focus on 
enhancing legal and regulatory 
environment and strengthening the 
banking sector and the payments 
system, which would pave the way 
for increased IFC involvement. 

SME development
The Bank would focus on improving 
the business environment and 
collaborate with the IFC to reduce 
the constraints to SME development 
(finance, market access, etc.). 

Privatization

Infrastructure

____________________________ 

Information and communication
technology 

- Non-lending services focused on 
- TA/advice on and investment in
capital market development and 
innovative financial instruments or
mortgage markets. 
structures to build institutions in
- TA to strengthen the capacity of mortgage finance, underwriting and
middle management in the Central 
trading of bonds, and factoring.
Bank, and establish a primary 
- Medium to long - term loans to
market for Government securities. banks and non-bank financial
- Possible lending aimed at 
intermediaries.
developing mortgage markets. 
- Collaborate with the Bank on
mortgage market development, by
intervening in primary markets or
becoming a shareholder of a secondary
mortgage market institution.

- Focused lending to facilitate access
to finance (investments in credit lines,
risk capital, guarantees, or non-bank
financing instruments, such as
leasing).
- Extended African Project
Development Facility to Egypt.
- Selected direct investments in
companies with clear development
impact (e.g. IT).

- Advisory services.
- Selected transactions.

- Lending (under "high case 
scenario") to develop export 
finance mechanisms (e.g., pre- 
shipment export finance 
guarantees). 
- TA/ESW to help create a legal 
and regulatory framework 
conducive to SME development. 

- TA to improve performance of 
public enterprises through the 
development of monitoring and
management mechanisms, and
corporatization.
- Pilot turn-around fund to
encourage privatization of
selected public enterprises, if
requested.

- TA on policy and regulatory 
reforms in the power sector. 
- advise municipal authorities on 

PSP options in the water sector. 

- IFC investments in IPPs in power.
- Potential investments in diverse
sectors such as water and wastewater,

ports and airports.

- Lending and TA support in: (a) 
ICT Education; (b) capacity 
building of the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority; (c) 
preparation of a modern legal 
framework for e-commerce and e- 
government; (d) reform of postal 
services.

- Investments in educational facilities
and/or technical institutions (in
collaboration with the Bank) to
promote computer literacy and ICT
skills.
- Investments in incubators and jber
parks.

Annex 1
Page 11 of 16

In addition to providing a more detailed description of recommended actions, this section
also highlights areas of potential comparative advantage for the Bank and IFC.

Detailed proposals under the main themes are set out below:

Collaboration: In recent years the Bank Group has supported a variety of approaches (consultative
forums, regulatory complaint offices, and strengthening professional associations) designed to foster
ongoing public-private dialogue on the objectives, scope and details of reforms. Such activities have
included 
the creation of Private Sector Foundations 
in Senegal, Ghana and elsewhere,
Competitiveness Review Commissions (Cote d'Ivoire and Cameroon) and simpler networking
activities which have helped to harmonize the activities of diverse PSD groups and focus the agenda
for public-private debate. To enhance the government -private sector dialogue the Bank Group can
support a series of workshops and strengthening institutional and organizational capacity along these
lines. A specific component of this work could be to develop conflict resolution mechanisms as well
as to upgrade the capacity and support systems of local professional associations and chambers of
commerce.

Business Environment: The business and regulatory environment plays a substantial role in
determining the commercial orientation and cost structure of the private sector. WBG assistance in
this area could include an omnibus ESW policy package addressing the legal-regulatory environment
and administrative processes which impose barriers to entry, exit and domestic competition. This
would include investment approval processes, competition policy to address nontradable sectors
which will complement the trade facilitation component in addition to tax issues. An additional
component of this package would be facilitating the private-public dialogue and collaboration.

Privatization: WBG assistance in this area could involve: (a) technical assistance to improve
performance of public enterprises through the development of monitoring and management
mechanisms, and corporatization; and (b) pilot turn-around funds to encourage privatization of
selected public enterprises. In the longer term, depending on the speed of the privatization program,
the Bank could provide financial resources to facilitate the program.' Privatization advisory services
can be provided by the IFC, where the Government would prefer 
to give IFC a mandate for a
particular transaction.

SME Development: 
In addition to the proposed assistance to create an incentive structure and
business environment conducive to private sector (including SME) activity, the Bank Group can
provide assistance in three dimensions of SME development: (a) facilitating access to resources,
especially finance; (b) providing business development assistance; and (c) helping to build linkages
between Egyptian and foreign SMEs. The nature of this assistance, in turn, varies for different
categories of SMEs. Egyptian SMEs represent very heterogeneous sectors that consist of a large
variety of enterprises 
in terms of the number of employees, amount of assets, technical
competencies, "know-how", dynamism, etc., and range from informal to formal, self-employment to

' Turn-around funds catalyze operational and financial turnaround of target companies. The component would
structure a package of managerial/technical resources and financing on terms which maximized the incentive of firm
management to improve competitiveness and restore profitability, and solicit private sector participation in such a
vehicle. The component would also serve to identify tax and regulatory obstacles to corporate restructuring.

Annex 1
Page 12 of 16

enterprises hiring 200 or more workers, artisanal products to high technology products, or
subsistence enterprises to those that are more competitive and dynamic.

Specific initiatives could include:

> Focused lending opportunities to facilitate access to finance (e.g., IFC investments in credit lines,
risk capital, or non-bank financing instruments, such as leasing, as well as Bank assistance to
develop modem export finance mechanisms, including guarantees etc.). The focus would be on
sustainability. In addition, financial intermediaries will be targeted for assistance. Opportunities
to issue credit lines for direct SME lending, especially in the leasing industry will be examined .

> Developing an ICT package for SMEs in different sectors (see section under ICT).

> As part of the WBG assistance, the business partnership group could help to spur the
development of new partnership activities between selected European and Egyptian Chambers of
Commerce that would: transfer expertise on best practices of Chamber services for SMEs,
encourage linkages amongst European and Egyptian SMEs, and provide SME skills development
in joint ventures and e-commerce.

Globalization: Under the CAS high case scenario, the Bank could consider a trade facilitation
project which deals with tariff reforms, customs reforms and removing infrastructure and
administrative constraints to exports. EPZ development and monitoring could also be included. In
addition, the project could include schemes to facilitate access to foreign markets and buyers (e.g.,
matching grants financed by other donors, or e-commerce schemes managed and operated by
professional associations) by Egyptian SME and new exporters.

> The Bank could also assist in the area of Information and Communication Technology.
Specifically, a project will be prepared focusing on Information Infrastructure, which could
include capacity building of the Telecom Regulatory Agency, preparation of a modem legal
framework for e-commerce and e-government and reform of the postal services .

IFC plans to invest directly in internet or IT companies and in internet infrastructure
enterprises. FIAS will continue to support efforts to improve the climate for foreign investors.

Financial Sector

The Bank would provide TA to promote the financial reform agenda. Specifically, this TA
would focus on building the capacity of middle management in the Central Bank, and establishing a
primary market for Government securities. The Bank would also collaborate with the IMF to
enhance the legal and regulatory environment in the context of a financial sector assessment (FSAP).

A Mortgage Market capacity building activity could be prepared to provide various financial
products that would help the Government in mobilizing at relatively low cost, the large amounts of
private funding that will be needed. It may also be possible for the IEFC to support a Bank operation
by intervening in primary markets or by becoming a possible shareholder of a secondary mortgage
market institution.

Annex 1
Page 13 of 16

IFC would follow a three-pronged approach in the financial sector: creating or strengthening
existing institutions, providing medium to long-term funding, and deepening the financial sector by
developing the bond markets and introducing new financial instruments.

IFC's institution building role will build on the successful experience of setting up joint
ventures between local financial institutions and international companies that are industry leaders, to
promote the transfer of expertise and best practice. IFC expects to be active in setting up institutions
to engage in activities that are as yet undeveloped, including mortgage finance, underwriting and
trading of bonds, and factoring. Developing mortgage finance will first entail the growth of a
primary market, where existing or new institutions provide mortgages. This is expected to happen
with the passage of the mortgage law. A second stage will be the development of a secondary
mortgage market, which will need the introduction of securitization and setting up secondary
mortgage institutions.

IFC will continue to offer medium to long-term loans to the financial sector, to banks and to
non-bank financial intermediaries. The maturities offered by IFC are longer than those available
from' other sources, and would enable financial institutions to better manage their balance sheets.
Extending financing to intermediaries engaged in the SME sector, such as leasing companies, will be
the focus of particular attention.

Developing the corporate bond market, and fixed income markets more generally, is an
important component of general financial sector development. An active, well functioning primary
market provides an important corporate finance tool that can reduce interest rate, foreign currency
and refunding risk. Egypt has a somewhat active primary corporate bond market (although activity
has dropped off sharply recently) with established procedures, but an illiquid secondary market. IEFC
has provided advisory services to the Capital Markets Authority on developing the corporate debt
market, and will seek to complement that by setting up a new institution(s) or strengthening existing
ones that underwrite and trade debt instruments. This activity would also support development of an
active government securities market, which provides benchmark interest rates across the maturity
spectrum, among other financial sector benefits.

Infrastructure

The Bank Group has and can continue to play a role in the infrastructure area, and
increasingly in the private provision of infrastructure. Areas for Bank and IFC activity include
power, water and wastewater, and ports and airports. Over the short term the role of the Bank in this
sector would be to provide technical assistance on policy reforms and needed regulatory framework.
IFC's involvement include both advisory activities and investment.

The water and sanitation sector has benefited from substantial donor funding over the past
two decades. With donor funding expected to decline, policy advice will focus on attracting private
sector participation in the provision of water and sanitation services. Low water tariffs are a major
impediment to private sector participation. Reforms of the regulatory framework are expected to
decentralize decision-making and grant more autonomy to municipal water and sanitation authorities
in setting tariffs. The WBG can advise municipal authorities on PSP options and ways to implement
transactions with private sector companies and IFC could provide direct financing to the projects.
Cities such as Alexandria, with a strong commitment to private sector participation and where tariffs

Annex 1
Page 14 of 16

are higher than other cities (they are still low by international comparison) are more likely to attract
private sector investment in water/sanitation and can then serve as a model to be replicated in other
cities.

In the renewable energy area work to develop self sustaining markets can also be pursued.
IFC through PSAS can provide advisory services to facilitate private transactions.

In the power sector, reforms need to be aimed at attracting private sector participation and
financing of the large amount of investment needed in generation, transmission and distribution to
cater for load growth. IFC has been requested to provide financing for the first 3 IPP's in Egypt.
While it is expected that there will continue to be demand for IFC financing in power generation,
IFC's strategy will be to explore the scope for private participation in the distribution sub-sector and
in developing alternative sources for generation such as wind power. In this sector, Egyptian
authorities are dealing simultaneously with the cornerstone elements of sector reform, namely sector
structure, ownership policy and regulation (including prices). Until recently, electricity supply was
under monopoly control of the Egyptian Electricity Authority (EEA), but this has changed and the
private sector is now authorized to build, own, operate and transfer (BOOT) power generation plants.
In addition, the Government and Egyptian Electricity Holding Company are currently considering
whether it is better to separate generation from distribution before proceeding with the privatization
process.

While the technical performance of the generation, transmission and distribution systems is
adequate, consumers receive a reliable service at a low price, and the power sector in Egypt has, over
the last few years, experienced notable achievements, these arrangements have not been adequate to
establish financial discipline and sound commercial practices in the power sector. The financial
position of the sector is weak; there are subsidies in electricity tariffs and large arrears in the
payment of electricity bills, mainly by several major customers in the public sector. As for pricing
and regulation, electricity tariffs are set by Cabinet decree. There have been no changes in tariffs
since 1994, which means that tariff rates have been decreasing in real terms.

IFC has been heavily involved in the power sector in Egypt in recent years. The work done
on specific BOOT investments in power generation has provided an opportunity to address some of
the issues facing the country in this sector. This involvement has allowed IFC, as a part of the Bank
Group an initial entr6e to the discussions with the Government of Egypt. The outcome of decisions
made by the Government of Egypt will have a considerable impact on the future commercial
performance of the sector, and its ability to attract the necessary investment for meeting future load
growth.

IFC Activity since the last CAS

In the manufacturing sector, since the last CAS IFC approved 9 investments in companies
producing steel, cement, carbon black, industrial gases, corrugated boxes and autoparts. In general
however, demand for IFC financing in the manufacturing sector has been less than expected. This
has largely been due to the availability of financing from other sources, including local and
international banks, other multilateral agencies such as the European Investment Bank, the African
Development Bank, the Islamic Development Bank and Arab funds and, to a limited extent, the
domestic bond market. Another reason has been the fears of a possible devaluation of the Pound,

Annex 1
Page 15 of 16

particularly since 1999, which have inhibited demand for US$ financing, including from IFC,
particularly for projects which are not foreign exchange earners.

The last CAS identified IFC's strategy in the financial sector as a three-pronged approach
of: creating or strengthening existing institutions, providing medium to long-term funding and
providing technical assistance where appropriate expertise can be sourced. IFC made significant
progress in all three areas. The aim of EFC's institution building efforts is to deepen the financial
sector in Egypt, by introducing new activities and best practices and ultimately increasing the
efficiency of the financial sector in providing services in support of private sector activity. Since the
CAS, IFC has set up and invested in institutions in leasing, credit ratings, life insurance and
investment banking. In all these cases, the companies are set up as joint ventures with international
companies that are industry leaders to ensure that best international practice is followed. Orix
Leasing Egypt has the Orix Corporation of Japan and Orix Leasing Pakistan as technical partners.
The rating company, Nile Ratings, was set up with Fitch IBCA of the U.K. Commercial International
Life Insurance Company is a joint venture between Egypt's leading private bank, CI ( which is also
an IFC investment since 1992) and Legal & General, one of the leading U.K. insurance companies.
The investment banking company, HC Securities, is in joint venture with Morgan Stanley Dean
'Witter.

IFC has also provided funding to the financial sector. A forfaiting credit line was recently
approved to some Egyptian private banks to help them expand forfaiting services to their private
clients. IFC has also extended a loan to a leasing company, ORIX Leasing Egypt which IFC helped
establish in 1996, to enable it to expand the financing it provides to SME's. In FY01 IFC concluded
a US$30 million loan to a leading investment bank to help it fund new lines of business and to
expand into regional markets. IFC has also been offering long-term lines of credit to private
Egyptian banks to enable them to provide term US$ funding to their private clients, but none have
been concluded so far. In general , IFC lending to the financial sector, to banks and to non-bank
financial intermediaries (NBFIs), has been in less demand than expected. Once Egypt was awarded
investment grade rating from the major rating agencies in 1997, the availability of shorter term, but
lower cost financing in US dollars from international banks to Egyptian banks improved and reduced
the demand for IFC lending to the banking sector. NBFIs generally have a preference to borrow in
local currency unless the foreign exchange risk can be hedged, and hedging instruments are limited
in Egypt.

IFC has supported the growth of the Egyptian Stock Exchange. IFC included the Egyptian
market in its widely followed IFC Indices in 1997, helping to increase international interest and the
flow of capital to Egyptian equities. IFC also set up and invested in the first offshore country fund
for Egypt (The Egypt Trust, capitalized at US$ 90 million) thus helping to mobilize international
funds to invest in Egyptian listed equities.

IFC has also provided technical assistance to the Egyptian Capital Markets Authority (CMA)
and Ministry of Economy to help develop the corporate debt market.

In infrastructure, the Government has opened up some areas to private sector investment.
Power generation has been at the forefront and 3 contracts to develop and operate power stations
have been awarded to private companies to date. The large financing requirements of these projects
and the long tenors needed created a demand for IFC financing which was sought for all 3 projects.

Annex 1
Page 16 of 16

IFC's Board approved financing to the first (Sidi Krir) in FY1999 and to the other 2 (Suez and Port
Said) in FY2001. The loan to Sidi Krir has not been signed as the company has not yet chosen to
convert the bridge loans it obtained from commercial banks to the longer term IFC loan. The loans to
Suez and Port Said were signed in April 2001. IFC's loans are of the long tenors needed and,
through the B loan program, IFC is able to mobilize large amounts of international bank financing to
complement its own lending. For the Suez and Port Said projects, IFC will attempt to raise a total of
about US$300 million from international banks to complement the US$90 million it will provide
from its own resources.

Annex 2
Page 1 of 1

World Bank Institute (WBI) in Egypt

As the focus of the Bank Group shifts increasingly toward knowledge-based
activities, the role of WBI is expected to become correspondingly important in capacity
building and knowledge management services. For greater impact and to assure
selectivity, WBI will focus on a few strategic areas where the Bank Group is heavily
involved. Table 3 summarizes some of WBI's activities under the base case scenario. In
each case WBI is expected to ensure wide consultations and dissemination of experience
of other countries in areas where AAA on Egypt is underway or completed.

Egyptian participants are expected to benefit from courses for the sub-region in
Lebanon on: health sector reform and health financing; agricultural trade and WTO; and
financial sector issues. Other WBI learning programs relate to governance issues,
privatization strategy and infrastructure finance; and in the area of information and
communication technology.

WBI's strategy is to work closely with, and strengthen, local partners for training
and policy dialogue. Following the WDR workshop in Cairo (Feb 2001), a group of
Egyptian civil society leaders will participate in country and regional development
debates focused on poverty with videoconference support. Later, a similar group will
provide critical input and draw substantial benefit from the next Mediterranean
Development Forum (MDF) event scheduled for March 2002. The fourth MDF should
be an effective instrument for policy dialogue in the region, with relevance and concrete
follow-up for all countries concerned.

WBI will stay responsive to strong country demand in other specific areas, such as
project appraisal, monitoring and evaluation, following up on the successful course
offered in Cairo in March 2001. WBI will also explore the demand for learning on
education (including ECD), reproductive health and population, as well as water and
environment issues and urban management. It is also expected to support exploratory
work and consultations on governance issues.

Egypt's global distance learning center will become operational in 2001 at the
Regional Information and Technology Software Engineering Center (RITSEC). As part
of the Global Distance Learning Network (GDLN), WBI, in collaboration with the
Economic Research Forum (ERF) and RITSEC, will offer in 2002 a first distance
learning course in Cairo for a regional audience on Macroeconomic Management for
Financial Stability and Poverty Reduction.

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Egypt, Arab Rep. at a glance

M. East 
Lower-
& North middle-
Africa 
income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Egypt 

Developrnent diamond'

1898
Population, mid-year (nillions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas niethod, US$ billions) 

62.4 
1,380 
86.4 

291 
2,060 
599 

2,094 
1,200
2,513

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993-99
Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 

1.8 
2.7 

2.1 
3.0 

1.1
1.2 

GNP 
per 
capita 

Gross
primary
enrollment

Most recent estimate /latest year available, 1993899) 
Poverty (% ofpopulation below nabonal poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 Ive births) 
Child malnutrition (% of chikden under 5) 
Access to improved water source (% ofpopulaton) 
illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
GrossprimarVenrollment (%of'school-agepopulation) 
Male 
Female 

23
45 
67 
49 
12 
95 
45 
101 
108 
94 

58 
68 
44 
15 
89 
36 
95 
102 
88 

43
69
32
15 
80
16
114 
114 
116

Access to safe water

EW'ptArabRep.
Lower-mIddrt-Income group

-

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

Econonilc ratIos'

GDP (USS billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

18.2 
32.8 
29.7 
14.2 

30.0 
31.8 
17.9 
17.3 
30.0 

82.5 
20.5 
16.8 
14.0 
21.0 

89.0
22.8
16.0 
14.4
21.0

Trade

.. 

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest paymentslGDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debVGDP
Present value of debt/exports

-10.6 
1.2 
82.1 
6.4 

-1.6 
3.7 
151.9 
23.3 

-3.0 
0.9 
36.7 
8.5 

-1.9
0.8 
33.7 
9.5

Domestic 
Savings

Investment

Indebtedness

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

1999.03

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

5.8 
4.5 
4.4 

4.3 
2.6 
3.5 

5.6 
3.9 
-7.7 

6.0 
3.9 
9.2 

5.7 
4.1 
12.4

-- 

-Egypt, Arab Rep.
Lower-mIddle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

19f8 

Growthofinvestrent andGWP(%)

(% of GDP)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

20.9 
35.8 
13.6 
43.3 
68.7 
17.1 
48.3 

19.7 
28.0 
18.1 
52.3 
70.1 
12.6 
32.4 

17.5 
32.3 
18.6 
50.2 
75.9 
10.1 
23.3 

17.4
31.5 
19.5 
51.0 
75.5 
10.1 
24.4

20
10 
0 
ao Of 

} 
I

,_0

p_ 

94 

95 

9 

97 

9a 

99

GDI 

0GDP

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growtb or exports and imports (%)

(average annual gtrowth)

Agriculture 
Industrv 
Manufactuing 
Services 

2.8 
5.6 

3.0 
4.0 
5.9 
4.6 

3.7 
7.1 
7.8 
5.4 

3.7 
3.7 
9.7 
8.3 o

15

10
s

.. 

7.5 

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

3.5 
4.8 
1.2 
-1.6 
7.2 

4.2 
1.8 
4.7 
2.8 
4.7 

4.3 
4.5 
21.4 
1.1 
5.8 

3.6 
3.9 
19.8 
12.8 
5.7

w 

95 

96 

97 \ 

95 / 

99

-
-10

-Exports 

0Imports

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Egypt, Arab Rep.

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

inflation (%

Domestic prices
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Govemment finance 

10- 
* 

-

.. 

16.7 
18.5 

3.8 
3.6 

3.8 
1.7 

' 

<-

22.3 

-

2

(% of GDP, Includes cunfent grants) 
Current revenue 

o -

.. 
.. 
.. 

19.3 

22.8 

22.2 

94 

95 

96 
deflator -0-CPI

97 

98 

99

Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficR 

-4.9 
-15.4 

2.9 
-1.0 

2.0 
4.2 

-GDP 

w__w___

TRADE

(US$ m9lions79 
Total exports (fob) 
Cotton 
Otheragriculture 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cil. 

1989 
2,697 
1,066 
299 
978 
10,361 

1998 
5,128 
1,728 
103 
1,685 
16,899 

1999 
4,445 
1,000 
208 
2,080
16,969 

Export and lniport levels (US$ mill.)

.. 
.. 

20,000

T

15000

100-0

Food 

2,404 

3,194 2,374 

s,oojj *- 

-

]

Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

680 
2,050 

2,188 
4,801 

1,319
5,575 

o

Export price Index (1995=100) 
Importpricelndex(1995=100) 

.. 
.

91 
86 

98 
94 
105 

94
90 
104 

a Exports 

olmports

Terms of trade (1995=100) 

107 

_

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(USS minllons) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

1979 
5,401 
8,781 
-3,380 

1989 
8,216 
12,539 
-4,323 

1998 
13,503 
21,795 
-8,292 

1999 
13,537 
21,109 
-7,572 

Current account balance to GDP (%I

-

s

4

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-1,069 
2,534 

-389 
4,243 

1,213 
4,600 

995 
4,869 

2

1-

Current account balance 

-1,915 

-469 

-2,479 

-1,709 

-1 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

1,747 
168 

35 
433 

2,344 
135 

-409 
2.117 

-3
-4

Memo:

Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locaVUS$) 

.. 

2,437 
2.6 

20,878 
3 4 

18,763
3 4

0.7 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ rmillions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composlton of 1999 debt (US$ mill.)

14,906 45,611 
258 
1,448 
266 
905 

30,313 
846 
1242 

29,955
761
1273 

G:3,0 

0:4,21

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

519 
22 
2 

2,910 
250 
12 

1,643 
236 
25 

1,833 
221
28

F. 723

Composition of net resource flows
Ofricial grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

258 
1,148 
441 
1,216 

455
397 
259 
1,250

0 
-105 

-193
-165

0 

0 

E. 21,976

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

298 
172 
3 
169 
21 
148 

241 
118 
144 
-26 
118 
-144 

142 
217 
180 
38 
81 
-44 

550 
199 
166 
32 
83
-50

A - IBRD 
B-IDA 
C- IMF 

E - Bilateral
D-Othermultilateral F-Private
G - Short-term
- - - - --

_

Development Economics 

04/13/01

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B2 - Arab Republic of Egypt

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As of Date: 05/30/2001

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount as 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number ' d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) ' 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousapd) 
Average Supervision (US$ thousand/project) 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

17 
4 
17.6 
15.4 
17.6 
15.4 
36 

20 
3 
15 
12.3 
15 
12.3 
14.4 

21 
4 
19 
36.9 
19 
36.9 
8.1 

19
4.7
10.5
1.8
10.5
1.8
5.6

Yes (Nov 97) 
1,124.0 
62.5 

No 
1,359.0 
59.1 

No 
1,596.0 
76.0 

No
1,332.0
66.6

Memorandum Item 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amtf 

73 
3474.7 
24.3 
14 

7
435
29
2

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. Figure is based on net disbursements of unsatisfactory projects after cancellations. If based on original
commitments, figure for Last Five FYs would be 11%.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 1

Arab Republic of Egypt
Bank Group Program Summary
Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal 
year 

Project 

Strategic Rewards 
(HIMIL) 

US$(M) 

Implementation
Risks
(HIMIL)

2002 Higher Education Enhancement Prog. 
Skills Development 
Information Technology 
Result 

2003 Early Childhood Development 
Natural Resource Management 
Result 

2004 Health Sector Reform II 
Irrigation/Drainage Improvement 
Agriculture Exports 
Result 

Overall Result 

50.0 
50.0 
10.0 
110.0

50.0 
50.0 
100.0

100.0 
100.0 
40.0 
240.0

450.0

H 
M 
H 

H 
H 

H 
M 
H 

a/ This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.

M
M
L

M
M

M
L
M

Arab Republic of Egypt: Summary of Nonlending Services

As of 4/13/01

Product 
Recent completions 

Completion FY 
Export Promotion 
Safety Net 
Agriculture Reports 
Cairo Traffic 
Business Environment 

Ongoing 

Social & Structural Review 
Nile Basin Initiative 
Water Notes 
CDF for Education 
Private Investment in Public Infrastructure 
Project Analysis for Training (WBI) 
Economic Monitoring 

FY 
01 
01 
01 
00 
01 

01 
01-04 
01/02 
01 
01 
01 
01-04 

Planned 

Poverty Assessment 
CPAR Update 
Health Insurance 
Gender Assessment 
Early Childhood Development 
Corporate Governance Assessment 
CFAA 
Public Expenditure Review 
Irrigation Improvement Sector Review 
Drainage and Wastewater Reuse 
Financial Sector Assessment 
Social & Structural Review II 
Evaluation of Health Sector Reform 
CAS 
G = Government; B = Bank; D = Donors; P = Public Dissemination
KG = Knowledge Generation; PD = Public Debate; PS = Problem Solving

02 
02 
02 
02 
02 
02 
03 
03 
03 
03 
03 
04 
04 
04 

Cost
(US$000) 
20.3 
9.5 
170.2 
31.0 
143.9 

Audience 
G, B 
G, B 
G, B, D 
G, B 
G, B, D 

164.7 G, B, D, P 
108.6 
G, B, D 
67.8 
G, B 
276.8 
G, B, D 
166.0 
G, B, D 
G 
B, G 

150.0 

-

200.0 G, B, D, P 
30.0 
G, B 
75.0 
G, B, D 
75.0 
G, B, D 
50.0 
G, B, D 
40.0 
G, B 
50.0 
G, B, D 
250.0 
G, B, D 
100.0 
G, B, D 
100.0 
G, B, D 
150.0 
G, B 
250.0 G, B, D, P 
100.0 
G, B, D 
150.0 G, B, D, P 

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

Objective
PS
PS
PD, PS
PS
PD, PS

KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
PS
KG

KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
PS
KG, PS
KG
PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
PS, KG
KG, PD
KG, PS
PD, PS

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

Egypt, Arab Rep. Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same reglon/income group
M. East 
Lower-
& North 
middleh
Africa 
Income

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-99 

POPULATION

Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

36.3 
1.9 
43.5 
5.4 

46.5 
2.6 
43.9 
4.6 

62.7 
1.9 
45.0 
3.3 

290.3 
2.0 
58.2 
3.5 

2,093.0
1.1
42.9
2.1

POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

.. 

.. 

22.9
22.5
23.3

.. 

.. 

.. 

INCOME

GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

340 
6 

640 
21 
23 

1,380 
120 
116

2,060 
114 

1,200
137

.. 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

28.9

Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

5.8 
48.1 

9.8
39.0

Health (% of GDP) 

.. 

.. 

1.8 

2.2 

2.3

Education (% of GNI) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

5.1 
4.7 

6.3 
5.2 

4.8 
0.1

5.2 

4.8

Total 
Male 
Female 

63 
75 
49 

.. 
.. 
.. 

93 
98 
88 

87 
90 
83 

99
100
99

Access to an improved water source

(% of population)

Total 
Urban 

.. 
.. 
.. 

90 
93 
61 

95 
96 
94 

89 
96 

80

94
69

Rural 

80 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

74 
95 

96 
95 
12 

91 
92 

87
87

.. 

.. 

9

Life expectancy at birth
(years)

Total 
Male 
Female 

53 
52 
55 

59 
58 
61 

67 
65 
68 

68 
67 
69 

69
67
72

Mortality

Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

139 
235 

92 
175 

49 
61 

44 
56 

32
40

255 
179 

257 
204 

193 
168 

183 
151 

191
133

Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

170

Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

56

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indIcate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water
source data is 2000.

2001 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Egypt, Arab Rep. - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100 
17 
32 
51 

100 
18 
32 
51 

100 
17 
32 
50 

100 
17 
32 
51 

100 
17 
34 
50 

100 
16 
32 
52 

100 
15 
32 
53 

100 
14 
33 
53 

100
13
33
54

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

89 
16 
5 
11 

87 
18 
6 
12 

86 
19 
7 
12 

86 
20 
7 
13 

81 
22 
7 
14 

82 
24 
6 
18 

82 
24 
6 
18 

81 
25 
5 
19 

80
25
5
20

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

20 
26 

20 
25 

17 
23 

16 
24 

16 
22 

17 
24 

18 
25 

19 
25 

20
26

Grossdomesticsavings 
Gross national savingsc 

11 
17 

13 
20 

14 
21 

14 
21 

19 
24 

18 
23 

18 
23 

19 
23 

20
24

Memorandum iters
Gross doinestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNPper capita (US$, Atlas method) 

67591 

75516 

82539 

89016 

99459 

102884 107123 

114628 

120177

1100 

1200 

1280 

1380 

1610 

1670 

1700 

1750 

1820

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
5.0 
Gross Domestic Income 
3.7 

5.5 
6.6 

5.6 
5.3 

6.0 
4.5 

6.4 
8.7 

5.5 
4.3 

5.6 
5.2 

5.7 
5.3 

5.9
5.6

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
3.1 
3.6 
Total consumption 
1.9 
2.2 
Private consumption 
2.3 
2.1 

3.8 
-0.1 
-0.1 

4.3 
2.5 
2.5 

4.7 
2.9 
2.6 

3.8 
4.0 
4.7 

3.9 
2.6 
3.1 

4.0 
2.6 
3.1 

4.2
2.5
3.0

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)5
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

13415 
4609 
17660 
14263 
-4245 
3521 
-185 

14534 
5345 
19528 
16718 
-4994 
4145 
119 

13503 
5128 
21795 
15321 
-8292 
4600 
-2479 

13537 
4445 
21109 
16969 
-7572 
4869 
-1709 

15975 
6388 
22756 
17861 
-6781 
4679 
-1171 

17539 
7219 
24746 
19234 
-7207 
4660 
-1865 

19402 
7960 
26527 
20454 
-7125 
4530 
-2225 

21651 
9008 
28806 
21822 
-7155 
4694 
-2237 

24071
10417
31038
23356
-6967
4473
-2411

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ornnissions) 
Change in reserVeSd 

612 
-354 
21 
-374 
497 
-570 

723 
-255 
-51 
-205 
1326 
-1912 

967 
-105 
0 
-105 
1481 
135 

655 
-522 
-298 
-224 
-542 
2117 

1613 
-788 
-587 
-201 
-2679 
3025 

1613 
-864 
-522 
-342 
-1400 
2516 

1855 
-955 
-587 
-368 
-1400 
2724 

2133 
-1026 
-621 
-405 
-1300 
2430 

2453
-1144
-724
-420
-1200
2302

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR92 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-6.3 

-6.6 

-10.0 

-8.5 

-6.8 

-7.0 

-6.7 

-6.2 

-5.8

-12.8 
-16.1 
-21.9 
6.9 

-2.4 
-10.9 
-13.6 
10.8 

24.0 
2.5 
61.3 
19.5 

-9.5 
-27.7 
26.4 
4.2 

31.7 
33.7 
40.3 
7.0 

6.0 
9.5 
10.0 
5.0 

13.7 
11.3 
15.0 
4.8 

15.6 
9.5 
20.0 
5.0 

15.8
9.6
20.0
5.0

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Egypt, Arab Rep. - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator 

W

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current fiscal surplus (+) or deficit(-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2(%) 
Private sector credit growth 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR92 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandiseimport price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)' 

Real interest rates
Consumerprice index (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

25.1 
22.6 
2.5 
5.2 
-0.6 

73.4 
10.5 
80.1 

23.7 
20.8 
2.9 
5.2 
-0.6 

75.7 
15.1 
83.8 

22.8 
19.9 
2.9 
5.4 
-0.5 

75.1 
8.6 
98.1 

22.2 
20.2 
2.0 
8.2 
-0.6 

77.6 
11.4 
73.9 

21.3 
20.2 
1.1 
6.8 
-0.8 

75.3 
8.8 
75.4 

21.0 
20.8 
0.1 
5.8 
-0.5 

75.1 
10.5 
38.0 

20.8 
20.7 
0.0 
5.5 
-0.6 

75.1 
9.8 
73.5 

20.4 
20.6 
-0.2 
5.1 
-0.6 

75.1 
9.9 
74.0 

20.0
20.4
-0.4
4.7
-0.7

75.1
10.1
74.6

107.5 
112.3 
95.8 
123.0 

127.8 
111.8 
114.4 
129.4 

98.9 
101.6 
97.4 
146.6 

94.7 
97.8 
96.8 
152.8 

103.3 
96.3 
107.3 
164.6 

110.1 
98.7 
111.5 
160.4 

106.8 
100.2 
106.6 
152.7 

104.6 
101.8 
102.7 
149.7 

104.5
103.8
100.6
144.1

7.3 
7.1 

6.2 
5.9 

3.8 
3.6 

3.8 
1.7 

2.8 
5.4 

3.4 
5.0 

3.5 
4.0 

3.8 
4.0 

4.1
4.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of TMF resources.
e. Consolidated central govemment.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Egypt, Arab Rep. - Key Exposure Indicators

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

31613 

30319 

30313 

29955 

28988 

28124 

27170 

26143 

24999

Net disbursements (US$m)' 

-476 

522 

-105 

-522 

-788 

-545 

-583 

-618 

-624

Total debt service (TDS) 

(US$m).

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRDDS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

2378 

1926 

1642 

1769 

1793 

1827 

1840 

1873 

1973

175.2 
46.8 
13.2 
63.0 

11.0 
29.9 

1.6 
1075 

152.8 
40.1 
9.7 
75.6 

157.1 
36.7 
8.5 
76.2 

154.8 
33.7 
9.5 
76.8 

134.5 
30.0 
8.7 
78.5 

118.4 
28.8 
7.7 
79.5 

106.9 
26.6 
7.2 
80.3 

10.4 
31.1 

1.3 
869 

9.1 
30.9 

1.2 
846 

7.2 
28.6 

0.8 
761 

6.8 
27.3 

0.6 
639 

6.4 
28.6 

0.5 
579 

6.2 
28.9 

0.4 
573 

95.7 
24.5 
6.9 
81.1 

6.1 
28.7 

0.4 
587 

85.8
22.3
6.8
81.7

6.1
27.5

0.4
605

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

1090 

1206 

1242 

1273 

1266 

1289 

1324 

1359 

1384

IFC approvals (US$m) 
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity /c 
GSR (Guarantee/Standby/Risk Mgt) 

85.5 
42.5 
16.0 
27.0 

82.2 
69.0 
13.0 
0.2 

78.8 
67.5 
11.3 
0.0 

81.0 
76.7 
4.3 
0.0 

15.5 
8.8 
2.8 
4.0 

177.2
133.7
2.5
41.0

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for Intemational Senlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

CAS Annex B8 - Egypt, Arab Republic
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

As of May 18, 2001

Active Projects 

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Oriainal Amount in US$ Millions 

CAS Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Disbursements 

_

Project ID Project Name 

P005157 AGRICULTURAL MODERNI 
P005161 BASIC EDUCATION PROJ 
P049166 EG-EAST DELTA AG.SERV. 
P005169 EG-ED.ENHANCEMENT PROG. 
P045175 EG-HEALTH SECTOR 
P045499 EG-NATIONAL DRAINAGE II 
P004981 EG-RED SEA COASTAL 
P005173 EGYPT IRRIGATION IMP 
P005153 MATRUH RESOURCE MANA 
P041410 P.S. REHAB. III 
P054958 POLLUTION ABATEMENT 
P005163 POPULATION 
P053832 PRVT SECT.& AG. DEV. 
P005168 PVT SEC TOURISM INF& ENV 
P005152 SCHISTOSOMIASIS CONTROL 
P050484 SEC EDUC ENH PROG 
P066336 SOC PROT INIT PROJ 
P052705 SOCIAL FUND III 
P040858 SOHAG RURAL DEV. 
Total 

Development implementation Fiscal 
Obmectives 
Progress 
Year
S 
S 
1994 
S 
S 
1993 
S 
U 
1998 
S 
S 
1997 
S 
S 
1998 
S 
S 
2000 
S 
S 
1993 
S 
S 
1995 
S 
S 
1993 
S 
S 
1999 
S 
S 
1998 
S 
S 
1996 
S 
S 
1999 
S 
S 
1993 
S 
S 
1992 
S 
S 
1999 
S 
U 
1999 
S 
S 
1999 
S 
S 
1999 

IBRD 

IDA GRANT Cancel. Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

54 
0 
0 
0 
0 
50 
0 
26.7 
0 
120 
20 
0 
100 
260 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
630.7 

67 
55.5 
15 
75 
90 
0 
0 
53.3 
22 
0 
15 
17.2 
75 
0 
26.8 
50 
5 
50 
25 
641.8 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4.8 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4.8 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
189.5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
189.5 

6.0 
7.7 
13.4 
41.9 
79.2 
50.0 
0.9 
53.2 
1.7 
119.5 
23.5 
13.3 
169.5 
8.0 
10.7 
46.0 
4.7 
47.9 
23.7 
720.9 

2.6 
-5.5 
6.6 
13.4 
21.7 
0.0 
-0.3 
37.5 
-4.2 
43.2 
10.6 
9.0 
48.2 
67.5 
4.5 
2.0 
0.5 
17.7 
5.4 
280.5 

0.0
-13.4
0.0
2.9
0.0
0.0
-0.9
12.6
-6.1
0.0
-6.6
5.0
0.0
2.5
4.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.6

IBRDIDA Closed Projects: 86

Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

324.10
4.88
3,942.10
2,850.30
4,266.28
2,855.14

719.96
0.00
719.96

a/ Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Arab Republic of Egypt

Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

As of April 30, 2001
(In US Dollars Millions)

IFC Held 

IFC Disbursed

Loan Equity/QE Guar/RM Partic 
8.57 
22.59 
19.85 
0.00 
0.00 
1.45 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.65 
0.00 
0.00 
13.00 
2.96 
0.00 
0.00 
2.45 
2.37 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
15.59 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
34.40 
0.00 
30.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
5.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.41 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.47 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
30.82 
0.00 
0.00 
9.70 
3.77 
0.00 
0.00 
16.00 
4.85 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.89 
0.00 
0.00 
45.00 
0.00 
0.00 
152.50 
45.00 
0.00 
0.00 
152.50 
7.06 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Loan Equity/QE Guar/RM Partic
8.57 
22.59 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
1.13 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.88 
0.00 
0.00
13.00 
2.96 
0.00 
0.00
2.45 
2.37 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
15.59 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
5.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
1.41 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
1.47 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
9.70 
3.77 
0.00 
0.00
16.00 
4.85 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.89 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
7.06 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00

Company 
ANSDK 
Abu Soma Develop 
CIL 
Carbon Black-EGT 
Club Ras Soma 
Cmrcl Intl Bank 
ECC 
EFG Hermes 
Egypt Trust 
HC Investment 
IT Worx 
MGDK 
Meleiha Oil 
Misr Compressor 
Orascom 
Orix Leasing EGT 
Port Said 
Suez Gulf 
UNI 

Total Portfolio 

176.78 

97.32 

54.25 

305.00 

56.78 

62.91 

0.00 

0.00

Approvals Pending Commitment

AAC 
Sidi Krir 
ACB Expansn III 
OLE - CL 
Total Pending Commitment: 

Loan Equity/QE Guar/RM Partic
4.74 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
70.00 
0.00 
0.00 
122.00
5.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
6.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
85.74 
0.00 
0.00 
122.00

ANSDK Guarantee/RM held is presently showing only the Guarantee amouunt.

EGYPT COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX, FY02-04

Annex B9
Page 1 of 6

DIAGNOSIS 

-

FSTRATEGY/ACTIO 

PROGRAM 

INDICAToRs/BENcHMARKS 

BANK GROUP 
NSTRUMIENTS _ 

OTHER DONOR

_A.CTIvITlFS

__ 

1. 

INTERVENTIONS SUPPORTING 

IHIGHER AND SUSTAINED GROWTH

Macroeconomic Stability & Growth
Recent increase in the fiscal deficit > Maintain fiscal discipline. Establish > Fiscal deficit cut below 4% of 
current budget process makes it 
a medium-term framework for 
GDP. Current and investment 
difficult for government to 
public expenditure planning. 
budgets consolidated. Investment 
implement its policies and assess 
Prioritize and scale back 
projects prioritized on economic 
outcome of expenditures. 
implementation of mega projects. 
grounds. Major tax reform 
Shift gradually toward results- 
completed (extension of GST, tax
oriented budget. 
admin, corporate tax system).

> AAA: Public Expenditure 
Review; Social & Structural
Review 11; Economic
Monitoring; Project Appraisal &
Evaluation (WBI/IDF).

IMF; USAID

Export Promotion
> Distorted incentives framework; 
inefficient and high cost 
infrastructure services; institutional 
and bureaucratic constraints led to 
disappointing export performance. 

> Flexible management of exchange 
rate. Tariff reform (reduction in 
level and dispersion of tariffs). 
Adherence to requirements of 
COMESA, PAFTA and EU. 
Removal of non-tariff barriers 
(customs reform, quality controls). 
Enhancing private provision of 
infrastucture. 

> Non-oil exports increase by at 
least 10% p.a. Reduce maximum 
tariffs from 40% to 30%. Bring 
all tariffs that were between 20%- 
30% to 20%; bring them between 
15%-20% to 10%. Eliminate the 
customs surcharge. 

> New operation: Agricultural 
IMF; USAID;
Exports Project. 
EU; Arab Fund;
IFC loans & equitv: Investment Kuwait Fund;
in export-oriented companies. 
Japan
Investment in IPPs in power.
Potential investments in diverse
sectors such as water and waste
water, ports, airports.
Non-lending: Agricultural
Trade and WTO (WBI).

Private Sector Development
> Unfavorable business environment > Streamlining of tax and customs 
with a particularly unsupportive 
administration. Strengthen 
SME environment. 
commercial and legal system. 
Reform labor legislation. 
Bankruptcy and intellectual property 
rights legislation. 

> 

Improved perception of business 
environment (surveys). Increased 
private domestic investment and 
FDI. 

USAID; EU; UK;
UNDP; Germany;
Italy; CIDA;
AFDB

> Non-lendinm:TA to strengthen 
business environment. 
Corporate governance TA. 
IFC loans, equity & TA: 
Focused lending to facilitate
access to finance (credit lines,
risk capital, guarantees, leasing,
etc.). Extended African Project
Development Facility. Selected
direct investments in companies
with clear development impact.

DIAGNOSIS 

STRATEGY/ACTION 

PROGRAM 
INDICATORSIBENCHMARKS 

BANK GROUP 
INSTRUMENTS 

OTHER DONOR
ACTIVITIES

Annex B9
Page 2 of 6

Financial Sector
> Dominance of publicly-owned 
institutions has limited scope and 
depth of financial markets. Range 
of products available insufficient to 
meet needs of private sector, 
especially SMEs. Slight increase in 
non-performing loans. No 
mortgage market to facilitate 
housing finance. Need to 
modernize and better regulate 
capital markets and insurance 
sector. 

Privatization
> After impressive progress during 
1995-99, marked slowdown in 
privatization. Share of public 
sector still 30% in economic 
activity. 

ICT Sector
> Weak capacity of the telecom 
regulatory authority (TRA). 
Inadequate postal services. 
Incomplete legal framework for E- 
Commerce.

> 

Strengthen bank supervision. 
Gradually privatize the public 
financial institutions. Develop non- 
bank financial institutions. Deepen 
and broaden capital markets. 

> 

Privatize at lease one state-owned 
bank. Stronger bank supervision 
capacity in place. Mortgage 
market development initiated. 

> 

> Govemment plans to divest most of 
remaining enterprises during next 2- 
3 years. 

> 

Substantial progress in 
completing industrial sector and 
non-industrial privatizations. 

> Build TRA capacity. Reform and 
modernize postal sector. Develop 
necessary legal framework for E- 
Commerce. 

> 

Fully functional TRA. Major 
improvement in postal services. 
Significant growth in E- 
Commerce activities.

> 

> 

IFC loans, & equity: TA on, and 
investment in, innovative 
financial instruments to build
mortgage finance institutions,
underwrite and trade of bonds.
Medium & long-term loans to
banks and non-bank financial
intermediaries. Become a
shareholder of secondary
mortgage market institution.
Non-lending: Mortgage
development and capital market
development. Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP).

Information Infrastructure 
Project (Telecoms & Post). TA 
to improve performance of
public entities. Advisory
services and selected
transactions (IFC).

IMF; USAID;
EU; UK

USAID; EU;
Germany; CIDA

Information Infrastructure 
Project. Direct investments by
IFC.

USAID

IJ. TARGETED 

INTERVE 

OSFOR 

NSNT 

POVERTY 

REDUCTION

Education
> Despite near universal basic 
education, inequity remains in 
certain area. Low student 
performance at all levels, especially 
in problem-solving and technology 
skills. 

> 

Increase demand for education in 
disadvantaged areas through 
parental participation and provision 
of early childhood education. 
Improve the quality of student 
learning for all. Reform curricula 
and provide enhanced learning 
environment at all levels. 

> Annually increase enrollment for 
girls by 2% and for boys by 1.2% 
until universal 8 years of basic 
education reached. Improvement 
in student achievement score, 
particularly in problem solving 
and technology skills. 
L_Development.

> Ongoing operations: Basic 
Education; Education 
Enhancement; Secondary 
Education. 
New operations: Early 
Childhood Development. 
Non-lendinz: Early Childhood

USAID; AFDB;
UNICEF; CIDA;
EU; ESDF;
Japan; Kuwait;
Netherlands;
Germany

DIAGNOSIS 

Despite improved access for girls' 
education over past two decades, 
more needs to be done to bridge the 
gender gap. 

' 

Health
Free public health services 
available in principle, but poor 
quality of services, especially in 
poor rural and urban areas render 
them ineffective. 

> Health delivery systems at all 
levels inefficient in operations and 
maldistribution of physical and 
human resources, leading to 
duplication, wastage and inequity. 

Public health services supply 
driven and fragmented through 
proliferation of many vertical & 
disease specific interventions. 

> Social health insurance coverage 
limited to formal sectors, students 
and infants, leaving most women 
and families in informal sector 
without effective insurance 
protection. 

> 

PROGRAM 
INDICATORS1BENCHMARKS 

Increased female literacy; 
increased female participation in 
formal economy. 

BANK GROUP 
INSTRUMENTS 

> AAA: Gender Assessment. 

Annex B9
Page 3 of 6

OTHERDONOR
ACTIVITEES

Netherlands;
Italy; UNICEF;
USAID

STRATEGY/ACTION 

> Provide additional basic education 
for girls, especially in rural areas. 
Train female teachers, improve 
teaching methods. Provide mothers
education and encourage
involvement in school activities.
Facilitate procedures for obtaining
birth certificates for children not
registered at birth.

> Support expansion of family 
medicine practice to establish 
quality standards and accreditation 
mechanisms, and provide an 
integrated primary care service 
responsive to needs of whole family, 
with greater emphasis on prevention 
and community participation.

> Preparation and implementation 
of govemorate Master plans in 
new target sites (Upper Egypt). 
Increase number of accredited 
family medicine practitioners to 
meet the needs identified in 
Masterplans.

> Ongoine: Population Project and USAID; EU;
Social Fund Project (health 
SFD; (Multi-
component). 
donor Support);
Kuwait; Spain;
UNICEF; UNDP;
Denmark

> Rationalize investments in health 
infrastructure and human resources 
through health service standards, 
preparation of govemment Health 
Masterplans and GIS mapping to
identify needs, gaps and duplication
in service delivery.

> Strengthen integration of public 
health programs through improved 
disease surveillance system and 
greater govemorate and district 
capacity to monitor and identify 
areas of need.

> Phased expansion of social 
insurance coverage for basic 
primary health care services by 
govemorates, and institutional 
capacity building of insurance 
functions at governorate levels. 
Undertake actuarial analysis to 
quantify financing implications of

expanding social health insurance.

> 

Implementation of an integrated 
national information system to
support the communicable disease
surveillance system.

> New: Health Sector II Project. 

EU

> Expansion of community 
development programs in "hot 
spot" villages in Egypt with very 
high fertility rates and high
Schisto infection rates.

> Expansion of Family Health Fund 
in selected govemorates to 
finance primary care social 
insurance program, and 
enrollment of uninsured 
population in targeted
govemorates.

> Ongoing: Schistosomiasis 
Control Project, and Population
Project.

UNICEF; WHO

> Ongoing: Health Sector I 
Project.
New: Health Sector II Project.
AAA: Health Care Financing
Study and Workshop.

EU; USAID

DIAGNOSIS 

Poverty Analvsis & Social Safety Nets
> Limited updated information on the 
magnitude and nature of poverty 
makes it difficult to develop pro- 
poor policies and strategies. 

STRATEGY/ACTION 

P Government to complete 
Household Survey and make 
results available. Government to 
develop revised Poverty Strategy. 

PROGRAM 
INDICATORS/BENCHIMARKS 

BANK GROUP 
INSTRUMENTS 

OTHER DONOR
ACTIVITIES

Annex B9
Page 4 of 6

> Government to update poverty 
figures and establish poverty line. 
Complete Poverty Assessment. 

> AAA: Poverty Assessment. 

UNDP; UK;
Italy; USAID;
WFP;
Netherlands;
Denmark

USAID

> Need for better understanding of 
distributional impact of public 
expenditures. 

> Need to improve social safety net 
components in terms of coverage, 
efficiency and effectiveness, based 
on recommendations of Bank TF 
report submitted to government. 

Rural Development
> 
63% of the poor and 74% of the 
ultrapoor in Egypt live in rural areas. 
Increasing the productivity of 
agriculture essential for increasing 
rural incomes. 

P Beneficiary analysis of public 
expenditures. 

> Complete Public Expenditure 
Review (PER). 

> Government to take steps to 
improve food subsidies, cash 
transfers, Social Fund and/or social 
insurance.

> 

Improved water availability, 
reduced soil salinity and water 
logging, better rural services for 
the poor. 

> Government addresses safety net 
issue in poverty strategy. 

> 

Incorporate safety net beneficiary
assessment in PER.

> Reduced soil salinity and water 
logging. Increased agricultural 
production in poor rural areas. 

> AAA: Public Expenditure 
Review (PER) and WBI
Workshop.

> AAA: Bank report on Safety
Nets submitted to government.
PER.

> Ongoing: Matruh Natural 
USAID;
Resources Management Project Germany
includes rain harvesting 
Netherlands;
techniques, water shed 
Japan
management.
New: Natural Resource
Management Project II; Rural

Water/Sanitation Project.

0 

09 0 :0 III. 

INTERVENTIONSV WITh MAJO 

INDY5IR aECT POERKTY REDU ICTIO0N IMPAACT: : ;90 0S0000;;

Higher Education & Skills Development
Graduates of secondaiy and higher 
education lack market-relevant 
skills. Need for strengthening skills 
in managerial entrepreneurial and 
technical skills in a viable manner. 

> Better align curricula and 
assessment with the skills needs of 
employers and further learning. 
Strengthen education management 
information system and introduce 
accountability based on student 
outcomes. Strengthen financial & 
administrative autonomy of higher 
education institutions and their 
partnership with private sector.

> 

Increased employer satisfaction 
with graduates as measured by 
tracer studies. Policy decision- 
making based on performance
indicators and objective criteria.
50% of higher education budget
will be allocated to higher
education institutions as block
grant.

> Higher Education Project; Skills EU; ILO;
Development Project. 
USAID;
Germany

DIAGNOSIS 

STRATEGY/ACTION 

Water, Irrigation. Drainage Improvement
Per capita availability of water in 
Egypt is low (less than 1,000 cu.m. 
per capita per year). Improving 
productivity of scarce water 
resources a key issue. In addition, 
cooperation with Nile riparian 
countries is critical to assure long- 
term cooperative management of the 
Nile. 

> Deteriorating water quality. 
Continuing problem of salinity, 
pollution and rural sanitation. 

Environment
> Costs of environmental degradation 
considerable but need to be better 
quantified for policy decision- 
making. 

> Govemment plans to invest in 
water pumping stations, irrigation 
improvement and drainage (I&D) 
to improve productivity of water 
use. Active involvement in the 
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) for 
"win-win" activities in the Nile. 
Institutional and management 
improvements, including water 
user participation and cost sharing
programs.

> Sub-surface drainage problem a 
national priority. Strategy for 
reuse of drainage water under 
implementation.

> Support policy dialogue on 
environment through systematic 
economic assessments of Egypt's 
environment issues. 

PROGRAM 
INDICATORS/BENCHMARKS 

BANK GROUP 
INSTRUMENTS 

> Agriculture output per unit of 
water. Conveyance efficiency, 
reduced soil salinity. 
Identification of "win-win" 
activities on the Nile Basin 
Initiative. Improved management 
of reuse. Recovery of O&M and 
capital cost as proportion of 
actual costs. 

> Ongoing: IfPs, NDP, Pumping 
Stations, and NDP 11 Projects. 
New: Irrigation/Drainage 
Improvement Project. Private 
Sector role in Water 
Management (IFC). 
AAA: Drainage & Wastewater 
Reuse; NBI; Irrigation
Improvement Sector Review.

Annex B9
Page 5 of 6

OTHER DONOR
ACTIVITIES

Germany;
Netherlands;
Japan; USAID;
UNDP; CIDA;
AFDB; FAO;
Kuwait Fund;
Abu Dhabi Fund

> Monitoring system of water 
quality operational. 

> New: Rural Water & Sanitation Germany;
Project. 
Netherlands;
CIDA; USAID

> Estimation of the cost of 
environmental degradation as % 
of GDP. 

> Non-lending: METAP Study on CIDA; Denmark;
cost of environmental 
Netherlands;
degradation. 
Germany; Italy;
Japan; UNDP;
UK; USAID

> Linkages between energy and 
environment poorly understood in 
electricity, petroleum and transport 
sectors. 

> Enable Egypt to identify and 
implement local environment 
management projects which bring 
global benefits. 

> Sector strategy developed for 
energy, addressing links to global 
environment concerns. 

Private sector and especially SMEs 
would be particularly affected by 
negative/positive implications of 
complying with strict environmental 
standards on exports/imports as a
result of Egypt's Association
Agreement with EU.

> Support private sector in reducing 
risks and exposures to 
environmental regulations. 

> Percentage change in imports/ 
exports due to changes in 
environmental regulations. 

> Non-lending: TF Study on
energy-environment review.
GEF work on wind, solar/
thermal energy and biodiversity
issues.

> Non-lending: METAP Country
Assessment of environmental
regulations on trade and
competitiveness.

> Poor environmental management at 
local level. 

> 

Improve access to environmental 
information and help promote 
better environmental management. 

> Number of staff trained on
environmental management in 
local administration. 

> Non-lending: DGF for
environmental training at the
local level.

Annex B9
Page 6 of 6

DIAGNOSIS 

STRATEGY/ACTION 

PROGRAM 
INDICATORS/BENCHMARKS 

BANK GROUP 
INSTRUMENTS 

OTHER DONOR
ACTIVITIES

Governance
> Absence of transparency and 
ineffectiveness by government 
officials increases cost of business. 
Also tax incentives tend to offset 
each other with little incremental 
benefit, but room for petty 
corruption. 

Commercial legal system too slow 
and cumbersome in resolving 
commercial legal disputes. 

> Need for improvements in 
administration and tax code. 

> Set up easily monitorable 
performance standards in all 
major revenue collection
functions, starting with duty
drawback and sales tax rebates for
exports. Abolish most tax
incentives.

> AAA: Govemance Issues 
Report. 

IMF; USAID;
UNDP; Spain

> 

Increase number of judges and 
improve their remuneration. 

> 

"Clearance rate" for commercial 
dispute resolution (% of filed 
cases actually resolved) to 
increase from about 40% at
present to 50% by 2005.

> AAA: Task Force Report on 
Business Environment
(completed).

USAID; CIDA

With Egypt's increasing exposure to > Egypt to undertake an assisted self- > Completion of Corporate 
globalization and its need to tap 
assessment of corporate 
Govemance Assessment. 
domestic and international capital 
governance standards. 
markets, corporate governance
standards will need to improve to
give investors the protection
required to encourage them to
provide capital. 

.

> AAA: Corporate Governance 
Assessment. Seminar to
disseminate findings.

USAID

Network area 

Country 
performance' 

Major issue' 

Countrypriority' 

Bankpriorityc Reconciliation of country and
Bank priorities d

CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B10
Page 1 of 1

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 

Public sector 

Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 

Health, nutrition & population 

Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private sector 

Energy*& mining/Infrastructure 

F 

G 

F 

G 

G 

G 

F 

F 
F 
F 

F 
F 

G 

Lack of credible data 

Fiscal stability, exchange rate 
management and privatization

Civil service reform; 
administrative decentralization
Gender-differentiated data 

Efficiency and quality / 
curriculum reform
Overstaffing / health insurance 
coverage
Effectiveness of government 
programs

Rural incomes 
Water / air quality 
Lack of decentralization 

Lack of transparancy 
Slow pace of privatization; low 
FDI
Private Participation/Cost 
Recovery

H 

H 

M 

H 

H 

H 

M 

M 
M 
M 

M 
M 

M 

Poverty Assessment

PER; Coordination with IMF

Policy dialogue on best practices

Gender Assessment

Bilateral donors taking lead

Proposed FSAP
Bilateral donors taking lead

H 

H 

M 

H 

H

H

M

M
H 
M

H 
H 

M

a. Use 'excelient," 'good," 'fair,' or 'poor.'
b. indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g,, for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty;" for education, 'female secondary completion;' for environment, 
'urban air pollution').
c. To indicate priority, use 'low," 'moderate," or 'high.'
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example. another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

280 

Mediterranearan 

Sea 

320 

, 

360

WESrRANtKAND GAZA 

320-

IBRD 27759

Marsa Matruh 0 

Ai XOfldRAL 

sad

JORrDA 

/ 

.

i hine 

Q 

L k 

SS 
G 

fiAIRO 

Ismiliyo

.(j)~~~~~ 

ISRAEL

~~~ 

~ 

~~~~~~~~Suez 

ARAB REPUBLIC 
°OF EGYPT 

280 

i Suef

.
.

-

, 

SAUDI

ARABIA280

I 

240 

0 
' * 

SELECTED CITIES 
NATIONAL CAPITAL 

RIVERS
CULTIVATED AREAS

0 

I" 

50 
1

. I 

100 

I 

'

150 MILES 

I 

0 

50 100 150 KILOMETERS

As ut 

Hurghada

Sok 

na~~~~e

~~~~~Redi

sea

xor

won 

24°

Lake

Laker

Nosser

This map Avas produced b< the Map Designyit of The Wlrid Bankh
7h nanes,pr, ominations an an other rmation shown on
on the legal status oaony territory , or any -esement or acceptanceof 

nhe prt of The word0BnekGrou, any udgmnqUA
to 

this mop do 

ml 

320 

360

APRIL 1997

