d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 20232-SK

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

January 8, 2001

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only
in the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be
disclosed without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
(Exchange Rate as of Noveimber 30, 2000)

Currency Unit = Slovak Koruna (SK)
US$ - 49 75
SK = 0.021

GOVERNMENT'S FISCAL YEAR

January I to December 31

ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS

CEM 
EBRD 
EC 
EFSAL 
EIB 
EMU 
ERL 
EU 
ESW 
FDI 
FIAS 
GDP 
GEF 
IBRD 
ICR 
IDF 
IFC 
IMF 
IT 
MIGA 
NBS 
NGO 
NLS 
NPF 
OECD 
PHRD 
PPAIF 
SAL 
SBA 
SME 
SMP 
TA 
TDO 
UNDP 
USAID 

Country Economic Memorandum
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Commission of the European Union
Enterprise and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan
European Investment Bank
European Monetary Union
Econornic Recovery Loan
European Union
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Services
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Fund
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Implementation Completion Report
Institutional Development Fund
Intemational Finance Corporation
Intemational Monetary Fund
Information Technology
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
National Bank of Slovakia
Non-Governmental Organization
Non-lending Services
National Property Fund
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Policy and Human Resources Development
Public/Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Structural Adjustment Loan
Social Benefits Administration Project
Small and Medium Size Enterprise
Staff Monitored Program
Technical Assistance
Total Debt Outstanding
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International Development

IBRD 
Vice President: Johannes Linn 
Country Director: Roger Grawe 
Task Manager: Laurens Hoppenbrouwer 

The World Bank Group Team
IFC
Vice President: Assaad Jabre
Director: Edward Nassim
Task Manager: Kutlay Ebiri

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SLOVAK REPUBLIC

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................

i

I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND .................................................................. 
1
Introduction ..................................................................
1
Political Developments ..................................................................
2
Social Developments ..................................................................
3
Economic Developments ..................................................................
5
II. THE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS ...... 7

III. THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM .................................................................. 
8
Introduction .................................................................
8
Structural Reforms ..................................................................
9
Environment ................................................................. 
13
IV. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ................................. 13
Review of the Past Assistance Program .......................................... 
....................... 13
Current Activities ................................................................. 
14
The Role of Other Partners .................. 
14
The World Bank Group's Proposed Assistance Program ........................................... 
16
The Assistance Program and Poverty Reduction ............... 
............................ 
20
CAS Lending Scenarios and Triggers and Exposure ........................................... 
20
V. RISKS ........................................... 
23

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

TEXT TABLES

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators: 1994-2000
Table 2: Key Economic Indicators 1999-2005
Table 3: Lending Program FYOI-03

TEXT BOXES

Box 1: Social Exclusion and Poverty in Slovakia - The Roma
Box 2: Corruption in Slovakia - Survey Results
Box 3: Fiduciary Assessments in Slovakia
Box 4: Slovakia CAS: Selectivity of World Bank Support
Box 5: IFC Investment Priorities in Slovakia

Box 6: CAS Self-evaluation - Benchmarks

ANNEXES

Annex A2: 
Anmex B2: 
Annex B3: 
Annex B3: 
Annex B4: 
Annex B5: 
Annex B6: 
Annex B7: 
Annex B8: 
Annex B8: 
Annex B9: 
Annex B IO: 
Annex B 11: 

Slovak Republic at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program
Summary of Non-lending Services
Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Status of Bank Group Operations
CAS Country Program Matrix
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Consultations on the Country Assistance Strategy

Map 

IBRD No. 27947R

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUJNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

1. 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The first World Bank Group Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Slovak Republic' comes at
a time when the country is intensively pursuing its objective of accession to the EU. World Bank activity
had been limited in Slovakia during 1994-98 by a lack of receptivity to a program of Bank assistance on
the part of the Government at that time. A new Government took office in late 1998 against the
background of slowing economic growth, widening macroeconomic imbalances, lagging transition
reforms, concerns over governance, and a malaise in Slovakia's international relations. The new
authorities have established a solid track record of economic adjustment and broad-based reforms, and
have requested the Bank Group to support their efforts with an active program of technical and financial
assistance.

ii. 

The Government also faced daunting challenges on the social front. Employment growth did not
accompany the GDP expansion in the mid-1990s and unemployment has rernained high, at 17 percent on
average during 2000. The pension and health insurance systems are generating increasing deficits, a
number of human development indicators have deteriorated in recent years, and recent surveys indicate a
weakening sense of security and well-being, with over half of all respondents considering themselves
worse off than before 1989. The marginalized Roma minority and the long-term unemployed are among
the most vulnerable groups in Slovakia. The share of population living on US$2 a day, at about 5 percent
in 1996, is well above that of other Central European countries, although income distribution overall
remains relatively egalitarian, owing to an extensive social safety net. The particular situation of the
Roma, who by some estimates number close to 10 percent of the population, represents a core challenge
to poverty reduction and social justice. The recent economic slowdown and increasing levels of
unemployment now place social welfare issues high on the Government's agenda for action. The
Government is committed to accompany stabilization and reform with improvements in social protection,
to target social assistance better, and ensure that disadvantaged groups have adequate access to quality
education and health services.

iii. 
Slovakia's economic perforrmance, as measured by GDP growth and inflation, was good in the first
years after independence, building on the structural transformation and economic liberalization that took
place in Czechoslovakia during 1989-92. The rapid growth that took place during 1994-97 (5-6 percent
p.a.) became increasingly unsustainable, however, in the absence of structural reforms. Macroeconomic
balances sharply worsened from 1996 as a result of rising levels of inefficient investments, reflecting poor
governance in the public and private sectors. In response to widening deficits, the National Bank of
Slovakia (NBS) tightened monetary policy. The resulting high interest rates caused debt-servicing
problems for the enterprise sector which contributed to a deterioration in the loan portfolio performance
of banks. At the same time, speculative attacks on the exchange rate in the wake of the Russia crisis in
1998 forced NBS to float the currency after a sizeable loss in reserves.

iv. 
The Government moved quickly to take strong and convincing stabilization measures. These led
to a one-third reduction in the fiscal deficit to GDP ratio to 3.6 percent in 1999, and a near halving of the

I Hereafter referred to as Slovakia.

ii

current account deficit to 5.5 percent of GDP, while real interest rates came down and international
reserves recovered. Fiscal adjustment was consolidated in 2000, and the current account deficit narrowed
further on strong export growth, with reserves rising to 4 months import coverage. 
In spite of a
slowdown in growth to about 2 percent p.a. in 1999 and 2000, financial markets have responded
favorably to the Government's policy measures. Confidence in the Government's commitment to
economic adjustment and reforms, and the EU decision in December 1999 to initiate accession
negotiations with Slovakia resulted in a decline in spreads from 1000 basis points (bp) during the Russia
crisis in 1998 to just over 150 bp in 2000.

v. 
Economic prospects have received a boost with the recent accession to OECD membership and
two successive favorable Regular Reports from the EC, which have marked Slovakia's progress toward
the first rank of EU accession candidates. The Government and the EU have agreed on a set of medium-
term economic policies necessary to accelerate Slovakia's economic transformation, grounded in a
commitment to macroeconomic stability and structural reforms, Slovakia is increasingly integrated in a
network of intemational institutional arrangements which reinforce and lock-in the Government's
commitments.

vi. 
The medium term macroeconomic scenario envisages continued fiscal consolidation and structural
reforms, with a gradual growth recovery, underpinned by strong export sales to the EU, offsetting weak
growth in domestic demand. Growth should accelerate in spite of lower investment levels, as structural
reforms bolster efficiency gains, improve governance, and increase FDI associated with privatization.
The medium-term scenario projects the primary fiscal balance to improve steadily and become positive by
2004. The overall fiscal deficit as a share of GDP is expected to remain unchanged in 2001, and then
decline to 2 percent or less beyond 2002, in spite of the significant fiscal impact (over 1 percent of GDP)
of the financial sector restructuring now underway. The current account should continue to improve
gradually, and following expected FDI, the external debt to GDP ratio declines and reserves continue to
strengthen. Overall, vulnerability to external shocks should decline significantly.

vii. 
The Government's medium term policies aim at meeting requirements for EU membership.
Maintaining macroeconomic stability and advancing key governance and structural reforms are essential
to ensure competitiveness and re-ignite the growth necessary to reduce persistent unemployment and
underpin greater social inclusion. Structural reforms are most urgent in the enterprise and financial
sectors. Earlier privatizations were carried out in an environment of poor public and corporate
governance. As a result, enterprise losses steadily increased, further undermining the asset base of the
predominantly state-owned banks. Reforms were neglected in other areas as well, including utilities,
public administration, and social assistance and services. The significant measures already taken to
privatize the banks and implement a work-out strategy for loss-making and bankrupt enterprises will lay
the microeconomic foundations for restoring sustainable high growth. At the same time, Government has
begun to divest in the utilities sectors, starting with privatization of telecornmunications in mid-2000.
The establishment of more effective regulatory institutions supports these liberalization and privatization
plans. The authorities also realize that to complete the transformation agenda, corporate and public
governance must be improved. Significant legislative efforts have already resulted in a much stronger
bankruptcy law and improved commercial and tax codes.

viii. Key institutional weaknesses in the public sector include excessive centralism, a discredited legal
and judicial system and widespread administrative corruption. The current Government has devoted
special emphasis to combating corruption. A broad-based national survey carried out in 1999
documented the extent to which corruption affects all aspects of the economy. Individual citizens were
most affected in the social sectors, and all groups - citizens, entrepreneurs and civil servants - identified
corruption in the judicial system as a major problem. The Government has announced an anti-corruption
program with measures to improve information and transparency, reduce state intervention, and simplify

iii

the regulatory framework. It has also reduced public employment and initiated public sector reforms,
with focus on public finance management, decentralization, civil service reform and judicial reform.

ix. 
Although aggregate social sector outcomes are still satisfactory in relation to Slovakia's income
level, there are serious threats to sustainability of these outcomes. Significant problems have emerged in
health finance and in the structure of health services. Education suffers from inefficient resource use and
unclear lines of responsibility. 
In both sectors, salaries have eroded and corruption is rife. The
sustainability of Slovakia's extensive system of social protection is also at risk. The Government's
agenda for public sector reform (including a review of public sector expenditures, an assessment of public
administrative functions, decentralization, and the anti-corruption program), will go a long way to address
the common elements of social sector reforms. In addition, the Government fully appreciates the need to
underpin broad public administration reforms with focused sector specific interventions.

x. 
Building on an already active program of Bank Group advisory and technical support, the
Govermment has requested significant financial assistance particularly linked to structural reforms and
public sector capacity building. This opens a window of opportunity for the Bank Group to support
Slovakia in quickly advancing the ambitious structural reform agenda on which it has already embarked.
The European institutions are also stepping up their support to Slovakia, with concentration in selected
sectors and areas. The Bank's program would therefore complement the role of others, build on
partnerships and emphasize selectivity. This CAS focuses on helping Slovakia to complete reforms so as
to restore sustainable growth, advance the process of EU accession, and improve living conditions
especially among vulnerable groups. Three clusters of activities will contribute to these objectives: (i)
completing the transformation reforms, including privatization, in the banking, enterprise energy and
infrastructure sectors; (ii) strengthening governance and building more effective public institutions; and
(iii) improving social security and enhancing human development.

xi. 
Initial support for structural reforms has focused on banking and enterprise reforms. Following on
a program of technical collaboration now well underway, and Government's initial implementation of the
comprehensive bank asset restructuring program as a precondition for privatization, a proposed Enterprise
and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (EFSAL in FY01) for about US$300 million would support the
Government's continuing reform efforts related to bank privatization, enterprise restructuring and
improved corporate governance including through a strengthened legal framework for bankruptcy and
foreclosure. The EFSAL would assist in meeting a portion of the significant fiscal cost of these reforms.
A labor market and social assistance assessment of the impact of the EFSAL has been completed. Its
findings are that an increase in unemployment will not be pronounced and that potential negative impacts
can be largely mitigated by existing social assistance programs. The assistance program would also help
prepare for utility privatization and market liberalization. The IFC program would also focus on the
financial sector, through participation in bank privatization 
transactions. 
IFC would consider
opportunities to invest in privatized utilities. 
Its program includes support for selected industrial
enterprises, and technical assistance to create an environment that is conducive to private business
development, in particular for attracting FDI, which is also a focus of planned MIGA activities. Total
IFC investments are expected to be in the order of US$100 million during FYO1-03. FIAS is providing
assistance to improve the business environment, including an assessment of administrative barriers to
FDI, while MIGA is supporting privatization marketing and attracting FDI, and expects increased demand
for guarantees as a result of the shift to a more open foreign investment regime.

xii. 
Support to improve public governance has focused on the Government's anti-corruption program
and the design of a broad public sector reform program. Public procurement and financial accountability
assessments have already been completed. A proposed Public Finance Management and Judicial Reform
Loan (FY02) would finance training, technical assistance and information technology for both public
finance management and judicial reforms. In the social area, initial support focused on the emerging

iv

crisis in the social security system, and helping to strengthen management systems and institutions. A
social sectors policy and expenditures review, now underway, would provide the analytic underpinning
future social sector reforms, while ongoing labor markets and poverty analysis and a situation assessment
of the Roma population will contribute to an overall poverty reduction strategy. A proposed Social
Benefits Administration Project (FY01) would help improve and integrate pension and employment
information systems and prepare for pension reform. A second social sector operation (FY03) would
build on preparatory activities in health and the currently on-going sector analyses. 
IFC would also
consider investments in human development (private education and health) as well as in pension funds.

xiii. Poverty reduction objectives permeate all three clusters of the program. The poverty-related
analytic work is front-loaded so as to improve our as yet limited understanding of poverty in Slovakia and
ensure maximum operational impact given the limited time horizon for our likely involvement in
Slovakia. Restoring sustainable growth based on stronger microeconomic foundations following
structural reforms should lead to more rapid employment growth with improved labor market
performance. Public administration reform will increase voice and access for the poor focusing on areas
most susceptible to corruption. Planned social and human development interventions will strengthen the
sustainability of the safety net, and improve access to social services, specifically tackling the challenge
of social exclusion of the Roma minority.

xiv. 
In the base case scenario, lending would be USS415 million, with the EFSAI as the single
adjustment operation, and one investment operation per year. Maintaining the base case posits fiscal
outcomes in line with a sustainable macroeconomic framework as indicated by consistency with the IMF
Staff Monitored Program (SMP) that the Government requested and is currently preparing for
consideration by the IMF early in 2001 prior to the proposed Bank adjustment lending. The base case
also posits good progress in implementation capacity and institution building. Based on the
Government's current performance and commitment to reforms, the program is evolving beyond the base
case toward a high case scenario. This could lead to a lending program closer to US$765 million, with
the EFSAI followed by policy-based lending linked to utilities and infrastructure restructuring and
privatization, and to significant reforms in social service financing and delivery and/or social assistance,
e.g. comprehensive pension reform. 
'I'he triggers for the shift to the higher level of support would
concentrate on structural reforms in these designated areas proceeding at the accelerated pace which the
Slovak authorities currently envisage. A low case scenario which would put lending on hold, would
respond to stalled reforms and worsening macroeconomic balances.

xv. 
In both the base and high cases, adjustment lending would represent a large share of total lending,
and disbursements under adjustment operations would depend upon satisfactory macroeconomic
performance, as evidenced through the implementation of the IMF SMP, and satisfactory performance
thereafter. This composition and timing of Bank support reflects the Government's current agenda for
structural reforms and corresponds as well to the nature and timing of the likely fiscal costs associated
with these reforms. During the past two years Bank Group staff and Slovak counterparts have
collaborated closely on the analytic underpinnings of the programs which this CAS supports. The Bank
anticipates a continued period of intense involvement after which the need for Bank (Group involvement
should rapidly attenuate as Slovakia regains the momentum and prospects comparable to its central
European neighbors.

xvi. The main operational risk is political. The governing coalition may not hold together if the
political costs of decisive reform become too high; the perception of political risks could also lead to
Government delays in adopting further reforms. These risks should not be discounted; but on balance the
recent opening for EU accession should guide policies and actions toward sustained reform. Other risks
include limited capacity to prepare and implement reforms; in response the Bank would re-phase or
rebalance the program, including reduced commitments as appropriate. Should external shocks lead to

v

worsening macroeconomic conditions, the Bank would consider stepping up the volume of planned
adjustment lending to support the Govemment's own corrective measures. Finally, it may take longer
than Government or its partners currently anticipate for Slovakia to comply with the requirements for EU
accession, or delayed implementation of the EU's own reform agenda could affect the broad accession
schedule. This could undermine the domestic commitment to reforms, feeding back to political
uncertainties. In such an event, the Bank would need to reassess it's own role as the Government would
not be able to achieve its principal strategic objective within the time frame it now envisages. While the
Bank's continued strong partnership with the EU should help mitigate this risk in part, an overall delay in
the accession process leading to a significant change in Slovakia's relationship with European institutions
would necessitate a reassessment of the Bank's overall program.

Proposed Agenda for Board Discussion

* Does the proposed assistance program appropriately take into account the Bank's comparative
advantage, its global mandate, especially poverty reduction, and the role of others, in particular the
private sector and European institutions?
Is the program sufficiently selective, within the three key clusters that are proposed?
Is the range of assistance in terms of lending amounts, lending composition (mainly adjustment
lending), and non-lending services appropriate?

* 
* 

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

Introduction
1. 
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Slovak Republic', is the first since Slovakia
became a member of the World Bank Group on January 1, 1993 and covers the period FYOI-03. It
presents both Bank and IFC programs in a unified framework. The CAS has been prepared in close
collaboration with the Slovak authorities, and also takes into account consultations with civil society in
Slovakia2 and key external partners, in particular the European Union (EU) and its institutions.

2. 
Over the 1995-98 period, Bank activity in Slovakia was limited to implementation of a
telecommunications project (completed in 2000) and a Country Economic Memorandum3
(CEM)
published in 1998. This limited program reflected a lack of receptivity by the then Government to engage
the Bank in broader dialogue. During this period, economic growth was rapid (5-6 percent per annum
over 1994-97), although by 1996 macroeconomic balances had sharply deteriorated due to a rising level
of inefficient investments that reflected poor governance in both the public and private sectors. By 1998
it had become clear that the high growth levels of the mid-1990s were unsustainable due to little progress
in implementing structural reforms and that governance issues were undermining Slovakia's transition to
a market economy. Economic growth had slowed, already high unemployment levels were increasing,
and international relations had reached a low point. Thus, at a time when other Central European
countries were becoming strong candidates for accession to the EuTopean Union (EU), Slovakia entered a
period of economic uncertainty with its prospects for EIJ accession constrained both by a lack of
competitiveness and poor public and corporate governance.

3. 
Parliamentary elections, which took place in September 1998, brought to power a broad-based
opposition coalition. The new government set out to reverse the policies of the past that threatened the
transition to a market economy and had impeded prospects for EU accession. It recognized the urgent
need to restore macroeconomic stability and to address the underlying governance and structural issues.

4. 
Early on the new Government requested the Bank Group to assist with an active program of
technical and financial assistance to support far-reaching structural and governance reform. The request
also reflected the need to finance the up-front fiscal costs of the structural reform program that would
otherwise be too expensive for the Government to shoulder in the short-term. The Government envisaged
substantial fiscal support from the Bank over a relatively short period, which would underpin its
ambitious reform program and improve its access to sustainable private financing. To its credit, the
Government took strong actions already in 1998 and again in 1999 to restore macroeconomic stability,

' Hereafter referred to as Slovakia.
2 A note on these consultations and a summary of NGO comments are presented in Annex B 11. Subsequent to these
consultations a draft of the full CAS was made available publicly for comrnments and reactions on both the
Government's and Bank's websites in Slovakia in both Slovak and English versions.
3 Slovak Republic: A Strategy for Growth and European Integration

2

incurring up-front political costs. The Government has also established a strong track record in advancing
the structural reform agenda.

5. 
In summary, at this stage in Slovakia's development, there is a clear opportunity for the Bank
Group to provide substantial technical and financial support, in a short time frame, to ensure a successful
transition to a market economy. The assistance strategy proposed for FY01-03 corresponds to the
Government's own development program with a particular focus on instruments to support improved
governance and structural reforms.

Political Developments
6. 
In September 1998, Parliamentary elections resulted in a victory by a broad based coalition of
parties that had been in opposition. The new Government led by Prime Minister Mikulas Dzurinda
brought together the Slovak Democratic Coalition (SDK), itself a grouping of five parties, the main one of
which is the Christian Democratic Movement (KDH), and three other parties--Party of the Democratic
Left (SDL), Party for Civic Understanding (SOP), and the Hungarian Coalition Party (SMK). This
coalition, which spans a broad range of interests and ideologies, holds an approximate two-thirds majority
in Parliament. The Government has strong roots in the NGO sector which became an increasingly strong
and active force as the main forum of opposition to the previous Government led by Vladimir Meciar and
his Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (lIZDS). HZDS remained the single largest party in the ncw
Parliament, however. Direct Presidential elections in 1999 resulted in a second round victory for the
coalition candidate, Rudolf Schuster (of the SOP), then Mayor of Kosice (Slovakia's second city), over
for-mer Prime Minister Meciar. More recently, in November 2000, an HZDS sponsored referendum
calling for early elections fell dramatically short of the 50 percent voter turnout which would have
required Parliamentary consideration. This represented the third consecutive electoral defeat for
Mr. Meciar.

7. 
The Government moved rapidly to rebuild ties to the international community, with a focus on the
EU, but including the OECD and other international institutions as well. It has systematically addressed
governance issues, including the discriminatory treatment of minorities (representing close to a fifth of
the population) which was an important factor in the EU's earlier exclusion of Slovakia from the group of
first round accession candidates. The stabilization and adjustment measures that the Government has
taken to counter the macroeconomic disequillibria and structural distortions that it inherited have
predictably eroded some popular support. The adjustment and reform challenges ahead are substantial
and there will likely be significant strains on the governing coalition as it seeks to maintain the required
consensus for the hard decisions that are needed to lock in sustainable growth. Over the past year, the
creation of split-off parties has weakened some coalition partners, but the parliamentary majority remains
in-tact. Following the November 2000 referendum result, prospects that the current coalition Government
will complete its full term have improved. The question remains whether the medium term benefits from
restoring the basis for sustainable high growth and accelerating the EU accession process will be apparent
to the voters by the time of the next elections due in 2002.

8. 
TShe political divisions that have existed in Slovakia since before independence, and that continue
today, in part reflect different views on the role of the state in the context of the change from a command
economy to one based on market incentives. In Slovakia, the process of building a modern nation had
barely begun during the transformation that took place in Czechoslovakia after 1989. Although federal
states had been established prior to independence, with broad devolution of powers since 1990, the
process of building a Slovak state, and its institutions, was far from complete by the time of independence
in 1993. While the Government now explicitly recognizes this challenge and has begun to tackle it,
reorienting the role of the state, developing modern institutions, and improving administrative capacity
will pose significant challenges as Slovakia seeks to complete the transformation agenda and promote

3

compliance with the EU's acquis-comnmunautaire (which are the obligations of membership hereafter
referred to as the acquis).

Social Developments
9. 
In addition to an incomplete transformation agenda and worsening macroeconomic conditions, the
Government faced daunting challenges on the social front. Employment growth did not accompany the
GDP expansion in the mid-1990s and unemployment increased following stabilization measures, reaching
17 percent on average in 2000. Furthermore, while levels of life expectancy, enrollment and other human
development indicators are in the middle of the range for Central Europe, a number of these have
deteriorated in recent years, in spite of adequate overall social expenditure levels. A major 1998 survey
indicated a weakening sense of social security and well being, with over half of all respondents
considering themselves worse off than before 1989. As the need for social assistance and protection
increases in response to stabilization and adjustment measures, the country's pension and health insurance
systems generate increasing deficits thereby endangering the sustainability and solidarity of the system.
The Govemment is committed to accompany stabilization and reform with improvements in social
protection, to target social assistance better, and ensure that disadvantaged groups have adequate access to
quality education and health services.

10. Poverty. Knowledge about the incidence and scope of poverty in Slovakia was very limited until
recently when initial findings of analytical work initiated by the Bank became available (paras 59 and 62-
63 describe the work program that the Bank has initiated to enhance understanding and knowledge of

poverty issues in Slovakia). The recent economic slowdown and increasing levels of unemployment now
place poverty issues high on the Govemment's agenda for action. Available data indicate that the Roma

households headed by unemployed persons are the most vulnerable groups in Slovakia. Moreover, there
are very sharp regional differences in unemployment and proportions of Roma population, with the
eastern part of the country consequently having a much higher incidence of poverty. Economic activity is

heavily concentrated in the western part of the country, particularly around the capital Bratislava. The

poor state of the extensive public housing estates and district heating systems also represent additional

urgent social issues.

11. Analysis of poverty in Slovakia is constrained by the absence of representative household
consumption surveys.4 Initial analysis based on a 1996 micro-census income data indicates that those
living below US$2 a day represent about 5 percent of the population5 , which is significantly higher than
in other Central European countries, while those living below US$4 a day represent about II percent of
the population, a much lower share than in other Central European countries. Similarly, relative poverty
or income inequality, as measured e.g. by the share of households having incomes at less than 50 percent
of median equivalent income is also much lower than in comparator countries The existence of pockets
of deep absolute poverty alongside relatively low relative poverty reflects in large part Slovakia's system
of social transfers Which in effect "compensates" for inequalities in income resulting from differences in
education, labor market status, gender, location and other characteristics which often are associated with
poverty. In particular pensions have been particularly effective in containing poverty among the elderly.
The incidence of poverty may well have increased since 1996, with a slowing down of economic growth
and rising unemployment, in addition to narrowing the scope of some social assistance benefits as part of
on-going fiscal adjustment. The situation of the Roma, who by some estimates number as many as

4 The annual household survey sample unfortunately covers only households headed by employed persons which
renders it virtually useless for analyses of poverty.
5The micro-census data themselves indicate a rate of 2 6 percent, but it is likely that a significant number of poor

Roma living in isolated settlements were not covered. The initial analysis assumes, based on indirect indicators of
poverty status, that this component could represent as much as 25 percent of total estimated Roma population, in
addition to those covered by the micro-census.

4

500,000, or close to 10 percent of the population, represents a core challenge to poverty reduction and
social justice and cohesion in Slovakia (see Box 1). The Government is especially concerned that social
transfers represent a rising burden on the budget, so that while they are effective in promoting equity
objectives, they are not sustainable without more effective targeting. In addition, the high incidence of
public corruption is likely to affect the poor disproportionately, as analyses of corruption in other
transition economies has shown.

Box 1: Social Exclusion and Poverty in Slovakia--The Roma

Roma ate believed to account for close to 10 percent of Slovakia's population, although census data indicate just 1.5 percent,
with the differcnces in magnitude reflecting possible undersampling of isolated Roma settlements and more generally, an
unwillingness to declare Roma ethnicity given official and unofficial discrimination The status and well being of Romna families
has deteriorated since the collapse of communism in 1989 With little schooling, Roma workets were often among the first laid
off in restructuring and face particular barriers given the premia that market economies attach to skills and education. While
discrimination against minorities generally reached its peak in Slovakia during 1994-98 and increased support to minorities has
been an explicit policy of the current government, Roma students, workers, citizens and communitics nevertheless continue to
encounter widespread discrimination Roma students are disproportionately represcnted in special schools, Roma workers
represent a disproportionate share of Slovakia's unemployed, and Roma communities often receive little of the public services to
which they ate entitled The rate of unemployment among Roma far exceeds the national average of 20 percent, reaching close
to 100 percent in some parts of Eastern Slovakia. Similarly, average family size, at over 6 persons, is well above the national
average, increasing vulnerability and the acuteness of socioeconomic problems. Hlousing conditions in Romna settlements are
often poor and Roma access to education and social services inferior to that of the rest of the population, e g only 3 percent of
children complete secondary education The situation of the Roma represents the single most important social equity and poverty
issue facing Slovakia now

The current Government has moved rapidly on the legislative front with respect to discrimination against minorities It has
established a special Roma Office under the responsibility of a Deputy Prime Minister for Human Rights, Minorities and
Regional Developnment that aims to focus and coordinate better the initiatives already underway by Government, many donors,
and NGOs to help improve the situation of Roma communities The Bank provided a grant from the IDF in FY00 to help
strengthen this office A special assessment of Roma households in FY01 would examine the extent and characteristics of
poveny and form the basis for helping Government develop an effective medium term strategy for integiation and social and
cconomic development of the Roma population 
It would also help identify how future Bank support could be best directed
towards reducing poverty, and increasing opportunities among Roma households

12. The Government clearly recognizes that, aside from the particular challenge presented by
vulnerable Roma households, strong, sustained economic growth is the best strategy for reducing poverty
in Slovakia. The structural reforms implemented now will only yield dividends in the medium term,
however. Therefore, Government poverty reduction efforts will focus on: (i) reforming social assistance
and protection programs to improve equity, efficiency and sustainability; (ii) implementing anti-
corruption initiatives to reduce the role of "informal" payments and bribery in granting access to health
and education services; and (iii) encouraging the development of small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
by simplifying administrative barriers and reducing corruption. The Government appreciates that special
efforts will be required to address poverty in Roma communities and has requested that the Bank program
include analytical and operational support in this area. Already the Bank has provided an Institutional
Development Fund (IDF) grant to the recently established Roma Office with the mandate to empower and
assist Roma communities. Currently the Bank is supporting a detailed situation assessment of Roma
households as an input to the poverty and labor market analysis underway in FY01 (paras 62-63 provide
more detail on the relation between Bank supported activities and poverty reduction).

13. Gender Issues. The UNDP's 1998 National Human Development Report for Slovakia notes that
the equality of men and women is guaranteed by the Constitution of the Slovak Republic and that there
are no laws in existence that can be regarded as discriminating against women. A relatively high level of
employment of women continues to prevail in Slovakia, with women accounting for about 46 percent of
the economically active population. Employed women have concentrated in traditional job categories,
however, including health service, finance and insurance, commerce and education. This issue has

5

intensified over the 1990-97 period and the percentage of women in health and education has now passed
80 percent. A related issue is the concentration of women in lower income categories than men.
According to government statistics, women receive about 79 percent of men's wages for the same work.
While current legislation promotes the principle of equal pay for equal work the Human Development
report suggests that amendments could facilitate better application of the law. A number of organizations,
associations and initiatives devoted to the concerns of women are in place in Slovakia; they focus on
work with children, violence against women and social care. These groups were represented in the CAS
consultations. The Bank's analytic work on poverty and labor markets (para 59) will explore gender-
labor market linkages in greater depth.

Economic Developments
14. While transition for other Central European countries was initially marked by the collapse of
economic growth, Slovakia registered average annual GDP growth of 5-6 percent starting in the mid-
1990s and inflation declined to single digit levels from 1995 (see Table 1). However, the rapid growth
that took place during 1994-97 became increasingly unsustainable in the absence of structural reforms and
with low levels of direct foreign investment. Nor did this growth contribute to increased labor demand:
the unemployment rate remained consistently in double digits.

15. The output recovery that started in 1994 initially seemed sustainable, as it was based on exports and
took place in a context of low fiscal and current account deficits. The prospects of continued high growth
were underpinned by the highest investment ratio in Central Europe in the mid-1990s. Beginning in
1996, however, the current account shifted to a persistent deficit in excess of 10 percent of GDP, driven
by a dramatic increase in fixed investment ratios to nearly 40 percent of GDP. The sharp investment
expansion did not raise too much concern initially, as the expectation was that such large investment
outlays would increase output and export capacity further. However, over time it became clear that much
of the increase in investment was driven by perverse incentives, stemming from generous public
guarantees on foreign borrowings, extensive political interference in bank lending, and weak corporate
governance. Widespread reports of corruption and the growing volume of enterprise losses progressively
revealed the underlying distortions.

16. 
In an effort to offset increasingly lax fiscal policies and prevent the current account from
deteriorating even further, the National Bank of Slovakia (NBS) tightened monetary policy from 1996 to
1998. This contained the current account deficit at 10 percent of GDP, but at the cost of very high real
interest rates (in excess of 20 percent p.a.) and repeated periods of turbulence in the foreign exchange
market. The tight monetary policy was ultimately not able to sustain the exchange rate in the face of
speculative attacks in the wake of the Russia crisis, forcing the NBS to float the currency (koruna) in
October 1998 after a sizable loss in reserves. More important, high real interest rates made it increasingly
difficult for enterprises to service their debts. This contributed to a significant increase in the proportion
of non-performing assets in the loan portfolios of domestic banks, eventually endangering the viability of
the financial system.

17. The new Government moved quickly to take strong stabilization measures, particularly in May
1999 following renewed pressures on the koruna. Partly as a result of these stabilization measures, GDP
growth, which had already decelerated to just over 4 percent of GDP in 1998, fell to less than 2 percent in
1999 and remained at about the same level in 2000, with weak domestic demand offsetting strong export
growth. End-year inflation increased to about 14 percent in 1999 as a consequence of currency
devaluation and the (temporary) effects of the Government's stabilization package, which included
adjustments in administered prices, value added tax rates, and import tariffs (temporary surcharge).
However, the core inflation rate remained in single digits, reflecting fiscal adjustment. Towards the end
of 2000 the broad inflation rate had eased to about 9 percent.

6

18. The stabilization measures resulted in a reduction in the primaly fiscal deficit of nearly 2
percentage points during 1999 and a reduction in the overall deficit to 3.6 percent of GDP. Tmhe
Government also tightened financial discipline (e.g. halting the provision of new credit guarantees) and
began structural reforms in the enterprise and financial sectors. These reforms resulted in a shatp decline
in fixed investment, which together with the tightened fiscal stance contributed to a reduction in the
current account deficit to 5.5 percent of GDP in 1999, from 10 percent in 1998. For 2000, the overall
fiscal deficit is estimated to remain about 3.5 percent of GDP (exclusive of privatization revenues and
called guarantees), with rising deficits in the social security funds, due to high unemployment and poor
collections, offsetting deficit reduction measures, including further adjustments in administered priccs in
early 2000. The estimated current account deficit narrowed to below 3 percent of GDP based oni strong
export growth. The Government has also undertaken a comprehensive program of banking and entcrprise
reforms which laid the ground for privatization of the state banks and implementation of debt workout
strategies for enterprises (detailed below in paras 28-32). The improved policy mix and the structural
reforms contributed to a sharp reduction in real interest rates, a nominal appreciation of the koruna and a
recovery in foreign exchange reserves from their low in May 1999 to about 4 months of imports by
November 2000.

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators, 1994-2000
1994 
1997 
1998 

1995 

1996 

Real Sector
Real GDP growth (perccnt p a.) 
CPI Inflation (period average, 
percent p a )

Exports/GDP (percent) 
Fixed Investment/GDP (percent) 

General Government l
Overall balance/GDP 
Primary balance/GDP 
Expenditures/GDP 
Debt/GDP 

4 9 
13 4 

61 6 
28 3 

-1 2 
2 4 
45 1 
25 0 

6 7 
9 9 

59 8 
26 4 

0 4 
2 6 
45 7 
22 8 

6 2 
5 8 

55 2 
34 2 

-I 3 
0 8 
46 6 
27 4 

External Accounts
Current account deficit/GDP 
2.1 
Foreign Direct Investment/GDP 
1 1 
Gross external debt/GDP 
30 9 
Net external debt/GDP 
2 9 
I/ Foi 1998-2000, excludes ptivatization revenues and called gualantees

4 6 
1 6 
32.0 

-10 6 
1 0 
38 8 
10.0 

6 2 
6 1 

58.0 
35 9 

-5 0 
-3 2 
47 7 
29.7 

-9 6 
0 4 
48.4 
16 6 

4 1 
6 7 

61 2 
38 0 

-4 8 
-2.5 
44 9 
30 4 

-10 0 
1 8 
55.9 
27 4 

1999 

2000 est.

1 9 
10 6 

61.8 
30 S 

-3 6 
-0 8 
44.8 
31 4 

-5.5 
3 6 
53 4 
31 1 

1 8
1] 5

77 4
28 8

-3 5
-0 7
41 4
31 8

-2 7
8 0
54 1
22 5

19. Financial markets have responded favorably to the recent performance. After the May 1999
measures, spreads over the German bund rate came down from as much as 1000 basis points (bp) in 1998
to about 400 bp. With a good outcome for 1999 in terms of reductions in the fiscal and current account
deficits, confidence in Government's continued commitment to economic adjustment, and the EtJ
decision to start accession negotiations with Slovakia, spreads have rapidly come down further to just
over 200 bp on a new Euro5OO million 10-year issue placed in the first half of 2000, and about 150 bp at
end 2000.

7

II. THE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS
20. As a small and open economy, with trade volumes representing well over 100 percent of GDP,
Slovakia remains vulnerable to trade related shocks. Today trade focuses on Europe, and manufactures
dominate exports. Because of the macroeconomic imbalances that evolved in the mid-1990s and rising
debt ratios, Slovakia had also become increasingly vulnerable to swings in capital flows, with pressures
on the Slovak Koruna first in 1997, and again in late 1998 in the aftermath of the Russia crisis,
compounded by domestic political uncertainty immediately following the 1998 Parliamentary elections.
These pressures continued until May 1999 as international investors initially lacked confidence in the
Government's stabilization efforts. The fiscal adjustment package introduced in May 1999 demonstrated
the Government's commitment to structural reforms and improved prospects for initiating accession
negotiations with the EU, setting the stage for more stable conditions from the middle of 1999. In the
course of 2000 the overall macroeconomic situation has improved further, capital inflows have put
upward pressure on the exchange rate, negotiations with the EU have been formally initiated and Slovakia
became a member of OECD.

21. The medium term scenario of the CAS envisages a continuation of the fiscal consolidation process,
implementation of structural reforms that have been initiated in 1999, and steady process towards EU
accession around the middle of the decade. On this basis, the rate of growth is expected to recover to
higher levels, from 1.9 percent in 1999 and 2000 to 3.5 percent by 2001 and to 5 percent by 2003 (see
Table 2). Strong export growth to the EU would offset weak growth in domestic demand. This outcome
is consistent with levels of fixed investments projected at about 30 percent of GDP, given the efficiency
improvements associated with banking sector reforms, improved corporate govemance, and higher
foreign direct investment (FDI), the latter linked in part to the privatization of banks and utilities. Higher
imports of investment goods and supplies associated with higher FDI flows, and the phase-out of the
import surcharge are likely to lead to an increase in the current account deficit to over 4 percent of GDP
in 2001. However, external debt ratios should decline substantially as FDI flows should exceed the
current account deficit.

22. The Government's proposed budget for 2001 implies an overall fiscal deficit in the order of 5
percent of GDP. However, the budget is based on very conservative revenue forecasts. The fiscal
projections in the base case scenario are based on a more moderate decline in the revenues to GDP ratio
and envisage maintaining the overall deficit in 2001 at about 3.5 percent of GDP. This neutral fiscal
stance is warranted to support the recovery of domestic demand, which remained weaker in 2000 than had
been envisaged. Even so, maintaining a roughly neutral fiscal stance will imply a significant fiscal effort
as Government will need to offset the elimination of the import surcharge and the reduction in the
corporate tax rate (from 40 to 29 percent). The privatization of the 3 largest banks and divestitures in the
energy sector would result in significant privatization revenues in 2001. The scenario assumes that the
privatization revenues will be used to retire debt, including National Property Fund (NPF) bonds of about
3 percent of GDP. This debt reduction would offset a significant portion of new bank restructuring bonds
(equivalent to about 11 percent of GDP) issued by the Government to replace guarantees linked to the
carve-out of bad loans from bank portfolios during 1999 and 2000 prior to privatization (see paras 30 and
31).

23. The scenario envisages continued fiscal consolidation in the 2002 election year, with further
improvements in the primary balance, which is expected to become positive by 2004. The overall fiscal
deficit, inclusive of interest on the bank restructuring bonds to be issued in 2001, would decline from
2003 onwards to no more than 2 percent of GDP in the medium term. The achievement of steady modest
reductions in the primary balance would depend in part on measures to reverse recent trends of rising
deficits in the social insurance funds (pensions and health in particular), and better targeting of social
assistance programs. The tightened fiscal stance in the medium term, combined with low growth in unit

8

labor costs and enterprise restructuring are expected to contain domestic demand. This should allow for a
somewhat moderating monetary policy and lower real interest rates, and lead to further modest reductions
in the current account deficit towards more sustainable levels which could be financed from non-debt
capital inflows, especially FDI.

24. The recovety of growth in the scenario outlined above is similar to the lower end of the growth
prospects in the (Government's own scenario, as reflected in the Government/EU Joint Assessment.6 At
the higher enld, that scenario envisages growth reaching 4.5 percent by as early as 2001, and 6.5 percent
by 2004, in response to the ambitious reform program that Government envisages. This pattern of growth
may well result from a strong economic program if other circumstances, including external conditions,
remain favorable. The projections presented above reflect a more conservative assessment of outcomes
and of lags between reforms and their impact on growth. Risks associated with these projections stem
from political uncertainties, capacity constraints in policy implementation, external shocks and the pace
of EIJ accession. These are discussed in Section V below.

Real Sector

RealGDP 
Exports of goods and services 
limports of goods and services 
Private consumption 
Inflation (GDP deflator) 

Fixed Investment 

General Government

Ovcrall balance"' 
Primary balance" 
Debt 
External Accounts
Current account deticit 
Foreign Direct Investnient 
o/w privatization related 
o/w non-privatization related 
Gross external debt 
Net external debt 2 

Table 2: Key Economic Indicators 1999-2005
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
200(5
Actual Estimate Projected Projected Projected Projected Projected

19 
3 6 
-6 1 
0 1 
8 6 

30.8 

-3 6 
-0 8 
31.4 

-5 5 
3.6 
1 9 
1 6 
53 4 
31 1 

1.8 
18.5 
10 1 
-2 0 
6 9 

28 8 

-3 5 
-0 7 
318 

-2.8 
8 0 
2 9 
5 2 
54 1 
22 5 

(percentage change)
35 
45 
10 0 
9 9 
12.4 
10 8 
3 1 
4 3 
6 5 
5 0 
( percent of GDP)
30 0 
30 5 

-3 5 
-I 0 
313 

-4 2 
17 0 
14 0 
3 0 
44 6 
6 6 

-3 0 
-0 7 
310 

-3 7 
5.0 
2 0 
3 0 
40 7 
3 8 

50 
9.9 
9.1 
4 3 
4 5 

30 5 

-2 5 
-0 4 
307 

-3 2 
3 0 
0 0 
3.0 
40 0 
2 8 

5(0 
9 6 
8 6 
4 2 
4 0 

30 5 

-2 0 
0 1 
30 1 

-2 9 
3 0 
0 0 
3 0 
39.3 
1 8 

50
9 6
8.9
4 4
3.5

30.5

-1 6
0.3
293

-2 7
3 0
0 0
3 0
38 8
0 7

1/ Excludes privatization revenues and called guaranitees

2/ Equal gross debt less foreign assets of the NBS and banking secto,

III. THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM

Introduction

25. The Government's set of medium term economic policies are elaborated in the Joint Assessment of
Medium Term Economic Priorities of the Slovak Republic, prepared 
in consultation with the EU and
agreed in February 2000. The driving objective of the joint assessment 
is the implementation of the
acquis and other criteria for EU membership. While progress 
in harmonizing specific laws to meet the
acquis will be important, the Joint Assessment emphasizes that maintaining macroeconomic stability and
advancing on key governance and structural reforms are essential to strengthen the competitiveness 
in the

6Joint Assessment of Medium Term Economic Policy Priorities of the Slovak Republic, February 29, 2000.

9

EU market that will underpin the convergence of Slovak incomes to EU levels. The specific elements of
the program are discussed in greater detail in paras 29-40 below, with the exception of plans for
macroeconomic stabilization discussed in Section II above.

26. Maintaining macroeconomic stabilization underpins this program and is critical to enhancing
prospects for accession to the EIJ. In terms of structural reforms, the document clearly gives priority to
banking privatization and enterprise restructuring, linked to the broader promotion of private sector
development, including increased FDI. The Government acknowledges that meeting this objective will
require improvement in the business environrnent, including a reduction in administrative complexity and
harmonization of legislation and institutions with those of more fully developed market economies. The
authorities recognize that reducing corruption is an essential step to improve the business environment.
Their program emphasizes the close link between public administration reforms, including anti-corruption
measures, and private sector development. Finally the Government's program recognizes that structural
reforms are also required in the social sectors. Actions to improve governance, including those supported
under anti-corruption and broader public sector reform programs, will also be necessary to assure the
efficient delivery of quality social services to the poor. Education reforms to enhance labor market
flexibility and improve productivity will help ensure continued competitiveness in the European market.
Reforms in health delivery and financing can begin the reorientation of Slovakia's health system to cope
better with the changing health profile of society while improving cost effectiveness. Finally, reform of
the social protection system will be geared to: (i) promote the transition from a benefit-based system to an
insurance-based system; (ii) complement the pay-as-you-go pension system with a multi-pillar system;
(iii) target social assistance better; (iv) address the incentive effects of social assistance on employment;
and (v) harmonize the instruments of the system in order to make it more efficient and cost-effective.

27. The Government's program is appropriately ambitious, considering the need to respond quickly to
the opportunities facing Slovakia. To its credit, the Government has committed to this program with
significant actions. As discussed above (paras 18-19) the macroeconomic stabilization package
introduced by the Government in May 1999 and consistently implemented since then has restored
economic stability. The Government has underscored its commitment through the preparation of an 1MF
Staff Monitored Program (SMP) which is currently underway. Based on discussions now well underway
between the Government and IMF, the SMP will be broadly consistent with the macro scenario described
in Section II.

28. The Government is also well into implementation of the structural reform agenda. 
Its anti-
corruption program was formulated with inputs and support from NGOs, the Bank and bilateral partners,
a partnership which continues into the implementation phase. The bank privatization and enterprise
restructuring process is fully underway. The Government has completed the carve out of classified assets
of the major state-owned banks and privatization advisors have been selected. The legal framework for
bank regulation and supervision has been strengthened. The workout agency for bad debts has been
created and legal reforms enacted, including amendments to the bankruptcy law. The Government has
successfully sold Slovak Telecoms. Gas, power and other utilities are next on the agenda. These
initiatives for financial and enterprise restructuring have benefited from technical and financial support
from many partners, including USAID, the EU, the British Know How Fund, and the World Bank.

Structural Reforms
29. Enterprise and Financial Sector Reform. Slovakia's structural reforms during the 1994-98
period were highly uneven and failed to produce the expected results. Enterpnrse privatization involving
primarily direct sales followed the mass coupon privatization that had already taken place in the former
Czechoslovakia. The private sector share of GDP reached 80 percent, but poor public and private
governance, fraught with corrupt practices vitiated this achievement. 
Inadequate capital market

10

regulation allowed extensive "tunneling" or stripping of assets by the very investment funds that should
have been promoting strong corporate governance in the interest of shareholders (the public). The second
round of privatization involved direct sales of enterprises at favorable prices to groups politically
connected to the Government then in power. Both privatization waves thus failed to produce the expected
gains in efficiency and competitiveness, and the financial condition of enterprises deteriorated. The
losses of Slovak enterprises increased from 6 percent of GDP in 1995 to 10 percent of GDP in 1998, by
which time the number of loss-makers exceeded the number of profit-makers.

30. The financial condition of enterprises deteriorated because of weak bankruptcy and foreclosure
laws and a weak legal/regulatory framework for corporate governance, in addition to extensive political
interference in the lending of domestic banks. This interference affected not only the three large State-
owned banks (accounting for half of total assets in the banking sector), but also a number of medium-
sized banks in which the State retained some shares. As a result of these developments, by end-1999 the
stock of classified loans amounted to almost 30 percent of GDP. The lack of financial discipline also led
to a large stock of tax and inter-enterprise arrears that in 1999 exceeded 10 and 30 percent of GDP,
respectively. Failure to privatize banks and to create an environment for enterprise restructuring during
four key transition years were probably the most negative legacies of this period. However, reforms in
other key areas stalled as well. Nearly all utilities and infrastructure services remained in the public
sector and the development of a regulatory framework lagged. Fiscal risks also increased due to previous
Government guarantees for major investments, primarily in roads and energy, or to inefficient operations,
as in the power and railways sectors. Reformns in public administration and social services, including
pensions, health, and social assistance were also neglected for most of the 1994-98 period. 'Ihis had a
negative impact on economic efficiency and welfare, and further exacerbated fiscal pressures.

3 1. The current Government began quickly to formulate a comprehensive program of bank and
enterprise reforms, including bank restructuring and privatization, debt workout, and legal reforms.
Implementation of the program has laid the microeconomic foundations to restore and sustain high
groNvth. The Government has already completed diagnostic audits of the major public banks, appointed
financial advisors, re-capitalized the banks, and completed a carve-out of classified assets for about
SKIOO billion, equivalent to 12 percent of GDP, following which the banks' capital asset ratio reached
the international standard of 8 percent. In the meantime, the banks' advisors are preparing the way for
sales to strategic investors. In conjunction, legislation has strengthened the banking and supervision laws
and reformned the bankruptcy law.

32. The number of enterprises recording losses in 1998 were as many as 20,000 out of a total of 36,000
non-financial enterprises. Of these about 200 enterprises account for about 60 percent of all losses. The
Govemment is currently assessing the extent to which the bad assets carved out from the banks are
concentrated in this group of enterprises as well. The scope and complexity of the debt workout and
enterprise restructuring program will depend in part on the outcome o:f this assessment. At the same time,
Government intends to divest the assets currently held by the State through the NPF in enterprises that
were previously designated as strategic (about SK54 billion7 , or 6 percent of GDP).

33. 
In the utilities and infrastructure sectors, the Government envisages a sharply reduced role for the
state. In 2000, the Government successfully sold a majority stake in Slovak Telecoms. Privatization of
government holdings in the gas and oil sectors is currently under preparation with transactions anticipated
during 2001. In addition, the Government and utility companies are preparing for future power sector
liberalization in line with EU accession requirements. The Government intends first to unbundle and then
privatize major segments of the power sector, which is currently operated by a state monopoly. The
Government recognizes the need to establish strong regulatory institutions to support these actions. In

7These 

represent equity assets. At the same time the NPF has receivables of SK14 billion fiom past privatizations.

11

addition, while energy price adjustments have already taken place during 1999 and 2000, tariffs remain
relatively low and industrial and commercial customers heavily cross-subsidize residential customers.
Further tariff adjustments and re-balancing will help prepare for privatization. This will likely require
compensating measures to offset the impact on poor households. In those infrastructure sectors with a
continuing state role, such as roads and transport, the focus would switch from large public investments to
improving operations and maintenance, and increasing private sector participation, while identifying and
implenmenting only high benefit-cost investment options (a continuing focus of Government dialogue with
various civil society and local government interests). Past motorway investments, often financed by
expensive commercial and short term loans, have crowded out resources for maintenance. The
Government's recent decision to incorporate the State Road Fund into the overall budget should increase
public accountability and improve allocation of resources within the sector. 
In the case of Slovak
Railways, which faces major deficits and has been a drain on the budget, Government is undertaking a
restructuring program with support from the European Investment Bank (EIB). Investment requirements
in transport to meet EU accession requirements are significant; but overall, financing for infrastructure
would increasingly come from private sources, including FDI, while continuing to draw on EffB and other
European institutions such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).

34. Slovakia's financial sector and enterprise reforms, and the associated legal reforms, are significant
steps towards creating an overall environment that encourages efficient private sector investment and the
creation of new employment opportunities. Government has also moved on other fronts to encourage
private investment, including FDI, by reducing corporate tax rates, streamlining procedures, and
improving the regulatory and tax regimes, based in part on an analysis undertaken by FIAS in 1999.
There has already been a response, notably some major FDI transactions this year: but there continue to
be important constraints to the development of new private enterprises, particular small and medium scale
enterprises that offer the greatest prospects for employment generation. These include, among others,
administrative corruption, as indicated by the survey results discussed in para 36 below, access to long
term financing, and high payroll taxes as part of the existing social security system and other labor market
rigidities. Government is moving also to address these issues through its overall public administration
rcforms, the anti-corruption program, legal and judicial sector reforms 
and the restructuring and
privatization of banks, which, in conjunction with an easing of public sector borrowing requirements,
would improve overall availability of finance for the private sector. Labor market reforms will be
considered in the broader context of reforms in the social security and assistance regimes that
Government is now initiating. In addition, FIAS is supporting the Govemment in further streamlining
administrative requirements for new businesses and setting an appropriate regulatory environment.

35. Public Governance. Re-orienting the role of the state to support a market economy more
effectively remains a key challenge. The formal institutional framework is in place and checks-and-
balance mechanisms do exist at all levels; but there is too little accountability by public officials and
administrative corruption is widespread. Furthermore, the planned move to decentralize many important
state responsibilities to local governments will create new challenges, particularly in social service
delivery. Initial analytical work supported by the Bank identified the key public sector weaknesses as: (i)
large contingent liabilities reflecting the common use of state guarantees by the previous Government; (ii)
the proliferation of extra-budgetary funds; (iii) excess employment in the public sector and lack of a legal
framework for civil service; (iv) lack of control of subsidies and transfers; and (v) a low level of
accountability.

36. Fighting corruption has been one of the key priorities of the new Government which fully
recognizes its impact on both public service delivery and private sector activity (see Box 2). A recently
announced "National Program to Fight Corruption", which is posted on the internet and has been debated
publicly, stresses the corroding effect of corruption on economic life and envisages: (i) freedom of
information legislation, with resources allocated for implementation; (ii) increasing transparency, e.g. in

12

monitoring state asset management, and reducing the scope for conflicts of interests for politicians and
public officials through asset disclosure; (iii) reducing state intervention in economic management; (iv)
simplifying the regulatory framework; and (v) increasing public awareness about corruption. This
program also includes preparation of concrete measures to improve public governance in the executive
and judicial branches of government, reform the management of courts, and introduce better financial
control and audit mechanisms. Parliament has already adopted a Freedom of Information Act and steps
are underway to improve public sector procurement.

Box 2: Corruption in Slovakia-Survey Results

At the request of the Government, the World Bank, with USAID co-financing, supported three surveys on corruption in Slovakia,
with questionnaires designed with the help of Transparency International and polling by a local NGO The surveys, in late 1999,
covered over a 1000 households, about 400 enterprises and a similar number of public officials, and contain information on both
perceptions of corruption and actual experience of bribing public officials, providing key insights on the incidence and cost of
corruption, the sectors that are most affected, and institutional weaknesses within Government The findings were prcsented
publicly in February 2000 and supported the design of the anti-corruption program announced in March 2000 The surveys
confirm that corruption is widespread and affects all key sectors of the economy Individual citizens were most affected in the
social sectors, with 60 percent indicating informal payments or bribes to obtain hospital services and between a quarter and a
third of respondents indicating payments for other medical services and access to higher education Customs and regulatory
bodies that issue licenses and permits are the public entities in which corruption most affects enterprises, with about one-third of
enterprises reporting bribes to these offices All three groups of respondents identified the judicial systcm as a major locus of
corruption, with enterprises reporting frequent bribes to judges and citing slow courts as well as slow execution ofjustice as the
most important obstacles to doing business, while households report paying frequent bribes to judges and court personncl Courts
are perceived to be inefficient and slow, with bribes necessary to speed them up The institutions perceived to be the least coriupt
are the Presidency, the armed forces and local governments.

37. Social Sector Reforms. Although social sector outcomes are still satisfactory in relation to
Slovakia's income level, there are serious problems which threaten the sustainability of these outcomes.
Health care in Slovakia suffers from a number of weaknesses making it difficult to devise and implement
a coherent strategy for reform. Serious problems have emerged in health finance and in the structure of
health services. 
Inter-sectoral arrears are rapidly mounting. Eighty percent of all health insurance
contributors are in arrears to the health insurance companies. The state-owned enterprises are the worst
offenders; but the central government budget is also in arrears to the insurance companies for
contributions covering 3.2 million economically inactive citizens (out of a total population of 5.4 million).
As a result, insurance companies are in arrears to providers and providers are in arrears to suppliers. In
addition to health financing, equally serious problems are emerging in the provision of health care.
Health care workers, including doctors and nurses, are so seriously underpaid that they are now one of the
lowest paid groups in society; management capacity is severely limited and incentives to improve the
quality of health services and resource usage are weak. Education suffers from inadequate funding and
unclear lines of responsibility. In primary and secondary education, devolution of responsibility to the
county level, without commensurate transfer of funds, has made it difficult for poor counties to cope and
threatens education quality. Teachers' salaries are so eroded that entrants to the profession are drying up
and those who do now become teachers do so as a last resort and lack motivation. In both the health and
education sectors, corruption is rife. Social protection in Slovakia encompasses on-going programs of
unemployment insurance and social assistance and a pension system, all of which are in need of reform to
assure sustainability. The pension system has run a deficit in recent years due to ad hoc increases to
adjust benefits for inflation and reduced revenues resulting from payment arrears on the part of state
employers, increased unemployment and the growing informal sector. With rising unemployment, the
Employment Fund has been hard pressed to pay out unemployment insurance benefits. Expenditures on
social assistance are relatively high (surpassing 1 percent of GDP), but cover an unusually high
proportion of young people, probably at the expense of families.

38. Across the social sectors, the appropriate line ministries do grasp the magnitude and complexity of
the problems; but because of the common structural foundation of most of these problems, they are not

13

equipped to address them on their own. The Government fully appreciates the need to formulate broad
structural reforms for the social sectors while building on detailed sector specific analyses. The
complexity of this challenge inevitably implies a medium term time frame for implementation, with
analytic and administrative capacity building now underway.

Environment
39. The 1998 CEM for Slovakia reviews the status of the environment and examines the implications of
EU accession for environmental policy, including an estimate of investments required for compliance
with the EU guidelines and directives in this area. The report notes that the emission of air pollutants has
fallen substantially since the late 1980s due to both the contraction of particular industries and to emission
reduction measures. Ambient air quality has also improved. In addition, 86 percent of waste water is
currently discharged to treatment plants, 87 percent of which have biological treatment and about half of
all households are linked to sewer systems. Produced waste decreased by close to 30 percent between
1992 and 1995, enabling a reduction in the number of landfill sites. Notwithstanding these positive
developments, the remaining agenda is substantial particularly in a context of accelerating economic
growth.

40. Complying with EU environmental legislation involves not only legal harmonization, but also a
strategy that will allow Slovakia to meet EU standards rapidly and cost-effectively. The quality of
drinking water fails to meet EU standards in many communities. This is not a matter of microbiological
contamination, which might pose a serious threat to health. Rather, the problem is linked to the presence
of minerals and pollutants, arising from either the water source, or poorly maintained distribution
infrastructure. Slovakia will need significant investments to improve raw water quality, upgrade
treatment facilities and replace parts of the water distribution system. Preliminary estimates suggest that
overall environment requirements could amount to around US$5-6 billion, including US$2.5 billion for
investments in water, US$1.5-2.5 for investments in air quality, and US$0.9 billion in waste management.
This would imply annual expenditures around US$300 million distributed over a period of 20 years. It is
expected that EU structural funds and support from EBRD, EIB and private sector investors will help
meet these investment requirements. In addition, policy makers will also need to strengthen
environmental regulations and enforcement.

IV. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Review of the Past Assistance Program
41. Following Slovakia's independence in 1993, the Bank began to prepare an active program of
assistance. The Bank released the third tranche of Slovakia's one-third share of a Structural Adjustment
Loan (SAL) that had been extended to Czechoslovakia and approved an Economic Recovery Loan (ERL)
for US$80 million to support the initial phase of structural reforms of the new Slovak Government and
short-tenn fiscal adjustment measures. The Bank also loaned US$55 million to support investments and
institutional development in telecommunications and initiated the preparation of other investment projects
as well as an adjustment operation to support enterprise and financial sector restructuring and public
sector reforms. However, elections in 1994 led to a Government which was not receptive to World Bank
advice. In any event, an assistance program would have been difficult to implement as the momentum for
reform also stalled at this time. The main Bank activities during 1994-98 included the implementation of
the Telecommunications project which was highly successful in helping to pave the way for privatization
of the sector, and the preparation of a comprehensive CEM in FY98 that focussed on EU accession issues.
The IFC program in Slovakia has also been relatively limited with US$80 million approved for 5 projects
through FY00, whereas the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) has to date provided 7
guarantees for US$67 million.

14

Current Activities
42. 
IThe World Bank Group initially responded to the present Government's request for assistance with
an expanded program of policy advice and technical assistance. 
Initial collaboration focused on
enterprise and financial sector restructuring, and support to the Government's anti-corruption and public
sector reform program, and utilities privatization. As this program proceeded, the Governmcnt extended
its request to include financial support which now fonrs the base case of the CAS. The Bank's analytical
efforts have also expanded to include a review of poverty and labor markets, a situation assessment of
Roma households, a survey of the transport sector, and a social sector expenditure review. The front-
loading of analytical work will continue under the CAS to support the Government's demand for prompt
and focused advice. flowever the Government also recognizes that selected lending operations can
effectively supplement this advice with concrete support to the implementation of the reform program.
This has led to preparatory work on a small number of investment and adjustment operations in addition
to the EFSAL and Social Benefits Administration Loan, both of which are well advanced.

43. The initial phase of the assistance program that has been underway since 1999 has also included
fiduciary assessments with respect to the procurement and financial management systems, anticipating
that such "due diligence" activities would be important not only as a basis for possible lending but that
they would also contribute relevant technical support for improving public and private sector governancc
more generally (see Box 3). A private sector accounting and auditing assessment (the first in the ECA
region) is underway for completion in early 2001, while a joint IMF/Bank Financial Sector Assessment
will take place in late 2001, once privatization of the state banks is well underway. Combined witli the
earlier CEM (FY98) and the on-going social sector expenditure review, the Slovakia program is well
positioned to benefit from a full set of "due diligence" assessments.

44. The current program also corresponds well to the relatively weaker areas of country economic
perfornance. 
In recent years, Slovakia has improved performance with respect to social policies and
economic management, while structural policies (in particular financial sector and banking, and
environmental policies) and public sector management (in particular iransparency, accountability and
corruption, and efficiency of fiscal revenues and expenditures) have continued to lag. T'he Government's
own policy agenda now also emphasizes these areas, thus strengthening the complementarity betwcen the
Bank's current ESW and operational program and the Government's resolve to address these weaknesscs.

Box 3: Fiduciary Assessments in Slovakia

In support of the G,overnment's anti-corruption program and considering the renewed prospects for Bank lending, the
Government and Bank agreed on the importancc of early fiduciary assessments The recenltly completed country Orocurement
assessment confirms the progress already made by the adoption in 1999 of new procuitement legislation compatible with EU
standards, while noting that a number of the procurement methods envisaged in the law could be improved further to ensure
transparency and competition Similarly, the establishment of an independent procurement office is a major step forward, but a
number of related functions require further strengthening, such as training of piocurement professionals and procurement
planning 'T'hese and further strengthening of the procurement law, are part of the proposed action plan under discussion with the
authorities The financial accountability assessment highlights that basic systems are in place and technical skills strong, but
notes a need for greater transparency and public accountability, while modernizing to bring local standards to international
norms, particularly in the contcxt of EU accession Current efforts to improve public and private governance overall need to be
complemented by improvements in accounting (to make it more flexible and responsible) and auditing (by external auditors)
Financial management risks are diminishing as a result of the public finance reforms underway, such as eliminating extra-
budgetary Funds and limiting the use of state guarantees The greater transparency that will result from these and other reformis
in public expenditure management is expected to reduce the misuse of public funds and administrative conruption in general

The Role of Other Partners
45. 
'T'he IMF supported macroeconomic stabilization in Slovakia with a 1994 Standby Agreement. 'I'he
Government that took office later that year let this program lapse in 1995. 
In 1998 as the new
Government began to implement its stabilization program, the dialogue with the INF again strengthened.

15

The authorities worked closely with the IMF in the design of fiscal policy and have maintained continuing
consultations on the medium-term macroeconomic framework. While the current success of stabilization
measures have lead the authorities to conclude that a Standby Program is not currently needed, the
Government has requested a one-year IMF Staff Monitored Program (SMP) for 2001-2002 to increase the
transparency and credibility of its commitment to maintaining macroeconomic stability. Agreement on
the program is expected early in 2001.

46. European institutions are stepping up their support to Slovakia as well. Most of their financial
support is earmarked for investments and related technical assistance in specific sectors--in particular
infrastructure, agriculture, rural development, and environment. This assistance would, generally, be
adequate to meet external financing needs in these sectors (within the Government's overall expenditure
and administrative constraints). With strong prospects for timely accession to the EU, the Government
expects that the European institutions will be the major source of official financing in Slovakia over the
coming years. Support from the EU itself could, in principle, exceed about EurolOO million (in grants)
annually8 .
Ihe EIB expects its program to be about Euro 900 million over the 2000-2002 period, split
equally between public and private projects, largely concentrated in infrastructure (transport, energy,
telecommunications, water, sewerage and waste). The EBRD is also expanding its program in Slovakia9 ,
focusing on privatization, small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), strategic investors, and municipal
infrastructure. These European institutions will be the World Bank's main external partners in Slovakia,
and are the lead sources of official financing for the sectors on which their programs are focussed.

47. With sectoral investment programs well supported by others, the Bank's comparative advantage is
to help Slovakia complete its transformation reforms, improve public sector performance, and promote
human development. The Government also considers the Bank Group best placed to provide support in
these areas. Moreover, each of these areas is integrally linked to reducing poverty in Slovakia (paras 62-
63 summarize these linkages). The implementation of the Government's broad reform agenda is expected
to dominate the FY01 -03 period of this CAS. Even in its areas of comparative advantage the Bank is
only one among many partners and as the Government proceeds with the implementation of its reform
agenda, the Bank will continue to maintain the effective external partnerships that have already been
established particularly with both multi- and bilateral donors. Coordination with other partners,
especially EU PHARE, will be key to ensuring that Slovakia's development needs are effectively met.
Beyond this CAS period, as Slovakia approaches EU accession, the role of the Bank will evolve toward
even more focussed and limited activities analogous to its partnership with those neighboring countries
currently in the first rank of EU accession candidates.

48. During the preparation of this CAS consultations were held with a variety of civil society groups
(as detailed in Annex BI 1), including NGOs, labor representatives, media and the private sector. Given
the clear indication of the priorities of a democratically elected Government itself with strong roots in the
NGO sector and the World Bank's relatively limited time and resource frame for Slovakia, consultations
focused primarily on confirming the relevance of these priorities and seeking advice on the
implementation of the proposed activities. However, as CAS preparation proceeded, the dialogue
between some civil groups and the Government, combined with consultations conducted in the course of
World Bank analytic work has led to an increased emphasis in the CAS on policy advice related to
investment options in the transport sector and tariff strategies for the energy sector. Continuing
consultation during the implementation of the CAS may well lead to similar adjustments as the World
Bank's involvement deepens in selected areas. The Government's commitment to openness and

8 From EU Phare, particularly for technical assistance, and pre-accession programs for environment, transport,
agriculture and rural development (ISPA and SAPARD).
9 EIB's cumulative lending to Slovakia since 1993 is about Eurol.2 billion (approved, of which Euro950 million
signed and Euro700 million disbursed), and EBRD has provided Euro400 rnillion.

16

consultation led to their posting a Slovak translation of an earlier draft of the CAS text on a Government
website in addition to the Bank's posting the English version on its own Slovak website.

Box 4: Slovakia CAS: Selectivity of World Bank Support

The proposed assistance program envisages significant Bank Group technical and financial support to Slovakia after a limited
role in the past Since 1993 total Bank Group assistance has amounted to less than US$300 miliion, of which about half was
from IBRD and half fiom IFC/MIGA The European institutions were the main source of official support, with commitments of
close to UJSS2 billion Private sources represented the bulk of overall financing, accounting for about 90 percent of total external
debt of US$10 5 billion by end-1999 The CAS envisages IBRD/IFC commitments in the order of US$500 million for the next
three years in the base case, and about US$850 million in the high case The Euiopean institutions have indicated plans fol
commitments in the order of US$1.5 billion over the same peiiod Financing, including FDI, from private sources at over
US$3.0 billion per annum on average would continue to represent the major proportion of overall gross capital inflows

The Bank Group's operational program focuses on key areas that arc complementary to other official donors or lenders, including
the private sector (IFC), namely: financial and cnterprise sectot restructuring, transformation reforms in energy and
infrastiucture, public sector administrative reforms, including anti-corruption, regulatory and judicial leform, and human and
social development, including poverty reduction The Bank's program would support individual investments in public finance
managemenit, juLdiciary reform, the social sectors, and, through the Global Environmental Fund (GEF), in environment Physical
investments in all other sectors- infrasttucture, energy, uiban and rural development, agriculture -are 
left to other official
sources, in particular the European institutions, and the private sector With respect to the overall structural reforms, the
Government considers the World Bank Group to be best placed to provide leadership among donors to its structural refornm
program, and this role is also acknowledged by the EU, the key external partner The proposed policy-bascd lending- more
than three quarters of all lending in both base and high cases- builds on the technical support that the Bank is ali eady providing
and would help the Government implement its reform program as well as assist in financing the fiscal cost of the reforms as they
are undertaken.

The World Bank Group's Proposed Assistance Program
49. TIhe overarching strategic objective for the proposed CAS is to put Slovakia on a path of rapid and
sustained growth that will promote convergence with its Western European neighbors and improve living
conditionis particularly among the most vulnerable groups in the population. Specifically, the CAS would
entail three clusters of activities: (i) completing the transformation reforms to restore and sustain high
growth and stability; (ii) strengthening governance and institutions, to promote, inter alia, convergence
with the acquis and European practice; and (iii) improving social security, enhancing human
development, and meeting environmental standards.

Objective I. Completing the Tranisformnation Reforms

50. To date Bank support has focused on helping the Government design a comprehensive program for
bank privatization, enterprise workouts and associated regulatory and legal reforms. As discussed in para
31 above, the Government has already implemented important components of the program, including the
carving-out of classified assets in preparation for bank privatization, and due diligence requirements
associated with the privatization process with the help of financial advisors. Majority sale of one of the
two largest banks, and minority sale of the other, and implementation of key elements of the governance
component of the program, are expected to be completed during the first quarter of 2001. Based on this
work undertaken over the past year or so, and the progress already made in implementation, the assistance
program includes a proposed Enterprise and Financial Sector Adjustment loan (EFSAL) in the order of
US$300 million (FY01). The EFSAL would be multi-tranched over the 2001-2002 period, with
benchmarks related both to progress in bank privatization, enterprise restructuring, and the framework for
external and internal corporate governance and the maintenance of a supporting macroeconomic
framework in conjunction with the SMP. It would provide about two-thirds of the estimated annual

17

interest payments on the bonds issued by Government to re-capitalize the state owned banks prior to
privatization (amounting to 1.1 percent of GDP p.a. during the first two years).'I

51. Preparation of the EFSAL already included technical support for measures to improve corporate
governance, such as bankruptcy reform and supervision of non-bank financial institutions. An IDF grant
to support bankruptcy reform, including judicial training, was approved in FY00. IFC's program would
also focus on the financial sector, in particular improving the quality and effectiveness of financial
intermediation. IFC's participation in the privatization of state-owned banks in conjunction with the
EFSAL is proceeding with a planned share of up to 12.5 percent in the equity of a major state owned
bank, in parallel with a similar participation by EBRD, both in support of full privatization to a strategic
investor later in 2001. 
IFC would also support smaller private financial institutions to become
competitive in local and regional markets, and promote the nascent housing finance market.

52. A labor market and social assistance assessment of the impact of the EFSAL (March 2000)
suggested some increase in unemployment could result from further enterprise restructuring under
EFSAL (as a result of the restructuring and privatization of banks and utilities, the workout of bad loans,
and the strengthening of bankruptcy legislation). The assessment noted, however, that mitigating
programs already in place in the Slovak Republic were effective in cushioning the social and poverty
impact of restructuring. These include: (i) the employment programs managed by the National Labor
Office, which include the unemployment insurance and active labor market programs; (ii) the social
assistance program administered by a network of regional welfare offices; (iii) social insurance programs
(pensions and short-termn benefits) administered by the Social Insurance Agency; and (iv) the new
Guarantee Fund also administered by the National Labor Office. The Slovak Government has taken steps
over the years to streamline these programs, and the basic parameters of the unemployment insurance and
social assistance programs provide an appropriate safety net for the unemployed and a floor of protection
for the poor. However, both this assessment and the related ESW on labor markets and poverty identify
possible policy adjustments to cope better with increased workloads and fiscal stress in each of these
programs, and to improve incentives to promote job search and employment creation. Such policy
actions will also contribute to preventing the emergence of welfare dependency, and ensuing poverty
traps. T'here are also significant managerial issues that need to be addressed to deal with fraud and abuse
that has come about with the growth of the informal sector and the increased numbers of unemployment
insurance and social assistance beneficiaries. The Slovak Government has also taken steps to improve
labor market flexibility, although more could be done to encourage restructuring by reducing associated
labor costs.

53. 
In the event, it appears likely that the increase in unemployment will not be pronounced for a
number of reasons: first, the slowdown in growth has likely bottomed out with increases in labor demand
more likely; second, most of the redundant labor was probably already laid-off during 1999 and 2000 as
the Government's strong resolve to deal with the problem became apparent; third, as pressaged in the
EFSAL assessment, the Government's restructuring of active labor market programs toward low wage
public works has begun to bring down the registered unemployment rate; and finally a large share of the
classified debt, with which the EFSAL program will deal, relates to enterprises that have been extensively
tunneled and that probably have been reduced to a shell with all the debts but very few assets. In any
case, the Government is committed to maintain effective employment and social assistance programs and
to improve incentives and mechanisms for reintegration into the labor force at a reasonable cost. Related
World Bank ESW on Labor Markets and Poverty and the implementation of the Social Benefits
Administration Project (para. 59) will further support this effort during the implementation of the EFSAL
and beyond.

' The gross upfront cost of bank restructuring to Government is in the order of US$2 billion on account of the assets
carve-out, of which only a portion would be recovered from the sale of the banks and recovery from creditors.

18

54. The remaining agenda for transformation reforms also includes infrastructure, in particular the
state-owned energy sector. The Public/Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPAIF) will provide
advice on the regulatory framework for public utilities. The Bank program would provide further
technical support for privatization and liberalization in the energy sector, which would promote
Slovakia's efforts to meet the requirements of the acquis in liberalizing energy markets. The impact of
long overdue price adjustments and design of compensatory, targeted subsidies could receive attention in
this context. IFC would consider opportunities to invest in privatized utilities, building on its experience
in infrastructure to play a pioneering role in transactions associated with privatization, and enhancing
credibility of the privatization process. A review of the transport sector is being completed and
subsequent discussions with Govemment may identify further reforms in administering the road and rail
networks and in investment evaluation criteria, taking into account, inter alia, the views of concerned
civil groups. Under a high case scenario, policy-based lending would support privatization of energy and
oil and gas companies following unbundling, other infrastructure management and policy reforms, as well
as the establishment of the associated regulatory framework.

55. Expanding opportunities for the poor in Slovakia means, first and foremost, creating new jobs
through a pattem of growth that combines increased private investment and exports, in particular by
smaller domestic firms and foreign investors. IFC's program (see Box 5) includes support for SMEs and
leasing, and selective restructuring of industrial enterprises. IFC advice will also focus on improving
corporate governance and supporting restructuring efforts thereby creating an environment conducive to
private business development, in particular FDI, which is also a focus of FIAS and MIGA activities.
FIAS is completing an assessment of barriers to investment, as a follow-up to its recent work on measures
to improve the legal, regulatory, and tax environment for FDI, while MIGA is supporting privatization
marketing and attracting FDI, and would provide guarantees as opportunities arise. IFC would work with
joint-ventures where foreign partners are less well known to help raise long term finance, and provide
long-term financing to first tier local firms investing in the Central European region. Based on business
prospects that are currently being considered, total IFC investments are expected to be in the order of
US$100 million during FYOI-03", with upward flexibility in case a significant number of investment
opportunities arise in connection with banking and utilities privatization.

56. While the Government will look primarily to the IMF for advice on maintaining a sound
macroeconomic framework (in the context of the SMP), the Bank would continue to monitor closely
macroeconomic developments which will support the proposed base and high case lending. The Bank
would particularly assist to strengthen public finance management in line with the request of the Ministry

of Finance.

Box 5: IFC Investment Priorities in Slovakia
Sector 
Transition Objective 
IFC Operation
Financial Move major banks out of state ownership, transfer Pre or post-privatization investment in support of
Sector 
of know-how and best practice from selected 
privatization of state-owned banks
strategic partner, improve the quality and efficiency
of financial intermediation in Slovakia
Promote the transformation and technological 
modernization to sustain productive employment 
as a means of alleviating poverty 
Social Sector Create a sustainable pension insurance system 

Investments in joint ventures with significant
development impact
Support for SMEs through financial intermediaries
Investment mn a third pillar pension insurance
scheme

Industrial 
Sector 

Promote private investment in health care and
education to improve quality and relieve the burden Catalyze private investment in education and health
on public finance 
care facilities

IFC's investments (for own account) were US$80 million during FY97-00.

19

Objective 2: Strengthening Governance and Institutionis

57. Almost immediately after the 1998 elections, the Government requested support from the Bank in
initiating an anti-corruption program. Thus far the Bank has worked with the authorities on both a
diagnostic survey and in the initial formulation of a program, including participating with other donors
and civil society representatives in a Government steering committee to guide the process. The initial
diagnostic work identified the following priorities: (i) preventing high-level corruption; (ii) reforming
public finance management; (iii) making service delivery more accountable, eliminating unofficial
payments; (iv) reforming the legal and judicial systems; (v) strengthening financial sector and corporate
governance; and (vi) promoting public transparency and oversight by NGOs and the media. Several
Bank-supported activities already address these areas including financial sector and corporate governance,
legal training (under the IDF grant for bankruptcy reform), and technical assistance to the Finance
Ministry for better public finance management. Other work to help stem corruption and advance
transparency and accountability includes recent Bank assessments of Slovakia's public procurement and
financial accountability frameworks, prepared in anticipation of resumed Bank lending.

58. 
In determining joint priorities, the Bank and the Government have established arrangements for
regular coordination with the EU, a key contributor to public sector reform. Based on current
understandings, in the base case program Bank financial support would be provided primarily for
technical assistance and informnation technology for public finance management, and judicial reform, with
a focus on improving management of courts.

Objective 3. Imnproving Social Security, Enhance Humnan Developmnenit, anid Meeting Environmental
Standards

59. Bank support to the social sectors has focused first on the emerging crisis in the social security
system. The current social security system faces increasing deficits; 2 million workers supporting I
million pensioners and 0.5 million unemployed represents an unsustainable situation. As a first step, a
proposed Social Benefits Administration Project (FY01) would help improve basic informnation systems,
and prepare for pension reforrn. A second area of emphasis is the ongoing, in-depth review of the
situation of Roma households and communities which as discussed above represent the most significant
challenge to poverty reduction in Slovakia. Third, the ongoing assessment of poverty and labor markets
should contribute to better social assistance policies consistent with job growth, gender equity and
targeted support to the poorest households. Fourth, a social sectors expenditures and policy review
(FYOI) will provide a framework for a strategy for reducing corruption and increasing accountability,
improving access of vulnerable groups, and increasing cost effectiveness in line with the evolving health
and education needs of Slovakia.

60. T he proposed social sector lending program (beyond the planned FY0I Social Benefits
Administration Loan) would depend primarily on the depth and pace of sector reforms. In the base case,
the lending program would likely concentrate on a single sector (preparation of a possible future
operation in the health sector is underway) and include investments to improve access for Roma
households and other groups at risk. In the low case scenario, Bank analytical support would continue
assuming a viable constituency for eventual reforms. In a high case scenario, the Bank could provide
additional policy-based lending to support a reform package which might include pension reforn, social
sector financing reform, and/or administrative restructuring for improved service delivery. The latter
could include actions in a number of areas including decentralization, development and implementation of
regulations and incentives for private sector investment (e.g. in health delivery, private pensions,
vocational training), governance (e.g. rationalizing staff to improve salaries and reduce gender inequities
in pay and positions, and tightening oversight and accountability), or targeted efficiency improvements

20

(e.g. upgraded information systems, better and tightened criteria for social assistance, a higher education
strategy, revised health protocols emphasizing outpatient care).

61. World Bank support in the environment sector would be limited in view of the programs being
considered by others, in particular the European institutions. 
It would focus mainly on (ilobal
Environmental Facility (GEF) operations for industrial co-generation and geothermal projects which
would complement the support that the EU provides Slovakia to meet EU standards and requirements. In
response to Government interest and in the absence of alternative sources of funds, an IDF grant is under
consideration to help promote capacity to implement cultural heritage and landscape protection linked to
the realization of Slovakia's eco-tourism potential.

The Assistance Program and Poverty Reduction

62. Poverty reduction priorities permeate all three clusters of the proposed assistance program. The
World Bank's general knowledge and understanding of poverty issues during transition has increased in
part based on the work that was prepared for the Prague 2000 meeting. Specifically for Slovakia, several
key activities contributing to poverty-related analysis began already in FY00, for completion in FY0 1, so
that they can contribute as soon as possible to the design of Government programs, including related
support from the World Bank and other partners. The preparation and appraisal of all policy-based
lending would include an assessment of the operation's poverty impact; if adverse impact is identified, the
operation would also include measures for amelioration.

63. Restoring sustainable and rapid growth is the basis for reducing unemployment and poverty
generally. To assure that growth is also equitable, banking, enterprise, corporate governance and
regulatory reforms would address key microeconomic constraints to more labor-intensive growth, as
would IFC and MIGA support for increased foreign direct investment in Slovakia. Anti-corruption
efforts, public sector administration, judicial, and other governance reforms would not only help improve
the environment for sustainable growth, but would also increase access to public services and open the
way toward greater empowermnent of vulnerable groups. The design of Bank support for social and
human development would have a strong poverty focus especially in terms of more equitable access.
Education and labor policy reforms also support employment growth and gender equity. More direct
social protection interventions may be needed to address poverty issues, including those resulting from
social exclusion. Government social programs (social assistance, health, education) are adequately
funded in the aggregate, and indeed particular outlays for social assistance and health could exceed
sustainable levels. Therefore, better targeting of social expenditures, complemented by financing reforms
in the pension, health and education sectors would be a priority area for support. Progress towards
achieving the poverty objectives of the assistance program would be monitored on a regular schedule.
Monitoring will use benchmarks identified in the course of the analytic work now underway and
discussed and agreed with Government and stakeholders.

CAS Lending Scenarios and Triggers and Exposure
64. Base Case. The base case scenario posits: (i) satisfactory macroeconomic performance, in
particular maintaining fiscal outcomes in line with further reducing the primary deficit and containing the
Government debt to GDP ratio along the lines of the medium tern scenario presented above and as
indicated by the INMF SMP now being finalized; (ii) good progress in utilizing the analysis and technical
assistance from the World Bank in the formulation of an agenda for structural reforms, and (iii)
substantial progress in financial sector and enterprise restructuring (see Table 3 for a more detailed
description of performnance triggers). The EFSAL would be part of the base case. In the base scenario,
there would be no policy-based lending after the EFSAL, largely due to the expectation that the
Government would need an extended time frame to formulate, implement, and/or build consensus for
completing the transformation agenda and extending reforms to the social sectors. Total Bank lending

21

during the CAS period would be in the order of US$415 million, with one investment/technical assistance
operation each in FY02 and FY03 (supporting public sector finance management and judicial reform and
social sector investment respectively). The Social Benefits Administration Project would be implemented
under all scenarios.

65. High Case. Taking into account the Government's track record to date and intentions for the
coming years, the Bank's program is evolving toward a high case scenario. Under this scenario, all of the
performance criteria of the base case would apply. In addition, Government would need to demonstrate
rapid implementation of structural reforms incorporating the following benchmarks: compliance with the
first and second tranche conditions of the EFSAL; substantial reform and privatization in utilities and
infrastructure sectors, including establishment of the utilities regulatory agency; implementation of public
administration reforms, including the anti-corruption program, and implementation of steps to ensure
sustainability of the pension system and health insurance. The high case lending program would include
a Utilities and Infrastructure Adjustment Loan in FY02 and a Social Sectors and Social Security
Adjustment Loan in FY03. In this scenario, lending could total about US$765 million, of which the three
policy-based operations would account for US$650 million. Progress against the triggers for the high case
would be assessed by late 2001, taking into account implementation experience under the EFSAL and the
IMF's SMP.

66. Low Case. Finally, the low case would involve a scenario in which reforms stall and
macroeconomic balances deteriorate for reasons other than significant external shocks. 
In view of
progress already achieved with respect to macroeconomic stability and enterprise and financial sector
reforms, low probability is attached to this case. In this scenario there would be no further lending, and
non-lending activities would be limited to selected areas where receptivity for Bank advice would still
warrant such support. Given the timing and phasing of lending in the base case program, lending
commitments in the low scenario over the FYO1-03 would include at least UIS$35 million for the Social
Benefits Administration Project.

67. Table 3 below provides a comparison of proposed lending under the various scenarios, and the
triggers for each. In both the base and high cases, policy-based lending would represent a very large
share of total lending (about 70 percent and 90 percent respectively), with commitments concentrated in
the first half of the CAS period. This reflects the demonstrated commitment of the authorities to move
ahead quickly with structural reforms over a broad front, in order to restore rapid growth and accelerate
accession to the EU. It also corresponds with the timing of the fiscal costs associated with these reforms,
particularly those related to financial sector restructuring which will be significant in the early stages.
The program focused strategy also takes into account that specific investments across a wide range of
sectors will attract support from the European institutions, pushing the limits of preparation and
implementation capacity in the public sector. In addition, it acknowledges that the Government intends to
minimize off-budget expenditure programs by Ministries and public institutions, in part to ensure that
overall fiscal targets will be achieved. Disbursements under the EFSAL would be multi-tranched to mesh
with periodic assessments of Government's macroeconomic program under the SMP as well as agreed
enterprise and financial sector reform benchmarks. Disbursements under further adjustment operations in
the high case would be tranched in line with the design of the programs they support, the sequence of
reforms, and fiscal needs.

22

Table 3: Lendine Pro ram FVAI-03 AUS$ Million)
FY 
01 
01 
02 
02 
03 

Social Benefits Administration 
EFSAL 
Public Finance Management and Judicial Reform 
Utilities and Infrastiucture Adjustment 
Social Sectors Investment 
Social Sectors / Social Security Adjustment 
Total 
* Adjustment/policy-based lending 
** Low case would include continued disbursements of other, satisfactorily
implemented base case investment operations approved before low case is
thiggered 

03 

_d

High 
35 
300* 
30 
150*
50 
200*
765 
650 

Base 
35 
300*
30

50

415 
300 

Low*"
35

35
0

Base Case Triggers
Successful stabilization/sustainable macroeconomic environmcnt***
* Macroeconomic adjustment, as indicated by SMP implementation, on track
* 
Fiscal deficit in 2001 not to exceed 2000 level, and decline by 0 5 pcrcent of GDP in 2002 and 2003
* No increase in Government/NPF debt to GDP ratio in 2001 and reduction in debt to GDP ratio during 2002-03
Good progress in implementation/building institutions
* Acceptable financial managcment arrangements in place for Bank lending
* Adoption of procurement law in accordance with EU standards, and establishment of procurement agency

* Macroeconomic targets and triggers would reflect updated targets as indicated by the SMP.

High Case Triggers

Full implementation of base case triggers
Rapid implementation of structural reforms
* Government gas sector holdings offered for sale, divestment of Government oil sector holding prepared
* Adoption of power sector restructuring program to prepare for privatization
* Government (cabinct) decision to implement health financing and pension reform
* 
Satisfactory anti-corruption action plan under implementation, including measures to ensure transparent
privatization processes and health and education financing reforms to reduce/eliminate informal payments and
bribes

Low Case Triggers
Stalled reforms and worsening macroeconomic performance
* 
SMP not implemented, rising fiscal deficits and debt to GDP ratios
Structural reform stalled in financial/enterprise sectors - EFSAL off track
Poor implementation
* 
Poor implementation of Bank funded programs

e 

68. Exposure. The proposed lending levels, particularly in the high case, would result in a rapid

increase in Bank exposure from the very low current level of about US$200 million but would not raise
issues with respect to exposure ratios. Moreover, 
the ongoing fiscal adjustment and structural reforms
and the improved prospects 
for EU accession and foreign direct investment 
in Slovakia suggest that
creditworthiness should improve markedly over the next years. The Bank's share in total debt scrvice,
now just over 2 percent, would peak around 2010 at about 3 percent and 4 percent, in the base and high
cases respectively, and decline rapidly thereafter. The Bank's share in public debt service would be at
about double those levels. Nominal exposure would peak at about US$475 million, or 5 percent of total
debt outstanding 
(TDO) by 2003-2004 in the base case and at about US$725 million in the hligh case.
The latter would represent just over 6.5 percent of TDO (and about 13 percent of public external debt),
and this ratio would also decline rapidly as performance 
in line with the high case triggers would
contribute to rapidly achieving the EU accession objectives and access to financial markets at competitive
spreads, and thus rapidly diminished Bank lending.

23

69. Self-evaluation. Overall success in CAS implementation would be assessed on the basis of: (i)
steady improvements in living conditions based on a recovery of sustainable growth driven by a strong
private sector, with reduced unemployment, strengthened social security, particularly for the most
vulnerable, and enhanced opportunities for excluded groups; (ii) continued progress in meeting the overall
requirements of the EU's acquis. Selected benchmarks for self-evaluation of the three program objectives
are presented in Box 6 below.

CAS Objective 
Completing the transformation reforms, restoring 
high growth and maintaining economic stability 

Strengthening governance and institutions 

Box 6: CAS Self-evaluation - Benchmarks
Benchmarks
* Completion of bank privatization by 2002
a Establishment of legal framework for bankruptcy to
facilitate enterprise debt workouts by 2001
Implementation of an anti-corruption action plan in 2001
Incorporation of extra-budgetary funds and
establishment of a unified treasury system through the
2002 budget submitted to the Parliament
* Presentation of pension ieform to Parliament in 2002
a Development of indicators and instruments for
monitoring welfare of Roma by 2002
a Successful implementation of pilot activities to improve
Roma health and education by 2003

Improving social security, enhancing human 
development, meeting environmental standards 

V. RISKS
70. Risks associated with the Slovak Government's stabilization and reform program and the proposed
World Bank support to that program have both internal and external dimensions. The main internal risks
relate to Slovakia's political economy: the diverse and potentially fragmented governing coalition may
not hold together as the Government moves decisively to implement the further adjustments and reforms
that underpin the program, or in the obverse situation, the Government might itself delay further
adjustments and reforms based on insufficient political support and a desire to maintain the political
balance in the coalition even at the cost of reform. To the extent that benefits from the reforms are
delayed or not widely felt, this dilemma could be exacerbated. In either case the implementation of the
program would suffer, undermining the basis for World Bank support as envisaged in the base scenario.
Parliamentary elections, which will be held before the end of the CAS period, will introduce an element
of political uncertainty. On balance, it is expected that the recent OECD accession and momentum for
first round EU accession will guide the policies and actions of both current and future Governments in
directions that are conducive to sustained reform. In recent months, the main opposition party has also
expressed its commitment to pursuing EU accession. To further mitigate these risks, the Bank would
work with Government and other stakeholders during the implementation of the CAS to develop a broad
understanding of the program, its rationale and impact. This dialogue should not only promote reforms
but also ensure that Bank Group inputs appropriately reflect changing circumstances in terms of both
sequencing and content of reforms.

71. Another internal risk relates to domestic capacity. Implementing all the reforms envisaged in the
high case within a short time frame may tax the capacity of the Government and the public sector at large.
If this risk materializes, the program would revert to a slower pace and/or a lesser scale than in the
proposed high case scenario. At the same time, it is likely that with active support during the preparation
phase, Government and public sector capacity will respond, as experience with the financial sector and
enterprise reforms has shown.

72. There are also external risks facing Slovakia's program and the CAS. Should external shocks lead
to worsening macroeconomic conditions, the Bank would consider stepping up the volume of planned
adjustment lending to support the Government's own corrective measures. Conversely in the absence of

24

appropriate corrective measures, the Bank would suspend further adjustment support. A communications
strategy to increase awareness of the links between Slovakia's development prospects and sustained
macro-stabilization could help ensure sustained implementation of the reform program should
unfavorable external shocks materialize.

73. Finally, given the importance of EU accession in driving the formulation and implementation of
reforms, unforeseen or substantial delays in the process could significantly undermine Slovakia's
program. These could occur due to the complexity of accession involving so many countries or indeed
due to delays in the EU's own readiness to take on a significant number of new members. This could
feedback negatively to the domestic commitment to reforms. In such event, the Bank would need to
reassess its role as the Government would not be able to achieve its own principal strategic objective
within the time frame that they currently envisage. Continued strong partnership with the EU to ensure
responsiveness of Bank support as the accession process evolves would mitigate this risk, but if delays
were to lead to a significant change in Slovakia's relationship with European institutions, the Bank would
reassess the program in consultation with Government and key partners.

74. Although the risks to the proposed strategy are non-negligible, the potential benefits within and
beyond the time frame for probable World Bank Group collaboration with Slovakia are substantial. The
partnership that has evolved with the authorities during the formulation of the CAS and the initial phases
of support, particularly the EiFSAL preparation, has demonstrated a high degree of engagement and
commitment that clearly enhances the probability of success and confirms the impressive progress thus
far.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter Woicke

By:

Sven Sandstr6m 

Washington, D.C.
January 8, 2001

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Slovak Republic at a glance 

9/12/00

Europe & 
Upper-
Slovak Central middle-
Republic 
Asla 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development diamond-

1999
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (AtMis method. US$) 
GNP (Atiasmethod, US$billions) 

5 4 
3.590 
19A4 

475 
2,150 
1,022 

573 
4,900
2,811

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993-S9

Most recent estimate (latest year avallable, 1993-99) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 five births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under S) 
Access to improved water source (% of population) 
Iliteeacy (Y% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-age population) 
Male 
Female 

capita 

enrollment

57 
73 
9 

67 
69 
22 
8 

76
70
27
7 
78
10
109 

Access to safe water

3 
100 
101 
99 

102 
102 

-

SlovakRepublic
Upper-middle-income group

| 

102 

__

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

Economic ratios'

GDP (USS billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GOP 
Exports of gooCs and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

17 8 
31 8 
28 8 
28.5 

20 4 
394 
63 7 
28 2 
29 3 

188
33.8 
64.8
28 7
28 0

Trade

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debUGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Presen' value of debt/exports 

-10 4 
2 6 
58 5 
13 9 
44 9
68 0

.5.7 
2 3 
55 6
13 6

Domestic 
Savings 

Ie 
n
Investment

06 
10 3 

Indebtedness

197W9 1989-99 

1998 

1999 1999-03

(average annuajl growth)
GOP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

27 
2 2 

0 9 
06 
113 

44 
41 
10 8 

19 
1 0 
7 0 

3 9 

SiovakRepublic
Upper-middle-income group

.

9 2

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)
30

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

94 
5 5 

4 4
3156 
23 2 
64 0 

40
20 

I N

32 2 

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

49 9 
21 6 
32 1 

50 6 

51 1 
20 2 
69 9

2D I 
-GDI 

' 

ss 

ot 

97 

98

21 2 
74 8 

GDP

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and imports 1%)

(average annual growth)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing
Services 

-16 
-6 6 

-10 
-0 3 

30
2a.

7 6 

7 5 

is-

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

-11 
1 3 
24 
8 3 
0 8 

50 
3 5 
34 
9 6 
4 2 

05 
0 3 
-13 7 
-2 5 
1 1

a

9 

95 

96 

97 93

.10

Exports -ImpsOns

2 7 

Note 1999 data are preliminary estimates
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete


Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Slovak Republic

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 
11

1989 

1998 

1999 rInflaiton 

(%)

Domestic prices 

(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

30

6 7 
5 1 

10 6 
6 6

2C

2 8 

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 

o 

., _

Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

42 4 
1 6 
-5.0 

431 
3 4 
-3 6

94 

95 

95 

97 

98 

99

-

GDP deflator 

-0 CPI

.

TRADE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and Import levels (US$ mill)

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob) 
n a

10,667 

10,197 

so,000

Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods o
Export price index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100)

8,535 
12,959 
686 
1,419 

8,130 
11,300
597 
1,301

1,0009

5,999|

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

99 
srmports

99

r Exports 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Curren t account balance to GDP (%)

(US$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods andI services 
Resource balance 

l

13,015 
15,348 
-2,333 

12,191
13,145 
-954

i

Net income 

-157 

-302 

94 

95

Net current transfers 

367 

173

Current account balance 

-2,124 

-1,083 

-

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

1,641 
483 

1,550
-467 

-12

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locaUUS$) 

2,923 
35 2 

3,283
41 4

15 1 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of 1998 debt (US$ mill)

1,827 
0 
0 

11,903 
239 
0 

10,517
219 
0 

239

189

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

505 
0 
0 

1,867 
31 
0 

1,988
34 
0

4605

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

52

-13 
-28

.

6869 52

387 
0 

701
624

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
15 
17 
-2 
14 
-16 

0 
3 
20 
-17
14
-31

A-IBRD 
B-IDA 
C - IMF 

E - Bilateral
D-Other multilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

Development Economics 

9/12/00

Annex 82

Slovak Republic
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d0 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

As of date 12/4/2000

4 
0 
0 

0 

5 
0 
0 
0 

0 

.0 

24.76 

50.03 

no 

-
-

no 
63.0 
63.0 

1 
6 
0 
0 
0 

54.3 

no 
40 0 
40.0 

1 
7 
0 
0 
0 

0 

28 2 

no 
68.0 
68.0 

0
0
0
0
0

0

0

no
n/a
n/a

Memorandum Item 

Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

1 
80 
0 
0 

0
0
0
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year. Investment projects only.

Slovak Republic - Bank Group Program Summary

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

Fiscal year 

Project 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(H/M/L) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program FY 2001-2003

2001 

SOCIAL BENEFITS ADMINISTRATION 

EFSAL 

TOTAL FY01 

2002 

PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT AND 
JUDICIAL REFORM

TOTAL FY02 

2003 

SOCIAL SECTORS INVESTMENT 

TOTAL FY03 

TOTAL FY01-03 

35 0 

300 0 

335.0

30.0 

30.0

500 

50.0

415.0

M 

H 

M 

H 

M

M

M

M

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).

Template created on 12/18/00.

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Slovak Republic - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-2000

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMS 
FINANCIAL SERVICES 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
MANUFACTURING 
TIMBER, PULP & PAPER 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other 

Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) "1 
1/ Cumulative

1997 1998 1999 2000

0.00 

0.00 62.28 23.24

4
48
48

50 

50

0 

100 100 100

100

100 

68 

32 

0 

48
25
52
0

0 

100 

100 

125

44.45 43.57 66.68 67.06

Slovak Republic - Summary of Nonlending Services

Annex B4

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objective b

Product 

Completed

IDF Institutional Support
for Roma Office /c 
IDF Bankruptcy Reform /c 
Anti-Corruption Diagnosis 
INFODEV Grant for Y2K Strategy /c 
GEF Grassland Conservation 
Transport Sector Review 
Procurement Assessment 
Financial Accountability Assessment 
Priv Particip. in Infrastr. (PPIAF) /c 

Underway

Social Sectors Expenditures Review 
Public Sector Policy and Management 
Poverty and Labor 
Roma Assesment 

Planned

00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 

01 
01 
01 
01 

278.30 
396.40 
101.50 
300.00 
20 00 
57.19 
20.00 
20.00 
75.00 

G/D 
G/D 
G/PD/B 
G 
G 
G/B 
G/B 
G/B 
G/D 

KG/PS
PS
KG/PD/PS

PS

PS
KG
KG/PS
KG/PS
PD/PS

156.00 
156.00 
137.00 
104.00 

GIB 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 
G/B/D 

KG/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PD/PS

250.00 

G/D 

KG/PS

G/B 
G 
G/D 
G/B 
G 
G/B/D 
G/B 
G/B 
G/B/D 
G/D 

KG/PD/PS
PS
KG/PS
KG/PD
PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PD/PS
PS

102.00 
81.00 
60.00 
50 00 
152.00 
180.00 
170 00 
140.00 
100.00 
100.00 

85.00
60 00

100.00

02 

02 
02 
02 
02 
02 
03 
03 
03 
03 
03 

IDF Env. Mgmt.and Cultural Heritage Id 
Utilities/Infrastructure Liberalization and
Privatization 
GEF Industrial Co-generation 
Social Housing and District Heating 
Education Sector 
GEF Geothermal 
Public Sector Policy and Mgmt. TA 
Social Sectors Expenditures TA 
Pension Reform 
Roma TA 
Environmental Assessment (EU acc) 
Studies (currently unidentified)
-to complete transformation of reforms 
-to strengthen governance & institutions 
-to improve social security, enhance
human resources & meet
environmental standards 
a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
c Approved in FYOO - Cost represents amount of the Grant
d Subject to availability of IDF Funds

03 
03 

03 

Slovak Republic Social Indicators

Annex B5

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY

(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food prce index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to safe water

(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rurat
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrtion (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (perthousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

1970-75 

1980-85 

1992-97 

Europe & Upper-middle-
Central Asia 
Income

4 7 
0 9 
46 3 
26 

5 2 
0 8 
54 2 
2 3 

5 4 
0 2 
59 7 
1 4 

474 0 
0 1 
67 0 
1 7 

574 0
1 3
73 8
2 5

3,680 

2,310 

4,540
117

34 

70 
67 
74 

25 
29 

71 
67 
75 

16 
23 

226 
105 

110

19 5
11 9
31 4

61 
49 

98 
98 

73 
69 
77 

9 
13 

208 
90 
8

40 
54 
88 

92 
93
92

91 
89 

69 
64 
73 

23 
30 

287 
122 

30
48
7 9

94

92
82

70
67
73

30
38

193
116

1999 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Slovak Republic - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
W997 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2002 
2003 

Inidicator 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2001 

2004

National accounts (as % of GDP)

Gr-oss doomestic producta 
AgricultuIc 
Industry 
Services 

100 
5 
37 
59 

100 
5 
34 
62 

100 
4 
32 
64 

100 
4
32
64

100 

100 

100 

100 

100

'ITotal Consutm1ption 
Gross domestic fixed inivestment 
Govemment investment 
Private investmenit 
(incLiudes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b 
lmports (GNFS) 

74 
34 

73 
36 

75 
38 

73 
31 

71 
29 
4 
26 

71 
30 
3 
29 

71 
31 
4 
30 

70 
31 
4 
29 

69
31
4
29

55 
67 

58 
68 

61 
72 

62 
67 

77 
79 

81 
85 

83 
87 

85 
88 

88
90

Gross dontestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

26 
26 

27 
27 

25 
26 

27 
26 

29 
28 

29 
28 

29 
29 

30 
30 

3]
30

Memo anrhduor iJemrs

Gross donmestic product 
(US$ million at current pnces)
GNPpcrcapita(USS, Atlas method) 

19772 

20410 

21308 

19712 

19260 

20612 

22616 

2481(6 

27099

.. 

3870 

3770 

3920 

3890 

4030 

4410 

4810

Real annual growth tates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
6.2 
Gtoss Domestic Incomile 
2 2 

6 2 
5 4 

4 1 
7 

1 9 
0 8 

1.8 
05 

3 5 
3 4 

4 5 
5 1 

5 0 
4.9 

5 0
4 9

Real annual per capita growth iates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
6 0 
5.4 
Iotal consuimption 
11 3 
4 2 
Private consumption 
7 8 
4 7 

3 9 
5 1 
5 7 

1 8 
-2 3 
-0 3 

1 7 
-3.7 
-3 3 

3 4 
3 3 
3 0 

4 4 
4 3 
4 0 

4 9 
3 9 
3 9 

4.9
3 5
3 7

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Mcrchiandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Mcrchandise lOB 
Rcsource balance 
Net current transfers 
C'urrent accouint balance 

10899 
8831 
13155 
11124 
-2256 
203 
-2068 

11810 
9639 
13816 
11720 
-2006 
175 
-1952 

13015 
1072(0 
15348 
13074 
-2333 
367 
-2124 

12191 
10197 
13145 
11300 
-954 
173 
-1083 

14916 
12677 
15245 
13449 
-329 
140 
-543 

16725 
14419 
17441 
15519 
-716 
120 
-865 

18801 
16379 
19599 
17494 
-798 
210 
-842 

21180 
18598 
21914 
19607 
-734 
244 
-785 

23795

21043
24398
21881
-603
255
-798

Net private foreign direct itivestment 
[ong-term loans (net) 
Official 

199 
965 

84 
1955 

387 
3141 

701 
873 

1550 
434 
-23 

3500 
-854 
165 

1130 
240 
-38 

744 
913 
-110 

813
922
-98

Private 

.

.

457 

-1019 

278 

1023 

1020

Other capital (ner, iici eTors & omnrtissions) 
Cliange in reservesd 

1152 
-247 

12 
-')8 

-1887 
483 

-24 
-467 

300 
-1741 

0 
-1781 

0 
-529 

0 
-873 

0
-937

Memnorandumn i1eirs

Resorrrcc balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)

-11 4 

-9 8 

-11 0 

-4 8 

-1 7 

-3 5 

-3 5 

-3 0 

-2 2

Primary
Manufactures

Merchadlise 

imports (CIF)

(Contintuzed)

Slovak Republic - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Indicator 

1996 

Actual 
1997 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

Projected
2002 
2003 

2004

Public finance (as %/, of GDP at market prices)'

Current revenues 
Currenit expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-) 
Capital expenditute and Net Lending 
Foreign financinig 

45 3 
40.9 
4 4 
5 7 

42 8 
40 3 
2 4 
7 4 

40 5 
390 
1 5 
6 3 

41 2 
37 9 
3 2 
6.7 

37.9 
37 2 
0 7 
3 3 
2 4

35 6 
35 4 
0 3 
2 7 

35 9 
35 1 
0 8 
3 3 

36 0 
34 6 
t 4 
3 9 

35 9
33.7
2 2
4.2

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 

GrowthofM2(%) 
Private sector credit growth /
total ciedit growth (%)

Price indices( YR95 =100)

Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (USS/LCU)f

Real interest rates
Coonsumerprice iidex (%change) 
GDPdeflatot 
(%change) 

688 

167 

66 1 

88 

63 0 

42 

646 

11 4 

65 8 

108 

621 

4 1 

613 

84 

61 3 

97 

613

92

58 
45 

61 
66 

67 
51 

106 
6.6 

92 
69 

66 
65 

3.9 
50 

44 
45 

40
40

a GDP at maiket prices
b "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services"
c 
includes net unrcquLited tiansfers excluding official capital giants
d 
Includes use of IMF tesources
e Conlsolidated central govemment
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units " An increasc in US$/LCU denotes appreciation

Annex B7

Slovak Republic - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
1996 1997 
1998 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2002 
2003 

Indicator 

1999 

2001 

2004

Totaldebtoutstandingand 

7661 

9768 

11902 

10517 

10421 

9186 

9216 

9925 

10641

disbursed (TDO) (US$rn)a

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

1977 

2345 

1787 

-1350 

-96 

-1235 

30 

708 

717

Total debt service (TDS) 

1537 

1631 

1934 

1988 

1747 

2352 

2406 

2949 

2982

(US$m)3

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGSb 

68 9 

806 

88.5 

84 4 

69 0 

53 8 

47 9 

45 8 

43 8

TDO/GDP 

38 7 

47.9 

55 9 

53.4 

54 1 

44 6 

40 7 

40 0 

39.3

TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO

13 8 

13 4 

14 4 

16 0 

11 6 

13 8 

12 5 

13 6 

12 3

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred cieditor DS/public 
DS (%)
IBRD DSIXGS 

5 2 
182 

5 8 
19.6 

8.0 
23 2 

3 6 
8 6 

3 6
77

.

.. 

0 2 

0 3 

0 2 

0 3 

0.3 

0 3 

0.3 

0 3 

0 2

IBRD TDO (US$m) 

250 

227 

239 

219 

196 

400 

463 

461 

465

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)

Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 

.. 

.

IDA TDO (US$m) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

IFC (US$m)

Loans 

0 

0 

0 

2 

31 

34 

62 

80 

80

Equity and quasi-equity /c 

0 

0 

0 

0 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits .and net short-

term capital

b "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including woskers' remittances

c Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Slovak Republic - IFC Portfolio

Slovak Republic
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 9130/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1999 BACASR 
SEF Scame Tatra 
1999 SEF West Exp-lmp 

1998/00 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
30 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
1 33 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
1.85 
0 
0 
0 1.85 
0 
0 
0

Total Portfolio: 

33.18 

0 

0 

0 1 85 

0 

0 

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

2000 Ruzomberok 
2000 Ruzomberok BLINC 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0

Total Pending Commnitment. 

0 

0 

0 

0

Slovak Republic - Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

Annex B8
Page 20f2

Board 
Date 
Fiscal 

Year 

Active Projects 

There are no projects under implementation.

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating b/ 
Dvlpet 
Ipeetto
Development 
Implementation 
Objectives 
Progress

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between

Expected and Actual
Disbursements a

IBRD 

IDA 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

Closed Proiects 

Total Disbursed 
(IBRD and IDA): 
of which has been repaid: 
Total Now held by IBRD and IDA: 
Amount sold: 

Total Undisbursed: 

280.43 
78.51 
201.92 
0.00 

0.00 

Total"

280.43
78.51
201.92
0.00

0.00

a. Intended disbursements 

to date minus actual disbursements 

to date as projected at appraisal.

b. As of October 31, 2000

CAS objective 

Diagnosis 

SLOVAK REPUBLIC
CAS COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX (BASE CASE)

Government strategy/action 

I ____________________________________________ 

Performance benchmarks 

Non-transparent and politicized privatization of 
cnterpnses, with enterprise sector generated large 
losses and put pressure on banking system. 

Complete Transformation Reforns, Restore High Growth, and Maintain Economic Stability
All state banks pnvatized by 
2002

Comprehensive program of banking and 
entcrprise restructuring underway with Bank. EU 
and USAID support 

Annex B9

Page 1 of 3

J 

Bank Grozup Instruments

~~~Bank 

II'C/A'fIGA

Lendina

Enterpnses and 
Sector Adj. 
Loan--EFSAL (FY01) 

Participation in tbe
prrvatization of selected
state-owned banks

debt workout 
Enterprise detwrotFinancial 
underway 
Bankruptcy law reformed (2001)
and fast track arangements 

established (2001) 

PoEquty 

Telecom Project (ICR 
FYO1) 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~and 

Gas company privatized (2001) 
power sector unbundled 
(2002) 

EFSAL (SPN FY0 1,
ICR FY02) 

Complete transformation 
reforms 

Rcstore high growth 

Major banks remained in state hands and were 
increasingly illiquid and on the way to insolvency 
Most utilities remain in public domain 

State banks being restructured and capitalized, 
with carving out of bad loan portfolio prior to 
full pnvatization 

Inadequate legal framework to support efficient 
enterpnse and banking system, including absence of 
functioning bankruptcy system, and poor corporate 
govemance 
governance 

Major stake of telecommunications company 
pnvatized in 2000. revised telecommunications 
law adopted. 
Govemment preparing reforms energy sector and 

Inadequate financial sector supervision 
Investment/GDP ratio high, but investments 
inefficient in the absence of reforms, with low levels 
of FDI. 
GDP growth has decelerated to 4% in 1998 and less 
than 2% in 1999 and 2000. 
High and rising unemployment (to close to 20% mit 
2000). decline in wages/GDP ratio, and increasing 
poverty 
FDI constrained by administrative bamers 
Regulatory framewvork not conducive to SME 
development 
development 

establishment of regulatory institutions for 
utilities that are to be liberalized or privatized. 
Govemment preparing transformation reforms in
banking and enterprise sectors and in utilities 
that that will improve overall efficencyIDF(approved 
investment. 

Government seeking increased foreign direct 
investment 
Govemment program to improve corporate 
govemance and public sector govemance 

~~~~~~~~administrative 

Goverment action program to remove 
bamers to FDI and improve
regulatory framework for SMEs. 

Regulatory body created (2002)
bh

NLS/O 

Bankruptcy Reformm
FY) 
Macroeconomic/Debt 
/Fiscal/ Monitonng
(FYOI-03) 

Sh 
i 
from 1994-99 levels by 2001 

Recovery of GDP growth to 4.5% 
by 2002, with unemployment 
down to 15% 

and loan support

to specific projects in
pnvatized infrastructure
sectors
Policy advice on a

Funding ofoint venture
inflow.

Restructunng support to
individual comrpanies
TA on bamers for SME
lending (ongoing)
Line of credit to SM E
via local intermedianes

Technical assistance to
SMEs

Maintain economic stability 

Fiscal deficit 6% of GDP and current account deficilt 
of 10% in 1998 with nsingdebt 
to GDPratio 

Currency depreciation, rsing inflation, and loss of 
reserves in 1998. 

Social secunty and assistance systems have rising 
deficits. Pensions and health systems are financially 
unsustainable 

Govemment guarantees and contingent liabilities 
(National Property Fund and others) are latent threat 
to stability

Fiscal deficit reduction in 1999 and 
consolidation in 2000and 2001. Furtherdeficit 
reduction in medium term, particularly through 
reduction in expenditures/GDP ratio, and debt 
reduction through pnvatization 

Measures to improve collections and strengthen 
social benefits administration system. 
Govemment preparing for pension reform (based 
on Polish model) and for health insurance reform

Fiscal deficit down to 3% by 
2002. and external debt to GDP 
ratio to 40%, with inflation at 
single digit level 

Establish unified collection 
(2001)
Drafl pension law presented to
Parliament (2002)

Plan for health insurance reform
(2001)

Utilities/ 
Infrastructure 
Liberalization and 
Pnvatization (FYOI) 
PoverEui and Labor
Markets (FY0) I

MIGA support for
pnvatization marketing
and TA for attracting
FDI.

Development objective 

Diagnosis 

____________________________________ 

_________________________ 
Government strateD/action 
Performance benchmarks 

Improve governance 

Widespread corruption in public sector 

Poor public sector service delivery 

Poor financial management 

Public sector oversized with high general government 
expenditures to GDP ratio and overemployment, and 
utilities and most banks still in public hans 

Excessive centralization of govemment functions 

Improve the institutional 
framework 

Inadequate regulatory framework to support pnvate 
sector, in particular SMEs 

FDI constrained by administrative bamers 

Lack of regulatory framework to support utilities 
pnvatization and liberalization 

Improve governance and the institutional framework

Govemment is formulating broad based anti- 
corruption program, based in part on results of 
survey carried out with support of Bank and 
USAID 

Public finance refonns being prepared 

Judicial reform being prepared 

Public administration reform program being 
prepared 

Performance audits to be camed out in 2000/1 

Govemment engaging NGOs in oversight of
public procurement and pnvatization 

Govemment reviewing licensing procedures and 
administration preparing company registry and
other regulatory reform 

Public sector employment retrenchment as part 
of fiscal adjustment.

Fiscal decentralization being prepared, with
program to decentralize service delivery

Preparing establishment of regulatory body or
bodies for utlities

Action plan and specific anti- 
corruption measures adopted and
taken duTing 2000 and 2001. 

Abolishment of extra-budgetary 
funds (2001), establishment of 
treasury and debt management
systems (2002), adoption of 
medium-term expenditure 
framework (2002)

Adoption of public 
administration refomi program by
Cabinet (2001).

Public sector employment
reduction as part of fiscal
adjustmnent

Gradual reduction tn ratio of
general govemment expenditures
to GDP

Annex B9

Pane 2 of 3

BankGroupstruments

IPIII 
Bank 

| 

IFC/MIGA

FIAS study of
Administrative Bamers
to Investment

Lending

Public Finance 
Management and 
Judicial Reform Loan 
--PFMJR (FY02)
Portfolio

PFMJR
NLS/Other

Public Sector
Management

Development objective 

Diagnosis 

Govenmnient strategy/action 

I__________________I________________ 

Perfonnance benchmarks 

I ___________________ 

Bank Group instruments

Bnnk 

IFC/MIGA

Improve social protection. upgrade human resources, and meet environmental standards

Annex B9
Page 3 of 3

Improve social protecton 

Upgrade human resources 

Increasing poverty associated with nsing 
unemployment and limited social assistance, and 
social exclusion,.a 

Social benefits systems generate large deficits and fail 
to cover social assistance needs. 

Poor socto-economic conditions of Romas 

Govemment preparing pension reforms (in early 
stages) 
eie 
npicpet 
nf 
Govemment has decided m prnciple to unify 
social benefits contribution collections and is 
prepanng plans to improve administration 

Govemment has established special office at 
Deputy PM level to focus on Roma support 

Poor management and low efficcency of education 
maaeetadlwefcec 
feuainassessment 
sector. Oversupply of teachers. Limited cost recovery Govemmcnt intends to undertake sector refornms 
and no higher education financing schemes 
in health and education, but preparation has just 
Education management heavily centralized 
begun, and Bank support through AAA program 
requested to help define strategies. 

Educason system not responsive to labor market 

Health insurance systems generates large deficits 

Oversupply of hospital beds and doctors 

Poor management and lack of accountability in health 
service provision. 

Access of rural areas and poor to education system 
and health services (in particular Romas) Is limited 

Policy advice on
private persion
system (3d
pillar)

Equity
investment in
pcsoona 
me

company
Participate in
restructunng,
s oan
and
education related
enterprses i the

These have to be developed by 
Government, with Bank analytical 
support in the context of NLS thiat is 
underway or planned. Some 
indicative benchmarks are: 

Development of education sector 
strategy and plan by 2001 

Action plan for standardized national 
for school leavers and 
lower grades by 2001 

Pla 

balance public resources and 

cost sharing opons by 2002 
halndhart 
cotsaighpiney202S 
Plan to better regulate expenditures 
and incentives for cost containment 
by 2002. 

Lending 

Social Benefit 
Administration 
(SBA) Loan
(FY01) 
Social Sectors 
Scos 
-surance
SSL(FY03) 
Portfoliocmpn

SBA Loan 
SS Loan 
onandthart-p 
GEFs 
NLS/Other 
IDf for Roma

Proposals for comprehensive health 

f 

(appoved

care reform by 2002 

Plans foT downsizing human and 
physical infrastructure in health by 
2002 

Roma Review
(FYO 1) and TA
(FY02103)
GEF Grant
Industnal Co-

High incidence of informnal payments for health and 
education 

Govemmenit planning decentralization of 
selected services 

Evaluation showing improved healeh 
and education access/indicators of 

generation (FY02)
GEf Grant

Poor condition of social housing estates and distnct 
heating 

Government has announced anti-corruption 
program and preparing detailed action program 

Meet the environmental 
standards 

Legal framework not in line with EU accession 
requirements. 

Romas by 2002 
Specific actions under 
implementation by 2001 with respect 
to social sectors 

Geothermal Project
(FY02)
Social Sectors
Expenditures
Review (FY0 1)
P 
and Lal

Markets (FY0 1)
Social Sectors TA
(FY02/03)
Pension Reform
(FY02)
Social Housing and
District Heating
(FY02)
Environmental
Assessment/EU
Accession (FYO2)

Slovak Republic - CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
performance' 

Major issue' 

Country 
pnorityc 

Bank 
priority C 

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 

Public sector 

Gender 

Human Development Department
Education & 
Health, nutrition & population 

Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development 

Environment 
Social development 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private sector 
Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

good 

good 

fair 

good 

good 
good 

good 

fair 

fair 
poor 

fair 
fair 
fair 

fair 

M 

H 

social exclusion 
unemployment
fiscal sustainablilty H 
privatization
corruption 
centralization
labor force 
particiption

L 

M 
M 

good outcomes 
low efficiency 
excess capacity
fiscal sustainability M 
targeting

rural areas under- M 
serviced 
legal framework 
social exclusion 
of Roma

M 
H 

viablity 
governance 
excess capacity 
privatization 
poor management M 

H 
H 
M 

H 

M 

H

L

H 
H 

H 

L 

L 
H

H
H
M 

M 

Annex B10

Reconciliation of
country and Bank
pnorities d

Major CAS focus e/

IMF in lead

Major CAS focus e/
Major CAS focus e/

Major CAS focus e/

European
Institutions
in Lead

European
Institutions
in Investment Lead

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair,' or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty:" for education, "female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution').
c. To indicate prnority, use 'low," "moderate," or 'high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.
el Major CAS focus agreed with Government, AAA program agreed, and dialogue underway

Template created on 12i 18/0(

Annex B11
Page 1 of 2

Slovak Republic: Consultations on the Country Assistance Strategy

In the course of preparing the CAS regular consultations took place with the authorities of the
Slovak Republic and the "third sector" community of Slovakia. The current governing coalition in
Slovakia represents a wide range of ideologies and views within Slovakian society and has strong
representation from "third-sector" organizations who played a strong role in the opposition to communism
until its fall in the late 1980s and more recently to the previous Government. The Government's coalition
is supported by a two-thirds majority in Parliament and opposing parties, in Government during the
preceding four years, showed little interest in a dialogue with the World Bank. During the previous
Government's reign, the NGO sector in Slovakia became increasingly stronger and a focal point of
democratic opposition as the role of Parliament and the press was constrained

After an extended period of very limited Bank Group activity, we considered that the use of the
client survey instrument as part of CAS preparation would be of limited value given the overall lack of
knowledge about the Bank and the absence of Bank-supported activities. We would use this instrument
once an active assistance program is underway. Collaboration with NGOs in the initial technical work in
Slovakia in the course of 1999 and 2000, in particular on public sector reform, was followed by a series of
consultations with civil society organizations on the CAS These consultations took place relatively late in
the process of preparing the CAS, once the overall strategic foci had been agieed with Government and
consultations with key external partners had confirmed the broad parameters for selectivity that had been
discussed with the Government. Given the relatively limited amount of analytical work undertaken prior to
the CAS, the meetings with civil society -- including NGOs, academic rescaich organizations and trade
union organizations -- became increasingly important as an opportunity for the Bank Group to learn and
listen and accordingly adjust the CAS, and, more importantly, to reflect their insights and inputs in the
design of specific future assistance programs and piojects.

In the absence of a Bank presence in Slovakia, organization of the first major CAS meeting was
organized by the Slovak Academic Information Agency--Service Center for the Third Sector (SAIA-
SCTS), member of Slovakia's Gremium of the Third Sector (G3S)l, and a main umbrella organization for
NGOs in Slovakia. Over a hundred civil society organizations (out of several thousands operating in
Slovakia) wete invited, and about two-thirds attended, representing a broad range of sectors and interests
and areas of the country. Some of those invited were umbrella organizations who themselves represented
dozens of NGOs An extensive summary of a draft CAS document provided the basis for the discussions at
this first meeting in February 2000 A subsequent meeting in March focused in more detail on key issues
with respect to the major themes of the CAS as it had evolved by that time.

A number of NGOs, both from Slovakia and elsewhere, organized the preparation of a document
"Comments and requests of NGOs in Slovakia related to the CAS of the World Bank" This offered a
broad range of suggestions with respect to a number of the proposed programs, as well as on sectors in
which no Bank support is envisaged (see Annex BI1, page 2). A number of the NGOs expressed
dissatisfaction with the CAS consultation process and queried whether the strategy as proposed would
translate in tesults on the ground, in particular as regards poverty reduction and social development. Other
NGOs expressed the view that in the Slovak context the overall focus on completing transformation
reforms, undertaking major public sector reforms, and support for human and social development were the
appropiiate instruments to improve living standards and social equity During the discussions we stressed
that a CAS represented an overall framework for Bank Group assistance prepared in consultation with the
client country, in particular its Government, and that the initial consultations provided the basis for
continued close collaboration with NGOs and other groups of civil society in the context of the specific
programs and projects that would be undertaken over the next three years

' G3S was awarded the Prize of the EU and the USA for Democracy and Civil Society in 1998.

Annex B1l
Page 2 of 2

"Comments and requests of NGOs in Slovakia related to the CAS of the World Bank"

The above document was compiled during February-March, 2000 by the Centet for Environmental
Advocacy (CEPA) and Friends of the Earth (FOE) of Slovakia, as a supplement to the consultation process.
A brief overview of the wiitten contributions and selected key points, attributed to the NGOs making the
specific contribution, are sumnmarized as follows

 

CEPA and FOE considered the consultation process to have been inadequate.

* CEPA, FOE and the US Bread for the World Institute queried the link between the proposed strategy
and results on the ground, in particular poverty reduction, and suggested that progress in poverty
reduction rather than with respect to structural reforms should be the benchmark, and that the poverty
focus should reflect new thinking as per the forthcoming WDR. They expressed concern about the
impact of the strategy on reducing unemployment, about the social impact of structural reforms to be
supported by the Bank program, and by the extent, pace and sequencing of privatization and
liberalization.

* The World Conservation Union suggested that the CAS should be a strategy for sustainable
development and recommnended that key indicators used by the Bank should be enhanced to cover
environmental indicators.

* CEPA and FOE suggested a number of guidelines for structural reform to help meet the overall
objective of reducing poverty. It noted that some reviews indicated that Bank SALs and SECALs had
not generally contributed to this objective.

* The Sustainable Development Society, Greenpeace and CEE Bankwatch Network presented an
overview of issues in the energy sector in Slovakia, and recommended that the Bank to involve NGOs
and local consultants in its energy sector work, focus on renewable resource projects and encourage
energy savings and efficiency, and develop a regional energy strategy

* The Center for Support of Local Activism and FOE provided an overview of water nmanagement issues
in Slovakia and recommnendations as to the priorities that the Bank should support in this sector.

* The Forest Protection Group and FOE provided an overview of key issues in the forestry sector and
reconunendations with respect to priorities

* FOE provided an oveiview of key issues in waste management and recommendations with respect to
priorities

* Citizens for Improved Transport and Free Alternative provided a comprehensive overview of the
transport sector and key issues, with respect to road, public, rail, bus, and air transport It reconmnends
that Bank support should aim at supporting ecologically, economically, and socially acceptable
methods of transport

* The Integra Foundation provided an overview of problems faced by SMEs and recommendations for
financial sector support.

* Civil Association's contribution on rural development highlights human resources as a main factor in
rural problems (low level and quality of education). It also notes the biases against rural development,
and the lack of capital. It recommends an increased regional focus with respect to human resources
development and physical and social infrastructure.

* Pro Family and Community of Women's Interest note the incidence of violence, including physical
and social, and the inequality of incomes and wages, as well as the higher incidence of unemployment
among women. They recommend increased education, legal changes and support programs for
women

MAP SECTION

sTHLANI~ 

> 

.| 

BELARuS

GERMANY 

PoLAND

< 

CZECH 

L KRANE 

.

AJSTRIA 

HUNGARY o

CZECH

POLAND

ETALY 

,< 

r-

-IA 

T 

K , 

IBRD 27947R

E-~ 

K 

'53ETERS 

REGIO 

N BO 

U N DARIE 

5

17 

h. 

I.-'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~N

)~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

I N- 5 KII YRC 

3~~~~~~~7

-

MAIN ROADANI

ALOD

AUSTRIA

SLOVAK,.S.GL 

TRACUBLICRO

C 25 

40 

sO~~~~~~~~~~~0 

TON

FGp 
?'J. 

T 

RR. 
Feo5sgnoTp,W,r,dBo% 
Cs.e',, 

showr~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
,k0 

LjmETERSmpJ 

rkobonires 

cob-s 

llommstcnsalzLraues] 

Cor 

n 

15 

5 H5 

oG- 

M E5~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~StILETRCKRALRAD

-

INTERNATONALBO.UDARIE5

REGION BIDUNDA.idBES
DOUBLE 
TRACK RAILROADS

RIVER5

