Public Disclosure Authorized

Documentof

The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No: 20309

MEMORANDUMOF THE PRESIDENT OF
THE INTERNATIONALDEVELOPMENTASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A WORLD BANKGROUP INTERIM
COUNTRYSTRATEGYNOTE
FOR
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

Public Disclosure Authorized

May 18, 2000

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only
in the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be
disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective April 13, 2000)
Current Unit
Naira

US$1

=
=
=

Naira
US$0.0098
100.8

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AfDB
AFEM
BPE
CAS
CBN
CDF
CFAA
CPAR
DFID
EMCAP
EMP
EU
FEAP
FGN
FMF
FMOE
FMOH
FOS
GEF
HSF II
IDRC
LIL
NACA
NCP
NNPC
OPEC
PEs
PEP II
PRF
PRGF
PSA
PSD
SBA
SMEs
SMP
UBE
UNICEF
UNESCO
USAID

African Development Bank
Autonomous Foreign Exchange Market
Bureau of Public Enterprises
Country Assistance Strategy
Central Bank of Nigeria
Comprehensive Development Framework
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Department for International Development of the United Kingdom
Economic Management Capacity Building Project
Environmental Management Project
European Union
Family Economic Advancement Program
Federal Government of Nigeria
Federal Ministry of Finance
Federal Ministry of Education
Federal Ministry of Health
Federal Office of Statistics
Global Environment Facility
Second Health Systems Fund Project
International Development Research Center
Learning and Innovation Loan
National AIDS Coordinating Agency
National Council on Privatization
Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
Public Enterprises
Primary Education Project n
Poverty Reduction Fund
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Private Sector Assessment
Private Sector Development
Stand-By Arrangement
Small and Medium Size Enterprises
Staff Monitored Program
Universal Basic Education
United Nations Children's Fund
United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization
United States Agency for International Development

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:

Jean-Louis Sarbib/Assaad Jabre
Yaw Ansu/Cesare Calari
Yaw Ansu/James Emery

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
WORLD BANK GROUP INTERIM COUNTRY STRATEGY NOTE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page No.
EXECUTIVESUMMARY................................................................

i

I. INTRODUCTION................................................................

I

II. BACKGROUND AND PROSPECTS

2

...............................................................

BACKGROUND................................................................
POLITICAL................................................................
ECONOMC ................................................................
ECONOMIC PROSPECTS................................................................

2
3
4
5

m. DEVELOPMENTCHALLENGES................................................................

7

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES................................................................

7

IV. THE GOVERNMENT'SSHORT-RUNSTRATEGY

...

ANTI-CORRUPTIONAND GOVERNANCE.........................................................
PRIVATIZATION.........................................................
POVERTYREDUCTION ........................................................
RELATIONS WITH THE IMF .........................................................
RELATIONS WITHTHE PARIS CLUB AND OTHER CREDITORS.......................

11
11
11
12
12
13

V. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S TRANSITIONALASSISTANCESTRATEGY
TO NIGERA ...........................................................
13
ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT,GOVERNANCE,ANTI-CORRUPTIONAND
LEGAL/JUDICIALREFORM ...........................................................
HUALNDEVELOPMENT ...........................................................
Health ......................................................
Education ........................................................
AGRICULTURE AND ENVIRONMENT...........................................................
Agriculture ......................................................
Environment......................................................
PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT,INFRASTRUCTUREAND FINANCE........
Private Sector Development......................................................
SME Development......................................................
Infrastructure......................................................
Financial Sector.........

13
15
15
16
17
17
18
19
19
21
21
21

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

TARGETED POVERTYINTERVENTIONS ..............................................................
CAS/CDF PREPARATION, DONOR COORDINATION, AND OUTREACH..........
CAS/CDF...............................................................
Donor Coordination .................
..............................................
Outreach ...............................................................

22
23
23
23
23

DECENTRALIZATIONAND STRENGTHENING THE COUNTRY OFFICES ....... 24
VI. NIGERIA'S FINANCIAL RELATIONS WITH THE BANK................................... 24
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS/BUDGETARYFINANCING ......................................... 25
VII. RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE WORLD BANK GROUP ................... 25
TABLES

Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:

Nigeria: Key Economic Indicators
Nigeria: Debt and Financial Indicators, 1997-2001
Nigeria: Planned Activities/Products in Next 18 Months

BOXES

Box 1:

Poverty in Nigeria

ANNEXES

Annex I:
Annex II:
Annex III:
Annex IV:
Annex V:

Nigeria: External Public Debt, 1998
Bank Flows to Nigeria, 1996-2001 (Without New Lending)
Nigeria At A Glance
Nigeria: Status of Bank Group Operations
Nigeria: Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

MAP OF NIGERIA

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A WORLD BANK GROUP INTERIM
COUNTRY STRATEGY NOTE
FOR THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
Nigeria is at a threshold. The country has the potential to become an economic giant in
Africa by virtue of its size, human talent, rich resource endowment, and economic capacity.
Indeed, it could become the locomotive that pulls other economies in West Africa. Though the
country's potential has been squandered in the past several years by bad governance, the
situation has begun to change in the past eighteen months. After a short one-year transition, a
democratically elected government assumed power in Nigeria on May 29, 1999. The new
government has clearly identified corruption and governance as issues that need to be forcefully
tackled in order to begin to reverse the economic decline. Additionally, the government has
acknowledged the widespread poverty (affecting about two-thirds of the population) and has
embraced the need to adopt policies to quickly generate broad-based economic growth as well as
to implement targeted poverty programs. Among Nigerians, there is now a broad consensus that
economic growth can only come through a market-based economy led by the private sector.
However, the political situation is volatile and could worsen if the economic situation fails to
improve.
2.
The World Bank Group has reacted quickly to the favorable changes in Nigeria by reactivating our program with policy advice, technical assistance and new projects. The IFC
presented a project to the Board in October 1999, and another one is slated for Board discussion
in April 2000. The Bank is presenting two projects to the Board in May 2000, in addition to a
LIL to be approved by Management. The Bank Group Interim Country Strategy Note seeks to
update the Board on Nigeria's current situation, highlight the development challenges and
prospects faced by the country, and outline the transitional strategy that the Bank Group is
following while a full Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) is being prepared.
3.
A basic principle guiding the overall design of the strategy is that, with sound policies
and good management, Nigeria should be able to generate sufficient resources from within and
from foreign private investors to achieve sustainable development. Resources from the donor
community including the World Bank will always be small compared to those available from
these other sources. Therefore, a major role of the Bank will be to help the Nigerian government
build the capacity to manage its own resources effectively and to implement policies that will
attract private investment.
4.
The over-arching objective of the proposed World Bank Group Interim Country
Strategy Note is to assist the Nigerian authorities in their efforts to rapidly reduce poverty.
Poverty is now widespread in Nigeria and rising. GNP per capita at about US$300 today is
below the level at independence 39 years ago and below the US$370 that obtained in 1985. Over
66 percent of the population now falls below the poverty line of roughly one U.S. dollar a day
compared to 46 percent in 1985, and the social indicators remain unacceptably poor. Economic
mismanagement, corruption, and excessive dependence on oil have been the main reasons for the
poor economic performance and rising poverty.

ii
5.
By its very nature, an Interim Strategy, which is a quick response to a still unfolding
situation, cannot be comprehensive.
A CAS, which will provide a more comprehensive
analysis and will be based on extensive consultation with stakeholders, is currently under
preparation for presentation to the Board early next year. Nevertheless, the Interim Strategy
provides a context for the Board in its discussion of the two projects that are being presented to
it, and also for the LIL that Management plans to approve to Nigeria--the first new Bank projects
in Nigeria since 1993. The Strategy's key elements include: (a) carrying out discussions with the
government and Nigerians at large on development priorities; (b) undertaking a set of sector
studies to update the Bank's knowledge (given the long period of our reduced presence) and
prepare the basis for future operations; (c) providing advisory services in a wide variety of fields,
including governance, economic management and privatization, backed by technical assistance
projects where necessary; (d) preparing a set of small priority projects aimed directly at poverty
reduction or at spurring private investment; and (e) working with the IMF and others to help the
government sort out its external payments situation and regularize its relations with the external
creditors in a way that enables economic growth and poverty reduction under a regime of good
governance and prudent economic management.
6.
As stressed above, a major role of the Bank will be to help the Nigerians build their
capacity to manage their own resources effectively and to implement policies that will
attract private sector investment while assisting the government to implement programs
that directly alleviate poverty.
In line with this strategy, our current activities focus on:
economic management, governance, anti-corruption and legal/judicial reform; human
development, particularly health and education; agriculture and the environment; private sector
development including the privatization of the major infrastructure sectors (e.g. power and
telecommunications) to assure the availability of these key inputs for economic growth, the
financial sector; and targeted poverty interventions. We are also preparing a CAS using the CDF
approach, and we are focusing on donor coordination. To ensure effective management of our
increasing level of activities and to maintain a continuous and active in-country dialogue, we are
strengthening our Country Office in Abuja, including moving the Country Director to the field at
the beginning of next fiscal year.
7.
The proposed strategy faces risks. Nigeria has begun the long and difficult journey of
rehabilitating its economy and reducing poverty. The country's future will depend on the
manner and speed with which it can overcome its key development challenges, which include
poverty, governance, corruption, social and political unrest (particularly in the Niger Delta),
religious conflicts, a large external debt (with large arrears), poor infrastructure, and overdependence of the economy on oil. With a high price of oil, there is also a risk that the will to
maintain fiscal discipline and to pursue economic reforms will be weakened, as has happened in
the past. In addition, Nigeria has in the past been a very difficult place to implement projects.
The risks are high, but the potential rewards are great. With the right policies and political
commitment and with support from the World Bank Group and other donors, the country can
finally begin to realize its potential and make a significant contribution towards poverty
reduction in Africa. However, we need to be mindful of the fact that, given the long period of
institutional decay and the current weaknesses in capacity, there may be bumps in the
reform process, and progress may not always be as rapid as we would like.
8. Executive Directors may wish to comment on the thrust of the World Bank Group
Interim Country Strategy and the specific activities now being pursued under it.

NIGERIA: WORLD BANK GROUP INTERIM COUNTRY STRATEGY NOTE

I. INTRODUCTION
Introduction
1.
The last Board discussion of Bank strategy in Nigeria was in April 1993, in the
context of the discussion and approval of the Development Communication Pilot Project
(Credit No. 2481-UNI). It was a time of great political uncertainty in the country, which
translated into uncertainty and concern regarding the future direction of economic policy
in Nigeria. An additional source of concern was the poor implementation performance of
the portfolio. Reflecting these concerns, the Bank's annual lending program of FY92-93
had been reduced to an average of US$200-250 million from an average of US$600
million a year in the preceding five years. Further deterioration in governance in Nigeria
after this decision, and the Abacha government's placing of an embargo on all foreign
borrowing meant that there have been no new Bank projects in Nigeria since FY93.
During this period, work on project preparation was gradually stopped while ESW was
sharply curtailed. However, the Bank remained engaged in Nigeria through supervision
of projects under implementation (the portfolio shrank from 43 projects in FY93 and total
commitments of about US$6,768 million to 5 projects by March, 2000 and total
commitments of about US$539 million), as well as through discussions with the
government, and information and outreach campaigns to the public. Similarly, the IFC
suspended processing of new mainstream investments in 1994, although it continued with
investments in projects for Small and Medium Enterprises (up to US$1.5 million per
project) not directly affected by government actions.
2.
In June 1998, a new government came to power in Nigeria, under General
Abdulsalami Abubakar, that began to take measures to improve the economic, political
and human rights situation in the country. In response to these positive developments,
Bank staff began to elaborate a transitional strategy to enable the Bank to proactively
encourage and assist the changes in economic management while making preparations to
initiate the process for developing a Country Assistance Strategy (CAS). At the end of
May 1999, a democratically elected government under President Olesegun Obasanjo,
replaced the Abubakar regime. Bank Group staff have been engaged in dialogue with the
new government, explaining ongoing Bank operations, responding to specific advisory
requests from the govermnent, encouraging it to pursue needed economic and governance
reforms, preparing priority capacity building technical assistance and poverty reduction
projects, and discussing possible future Bank assistance.
3.
This Bank Group Interim Country Strategy Note seeks to update the Board on the
current situation in the country, highlight the development challenges and prospects faced
by the country, and outline the transitional strategy that the Bank Group is following
while we prepare a full CAS for future Board discussion. The key elements of the

2
strategy include: (a) carrying out discussions with the government and Nigerians at large
on development priorities; (b) undertaking a set of sector studies to update our knowledge
(given the long period of the Bank's reduced presence) and prepare the basis for future
operations; (c) providing advisory services in a wide variety of fields, including
governance, economic management and privatization, backed by technical assistance
projects where necessary; (d) preparing a set of small priority projects aimed directly at
poverty reduction or at spurring private investment; and (e) working with the IMF and
others to help the government sort out its external payments situation and regularize its
relations with its external creditors in a way that enables economic growth and poverty
reduction under a regime of good governance and prudent economic management. It
bears reiterating that by its very nature, an Interim Strategy, which is a quick response to
a still unfolding situation, cannot be comprehensive. A CAS, which will provide a more
comprehensive analysis and extensive consultation with stakeholders, is currently under
preparation for presentation to the Board in early next fiscal year. A key objective of the
Interim Strategy is to provide a context for the Board in its discussion of the two projects
that are being presented to it; and also for the LIL that Management plans to approve to
Nigeria -- the first new Bank projects in Nigeria since 1993.
4.
The projects-the Primary Education Project II (PEP II), the Economic
Management Capacity Building Project (EMCAP), and the Small-Towns Water Supply
and Sanitation Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL)-are all consistent with our interim
strategy, as was IFC's Capital Alliance Private Equity Fund Limited Project approved by
the Board last October.

II. BACKGROUND AND PROSPECTS
Background
5.
Nigeria is the largest country in West Africa: around 125 million people (47
percent of West Africa's population) and a GNP of US$ 36 billion (41 percent of West
Africa's GDP). The country has the potential to become an economic giant in Africa by
virtue of its size, human talent, rich resource endowment and economic capacity; indeed,
it could become the "locomotive" that pulls other economies in West Africa. However,
Nigeria is poor, and poverty has been getting worse in the past two decades. Per capita
income at about US$300 today is below the level at the time of independence 39 years
ago and below the US$370 that obtained in 1985. Over 66 percent of the population falls
below the poverty line of roughly one U.S. dollar a day, compared to 46 percent in 1985.
6.
One of the main reasons for the poor economic performance has been economic
mismanagement and corruption. In addition, the country's extreme dependence on
petroleum exports (about 85 percent of the total) make it vulnerable to sharp swings in
the international price of oil. Sharp price rises have tended to encourage wasteful public
expenditures and distortions in economic policy, while price falls have produced
significant revenue shortfalls and current account deficits. For example, the oil price

3

boom in the 1970s led to a spending boom, an overvalued foreign exchange rate, and
other associated policy distortions that caused the collapse of virtually all agricultural
exports, further reinforcing the dependence on oil. A similar rise in the oil price in the
early 1990s led to the government abandoning its economic reform program that was
being supported by the Bank. On the other hand, the oil price fall of 1998 (and the first
half of 1999) resulted in a US$5 billion (a one-third) drop in oil receipts in 1998.
7.
Like the Bank, many other aid agencies either suspended or curtailed their
assistance to Nigeria after 1994. In 1995, the European Union, the Commonwealth
countries, and the United States, for example, imposed limited economic sanctions on
Nigeria due to their dissatisfaction with governance conditions under General Abacha's
regime.

8.
Although the economic sanctions have now been lifted, Nigeria's relations with
bilateral donors are complicated by the fact that the country has accumulated significant
payment arrears with several countries. Due to poor record keeping by the country, the
exact size of the country's external debt is uncertain. However, provisional estimates put
the stock of public external debt outstanding and disbursed at about US$28 billion at end1998. This includes arrears estimated at end-1998 to be around US$18.5 billion, due
mainly to the Paris Club. The Paris Club at end-1999 revised upwards Nigeria's debt and
debt arrears to it by about US$6 billion due to the interest charges and penalties on
accumulated arrears.
Political

9.
The sudden death of General Abacha on June 8, 1998 and his replacement by
General Abubakar provided Nigeria with a new beginning. For the next twelve months,
General Abubakar's administration improved the human rights climate, conducted local,
state, and national elections, and handed over to a democratically elected civilian
government on May 29, 1999. This impressive achievement in a democratic transition
has re-awakened the interest of the international community in Nigeria and re-kindled
hope among Nigerians.
10. Despite the remarkable political transition, the political situation in the country is
fragile and could influence the manner and pace that the government is able to tackle
important economic issues. There are four main factors contributing to the fragile
political environment: (1) the threat that the military, which has ruled Nigeria for the past
15 years (and for 29 of the 39 years of independence) could force itself into politics
again; (2) the threat to national unity arising from ethnic and religious unrest, particularly
in the Niger Delta where there is deeply felt concern that oil production has brought little
economic and social benefits while polluting the lands and rivers, and from the recent
conflicts between largely Muslim Northerners and largely Christian Southerners over the
imposition of Islamic law in some Northern states; (3) the tension-filled relations between
the Executive and the Legislature; and (4) the high expectations among the people that
after 15 years of military rule that has impoverished the majority of Nigerians, democracy

4
would be accompanied soon by improvements in their economic condition. If this
"democracy dividend" fails to materialize shortly, then support for the democratic
experiment is likely to erode rapidly.
Economic
11. The main macroeconomic issues that caused the Bank to scale back its activities in
Nigeria in 1994 included: replacement of the market-based exchange rate system with an
administered system with the rate fixed at a much appreciated rate; and a marked
deterioration in fiscal discipline with the deficit increasing to 18 percent of GDP in 1993,
which fueled inflation that reached 51 percent in 1994. Associated with the fiscal issues
were the large implicit subsidies on domestic petroleum sales and other subsidies, notably
on fertilizer and to parastatals. Of concern to the Bank as well were microeconomic or
structural issues including: the lack of transparency in public expenditures, with a number
of extra-budgetary funds; and a large and inefficient parastatal sector, particularly in
power and telecommunications, that drained the budget and stifled growth.
12. There has been progress in addressing several of these issues, although much still
remains to be done. Beginning in 1995, the Abacha government began to retrace its steps
and adopt a number of the policies it had abandoned in 1994. First, it introduced an
"autonomous foreign exchange market" (AFEM) to cover foreign exchange transactions
other than those of the central government. Although this introduced some market
competition, it also resulted in a dual exchange rate regime with an official rate that was
highly overvalued. The government also removed the caps on interest rates and
discontinued the sectoral allocation of credit. Subsequently, it moved aggressively to
clean up and strengthen the commercial bank sector by forcing the closure of some
troubled banks and raising the amount of paid-up capital required of banks. Fiscal
discipline was also re-established, with the budget deficit turning from a deficit of 18
percent of GDP at end 1993 to a small surplus of 1.2 percent by end 1997. Lastly, the
fertilizer subsidies were eliminated in 1997.
13. The transition government also implemented a number of reforms including most
importantly, the abolition of the heavily subsidized official exchange rate, the launching
of an ambitious privatization program, the replacement of the petroleum subsidy by a
consumption tax resulting in a doubling of the gasoline price, the recovery of about
US$700 million of the money stolen by Mr. Abacha and members of his regime and
deposited abroad, and the incorporation in the 1999 budget of revenue and expenditure
measures amounting to 9.4 percent of GDP to offset a serious drop in petroleum
revenues. A comprehensive program to remove anti-competitive obstacles to private
sector development was begun towards the end of 1998. In addition, the 1999 budget
increased allocations to states and local governments to enable them to better fund social
services. These actions allowed Nigeria to come to an agreement on an IMF staffmonitored program (SMP) in January 1999.

5
14. The SMP envisaged the pursuit of tight fiscal and monetary policies, a marketbased exchange rate, rapid progress in privatization and deregulation, and an important
beginning in improving governance. It was understood that satisfactory performance
under the SMP through May 1999 could lead to a medium-term IMF arrangement around
the middle of 1999. However, performance under the SMP was unsatisfactory as reform
stagnated and the macroeconomic situation began to deteriorate rapidly during the second
half of the Abubakar administration (January-May 1999). Large extra-budgetary
expenditures (equivalent to 3 percent of annual GDP) increased the budget deficit to 8.3
percent of annual GDP over the first five months of 1999. The deficit was financed by an
expansion of the net domestic assets of the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN), equivalent to
72 percent of the stock of reserve money at the beginning of the year, and intemational
reserves fell from about US$7 billion to US$3.25 billion by end-May despite a tripling of
short-term interest rates to 30 percent (15 percent in real terms) and a 10.5 percent
devaluation of the Naira. All but one of the quantitative SMP targets were missed by
large margins and structural reforms were either not undertaken or delayed.
15. Upon taking office, President Obasanjo's govermnent took immediate action to reestablish fiscal control. It froze payments on extra-budgetary commitments, suspended
capital spending, and cancelled oil concessions that had been given under questionable
circumstances. With these measures, it was able to stem the serious deterioration of
Nigeria's macroeconomic situation. The government re-introduced fertilizer subsidies in
mid-1999, but it quickly removed them again in early 2000 after seeing the impact on the
budget and also the measure's ineffectiveness in assuring access of farmers to fertilizers.
Lastly, the fiscal 2000 budget presented by the government shows a considerable
improvement in transparency and indicates that extra-budgetary expenditures have been
eliminated.
Economic Prospects
16. Real non-oil GDP growth in 1999 is estimated at 3.5 percent in light of timely
rains, which helped produce a good agricultural crop, and the easing of the fuel scarcity
which boosted activity of the non-petroleum sector (see Table 1). However, because of
negative growth in the oil sector due to falling prices and production difficulties, overall
GDP growth for 1999 is estimated to be only 0.8 percent. Recent increases in the
international price of petroleum will contribute to achieving the budget deficit target and
strengthening the foreign exchange position in 2000. Inflation fell from 11.9 percent at
the end of 1998 to 6.8 percent by the end of 1999. Gross international reserves reached
about US$5.9 billion by the end of 1999, equivalent to about 4.5 months of imports.
Despite a recovery in oil prices, the short-term economic outlook remains weak. Oil
production is constrained by unrest in the Niger Delta and by international production
quotas by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). Despite renewed
activity, output growth in the non-oil sector is likely to remain low in light of the
electrical power, water, and telecommunications constraints. The medium term outlook
will depend on sound economic management, political stability, and a sustained level of
oil prices.

6

17. Because of its focus on distribution of oil revenues rather than generation of new
wealth, Nigeria's public sector has acted as a brake on growth rather than a facilitator.
The domestic private sector remains vibrant and entrepreneurial, although it has
responded to the large-scale official corruption by concentrating on gaining public favors
rather than competing for markets or cutting costs. However, a positive adjustment is
taking place as the government begins to focus on addressing corruption and governance
issues and on removing restrictive regulatory constraints on business.
18. Much of the activities of the domestic private sector revolves around trading, and
the bulk of the foreign private sector is in the oil and gas sector and in related support
service sectors, but there is also a good number of foreign and local companies involved
in construction and tradable production activities. Most of the activities are primarily
located , as well as serviced, marketed and financed in urban areas. Owing in part to the
geographical mobility of unskilled workers who move between agricultural work in the
villages and construction work in the cities, Nigeria's labor market is flexible. And
although educational standards and opportunities have declined in recent years, Nigeria
still has a sizable cadre of highly educated professionals, thanks to the human capital
investment made during the oil boom years.
Table 1 - Nigeria: Key Economic Indicators
=_____

__________________1994
1995

Actual
1996
1997

Estimated
1998
1999

Real growth rates
GDP
Oil GDP
Non-oil GDP

0.1
-2.6
1.6

2.5
2.5
2.4

4.3
6.9
2.9

2.7
1.4
3.4

1.8
-1.8
3.8

0.8
-3.0
3.5

GNP per capita

220

210

240

270

290

300

Ratio of external current account
balance/GDP
Ratio of FGN overall deficit (net and
lending)/GDP (- deficit)

-6.9

-4.7

8.3

9.1

-9.8

-12.3

-13.9

-8.1

Growth of money supply
CPI (end of period)
(1995 = 100)
Terms of Trade
Real Exchange Rate (1995 = 100)

I
-5.2

4.4

5.2

1.2
_

38.0
76.8

19.5
51.6

2.6
14.3

19.7
10.2

25.4
11.9

24.8
6.8

102.3
118.0

100.0
100.0

163.2
123.7

118.7
142.0

86.8
155.7

NA
82.0

19. Nigeria's diverse agro-ecological conditions permit a range of farming systems, but
productivity of the agricultural sector is low. Years of neglect and overvalued exchange

7
rates have virtually decimated Nigeria's traditional export agricultural industries such as
cocoa and palm oil. Value added in food production is currently constrained more by
marketing, storage and processing problems, rather than by serious production
constraints.
20. After increasing rapidly during the 1970s, manufacturing currently accounts for 6.4
percent of total GDP and employment, with capacity utilization reported by the trade
associations at around 30 percent. Some Nigerian manufactured products (e.g. toiletries,
light household items, tires, processed food, and African prints) have made deep inroads
in West African markets. Nigerian industry could expand rapidly, (i.e., at significantly
higher rates than those recorded in recent years), with better provision of power and other
infrastructure services. In addition to large proven oil reserves that will support
production at current levels for over 20 years, the country has vast reserves of natural gas
which are only beginning to be exploited. The oil sector, even within the confines of
international production quotas, can also expand rapidly when the domestic refining
capacity is upgraded. Nigeria currently imports 300,000 barrels of oil per day, which it
can produce domestically. It could also export refined products, which are not included
under OPEC's production quotas. Nigeria also has deposits of several solid minerals,
which at present are not well exploited. By African standards, financial markets have
enjoyed rapid growth and are well developed, and could contribute to a more rapid
growth of the economy. Pulled by industrial, agricultural and mining growth, the service
sector also has good potential for expansion.
21. To reduce the large number of the poor in the face of an increasing population, and
sharply increase its GNP per capita, Nigeria needs a labor intensive broad-based
economic growth rate well above 5 percent. During 1986-92, in response to good
economic policies, the economy recorded an average growth rate in excess of 6 percent.
In the four years between 1987 and 1990, growth was 7 percent per year on average.
During the next couple of years, growth is likely to hover around 3-4 percent as the
economy is restructured from years of neglect, but a longer-term growth rate of at least 6
percent (about 3 percent on a per capita basis) is necessary and feasible. Unshackled from
policy and governance constraints, the private sector is capable of delivering a strong
supply response by efficiently utilizing the diversified agricultural base, the resilient and
competitive manufacturing sector, extensive solid mineral resources (e.g. gold, coal, tin,
columbite, and tantalite), large oil and gas reserves, a large pool of well-educated people,
and a large domestic market with strong trading links with neighboring countries.

III. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
Development Challenges
22. To convert its long-term economic prospects into reality, Nigeria has to quickly
confront a number of challenges, the most pressing of which have already been
mentioned, and which we list below.

8

Poverty: Poverty is now widespread in Nigeria and rising. Estimates released
recently by the Federal Office of Statistics (FOS) based on work done collaboratively
with the Bank, indicate that about 66 percent of the population lived below the
poverty line in 1996, up from 43 percent in 1992 and 27 percent in 1980. (see Box
1). From 18 million people in 1980, the number of poor people in Nigeria is now
about 70 million, almost 30 percent of the population of the whole of West Africa.
Urban poverty is also on the rise: it rose sharply from 17 percent to about 58 percent
between 1980 and 1996. The enduring solution to poverty is high and broadly based
growth sustained over several years. However, in the short term, the country needs to
come up with resources to finance programs to help the close to 70 million poor,
particularly the extremely poor.
*

Governance: The prolonged period of military rule has undermined due process and
the rule of law. Many institutions of civil governance including the civil service and
judiciary have been severely weakened and would require significant effort,
resources, and time to be revived.

*

Corruption: Pervasive corruption has robbed the economy of resources that
otherwise could have been used for development and poverty reduction. The
country's reputation for corruption also scares away many legitimate investors that
otherwise would be attracted to the country, given its resources and large market size.

X

Social and Political Unrest -- particularly in the Niger Delta and Religious
Conflicts: With the bulk of the petroleum that now sustains the Nigerian economy
coming from the Delta region, continued intense social and political unrest in this
area could be devastating for the country's economic prospects. Equally, the
emerging religious tensions could deal a serious blow to Nigeria's political stability
and economic prospects unless managed carefully.

*

Debt: Provisional estimates show that the stock of public external debt outstanding
and disbursed was about US$28 billion at end-1998. Substantial external debt arrears
have accumulated amounting to some US$18.5 billion at end-1998 mainly owed to
the Paris Club (see Annex I). Estimates of Nigeria's debt ratios for 1998 are all high
(see Table 2): debt service due to exports was 41 percent, DOD to exports was about
280 percent, and DOD to GDP 84.5 percent. Moreover, inflexible debt service as a
share of total debt service is expected to increase given the lack of new lending in
recent years and the increasing proportion of post cut-off Paris Club debt. In the short
term, to find the resources to clear the arrears and become current on the obligations
falling due and at the same time to attend to the pressing needs for poverty reduction
and economic development poses a formidable challenge.

* Poor Infrastructure: The country's infrastructure has become dilapidated and
unreliable, with many of its services being delivered by poorly performing state

9

enterprises. For example, only 34 percent of Nigerians have access to electricity; while
there are only 3 telephone lines per 1,000 persons with most of these lines confined to the
major urban centers. Effective coverage by a reliable water supply in both urban and
rural areas is only about one third; data on the availability of adequate sanitation facilities
are lacking, but are thought to be worse than for water supply.
* Diversification of the Economy: About 85 percent of Nigeria's foreign exchange
earnings and 40 percent of its GDP derive from the oil sector. In addition to the
vulnerability to external shocks that this situation implies and the distortions in
economic policy that it has produced in the past, the petroleum sector has little
integration with the rest of the economy, and contributes little in the way of direct
employment.
Table 2 - Nigeria's: Debt and Financial Indicators, 1997-2001

Total DOD in US$ millions a/
GNFS Exports b/
DOD-to-Exports GNFS
(percentage)

DOD-to-GDP

1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
28,882 28,343 29,600 32,100 33,200
15,208 10,232 11,699 13,635 14,074
189.9 277.0 253.0 235.4 235.8
_

_

83.0

84.5

82.2

78.9

75.4

Amortization Due
Interest Payments Due
Total Debt Service Due c/

*3,556
1,539
5,095

2,135
2,100
4,235

2,130
1,950
4,080

Total Debt Service Paid
Debt Service Due-to-Exports GNFS

1,934
33.5

1,343
41.4

NA
34.9

1,095
1,987
3,082
d/
NA
22.6

996
2,056
3,052
dl
NA
21.7

40.0
19.2

30.4
29.8

32.5
32.8

38.5
37.3

39.3
35.8

(percentage)

Exports GNFS-to-GDP (percentage)
Revenue-to-GDP (percentage)

a/ includes private debt; does not include interest and penalties on arrears.
b/ 3 year rolling average.

cl in accumulating arrears, total debt service paid has been in the range of US$2 to US$2.5 billion.
d/ assumes rescheduling of arrears but post cutoff arrears at end- 1999.

NA/ not applicable.
Source: Govemment of Nigeria and Bank Staff estimates.

10

Box 1 - Poverty In Nigeria
The intensity and severity of poverty in Nigeria has been generally increasing over
the last two decades. In 1980, 27 percent of Nigerians were living in poverty. By
1985, it was 46 percent. While this level decreased to 43 percent in 1992, it increased
dramatically to 66 percent in 1996. About 70 million people now live in poverty
compared tol8 million people in 1980. The number of extreme poor has also
increased. About 30 million people were defined as extreme poor in 1996 compared
to 4 million people in 1980.
Poverty in Nigeria is more widespread in the Northern parts of the country, but more
intense and severe in the riverine and remote southern areas. Most of the poor are
engaged in the agricultural sector - about 89 percent of the core poor in 1996 were
engaged in some form of agriculture for their livelihood. Urban poverty is on the rise,
about 58 percent of urban dwellers are living in poverty compared to more than 60
percent of rural dwellers. Poverty in Nigeria is also characterized by a strong
statistical relationship with the age and education of the head of households as well as
household size - attending primary school reduces the probability of living in poverty
by about 48 percent.
In recent years, poverty has gained a high level of attention in public discussion of
economic policy, due mainly to work done collaboratively by Bank staff and the
Federal Office of Statistics (of Nigeria) whose results have been widely disseminated.
The Abacha government responded to this in 1997 and 1998 with large budgetary
allocations for poverty reduction programs, notably the Family Economic
Advancement Program (FEAP). However, the programs were poorly conceived, and
a Bank review in early 1999 concluded that the expenditures did not have a
measurable impact on poverty reduction.
Since the transition to democracy, several State Governors have approached the Bank
seeking advice and assistance on poverty reduction/community development
programs. In response to these requests and the needs identified by the Bank's own
reviews, the Bank sent a reconnaissance/identification mission to Nigeria in August,
in collaboration with the U.K.'s Department for International Development (DFID),
the EU and UNICEF, to discuss with Federal and State government officials the
feasibility of effectively piloting community based multi-sectoral poverty alleviation
programs at the state level, taking into account the current federal structure and the
state's readiness to implement these programs. A follow-up mission visited Nigeria
in November, 1999 to move towards the development of a social fund mechanism to
pilot community based poverty alleviation programs for selected states based on a set
of criteria. A Community Development Project is currently being appraised. The
Bank is also working on a parallel urban program, the Community-based Urban
Upgrading Project, as well as a rural and micro-finance study which could provide
the basis for further poverty alleviation efforts through a micro-finance program
Government has set up a Poverty Committee to review existing poverty programs and
make recommendations for their restructuring, and the Bank has been formally
invited to make submissions to the Committee.

11

IV. THE GOVERNMENT'S SHORT-RUN STRATEGY
23. The government has yet to come out with an explicit development strategy, but the
challenges listed above are fully reflected in a broader set of priorities articulated by
President Obasanjo immediately following his assumption of office. They are also
reflected in the "Vision 2010" document, a broad development strategy formulated in a
participatory manner in 1997-98, which the government has indicated it intends to follow.
There are a number of issues, which the government has decided, are of utmost urgency
and for which a number of important steps have already been taken.
24. Anti-Corruption and Governance. Immediately upon taking office, President
Obasanjo declared the fight against corruption and to improve governance his topmost
priorities. He has already begun taking measures towards these ends. The first bill that
he submitted to the National Assembly was an anti-corruption bill, which was just passed
after much debate. He also set up a commission to review past awards of public sector
contracts, and he conducted re-orientation workshops for senior civil servants, while
requiring his ministers to take integrity pledges. Several contracts for oil exploration
awarded towards the end of the previous regime under questionable circumstances have
been cancelled. The government has also cleaned up and made more transparent the
procedures for awarding contracts for the export of Nigeria's oil, a major source of
patronage and corruption in the past. President Obasanjo has declared his intention to
clean up procurement processes in the public sector and has requested World Bank
assistance for the purpose, beginning with a review and audit of the oil sector and of the
public procurement system.
25. Privatization. The government has declared its commitment to privatization, and
has begun to take action. Actions include a change in the leadership of the Bureau of
Public Enterprises (BPE), which is charged with the implementation of government
privatization decisions taken by the National Council on Privatization (NCP), chaired by
the Vice-President of the country. The change in leadership at BPE has brought more
operational commitment to privatization and to developing and following transparent
processes. A number of small government enterprises have been sold on the Lagos Stock
Exchange, and the Bank Group has been requested by the government to advise and assist
on the overall privatization process, particularly on the major infrastructure utilities. IFC
has been retained to advise on the privatization of Nigerian Airways and on the opening
up of Lagos State Water Supply to private sector participation. In addition, the Bank is
preparing a technical assistance credit to assist the restructuring of the power and
telecommunications sectors. Here, progress has been tortuous due to problems with
coordination between the NCP and BPE on the one hand and the sector ministries and in
some cases State Governments on the other. It has been particularly difficult to get
commitment all around to the need to ensure the existence of clear sector policies and
regulatory frameworks before proceeding to transactions, and the need for a high level of

12
openness and transparency in the transactions. Insufficient appreciation of these
requirements has on a few occasions led to false starts and deals that have to be reopened.
The Bank is working hard to help the Government correct the situation as part of the
preparatory activities for a Privatization Technical Assistance credit.
26. Poverty Reduction. While recognizing the need to take the necessary measures to
spark sustained high economic growth, the government has also acknowledged the
problem of widespread poverty and the need to come up with targeted poverty reduction
programs in the short term. Following the work of a government appointed Poverty
Committee that reviewed existing and past govermmentpoverty programs, and consulted
with a cross-section of people, including Bank staff, the government has abolished the
Family Economic Advancement Program (FEAP), a poorly designed poverty program. It
is now setting up a Poverty Reduction Fund (PRF) that will finance poverty-oriented
projects. President Obasanjo in his 2000 Budget Address to the National Assembly
stated that "The PRF is to fund grassroots initiated and targeted poverty reduction
initiatives in the areas of primary education, health care, water supply, agriculture and
food security, rural roads, and women and youth development." The government has
requested the Bank's advice on the design and implementation of the PRF to enable the
program to deliver services effectively and urgently, while stressing transparency,
accountability, and grassroots participation. It is the government's hope that donors
would be encouraged to also contribute to a program that meets these objectives. We
very much welcome the opportunity to work with the Government on the PRF. However,
we are also mindful of the need to design the PRF to effectively achieve its objectives
while at the same time avoiding the creation and perpetuation of a parallel budgetary
mechanism that undermines the important goal of improving the overall budgetary
system.
27. Relations with the IMF. Negotiations with the Fund in the form of a
Precautionary Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) in the amount of SDR 788.9 million (about
45 percent of quota) have been substantially completed. Fund staff were expecting to
take the program to their Board in April, after approval of the year 2000 budget agreed
with the fiscal authorities by the National Assembly and the preparation by the
government of policy letters for the telecommunications and power sectors satisfactory to
the Bank. Unfortunately, the budget approved by the National Assembly substantially
increased overall expenditure above the level that the fiscal authorities agreed with the
Fund, and most of the additional expenditures are for items that we cannot readily
support. The Executive is in discussions with leaders of the National Assembly to try to
resolve the issue. This unexpected development has now made the timing of the Fund
program uncertain. (The development is unexpected since the Fund staff had engaged the
leadership of the National Assembly in discussions preparatory to their agreement with
the fiscal authorities on the budget). The government was expecting that a successful
performance under the SBA would pave the way for a program with concessional Fund
resources and for seeking debt relief from external creditors.

13
28. Relations with the Paris Club and Other Official Creditors. Nigeria is
beginning to improve relations with the Paris Club, and in 1999 started making some
payments towards clearing its post cut-off arrears. More recently it has reached an
understanding with the Paris Club on the amount of debt service payments to be allocated
in the year 2000 budget. With assistance from the Department for International
Development of the United Kingdom (DFID), the Federal Ministry of Finance has set in
motion an exercise to bring Nigeria's external debt statistics up to date, which would
help discussions with creditors and also bring reporting of Nigeria's external debt in
compliance with international norms by 2000.

V.

THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S TRANSITIONAL ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY TO NIGERIA

29. A basic principle that guides the overall design of our strategy is that with sound
policies and good management, Nigeria should be able to generate sufficient resources
from within and from foreign private investors to achieve sustainable development.
Resources from the donor community including the World Bank Group will always be
small compared to those available from these other sources. Therefore, the major role of
the Bank will be to help the Nigerians build their capacity to manage their own resources
effectively and to implement policies that will attract private sector investment from
abroad and from within Nigeria. This theme will inform all of the Bank's activities in
Nigeria.
30. We are currently involved in either conducting analytical studies, providing
advisory services or preparing projects in the following areas: (a) Economic
Management, Governance, Anti-Corruption and Legal/Judicial Reform; (b) Social
Sectors (Education and Health); (c) Agriculture and Environment; (d) Private Sector and
Infrastructure Development; and (e) targeted poverty reduction programs. Since 1993
when the Board approved the Bank's last project in Nigeria, the Bank project portfolio
has shrank from 43 to 5 projects, all of which are due to close by the end of September,
2000. The advantage of this situation is that we can practically start afresh in Nigeria and
be able to reflect the lessons learnt both in Nigeria and the rest of the Bank in the
intervening years. The downside is that given the several years of reduced activity and
staff working on the Nigeria program, we are starting from a deficit in several areas in
terms of detailed economic and sector knowledge, which we have to quickly make up.
Our current activities in each of the areas listed above are described below.
Economic Management, Governance, Anti-Corruption and Legal/Judicial Reform
31. After over a decade of arbitrary and corrupt rule by the military, there is deep and
pervasive institutional decay in the public sector. Standard procedures in government
that help ensure good policy formulation, implementation and accountability have been
ignored for so long that they have been largely forgotten. In recognition of this, President
Obasanjo, in his first weeks in office, mounted a series of workshops to begin the re-

14
education of senior and middle-level civil servants. The government has also set up a
committee, headed by a distinguished Nigerian economist, to reform the budget process.
In contrast to the practice of recent years, off-budget items of expenditures have been
eliminated, and the budget submitted this year by the Executive to the Legislature shows
a significant improvement in transparency. Furthermore, with the assistance of the IMF,
the government has introduced an effective system of tracking foreign exchange
transactions.
32. The Bank is fully aware of the institutional decay, which was the reason why the
first assistance project we discussed with the Transition Government in 1998 (after the
death of Abacha) was the Economic Management Capacity Building Project (EMCAP).
The EMCAP is designed to strengthen key economic institutions of government,
particularly, those dealing with the formulation, implementation, monitoring, accounting
and auditing of the budget. Institutions to be supported include the Federal Ministry of
Finance (FMF), the Offices of the Auditor and Accountant Generals; the National
Planning Commission (to improve development expenditure planning and monitoring),
the Federal Office of Statistics; the Ministry of Justice and the judicial system (to prepare
a follow-up project on judicial and legal reform) and the economic committees of the
National Assembly. The project provides for three surveys of corruption to help design
better anti-corruption programs and to provide a base line for measuring future progress
in anti-corruption efforts. As part of the preparation of the project, the Bank in October
1999 organized, jointly with Nigerian academics, a workshop on fiscal issues for the
leadership of the National Assembly. The project would also support studies to prepare
for future reform, for example, fiscal decentralization and civil service reform. The Bank
in March 2000 organized jointly with government officials and academia, a workshop on
fiscal decentralization and other budgetary issues, as well as on issues which would help
in the preparation of a broader civil service reform program, and would support the
carrying out of a Public Expenditure Review Exercise. The EU, DFID, Japan and the
USAID, have worked with us to develop the EMCAP project and are already providing
or planning to provide financing. In addition, the preparation has been done in close
consultation with the IMF, which together with the UNDP is planning a complementary
technical assistance program.
33. The Bank is also working jointly with the government on a Country Procurement
Assessment Review (CPAR) and a Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA) in Nigeria.
The government has already introduced some of the
recommendations on the CPAR, while it is currently discussing the draft report. Given
President Obasanjo's request for Bank assistance on public procurement, the exercises
have been comprehensive, involving close collaboration not only with officials of the
Federal Government, but also with state governments, the private sector, and NGOs. The
exercises have also benefited from resources from the Danish Trust Fund. Workshops
have already been organized in Nigeria to discuss interim results. We would, through
EMCAP, assist the government in the implementation of agreed reforms stemming from
the report.

15
34. We are also, at the request of President Obasanjo, conducting a comprehensive
review of the Nigerian oil and gas sector. The review, being conducted by Bank and IFC
staff, covers both the upstream and downstream segments of the sector, and focuses on
issues such as: flow of funds in the sector; management audit of the Nigerian National
Petroleum Corporation (NNPC); the fiscal regime in the sector; and product marketing
and pricing. Work on the last two issues is being coordinated with a counterpart team in
the IMF. While results of the review would help strengthen governance in the oil and gas
sector, it would also provide a basis for making decisions on the restructuring and
privatization of the sector. In addition to other benefits, privatization in Nigeria would be
very helpful in improving governance by eliminating important avenues for corruption.
Human Development
35. Health. Basic health, nutrition and population (HNP) indicators from 1999 are a
cause for serious concern. They suggest that Nigeria is making little progress in health
aspects of human development. These indicators show a maternal mortality rate of 948
per 100,000 births, an infant mortality rate of 79 per 1,000 live births, and a life
expectancy at birth of 54 years.
36. Future program strategy in the HNP sector will build on the significant Bank
experience in the health sector acquired over the past six years. Much of this is derived
from the Health Systems Fund Project (HSF), which closed in December 1999. This
project provided assistance in: (a) building the capacity in 16 State Ministries of Health
and the Federal Ministry of Health; (b) improving access to basic health services through
renovation/new construction of primary health care centers and the purchase of
equipment required for the facilities; (c) providing safe and affordable drugs through an
essential drugs component; (d) training of all cadres of service delivery staff; and (e)
establishing a health information system as well as a health research capacity.
37. The Bank is currently working with the government to develop an overall health
sector strategy. In July 1999, the Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) launched
consultations to generate a consensus on the priority issues and measures for health sector
reform. In collaboration with the World Health Organization, the World Bank provided
technical and financial assistance for a workshop held in October 1999 convened by the
FMOH to discuss health sector reform issues with development partners. Technical
support to the FMOH's efforts to organize health sector reform consultations with all
stakeholders will continue as part of project preparation activities in the rest of the current
fiscal year. In FY01, a distinct activity to further the dialogue on broader HNP sectoral
issues might be appropriate, which could result in a Sector Review as the basis for the
Bank's re-engagement with the sector.
38. In parallel to this important health strategy undertaking, both the government and
the Bank share a great sense of urgency to prepare two Bank-assisted projects on a fasttrack basis: (1) a multi-sectoral operation on HIV/AIDS Program Development; and (2)
a Second Health Systems Fund (HSF-II).

16
39. The HIV/AIDS prevalence rate in Nigeria is estimated at 5.4 percent and has been
rising rapidly. Given the large population of Nigeria, without swift and effective
interventions the potential socio-economic implications of this pandemic are grave.
President Obasanjo has recently established an Inter-Ministerial Council, which he chairs
to formulate policy. A multi-sectoral National AIDS Coordinating Agency (NACA) has
also been established and is working with the UNAIDS Theme Group to develop an
HIV/AIDS strategy for the country. Presently, a small educational and advocacy program
is ongoing under our agricultural sector operations financed by the Bank and a small
HIV/AIDS component has been included within the Primary Education Project II (PEP
II). Infrastructure projects will also particularly address the relationship between AIDS
and truckers, work crews and displaced persons. The nature and magnitude of the Bank's
assistance to Nigeria on HIV/AIDS will be determined as the result of a consultative
process being undertaken in March-April 2000, with the involvement of relevant partners
and concerned sectors, including NGOs and the commercial private sector. The current
thinking is for a two-track approach, simultaneously preparing a comprehensive national
HIV/AIDS strategy for the long term while rapidly mounting an immediate operation.
All of the Bank's activities in Nigeria will be cognizant of the impact of the HIV/AIDS
pandemic on program success and the impact of the program on the pandemic.
40. HSF-II would cover all 36 states in addition to capacity building at the FMOH. It
would expand successful elements of the first HSF that strengthened health services
delivery, increased access to potable water, provided essential drugs and basic health
equipment, improved maternal and child health services, upgraded institutional capacity,
and established Health Management Information Systems. Rapid project preparation is
needed to increase service delivery to the large numbers of impoverished citizens in the
country. To this end, the project design will be kept simple and new interventions or
design features will be kept to the minimum - limited to significant lessons learned from
HSF. The 16 States where HSF was previously in operation have already completed
studies to guide the design of the second phase. The current timetable for HSF-II
envisages Board presentation by October, 2000.
41. Working with the private sector, the IFC is also supporting the improvement of
health in Nigeria. It has financed a project to establish 5 model clinics and equip a
hospital in Lagos. The project, Hygeia Nigeria Limited, will meet the needs of corporate
clients who wish to provide their employees health care at competitive prices while
eliminating fraud and abuse. The project's strengths are strong, dedicated national
sponsors with an excellent reputation in the health service sector and with a track record
of obtaining and retaining corporate clients and their employees for the managed care
business.
42. Education. At present, two Bank-assisted projects remain active in the education
sector: the Development Communication and the Primary Education Projects. The
former, which closes on June 30, 2000, has successfully established basic capacities for
promoting early childhood education through the use of instructional television and

17
audio-visual media outreach to communities. The production and communication
capacities established under the project will also be used to disseminate messages to the
general public regarding child-related issues such as nutrition, vaccination, and
HIV/AIDS prevention. The Primary Education Project (PEP I) which has been extended
to June 30, 2000, has supplied textbooks and instructional materials to thousands of
primary schools across the country, supported educational planning and curricula
development, and helped to rehabilitate selected schools with community participation.
43. Responding to the new government's urgent 1999 request for assistance in the
design and implementation of its recently announced Universal Basic Education (UBE)
program, we have prepared the PEP II (US$55 million), that accompanies this Interim
Strategy Note. PEP II seeks to promote promising mechanisms for community
involvement in the management and maintenance of local schools that were piloted under
the PEP I project, to reinforce recent efforts to improve educational quality, and to build
capacities for nationwide implementation of the UBE program.
44. Since late 1999, we have also been working closely with the Federal Ministry of
Education (FMOE), associated government units, and 12 external partners to undertake a
joint exercise in education sector analysis and strategy development. The resulting
government strategy will address the triangular policy tensions among increased access,
improved quality and sustainable funding within the system. This will be done within the
context of UBE implementation, pressures for greater relevance and quality in secondary
education, the challenges of innovation and diversification within tertiary education, and
the demand for training linked to the private sector requirements. Currently, eight donors
(USAID, DfID, EU, UNESCO, UNICEF, AfDB, IDRC, and the Commonwealth
Secretariat) and four foundations (Ford Foundation, Carnegie Corporation, MacArthur
Foundation, and the Commonwealth of Learning) are engaged with Nigerian officials and
us in an electronic discussion of how this sector partnership will be carried out. An early
April meeting in Abuja with the Federal Ministry of Education (FMOE) and donor
representatives will finalize the approach and division of responsibilities; a launch
workshop for the joint assessment team will be held in mid-2000.
45. Consistent with high level discussions held between the government and the Bank,
we have agreed with the FMOE to begin preparation for projected Board presentation in
FY02 of a project to encourage innovation and relevance within the tertiary education
system. Bank support for UBE will be pursued through a longer-term program of
assistance at both the primary and secondary levels which is currently in preliminary
discussion with the FMOE.
Agriculture and Environment
46. Agriculture. The Bank has had a substantial presence in Nigerian agriculture.
Recent projects have supported: research, extension, technology development, and simple
pump irrigation systems for smallholders farming in low-lands called Fadamas. These
projects have made significant development achievements. The National Agricultural

18
Research Project supported the National Agricultural Research Institutes programs for the
generation of technologies with emphasis on varietal improvement and release, and the
enhancement of the economic value of agricultural by-products. Significantly high
adoption rates by farmers were recorded for most of the technologies, and economic
impact assessment studies showed the positive impact of agricultural research on the
economy. Some of the economic rates of return were 55 percent for improved cassava
varieties, 29 percent for soybeans and about 14 percent for improved sorghum. The
Fadama Project provided the opportunity for fadama farmers in the project area to
produce two harvests in a season instead of one. In view of the achievements, which
demonstrates the potential, and of the needs, we envisage support to the agricultural
sector as a very important part of our strategy. However, before we present any new
agricultural projects to the Board (the last two projects closed in December 1999), the
government would have to implement agreed measures to reform procurement procedures
in the sector.
47. An ex-post audit conducted recently on six projects in Nigeria uncovered instances
of significant irregularities in procurement in three projects, all in agriculture.
Concurrent with the ex-post audit, an investigation ordered by the Bank's Oversight
Committee on Fraud and Anti-Corruption was conducted on the three agricultural
projects. The results of both the audits and the investigation have been discussed with the
Nigerian authorities. The government has been very responsive, deploying very high
officers in the police and the National Security service to carry further the investigation,
using evidence supplied by the Bank. The Minister of Agriculture has also set up a task
force to study the report of the audits. A mission by Bank procurement experts in
October 1999, agreed on a draft Action Plan with the task force for presentation to the
government. Presentation of new agricultural projects to the Board will be contingent on
satisfactory progress by the government in implementing the changes agreed in the
Action Plan. In the meantime, we have declared misprocurement on the contracts
involved and closed the projects. In addition, the Bank has debarred 29 companies and 7
individuals, which were involved in the fraud from bidding on contracts on Bank-funded
projects in the future. Most of the companies involved were foreign-based and affiliated
with each other.
48. Meanwhile, we are proceeding with the government and other partners on
analytical work on sector strategy and on rural finance issues. We are also preparing a
follow-up Fadama Project (Fadama II). Both the sector strategy study and that on rural
finance would be completed this fiscal year. They would provide the basis for our
discussions with government on Bank Group assistance to the sector early on in the next
fiscal year, subject to the satisfactory implementation of the Action Plan on the
procurement issues mentioned above.
49. Environment.
Bank assistance for environmental and natural resource
management in Nigeria began with support provided to the government to formulate a
National Environmental Action Plan. This support was followed by an investment and
capacity building program - the Nigeria Environmental Management Project (EMP) -

19

which focused mainly on capacity building at the Federal level for environmental
management, including the generation of information on environmental degradation.
Some support was also provided for the state and local level with the initiation of pilot
activities on community based natural resources.
50.
Although there was clear need for continued work on the environment, the
situation in Nigeria at the close of the EMP project in March 1998 was not conducive to
further Bank project assistance. We did, however, initiate a study of natural resources
management, working with the government and other donors. The Bank agreed as well to
continue supporting the development of water resources management strategy under a
participatory arrangement involving all stakeholders through the Federal Ministry of
Water Resources. We also provided assistance for the preparation of Nigeria's
Biodiversity Strategy with funding from the Global Environment Facility (GEF).
51. The democratic government that came to power in the middle of 1999 decided to
form a Ministry of Environment out of the previous Federal Environmental Management
Agency, and environment-related units in other ministries to focus increased attention on
environmental issues. The government requested Bank assistance in developing the
structure and work program of the ministry, to which we are responding by making
available the advisory services of a top expert on environmental issues. The Bank has
also begun working with the government in the preparation of a Micro-watershed and
Environmental Management Project. The project's first phase of activities would target
three macro watersheds in the country, and within these work with local communities to
address the most critical natural resource issues. The project would also provide support
for decentralized decision-making and micro-project implementation. Capacity building
at the federal, state and local level for environmental and natural resources management
will be a key component of the project. Another of the project's components will target
global issues and funding will be sought from the GEF. This component will defme and
implement innovative mechanisms for the conservation and management of globally
significant wildlife and biodiversity while generating livelihood options for local
communities. In view of the range and complexity of global issues and opportunities in
Nigeria, there is a strong potential for mobilizing other significant GEF support in the
future to support biodiversity conservation as well as for initiatives in international waters
and climate change.
52. Although there are serious environmental problems in the Niger Delta (the primary
source of the country's oil production), the current unrest and tense security situation in
the area calls for extreme caution in sending Bank staff to work there.
Private Sector Development, Infrastructure and Finance
53. Private Sector Development. An enhanced private sector contribution to
accelerated economic growth has to be a key element of the Nigeria's economic renewal
and poverty reduction efforts. In this context, the aim of the Bank Group effort will be to
support: (a) an improved business environment, through improved governance, reforms

20
in taxation, regulation, business law and related areas, and more capable support
institutions in the public and private sector; (b) liberalization of markets and privatization
of public enterprises (PEs) - aimed at improved supply and quality of key services,
particularly infrastructure; and (c) the expansion of private investment, including foreign
direct investment and small and medium size enterprises (SME's). In meeting these
objectives, the different entities in the Bank Group, IDAJIBRD, IFC and MIGA, have
been working jointly to bring their different capabilities and instruments to bear on
Nigerian Private Sector Development in a complementary and coordinated fashion.
54. Our initial emphasis has been on advisory assistance. The Bank Group has recently
been requested by the new Nigerian government to provide assistance in a number of key
areas related to PSD. These include: technical assistance for the Government's
privatization program, including for major infrastructure sectors (e.g., power and
telecommunications); assistance in reviewing the oil and gas sector to improve its
economic performance and transparency, and to provide a basis for making decisions on
future restructuring and privatization of the sector; support for divestitures in the water
and airlines sectors; assistance in design of an improved mining sector strategy; and
review of Nigeria's financial sector.
55. The Bank Group is focusing on privatization as a key initial step in restoring
economic growth and promoting good governance. In Nigeria, government virtually
controls the whole petroleum, minerals, development banking, telecommunications,
electric power and steel sectors. These alone contribute at least 40 percent of GDP.
These public enterprises consume a large proportion of national resources. Data obtained
from various government departments and estimates reveal that in 1998, Nigerian public
enterprises received about N265 billion (about US$2.5 billion) in transfers, subsidies and
waivers which could have been better invested in education, health and other social
sectors. There is virtually no public enterprise in Nigeria that functions well. Of
particular concern is the poor delivery of key infrastructural services that the rest of the
economy depends on. These include power, telecommunications and port services. The
chances of high economic growth, and therefore of significant reduction in poverty, in
Nigeria are very slim unless problems in these sectors are addressed. After years of
supporting the government parastatals in these sectors, particularly in power, we are
convinced that a sustainable solution has to include significant private sector participation
in the production and delivery of these services. The Bank Group is working closely with
the government on its privatization program, focusing on these three sectors and on
ensuring that systems and procedures are put in place to ensure that the whole
privatization process (including even those areas that the Bank is not directly focusing
on) is transparent and accountable. We are preparing a Privatization TA project, which
we plan to present to the Board in FY00, to support the process.
56. Alongside these activities, however, we will need to make a major effort over the
next 9-12 months to re-establish the Bank Group's knowledge base. We therefore plan a
private sector assessment (PSA) which will focus on performance, potential and

21

constraints of Nigeria's private sector so as to provide us with a sound basis for policy
advice and future operations.
57. SME Development. SME development has been a priority for the government,
and the subject of requests for assistance from the Bank Group. As part of the PSA, the
World Bank will focus on constraints to SME's in particular. The IFC, which continued
to finance SME's even during the period of non-lending for other sectors by the World
Bank Group, has built up substantial knowledge in the sector. Its support facilities, the
Africa Project Development Facility and the Africa Management Services Company, are
being expanded in Nigeria. IFC is also examining innovative alternatives to supporting
SME's in Nigeria, such as the STEP (Support and Training for Entrepreneurship
Program) with the Lagos Business School, which will recruit recent MBA's to work with
microenterprises.
58. Infrastructure. Nigeria's physical infrastructure has deteriorated drastically in the
past two decades. The impacts of power outages, lack of telephones, inadequate ports,
roads, rail systems, and inadequate water systems in cities, have created negative macroeconomic impacts, and have become severe constraints on economic growth. The Bank
group has begun working with the national government, parastatal utilities, state
governments, and other agencies to reform these sectors, reduce state ownership and
establish the framework for private participation. Doing so will rehabilitate these sectors,
upon which future growth will depend, and at the same time contribute to removing one
of the chief vehicles for corruption and mismanagement by reducing direct government
ownership. Improving infrastructure will also improve the social well being of the people
directly. For example, it has also been shown that better access to potable water can
relieve about the same total burden of disease (measured in daily-adjusted life years), as
do improvements in public health care. Joint Bank/IFC teams have been formed to
undertake initial sector reviews in Telecommunications, Power, Transport, and Water.
As these sector reviews are completed, a detailed agenda for sectoral reform and project
support from the Bank on the public sector side will be defined. The Bank and IFC may
assist the government with short-term resident advisors on Power and
Telecommunications; additional transactional assistance will come under the
Privatization TA project. Two key transactions are moving ahead with IFC advisory
assistance: privatization of Lagos Water and Nigeria Airways. Across all sectors, IFC
and MIGA will play a key role in financing subsequent private investments. In fact,
MIGA has received inquiries to the tune of around US$900 million on Nigeria.
59. Financial Sector. Nigeria has a relatively well-developed financial sector by
African standards in terms of the number of institutions. As a result of expansionary and
unstable macroeconomic policies combined with lax supervision in the early 1990s, a
number of financial institutions began experiencing difficulties, which produced a
financial crisis in 1996. The government responded forcefully, closing about 31 banks,
raising the minimum paid-in capital requirement by tenfold, and strengthening
supervision. A financial sector study, which is just being completed, indicates that the
commercial bank sector is relatively healthy and the risk of a financial sector crisis is

22
currently low, but there is need to take measures to develop the market for long term
capital. Future Bank assistance in financial sector development will be discussed with
the government, and is likely to focus on strengthening non-bank financial institutions,
reforming Development Finance Institutions in particular, promoting mortgage finance
and other undeveloped sub-sectors, and in supporting a sound policy framework. IFC
will focus on expanding the term lending of commercial banks, helping build sound
financial institutions, promoting competition, and supporting capital markets
development. IFC is working with several commercial banks to provide term facilities,
allowing them to expand medium-term lending to the private sector to finance
rehabilitation and expansion. Current projects being developed in this area total over
$100 million, and the first is slated for Board discussion in April 2000. Additionally, IFC
will work with banks to help identify and recruit foreign strategic partners in order to
bring additional technical expertise, and also contribute to buying out the residual
government shareholdings in a number of banks. In October 1999, the Board approved
an IFC operation to finance a private equity fund to promote private investment. IFC is
also examining initiatives to support capital markets development, such as the
establishment of a credit rating agency.
Targeted Poverty Interventions
60. While assisting the government to seek fundamental solutions that would bring
about a broadly-based economic growth to reduce poverty, we would also assist it in
providing help in the short term to those poor that can be reached through targeted
poverty programs and reorientation of public expenditure allocations. The Small Towns
Water and Sanitation LIL, presented with this Interim Strategy Note, would pilot the
concept of community owned and managed water supply systems in 12 small towns
across Nigeria. Communities would choose from a menu of simple water supply and
sanitation technologies, and contribute towards construction cost (in cash or in kind).
The completed systems would be turned over to the communities and they would be
assisted to contract local private sector operators to manage the systems. If the pilot is
successful and replicated, it is expected to have a major impact on poverty reduction in
the country. Through previous projects, such as Oyo State Urban and the Lagos State
Drainage and Sanitation, which, among other services, upgraded water, drainage,
sanitation, primary school and primary health care facilities for some of the very poor
communities in lbadan and Lagos, the Bank has gained some experience in poverty
programs in the urban areas. We plan to leverage this experience in the Communitybased Urban Upgrading Project which we are currently preparing. Prepared in a
participatory manner, the project will demonstrate an inclusive approach to urban
development that fosters good governance by stimulating partnerships between Local
Govermmentsand their constituents. It would initially cover urban areas in six States. A
counterpart Community Development Demand-driven Project for the rural areas is also
under preparation to similarly cover six (different) States initially. These projects are
expected to be ready for the Board early next fiscal year.

23
61. Because of the seriousness of the poverty problem, the government has decided to
shift significant resources to community-based and participatory poverty reduction
programs. In this regard, the government is keenly interested in having the PRF operated
on a professional and transparent basis so as to engender the confidence necessary for
donors to also contribute to the fund and be associated with the poverty reduction
programs. In addition to donors, the government envisages inviting NGOs to participate
in the implementation of the targeted poverty programs.

CAS/CDF Preparation, Donor Coordination, and Outreach
62. CAS/CDF. We have just started work on preparation of a Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS), which is planned to be ready for presentation to the Board early in the
next fiscal year. It would be a joint Bank Group CAS. President Obasanjo has expressed
the wish for us to follow the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) approach
in Nigeria. Since almost all the development partners, including the Government, are
starting afresh in Nigeria, we have a great opportunity to try the CDF approach, with
fewer constraints than would be faced in a country with high levels of ongoing donor
activities. Several donors expressed the wish for this kind of collaboration at the Donors
Meeting in Paris in April 1999 and also at a working-level donors workshop that the
Bank organized in Washington in September 1999, to facilitate the exchange of ideas and
to explore opportunities for collaboration. We therefore plan to initiate a CDF process in
Nigeria, which would enrich the preparation of the CAS. We are being assisted in the
participatory aspects of this exercise by the Monitor Corporation through the auspices of
the Bank's Learning and Leadership Center (LLC). From late March to mid-April
consultations will be held in Abuja, Lagos and six other locations with a broad spectrum
of Nigerian government and society. A number of donors will be participating with the
Bank in this effort which is to be led by the FMF.
63. Donor Coordination. Apart from the plans on the CDF, we have also been
making special efforts to coordinate and partner with donors as is evident from the
collaboration we have with the EU, DflD and USAID on the EMCAP. It is also evident
in the several initiatives discussed above on which we are working with various donors.
A Consultative Group meeting in Paris is planned for June, and we plan to use it to
discuss development priorities and explore avenues for further collaboration. On the
local scene, we organized the first donors meeting in Abuja in January 1999 and we
intend in the future to convene such meetings on a regular basis, as more and more
donors open offices in Abuja. We are active in the United Nation Development System
and in the Thematic groups, particularly in the following areas: Poverty (lead agency),
Education, Health, Capacity Building and HIV/AIDS. The Bank also is a member of the
Advisory Board on the UNDP Microstat Programme.
64. Outreach. Outreach to civil society became a major plank of our country program
in the dormant years before the transition to democracy. The main thrust was the training
of journalists on economic policies and economic reform (highlighting the key issues to

24
be addressed in Nigeria) through the use of workshops. Additionally, information was
disseminated to civil society and media through the visits of journalists to Bank
supported projects (e.g. on agriculture and in the social sector) and press briefings by
supervision missions. The visits were aimed at informing civil society about the Bank's
poverty reduction and social development activities so as to correct the pervasive
negative image associated with Structural Adjustment that the Bank had in Nigeria. The
press briefings by supervision missions were meant both to inform and to publicize
problems on project implementation so as to help engender timely and appropriate
responses from the relevant authorities. Finally, extensive networks of contacts with
NGOs and the private sector were developed. We intend to continue these activities, and
the World Bank Institute has now joined forces with us on the outreach to the media.
Canadian CIDA has also provided resources for the initiative. We have developed a
comprehensive database on NGOs and civil society groups, and have held some
consultative meetings with them. After a successful FY99 Small Grants Program with 7
NGOs/CSOs, the FY00 Program will support NGOs and CSOs to facilitate information
dissemination, capacity building and networking on current development issues. With the
advent of democracy, we have broadened the outreach program to include workshops for
members of the Legislature. The first, on the economic oversight roles of the legislature,
was held in October for leaders of both the National Senate and House of Assembly on
economic and budgetary matters. The workshop, which was organized jointly by the
Bank and leading Nigerian academics with participation by other foreign parliamentary
experts and parliamentarians, was opened by President Obasanjo and Mr. Wolfensohn.
We plan to continue with this type of workshop in the coming months, with a special
emphasis on reaching out to members of the State Legislatures (36 of them). Lastly, the
EMCAP also includes a Distance Learning component, which would help in the outreach
effort.
Decentralization and Strengthening the Country Offices
65. To ensure effective coordination and implementation of our reactivation program,
and to signal the importance that the Bank attaches to helping Nigeria's renewal succeed,
the Country Director position will be moved to Abuja starting next fiscal year. We have
already begun strengthening the Bank's Abuja Country Office by recruiting an additional
professional staff in the social sector. Further additions are likely in the social and other
sectors, including, in particular, short-term resident advisors on power and
telecommunications. IFC has also been pursuing a similar course in strengthening its
Lagos Office, beginning last year with the re-posting of a Resident Representative in
Lagos. It has taken up better office facilities in Lagos, with space available for the Bank
to facilitate its contact with the private sector in Lagos.

VI. NIGERIA'S FINANCIAL RELATIONS WITH THE BANK.
66. Nigeria is formally an IBRD/IDA blend country but, given its poor and
disappointing performance in recent years and its short-term economic prospects, it is

25
currently not creditworthy for borrowing at IBRD terms. Total net transfers from IBRD
and IDA have been substantially negative for the past three years and are estimated to
remain so for the next three. Nigeria has so far been current in payments to the Bank, but
risks of missed or delayed payments cannot be ignored. In view of the situation, it is
envisaged that the projects currently under preparation, which are mostly for technical
assistance or direct poverty reduction would be processed using IDA credits. As
Nigeria's external payments situation improves and it becomes creditworthy for IBRD
loans, it is envisaged that the blend of Bank lending would change accordingly.
67. For FYOO-02,the Lending Strategy Review indicated a notional IDA allocation of
up to SDR700 million (US$910 million equivalent), based on performance. We expect to
have a clearer lending scenario by the time of the full CAS discussion, when we would
have had more time to work with the government and other development partners to
develop an assistance program. During the next few months, however, we plan to work
on the operations identified in Table 3.
68. Balance of Payments/Budgetary Financing. Ordinarily, we do not envisage the
Bank providing balance of payments or budgetary financing in Nigeria. However,
Nigeria needs to get back into good standing with its creditors, to which it owes over
US$18 billion in arrears. Any arrangement agreed to clear these arrears would entail
higher debt payments by Nigeria relative to the situation where it just continued to
accumulate arrears. At the same time, the government needs to spend significant
resources to begin addressing the widespread poverty and thereby to provide tangible
"democracy dividend" to the people, in order to sustain support for democracy. To help
the government accommodate these competing demands, the international community
may have to, in the short term, supplement the government's resources with quick
disbursement assistance, provided the government were to continue its commitment to
economic and governance reforms, and in particular conclude negotiations on an IMFsupported macroeconomic program. We are therefore currently discussing with the
government a possible quick disbursing operation that would provide resources to help
support the Poverty Reduction Fund, which we would be helping the government to
design and implement. The policy content of the operation would be on governance, and
would derive from the analyses that we have already done or are now completing on
procurement, financial accountability and the budget system.
VII. RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE WORLD BANK GROUP
69. Nigeria is at the beginning of a long and difficult road towards rehabilitating its
economy and reducing poverty. Nigeria's future will depend on the manner and speed by
which it can overcome its development challenges, particularly those that were outlined
in Section III. After years of military rule, President Obasanjo has said that expectations
are high among Nigerians who are anticipating improvements in the economy as a
democracy dividend. One of the key risks is that failure to deliver an economic turnabout
or some clear signs of it soon would lead to frustration among Nigerians, which could
provide a pretext for the military to take over government again. A more immediate

26
threat to political stability and the economy is the unrest in the oil-producing Niger Delta
as well as the tensions aroused by the attempt of some Northern States to introduce Sharia
Law. Unless handled carefully and soon, this unrest could once again (as in the late
1960s) ignite larger ethnic conflicts and destabilize the Nigerian Federation.

Table 3 - Nigeria: Planned Activities/Products in Next 18 Months
_ActivitylProduct

_ailing

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Workshop for Parliamentarians
CPAR/CFAA I/
Audit of Oil Sector
Anti-Corruption Survey

Rural Sector Strategy
Health Sector Study
Education Sector
Financial Sector Assessment
Water Resources Management
PSD

Country Assistance
Dev. Framework

Strategy

Strategy/Country

DaU

Comp.le oDelivry B.oarEd

Fall-99
September-99
September-99
November-99

October-99
April-00
June-00
June-00

October-99
October-99
September-99
September-99
September-99
July-00

May-00
March-01
September-00
April-00
February-O1
March-01

FebruaTy-00

June/July-00

April-00
April-00
April-00
September-00
June-00
December-00
February-01
May- I
Tbd
Tbd
October-01
Tbd

Small Towns
Economic Management
Primary Education 11
Privatization T.A.
Com. Rural Dev.
Micro-Watershed & Env.
Com. Urban Upgrading
FADAMA 11
Higher Education
HIV
Health Services Fund 11
Universal Basic Educ.

September-98
November-98
May-99
December-99
November-99
November-99
November-99
November-99
April-00
March-00
March-00
March-00

Balance Of Payments Support Operations

March-00

June-00

September (Working Level Workshop)

September (Working Level)

June-00

June-00

New Projects:

CG/Donor
CG

Coordination

=

gnkP
#

LIL US$5 million
US$20 million
US$55 million
US$45 million
US$60 million
US$100 million
US$60 millioni
US$70 million
Tbd
Tbd
Tbd
Tbd
US$200-300

million

70. Will corruption be reduced to ensure the effective use of resources, and does the
economic management capacity exist to ensure the formulation and effective
implementation of reforms to promote economic growth and poverty reduction? These
are clearly major risks. A key problem that we have faced in re-activating our program in
Nigeria is the institutional weakness in government, including serious problems of
coordination, that considerably slow down progress, even when there is a complete
meeting of the minds between the Bank and the Federal Government. President Obasanjo
is providing strong leadership in the efforts to reduce corruption, and his key economic

27
advisors have been very receptive to the Bank supporting their efforts in addressing
specific issues in this area. This positive and cooperative attitude on improving
governance is evident in the way the Ministry of Finance and other economic agencies
have cooperated with us in preparing the Economic Management and Capacity Building
Project (in particular, welcoming the inclusion of the corruption surveys) and in
reviewing the procurement system and agreeing to start implementing some of the
recommendations, even before the study is finalized. As we have already discussed,
helping improve governance in Nigeria is a central part of our interim strategy, and we
fully expect that this will continue to be the case in the strategy to be developed in the
CAS now under preparation. However, despite the best efforts of the government and the
Bank, it is important to keep in mind that after years of institutional decay and
widespread corruption in Nigeria, the battle to improve governance will not be won
overnight; it will be long and hard, possibly with occasional serious bumps along the
way. But with the number of poor people now in Nigeria, the potential of the country,
and the fragile political situation, it would be imprudent to wait until we are fully
reassured of the governance situation before actively re-engaging. We believe that we
must proceed, being always mindful of the risk and satisfying ourselves as we go along
that we have in each case taken all possible and reasonable safeguards.
71. There is a risk that with the rising price of oil, the will in Nigeria to maintain fiscal
discipline and to pursue economic reforms will be weakened, as has happened in the past.
This is a real concern, particularly with respect to the National Assembly. Together with
Fund staff, we will intensify our dialogue with the government and key members of the
National Assembly to try to reduce this risk.
Our planned workshops for
parliamentarians would be quite helpful in this regard, as would our information and
outreach programs, especially the seminars on economic issues for people in the media.
72. Nigeria has in the past been a very difficult place to implement projects. Among
the reasons for this are: poor and unstable policy environment, the need often to
implement a single project over several States, (which given the transportation and
telecommunications systems greatly increases the difficulties and costs of supervision),
counterpart funding problems, corruption, lack of transparency, frequent and disruptive
changes in project personnel and in the institutional environment (for example, creation
of new States which necessitates a long and laborious process of dividing the assets of
ongoing projects among the new States). It is also important to note that another reason
for the poor implementation of projects in the past was, in some limited cases, poor
project design or supervision by the Bank.
73. Through lessons learnt from the Bank-wide focus on quality and from internal
discussions in the Country Team of our past experiences, we expect to avoid the mistakes
of project design and supervision in the past. We will, through the planned sector work,
ensure that the projects are relevant and well-designed. We will continue to strengthen
the Field Office in Nigeria to enable it to provide greater direct implementation support to
our clients and to closely monitor the impact of the Bank's activities. Next, we will
continue to work with our Nigerian counterparts to explore various implementation

28
arrangements to overcome the difficulties that we have encountered in the past. Earlier,
we mentioned the activities of our outreach program and the press releases on the results
of supervision missions and selective invitations to the press to join in the supervision
missions.
This initiative has highlighted progress and deficiencies in project
implementation and has contributed to project management units and authorities striving
for good project implementation. There has also recently been a more expanded use of
the procedure whereby State Governments agree to authorize the Federal Government to
deduct funds from their allocations and directly deposit them into project accounts to
reduce the problem of counterpart funds which had affected project implementation in the
past. The Procurement Review and Financial Assessment currently underway will be
used to agree with government by the end-June 2000 on specific programs to improve
project implementation and develop good financial management systems in all our
operations. The rate at which we expand our project portfolio will depend on satisfactory
progress by government in implementing the agreed programs. Lastly, the EMCAP
project on economic management will help increase transparency and accountability in
fiscal operations, which would also be an important factor in deciding the overall size of
Bank Group assistance.
74. By mobilizing quickly to provide advisory and development assistance to the
government, we enhance its ability to provide some quick improvement in the economy
to meet the expectations of the population. Our assistance in governance and anticorruption will help economic performance and enhance the attractiveness of the country
to foreign investors. While the Bank Group cannot contribute directly to the political
solution of the crisis in the Niger Delta (or elsewhere in the country), the community
development projects and the sector work that we are undertaking will put us in a good
position to support economic and social programs that would help respond to the
grievances of the people of the Delta when the security situation in the area improves.
75. The challenges facing Nigeria are considerable, but with the right policies and
political commitment, as well as support from the World Bank Group and other donors,
the country has the potential to become economically prosperous and be an engine of
growth for the West Africa Region. For the Bank Group, a main challenge would be to
gear up to provide quick and effective support to the country as warranted by the
government's policy actions and the country's development needs. Although quick and
effective support is needed, rapid results are not assured, given the extent and depth of the
problems and the political fragility in the country. However, as long as the government
continues to demonstrate its commitment to economic reforms and poverty reduction, we
should sustain our commitment of support.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
By: Shengman Zhang
Attachments
Washington, D. C.
May 11, 2000

Peter L. Woicke

Annex I
Page 1 of 1
Nigeria: External Public Debt, 1998/a
Nigeria's Debt in 1998
Total

1998 Debt

Share of Total

(US$ million)

(in percent)

28,343
18,477

100.0
65.2

Multilateral
of which: Arrears

4,237
74

14.9
0.3

Paris Club
of which: Arrears

20,398
18,403

72.0
64.9

of which: Arrears

Other Bilateral
of which: Arrears

Par Bonds

68

0.2

0.0

0.0

2,043

7.2

Promissory Notes
1,597
5.6
a/Estimates for 1998 are provisional.
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance of Nigeria; Central Bank of Nigeria; IMF staff estimates.
* Nigeria's stock of external public debt for the end of 1998 is provisionally estimated at about US$28 billion. Of
this, US$18.5 billion comprise arrears, of which most are owed to Paris Club creditors. The Paris Club at end1999 revised upwards Nigeria's debt and debt arrears to it by about US$6 billion due to interest charges and
penalties on accumulated arrears.
*

Nigeria's debt due to IBRD for CY 1999 was US$2.0 billion and that to IDA US$0.6 billion.

*

Since 1986, Nigeria has signed and honored three rescheduling agreements with the Paris Club, but arrears have
accumulated with the expiration of the third agreement in early 1992.

*

Nigeria concluded a London Club DDSR agreement in early 1992 and has continued to service the bonds resulting
from this agreement. More recently, buyback operations have discounted the debt owed to certain official
creditors.

*

Payments to multilaterals have so far been made in full, although at times late (especially to the AfDB), and all
commercial obligations have been honored.

*

The government cut the budget allocation for debt service from US$2.5 billion in 1996, to US$2.0 billion in 1998,
and to about US$1.5 billion in 1999, although it later paid out US$1.9 billion.

*

Of total debt service paid by Nigeria, payments to the IBRD amount to roughly US$0.5 billion, or 28 percent of
the total.

Annex It
Page 1 of 1
Bank Flows to Nigeria, 1996-2001
(Without New Lending)
Million US$

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

IBRD Disbursements

139

177

86

65

53

0

IBRD Amortization

369

338

313

307

293

232

IBRD Net Disbursements

-230

-162

-227

-242

-240

-232

IBRD Interest and Charges

228

181

154

149

109

89

IBRD Total Net Transfers

-458

-342

-381

-391

-349

-322

IDA Iisbursements

90

81

114

113

41

19

IDA Amortization

1

1

1

1

4

6

IDA Net Disbursements

89

80

113

111

37

13

IDA Interest

2

2

3

4

5

6

IDA Total Net Transfers

87

77

110

107

32

7

TOTAL Bank Disbursements

229

258

200

178

94

19

TOTALBankAmortization

370

339

314

308

297

238

TOTAL BankNetDisbursements

-141

-81

-114

-130

-203

-219

TOTAL Bank Interest

230

183

157

153

115

95

TOTAL Bank Net Transfers

-371

-265

-271

-283

-318

-314

1996 to 1999 are actual figures and 2000 to 2001 are projected figures.

2001

Annex m
Page 1 of 2

Nigeria at a glance
POVERTY
and SOCIAL
Nigeia
1999
Population,
mid-year(rnvIlons)
GNPpercapita(AUasmedWod,
USS)
GNP(AN"as
meod, USS bbions)

SubSaharan
LowAfrica Income

124.6
300
36.3

628
480
304

3,515
520

2.9
2.9

2.6
2.6

1.7
1.9

33
51
91

31
63
69

4118=

Development
diamond*
Lifeexpectancy

1,844

Averageannualgrowth,1i9340
Popubtion(%)
Labor
(X)
Mostrent stiRate (tate yearavailable,1993499)
Poverty(X of populin belownaffonalpove-tyline)
Urbanpopulation
(%of Ia populaton)
Lfe expe tc at bidh (syea)
IWantmorality(per1,000NW brta)
Childmalnutrition
(%ofchlldrn under5)
Accssto afe water(%of population)
llitery(% o(populaonages5+)
Groespnry enrollment(%ofsho-ag populad-on)
Male
Female

66
42
54
79
39
50
40
98
109
87

..

..

47
42
77
84
69

74
32
108
113
103

G
GNP
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

.

Access to safewater

-Low-income

group

KEYECONOMIC
RATIOSand LONG-TERM
TRENDS
1979

1988

188

1899

47.3
22.1
24.8
27.8
26.7

23.8
17.7
32.7
25.3
19.1

33.5
25.7
30.4
22.4
19.0

36.0
26.0
32.5
19A
16.0

Cuffwt accountbabance/GDP

35

-1.0

-9.8

-12.3

Interest pWntdGDP

0.5

6.2

6.3

5.4

Savings_

13.2
2.2

126.3
20.9

84.5
41A

82.2
34.9

Savings

1998

1999 1999-03

GDP(USSbNIons)
GrossdomesticinvestmenttGDP
Exportsogoodsand servicesWGDP
GrossdomesticsavingslGDP
GrossnationalsavingWP

TotaldebtGDP
Totaldebtseviceexports
Prent valueof debtUGOP
Pr;sentvalueof debt/exports

=
Economicratios
Trd
rade

Domestic

n
Investment

..
..

Indebtedness
1979-89 1989-99
(aerge amualgrowh)
GDP
GNPpercapita
Exportsofgoodsandservices

0.2
-2.7

2.7
OA

1.8
-1.0

0.8
-0.7

2.6
-0.2

-3.6

3.4

2.6

12.8

11.6

1979

1989

1998

1998

28.7
37.8

31.3
43.2

39.2
33.4

8.8

5.3

6.4

33.5

25.5

26.7

58.3
13.9
19.1

64.3
10.4
25.2

63.9
13.5
29.4

33.5

1998

1899

-Nierla
Low-Income
group
------

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% orGDP')4
Agriculture
Indusry
Manufcuring
Services
Prvateconsumption
Generalgovernment
consumption
hnportsofgoodsandserces
(averageannualgrowth)
Agricuure
Industry
Manufacturing
Servces
Privateconsumption
Generalgovernment
consumption
Grss domesicinvestment
importso goods
and
services
Gross naional product

1979-89 1989-89

Growthof investmentandGOP(%)

.
-4

20

o
Os

-40

-

2.2
-2.7
1.1
2.3

2.9
2.0
2.3
3.7

4.9
0.9
-2.3
3.1

-1.6
-4.6
-10.2
-13.2

2.0
0.5
7.5
4.7

5.5
2.0
17.6
7.8

8.5
13.9

0.3

3.4

1.8

2.5

-

GDI

C

GDP

Growthof exportsandImports(%)

-

9s

20-.
tS-

10
s

0
-

9

-10
Expst

lmpart

Note:1999dataare preliminary
estimates.
* The diamonds
showfourkeyindicatorsin thecountry(inbold)comparedwih its income-group
average.If dataare missing,thediamondwill
be incomplete.

Annex HI
Page 2 of 2

Nigeria
PRKIS and GOVERNMENT
FINANCE
pdcox

'1979

1989

1998

1999

(%chmgea)
Consum pics
iliI
GDPddfa

11.7
11.5

50.5
44.4

11.9
-5.2

6.8
12.7

-mostk

Govenmnw,tffwl,i
(% orGOP,bihudeecuwit gis)

Current
revene
Currentbudgblanoc
Overallsurfplu.deflcit

lltio

()

s
d_
40

20
0

20.7

13.8

16.2

18.0

12.0
-2.5

-1.4
-7.2

-7.7
-13.9

-2.3

1979
16.767
15,655

1989
9,812
9,411

1998
10,114
9218

I

-2

04

5

-G

97

so

DPdeflator

so

so

CPI

-8.1

TRADE
(USSmNiam)
TOWalupot(rob)
Fuel
Cocoa
anufacte
ToWlImport (c)
Food
Fuelandenergy

..

ImportPic wodeh
(1995-100)
Tenrms
ofdtrade(195=100)

..

15,971
1,638
442

.

..

117
59
198

107
80
133

84

CaplWgoods..
Expoltprioe Idex (1995-l0oJ

..

39
6,544
425
46

..

407
9,276

1,397
123

79
87

1999
11,572
10,438
322
471
10,834
1,559
156

ExportandImport levels(USSmlil.)
20,000

15,00
10000

5

.

s

108
82
120

9

9

49

a9

* Exports

9
e

9

U Impoits

BALANCEof PAYMENTS

(USSM
MbA)

1998

1999

Export ofgoods and seNbes

17,631

1979

9,979

10,232

11,691

10

ImportsofgoodsandserIoes
Resource
baanc

13,543
4,089

7,679
2,301

11,726
-1,495

13,593
.1,902

a

Notincome
Notcurrertnnder

-2,026

-2,668
118

-2,669
1,516

-2,853
1.220

..

1989

Crent account balance

1,675

-249

-3,088

-3,971

Fbwnning tems(net)

1,765

1,521

2,973

1,697

-3,440

-1,272

115

2,274

5,580

1,797

7,221

5,921

0.9

9.4

88.0

95.0

Changesin nt reserves

Currentaccountbalanceto GDP(%)

-

D-

9_

-

Memo:
ReservesIncouding
gold(USSmWbns)
rte (DEC.loc8VUSS)

Conesion

EXOTERNAL
DEBTand RESOURCEFLOWS
(USS
Totaldebtoutstanding
anddisbursed
I1RD
IDA
Totaldebtuervlce
IBRD
IDA

1979
1969
19
9
6,245 30,122
478

38
392
65
1

1998
99
28,343

1999
9
29,600

2,906

2,278

2,030

30

472

583

1,343
467

1,900
456

2,117
411
1

4

Compositionof 199 debt (US$mill.)
-

A2

A:Z,1 5i2

5

)_

Compositionfdnet resource flows
Oci

gs

Officialcredos
Prtbte credIors
Foreign drect investment
Portlol oequiy

WorldBankprogram
Commitments
D
PrIcal

_bursemet
repaymnt

Notfla
btald paynwnt
Nettrnsfers
Development
Economics

..

59
1,234
0

.

461
522
2,443
0

.

.

-1,763
0

-1,994
0

1,220
0

1,469
0

182

702

0

0

51
21

450
200

200
314

178
308

31
45
-15

250
212
38

-114
156
-271

-130
153
-283

,
F: 5,829

A -IBRD
B IDA
C-IMF

14,415

E -Blateral
D- Othermuftilateral F - Pivate
G - Short-term

4118/00

Annex IV
Page 1 of 1
Nigeria
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

Closed 79
Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR

Board
Date

Su pervision Rating b/
Active Projects

1991
1991
1992
1993
1993

P002134
P002084
P002109
P002156
P002176

PRIMARY EDUCATION
WATER REHAB
STATE WATER I
DEV. COMMUNICATION
STATE ROADS II

Disbursements8 v

Original Amount In USSMillions

Develob ment

Implementation

IBRD

IDA

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

Frm Revd

S
S
s
S
S

S
S
S
S
S

0
256
0
0
0

120
0
101
8.03
85

29.95
0
0
0
0

19.82
37.3
13.46
0.98
6.86

44.87
37.3
9.73
0.8
7.14

-13.01
37.3
9.56
-0.27
7.24

256

314.03

29.95

78.42

99.84

40.82

ObLectves

Progress

TOTAL

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Annex V
Page 1 of 1

Nigeria
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 2/29/00
(In US Dollars Millions)
Held
FY Approval Company
1998 AEFAnsbby
1996/98
AEF Bailey Bridg
1992 AEF Canplas
1999 AEF Chartered
1996 AEF Courdeau
1997 AEFEkesons
1994 AEFEtema
1999 AEF GlobalFabri
1999 AEFHercules
1999 AEFlHygeia
1996 AEF Mid-East
1998 AEFMinaj
1997 AEFMoorhouse
1997 AEFRadmed

Disbursed

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.68
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0.04
0
0
0
0.04
0
0
0.32
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.4
0
0
0 0.4
0
0
0.29
0
0
0 0.29
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.7
0
0
0 0.7
0
0.32
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.38
0
0
0
0
0 0.12
0
0
0 0.12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
0
0
0
0 1.35
0
0
0
1.35
0 0.29
0
0
0
0.29
0
0

1991AEFStark

09.03

1997 AEFTelipoint
1995 AEFVinfesen
1994 AbujaIntl

0.14
1
1.75

0

0

0 0.03

0

0

0

0
0
0.71

0
0
0

0 0.14
1
0
0 1.75

0
0
0.71

0
0
0

0
0
0

1964(66(89 ArewaTcxiles

0

0.12

0

0

0

0.12

0

0

1992 FSDH
1981/85/88 Ikeja Hotel
1993 Tourist Co Nir

0
0
0

0.86
0.25
0

0
0
2.5

0
0
0

0
0
0

0.86
0.25
0

0
0
2.5

0
0
0

9.59

1.94

2.62

0 5.99

1.94

2.62

0

Total Portfolio:

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan Equity Quasi Partic
1999 AEFHygeia
0
200
0
0
1995 AEF-NABEGU CO. 1000
0
0
0
0
0
0 7500
2000 Cape Fund
Total Pending Commitment:

1000

7700

0

0

MAP SECTION

~~~~6
~
G E R

~

1o
~~~~
',<\ ~~~~~~~~~~N
C
/'
' ' ~~~~~~~~~~~

4O 4O

I

;

CHAD

by the
This maipwasproduced

Deig Uni oThWrlBak

f~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~a

J aX

1/

- .>

,/- <

C,

fMinn

t

l
jff Katsina

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- '};J j'fl'%;'Jv~
Sb9ApfSiai

ff~
i f;
f

t

;

- ......

RA

<
*
, ...................

KAT NiAS

S

>..

LA PE

>

f

W

s

,\

S

U

j

t;

SB-n
ina>.

3i

..........

shw on
E RInomtn
anJdNanIoG

W
/!

s

ECPTL
thi ma do no imly on the par of
NTIOALCAPTA
World...Bank...Group,any judg,ment
R ERhe...

..

-rn
,....................
(tB-V.t
th leg lst tus f an teritor , o
.
7w OgromosoO
ffo.>---

Z}, M,EAR-A

B3
Evi
8 40

60

(,,
~~~~~~~
st

\,
\,<>
y .........EXPRESSWAYS~~~~n

.
P. A0ROON

:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

<~~

14o

16

A

'

I2'

loD

12:)

"
o _. _ I u _ I . I . r X~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~M

O

GUNE

sAPiTOMEW

--

GABON
1OO

sDts
\

CONGO

