Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No: 38326-MW

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF MALAWI

Public Disclosure Authorized

January 4,2007

Country Management Unit: AFCS2
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

DATE OF THE LAST COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
May 14,2003
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
US$1=MK 123.40
MK1= US$O.OOSl
FISCAL YEAR
July I June 30

-

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA

Analytical and Advisory Activities

IFMIS

ACB
ADMARC

Anti-Corruption Bureau
Agricultural Developmentand Marketing
Corporation
African Development Bank
Alliance for Democracy
Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum
Commercial Bank of Malawi
ConsultativeGroup
Country Procurement Assessment Review

IMF
JSA

AfDB
Aford
AIDS
CAS
CEM
CBM
CG
CPAR
CPPR
CPR
CFAA
DFID
DHRMD
ESAF
ESCOM
ESW
EU
FRDP
FSAP
HIPC
HIV
IBRD
IDA
IFAD
IFC

Acting Vice President:
Director:
Country Manager
Task Team Leader:

MTEF
MTL
NBM

Learning and Innovation Loan
Millennium Challenge Corporation
Malawi Congress Party
Malawi DevelopmentCorporation
MillenniumDevelopmentGoal
Monitoring and Evaluation
Malawi Growth and Development Strategy
Ministry o f Local Government and Regional
Development
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Malawi Telecommunications Limited
National Bank of Malawi

NFRA

National Food Reserve Agency

NGO

Non-GovernmentalOrganization

NRA
OED
PCC
PER
PRGF

National Roads Authority
Operations Evaluation Department
Petroleum Control Commission
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility

PRSP
RBM
UDF
UNAIDS

Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Reserve Bank of Malawi
United Democratic Front
Joint UnitedNations Program on HIV/AIDS

UNDP
USAID

United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International
Development
World Bank Institute
World Health Organization

LIL
MCC
MCP
MDC
MDG
M&E
MGDS
MLGRD

Country Portfolio Performance Review
Country Program Review
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment
Department for International
Development, U.K.
Department of Human Resource
Management and Development
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
Electricity Supply Corporation of Malawi
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Fiscal Restructuring and Deregulation
Program
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Highly IndebtedPoor Country
Human ImmunodeficiencyVirus
InternationalBank for Reconstructionand
Development
InternationalDevelopment Agency
InternationalFund for Agricultural
Development
InternationalFinance Corporation

WBI
WHO
~

Integrated Financial Management Information
System
International Monetary Fund
Joint Staff Assessment

Hartwig Schafer
Michael Baxter
Timothy R. Gilbo
Elizabeth M. White

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR M A L A W I
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

11.

INTRODUCTION

1

111.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

2

A. Political Context
B. Poverty Profile and Progress toward the MDGs
C. Economic Context

2

GOVERNMENT PROGRAM

9

IV.

3

5

A. The Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS)
B. Bank Analysis o f the MGDS
C. Development Partner Support

9
10
11

V.

CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
A. Key Development Challenges
B. Opportunities for Growth

13
13
19

VI.

WORLD BANK COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A. The Framework for World Bank Engagement in Malawi
B. CAS Outcomes and the Proposed Program o f Support
C. Monitoring the Country Assistance Strategy

19
19
24
32

VII.

MANAGING R I S K S

34

VIII.

CONCLUSION

35

Boxes
1. Progress toward the MillenniumDevelopment Goals
2. Lessons from past Bank assistance to Malawi
3. Mainstreaming governance work in all sectors and capacity development

5
22
23

Tables
1. Malawi- Key Macroeconomic Indicators
2. FY07/10 Indicative IDA CreditiGrant Program

7
33

Figures
1. Poverty in Malawi
2. Maize Production and GDP growth (1 984-2005)
3. Recent development partners support for Malawi
4. L i f e expectancy at birth compared to other SSA countries
5. Perceptions o f obstacles to doing business in Malawi
6. CAS Outcomes - Relationship with MGDS Goals

4
6
12
15
16
25

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

Annexes
Annex 1. Results Framework for the Malawi CAS
Annex 2. CAS Completion Report
Annex 3. Malawi at a Glance
Annex 4. Key Economic Indicators
Annex 5. Key Exposure Indicators
Annex 6. Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex 7. IDA Summary Program
Annex 8. Summary o f Non-lending Services
Annex 9. Operations Portfolio
Annex 10. Malawi Country Financing Parameters
Annex 11. Malawi Debt Sustainability Analysis
Annex 12. Map IBRD 33440

36
43
75
77
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86

MALAWI: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FY2007-FY2010

I.

EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY

i

This is thefourth Country Assistance Strategy for Malawi, and outlines a program o f
Assistance covering FY07-10 in support o f implementation o f the Malawi Growth and
Development Strategy (MGDS). The C A S outlines a proposed program o f IDA financial
support likely to total around US$340 million over the period, as well as an integrated body o f
Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) and Economic and Sector Work (ESW) that will
underpin planned financial operations. The program also includes activities intended by the
World Bank Institute (WBI) for which Malawi i s a focus country. The IFC has had minimal
activity in Malawi in recent years due to the highly uncertain economic environment, and thus
this i s not a joint CAS. However, with recent improvements in the economic climate the I F C
is now actively looking for new opportunities in Malawi, and will be working closely with the
Bank to identify financing and technical assistance opportunities that are complementary to the
Bank’s efforts. Similarly it i s hoped that opportunities can be identified for MIGA to leverage
additional private sector support for the MGDS.
ii.
As a small, densely populated, landlocked country with one of the lowest
GDPskapita in the world, Malawi faces formidable development challenges. Despite
substantial efforts over the last decade, including significant amounts o f development
assistance, poverty has remained largely unchanged. More than h a l f o f the population still
lives below the poverty line, and more than one in five people are unable to meet basic daily
food needs. A majority o f the population i s engaged in rain-fed subsistence agriculture, and i s
highly vulnerable to droughts, which, in conjunction with poorly developed input and output
markets, leads to chronic food insecurity and contributes to widespread malnutrition. The lack
o f economic growth over the last decade in Malawi and the high population growth rate,
explain the persistent high rates o f poverty. However, the new Government o f President
Bingu w a Mutharika has managed to control spending and bring macroeconomic stability
since coming to power in 2004, which offers the possibility o f M a l a w i making inroads on
poverty in the medium-term. Malawi reached the HIPC Completion point in August o f 2006,
also benefiting from the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative.
iii.
With limited known natural resource endowments, in the short- to medium term
Malawi will rely on improving agricultural productivity to drive economic growth. While
the M G D S identifies sectors such as mining and tourism as potential drivers o f growth, at
present little i s known about potential f r o m these sectors. With 85 percent o f the population
engaged in agriculture and the overarching importance o f achieving food security to longer
term efforts to diversify the economy, increasing agricultural productivity i s widely agreed as
a sine qua non for sustained poverty reduction in Malawi. This will require efforts to mitigate
the effects o f periodic droughts, increase irrigation, develop and strengthen input and output
markets, improve infrastructure, and improve the overall investment climate in Malawi.

iv.
Improving Malawi’s integration with the other economies in the region is also
crucial. It i s unlikely that Malawi will ever have sufficient domestic demand to allow it t o
flourish without strong trade ties to i t s neighbors and the broader region. Sustained economic
growth in Malawi will require concerted efforts to integrate seamlessly with regional and

international markets to take advantage o f the opportunities offered by strong economic
growth in nearby economies such as Mozambique and South Africa.
The Bank’s proposedprogram is closely aligned with those of other major partners
in support of the MGDS, and is designed to further the Paris Agenda. The proposed
program has been developed in close coordination with other development partners in
Malawi, and i s fully consistent with the Development Assistance Strategy which has been
developed by the Ministry o f Finance to align donor support to the MGDS. The program
builds on a key lesson from a recent Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) and CAS
Completion Report (CASCR) and seeks to support programmatic approaches in all areas o f
engagement. The proposed Bank program i s selective with a strong focus on agriculture,
infrastructure, and private sector development (PSD). While the proposed program would see
Bank engagement in the health sector reduce, the Bank would remain strongly engaged in
support o f the H I V I A I D S program, and education.
V.

vi.
For each CAS outcome, the program defines the contribution to the most related
M G D S goal, the outcomes and indicators to be achieved during the CAS period, and
milestones for progress. The four CAS outcomes are as follows: (i)improve smallholder
put in place a foundation
agricultural productivity and integration into agro-processing; (ii)
for long- term economic growth through improved infrastructure and the investment climate;
(iii)
decrease vulnerability at the household level to H I V / A I D S and malnutrition, and (iv)
sustain improvements in expenditure management, budget execution, and the accountability
o f c i v i l service.
Thefollowing issues are suggested for discussion by the Executive Directors:

vii.
0

0

I s the proposed strategy, including the enhanced emphasis on economic growth and
governance, an appropriate response to the current country context and other
development partners support to the MGDS?
Does the program adequately factor in the risks for supporting the MGDS?

..

11

11.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) covers the four-year period from FY07 to
FYIO. The CAS represents the World Bank’s strategic alignment with the Government’s
five-year Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (2006-1 1). I t reviews recent progress in
Malawi’s economic and social development and identifies the key development challenges
facing Malawi. The CAS was developed in close collaboration with the Government o f
Malawi and proposes a program o f assistance that will support the Government’s efforts to
achieve broad-based growth and poverty reduction. The CAS aims to focus o n a small
number o f key outcomes and to improve coordination and cooperation with Malawi’s other
development partners.
2.
Malawi is a small, densely populated, land-locked country, with one of the lowest
levels of per capita income in the world (US$164 in 2004). Almost 90 percent o f the
population lives in rural areas, where the majority i s engaged in smallholder, rain-fed
subsistence agriculture. Most people are highly vulnerable to annual rainfall volatility, and
there i s chronic food insecurity and widespread malnutrition. M o r e than h a l f o f the
population lives below the poverty line, with more than one in five people unable to meet
their basic daily food needs.

3.
Despite efforts over the last decade, there remain formidable challenges to Malawi’s
economic growth and development. The impact o f emigration, HIV/AIDS, deteriorating
infrastructure, macroeconomic instability and limited competitiveness o f Malawian products
in international markets has hurt Malawi’s economy and resulted in widespread poverty. The
delivery o f health care, the provision o f other services such as water supply and sanitation,
access to skills training, and employment have all suffered because o f these factors. In
addition, vulnerability to weather shocks, corresponding economic uncertainty, and difficulty
in attracting productive investments to effectively compete in international markets threatens
economic and social development.
4.
The Government of Malawi has taken encouraging steps to address the challenges
the country faces. The Government has enforced strict fiscal discipline and, as a result,
macroeconomic performance since June 2004 has been rapidly improving. In addition, the
Government has just finalized a comprehensive medium-term strategy, the M a l a w i Growth
and Development Strategy (MGDS). This strategy seeks to achieve the aspirations o f M a l a w i
as defined in Vision 2020 and the Millennium Development Goals, as localized to the M a l a w i
context. The M G D S enjoys the prospect o f being owned at the highest level o f political
authority and through that the prospect o f wider and more genuine country ownership. This
level o f commitment i s coupled with efforts for improved coordination o f activities o f
development partners by government.

1

111.
A.

COUNTRYCONTEXT

POLITICAL CONTEXT

5.
The Government is committed to maintaining macroeconomic stability and
pursuing sustainable fiscal policies. Since coming to power in 2004, the Government has
worked hard to control public spending and reduce the large public debt it inherited from i t s
predecessor. With the next parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled in 2009, the
next two years presents a crucial window o f opportunity for the Bank to engage with a

reform-minded government.

6.

Continuing divisions between the President and
impede reform progress. Malawi has been a multi-party
President Bingu wa Mutharika was elected in May 2004,
Front (UDF) candidate, but subsequently split from the

the former ruling party could

democracy since 1994. Current
as the ruling United Democratic
UDF to form a new party, the
Democratic People’s Party (DPP). The Government does not command a majority in
Parliament, whose composition has been changing frequently, due to switching o f party
allegiance by MPs. The Government retains about a third o f seats, with the UDF - headed by
former president Bakili Muluzi - holding roughly a third and the Malawi Congress Party
(MCP) o f former President Hastings Banda also holding about a third o f seats. The
Government has so far been able to pass legislation with the support o f various opposition
MPs. However, implementing the legislative agenda i s becoming increasingly constrained,
and passage o f the annual budget has been particularly difficult in the last two years.

7.
Regionalism and patronage continue to be factors in Malawi’s political economy. In
the first democratic election in 1994, political party support was strongly regional: with the
UDF strong in the South, the M C P strong in the center, and the Alliance for Democracy
(AFORD) in the North. Regionalism s t i l l remains a strong factor in Malawian society and
politics, despite some diminution in recent years, and the apparent widespread support for the
newly created DPP. There are concerns in civil society, that regionalism i s reflected in public
sector appointments and policy decisions. These issues will continue to be a challenge in
Malawi’s democratic development, and remain a risk for implementation o f development
programs.
8.
Substantial decentralization has been legislated in recent years, but implementation
has been slow. The current Government has continued a trend towards ministry

deconcentration and decentralization o f the responsibilities to the 40 local government
assemblies. These assemblies have legislative responsibility for administering a substantial
portion o f revenues for service provision (health, education, agricultural extension), although
in practice central government ministries retain substantial influence. While, an institutional
framework for advancing the decentralization agenda i s in place, i t lacks the resources,
capacity and policy support to be fully implemented. Although fiscal decentralization i s being
progressively implemented, the efficacy o f the intergovernmental fiscal architecture i s
unclear, as i s the scope and direction o f further decentralization.
The decentralization program has been hampered by several factors. These include
9.
weak and ineffective linkages between decentralization policy and other public policy
reforms; persistent power struggles and conflicts o f roles between elected officials such as

2

Members o f Parliament, councilors and traditional authorities; weak institutional capacity and
high s t a f f turn over; ineffective participation o f local communities; and inadequate financial
resources. Since 2004, the democratic credibility o f the City, Municipal, Town and District
Assemblies has also been called into question following the abolition o f the elected
Assemblies, their replacement b y appointed assemblies, the transfer o f their financial
expenditure powers to appointed District Commissioners and the delay o f constitutionally
mandated local government elections in 2005. Finally, the timetable for local elections,
scheduled to take place in 2007, may be at risk. This i s due to institutional and capacity
weaknesses and an emerging constitutional conflict on the procedures for the appointment o f
Commissioners to the Malawi Electoral Commission (MEC).
10.
The new Government has made fighting corruption a key plank in its program, and
Perceived corruption in Malawi i s
has achieved results in tackling high-level graft.
relatively better than in most low-income countries in Africa.’ However, several indicators
measuring corruption in Malawi deteriorated under the previous government. For instance,
Malawi’s index on the control o f corruption measured by percentile ranking declined f i o m
50.5 in 2000 to 23.6 in 2004. Over the past two years, the Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) has
launched several investigations o f high profile persons in government as well as in the
opposition. These have led to arrests and convictions, while some cases are s t i l l in the courts.
Significant steps have also been taken to improve the effectiveness and efficiency o f the

judicial system, although considerable reform, institutional strengthening andjudicial capacity
building i s s t i l l required. This i s especially true at the subordinate courts level and in the
establishment o f the new Commercial Division o f the High Court. The judicial system and
the legal profession also continue to be restrained by a significant lack o f experienced lawyers
which limits the responsiveness and capacity o f the courts in particular and undermines
confidence in the governance environment.
B.

POVERTY PROFILE AND PROGRESS TOWARDS
THE MDGS

11.
Poverty continues to be widespread in Malawi, and there has been virtually no
progress in reducing poverty and inequality over the past decade. The recent Malawi
Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment (PVA) indicates that more than 52 percent o f the

population (6.4 million people) lives below the poverty line and 22 percent (2.7 million
people) is living in ultra-poverty, such that they cannot afford to meet even their
recommended daily food needs. There i s no statistically significant difference between these
figures and those in 1998, when 54.1 percent o f the population was poor and 23.6 percent
ultra-poor. Poverty has not been static however; about two-thirds o f households have moved
into or out o f poverty during the past decade. Such large movements reflect the fact that a
quarter o f Malawians have income levels within 20 percentage points o f the poverty line and
could therefore be forced into temporary or permanent poverty by even slight misfortune.
Ninety percent o f the population lives in rural areas and i s engaged in smallholder, rain-fed
agriculture, making i t highly vulnerable to deviations from the average annual rainfall pattern.
Even in years o f average rainfall, the annual lean season (the period just before harvest),

’ Malawi’s score on the Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (TICPI) in 2005 was 2.8 out

o f 10. This score is better than the average for other L o w Income Countries in Africa (2.5). Compared t o those countries that
have already reached the HIPC completion point, Malawi’s score is the same as that o f Mozambique and Madagascar, and
better than that o f Zambia (2.6), Uganda (2.5), Niger (2.4), Cameroon (2.2) and Ethiopia (2.2).

3

increases vulnerability since maize prices are relatively high at this time. In response to
shocks families sell their assets for cash to purchase maize and other food and keep their
children home from school to gather or work for food and take care o f younger siblings. Such
vulnerability reflects the pervasive risks and shocks which characterize l i f e in Malawi.
FIGURE1: POVERTY I N MALAWI
~~

Proportion o f poor and ultra-poor persons by
region in 2005

Proportion o f the population deemed poor and
ultra-poor in 1998 and 2005

I m
0 Southern rural
-_-__
80
region

C a n p r i s m d p w e r t y a n j ukra-povertyin 19s and2005

I

i

P

eo

52 4

50

Central rural
region

4

a

RNorthern rural
region

20
1008

I

2005

1008

I
UtmPoor

Source: IHSl (199Z) and IHSZ (2005)

io
2005

0

Pow

UIPa Pow

Urban

Notes.The solidline indicates t h e national povertylevel.

I

12.
Poverty is more prevalent and deeper in rural areas of the South and North regions.
The proportion o f people living in poverty is highest in rural areas o f the extreme south and
north o f the country. The South region has the highest poverty rate (64 percent), followed by
the North region (56 percent). The Central region i s relatively less poor (47 percent). Urban
areas have much lower levels o f poverty (25 percent), and o f ultra-poverty (8 percent). As
many as one third o f the rural population in the South region and one quarter o f the rural
population in the North region live below the ultra-poverty line.
13.
The PVA identifies key determinants ofpoverty. The poor are more likely to live in
larger households, have l o w levels o f education, have little access to non-farm employment,
cultivate smaller landholdings, and have no access to irrigation or ‘dimba’ land.2 Most o f the
poor are not involved in cash crop production and are located far from markets and trading
centers without access to tarmac roads. Female-headed households are more likely to be poor
(than their male-headed counterparts) due to a host o f social, cultural, economic and/or
political factors. Women are also likely to have less access to education, credit, land, and
property than men, and have less access to employment opportunities.

Dimba gardens are pieces o f land that, due to proximity to some water source (river or stream), retain moisture
for most o f the year, and can therefore be cultivated during the dry season.

4

BOX 1: PROGRESS TOWARDS THE MILLENNIUM
DEVELOPMENT
GOALS

A t current rates of progress, M a l a w i i s likely to achieve only three o f the international targets set for
the Millennium Development Goads (MDGs) by 2015. Malawi i s well placed to reach Goal 3 (to
promote gender equality and empower women). Good progress has been made in achieving equal
enrollment in primary education and in reducing the gender disparity in youth literacy. However, more
needs to be done to reduce the gender gap in tertiary education, and to increase the participation o f women
in the workforce and in positions o f authority. Advances have also been made towards Goal 4 (to reduce
child mortality), with under-five mortality projected to decrease by more than two-thirds, between 1990 and
2015. Some progress has been made towards Goal 6 (to combat HIVIAIDS, malaria and other diseases).
Notably, Malawi appears to have halted the spread o f HIViAIDS, as adult prevalence rates seem to have
stabilized at around 14 percent. However, accurate knowledge about HIV/AIDS transmission remains
weak, and only limited progress has been made in reducing risky behaviors. Good progress has been made
though increasing the proportion o f population using effective malaria prevention.
However, achieving the other MDGs i s unlikely. Malawi i s unlikely to meet Goal 1 (to eradicate extreme
poverty and hunger), as efforts have made l i t t l e impact on poverty and inequality over the past decade.
Hunger i s persistent and over 50 percent o f children under five are stunted in their growth. Good progress
has been made towards Goal 2 (to achieve universal primary education) however about a quarter drop out
before standard five and have not achieved basic literacy and numeracy. Achieving Goal 5 (to improve
maternal health) i s also unlikely; maternal mortality actually increased between 1992 and 2000, and, while
it has recently started falling again, the current rate o f reduction will not be sufficient to meet the MDG
target by 2015. Finally, there has been mixed progress towards Goal 7 (to ensure environmental
sustainability). Deforestation i s continuing at an alarming rate, and the majority o f the population s t i l l use
solid fuels. On a positive note, the proportion o f people who have access to safe drinking water and
improved sanitation appears to have increased significantly.

C.

ECONOMIC
CONTEXT

i

Recent Econom ic Developments

14.
Macroeconomic performance under the previous administration was mediocre, as a
result of both weather shocks and very weak public expenditure management. Economic

growth has been volatile and weak over the past decade, with GDP growth averaging below 3
percent (below 2 percent since 2000). As annual population growth has averaged above 2
percent, this corresponds to a modest 1 percent increase in per capita incomes over the past
ten years. M u c h o f the poor economic performance has been the result o f recurrent weather
shocks on smallholder agricultural production (Figure 2), with an average annual growth rate
o f 3 percent, which has fallen to less than 1 percent on average since the year 2000. The
impact o f erratic weather patterns has been compounded by high inflation, and high (nominal
and real) interest rates, largely caused by poor public expenditure management. In addition,
continued depreciation o f the exchange rate over the past decade has increased the cost o f k e y
imports, such as fertilizer.
15.
The new Government took rapid steps to stabilize the fiscal situation and pursue
sustainable macroeconomic policies. The new Government came into office in M a y 2004

and has since enforced fiscal discipline; consequently macroeconomic performance has
rapidly improved. As a result, the IMF and the new Government agreed on a Staff Monitored
Program (SMP) starting from July 1, 2004. Following strong performance in the
implementation o f the SMP, a new Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) was
approved in August 2005. Performance under the first year o f the PRGF program has been
strong, and Malawi has already completed the first and second reviews, in February and
August 2006, respectively. The Government reached HIPC completion point in August 2006.

5

FIGURE2: MAIZE PRODUCTION AND GDP GROWTH 1984-2005
Maize production and GDP growth

-15

I-GDP

-150

Growth Rate +Maize

Production Growth Rate

1

Source: NSO and IMF Statistics

However, there has been little noticeable diversification of the economy. Malawi’s
16.
economy remains based on agriculture, which accounts for more than 80 percent o f its export
earnings, contributes 38 percent o f gross domestic product (GDP), and supports 85 percent o f
the population. Smallholders make up about three quarters o f agricultural production and are
mostly engaged in rain-fed maize production. The Performance o f the agricultural sector
during the past decade has been weak and highly erratic, with an average growth rate o f 3
percent, which has fallen to less than 1 percent on average since the year 2000. This sluggish
growth record i s mainly due to the impact o f recurrent droughts, with the most recent being in
2001 and 2005. Constrained by high real interest rates (around 30 percent between 2001 and
2003), the manufacturing sector has averaged zero growth over the past decade and accounts
for only 11 percent o f GDP. Manufacturing i s also inward-oriented, with only 14 percent o f
manufacturing output exported.

17.

Exports remain heavily concentrated in a few sectors, leaving the economy
vulnerable to fluctuations in agricultural commodity prices. Over recent years, Malawi’s
export performance has lagged behind the performance o f many other developing countries in
the region. Despite being a relatively open economy and having non-reciprocal trade
preferences with the EU and the US, exports grew by only 2 percent in Malawi in the past 10
years (compared to 6.4 percent growth in world exports). In addition, trade remains highly
dependent upon a limited range o f primary commodities (mainly semi-processed tobacco, tea,
and sugar), reflecting limited success in past government policies to diversify the export base
away from primary products Tobacco alone accounts for around 60 percent o f exports.
Constraints to export are predominately on the supply-side in respect to trade policies (tariff

and non-tariff barriers, export support services including assistance to meet phyto-sanitary
requirements particularly in the EU and U S markets, trade capacity, customs administration,
trade facilitation, transit system, etc.) and behind the border constraints (macroeconomic,
infrastructure, structural and sector policies). Malawi i s landlocked and poorly integrated into
the region, both in terms o f trade and physical infrastructure.

6

TABLE1: MALAWI
- KEYMACROECONOMICINDICATORS

GDP Growth
Inflation (%) average
Growth in M2(%)
Exchange rate (average MWK)
Current Account balance incl. transfers/GDP
Fiscal Balance incl. grants (%GDP)
Underlying Fiscal Balance (% GDP) ’
Gross reserves in months of imports of GS
Averge interest rate *Estimate

2.1
14.9
25.2
76.7
-11.2
-11.6
-2.8
1.4
. 41.7.

mt

211114m<*
3.9
5.1
1.9
9.6
11.4 15.5
29.3 29.8 14.6
97.4 111.1 129.5
-7.6
-9.3
-7.7
-6.5
-6.5
-5.3
-0.5
1.0
1.0
1.4
1.3
1.5
39.3. 28.6. 24.4

Calendar year
Notes: 1. A measure o f domestic adjustment effort (i.e., domestic primary
exduding maize and health swap).

ii.

Medium-Term Prospects

18.
The medium-term outlook is generally positive, provided that the Government9s
macroeconomic program is maintained and progress is made in insulating the economy
against weather risk. The Government’s stabilization program provides a good basis for
accelerated growth. Annual output growth under the IMF-supported macroeconomic program
i s projected to increase to approximately 6 percent over the near term, and to drop to 4.5
percent in the medium term (in line with the regional long-term average). This projection
allows for output to recover from a prolonged period o f poor performance, and assumes that
measures are implemented to insulate the economy from the debilitating impact o f periodic
drought. However, the projections may prove ambitious when compared to an historical
average growth rate o f about 3 percent achieved between 1996 and 2005.
19.

While in the medium- to long-term sectors such as mining and tourism may hold
potential, in the short-term growth in Malawi will need to come from increasing
agricultural productivity. Agriculture employs almost 80 percent o f the population, and most
households in Malawi depend on subsistence agriculture as their main source o f livelihood.
Unlike neighboring countries such as Mozambique and Zambia, Malawi i s not endowed with
significant known mineral deposits that could be the basis o f a viable strategy to accelerate
growth in the short term. While tourism in Malawi likely does hold potential, little analysis
exists o f i t s potential economic contribution, and the need to overcome significant
infrastructure constraints suggests that i t i s unlikely to be pillar o f growth in the short-tern.
Critical to Malawi’s ability to sustain the high growth rates needed to have an impact o n
poverty will be rapid improvements in agricultural productivity, coupled with diversification
towards higher value crops and an expansion o f agro-processing and other related industries.
Increasing agricultural productivity will also be critical to improving food security and
creating the space for the economy to diversify in the medium term into more service and
manufacturing related activities.

7

20.
Improving Malawi’s integration with the other economies in the region is crucial.
As a small, landlocked country that i s dependent on import o f key commodities such as o i l
and fertilizer, it i s unlikely that Malawi will ever have sufficient domestic demand to allow i t
to flourish without strong trade ties to i t s neighbors and the broader region. Malawi’s
persistently high trade deficit i s indicative o f poor regional integration, constrained by poor
transport infrastructure and policy framework, limited and expensive regional and
international communications, and significant administrative and governance barriers to
private sector importers and exporters. Malawi needs to undertake a concerted effort to
integrate seamlessly with regional and international markets to take advantage o f the
opportunities offered by strong economic growth in nearby economies such as Mozambique
and South Africa. Malawi’s eagerness to pursue regional trade agreements has resulted in
membership o f a number o f overlapping preferential arrangements. This i s not unique to
Malawi and i s instead a feature in the sub-region where the majority o f countries are members
o f different regional organizations, thus over-complicating the regional integration process.
iii.

External Debt Sustainability

2 1.
Malawi reached completion point of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC)
Initiative in August 2006. According to the L o w Income Countries (LIC) Debt Sustainability

analysis, on reaching the HIPC Completion Point, Malawi’s NPV o f debt-to-exports ratio
dropped from 191 percent in 2005 to 39 percent in 2006 as a result o f HIPC and MDRI
assistance. Topping-up o f HIPC assistance was projected to decrease the debt-to-exports ratio
hrther to 30 percent in 2006.3

iv.

Domestic Debt Sustainability

22.

Domestic debt levels remain very high and hinder economic growth and poverty
reduction. As a result o f the previous government’s failure to control spending, particularly

since 2001/02, Malawi accumulated a dangerously large stock o f domestic debt. This debt
threatened macroeconomic and financial stability, and with over 30 percent o f government
expenditure consumed by interest payments in 2004/05, crowded out spending on social
services and investment. Further, government borrowing pushed up interest rates, making
credit prohibitively expensive for the poor, thus contributing to poor economic performance
and stagnating rates o f poverty.

23.

Having inherited this potentially unsustainable domestic debt spiral, the new
Government has managed to reverse the trend, but the situation remains precarious.
Having peaked at 25 percent o f GDP in 2003/04, domestic debt i s estimated to have declined
to 20 percent o f GDP by end 2005/06, and i s projected to fall to 16.5 percent in 2006/07.
Recent progress notwithstanding, domestic debt continues to constitute a large burden on
3

Malawi became eligible for topping-up assistance under the HIPC initiative because the debt sustainability
outlook had deteriorated substantially since the decision point, primarily due to exogenous factors that led to
fhndamental changes in the country’s economic circumstances. The largely unexpected decline in Malawi’s
export prices and a fall in international interest rates were the main factors leading to an unanticipated
deterioration in Malawi’s debt sustainability outlook.

8

government resources, and political pressures on government spending and the country’s
vulnerability t o external shocks could easily reverse achievements in bringing domestic debt
under control.

IV.
A.

GOVERNMENT
PROGRAM

THEMALAWI
GROWTH
AND DEVELOPMENT
STRATEGY (MGDS)

24.
The MGDS sets out the Government’s economic growth and development priorities
for the next five years (2006/07 - 2010/11). The strategy seeks to achieve the aspirations o f
Malawi as defined in Vision 2020 and the Millennium Development Goals. The strategy
builds o n the Malawi Poverty Reduction Strategy (2002), the Malawi Economic Growth
Strategy (2003), and integrates a number o f new sector strategies, policies and emerging
issues, such as land reform, public/private partnerships, etc. The M G D S i s organized around
five themes (Sustainable Economic Growth; Social Protection; Social Development;
Infrastructure Development; and Good Governance). Each theme specifies medium-term
outcomes and strategies to achieve them, including a prioritized and costed action plan. The
document has a strong focus on results, which has been supported by the World Bank.
25.
The MGDS recognizes that strong and sustainable economic growth is key to
reducing poverty. The long-term vision o f the M G D S i s to transform Malawi f r o m a
predominately importing and consuming country into a predominately producing and
exporting country. The M G D S seeks to achieve growth rates o f at least 6 percent a year. In
the medium term the strategy concentrates on agriculture as the driver o f growth. It focuses
on increasing agricultural productivity and integrating smallholder farmers into commercial
activities. In the long term, the Government has also identified four sectors with potential for
high growth: tourism, mining, manufacturing, and agro-processing. The M G D S also
emphasizes infrastructure development and the need to create a conducive environment for
export-led growth, as w e l l as macroeconomic stability and sound public expenditure
management. Growth related priorities include agriculture and food security, transport
infrastructure, energy generation and supply, irrigation and water management, integrated
rural development and HIV/AIDS.
26.
T h e MGDS also acknowledges the role of social development in health, education,
economic empowerment and social protection among others. The M G D S recognizes that a
healthy and educated population i s necessary if M a l a w i i s to achieve sustainable economic
growth. The M G D S also recognizes the importance o f increasing the assets o f the poor and
vulnerable so they can contribute to and benefit from economic growth. Government has put
plans in place to protect those that may be left out due to their inability to actively participate
in the development process.
27.
Institutional capacity at all levels of government will be a key constraint to
implementation of the MGDS. The M G D S notes that weak implementation capacity in
central and local government may impede delivery o f the M G D S objectives and prevent
additional resources that might become available (from debt relief, increased aid or domestic
revenues) from being used effectively. Currently there i s not a coordinated approach to public
sector capacity building at the national level. Ministries, Departments and Agencies are
responsible for their o w n capacity building strategies, but there i s little evidence o f their

9

effectiveness or effective oversight and monitoring for these strategies. The Government has
undertaken an assessment o f capacity at decentralized levels o f government and is revising the
National Decentralization Program to incorporate a local government capacity development
program based on that assessment to build this capacity.

B.

BANKANALYSIS

OF THE MGDS

The JSAN concludes that the MGDS broadly provides a comprehensiveframework
for growth andpoverty reduction in Malawi The M G D S assumes that growth will average 6
percent over the medium-term, which i s high compared both to Malawi’s past performance
and to anticipated growth in the region. In staffs’ view, this growth i s feasible because
Malawi’s poor performance over the past decade provides some scope for catching up.
However, this growth i s not assured: i t also depends on the Government’s continued
commitment to sound macroeconomic management, the implementation o f pro-growth
measures identified in the MGDS, and effective links between activities for developing an
enabling environment for private sector led growth and the institutional framework that is
essential to such an environment. I t also cautions that changing economic circumstances and
opportunities will necessitate that the government monitor and act responsively to the
changing needs o f the private sector.

28.

The JSAN also notes that the MGDS could have benefited from a discussion of the
risks to macroeconomic performance that could undermine its implementation. M a l a w i
remains vulnerable to a number o f exogenous shocks to growth, including drought and a
deterioration in the terms o f trade. Implementation o f the M G D S could strain Malawi’s
limited administrative capacity and risk diverting attention from core macroeconomic
priorities. Uncertain and volatile aid flows are potentially disruptive and will need to be
carefully managed.

29.

30.
For growth to be sustained, it will also need to be shared. The primary focus o f the
M G D S i s on measures to spur productive activities in economic sectors. However, staffs are
concerned that i t underplays the role o f social expenditures and social protection in supporting
growth. In countries such as M a l a w i where a shortage o f skilled manpower i s a real
constraint to growth, spending on social sectors can play a critical supportive role. The J S A N
notes that this will require integrating vocational training and entrepreneurship into the formal
education system and implementing change management reforms in order to improve the
education sector’s absorptive capacity. I t also notes that more sustainable solutions b e
considered for retaining key frontline staff in the health sector.
31.
Successful implementation of the strategy will depend on a number of
considerations being taken on board. Priorities will need to be further defined within the
context o f resource constraints. In addition, the ability to deliver the expected results in the
M G D S may be limited by the “real” resources available to Malawi. While Malawi benefited
significantly b y accessing debt relief under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative, the impact
on net flows has been modest on account o f offsetting reductions in gross flows. Further, the
strategy needs to be more clearly linked to the budget and a system needs to be put in place to
ensure that the budget i s indeed an instrument for i t s implementation. Policy reforms to
emanate from the strategy will need to be evidence based and infrastructure expenditure
choices made after due consideration o f alternative options. In order to ensure that the
10

authorities are able to properly assess progress towards the end period targets, there will be
need to have annual targets that can be realistically monitored.
Additional analytical work is necessary to achieve MGDS objectives. The JSAN
32.
recognizes that knowledge gaps s t i l l exist in a number o f areas:

Growth diagnostics, focused on the scope for expansion in high growth sectors and the
constraints these sectors face;4
Analytical work to improve the quality o f the governance environment especially
efficiency, accountability and transparency in the use o f public resources;
Diagnostic work to better understand the underlying constraints to evidence-based policy
making in Malawi;
More detailed analytical work on barriers and facilitators to infant and child feeding as a
main contributor to malnutrition;
Institutional audit to inform efforts to build a stronger disaster management system;
Further exploration on how market-based weather insurance initiatives currently being
implemented on a pilot basis can be scaled up if found successful.

C.

DEVELOPMENT
PARTNER
SUPPORT

33.

There are many donors and multilateral agencies active in a variety of sectors.

DFID, the EU and the World Bank account for around 80 percent o f all foreign development
assistance to Malawi. Most donors support a number o f different sectors with a concentration
o f support in social development and social protection (especially emergency relief). The
historic pattern o f aid expenditure confirms Government concerns on the low level o f
development assistance available for infrastructure and economic growth. (Figure 3) The
indicated pipeline o f development partners shows a similar pattern o f support. The African
Development Bank and GTZ have already developed strategies for support. DFID, the EU,
Norway, CIDA, and the UN Family are aligning to the MGDS, defining lead partners against
M G D S themes. Malawi i s also participating in the M C C threshold program.
Through the Department of Debt and Aid in the Ministry of Finance, the
Government is beginning to lead donor coordination. As part o f the M G D S process, the

34.

Government has developed a Development Assistance Strategy (DAS) which is a
coordination plan aimed at improving the effectiveness o f aid inflows to Malawi and defining
what Government and Development Partners have to do to implement the Paris Declaration
on aid effectiveness. I t i s comprehensive, setting out principles, roles, structures and action
plan and monitoring framework. The first joint sector review was held in 2005 by
Government and five donors, with discussions focused on how the Paris Declaration i s being
implemented across key sectors.

The need for a more detailed economic analysis o f the potential contribution o f the tourism sector to the
Malawi economy is discussed in the 2004 Malawi Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS).

11

PICURE 3: RECENT
DEVELOPMENT
PARTNERSUPPORT
D e v e l o p m e n t P a r t n e r A c t u a l E x p e n d i t u r e 05/06
S o u r c e : M i n i s t r y of F i n a n c e
Social Protection".
Social Development
General
Good Governance
Sustainable Economic
Growth
Infrastructure
Other
Theme
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

$ million

Development Partner Actual Expenditure 05/06
Source Ministry o f F i n a n c e
DflD
World B a n k

EU
N O'W
I egian E m b a s s y
USAID'
AD6

UNDP

GTZ
KfW
JICA'

Donor
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

S million

35.
The JSAN notes that meeting the objectives of the MGDS will require a substantial
increase in external financing to supplement Malawi's low domestic savings. T h i s includes
a substantial scaling-up o f donor support to finance public expenditures as well as private
financial inflows to finance private investment. The JSAN suggests fbrther recognition o f the
macroeconomic challenges posed by increased external financing and the need to strengthen
economic management and institutions to address these challenges. To date, donors have not
committed to scaling-up o f aid flows.

12

v.

CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES

A.

KEYDEVELOPMENT
CHALLENGES

i

Pervasive Risk

36.
Malawi faces widespread risks and uncertainty at the national and household level.
The 2004 Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) identifies the high level o f risk facing
households and key economic players as the main reason for persistently slow growth in
Malawi. Pervasive risk has also been identified in the 2006 PVA as a major cause o f
persistent poverty in Malawi. The three main sources o f risk are: (i)macroeconomic
instability; (ii)food insecurity caused by weather-related shocks to agricultural production
and poorly functioning agricultural markets; and (iii)illness or death, especially from
HIV/AIDS. Such a risky environment creates a poverty trap in which the poor stick to lowrisk, low-return subsistence activity, while actual shocks, when they happen, push the
marginal non-poor back into poverty.
37.
Macroeconomic uncertainty undermines growth and poverty reduction. Weak
policy performance in the past has damaged the economy and depressed private sector
investment. Poor fiscal management between 2000/0 1 and 2003/04 led to substantial domestic
borrowing, which pushed up interest rates and made borrowing unaffordable for small farmers
and businesses. Monetary financing increased inflation and exchange rate volatility, which
resulted in unpredictable prices for inputs and outputs for farmers and businessmen.’ High
interest rates (largely driven by government borrowing on the domestic money markets)
crowded out private sector borrowing, and therefore investment. Furthermore, having taken
on large amounts o f debt, a substantial proportion o f government spending was diverted to
debt service payments, leading to reduced public investment in human capital and
infrastructure. While the new government has managed to stabilize the situation, interest rates
and inflation remain high at 25 percent and 17 percent respectively at end 2005, although they
have begun too fall through 2006. Continued fiscal discipline will be required to bring these
down to levels conducive to private sector growth. In addition, Malawi’s projected foreign
exchange reserve cover i s s t i l l relatively l o w and the economy remains vulnerable to both
domestic and external shocks.
38.
Macroeconomic stability hinges on successfully managing key fiscal vulnerabilities.
Fiscal risks include a history o f poor management o f the payroll. Pension outlays could also
turn out to be higher if the demographic assumptions underlying the current reforms turn out
to be incorrect. To reduce these risks, the government will need to continue strengthening
payroll management, in particular, ensuring that the civil service database remains up-to-date,
and improve the compilation o f data related to current and h t u r e retirees and deaths.
Potential contingent liabilities to the budget also need to be managed by ensuring proper
governance in the administration o f Agricultural Development and Marketing Corporation
(ADMARC), National Food Reserve Agency (NFRA), Malawi Rural Development Fund
(MARDEF), and other key parastatals.

Inthe recent Investment Climate Survey, over 70 percent o f managers considered macroeconomic instability
to be a primary constraint to doing business.

13

39.
Chronic food insecurity harms growth and productivity and perpetuates poverty.
Chronic food insecurity continues to sap the nation’s energy to achieve significant economic
growth, hinders the nutritional development o f the population, and requires emergency
responses that deplete limited fiscal resources. In addition, they push people back into
poverty, for example when households are forced to sell productive assets, such as farm tools,
to buy food, thereby frustrating efforts to increase productivity. The uncertainty and risk
associated with diversification and cash crops also constrains productivity, as farmers stick to
low-risk, low-return production o f staple food crops. Further, reducing Malawi’s vulnerability
to weather shocks i s critical not only to reduce household food insecurity and increase
productivity, but also because the substantial macroeconomic impacts o f weather shocks
contribute to undermine macroeconomic stability.

40.
High vulnerability to recurrent drought results in chronic food insecurity at the
household level. The most severe shocks reported by households are droughthloods and food
price volatility, partially reflecting consequences o f climate risk. Households are acutely
vulnerable to rain failure and other weather shocks. Moreover, owing to poverty, l o w levels
o f productivity, degraded land, and extremely small landholdings6, an estimated 25 percent o f
households cannot produce or buy sufficient food even in good production years. Limited
access to storage and the pressing need for cash result in farmers selling a part o f their crop
immediately after the harvest, when prices are low. M a n y farmers are then forced to buy
maize later in the year when prices are high.7 A substantial portion o f the population i s
isolated from the rest o f the country both physically and in terms o f economic activity. This
translates into a lack o f household resources to purchase food, making food insecurity an
enduring condition for an overwhelming number o f Malawians.
4 1.
Limited and poorly functioning markets keep agricultural productivity low and
prevent farmers from getting the best price for their produce. Markets for key agricultural
inputs such as fertilizer and hybrid seeds work poorly where they exist and do not exist at a l l
in many areas. Farmers therefore have limited access to inputs with inadequate agricultural
extension (both for farm techniques and information about markets) and thus productivity
remains low. Successive governments have implemented schemes to address this and
increase fertilizer use, but these have often set back private sector development in this sector.
Government interventions are also a problem, for example, this year’s setting o f minimum
prices for tobacco has damaged market confidence. The recent P V A notes that markets where
the Government does not intervene, such as rice, beans and groundnuts, are more efficient
than the maize market, which i s influenced by the pricing policy and export restrictions o f
A D M A R C (Agricultural Development and Marketing Corporation). Output markets for
agricultural produce are similarly scarce and under-developed. Market development i s
constrained by the unreliable and limited provision o f core infrastructure (electricity,
telecommunications, water) and the high cost or lack o f transport, which impede the f l o w o f
produce around the country from areas o f plenty to areas o f shortage.

As a result o f rapid population growth, the average landholding size i s very small, at only 1.2 hectaredfamily.
The PVA indicates that home production i s a significant portion o f total food consumption; however more than
half o f the rural population runs out o f own-produced maize (the main staple crop) six to eight months before the
next harvest.

14

Illness or death in a family, especially from HIV/AIDS, is the third most common
42.
risk for households. The recent
IHS2 showed that two thirds o f all
FIGURE4: LIFEEXPECTANCY
AT BIRTH FOR
households reported that someone
MALAWI
AND SELECTED SSACOUNTMES
was illor had an injury in the past
two weeks.
One-third o f
70 1
households had a chronically ill
-65 c
m
person in the household. These
al
-60 people were chronically ill for an
c
2 55
average o f 7.8 years. In terms o f
+Uganda
m
coping
strategies,
households
+Zambia
=50
helped themselves by using their
Zimbabwe
45
past savings and borrowing or by
40
taking drastic measures such as
fostering out children and in rare
5 35
cases removing children from
school. Access to health facilities
195019601970198019902000with doctors i s quite limited for
1955
1965
1975
1985
1995
2005
most Malawians, especially in
rural areas and the South. The Source: UN (2004)
health system i s in a state o f
disrepair with limited availability o f drugs and medical supplies and poor remuneration
resulting in doctors and nurses moving abroad. In addition, access to potable water and
sanitation, while improving, i s s t i l l a threat to the health status o f the population.

-

:
E

a,
P
a,

With an estimated prevalence rate among prime age (15-49) adults of 14 percent in
43.
2005, Malawi ranks eighth in the world in terms of the severity of its HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Furthermore, infection rates are much higher among certain groups. For example, the disease
i s more prevalent among women than men, and among young adults, prevalence was more
thanfour times higher for females as males in 2004. HIV/AIDS has had a profound impact
on average life expectancy in Malawi - reducing i t to 37 years in 2005 - which i s reducing the
working-age population and increasing the dependency ratio. Furthermore, the labor
productivity o f the remaining workforce is lower, as people take time o f f to care for the sick
or to attend funerals. At the government level, the epidemic has reduced public investment,
as government spending i s diverted to meet growing health demands. As a result o f these
factors, the impact on GDP growth i s estimated at a reduction o f 1-2 percent per year. The
epidemic i s having a particular impact on the professional class, and illness and death among
teachers, doctors, and nurses are hampering efforts to improve healthcare and education
provision. For example, while the country struggles to increase the annual number o f new
teachers trained beyond 3000, it i s estimated that around 1000 teachers die every year,
primarily as a result o f HIV/AIDS.

ii

A Constrained Private Sector

44.
Malawi’s business environment is not conducive to sustained private sector growth
and the cost of doing business is high. The 2006 Investment Climate Survey identified the
main constraints to private sector development in Malawi as: macroeconomic instability (see
15

paragraph 3 3), deficient infrastructure, especially limited and unreliable electricity supply; a
shortage o f skilled personnel; expensive and restricted access to credit; crime; and corruption
(Figure 5).

Deficient infrastructure constrains all types of economic activity and the provision
of social services. The lack o f rural infrastructure, in particular feeder roads and
electrification, hampers growth o f agricultural productivity and marketing, and restricts the
provision o f health and education services. Improved infrastructure i s crucial if value-added
activities, like agro-processing and manufacturing, are to develop in Malawi. For example,
only 13 percent o f rural roads are tar or asphalt and rural communities are on average 20km
from a sealed road (40km in the North). As a result, the nearest road to communities i s
impassable by minibus on
FIGURE5: PERCEPTIONS OF OBSTACLES TO DOINGBUSINESSIN
average four months o f
MALAWI
the year (seven months in
the
North)
and
Figure 2: Percentage of Formal and Informal firms perceiving obstacles t o be
"major" or "very sewre" tooperations and growth
impassable by lorry on
average two months.
Macroeconomicmstebdty
Cost OF financing
External transport links
Electruity
are also a problem:
Tax rates
Malawi
has
no
5hlls and Educationof Available Workers
Crime, theft and disorder
hnctioning direct link to
Corruption
the coast. By contrast,
Tax administration
neighboring Zambia i s
Access to financing
fbrther from the sea but i s
Transportation
Anti-competitive or inFormalpractices
linked to the coast by
Political stablity
road, rail and pipeline
Customs and Trade Regulations
through Tanzania. As a
Regulatory Policy Uncertamty
T&cornrnunications
result, transport costs are
Access tu Land
significantly higher in
Labor Regulations
Malawi
than
in
Legal framework I Conflict resolution
3usiness Licensing and Operating Permits
neighboring
countries,
Environmentalregulations
increasing the price o f
0%
20%
40%
BIT"/.
80%
100%
key imports such as
fertilizer, and making
exports less competitive.
45.

46.
Malawi is already energy deficient. Lack o f reliable electricity has had a severe
impact on enterprise productivity, especially for those f i r m s that cannot afford their o w n
generators. Power outages and surges from the public grid inflict severe costs on Malawian
entrepreneurs*, especially for those f i r m s that cannot afford generators. In 2004, businesses
experienced power disruption on an average o f 50 days, compared to 15 days in Zambia,
while average losses in production due to power outages and surges were estimated at 10
percent o f sales for both formal and informal firms, far higher than in any comparator country.
Losses were higher (up to 20 percent) for f i r m s without a generator (around half). Since 98
Malawi has installed electricity generation capacity o f about 284MW, o f which only 220MW was operational
in 2005. Unsuppressedpeak demand i s 265MW, resulting in a current capacity deficit o f about 45MW (1 7
percent).

16

percent o f Malawi’s electricity i s hydroelectricity generated on the Shire River, generation i s
vulnerable to dry spells. In addition, i t i s estimated that unsuppressed peak load will grow at
2.5 percent or higher in the short to medium term, depending on GDP growth.
47.
Poor electrification levels hurt households. Electrification i s very limited with only 2
percent o f households in rural areas connected to the grid (compared to 30 percent o f
households in Lilongwe and 35 percent in other cities). Using electricity rather than paraffin
for lighting would save households an estimated MK18-23 per kilowatt-hour (USSO. 170.2l/kWh). Firewood remains the main cooking fuel for 98 percent o f the rural population
(women spend an average o f one and a half hours each day collecting firewood), which has
led to widespread deforestation, soil erosion and diminishing water supplies. The full
potential o f the energy sub-sector remains far from being realized owing to a number o f
structural, operational and institutional challenges.
48.
Access to key communication infrastructure, notably telephones, is limited to the
richest quintile of the population, and almost exclusively to urban households. Virtually all
phone owners, either landline or cellular, are in the highest two income deciles. Improving

access to information (about market prices, new farming techniques and technologies) in rural
areas will be key to improving smallholder productivity.

Recruiting skilled workers remains a real challenge. Unlike many other comparator
49.
countries, the main labor limitation i s availability o f skills rather than labor regulations.
Moreover, there i s significant variation across firm categories: more than half o f medium and
large firms, foreign owned firms, and exporting f i r m s report the lack o f skills to be an
important problem. Data from the Investment Climate Survey shows that only 50 percent o f
f i r m s can afford to offer training. Those f i r m s that do offer formal training are 60 percent
more productive than those that do not. This increase in productivity corresponds to an
increase in worker remuneration o f 20-30 percent. In addition, the education system is not
producing students with skills that match private sector needs. While progress has been
made in terms o f primary school access, the quality o f education has declined. T h i s i s due to
an insufficient number o f qualified teachers and consequently large class sizes, a high teacher
attrition rate largely due to HIV/AIDS, and poor school infrastructure. Access to secondary
and tertiary education i s heavily skewed towards wealthier Malawians. There are inadequate
places in the post-secondary educational system to allow many Malawians to attend, and
vocational training places are especially limited.

50.
The high cost of financing, and d i j j h l t y accessing it, are key obstacles to private
sector growth in M a l a w i Around 60 percent o f managers interviewed for the Investment
Climate Survey perceived access to and cost o f finance as a major obstacle to their firm’s
development (Figure 5). While 70 percent o f f i r m s have some form o f access to banking,
only 30 percent have access to long-term financing. High interest rates (real interest rates
were around 14 percent in 2004) constitute the largest obstacle to credit, and hinder both the
creation o f new enterprises and the expansion o f existing ones. Malawi’s financial system
lacks depth and i s vulnerable to external shocks as i t is quite small. Furthermore, even though
an increasing number o f banks have entered the sector, the two largest banks account for more
than 70 percent o f bank credit in the economy.

17

5 1.
The cost of crime and corruption remains high by international standards. Nearly
50 percent o f formal f i r m s and 30 percent o f informal enterprises viewed crime as a binding
obstacle to their performance. Malawian f i r m s lose an average o f 4 percent o f sales to crime,
double the sub-Saharan Africa average. Corruption i s another area o f concern. M o r e than
h a l f o f managers surveyed reported that Malawian f i r m s must pay a gift or informal payment
to public officials to “get things done”, with each payment on average equal to about 2
percent o f sales. They also pay 4-5 percent o f the value o f a contract when bidding for public
projects.
iii.

Weak Institutional Capacity

52.
The delivery of public services suffers from a shortage of skilled personnel, and
limited institutional capacity and accountability at all levels of government. Malawi faces
severe human resource constraints in a number o f key sectors, including health, education, the
financial (accounting, procurement, financial services) and legal professions. T h i s i s due in
part to the inability o f the post-secondary education system to educate sufficient graduates and
has been exacerbated by the impact o f the H I V / A I D S epidemic. Weak institutional capacity
in the c i v i l service at both national and local levels o f government seriously undermines
government’s capacity to develop evidence-based strategies, manage resources effectively,
implement reform and translate increased expenditure into improvements in the quality and
reach o f public services.
The 2006 IEG C A E notes that reasons for poor performance o f the c i v i l service include a
failure to deal with incentives for the c i v i l service including l o w pay, lack o f skills, and
poor enforcement o f standards o f performance. This is compounded by a young
democracy and an inherited patronage system.
Despite strengthening fiscal discipline, budget control and accountability in public
finances over the past two years, financial management capacity remains a substantial
problem. Weak capacity also constrains the alignment and management o f international
development assistance (which finances 40 percent o f the government budget). This i s
compounded by the need to implement effective establishment and payroll controls and to
remove perverse incentives to seek non-salary remuneration through training and other
non-service delivery activities.
While Malawi has embarked on many reforms in public expenditure management, the
linkages between planning, budgeting, public expenditure, monitoring and the policy
development and review processes are also weak.
M a l a w i has an appropriate survey program for measuring welfare and living standards at
the impact level-including the MDGs-and for tracking trends over time. However, the
national survey program i s fragile, and over-dependent on external funding and technical
assistance. The 2006 P V A notes that the political environment for monitoring and
evaluation has improved recently, but that the institutional framework and monitoring
systems are s t i l l weak. The lack o f adequate information hinders the ability o f c i v i l society
to make demands on the system and thus reinforce accountability.

At the local level there are ineffective linkages between the decentralization policy and
national public policy reforms. Planning and operational links between central and local
government are weak, especially the fiscal architecture. Weak public management

18

capacity, l o w access to resources and l o w levels o f c i v i l society and private sector voice at
local government and in ministries, i s a serious challenge to the implementation o f the
National Decentralization Program and the MGDS. Greater collaboration between the
executive and legislative branches and local governments combined with greater
accessibility by c i v i l society would enhance the integrity o f the governance framework.

B.

OPPORTUNITIES FOR GROWTH

53.

I n spite of the substantial development challenges facing Malawi, there are a
number of factors that offer potential for higher rates of growth. Reforms implemented b y
the current government since i t s election in 2004 provide a more solid base for economic
activity. For example, the Government i s committed to sustainable fiscal policy and to
maintaining macroeconomic stability: as a result, interest rates and inflation have started to
come down. Progress i s also being made on reforming key state-owned enterprises (SOEs),
including A D M A R C , with increased public-private partnerships (PPP) in infrastructure also
on the horizon. In addition, new strategies to minimize weather-related risk, such as pricerisk hedging and micro and macro weather insurance, offer promise to help reduce both
national and household vulnerability to drought and floods.

54.
Rapid economic growth in Mozambique, South Africa and Zambia is expanding the
regional market, which presents opportunities for Malawian exporters. Strong economic
growth in the neighboring economies, particularly Mozambique and South Africa has
increased purchasing power in the sub-region and presents an opening for Malawi to develop
export industries that would benefit from Malawi’s low labor costs.
Malawi could gain access to increased resources. Recent debt relief under the
55.
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
(MDRI) will open up new borrowing space for Malawi, bringing new opportunities and risks.
Going forward, Malawi will need to adopt a prudent policy towards new borrowing,
especially in light o f IDA’S new policy on non-concessional borrowing. In addition to
improved prospects for concessional borrowing, M a l a w i currently enjoys strong donor
support, with the possibility o f increased grant resources becoming available.

VI.
A.

WORLDBANKGROUPCOUNTRY
ASSISTANCESTRATEGY

THE FRAMEWORK
FOR WORLD BANKENGAGEMENT
IN MALAWI

The MGDS is the basis for the Bank’s support. The document identifies a clear need
for broad-based economic growth to reduce poverty in Malawi, and the Government and c i v i l
society stakeholders have indicated a strong preference for the Bank to be engaged in sectors
critical to achieving such growth. The Bank’s proposed assistance program i s focused o n
identified M G D S priorities o f agriculture and food security, infrastructure development,
combating HIV/AIDS, and governance and public sector management.

56.

57.

The CAS is designed to achieve four key outcomes, which will support the goals
articulated in the MGDS. Successhl implementation o f the existing project portfolio will b e
the main tool for achievement o f these outcomes, supported by new operations and
A A N E S W beginning under this CAS. Implementation o f the CAS and its evaluation will b e

19

based on partnership principles between government and donors, which were historically
limited to specific programs (such as H I V / A I D S and health) and expanded in FY06 (joint
CPR). The ESW program has been developed based on knowledge gaps identified in the
JSAN (para 3 1) and considering the analytical work o f other development partners.

58.
IDA availability and terms. Malawi’s access to new IDA resources has been affected
by the attainment o f HIPC completion and access to MDRI debt relief. The latest estimates
(based on the 2006 Performance-Based Allocation - PBA) adjusted for MDRI debt service
forgone and expected compensatory resources indicate that Malawi would have access to
about SDRm 105 milliong for the remainder o f I D A 1 4 (FY07-08). Indicative allocations for
FY09-10” are SDRm 65 annually, subject to the outcome o f the IDA 15 replenishment, and
the PBA. The improved debt sustainability outlook following HIPC Completion and MDRI
will also change the terms o f IDA financing, with Malawi expected to move from being a
grant-only IDA country to ‘yellow light’ status. This would result in a combination o f
financing on grant and normal IDA credit terms, as, despite MDRI, Malawi s t i l l remains at
moderate risk o f debt distress due to the country’s vulnerability to exogenous shocks. Current
indications foresee a grant element o f around 45 percent throughout the new CAS.
59.
Implementation of the Paris Agenda. The Bank will support the Government in
implementation o f i t s action plan for the Paris Declaration. In addition to aligning to the
M G D S and supporting Government efforts to improve i t s outcome orientation (PD 1 and 1l),
the Bank will seek to maximize the amount o f support delivered programmatically, ideally
through pooled funding mechanisms. I t i s estimated that over 50 percent o f new financing
will be delivered through programmatic support, or through co-financing arrangements (see
Table 3 - FY07/10 Indicative IDA eredidGrant Program). The Bank will also seek to
increase the level o f Development Policy support, through the C A B S group, as Government
planning and fiduciary systems develop and strengthen. Depending on performance, i t i s
anticipated that up to a h r t h e r 33 percent o f IDA financing to M a l a w i through the C A S would
be Development Policy support.
60.

Selectivity and realism. Being more selective and targeting more realistic results were

key recommendations o f 2006 IEG CAE. To this end, the proposed program envisages
limiting the Bank’s engagement in sectors in which other donors are better positioned to take
the lead. An extensive process o f consultation within M a l a w i both with Government and a
broad array o f c i v i l society actors has revealed a preference for the Bank program to be more
focused on economic growth than has been the case in the past. The current portfolio has
already been streamlined through the cancellation, closure, and restructuring o f operations and
the Bank will seek to maintain a portfolio o f ten or fewer projects in Malawi to allow budget
space for critical knowledge work. I t i s envisaged that the Bank would gradually scale back
from some sectors (e.g. health) as projects close through the C A S period, but leverage the
Bank’s capacity in knowledge generation and convening power to support interventions by
other partners.
This reflects a reduction o f SDRm 19.7 in FY07/08, which was frontloaded in FY06 in response to the drought
and food crisis.
lo
These assume constant relative performance in the PBA.
11
A t current exchange rates these figures translate to new IDA availability for Malawi o f approximately U S 8 0
million per year in FY07-08 and US$95 million per year in FY09-10.

20

6 1.
A strengthened partnership model. The M G D S has been used as the primary tool to
ensure alignment o f donor programs to country results. The Bank’s proposed activities have
benefited from close strategic coordination with development partners though the
development o f the M G D S and the DAS. K e y features o f the strong partnerships that have
been agreed include:
The Bank will take a leading role in agriculture and food security, in conjunction with the
European Commission (EC). The level o f donor co-ordination has been encouraging on
food security issues and the dialogue with GoM. Building on experience to date with the
pooled funding arrangement in Health and HIV/AIDS, the Bank will look to support the
Government efforts to develop a programmatic approach in the sector to be supported by a
pooled financing arrangement.
The Bank will play a lead role in private sector development, combining support for
private sector development with expertise in agricultural and food security in an integrated
manner.
The Bank will continue to play a central role in infrastructure development, also in close
collaboration with the EC. The E C will continue to play a leading role in the transport
sector including regional interconnectivity, while the Bank will focus i t s efforts in energy
and water development.
The Bank will play a more junior role in health, and concentrate i t s support on developing
fiduciary capacity in support o f the SWAP including through the Malaria Booster
Program. It i s envisaged that Bank financial support to the sector will not be renewed
once the current two projects financing the SWAP expire at end FY08. The UK
Department for International Development (DFID) will play a leading role in health.
- Malawi’s response to HIV/AIDS.
The Bank will play an enhanced role in supporting
Working closely with the Global Fund and other partners, the Bank will take o n the
secretariat for the pooled fund support to HIV/AIDS.

The Bank will continue to provide technical input into the Government’s efforts to revamp
Malawi’s Social Protection framework. Close collaboration with UK DFID and with
U N I C E F i s expected in this area.
The Bank will continue to be engaged in economic management broadly, through the
C A B S group.
The Bank will be engaged in public finance management reform and c i v i l service reform,
working with the European Commission, DFID, U S A I D and UNDP.
The Bank will engage with Government and other donors in developing a programmatic
approach to strengthening the intergovernmental fiscal architecture to ensure the integrity
and viability o f the budgetary and expenditure management framework for further
decentralization. This will be with GTZ which i s expected to continue to leverage i t s
strong field presence to play a leading role in supporting the Government’s
decentralization program.
The Bank will remain engaged in education, with a focus on vocational training, skill
development, and the educational svstem. The Bank will support Government efforts to

21

design a SWAP. The rationale for continued Bank financial support to the sector would be
re-examined in the CAS Progress Report, due at end FY08.
Box 2: LESSONS
FROMPASTBANKASSISTANCE
Since FY96, the Bank has provided about $850 million to Malawi and produced a number o f analytical
products. These efforts have supported various reforms in macroeconomic stability, private sector growth,
human resource development, and public sector management. W h i l e many o f the efforts by Government and
development partners have been positive, they have not translated into sustainable reductions in poverty or food
insecurity. The IndependentEvaluation Group’s Country Assistance Evaluation (covering 1995-2005) and CAS
Completion Report (covering 2003-2006) both concluded that while past strategies have been relevant to the
development challenges facing Malawi, the performance o f the World Bank programs in Malawi has produced
limited results. The CAE suggested that operations had been over-designed for the implementation
environment, coordination with other development partners was limited, and that high quality analytical work
was often not sufficiently disseminated to ensure results. Other findings o f the CAE included:
Labor intensive and broad-based growth has been elusive. T h e Bank has not been heavily involved in
agricultural productivity, and has had limited impact on food security or mitigating the risk o f weatherrelated shocks.
Public service delivery and social protection have seen mixed trends. Bank support was most effective in
sector-wide programs.
Macroeconomic stability and public sector reform have proven dfjcult over the past 1 0 years. Capacity
building efforts have not resulted in sustained capacity development or institutional change.

The main lessons from the previous CAS can be broken down into four interrelated
themes: (i)selectivity and realism, (ii)partnership, (iii)programmatic, integrated approaches, and (iv)
understanding political and institutional dynamics.

Lessons Learned.

(i) Selectivity and realism. Past assistance strategies and evaluations have repeatedly stressed the need for
increased selectivity and more realistic design, given the capacity constraints. However, being selective has
proven difficult for both the Government and donors; due in part to the difficulty in prioritizing Malawi’s
extensive economic and social needs. The CAE notes that each successive CAS acknowledged that the previous
CAS had been too ambitious and non-selective, but then failed to specify what would be eliminated.
(ii)Partnership -Alignment and Harmonization. There has been limited attempts to define the comparative
advantage o f the Bank against other development partners, and thus to determine the most effective allocation o f
resources to support Government priorities. In addition, there was no concerted effort to improve harmonization
and coordination with development partners.

(iii)
Programmatic, integrated approach. The CASCR, QAG Country Lending Assessment and LEG CAE all
noted the need to build a more integrated approach to investments and analytical and advisory services. W h i l e
analytical work was high quality, insufficient attention was paid to i t s dissemination or use in policy decisionmaking.
(iv) Understanding the underlying political and institutional dynamics. Evaluations and reviews o f specific
Bank interventions have indicated the importance o f understanding the impact o f political and institutional
dynamics on project operations and outcomes.

62.
The Bank will continue to support strong policy implementation with Development
Policy credits and will seek to fully j o i n the CABS group12 as a mechanism to further
integrate policy dialogue with that o f other key development partners. The proposed program
would see a gradual scale up o f resources provided through policy credits, assuming
continued strong policy performance i s maintained. Up to a third o f the Bank’s financial
assistance could be provided through this mechanism through the CAS period.

l2The

Bank currently maintains observer status in CABS.

22

,

The IDA program will be calibrated against continued reform progress. Malawi’s
63.
recent progress may translate into an upward trend on the CPIA, especially in key areas such
as economic management and governance, which in conjunction with improving portofolio
performance may translate into increasing levels o f IDA support. However, there are
substantial downside risks to the success o f the CAS program (refer section VII). In the event
o f performance slippage there would be a time-lag before P B A ratings were negatively
affected, and it would be necessary to adjust the CAS program. The main instrument for
adjustment would be the planned Policy Support Credits, which could be reduced in size or
delayed in line with collective assessments o f performance by the C A B S group. In addition,
coherent sector strategies and prioritized investment plans will be crucial in transport and
energy in particular, and planned IDA investments in these areas would be contingent upon
the Bank being satisfied that resources were being effectively utilized in accordance with such
strategies.

Box 3: MAINSTREAMING GOVERNANCE WORK IN ALL SECTORS AND
CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

The CAS proposes a three-pronged approach to strengthening capacity. First, in line with the Afi-ica
Region’s Management Action Plan on Capacity Development (ARMAP’), the Bank will focus i t s
financial resources on strengthening the capacity o f Government to manage the economy and improve
expenditure management and transparency and both the central and decentralized levels. In numerous
areas in which the Bank i s supporting SWAps the Bank will seek to ensure that capacity development
forms an integral part o f sector programs. Second, capacity and institutional constraints will be
addressed by Bank activities in each o f the outcome areas, particularly through including analyses o f
the political and institutional dynamics o f Bank supported interventions in the project cycle. The Bank
Group will seek to ensure that capacity development i s an objective o f all activities. W B I will launch
the Country Focus Capacity Building program for Malawi that has been specifically designed to
support the planned I D A program. Finally, efforts to improve donor coordination and aid effectiveness
will be a central feature o f all Bank efforts. Careful attention will be given to addressing the sectorand agency-specific (as well as cross-cutting) incentives that shape the performance o f each o f the key
public agencies responsible for helping achieve each o f the outcomes in the CAS. CAS
implementation (both in upstream AAA and in project design) will involve attention to the incentives in a context o f and in response to repeated earlier generations o f implementation problems. Analytical
work in the CAS will help inform the specific issues in agencies.

64.
The AAA program is closely linked with plannedfinancial support and accountsfor
political economy realties. The CAS includes a program o f AAA designed to address
analytical gaps13 and provide technical assistance essential to the achievement o f the C A S
outcomes. E S W will be conducted where possible following successful partnership models
that have been developed with key Malawian institution^'^, and will adhere to new Africa
Region norms for ensuring adequate resources for dissemination and integration toward
results. The AAA and ESW program in this CAS will attempt to focus systematically on the
political economy o f reforms and address governance constraints in the sectors and thematic
areas covered. In addition, the Bank will use i t s increasingly decentralized structure and
strengthened Country Office to provide real time policy support to the Government and
Development Partners, especially in sectors in which the Bank i s playing a support role. The
l3
An inventory o f completed and planned donor analytical work was completed as part o f the FY06 Joint
Program Review.
l4
For example the recent Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment was completed as ajoint product with the
Malawi National Statistics Office.

23

Bank will also seek to use other financing mechanisms (such as various Trust Funds,
Institutional Development Fund, GEF, etc.) more judiciously, explicitly linked to the
achievement o f CAS Outcomes.
65.

Strengthening the incentives of agencies for implementation will be a cross cutting
feature of all operations. The institutional constraints that lead to poor policy implementation

capacity, l o w levels o f service delivery across all sectors, relatively l o w levels o f
accountability and constraints on implementing the decentralization policy among others, will
be addressed through all components o f this country program. The Bank will address the
institutional aspects o f capacity and accountability in all projects and activities funded
through the CAS period to bring under scrutiny, and to assist in enhancing, the quality o f the
governance environment in both the public and private sectors and i t s impact on the
development outcomes on which the CAS i s focused (Box 3). In addition, the project
identification, design and implementation will consider the impact o f political and
institutional dynamics on achieving results.

Role of the broader World Bank Group. Beginning in FY07, Malawi was designated
as Focus Country for WBI. During this CAS period, the WBI Focus Country Capacity
Building program for Malawi will focus on improving governance and reducing corruption
and judicial institutional strengthening o f the Commercial Courts and Public Prosecution; and
activities aimed at reducing vulnerability will be launched and delivered over the CAS period.
The IFC” i s focusing on support to project development in the financial sector,
manufacturing, mining and tourism. While MIGA currently does not have any guarantees
issued in Malawi, opportunities are being sought for MIGA involvement as perceptions o f
political and economic risk in Malawi begin to improve. MIGA has provided technical
assistance programs in the past to support the Malawi Investment Promotion Agency (MIPA),
and the Government plans to request MIGA for help in implementing the merger o f M I P A
and Malawi Export Promotion Council (MEPC) and in post-merger capacity building

66.

activities.

B.

CAS OUTCOMES AND THE PROPOSED PROGRAM OF SUPPORT

67.
Bank Group assistance i s explicitly rooted in a results framework, which links
M G D S overall goals to four CAS outcomes. For each CAS outcome, the framework
defines the contribution to the most related M G D S goal16, the outcomes and indicators to be
achieved during the CAS period, and milestones for progress. The milestones address key
issues/problems that the Bank program seeks to accomplish in order to influence the C A S
outcomes (Figure 6).

In the past IFC has invested in a number o f business ventures in Malawi. From development o f a short to
medium stay residential complex to export and import investments for the purchase and installation o f a modem
rice and maize milling plant. At present IFC has two investments in Malawi, with 44 percent in capital markets
(insurance) and the balance in health care, totaling US$1.16 million (US00.64 million in loans and US$0.52
million in equity).
l6For each MGDS thematic area, there are sub themes defined. The MGDS uses the language “medium term
expected outcome” that are to be achieved during the five year period and beyond. To avoid conhsion with the
term “CAS outcome”, this document uses the term MGDS goal to capture how the CAS will align.

24

FIGURE6: CAS OUTCOME
- RELATIONSHIP WITH MGDS GOALS

MGDS Goal
Medium term economic
growth through agriculture and
agro-processing
Decrease need for food aid
(stable food prices)

Constraints the Bank program will directly address

CAS Outcomes

Related MGDS Goal

.

___
L

MGDS Goal
Increased private sector led
growth and competitiveness in
regional and international
:--j
markets

’

1
I

I

CAS Outcome #1
Improve smallholder
agricultural productivity and
integration inta agroprocessing

.

CAS Outcome #2
Put in place a foundation for
longer term economic growth 4
through improved
infrastructure and
investment climate

High vutnerability to weather related shocks
Distorted incentives keep farmers in subsistence farming

__ Ltmited integration of smallholders into markets and poorly
functioning input output markets

- Weak institutional capacity t o manage risks /shocks

7 Inadequate infrastructure, especially energy and transport
- Limitations in the investment climate

trading across
borders and difficulties with business start ups

- Limited access t o finance and poor conditions a f t h e
macro-econa my

HIV-AIDS levies a high cost with limited awareness not

MGDS Goal
Management and prevention
of nutrition disorders,
HIV and AIDS

I
I

,

I
I

. I

*-A

CAS Outcome #3
Decrease vulnerability at the
household level especially
from HIV/AIDs and
malnutrition)

- leading t o behavior changes, inadequate access t o drugs,
and weak essential health care delivery mechanisms

Vulnerability increased due t o poor nutrition due to lack of
knowledge on good feeding practices

- Social protection policy and programs are weakly
connected and short term relief oriented

MGDS Goal
Good Governance

4

CAS Outcome #4
Sustain improvements in
4
fiscal discipline, budget
execution, and accountability
of civil service

- Institutional system for fiscal discipline, accountability and
transparency threatened by political pressure, inadequate
enforcement, practices that enable corruption, and
procurement system still at ministerial units
Planning and operational links between the central and

- local government are weak with ill-defined financial
architecture and limited skills

CAS OUTCOME
ONE: Improve smallholder agricultural productivity and integration into
agro-processing. (Related M G D S Goal: Medium term economic growth through small-scale
agriculture and agro-processing and food security).

68.

Expected Results from the World Bank Program. Contributing to the Government’s
efforts to achieve agriculture-based economic growth and food security will be a main thrust
o f the Bank Group’s program under this CAS outcome. Efforts will focus on four k e y
constraints for improving agricultural productivity and diversification o f agricultural
production. These include (i)
high vulnerability to weather related shocks and limited farmer
capacity, (ii)distorted incentives (including Government policies) that keep farmers in
subsistence farming including limited knowledge and thus demand for crop diversification,
(iii)
poorly fimctioning input/output markets, and (iv) weak institutional capacity to manage
the risk o f food insecurity. The program will also seek to encourage the expansion o f valueadding activities in agriculture. Support will contribute to breaking the poverty trap in which
the poor stick to low-risk, low-return subsistence activity, while actual shocks, when they
happen, push the marginal non-poor back into poverty. By the end of the CAS period,
agricultural productivity and yields w i l l improve, specijkally for smallholder farmers in the
eleven districts supported by the Bank program.

25

69.
Responding to lessons learned. The OED C A E 2000 noted that greater
diversification, value addition and growth in agriculture will be driven by the presence o f
appropriate markets. I t fbrther noted that the success o f the smallholder-led growth strategy
would depend on the emergence o f an agro-processing base with access to world markets.
Agro-processing that uses local agricultural produce and labor for export i s a clear link
between the short-term and long-term growth objectives. Past performance o f the Bank
program has been unsatisfactory (OED CAE 2005, CASCR), though continued scaled up
engagement is recommended. The OED C A E 2005 recommended the Bank support efforts to
develop better policies in the sector and rural finance. I t also recommended a balancing o f
adjustment and investment lending to agriculture and direct investments for the sector to
address agricultural and rural issues.
70.
Bank instruments to Support CAS Outcome One. The Bank has strengthened i t s
Country Office to position for an increased re-engagement and leading role with development
partners in supporting agriculture and linking efforts to private sector development. Current
and planned interventions in support o f this CAS Outcome form a substantial part o f the
proposed program. These include:
Current Portfolio

Irrigation and Rural Livelihoods Project (FYO6-12) is addressing the over-dependence on
rain fed farming with improved water management, strengthen institutions for long-term
irrigation development, and raise agricultural productivity.
Community Based-Rural Land Project (FYO6-09) is seeking to develop efficient land
market institutions and free up un- and under used land resources for production.
Privatization and Utilities Restructuring Project (FYO3-07) which is assisting with the
ongoing restructuring o f A D M A R C and other parastatals.
Rural Infrastructure Service Project (FY06- 11) i s supporting comprehensive
infrastructure development in important rural trading centers, providing market linkages.

Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment (FY06) recently completed in conjunction with the
National Statistical Office provides analysis o f the second integrated household survey
data and information on the effects o f weather related shocks and coping strategies o f
Malawian households.
Micro-level Weather Insurance TA has facilitated the successfbl pilot o f weather insurance
and associated bank financing to 5400 smallholders in the current growing season.
Building Resilient Communities TA i s supporting Government efforts to improve the
tobacco value chain and develop efficient output markets.
Planned new activities

0 Agriculture and Food Security program (planned FY08) which will seek to establish a
pooled donor fund in support o f an agricultural development program incorporating
weather risk mitigation, irrigation and market development.
0 Food Security/Rural Development Credit (FYlO) which will also seek to support an
expanded agriculture/food security program, in conjunction with other key donors.
26

Development Policy Credits I-IV will seek to support policy implementation to reduce k e y
risks to market development.
Lake Malawi Watershed Management GEF (FY08) which will seek to mobilize GEF
financing to address land degradation and watershed conservation on the N y i k a plateau
and surrounds, building on the success o f the Mulanje Mountain Conservation Project.
National Water Development I Z (FY07) will improve the management o f water resources
for all purposes, including irrigation.
Forging Partnerships with Agribusiness AAA will seek to identify key opportunities to
integrate smallholders with value-adding businesses up the supply chain. Institutional
constraints on how they will effect public agencies implementing this, particularly within
the Government’s privatization strategy, will also be included.

CAS OUTCOMETWO:Put in place a foundation for long- term economic growth through
improved infrastructure and the investment climate. (Related MGDS Goal: Enabling

environment for private sector led growth and infrastructure).

7 1.
Expected Results from the World Bank Program. Contributing to the Government’s
efforts to put in place a foundation for private sector led growth and competitiveness in
regional and international markets will be a main focus o f this C A S outcome. Given the
resource requirements and number o f constraints, the program will concentrate on (i)
infrastructure investments to address unreliable and inadequate electricity provision coupled
with support for scaling up and allocating resources to priority transport needs, including
strengthening capacity o f Government to work with public/private partnerships, and (ii)
limitations in the investment climate where sector restructuring, and regulatory reform can
have an impact (trading across borders, business start ups, and collaboration between the
Government and private sector in the beginning o f a post secondary educational system that
meets demands). This will be complemented by work in CAS outcome four on macroeconomic stability and by strong partnerships with the EU (e.g. transport) and DFID (e.g
micro-finance). By the end of the CAS period, the program w i l l achieve improvements in the
efficiency and reliability of electricig, and doing business indicators for increased trade
across borders and reductions in the costs to start a business.
Responding to lessons learned In the past labor intensive and broad based growth
72.
has been elusive, despite efforts to improve the private sector environment. The Bank has
been particularly engaged in privatization efforts and support to roads. The Bank has been
only marginally supportive o f regional trade initiatives. The 2006 IEG C A E notes that there
has been little private sector response to private sector reforms and the poor macroeconomic
situation further hurt the impact o f the Bank’s program on private sector development. The
C A E recommends that more attention should be given to regulatory reforms and their
implementation, and to strengthening government agencies whose function i s to support
private sector development.
Bank instruments to support CAS Outcome Two. The Bank has strengthened i t s
73.
Country Office to enable on-going dialogue on private sector issues with Government and
development partners. As the needs for infrastructure are enormous, the Bank will also w o r k
with partners to identify ways for scaling up targeted resources to finance infrastructure,

27

including PPPs. Current and planned interventions in support o f this CAS Outcome form a
substantial part o f the proposed program. These include:
Current Portfolio

Regional Trade Facilitation Project (FY01-11) seeks to provide financial and technical
support to cross-border trade and investment across the region.
Privatization and Utilities Restructuring Project (FYO3-0 7) i s assisting with the ongoing
restructuring o f utilities and planning for capacity development to foster public-private
partnerships (PPP).
Investment Climate Assessment (FY06) was recently completed and i s providing the
analytical underpinning for development o f the Government’s PSD Strategy.
Private Sector Dialogue TA has facilitated the development o f the new PSD strategy,
based on the Doing Business Indicators and the ICA.
Building Resilient Communities TA i s supporting Government efforts to improve the
tobacco value chain and develop efficient output markets.
Planned new activities

Southern A p i c a Power Pool (FY08) which will interconnect Malawi to the sub-regional
power market, increasing integration and providing Malawi with access to a reliable
source o f electricity and the opportunity to export any surplus electricity.
Inpastructure Investment (FY09) will likely be focused on supporting further investments
in electricity transmission and distribution to link Malawi with more regional markets and
improve the domestic grid. Resources could also be used to support a transport program
being developed under the leadership o f the EC.
National Water Development Program II (planned FY07) will establish a SWAP for
provision o f water and sanitation infrastructure in rural and urban centers.
Private Sector Development (FY07) would be processed as a repeater to continue the work
supported by PURP, including the implementation o f the Government’s PSD strategy.

If possible, Malawi will seek early participation in the Regional Communications

Infrastructure Program currently under preparation.

Development Policy Credits I-IV inside the CABS framework will support macroeconomic policies creating a stable environment conducive to private sector growth.
Joint IFC(FIAS)-Bank Administrative Barriers Study (ABS) i s planned for the CAS period
will build on the Investment Climate Assessment 2006 and annual Doing Business
Surveys.
WBI support to Establishment of Commercial Courts (FY08) will provide capacity
building support to foster reforms in the judicial and legal system by assisting the
government to better define and establish the role o f planned commercial courts.

IFC senior corporate loan of up to US $3.0 million as part of the A p i c a Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprise Finance program i s under preparation, and if approved would
Not shown in the lending program (Table 3) as at writing i t i s not known when Malawi’s participation will be
possible.

28

increase the availability and accessibility o f much needed financing for small and medium
enterprises.
Possible M G A guarantee in mining sector.

M G A assistance to M P A and MEPC to facilitate their merger, and post-merger capacity
building assistance.
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP - FY07) would be conducted jointly by the
Bank and IMF and include a focus on opportunities to expand access to finance.
Growth Diagnostics ESW (beginning FY08) would seek to identify and quantify growth
opportunities for the medium-term, especially in priority M G D S sectors such as mining.
Rural Finance/FSAP Follow up ESW/TA will seek to build on the FSAP findings to
identify opportunities for improving access to finance, especially in rural areas.

Regional Infrastructure Linkages ESW would seek to identify new opportunities for cross
border infrastructure projects to enhance Malawi’s integration with i t s neighbors.

CEM Update i s planned for FY09 which will consolidate the results o f growth diagnostic
work to update the 2004 CEM.
CAS OUTCOMETHREE:Decrease vulnerability at the household level to HIV/AIDS and
malnutrition. (Related M G D S Goal: HIV/AIDS and Nutrition)

74.
Expected Resultsfrom the World Bank Program. The program will target efforts to
prevent and address the negative impact o f H I V / A I D S and malnutrition at the household
level. The program will focus on the (i)
translation o f awareness o f H I V / A I D S into changes
in behavior, and improved provision o f medical supplies and access to prevention/treatment,
and (b) the vulnerability o f households to poor nutrition that requires a deeper country level
response to under two nutrition through improved knowledge o f good feeding practices. In
addition, local level support to households i s compromised by an inadequate social protection
program, and thus the program will seek to influence policy and programs for moving away
from weakly connected and short-term relief to long-term reliable transfers to poor people t o
graduate from poverty (livelihoods enhancement).
Results under this outcome will
complement those under the first CAS outcome, which addresses risks to the poor due to food
insecurity, and the fourth outcome, which addresses local level capacity development. By the
end of the CASperiod, there w i l l have been behavior change contributing to a slowing HIV
infection rate, an increased number ofpeople on ARV treatment, and a coherent Government
Program improving under 2 nutritional status.
75.
Responding to lessons learned Social protection efforts and service delivery have
experienced mixed trends, with Bank support the most effective in sector-wide programs in
health and HIV/AIDS, while social safety nets have brought benefits to individuals and
communities. The Bank’s approach to support for social programs has been evaluated as
positive by shifting from hnding infrastructure and cash transfers to assisting local
government to mobilize communities to undertake activities to contribute to attaining
localized MDGs. IEG notes that the Bank should continue to support the programs n o w being
carried out through sector-wide, multi-donor operations. The Bank needs to give increased
priority to tackling high and persistent child malnutrition, and declining immunization. On the

29

input side, addressing the staffing crisis, ensuring more adequate drugs and supplies, and
maintaining health facilities are prime concerns.

76.
Bank Program to support CAS Outcome Three. The Bank will maintain its current
portfolio and deepen the partnership principles embodied in recent support to the health sector
and HIV/AIDS. The instruments the Bank will use to achieve this outcome include:
Current Portfolio

0

Multi-Sector AIDS Program (FYO3-08) i s the Bank’s instrument for engagement in the
pooled funding arrangement in support o f the National H I V / A I D S response.

0 Health Sector Support Program/Malaria Booster Program (to FY08) are the mechanisms
through which the Bank financially supports the Health sector SWAP. I t is not envisaged
that this support would be renewed once i t expires at end FY08, although fiduciary
support to the SWAP would continue as required.

0

Education Sector Support Program (FY06- IO) i s currently the Bank’s main engagement in
nutrition through a component to support nutrition activities in primary schools.

0

Irrigation and Rural Livelihoods Development Project (FY06- I 2 ) will seek to include
nutritional message production and dissemination as part o f its outreach campaign.

0 Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment (FY06) includes analysis on the nature o f the
vulnerabilities o f Malawian households.

0 Building Resilient Communities TA i s supporting Government efforts to develop a more
efficient and better-targeted social safety net system.
Planned new activities

HIV/AIDS project (FY09) will follow on from the Bank’s current contribution to the
H I V / A I D S fbnding pool. The Bank i s taking on the secretariat o f the pool, which will be
housed in the Bank’s Country Office, and include a liaison officer from the Global Fund.
Agriculture and Food Security program (FY08) will seek to promote agricultural
diversification, essential to the sustainability o f an effective nutritional campaign.
Education SWAP (FYIO) i s planned as a follow up to ESSUP, and will seek to include the
dissemination o f nutrition information to rural communities in particular.
Barriers and Facilitators to Good Feeding Practices ESW (FY08) will be a primary
mechanism through which the Bank will investigate root causes o f the nutrition problem
in Malawi and seek to inform and support the establishment and identify financing for a
coherent and appropriately targeted nutrition program.

CAS OUTCOMEFOUR:
Sustain improvements in expenditure management, budget

execution, and the accountability of civil service. (Related M G D S Goal: Good Governance).

77.
Expected Resultsfrom the World Bank Program. The program will seek to
contribute to continued improvements in macroeconomic management, the effectiveness o f
government programs, and corruption. The program will directly address weaknesses in the
institutional system for fiscal discipline (e.g. rules/regulations on fiscal controls, procurement,
personnel payroll management). I t will also seek to strengthen the operational links between
the central and local government through an improved fiscal architecture and integration o f
30

parallel M A S A F systems into the local governance system. By the end of the CASperiod,
Malawi w i l l have achieved improvements in expenditure management as measured by the
public financial management (PEFA) indicators.

78.
Responding to lessons learned. Macroeconomic stability and public sector reform
have proven particularly difficult to achieve over the past 10 years and capacity building
efforts have not resulted in sustained institutional change. Recommendations from the OED
capacity evaluation, IEG C A E and CASCR note the continued role for the Bank in supporting
public sector reform and targeting capacity building. They also note the need to address
institutional, organizational and individual aspects o f capacity building as well as the political
economy o f reforms.
79.
Bank instruments to support CAS Outcome Four. The issue o f capacity and good
governance cuts across the CAS, from the efficiency o f service delivery to the rules and
institutions that govern economic activities. The CAS proposes an approach to building
institutional capacity focusing on transparency, accountability, and inclusiveness. In
particular, in the public sector, the Bank will work with its partners in government to identify
what might be the underlying capacity, accountability and incentive problems which hinder
key public sector actors, and so account for these delivery shortfalls, such as those identified
in evaluation o f progress towards the MDGs. The proposed program includes:
Current Portfolio

0 Financial Management and Transparency Project (FYO3-08) i s addressing elements o f
public expenditure management, c i v i l service reform, right sizing, and capacity building.

0 PURP is addressing reform o f utilities and reducing the budget impact o f parastatals.
0 All on-going operations in some way provide support to strengthening line ministries o r

specific programs o f accountability/transparency. For instance, the Malaria Booster
Program is targeting improved monitoring and evaluation for management.

Planned new activities

Public Sector Swap/MASAF ZZZ (FY08). This operation will ideally be a contribution to a
pooled f h d program that would seek to incorporate and rationalize numerous current
donor efforts to improve public sector management and build c i v i l service capacity. This
project would also seek to strengthen the Government’s decentralization program by more
closely integrating the operation o f M A S A F into the local government financing system.
Development Policy Credits Z-ZV will seek to support policy implementation aimed at
strengthening the institutions o f public management and improving transparency and
accountability. I T will also seek to ensure that the policies o f the Government do not
jeopardize debt sustainability.
Public Expenditure Review (FY07) will provide analysis o f expenditure in key ministries
and make recommendations for improving the effectiveness and efficiency o f public
spending. I t will also provide monitoring information on the use o f expenditures.

WBZ support to Anti-Corruption and Governance will strengthen the A C B in the areas o f

Anti-Corruption and Governance Diagnostics through dissemination o f Governance
Survey results and skills building in anti-money laundering investigation and tracking.

31

0

Public Expenditure Tracking Suwey(s) would be initiated in one or more key sectors to
build on the work o f the FY07 Public Expenditure Review.

0

Fiduciary Assessment (FY09) would update the existing knowledge base on the status o f
procurement and financial management systems in Malawi.

c.

MONITORING
THE COUNTRY ASSISTANCESTRATEGY

80.

The results framework reflected in the CAS results matrices establishes the results
chain for the Bank’s program of support. Monitoring o f the M G D S outcomes (column 1)
will come from M G D S reviews with the majority o f the indicators not changing substantially
over the C A S period. The CAS outcomes (column 3) will be monitored jointly by the Bank
and Government, drawing on information collected under M G D S reviews, and augmented by
administrative data and information collected, e.g. as a part o f project M&E. Where possible,
reporting on milestones (column 4) will come from the annual reviews o f the MGDS.

81.
The Bank will align portfolio reviews with the results framework, and where
possible conduct these reviews with development partners. At mid-term a Country Program
Review will be prepared to assess whether progress i s being made toward CAS outcomes and
if support i s s t i l l relevant to the M G D S outcomes supported by the CAS. Mid-course
adjustments may be made in light o f these findings, and possible changes in financing needs
due to evolving programs o f development partners or changing country circumstances. A
completion report will be prepared at the end o f the CAS cycle.
82.
Flexibility in Managing for Results. While specific AAA and lending operations
have been planned against the outcomes identified in the results matrix, the CAS will remain
a dynamic and flexible tool; resources will be redirected in response to changing country
conditions and changes will be noted in the evaluations and reviews o f the results matrices.
The mid-term review i s an important step in ensuring that the CAS i s properly aligned in
support o f the MGDS. In addition, the Bank will continue to support Malawi in strengthening
the evidence base through good monitoring and evaluation, and help to link these efforts to
expenditure management and policy decisions.
Supporting Government Systems. Monitoring and evaluation o f the CAS w i l l use
83.
country systems, as will individual operations. The M G D S defines a results framework for
each thematic area, each varying in terms o f the quality o f the results logic, definition o f
indicators, and supporting statistical systems. For instance, the health sector has fairly strong
monitoring system i s in place, supported by statistical systems that can provide data at
different time period. To address weaknesses the government has developed a M&E master
plan for strengthening statistical systems, and the 2006 P V A provided recommendations on
integrating monitoring and evaluation into expenditure management, with close links to the
budget. The Bank will continue to engage through i t s operations in strengthening these
linkages and developing institutional systems supportive o f evidence-based policy and
programming decisions.

32

TABLE2: INDICATIVE
IDA PROGRAM
FY07-10
FY07

CredidGrant

ESW/AAA

FY08

CredidGrant

ES W/AAA

FY09

CredidGrant

ESW/AAA

Malaria Booster Program Grant (Health SWAp)
National Water Development Program I1(SWAp)
Private Sector Development
South African Power Market (MZ interconnector)
MGDS Development Policy Credit 1
Sub total FY07

US$m
5
25
15
15
20
80

Public Expenditure Review ES W
Building Resilient Communities ESW/TA
Financial Sector Assessment Progrum (FSAP) ES W
Forging Partnerships with Agribusiness TA
WeuthedPrice Risk Management TA

Agriculture SectorIFood Security SWAP
Public Sector Management SWApIMASAF 111-11
MGDS Development Policy Credit 2
Sub total FY08

30
25
25
80

Growth Diagnostics ESW
Ba~riers/Fucilitatorson infundchild feeding ESW
Rural Finunce/FSAP follow up ESW/TA
Regional Infrastructure Linkages ES W/TA
Report on Observunce of Standards and Codes (ROSC)

Infrastructure Investment (EnergyITransport pooledCofinancing)
HlV AIDS (pooled fund)
MGDS Development Policy Credit 3
Sub total FY09

45
15

30
90

C E M Update

Public Expenditure Tracking Survey ESW

FYlO

Fiduciary Assessment (CFAAKPAR Update) ES W

CreditIGrant

ESW/AAA

Education (SWAp)
Food SecurityRural development (tbd)
MGDS Development Policy Credit 4
Sub total FYlO
(tbd)

Total - USD million

30
25
35
90

340

I

33

VII.

MANAGING RISKS

84.
Substantial political risks exist to reform momentum. Recent progress
notwithstanding, local elections expected in 2007 and looming parliamentary elections in
2009 are likely to further constrain the already limited political space for economic reform
measures. While the Government has demonstrated resolve in implementing fiscal control, as
demonstrated during the 2005/2006 food crisis, institutional and procedural systems for the
formulation, analysis, and implementation o f policy remain weak and vulnerable. Moreover,
while the increasing role o f the Malawian parliament in providing oversight to the executive
i s welcomed as crucial to accountability and transparency, there remain risks that the
maturing political system will critically constrain the ability o f a minority government to
implement difficult reforms. In order to mitigate these risks the Bank i s engaging more
forcefully with parliament and c i v i l society in order to disseminate and make the case for the
growth-oriented reforms and policies.

Managing the Bank's Fiduciaiy Risk. The Bank will continue to engage in policy
85.
and institutional reform, but with an increased operational focus on improving sector and core
governance. This means changing the way the Bank does business, to reduce overall risks
(including corruption risks) associated with i t s projects. This i s in line with the Bank's
Governance and Anti-corruption Strategy (GAC) and includes several building blocks:
carrying out, through analytical and advisory activities, including in project preparation a
systematic analysis o f corruption risk in sectors o f potential engagement; designing "smarter"
projects that reduce corruption risks; strengthening supervision efforts, including through a
systematic annual review o f projects assessed to be at high fiduciary risk; more rigorously
pursuing the remedies open to the Bank when corruption i s found; and enhancing the
disclosure o f information that would facilitate oversight o f project implementation by third
parties, c i v i l society, and beneficiaries.
86.
Malawi remains very vulnerable to drought. While food security i s a key priority o f
the M G D S and the Bank's planned C A S program strongly supports risk mitigation and
agricultural productivity, in the medium term Malawi remains very vulnerable to weather
risks. Instruments such as weather risk insurance and market development will progressively
reduce this risk, but if rainfall i s poor in any o f the corning two or three agricultural seasons
substantial political and economic resources would be diverted towards crisis management, as
was the case in 2005/06. Through the Agricultural Sector Program under preparation the
Bank i s planning to support the Government to develop a comprehensive ex-ante Risk
Mitigation Strategy and Contingency Plan which should allow a more systematic and efficient
response to future droughts.
87.
HIV/AIDS remains a critical risk to implementation of Government programs. The
H I V / A I D S pandemic has had an enormous impact on Government capacity because o f its
disproportionate impact on the professional cadres. The illness or loss o f key s t a f f to
H I V / A I D S can and does present a critical risk to the success o f Bank financed operations,
especially in an environment in which c i v i l service capacity is very limited to begin with.
Through the National A I D S Commission Malawi does have an effective multi-sectoral
response in the fight against HIV/AIDS, which appears to be having some impact on infection
rates. However, in order to mitigate the risks posed by the disease, Bank supported projects
will need to augment the existing national programs and mainstream awareness and treatment
o f H I V / A I D S for s t a f f critical to project success.

34

VII.

CONCLUSION

88.
The proposed IDA Assistance program offers an opportunity for enhanced Bank
support to Malawi at a critical time. Strong recent progress in achieving macro-economic
stability and tackling corruption, and the achievement o f the HIPC completion point and
MDRI debt relief offer an opportunity. The M G D S offers an achievable national vision that
recognizes the need to focus on economic growth, while at the same time investing in
Malawi’s human capital, to make sustained inroads against poverty. In the short- and
medium-term efforts to enhance agricultural productivity and achieve food security will be
key to achieving sustained growth in Malawi. Through determined adherence to prudent
macro-economic management, continuation o f the fight against corruption, stronger efforts to
facilitate the development o f a robust and competitive private sector, and a strengthened fight
against H I V / A I D S and other diseases, Malawi can make substantially more progress over the
next four years than has been the case in the past. The proposed Bank program, which i s
anchored in a strong Result Framework directly supporting M G D S goals, seeks to provide
strong support to this effort.

35

rrl

a

.-

h

c1

.-Q

a,

>

0

%

a,
u
rA

a

Y

r-:

h

P

m
m

I

I
0
d

61.

I

..

z

.-s

z%
3
3

P

c

0

c

ir:

.r

5

.-M
Y

Eo
2

i

M

.i

Fr,
I

Table 1: Summary of Malani's progress towards the MDGs as of end-2005
F r o m M a l a w i Progress Toward the MDGs,
Baseline

Intermediate

Most
Recent

MDG
Target

Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower
women
Target 4. Climtnate geiider disluiity 111 p r i i i ~ i r yand seco~idasy
education. prefei ab14 hy 2005, did Lo a l l Ie&elsofeducatioii
_ICjender ratio ~nprtmaiy, Indicator 9a)

Potentially
Feasible
0 87

0 02

___

095

10

Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
'Iarget 4 Reduce bq tuo-thirds. bet-em 1000 and 1015. ilre wider
fibe iuortality l a t e (Itidtcatoi 1 i)

Target
feasibility

Potentially
Feasible
1MO

189 0

1310

78 0

17 4

24 I

Ih 0

'-174

76

20 2

.? b

Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other
diseases
r q e t 7 &aw halted by 201 5 and begiiii to reverse the
HIV AtDS (HIV jiie\aleiice aimiip pregnant ~ o ~ n i r r11t ,

Tmuget X Ha\? halted by 201 5 auld begin1 to rekerse the incidence of
nulatia a n d othei tiislor diseases (Proportion 01 popcilaiion in
111aIa118 risk arms tising effectite malaria preiention ( p e ~ c a io
tf
iirider f i \ e cliild~eiiusing bednet>. iiidicatui 22n)

Potentially
Feasible

42

-

Annex 2 Malawi CAS Completion Report
Date of CAS: M a y 14,2003
Period Covered by the CAS Completion Report: May 2003 - April 2006
Date of CASCR: May, 200618

I.Introduction
1. This Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR) i s the country team’s self-assessment
o f the effectiveness o f the 2003 CAS in achieving its intended results in Malawi. It highlights lessons
learned from the Bank’s program o f support, relevance o f the CAS to Malawi’s development objectives,
the Bank’s responsiveness to Malawi’s political and economic environment, and the overall performance
o f the Bank during CAS implementation. I t uses the CAS results framework to assess the results
achieved against each o f the expected CAS outcomes b y trackmg the key indicators and milestones laid
out in the CAS, although measurement o f results was difficult because o f lack o f data on the indicators,
especially at the CAS outcome level.
2. Consultations. In preparing the CASCR, the Bank’s country team consulted with the Government
and donor partners. The process was launched in January 2005 at the Malawi Country Program Review,
when Government officials from all line ministries were involved in discussions o f the relevance and
effectiveness o f the Bank program.
The CASCR also benefited from interviews with key
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in Malawi, and Bank staff; and the findings were further
informed b y key internal documents, such as the Country Program Assessment (May 2005) prepared the
Bank’s Quality Assurance Group (QAG), assessments b y the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG,
formerly OED) including the 2006 Country Assistance Evaluation, and finally various external reviews o f
Malawi’s economic and social performance over the last five years.
3. Summary of Ratings. While program performance and Bank performance are starting to show signs
o f improvement, this has occurred late in the CAS cycle. The rating for overall program performance for
the entire CAS period i s moderately unsatisfactory. While the CAS was evaluated as relevant to
addressing the key development constraints facing Malawi and was consistent with the directions o f the
previous CAS (1 998, and the 2000 CAS progress report), i t did not achieve several o f the expected CAS
outcomes. The overall rating i s derived from a weighted average o f ratings for each o f the expected CAS
outcomes that were defined in the results framework o f the 2003 CAS (Table 1). The rating for Bank
Performance was also moderately unsutisfuctory, reflecting shortcomings in design and supervision in the
various outcome areas.

11. Country Context at the design of the 2003 CAS
4. In 2003, despite the efforts o f the Government and development partners, Malawi had experienced
half a decade o f high inflation, l o w and even negative annual per capita growth, and substantial
fluctuations in the growth o f primary exports - especially tobacco. W i t h inefficient fiscal management
and a politically weak administration in power for most o f the CAS, the young democracy faced a
challenging environment in which to undertake needed structural reform^'^. Stagnating agricultural
This CAS Completion Report was prepared by the Malawi Country team, led by Elizabeth M. White. Core team members were Ozan Sevimili,
Patricia Rogers, and Jack van Holst Pellekaan. The country team provided significant input to the CASCR, the indicators, ratings, and lessons
leamed. Peer reviewers were Rosalia Rodriguez Garcia and Pedro Arizti.
l 9 Structural reforms implemented in several sectors had improved the business environment, but there were also delays: for example,
monopolies or oligopolies continued to operate in many large industries (sugar, cement, petroleum retailing, tobacco auctioning, and
transportation), and many small and medium-size enterpnses continued to operate in protected environments that do not necessarily promote
Malawi’s long-term competitive advantage.

43

productivity, l o w levels o f private sector investment, supply-side issues in specific industries and
subsectors, and high transaction costs for exports and imports resulted in reduced trade opportunities, and
low economic growth leading to continued widespread poverty. The effects o f these factors, coupled with
high levels o f HIV/AIDS, were food insecurity, deteriorating social services, and declining social
indicators.

5 . Donor Assistance. In 2003, Malawi received US$497.9 million in official development assistance,
which equaled almost 12 percent o f GDP and about 40 percent o f total Government expenditures. The
major donors-the European Union, World Bank, United Kingdom, Canada, Germany, Japan, Norway,
Netherlands, Sweden, and the United States-supported a variety o f sectors including agriculture,
education, environment, finance, health, HIV/AIDs, and infrastructure. Most donor support was provided
through grants, projects, or technical assistance, with four key donors (the European Union, Norway,
Sweden, and the United Kingdom) takmg a Common Approach to Budget Support (CABS) b y pooling
balance-of-payments resources.

6. Concerns about Malawi’s Performance. Because o f weak implementation o f the macroeconomic
program supported b y an IMF PRGF and governance concerns, the four major bilateral donors suspended
balance-of-payments support to Malawi in December 200 1. Denmark subsequently decided to end its
program in Malawi. Because o f setbacks in implementing the reform agenda, repeated delays in the first
review o f the PRGF supported program, , and questions about the progress o f the Malawi Poverty
Reduction Strategy (MPRS) 2o the Bank’s assistance program for Malawi was in a low-case scenario
when the 2003 CAS was being designed. These circumstances led the 2003 CAS to conclude that
“business as usual” would not achieve the needed results, and a fresh approach was required.
6. The Malawi Poverty Reduction Strategv. The MPRS, launched in April 2002, was built around four
strategic pillars: (a) sustainable pro-poor economic growth, (b) human capital development, (c) improved
quality o f life for the most vulnerable, and (d) good governance; and i t also featured a number o f cross-

cutting themes. In each o f the pillars there were long-term goals and objectives related to sub-themes.
The MPRS was consistent with the policy frameworks o f the 1990s that emphasized growth with equity
and sought to achieve the goals in Vision 2020, and also aimed at achieving such international
commitments as the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).~~

7. Targets. Recognizing that achieving many o f Malawi’s MDGs was unlikely, the MPRS established
three-year targets for 2005 that were less ambitious, but more realistic in the Malawi context, than the
international targets for the MDGs. As the Joint Staff Assessment o f the MPRS b y the IMF and the

revlsed baselme The 1998 baseline, and 2005 actual i s based on M S 2

**nw7nn4

The MPRS was Malawi’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP).
UNDP Review of the MDGs, 2003

44

World Bank22noted, the lower targets in the MPRS meant that i t was likely that the ultimate results in
2015 would fall short o f the international MDG targets. However, a more serious deficiency was that the
MPRS was not adequately linked to the national budget. Nevertheless, the Bank’s 2003 CAS program
was aligned to the MPRS targets for some o f the core MDGs, which are shown in Table 1.

111.

The 2003 Country Assistance Strategy

8. The 2003 CAS was not only aligned to the goals and priorities o f the Government’s MPRS o f 2002,

i t s design was also influenced b y the 2000 Report to the Board in 2000 on the implementation o f the
previous CAS.23 The new CAS sought to be responsive to the country’s economic problems and to
changes in the political environment. It was envisaged as a transitional program to help the Government

move from a relatively reactive and disjointed development program that was already overstretching
capacities, to a more proactive, focused, and integrated program that would address key constraints to
growth and poverty reduction and urgent development issues in Malawi. In particular, the CAS aimed at
improving the selectivity o f the Bank’s assistance program and increasing the focus on results.

9. Increased Strategic Selectivity. The 1998 CAS, the 2000 CAE prepared b y JEG, and the 2000 CAS
Progress Report all stressed the need for selectivity. Due to the range o f Malawi’s economic and social
problems, being selective was difficult for both the Government and donors; everything became a
priority. Choices needed to be made between pro-poor economic policies which would require vision and
political courage. The 2003 CAS made an effort to identify priority poverty reduction programs. I t
defined the priorities as follows:
0

0

0

0

Implement core reforms to achieve macroeconomic stability, improve public expenditure
management, and establish a basis for sustainable poverty-reducing growth.
Strengthen crucial human development interventions that would achieve results on the ground even in
a low-case Bank lending scenario.
Design interventions that would lead to poverty reduction in the medium and long term (for example,
creating an attractive investment climate for increased employment) rather than short-term povertyreducing interventions (for example, safety nets) that are probably unsustainable.
Improve harmonization o f development assistance among donors to improve implementation o f
assistance programs.

10. ThemesPillars of the 2003 CAS. The Bank designed the 2003 CAS around three themes or pillars,
which were reflected in the results framework o f the CAS:
0

0

0

22

23

Strengthening economic management and accountability. Expected outcomes: (a) improved public
expenditure management, and (b) improved parastatal effectiveness.
Establishing a platform for long-term sustainable growth. Expected outcomes: (a) more
competitive business environment; (b) improved agricultural productivity and revenue; and (c)
sustainable use o f natural resources in the Mulanje Massif.
Improving service delivery and expanding safety nets. Expected outcomes: (a) continued support to
vulnerable groups as a tool for food security; (b) improved expenditure management and institutional
structure for service delivery in health and education; and (c) reduction in risky sexual behavior
leading to HIV/AIDs.

JSAN (Document No)
1998 Country Assistance Strategy : (Document No.)

45

11. Alignment to Malawi’s Goals. Within each pillar, the 2003 CAS aligned Bank assistance to
Malawi’s development goals as set out in the MPRS. It then defined expected outcomes to be achieved
in the CAS period (FY04-FY06) that would be directly influenced by the Bank’s interventions. While
the scope o f the program was s t i l l quite broad, selectivity was expected to be achieved through the choice
o f activities that would be delivered from within the broad program (such as public expenditure
management in the health sector).

IV. Assessment of the 2003 CAS Implementation
12. The overall program performance o f the CAS i s rated moderately unsatisfactory. The CAS was
relevant to addressing the key development constraints facing Malawi and consistent with the directions
o f the previous CAS (1998, and 2000 progress report). The overall rating i s broken down into a rating for
each o f the CAS outcomes that were defined in the results framework o f the 2003 CAS (Table 2). In
addition, the rating for Bank Performance was also moderately unsatisfactory, reflecting shortcomings in
design and supervision in the various outcome areas. Toward the end o f the CAS both Bdnk performance
and program performance were beginning to improve. The remainder o f this section provides a summary
o f development objectives to which the CAS was contributing as well as an overview o f the lessons
learned from CAS design and implementation. This i s followed b y an assessment and lessons learned for
each o f the CAS outcomes, which were directly influenced b y the Bank’s program o f support.

Summary of Progress on Main Development Objectives to which the CAS was aligned
13. Poverty has not changed significantly in Malawi. A comprehensive review o f the MPRS was
completed in December 2005 and completion o f the second Integrated Household Survey (2005) showed
that poverty had not changed significantly over the past seven years. The poor s t i l l have poor
socioeconomic indicators, with food security a continuing threat to nutrition and a better life. The poor
still have difficulty gaining paid employment (though employment statistics are weak), and Malawi has
one o f the highest population densities in Sub-Saharan Africa. Income inequality persists as does higher
Table 2: Summary o f CAS CR Outcome Ratings

Pillar 1: Strengthening Economic Management and Accountability
Outcome 1: Improved public expenditure management.
Outcome 2: Improved parastatal effectiveness.
Pillar 2: Establishing a Platform for Long-Term Sustainable Growth
Outcome 3: More competitive business environment.
Outcome 4: Improved agricultural productivity and revenue, both for main
cash crop (tobacco) and main consumption crops.
Outcome 5: Sustainable use ofnatural resources in the Mulanje Massif.
Pillar 3: Improving Service Delivery and Expanding the Safety Net
Outcome 6: Continued support to vulnerable groups.

Moderately satisfacto y

I Moderately unsatisfactory
Moderately unsatisfactory
Unsatisfacto y
Satisfacto y
Satisfactory

Outcome 7: Improved expenditure management, institutional structure, for
service delivery in health and education.

Moderately satisfacto y

Outcome 8: Risky sexual behavior reduced.

Satisfactoy

The final rating i s a weighted average. The weights for outcomes 1 to 8 were 0.30, 0.20, 0.10, 0.20, 0.02, 0.08, 0.08, and
0.02 respectively. T h i s required a judgment o f the relative importance o f the CAS outcomes to the overall program.

46

poverty rates among female headed households, especially in rural areas. (see annex for poverty
estimates) Shocks (economic and other), continue to threaten households b y keeping the poor in poverty,
and for the marginal non-poor, pushing them into poverty. Most households have experienced at least one
economic shock in the past five years, and such short-term crises can lead to depletion o f household assets
and long-term negative effects. Women are more vulnerable than men to economic shocks and indicators
continue to show significant differences in access to basic services and employment. In addition, women
have a larger work burden than men, with a considerable share o f the time spent on domestic activities for
heavy tasks as collecting water and firewood.
14. Despite efforts in the MPRS and the earlier Malawi Economic Growth Strategy (MEGS),
trends show that more needs to be done to stimulate growth and diversification of the economy.
Malawi has experienced fluctuating but generally low growth rates averaging around three percent per
annum over the last decade, mainly because o f the economy’s dependence on the agricultural sector.24
These lower than expected growth rates, coupled with a population growth rate o f nearly 2 percent per
year, resulted in a decline in per capita income and consumption. In addition, market uncertainty and
slow growth in demand have resulted in a defensive response from local farmers and businessmen.
Because o f uncertainty, many have opted for personal and business security as opposed to aggressive
participation in markets where they might achieve higher productivity and incomes. This has resulted in
many farm households undertalung low-value subsistence farming, manufacturing firms scaling down
activities, and a less active financial sector that has used i t s resources in less r i s k y government paper
rather than aggressively engaging in business lending.25 In this l o w level equilibrium the economy was
vulnerable to external factors such as drought and other natural disasters; limited cost-effective access to
domestic, regional, and international markets; high transport costs; and a high level o f dependence on
external aid. Even small variations in crop production created food shortages that were devastating for
small-scale farm households. Growth was also constrained b y chronic macroeconomic instability, high
fiscal deficits, and slow progress on important reforms for market-led growth (for example, privatization
and elimination o f government intervention in agricultural markets did not take place).
15. Domestic food supplies remained a problem during the period, with droughts causing domestic
food shortages in 2002 and 2005. D r y weather in January-February 2005 led to widespread failure o f
the agricultural harvest in southern Africa, with Malawi one o f the countries worst affected. Agricultural
productivity f e l l 7 percent during 2004, and the 2005 maize crop was estimated to be almost 30 percent
lower than this level, resulting in 2005 being the worst maize season in 10 years. The drop in maize
production corresponded to a shortfall equivalent o f about 20 percent o f national food consumption
requirements between April 2005 and March 2006.

16. There have been limited improvements in trends in social indicators. Although efforts have been
made to implement a number o f actions, Malawi s t i l l faces a number o f challenges in the social sectors.
There has been some progress in social indicators, especially infant mortality levels, primary school
enrolment rates and the stabilization o f HIV/AIDs prevalence.26 percent. Other indicators have worsened
or stagnated, such as maternal mortality rates and life expectancy. Chronic malnutrition i s among the
worst in SSA with about 49 percent o f young children displaying stunting. High rates o f malnutrition
have persisted for at least the last decade and continue to reduce productivity levels in a number o f
sectors, hampering effective learning and increasing the severity o f related illnesses and child mortality.

24 2005 GDP growth i s expected to be2.1 percent (compared with a pre-drought projection o f 4.8 percent), mainly as a result o f lowered
agricultural production. GDP growth had risen in 2004 to 4.6 percent from 3.9 percent in 2003.
25 2004 CEM (Doc. No. 25293-MAI).
26 Estimated to be 14 percent ofthe adult population.

47

Key Lessons Learned on CAS Design - Bank Performance
While the CAS noted that i t would be more
17. Selectivity and integration of the program.
selective, in retrospect the Bank’s interventions were quite scattered across a number o f expected
outcomes. As noted in the 2006 IEG CAE, each o f the previous CASs failed to specify areas to be
eliminated or reduced and this resulted in a Bank program that was spread too thinly across sectors and
within adjustment operations. This may have diluted the Bank’s ability to adjust to weak implementation
o f the first two pillars o f the strategy. There was also little apparent attempt to integrate various activities
across products. For instance, while the issues o f macroeconomic management, parastatal reform, and
economic growth are all related, the CAS was spread over several smaller issues (agricultural
productivity, business reform, natural resource management, fiscal discipline, etc.). M u c h o f the effort in
the first two pillars dealt with capacity building (in the public sector, parastatals, and for service delivery
activities).

18. Inadequate attention to capacity building. The Program did not sufficiently address institutional
capacity issues - either in terms o f the complexity o f individual operations, consideration o f the broader
political economy in enabling implementation o f key reforms, or development o f a strategic program for
strengthening capacity through all operational opportunities. The IEG evaluation o f capacity building in
Malawi (2005) found that while economic analysis has tended to be better than the analysis o f underlying
political conditions, the shift in power and the conflicting interests among actors are poorly captured, and
the political incentives for privatization and public sector reform have been overestimated. This has often
led to simplistic conclusions about “lack o f commitment” in Bank reviews o f the results o f what were
unrealistic strategies and timelines. The Bank might have to recognize that a slower pace o f reform might
match the local absorptive capacity for change within the scope and objectives o f its lending
interventions, thus improving buy-in, ownership and ultimately results.
Pillar 1: Strengthening Economic Management and Accountability

19. During the CAS period, Malawi made some progress in improving economic performance including
in achieving macroeconomic stability. Fiscal slippages, especially in early 200427,and the long record o f
weak policy performance, had damaged the economy through entrenched inflation expectations, high real
interest rates, and depressed private sector investment. The new Government, elected in M a y 2004,
increased attention to macroeconomic stability, fiscal discipline, and anti-corruption. In the first twelve
months o f the new Mutharika administration a number o f important reforms were implemented and
efforts were made to rein in government spending and tackle entrenched interests and corruption.
20. The two expected CAS outcomes under this theme were consistent with the direction o f the Bank
program during previous p e r i o d ~ ’ ~and
,
were complementary to the IMF’s effort through its Staff
Monitored Program (2000-2004) and to the support from the Department for International Development
(DFID), the European Union (EU), and the UnitedNations.

27 Before the May 2004 elections, the government had failed to keep public expenditures in check, leading to the discontinuation o f the IMF
Poverty Reduction Growth Facility (PRGF) in April 2004. Shortly after the elections, the new government and the IMF agreed on an IMF Staff
Monitored Program (SMP), laying the basis for a new PRGF supported program agreed in 2005.
l4While macroeconomic stability was an explicit focus in 1996 and again in 2003, in 1998 it was subsumed as part o f the focus on economic
growth strategies. Economic growth has also been a constant, though evolving, theme throughout the three CASs. In 1996, private sector-led
growth was emphasized, reflecting the optirmsm that public sector restructunng, privatization, and an enabling environment would lead to a
resurgent private sector. The 1998 CAS focused more on broad-based labor-intensive growth, partly in response to the lack o f structural
transformations, but also partly due to a realization that inuch o f the growth would have to come ffom small-scale enterprises and the agricultural
sector. The 2003 CAS returned to the unfinished agenda o f economic restructuring intended to set Malawi on a higher and more sustainable
growth path. (IEG, Malawi case study as part o f a n evaluation o f capacity building, 2005)

48

Outcome 1: Improved public expenditure management. Relevant and moderately satisfactory.
21. This outcome focused o n improving public expenditure management through more transparent budget
formulation, execution, and reporting. It sought to strengthen financial management and monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) systems, and accountability institutions (including empowering communities). At the
start o f the CAS, each o f these areas was weak, with poor supporting systems.
22. Results. B y the end o f the CAS, the indicators for improved expenditure management showed
minimal improvement, although some o f the milestones were achieved. Most progress was noted in
“developing accountable institutions,” with increased parliamentary scrutiny o f the budget and with the
Government holding community budget consultations. Several efforts were made to strengthen capacity
in the five dimensions o f expenditure management (defined in the CAS). Toward the end o f the C A S
period the new Government showed increased commitment to these reforms.
0 Improving expenditure management. The new Government has eliminated extra budgetary spending
and introduced new expenditure management procedures, which, combined with strong political
commitment to fiscal discipline and sound public expenditure managements, has resulted in immediate
improvements in budget execution. Additionally, the Government has recently taken steps to improve
the reporting o f donor funding within the budget, and this i s expected to result in significant
improvements starting with 2006/07.

Budget discipline. During 2004/05 the Government lived within i t s budget for the first time in almost
a decade. Actual expenditure outturns appear close to budgeted amounts. The Government has been
rapidly implementing the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMIS) since August 2005; the
new system i s not yet functional, but i t s configuration i s well advanced. In October 2005, a Bank
mission to review i t s implementation revealed that it i s working and on track for piloting in five
ministries in early 2006. Financial reporting i s improving, but there remain significant gaps.

MTEF. At the beginning o f the CAS period, the Government was developing a basis for a MediumTerm Expenditure Framework (MTEF) as a more strategic approach to budgeting and planning. A t
completion, MTEF does not work in practice; i t continues to dependent on cash-based systems without
three-year projections and i s not supported b y an integrated financial management system. EU and
DFID are providing support to implement an M T E F Phase 11, to be completed in 2007.
0

Maluwi Growth and Development Strategy. In April 2005 the new Government began developing i t s
second-generation PRSP, the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS). The process
involved all line ministries, and brought together the various strategies and programs o f Government
into a results-oriented approach. The strategy’s results framework links impacts to outcomes, outputs,
actions, and expenditures. Plans are to link the MGDS results framework to the budget process, and
over time this could be used as a basis to develop a functioning MTEF.
New legislation. The new Procurement Act, Financial Management Act, and Public Audit Act have
been approved by Parliament and are being implemented, leading to improvements in transparency and
accountability in public expenditure management. Also, the recent centralization o f accounts, as part o f
the new epicor-based IFMIS, i s expected to contribute enormously to the Government’s accountability
and transparency framework.

23. Bank Support The Bank’s program o f support included FDRPIII and a technical assistance loan
(200 1/2004); National Water Development project; the Road Maintenance project; the Secondary
Education project; the Fiscal Management Transparency and Accountability Project (FIMTAP, 2003);

49

two IDF grants (anticorruption and support to the accountancy profession); “efficiency-enhancing”
components in sector loans (such as the Social Action Fund [MASAF IUIII] with a focus on community
empowerment; conditional balance o f payments support (if the CAS moved into the base case) in the
Fiscal Management and Accelerated Growth Program (FIMAG, 2005); distance learning in
macroeconomic management (GDLN, 2004); and two emergency projects to alleviate the impact o f

droughts on macroeconomic stability (Emergency Drought Recovery Project [EDRP], 2002, and
Emergency Recovery Loan, 2005). Relevant economic and sector work (ESW) included the Country
Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA, 2004), to complement the 2002 CFAA; the Country
Economic Memorandum (CEM, 2004); the Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR, 2004); and
the HIPC Country Assessment and Action Plan (HIPC AAP, 2004). In 2005/2006, programmatic analytic
and advisory services brought together the many pieces o f analytic work (by the Bank, the Government,
and other donors) to support design the MGDS as a results-oriented strategy linked to the budget, and
high-level dialogue with donors on the Paris Declaration helped align major donor strategies to the

MGDS.

24. The operations to deliver expected results, while technically sound, did not adequately take into
consideration the political conditions that would make important policy conditions and implementation
successful. The FIMAG and FIMTAP were both based on solid analytic work (such as the Country
Economic Memorandum (CEM) and Country Financial and Accountability Assessment (CFAA);
however; implementation was poor: FIMTAP suffered from a complex design with too many objectives
and FIMAG from inadequate commitment to reforms and too many conditions. The Bank’s response to
information on difficulties in implementation was late in the CAS cycle, with inadequate supervision o f
FIMTAP and FIMAG (rated b y Q A G as unsatisfactory and marginally satisfactory, respectively28).
Toward the end o f the CAS, more attention was paid to the difficulties in the portfolio, which resulted in
restructuring o f F I M T A P and cancellation o f GDLN. The technical and advisory support provided b y the
Bank to the new Government has been highly valued. This support supported development o f the results
oriented Malawi Growth and Development Strategy and integration o f various pieces o f Bank analytical
work into the process o f strategy development
Outcome 2: Improved parastatal effectiveness. Relevant but moderately unsatisfactory result,
25. This CAS outcome sought to reduce the burden o f parastatals o n the Government and improve the
operational efficiency o f key parastatals, thereby contributing to improved service delivery. To address
limited access to electricity, unreliable energy supplies, the high cost o f telecommunications, and
inadequate access to water, and to stop the drain on Government revenues from increasing parastatal
losses, the Government moved to privatize i t s telecommunications, power, and water utilities.
26. Results. B y the end o f the CAS, commercial parastatal losses had increased and operational
efficiency was still low; the only improvement in service delivery was in the postal services. There was
some progress in key milestones, such as the unbundling o f the Electricity Supply Corporation o f Malawi
and in privatization o f telecommunications, but b y and large implementation was unsatisfactory. The
Malawi Agricultural Development and Marketing Corporation (ADMARC) continues to represent an
impediment to the involvement o f the private sector in agricultural input and output markets, and the
Bank’s program did not succeed in reducing the negative effects o f some A D M A R C operations in these
markets.
27. Bank Support. The Bank‘s program o f support included the National Water Development Project
(NWDP), which closed in 2003; the Privatization and Utility Reform Project (PURP 2000); and
conditions in the FIMAG project. PURP, the main operation expected to contribute to this CAS outcome,

’’Country Lending Assessment, 2005
50

suffered from an overly ambitious project design and insufficient Government buy-in and ownership.
Disbursement was very slow during implementation, but the Bank did little to improve implementation
until mid-2005, when i t restructured the PURP. The Bank undertook no ESW in support o f the operation
and policy dialogue until late in the CAS period (with an Investment Climate Assessment, or ICA).
28. Lessons from implementation of Pillar 1. The assessment concludes that more results could have
been achieved in the Bank‘s program had more attention been given to ownership, capacity building and
partnership.

AAA. While the analytic work was strong, there was limited Government ownership o f the
findings, at least partly because the borrower was not sufficiently involved in preparation and design.
Weak borrower ownership o f important reforms, conditions that were unrealistic given the country’s
capacity constraints, and lack o f specificity in the language o f conditions contributed to slow
performance and confusion as to whether the government had met certain controversial conditions
(such as A D M A R C restructuring). It was also not clear if line ministries, important in implementing
the reforms, were sufficiently engaged in design o f the conditionalities, and thus owned the changes
that needed to take place. In addition, complex design with too many objectives was a key factor in
limiting success.
0

Capacity building. New s h l l s and capacities were not put into practice to improve Government
performance, although the Government and donors supported a variety o f capacity-building and
training activities with accountants, auditors, and financial managers.
0

0
Leverage and partnerships. The CAS design, or later modifications, could have leveraged other
resources to help improve service delivery along with privatization reforms. Such resources could have
included not only additional donor resources, but also consideration o f public-private partnerships and
alternative operational models.

Pillar 2: Establishing a Platform for Long-Term Sustainable Growth
29. This pillar highlighted the importance o f rapid, broad-based, and sustainable growth to reduce poverty
in Malawi. During the period, growth was below expectations and continued the pattern o f fluctuating,
highly variable real GDP growth, mainly because o f the economy’s dependence on the agricultural sector,
structural weaknesses, and vulnerability to external factors such as drought and other natural disaster.
Malawi’s private sector remains small, and output i s stagnating because o f low capacity utilization and
declining investments. There was a high rate o f deforestation adding to soil erosion and erosion o f the
natural resource base. This was coupled with continued dependence on wood as a source o f household
energy, and a few monopolistic industrial producers dependent on public forests for raw materials.

30. This pillar complemented the focus in the first pillar on improved public expenditure and parastatal
reform with a focus on a number o f key requirements for growth in Malawi. The CAS identified three
expected outcomes to be achieved during the period o f the CAS: a more competitive business
environment, improved agricultural productivity, and protection o f natural resources in the Mulanje
Massif.
Outcome 3: M o r e competitive business environment. Relevant but moderately unsatisfactory result.

3 1. This outcome sought to address key bottlenecks to the participation o f medium- and large-scale
private enterprises in the economy b y reducing the cost o f and increasing access to (a) utilities important

51

to private sector participation (power, water, and telecommunication); (b) transportation; and (c) financial
and political risk service instruments.
32. Results. B y the end o f the CAS, privatization efforts were not producing expected improvements in
service delivery (see Outcome 2); only postal delivery and urban water supply had improved. There were
improvements in the road networks, targets for the Road Fund were largely met, and as o f January 2006
the Road Fund was receiving sufficient financial resources to cover routine maintenance. While E G
found that the program o f Bank support had successfully built capacity in the road sector, there remained
problems with supporting local contracting industries, since high domestic interest rates often keep local
contractors from accessing affordable finance. The Regional Trade and Facilitation Project had little
impact on productive activities in Malawi, which continues to be constrained by a perception o f high
political risk.
33. Bank Support. The Bank‘s program o f support included the PURP, Regional Trade and Facilitation
project, FIMTAP, ROMARP, NWDP, Rural Infrastructure Project, Southern Africa Power Market (in
preparation for Malawi-Mozambique connector), a Financial Sector Review in 2003 (a Financial Sector
Assessment i s planned for FY07), IDF Grant support to the Anti-Corruption Bureau, a CEM, and an I C A
(launched in January 2006). Toward the end o f the CAS, the Bank increased i t s dialogue with private
sector and government, and proposed innovative approaches to address private sector issues-such as
bringing together potential supermarket customers and local producers to help identify constraints to and
opportunities for business development. The Bank also continued i t s more policy-oriented work o f
benchmarhng Malawi’s private sector performance against that o f neighboring countries.
Outcome 4: Improved agricultural productivity and revenue, both for main cash crop (tobacco)
and main consumption crops. Highly relevant but unsatisfuctory result.
34. This outcome sought to improve agricultural productivity, b y addressing key bottlenecks such as
inadequate access to input and output markets \ and inefficient land markets.
35. Results. A t the end o f the CAS, agricultural growth was l o w while productivity continued to decline,
with many o f the bottlenecks to productivity remaining to be addressed. Necessary actions to improve the
supply chain in tobacco did not take place, and targets for land scarce families to benefit from land
acquisition were not reached during the CAS period. In 2002 and 2005, droughts negatively influenced
this CAS outcome, and the Bank responded with a highly successful emergency drought relief project.
However, other operations did not deliver the expected results, and many o f the important milestones,
such as devolution o f service delivery to the front lines, were delayed.
36. Bank Support. The Bank’s program o f support included the Community-Based Rural Livelihoods
Project (CBRL, 2004), FIMAG, EDRP (2002)’ IRLAD (2005), the Rural Infrastructure project (entering
the portfolio), a strategic country gender assessment, a poverty and vulnerability assessment (2005), a
comprehensive review o f the tobacco sector, an informal note on agricultural policy options, and a policy
options paper that was well received by the Government.
e

In the FIMAG project, much o f the conditionality was designed to unleash agriculture
productivity (in cereals marketing, land, research and extension, and the tobacco value chain).
The main deficiency in FIMAG was the limited buy-in o f some stakeholders regarding key
conditionalities, such as A D M A R C restructuring. Line ministries have not always been
sufficiently engaged, and their commitment and ownership o f the reform agenda has, as a result,
not always been optimal.

52

e

The CBRL drew o n emerging worldwide best practices and adapts them to the Malawian context,
notably in the use o f the Social Action Fund institution (MASAF) to provide community assets.
Due to some slippages, as o f January 2006, the project had not settled any poor and landless (or
land poor) families on farms which have been already acquired.

e

The Bank produced a highly useful policy options paper that was well received b y Government.

Outcome 5: Sustainable use of natural resources in the Mulanje Massif. Relevant and sutisfactory
result.

37. This outcome contributed to the preservation o f biodiversity and the unique ecosystems o f the

Mulanje massif b y incorporating biodiversity conservation objectives effectively into management o f the
reserve and focusing on community involvement in forest protection. This outcome was supported by one
operation, the Mulanje Mountain Biodiversity Conservation Pr,oject, an innovative project that brought in
emerging best practice experience from other African efforts in biodiversity conservation and adapted
them to the Malawian context. The project has maintained its satisfactory status since 2001 and increased
community awareness o f ecosystem management. There has also been success in establishing a
functioning trust fund unit. Unfortunately, a very serious drought in 2005 led to wildfires that destroyed
large areas o f natural habitat. Sustainability i s dependant o n management o f forest resources,
commitment o f the Forestry Department, and sufficient allocation o f operating funds b y the Government
to the Forest Department and b y the Forest Department to the Mulanje Mountain Forest Reserve.

38. Lessons from implementation of pillar 2. The assessment concludes that more results could have
been achieved in the Bank’s program had more attention been paid to complementing reforms with other
investments and had a stronger analytical basis. (funded b y the Bank or other sources). Key observations
include:
0

0

e

While operations were aligned to the CAS outcomes, there was not a strong analytical basis to
understand many o f the issues facing business. The I C A launched in 2006 should provide
information on constraints in the enabling environment for private investment, but it may not
sufficiently address small and medium scale enterprises or the bottlenecks to microfinance and
domestic savings. In general, there was a lack o f sufficient focus on infrastructure to complement
reforms.
Projects often gave insufficient attention to marketing and logistical issues; investments in
increasing productivity are unlikely to enhance farmers’ incomes unless they address market
development issues simultaneously. Re-invigorated extension policies and interventions need to
focus on developing a pluralistic and demand-driven extension service, and extension should be
further devolved to the District Assemblies.
The emergency drought relief project was able to start the process o f formulating the food
security policy, but did not in i t s e l f provide a comprehensive food security strategy, Programs in
agriculture should be aligned to efforts to improve food security.

Pillar 3: Improving Service Delivery and Expanding the Safety Net

39. This pillar sought to contribute to improvements in social indicators in Malawi, especially for the
vulnerable. It highlighted the importance o f developing and maintaining a strong human resource base
and providing a mechanism to reduce the risks faced by vulnerable groups. The three expected outcomes
identified were (a) supporting the vulnerable, (b) improving expenditure management in health and

53

education, and (c) reducing risky sexual behaviors that lead to HIV/AIDs. During the period capacity
constraints continued to hinder the translation o f increased public social expenditures into sustained
improvements in the quality and reach o f basic social service delivery. This was exacerbated b y the
impact o f the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Outcome 6: Continued support to vulnerable groups. Highly relevant and satisfactory result
40. This outcome was expected to contribute to poverty reduction, increased food security,29 and the
MDGs through a community-based response, and was complemented by the efforts under pillar 2 to
address the structural issues o f food security in terms o f agricultural production. The CAS outcome
sought to directly influence the number households with measurable case incomes from programs such as
o f Public Works Programs (PWP) and Targeted Nutrition Programs (TNP).
4 1. Results. At the start o f the CAS, the demand for social and economic services was overwhelming
because o f poverty levels and continued shocks. Communities were unable to mobilize savings, which
negatively affected government-community partnership in service delivery. B y the end o f the CAS, there
was s t i l l a high demand for social and economic services; however, the program had been successful in
improving access to social services. The number o f households with measurable increases in cash
income rose from 260,000 to 1.4 million beneficiaries from public works programs; 220,000 children
benefited from school nutrition programs; and 115,000 orphans received take-home rations as part o f the
emergency drought relief efforts. Sustainability o f these positive results i s contingent on maintaining
close links to the community level, ensuring that public works and direct welfare transfers complement
government efforts to enhance pro-poor growth, and maintenance o f infrastructure at the district level.
Looking forward, the impact o f increased community development projects on women’s time should be
assessed, as women provide much o f the labor in community driven development (CDD) projects, and
they work 15 hours a day compared to 8 for men.30
42. Bunk Support. This outcome was directly influenced by MASAF I1 and 111, Bank support to the
National AIDS Council (NAC), a MASAF-related component in the ERDP, and the community-based
rural lands project. During the CAS period, MASAF I1 was closed and the follow-on MASAF I11 (an
Adaptable Program Loan) became effective. This transition demonstrated a shift in the Bank’s support
from funding infrastructure and cash transfers to assisting local government in mobilizing communities to
undertake activities to contribute to attaining localized MDGs. This transition was well sequenced, and
should help mitigate the potential negative impact o f social welfare transfers on the Government’s
program. The institutional structure provided b y the MASAF program enabled the Government to
respond quickly to the drought, and strong linkages have been forged between MASAF and certain
sectors (water, sanitation, roads) at the community level. (Several other donors are also active in
supporting vulnerable groups, especially in the delivering programs to enhance nutrition and welfare.)
Outcome 7: Improved expenditure management, institutional structure, for service delivery in
health and education. Relevant but moderately sutisfactory results

43. This outcome focused on two separate sectors with different longer-term goals in the PRSP and
MGDS-the education and the health sectors. In the Education sector the CAS focused primarily on
improving expenditure management and improving secondary school enrollment. In health, the CAS
sought to improve expenditure management and enhance the quality o f essential health care services.
The Country Economc Memorandum 2003 distinguished between food security constituting a social safety net for people without assets or
entitlement who required assistance at all times, and policies aimed at assisting productive indimduals who had lost their income because o f a
decrease in agricultural production resulting from weather-related shocks. The two are interrelated, but t h i s outcome specifically addressed the
former, while pillar 2 addressed the latter.
30 Malawi Strategic Country Gender Assessment, May 2004.
zy

54

44. Results in Expenditure Management. The budget system remains functionally de-linked to strategic
planning in the Ministries o f Health and Education. M T E F does not work in practice and continues to
depend on cash-based systems without three-year projections and i s not supported b y an integrated
financial management system. Recent efforts b y Government to develop a results based second
generation PRSP (MGDS) linked to expenditure management provide a good basis to deepen efforts for a
functioning MTEF.
Bank support for improved expenditure management included FIMTAP,
participation in the health sector SWAp, and several pieces o f ESW: a review o f health financing and
human resources, an education status report, and benefit incidence analysis in the poverty and
vulnerability assessment.
In the health sector, there i s some promise for future progress in expenditure management. The
SWAP framework includes a financial improvement plan and a procurement improvement plan to
strengthen weak fiduciary systems. Budgetary reform initiated under a 1995 MTEF and, more recently,
support from HIPC have allowed annual government health expenditures to be increased and protected
under the “Pro-Poor Expenditure” budgetary category.
In education, the Ministry o f Education has been slow in building capacities and strengthening the
management o f the sector. However, continuing strong government commitment to education has
translated into increasing budgetary and donor support.

45. Education Moderately Satisfactory Results. At CAS completion, the overall completion rate for
secondary education and the pass rate for the secondary school certificate examination had increased for
both girls and boys; however, secondary school enrollment continues to be biased toward richer
households, especially for girls. The quality o f secondary education remains weak: instructional materials
remain scarce, facilities are inadequate, and the number o f untrained teachers remains high with a limited
capacity o f the teacher education systems. The standards for secondary school are uneven and inequitable
deployment o f resources continues to weaken the overall quality o f secondary education where output,
particularly in the areas o f science and technology, remains weak.
46. Bunk Support for Education. The Bank‘s support consisted o f a US$48 million Secondary
Education Project (SEP, 1998); a US$32 million Education Sector Support Project (ESSUP, 2005); and a
Country Status Report (CSR) on Cost, Financing and School Effectiveness in Malawi. After seven years
o f implementation, SEP i s the oldest project in the Malawi portfolio. It has a track record o f uneven
implementation performance: at midterm only one-eighth o f the credit had been disbursed; every
component was in trouble; and serious procurement and financial management problems cut across all
components. Despite a recent turnaround in the implementation o f some components, it has become
evident that the objectives were unlikely to be achieved or measured within the expected timeframe and
without additional investments. W i t h ESSUP there have been delays in project start-up. The ministry has
now formally approved a move toward a SWAp, which most o f the ministry’s donor partners, including
the Bank, support. In terms o f analytic work, the CSR provided an excellent basis for work in the
education sector and brought the Government, the donors, and the Bank into a stronger collaborative
partnership.
47. Health - Satisfactory Result. At CAS design, a key challenge for the Government was to strengthen
the performance o f the district health systems and to develop integrated health programs to deliver the
Essential Health Package (EHP). This was particularly important given the government’s intention o f
decentralizing the provision o f public services. At completion, the health sector s t i l l faced a number o f
challenges to service delivery. The Health SWAP responded to the situation with developing and
emergency human resource plan with the Government to assesses the human resource shortage including
increasing the training o f health professionals especially medical assistants and nurses. Subsequently,

55

Malawi has increased the number o f health care professionals such as nurses in training. While there was
a target o f not less than 200 nurses, 50 medical assistants and 20 radiography technicians to be trained,
currently, there are over 500 nurses, 130 medical assistants and 20 radiography assistants in training.
However, the health sector s t i l l faces challenges to service delivery.
48. Bank Support Health. The 2003 CAS made improved health status in Malawi a priority and
identified the need for renewed engagement o f the Bank in the health sector. The Bank joined the Health
Sector Support Program (SWAp) with an IDA grant o f US$15 million. The Bank's interventions within
the SWAP aimed at improving the effectiveness and efficiency o f health services, and providing the
Essential Health Package to poor people, especially women and children. The Bank has effectively
leveraged i t s role as junior financing partner in the health SWAP and plays a critical role in
implementation. Other Bank support included FIMAG, providing local authorities with funding for
primary health care centers; MASAF 111, using a participatory rural approach to assist communities to
access the health services that they consider essential; and the Malaria Booster Project, a recent pipeline
project that i s part o f the health SWAp. Analytic work included the Strategic Country Gender
Assessment (2003) dealing with gender issues in the health sector, and Human Resources and Financing
for Health in Malawi (2004), analyzing the human resource situation in the health sector and health sector
financing options for consideration b y Government and development partners.

Outcome 8: Risky sexual behavior reduced. Relevant and satisfuctory result.
49. This outcome aimed to change the risky behavior o f groups at risk for HIV/AIDS. The outcome was
highly relevant to Malawi where HIV/AIDS continued to pose a challenge to Malawi's people and
resources - with an estimated prevalence rate o f 14 percent Malawi's H I V / A I D S crisis i s ranked the eight
most severe in the ~ o r l d . percent).
~'
The National Aids Commission (NAC) estimates that about 900,000
Malawians were infected with HIV/AIDS b y 2003. In addition, HIV/AIDS has gender specific
characteristics, not only in terms o f prevalence rates, but also in socio-economic impact. The CAS
outcome expected to contribute to reductions in prevalence rates by focusing on changing the behavior o f
at risk groups.
50. Results. A t CAS completion, HIV/AIDS awareness exceeded 90 percent in the general population,
with some evidence o f behavior change (between 2003 and 2005, condom use has increased from 39
percent to 47 percent in men and 29 percent to 30 percent in women). The number o f people aged 15- 24
who correctly identify ways o f preventing transmission o f HIV and reject major misconceptions about
HIV has increased during the CAS period from 37 percent to 41 percent in males and from 24 percent to
25 percent in females. In addition, three pilot districts supported b y the Bank p r o g r a m x h i t i p a , Ntchisi,
and Chiradzulu-recorded unprecedented increases in contraceptive prevalence rates.

5 1. Bunk Support. The Bank was engaged in the fight against HIV/AIDS in Malawi through a cluster o f
interventions: M A P support for implementation o f the National Strategic Framework for H I V / A I D S (the
Bank i s participating in pooled funding with other development partners and the Government); the Health
Sector Support Program, with complementary activities focused on linkages to the Ministry o f Health in
the fight against HIV/AIDs; MASAF I1 and 111 support for community proposals for vulnerable groups
with an emphasis on the chronically ill, orphans, and the elderly; the Roads Maintenance and
Rehabilitation project, with i t s sector HIV/AIDS strategy; the Secondary Education Project (SEP),
providing HIV/AIDS materials in secondary schools; and the Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods and
Agricultural Services Project (IRLASP) which integrates H I V / A I D S prevention messages into extension
services. Additionally, the Bank contributes such formal and informal ESW products as discussions o f
(Population Reference Bureau (PFU3) 2004

56

the HIV/AIDS epidemic, its impacts on achieving expected sector results, and possible mechanisms to
address impacts in specific sectors.
52. Lessonsfrom implementation of Pillar 3. The assessment concludes that where results were evident
in this pillar i t was partly because o f the multiple instruments that were used and the pooled or joint
approaches with other donors. This enabled limitation o f fragmentation and the management burden o n
the government. In addition, several recent Implementation Completion Reports emphasized the
importance o f realistic objectives that can be translated into operational and monitorable terms. The
Population and Family Planning (Pop/FP) project demonstrates the importance o f effective design, clearcut indicators, and continuous monitoring in achieving better results. Finally, support under this pillar
benefited from linking ESW preparation with policy choices and programmatic support. The recent ESW
on the financing o f health services and human resources for health highlighted the importance o f the
demand side in achieving health outcomes.

V. Bank Performance
Volume, Lending Instruments
53. Active Portfolio. As o f May 2006, Malawi’s active portfolio contained 13 projects with a net
commitment o f US$399 million. Projects exiting the portfolio in FY06 included Secondary Education,
Road Maintenance, and Fiscal Management and Accelerating Growth (FIMAG). Three projects entered
the portfolio: Irrigation and Rural Livelihoods, and Emergency Recovery, and Integrated Infrastructure
Project. As Appendix Table 2 shows, all planned projects were undertaken during the CAS period,
although there was streamlining o f the portfolio and some changes to the expected start dates. There were
several additional projects in the portfolio such as the two Emergency Operations in FY03 and FY06
respectively. Additionally, projects such as the Financial Management and Transparency Project and the
Integrated Infrastructure Project entered the portfolio during the CAS period. During FY03 and FY06 the
amount o f new commitments entering the portfolio amounted to US$407m. N o operations planned in the
2003 CAS were dropped. Some o f the portfolio features include:
0

0

Undisbursed balances. Undisbursed balances have increased slightly from a l o w o f about US$135 at
the end o f FY03 to about US$208 million.
Age. The current portfolio i s quite young, with an average age as o f December 2005 o f 2.9 years.
Instrument Mix. The active portfolio i s heavily concentrated on traditional specific investment
projects. In the earlier years under review, there was limited use o f such other types o f investment
operations as learning and innovation loans and technical assistance loans; there were few adjustment
credits and no poverty reduction support credit. Recent trends are toward increased use o f SWAps,
with pooled funding mechanisms, especially in the human development sectors (e.g., the H I V / A I D S
project, the Health Sector Support Project, and the education sector operation). MASAF I11 i s an
Adaptable Program Loan, a format that has helped to establish the long-term commitment (1 2 years)
required to make progress in developing sub-national governmental capacity and accountability and
to make noticeable progress towards the MDGs.

Portfolio Quality

57

54. Portfolio Management. Indicators o f portfolio management show improvements during the last year,
since the introduction o f a Portfolio Improvement Plan at the end o f FY05 (see Table 3). Realism and
proactivity indices are high, demonstrating that the team takes action to address problems. The increased
number o f risky projects in the FY05 portfolio can be attributed to closer scrutiny under the Portfolio
Improvement Plan. In FY05, task team leaders were asked to pay more attention to problem solving,
focusing on results and outcomes, and to reflect more realism in assessing progress in their projects and
programs. This was a marked change noted during the CAS period.

Problem Projects (YO)

21.4

10.5

21.4

18.2

33.3

9.1

0.0

25.0

23.1

Realism Index

50.0

66.7

75.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

0.0

75.0

100.0

Source: BW

55. Mixed Quality. A recent Q A G sample o f operations noted that poor quality at entry in close to 30
percent o f the reviewed sample, with such problems as unclear development objectives, overly ambitious
or complex designs and implementation arrangements, insufficient treatment o f implementation capacity,
governance and incentives issues, and poor readiness for implementation. Q A G also noted that the design
and implementation o f M&E arrangements appeared weak across the board, while the benefits o f lessons
learned from previous operations in Malawi often appeared to have been overlooked. Supervision, again
as rated b y QAG, was uneven, ranging from excellent (MASAF, ROMARP, HN/AIDS, SEP, and
Emergency Drought Recovery) to unsatisfactory (FIMTAP, PURP). In field interviews, Government and
some donor staff indicated a sense o f frustration with the slow pace o f Bank actions and decisions that are
handled from headquarters, especially in situations entailing intensive interactions about policy and
institutional reforms. There have been recent improvements in supervision and increased attention to
partnership at the country level. In addition, operations with poor quality at entry (FIMTAP, PURP) have
recently been restructured.
56. Analytic and Advisory Activities A Q A G panel rated the internal quality o f most o f the analytic work
as satisfactory, with the general quality o f conclusions and recommendations good but variable. QAG’s
Country AAA assessment found that the overall impact o f the Bank’s AAA program was less than the
sum o f its individual parts; the program could have been used to better effect if i t had led to successful
design and implementation o f Bank- or partner-funded operations. In the health and education sectors
there were good examples o f more programmatic approaches to AAA that were well received b y partners.
Recent advisory support for the MGDS focused on bringing in the findings from analytical work, such as
the poverty and vulnerability assessment, and strengthening the results focus o f the MGDS to make i t
more operational. Linkages to expenditure management were underpinned b y a strong policy dialogue at
the highest levels o f government. AAA was strongest in addressing the issues related to fiscal
management/accountability and improving service delivery but less strong in dealing with social
assistance and safety nets. Two planned analytical pieces were dropped; the Health Status Report and the
Institutional Governance Review. However, eight additional pieces were delivered during the CAS
period. Two o f these analytical reports are Social Impact Analyses o f A D M A R C and the Electricity

58

Sector Reform. A Decentralization Framework, Agricultural Policy Options, an Education Status Report,
and a Review o f Health Financing and Human Resources R were among the ESW delivered.

57. Improving Project Performance. The Government o f Malawi and the World Bank have been
working to improve project performance since FY05. Various activities and assessments undertaken in
FY05-the QAG-led Country Program Assessment (CPA, M a y ZOOS), an innovative Country Program
Review (CPR, January 2005), and an M&E Review (February 2005)-yielded
some important
recommendations: to simplify project design, increase candor in assessment, focus on capacity building,
promote the community-driven development (CDD) approach (as in MASAF) in operations, increase
selectivity, tighten the links between projects’ development objectives and the CAS goals, and ensure the
availability o f information to measure the achievement o f the development objectives (relating to M&E).
In-Country Consultation and Coordination

58. The MGDS provides a framework for all donors’ interventions in the country over the medium term.
Major donor coordination bodies include ad-hoc meetings o f the Consultative Group and the Paris Club
(there has not been a Consultative Group in Malawi since May 2000). The Bank played an important role
in supporting Government in designing the MGDS and in promoting dialogue with the donor community
on the Paris Declaration. Under the 2006-10 CAS, the Bank expects to make further efforts to increase
coordination with other donors to help avoid duplication o f efforts and support Malawi’s limited
institutional capacity.
VI. Lessons for the N e x t CAS
59. In retrospect, the fact that the CAS program was scattered across a number o f expected outcomes may
have diluted the Bank’s ability to adjust to weak implementation o f the first two pillars o f the strategy.
The chosen outcomes were no doubt necessary; however, there was little apparent attempt to integrate the
various activities. For instance, while the issues o f macroeconomic management, parastatal reform, and
economic growth are all related, the CAS spread them over several smaller issues (agricultural
productivity, business reform, natural resource management, fiscal discipline, etc.). Much o f the effort in
the first two pillars dealt with capacity building (in the public sector, parastatals, and for service delivery
activities). However, as IEG noted in i t s review o f capacity building and Q A G noted in its Country
Program Assessment, while the solutions were technically sound, the CAS made little attempt to address
the broader institutional setting or integrate support. Lessons specific to results area included in Annex 1:
Results Summary. Cross cutting lessons for the next CAS include the following:
0

Integration and linkages. Building linkages in the strategy can help deliver results; for instance,
through the CAS design or through modifications during implementation the Bank could have
leveraged other resources to help with service delivery, sequenced with the privatization
reforms-such resources as, for example, additional donor financing, public-private partnerships,
and Government organization to improve infrastructure and services.
Capacity Building. Capacity-building efforts (training, workshops, and organizational systems)
need to be coupled with efforts that address broader institutional reforms and better consideration
o f the political will that underpins successful implementation o f capacity building programs.

0

Project Design. Malawi continued to show poor results over several years as a result o f design
and implementation deficiencies in investment operations.

59

Ownership. Ownership o f the reform agenda set out in the Bank’s CAS i s always critical. QAG
noted that the Bank might have to recognize that a slower pace o f reform might match the local
absorptive capacity for change within the scope and objectives o f its lending interventions, thus
improving buy-in, ownership, and ultimately results. Effective consensus building and
partnerships, combined with sustained good-quality technical work, would also contribute to
producing better results.

60

. .

. .

a
a

Lo

N

r-

0

m
N

c
.e

a
m

N

N

...

. .

. . .

. .
c

L=

.

a

0

r.

.

Table 2: Planned IBRDDDA Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY04-FY06)

60.0 Actual
Additional Actual Projects
Fin. Managt., Transparency and
Accountability Project (FITAP)

Third Social Action Fund (MASAF Ill)

Fiscal. Mgt. and Accel. Growth (FIMAG)
Health Sector Reform Project
Global Distance Learning

Rural Infrastructure Services

ISubtotal
20061Education Sector Supt. SIL
FIMAG II

I

Subtotal

(a) Actual, Dropped, or Forwarded to a different FY

1
I

0.
Irrigation, Rural Livelih. & AgricultDev.
Additional Actual Projects
MW-lnfrastr Srvcs SIM

0.

71

Table 3: Planned AAA Program and Actual Deliveries (FY04-FY06)

I

CAS Plans 2003
~

FY
Project
20041Country Procurement Assessment Report
Financial Sector Review
Health Status Report
Gender Assessment
Poverty Assessment

Education Status Report

I

I

CAS CR 2006

Status (a)
IActual - 06/07/04
Forwarded to FY 05
dropped
Actual Forwarded to FY 06
Additional Actual Products
Decentralization Framework - 06/30/04
Agric. Policy Options - 06/28/04
ADMARC - Pov.&Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) - 01/12/04

fulled to FY 04
Additional Actual Products
Review of Health Fin. & HR - 11/12/04

Additional Actual Products
Elec. Sec. Reform Pov.&Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) - 06/28/05

(a) Actual, Dropped, or Forwarded to a different FY

72

Table 4: Indicators o f Portfolio Management, Fiscal Years 1998 to 2006 (as o f May 2006)

Comm At Risk

316.5

180.5

213.9

83.1

44.3

27.4

48.2

132.6

102.6

Disbursement Ratio

25.4

29.1

28.3

30.5

47.5

Disb Lae YO:Orie

26.7

21.2

17.6

22.3
-10.9

28.8

27.4

31.1
21.2

30.5
28.8

36.8

Projects at Risk (%)

42.9

15.8

33.3

9.1

9.1

33.3

23.1

21.4

10.5

28.6
21.4

18.2

Problem Proiects (%)

33.3

9.1

0.0

25.0

23.1

Proactlvity Index

50.0

66.7

m a

18.2

6.7

50.0

100.0

100.0

Realism Index

50.0

66.7

75.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

75.0

100.0

D

D

0.0

3.0

Source: BW

Table 5: Average age o f Projects in Malawi Portfolio (FY98-06)
Fiscal year
Malawi
Tanzania
Mozambique
Zambia
Bank wide

FYOO
4.5
4.4
4.3
3.4

I

FYOI
3.8
4.8
4.0
3.1
0.5

I

FY02
3.4
3.9
3.8
3.9
1.5

I

FY03
3.4
4.2
3.9
3.5
2.5

I

FY04
3.1
3.9
3.9
4.0
3.6

I

FY05
2.8
4.0
4.3
4.3
4.6

I

FY06
3.1
3.7
4.5
4.1
2.2

73

Table 6: IEG Evaluation Findings of Evaluated Projects (Projects Exiting Portfolio FY 98-05)
Exit PI

Source: OED, BW

’

Main non-traditional export crops are paprika, chillies, treenuts (cashew and macadamia), oilseeds (castor, sesame and sunflower). Average
annual production levels for these are: paprika (3,263 mt), chillies (1,484 mt), cashew (1,259 mt), macadamia (482 mt), castor (78 mt), sesame
(165 mt) and sunflower (4,175 mt). Their current annual average growth rates are: paprika (7%), chillies (1.8%), cashew (5.6%), macadamia
(5.4%), castor (2.3%), sesame (3.3%) and sunflower (0.9%). On average, output growth for these non-traditional export crops is around 4%, but
the target according to the MDGS i s supposed to be more than 6% p.a.

hybrid maize k o m 40%, composite maize k o m % and local maize at 55%. 15 - 20% o f the smallholder farmers
use fertilizer in maize.
”

74

Malawi at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2005
Population, mid-year (milfions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNi (Atlas method, US$ bilfions)

Malawi

subSaharan
Africa

LOWincome

12.9
160
2.1

741
745
552

2,353
580
1,364

2.3
2.0

2.3
2.3

1.9
2.3

8/13/06

Development diamond*
Life expectancy

T

Average annual growth, 1999-05
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1999-05)

Gross
i
primary
enrollment

capita

Poverty (% of population below nationalpoverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000five births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulation)
Literacy (% ofpopulation age 75+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

17
40
110
22
73
64
125
123
126

35
46
100
29
56
93
99
87

30
59
80
39
75
62
104
110
99

Access to improved water source
Malawi

-Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1985

1995

2004

2005

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital fwmationlGDP
Exports of goods and servicesiGDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savingsiGDP

1.1
18.6
24.2
12.9

1.4
17.4
30.4
-0.3
4.0

1.9
15.3
26.8
-9.1
-5.3

2.1
14.5
26.8
-11.6
-7 4

Current account balanceiGDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt serviceiexports
Present value of debffGDP
Present value of debffexpwts

-8.5
2.7
90.2
39.0

-12.2
2.8
160.2
26.5

-19.1
1.2
179.6
9.3
57.1
169.8

-19.2

198595

199505

2004

2005

2005-09

2.4
-0.9
1.7

2.7
0.1
1.9

7.1
4.8
-3.0

2.6
0.4
20 2

6.8
6.2
3.0

1985

1995

2004

2005

42.9
21.9
14.5
35.2

30.4
19.6
15.8
50.0

38.9
17.2
11.4
44.0

34.7
19.4
12.5
45.9

69.4
17.7
29.9

79.4
21.o
48.1

92.2
16.9
51.2

949
16.7
53.0

198595

1995-05

2004

2005

1.9
3.4
3.1
2.4

4.0
1.1
-0.7
1.3

2.7
10.2
6.9
5.3

-9.1
15.4
11.9
6.2

4.8
1.6
-1.4
2.8

3.2
3.7
-1.2
2.3

2.1
12.1
33.2
-0.7

2.7
1.5
0.3
11.0

(average annualgrowth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Sewices

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and semces

(average annualgrowth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Householdfinal consumption expenditure
Genera gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services

Economic ratios'
Trade

Domestic
savings

&

,

Capital
formation

1
Indebtedness

1

Malawi

-Low-income group

:1

Growth of capital and GDP (%)

-40

1
GCF

I

-GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)
40

I

2
~
~
4
+
Y
a
iv
s

-40
-20

Exports

-O-lrnports

Note: 2005 data are preliminaryestimates.
This table was producedfrom the Development Economics LDB database.
' The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its incomegroup average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

75

Malawi
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1985

1995

2004

2005

10.5
8.9

83.3
77.2

11.4
12.5

15.4
15.5

22.7
-0.8
-9.7

18.7
-6.2
-13.0

23.2
-8.1
-20.7

25.6
-10.2
-20.9

1985

1995

2004

2005

300
112
54
50
287
2
34
77

404
256
27
49
474
101
45
157

470
230
47
105
866
185
83
287

514
262
51
112
984
210
94
326

118
96
122

108
98
110

101
97
104

1985

1995

2004

2005

276
331
-54

429
548
-119

51 1
947
-436

578
1,066
-488

0

Net income
Net current transfers

-53

-47
-4

-45
118

-41
131

-10

Current account balance

-97

-1 71

-363

-398

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

54
42

258
-87

379
-16

445
-47

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ milions)
Conversion rate (DEC, /ocal/US$)

49
1.7

115
15.3

134
108.9

165
118.4

1985

1995

2004

2005

1,021
69
322

2,239
55
1,251

3,418
0
2,075

0
1,940

Total debt sewice
IBRD
IDA

110
7
3

118
18
16

60
1
25

0
50

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

38
52
-29
1
0

262
173
-23
6
0

348
62
-2
16
0

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

125
34
2
32
8
24

100
73
19
55
16
39

54
62
12
50
14
37

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusideficit
TRADE
(US$ milfions)
Total exports (fob)
Tobacco
Tea
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ rni//ions)
Exports of goods and sewces
Imports of goods and semces
Resource balance

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ rni//ions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.

99

01

00

02

GDP deflator

“I

03

+CPI

I Export and import levels (US0 mill.)
~

1.000,

98

00

99

0 Exports

01

02

04

03

Imports

1

Current account balance to GDP (%)

5

-15

-20
-25

Composition of 2004 debt (US0 mill.)
10

1956

45
35
10
16
-5

A - IBRD
B -IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E -Bilateral
F - Private
G -Short-term

8113/06

76

ANNEX 4

M a l a w i - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % o f GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

2001

’

100
39

Actual
2002
2003
100
39

Estimate

2005

2004

100
40

100
39

Pl’OJKted

2006

2009

2008

2007

100
35

100
36

100
36

100
36

100
36

Industry

17

16

16

17

19

20

20

20

20

Services

45

45

44

44

46

45

45

45

45

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

96
14
10
3

110
10
8
3

111
11
9
2

109
14
13
2

112
14
10
3

106
16
12
4

105
16
12
4

104
16
12
4

103
17
12
5

EXPO~~
(GNFS)~
S

28
39

24
46

27
50

27
51

27
53

28
50

27
49

26
47

25
46

Gross domestic savings

4

-10

-1 1

-9

-12

-6

-5

-4

-3

Gross national savingsC

2

-12

-5

-5

-6

-2

-1

0

1

1717

1935

1765

1903

2072

2154

2291

2483

2688

160

160

170

180

180

190

190

200

2.9
1.o

6.1
4.5

7.1
6.5

2.6
-0.4

9.2
11.0

5.6
5.7

6.0
6.0

6.0
6.0

4.0
-1.5
-4.5

5 .O
1.6
0.0

0.6
0.5
0.7

7.2
2.9
1.8

3.7
3.4
3.1

4.1
3.4
3.2

4.1
3.3
3.1

Imports (GNFS)

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product
(US$million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (oh,calculated from 1994 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
-5.0
Gross Domestic Income
-3.8

Real annual .
per capita
growth
rates (%, calculated from 1994 prices)
.
-6.9
Gross domestic product at market prices
0.8
-4.1
15.1
Total consumption
Private consumption
-6.0
19.1
Balance o f Payments (US% millions)

480
427

47 1
42 1

481
44 1

511
470

578
536

614
572

634
591

662
617

694
647

672
585
-191
10
-215

886
727
-415
8
-452

878
792
-398
141
-298

947
866
-436
118
-363

1066
984
-488
131
-398

1053
964
-439
134
-347

1123
1029
-489
137
-394

1177
1078
-515
140
-415

1246
1140
-552
142
-448

N e t private foreign duect investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

28

38

43

44

26

30

32

34

36

95

65

68

1

-19

-38

-52

-56

-74

Change in reservesd

12

111

-1

-16

-47

-3 1

-6

-33

-5

-11.1

-21.5

-22.5

-22.9

-23.6

-20.4

-21.4

-20.7

-20.5

16.9
13.4
52.8
8.0

-0.5
0.2
-10.8
24.8

-5.2
-12.1
30.2
9.6

-1.8
2.4
-5.8
10.3

17.5
17.8
6.0
14.7

5.5
6.2
6.0
-0.9

3.3
2.9
6.0
8.2

3 .O
2.5
6.0
6.2

3.9
3.3
7.5
7.4

(GNFS)~
Merchandise F O B

EXPOITS

1mp0rts (GNFS)~

Merchanhse F O B
Resource balance
N e t current transfers
Current account balance

Memorandum items

Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR94 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued

77

M a l a w i - K e y Economic Indicators
(Continued)

MiCatOr

2001

Public finance (as % o f GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2IGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR94 4 0 0 )
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index

Actual
2002
2003

2004

Estimate
2005

2006

Projected
2007
2008

2009

18.1
24.2
-6.0
8.6
10.5

17.7
27.4
-9.7
7.7
5.8

22.0
30.0
-7.9
9.3
10.6

23.2
31.3
-8.1
12.6
15.8

25.6
35.8
-10.2
10.7
17.0

23.8
29.5
-5.7
12.2
18.6

24.4
28.3
-3.9
12.1
15.7

24.1
26.5
-2.4
11.8
15.2

23.9
24.6
-0.6
12.1
15.0

17.5
21.2
12.2

18.3
25.2
5.2

20.5
29.3
115.0

22.0
29.8
49.3

21.3
14.6
104.7

21.0
19.1
42.5

21.2
14.5
28.3

21.5
15.0
66.5

21.7
14.9
83.0

72.7
134.6
54.0

72.1
134.0
53.8

79.6
133.2
59.7

86.5
132.2
65.4

80.5
130.9
61.5

82.8
129.4
63.9

82.9
127.8
64.8

83.8
126.1
66.5

84.8
124.2
68.3

22.1
25.6

7.6
16.4

9.8
9.2

13.7
12.5

16.0
15.5

4.9
10.8

7.3
7.3

7.0
7.4

7.0
7.3

Real exchange rate (USSILCU)'
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use o f IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency m t s . " An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

78

ANNEX 5

Malawi - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

2001

Actual
2002
2003

Estimafe
2095

2004

Projected
2007
2008

2006

2009

2604

2913

3134

3062

3025

2960

2888

2824

2744

Net disbursements (US$m)a

95

87

77

1

-19

-38

-53

-56

-74

Total debt service (TDS)

35

23

28

108

122

124

124

115

120

509.9

588.7

490.9

478.9

420.0

388.0

366.7

344.1

320.0

TDO/GDP

151.7

150.6

177.6

160.9

146.0

137.4

126.1

113.7

102.1

TDSiXGS

6.9

4.6

4.4

16.9

16.9

16.3

15.8

14.1

14.0

76.8

75.4

78.0

80.4

82.2

84.2

85.9

86.9

87.8

IBRD DSipublic DS

10.8

6.1

5.3

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Preferred creditor DSipublic

78.4

96.5

97.1

70.4

65.4

69.3

69.4

73.4

76.3

0.8

0.4

0.3

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

4

2

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

disbursed (TDO) (USSm)a

(USSm)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO~XGS~

ConcessionaliTDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)

DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$~I)~
Of which present value o f

guarantees (US$m)
IDA TDO (uS$m)d

1624

1770

1958

1956

1948

1935

1914

1887

1850

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0
0.5

0.5

3 .O

3.0

3.0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /e
MEA

MIGA guarantees (USSrn)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net short-

term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.

d. Includespresent value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

79

CAS Annex 6- Malawi
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 12/19/2006

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2004

2005

2006

2007

12
2.3
0.0
0.0
16.7
14.5
30.2

13
2.9
23.1
27.3
30.8
35.3
32.4

10
2.6
30.0
26.2
30.0
26.2
54.1

10
3.1
30.0
25.8
30.0
25.8
7.9

Yes
370
30.8

Yes
400
30.8

Yes
320
32

Yes
240
24

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
68
8
1,975.4
250.6
37.9
28.6
29.7
4.5

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

80

-

CAS Annex A7 IBRDllDA Program Summary

Malawi

See Page 33, Table 2

81

-

-

CAS Annex 8 Summary of Nonlending Services Malawi
Product

As Of Date 12/19/2006

Completion FY

Cost (US$OOO)

Audience a

Objective

Recent completions
Country Procurement Assessment
Decentralization Frame Work
Agricultural Policy Options
ADMARC PSlA
Malawi Education Country Status Rep

2004
2004
2004
2004
2004

225
15
56
1
110

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

God, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

Review of Health Financing and HR
Financial Sector Review

2005
2005

PSlA Elec Sec Reform
Poverty Assessment
Investment Climate Assessment

Underway
Public Expenditure Review
Bldg Resilient Comm Pol Note

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

21 1
104

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

2006
2006
2006

120
311
121

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

2007
2007

317
120

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public

2008
2008

75
30

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

Govt, Bank, Donors,

Knowl, Public.

Planned
MW-Accounting and Auditing
MW-Tobacco Sector Report

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

82

m

m

v)

2
m

iij

CAS Annex 10 - MALAWI: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
Date: September 16,2004
The country financing parameters for M a l a w i set out below have been approved by the
Regional Vice President for Africa, and are being posted on the Bank’s internal website

ITEM

Parameter
.~~

RemarkdExplanation

Cost sharing. Limit on the

100%

The Bank may finance up to 100 percent o f
the costs o f individual operations after
considering the context o f these operations
and portfolio implications within the CAS
envelope. Counterpart fimding will be
encouraged.

Recurrent costfinancing. Any limits that

No Country
level limit

Local costfinancing. Are the requirements

Yes

The Bank may finance recurrent costs as
needed in individual projects, after
considering: (i)
overall medium-tern fiscal
sustainability, (ii)
the
sustainability o f project achievements; (iii)
implied future budgetary outlays; and (iv)
Malawi’s aggregate fiscal position and
prospects.
The Bank may finance local costs in the
proportions needed in individual projects.

proportion o f individual project costs
that the Bank may finance

would apply to the overall amount
o f recurrent expenditures that the Bank
may finance.

for Bank financing o f local expenditures
met, namely that: (i)
financing
requirements for the
country’s development program would
exceed the public sector’s own resources
and expected
domestic borrowing; and (ii)
the financing
o f foreign expenditures alone would not
enable the Bank to assist in the financing
o f individual projects.
Taxes and duties. Are there any taxes and
duties that the Bank would not finance?

None

As o f June 2004, no taxes are identified as
unreasonable or discriminatory.

84

Annex 11 - Malawi: Joint World BanWIMF Debt Sustainability
Analysis based on Low-Income County Framework’
1.
Malawi’s risk of debt distress after debt relief under the HIPC Initiative and
the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI), inclusive o f ‘topping-up” i s
1
moderate. On reaching the HIPC Completion Point, Malawi’s NPV o f debt-to-exports
ratio will drop from 191 percent in 2005 to 39 percent in 2006. Debt service as a share o f
exports will decline from 22 to 16.2 percent between 2005 and 2006. Despite this drop in
its debt burden indicators, Malawi will nevertheless remain vulnerable to exogenous
shocks. If the government would not implement i t s reform strategy to enhance growth,
diversify exports, and improve governance, Malawi’s debt burden indicators would
increase steeply and the external debt stock indicators would breach their thresholds
within a decade. Even when assuming good policy performance accompanied by strong
GDP and export growth and substantial inflows o f external financing in the form o f
grants, all debt burden indicators are expected to deteriorate through the projection
period. Under the most extreme stress test, Malawi’s NPV o f debt-to-GDP ratio breaches
i t s threshold for a prolonged period o f time and the NPV o f debt-to-exports ratio also
approaches it. Moreover, Malawi’s high domestic debt i s also vulnerable to exogenous
shocks.’
I. E X T E R N A L DEBT S U S T A I N A B I L I T Y A N A L Y S I S

2.
The implementation of structural reforms to support private sector
development, export diversification and growth, while maintaining macroeconomic
stability characterize the underlying macro-framework. Annual output growth i s
projected to be about 6 percent over the near term, recovering from a prolonged period o f
poor performance. I t i s assumed to drop to 4.5 percent over the longer term converging
to the regional average. Private sector investment and FDI inflows are projected to boost
export growth in the long term, leading to an increase in the export share o f the economy
from 27 percent in 2005 to 30 percent by the end o f the projection period. Donor
support, as measured by net official assistance i s assumed to increase gradually and
modestly by about 2 percent o f GDP to about 23 percent o f GDP in 2015. It i s assumed
that even after HIPC completion point and implementation o f MDRI about 84 percent o f
total aid, excluding HIPC debt relief grants, i s provided in the form o f grants. The share
o f loans remains relatively low amounting to around 3.8 percent. Although the volume o f
new loans increases relative to the past five years, the grant element underlying the new
borrowing assumptions i s in line with past experience.
3.
All external debt burden indicators are projected to remain below their
thresholds under the baseline (Figure 1). Malawi’s NPV o f debt ratio to GDP i s
projected to fall from 52 percent in 2005 to 11 percent in 2006, before increasing toward
24 percent by the end o f the projection period (Table 1). Similarly, the N P V o f debt to
exports ratio drops from 191 percent in 2005 to 39 percent in 2006, before starting to
climb to 8 1 percent by 2026. Malawi’s debt service to exports ratio would decline from
22 in 2005 to 16 percent in 2006, remaining on average at 4.1 percent throughout the
projection period. “Topping-up” o f HIPC assistance will fbrther reduce debt burden
indicators in 2004.’ However, since “t~pping-up’~
reduces MDRI relief provided by IDA,
85

IDA’Sallocation to Malawi i s higher with “topping-up.” Assuming that growth
assumptions remain unchanged, the additional IDA allocation would lead to a slight
increase in Malawi’s debt burden indicators relative to the projections excluding
“topping-up” in the medium term.’
4.
Failure to implement reforms, lack of donor financing in the form of grants
and exogenous shocks would lead to a substantial deterioration of Malawi’s debt
burden indicators. If key macroeconomic variables, such as GDP growth, the current
account deficit and FDI inflows, would assume their historical average, Malawi’s debt
stock indicators would breach their thresholds within a decade (Figure 1). Debt stock
indicators would also approach their thresholds toward the end o f the projection period if
scaling up o f aid would be financed through concessional debt instead o f grants. Finally,
under the most extreme stress test, Malawi’s N P V o f debt to GDP ratio would be lifted
above i t s indicative threshold by 201 1 for a sustained period o f time.
11. PUBLIC DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS

5.
Reducing the large domestic debt burden i s expected to remain the
cornerstone of the government’s fiscal strategy through the medium term. Domestic
debt reached almost 25 percent o f GDP in 2003/04 with interest costs o f 9 percent o f
GDP (or one fifth o f the budget). When a new government was elected in early 2004, i t
made reversing the domestic debt spiral i t s fiscal priority. By the end o f FY05/06 the
government succeeded in reducing domestic debt below 20 percent o f GDP and domestic
interest costs to about 5.5 percent. This was achieved, despite the severe food crisis,
through fiscal restraint, lower interest rates, as well as higher program support. Continued
fiscal restraint, further reductions in interest rates in tandem with a sustained reduction in
inflation, and debt relief under the MDRI are assumed to enable the government to
reduce the domestic debt below 10 percent and interest payments to about 2 percent o f
GDP. Over the longer term, the baseline scenario assumes that the government will
target a stable domestic debt burden o f about 2 percent o f GDP at a cost o f less than 0.5
percent o f GDP in interest payments.

6.

External debt relief combined with the government’s commitment to reduce
domestic debt would lead to a substantial decline in Malawi’s public debt stock.
Malawi’s public debt stock i s expected to drop from 159 percent o f GDP in 2005 to 37
percent o f GDP in 2006 as a result o f HIPC debt relief and the implementation o f MDRI.
I t i s projected to decline and bottom out around 32 percent at the turn o f the decade.
Similarly, the N P V o f public debt would decline from 74 percent o f GDP in 2005 to
around 18 percent o f GDP at the end o f the decade.

7.
The projected improvement in the public debt burden i s vulnerable to
deterioration in either the external o r domestic debt indicators. Many o f the factors
that could cause deterioration in the external debt burden would also threaten domestic
debt sustainability. A failure to implement reforms or insufficient donor financing in the
form o f grants could also lead to pressures to accumulate domestic debt. A reversion to
the historical record o f poor macroeconomic policy implementation during 1999-2003
would retard the reduction in domestic debt and cause deterioration in the public debt
86

burden indicators, even with the level o f external support assumed in the baseline (Figure
2).’ Under the most extreme stress test, Malawi’s NPV o f public debt to GDP would
continue to rise indefinitely.

111. CONCLUSION
8.
Even after full delivery of HIPC debt relief, inclusive of “topping-up” and
implementationof the MDRI, Malawi would remain at a moderate risk o f debt
distress. On reaching the HIPC Completion Point, Malawi’s NPV o f debt-to-exports
ratio will drop from 191 percent in 2005 to 39 percent in 2006. Debt service as a share o f
exports will decline from 22 to 16 percent between 2005 and 2006. Topping-up o f HIPC
assistance decreases the NPV o f debt to exports ratio further to 3 1 percent and the debt
service to exports to 5.1 percent in 2006, but does not change Malawi’s risk o f debt
distress classification. Notwithstanding good policy performance, the debt stock
indicators are projected to increase during the projection period and to breach their
policy-dependant thresholds if key macroeconomic variables would assume their
historical average. Moreover, the NPV o f debt to GDP ratio would breach i t s threshold
under stress tests. Although projected to decline, Malawi’s domestic debt i s currently
high, increasing Malawi’s probability o f debt distress. For Malawi’s debt to remain
sustainable in the future it i s important that authorities make prudent use o f the resources
freed-up through debt relief and strengthen their public expenditure management.
Moreover, contracting o f new loans on less concessional terms or shifting from grants to
loans would significantly deteriorate Malawi’s debt sustainability outlook.

87

MAP SECTION

IBRD 33440
32°E

34°E

To
Mbeya

Song
w

TA NZA NIA

e

To
Tunduma

36°E

Chitipa

MALAWI

Karonga
10°S

10°S

Chisenga

KARONGA
CHITIPA
CHITIPA

To
Muyombe

Nykia
(2,606 m)

Chilumba

Chelinda

Mkondowe

To
Muyombe

Livingstonia
Katumbe
RUMPHI

Rumphi
Ruarwe

s.

MZIMBA
Kafukule

Mzuzu

Mtn

Euthini

Nkhata
Bay

NORTHERN
NKHATTA
NKHA
NKHATA
BAY
BAY
Chinteche

(MALAWI)

wi
Lake Mala

Mzimba
12°S

Viphy

a

ZAMBIA

Luwawa
To
Lundazi

Nkhunga
Kaluluma

KASUNGU

12°S

Nkhotakota

Kasungu

NKHOTAKOT
NKHOT
AKOTA
A
NKHOTAKOTA

MOZAMBIQUE

NTCHISI

Ntchisi

Mchinji

Bua

MCHINJI
To
Chipata

CENTRAL
DOWA
DOWA

Dowa SALIMA

Makanjila

Salima

LILONGWE

14°S

Namitete
LILONGWE

To
Furancungo

14°S

Monkey
Bay

DEDZA

To
Cuamba

MANGOCHI

Dedza

Mangochi
To
Ulongwe

SOUTHERN
NTCHEU

0

20

40

60

80 100 Kilometers

0

20

40

60 Miles

Machinga

32°E

To
Tete

MALAW I
DISTRICT CAPITALS

Zomba

16°S

Lirangwe
BLANTYRE

Mwanza

RIVERS

PHALOMBE

Chiradzulu

CHIRADZULU
Phalombe
Blantyre
MULANJE
MULANJE
Chikwawa
Mulanje
Sapitwa
THYOLO
(3,002 m)
CHIKWA
CHIKW
AWA
CHIKWAWA

Thyolo

16°S

To
Liciro

REGION CAPITALS
NATIONAL CAPITAL

Lake
Chilwa

e
Shir ZOMBA

MWANZA
MWANZA

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

To
Cuamba

Ntcheu BalakaMACHINGA

MOZAMBIQUE

N’gabu
N
’gabu
To
Morire

NSANJE

MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS

Nsanje

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
REGION BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
To
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
Vila de Sena
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

36°E
NOVEMBER 2004

