Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No: 38236-VN

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

AND
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
WITH THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM
FOR THE PERIOD 2007-2011

Public Disclosure Authorized

JANUARY 3,2007

Vietnam Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region
The International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific Region
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f their
official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

T h e last Country Assistance Strategy was dated September 3,2002, and the last Country
Assistance Strategy Progress R e p o r t w a s dated February 19,2004.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Dong (D)
US$l.OO = D16,080
FISCAL YEAR
January 1-December 3 1

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AAA
ADB
AFD
AFTA
APL
ASEAN
BTA
CAS
CBRIP
CDF
CFAA
CG
CIDA
CPIA
CPAR
CPPR
CPR
CPRGS
CPS
CSA
DAC
DAF
DANIDA
DFID
DSA
EIA
EVN
FDI
FSAP
FY
GDP
GEF
GNI

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Agence franpaise de dkveloppement
A S E A N Free Trade Area
Adaptable Program Lending
Association o f South East Asian Nations
Bilateral Trade Agreement (Vietnam-US)
Country Assistance Strategy
Community Based Rural Infrastructure Project
Comprehensive Development Framework
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Consultative Group
Canadian International Development Agency
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Country Program Review
Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Social Analysis
Development Assistance Committee
Development Assistance Fund
Danish International Development Agency
Department for International Development
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Environmental Impact Assessment
Electricity o f Vietnam
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Gross National Income

1

GoV
HCMC
IAS
ICA
ICT
IDA
IDF
IFC
IMTF
IMF
INTOSAI
IPP
IPR
ISR
JBIC
JPPR
JSAN
JSB
KfW
LUC
M&E
MDG
MDRI
MIC
MIGA
MOF
MPI
MPDF
MSP
NPL
NRM
OBA
ODA
OECD
PAR
PER
PFM
PIP
PMU
PRS
PRSC
PRSP
QAG
ROSC
SARS
SBV
SEDP
SFE
SIDA
SME
SOCB

Government o f Vietnam
Ho C h i Minh City
International Accounting Standards
Investment Climate Assessment
Information and Communication Technologies
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Inter-ministerial Task Force
International Monetary Fund
International Organisation o f Supreme Audit Institutions
Independent Power Producer
Intellectual Property Rights
Implementation Status and Results
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Joint Portfolio Performance Review
Joint IDA-IMF Staff Advisory Note
Joint Stock Bank
Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau
Land-Use Right Certificate
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Middle-income Country
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry o f Finance
Ministry o f Planning and Investment
Mekong Project Development Facility
Medium-sized Project
Non-Performing Loans
Natural Resources Management
Output-based Aid
Official Development Assistance
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
Public Administration R e f o m
Public Expenditure Review
Public Financial Management
Public Investment Program
Project Management Unit
Poverty Reduction Strategies
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Quality Assurance Group
Report on the Observance o f Standards and Codes
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
State Bank o f Vietnam
Socio-economic Development Plan
State Forestry Enterprises
Swedish International Development Agency
Small and Medium Enterprise
State-owned Commercial Bank

11

SOE
SPS
SWAPS
TF
TI
UNDP
USAID
VDG
VDR
VHLSS
VND
WBI
WTO

State-owned Enterprise
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Standards
Sector-Wide Approaches
Trust Funds
Transparency International
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International Development
Vietnam Development Goals
Vietnam Development Report
Vietnam Household Living Standards Survey
Vietnamese D o n g
W o r l d Bank Institute
W o r l d Trade Organization

IDA

IFC

MIGA

Vice President:

James W. Adams

Farida Khambata

Yukiko Omura
(Executive VP)

Country Director:

Klaus Rohland

Richard Ranken

Frank Lysy

Task Team Leaders:

Keiko Sato/Soren
Baunsgaard

Stoyan Tenev

Conor Healy

...

111

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY WITH THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM
TABLEOF CONTENTS

I.

Executive Summary

11.

Country Context
A. Social and Economic Context
B. Poverty Profile

111.

Vietnam’s Vision for 2010
8
A. Improving the Business Environment
B. Strengthening Social Inclusion
C. StrengtheningNatural Resources and EnvironmentalManagement
D. Improving Governance and Anticorruption
E. SEDP 2006-10 as Vietnam’s Next PRSP

IV.

Bank’s Group Track Record
A. CAS Completion Report Evaluation
B. Lessons from Independent Evaluation Group Evaluations
and Client Surveys

V.

World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy
A. Pillar I: Improving the Business Environment
B. Pillar 11: Strengthening Social Inclusion
C. Pillar 111: StrengtheningNatural Resources and Environmental
Management
D. Pillar IV: Improving Governance

22

VI.

Delivering the Bank Group Strategy
A. Lending Program
B. Portfolio Issues
C. Knowledge Program
D. Partnership, Aid Effectiveness, and Participation

40

VII.

Managing Risks
A. Slow-Down in Implementationof Structural Reforms
B. Addressing Fiduciary Concerns

51

Boxes
Box 3.1

Box 4.1

vi

1

18

Understanding Corruption in Vietnam
14
Box table 3.1 Corruption in the East Asia Region
Box figure 3.1 Spending on unofficial payments and “gifts”
ImplementingVietnam’s CAS: What Worked Well and
20
What Worked Less Well

iv

Box 5.1
Box 6.1

Vietnam’s Infrastructure: Key Policy Issues
Aid Coordination in Vietnam

30
48

Figures
Figure 2.1
Figure 2.2
Figure 2.3
Figure 2.4
Figure 5.1
Figure 6.1

CPIA: Comparison with Average IDA Countries
CPIA: Improvement in Policy Stance 2002-2005
Poverty Trends in Vietnam 1993-2004
Trends in Poverty for Kinh and Ethnic Minority Populations
Vietnam CPS Results Framework
IDA Commitments and Disbursement

4
4
5
7
23
42

Tables
Table 5.1
Table 5.2
Table 6.1
Table 6.2

IDA Eligibility Scenarios
CPS Goals
Vietnam’s Major Knowledge Products
Hanoi Core Statement

24
25
46
50

CPS Annexes
Vietnam CPS Results Matrix
Annex 1
CAS FY03-06 Completion Report
Annex 2
The Vietnam Development Goals
Annex 3
Consultations on Country Partnership Strategy
Annex 4
Hanoi
Core Statement on Aid Effectiveness
Annex 5
Donor Activities in Vietnam
Annex 6
Annex 7
Country Financing Parameters

CPS Standard Annex Tables
Annex A2
Vietnam At-a-Glance
Annex B2
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
Annex B3
IFC & MIGA in Vietnam
Annex B6
Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7
Key Exposure Indicators
Statement o f IFC’s Held and DisbursedPortfolio
Annex B8
Operations Portfolio (IDRD/IDA and Grants)
Annex B8

Map o f the Socialist Republic o f Vietnam (IBRD No. 33510)

V

I.EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
i. Social and Economic Context. Vietnam’s poverty reduction and economic growth
achievements over the last 15 years stand as a spectacular success story. Thanks to
carefully implemented economic reforms and steady macroeconomic management, the
annual real GDP growth rate has averaged around 7.5 percent and the rate o f poverty has
fallen from around 70 percent to below 20 percent with widespread improvements in the
lives o f Vietnamese citizens. Moreover, i t has been possible to maintain this high
economic growth rate with only a modest increase in inequality.
ii. The period o f the last CAS (FY03-06) has been a very productive one, with a
consistently high rate o f GDP growth despite a variety o f external shocks. Poverty has
continued to decline, and implementation o f the far-reaching Vietnamese reform program
i s well underway. Vietnam became member o f WTO in January 2007, and it i s believed
that Vietnam’s policy and institutional environment will catch up to that o f the highestperforming IDA countries in three-to-five years. To safeguard and sustain past
development achievements, the acceleration o f Vietnam’s banking and anti-corruption
reforms, whose pace have lagged other reforms, i s particularly pertinent.

iii. The Government’s Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP) 2006-2010 lays
out a path o f transition towards a market economy with a socialist orientation, and sees
Vietnam reaching middle-income country status with a GNI per capita above US$l,OOO
by 2010. The SEDP covers the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) principles,
incorporating a poverty focus and a results orientation, and i s broadly sound. The
preparation process has been open and participatory, representing a significant change in
approach to mainstream planning.
iv. Vietnam’s SEDP and World Bank Group Support. The new World Bank Group
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY07 to FYI 1 i s fully aligned to Vietnam’s tenth
SEDP. The SEDP sets out four broad objectives, which in turn are the organizing
principles o f the CPS:

(a) Improve the business environment;
(b) Strengthen social inclusion;
(c) Strengthen natural resource and environment management; and
(d) Improve governance.

A common theme underlining these four pillars i s the need to complete remaining
structural reforms while moving forward a set o f ambitious second-generation reforms.
Through these, the role o f the Government would be transformed from a major producer
o f goods and services to the regulator and provider o f foundations for a well-functioning,
equitable, and modern market economy.

v.

vi. The Bank Group will bring to bear all o f i t s instruments o f assistance to support
these objectives, including analytical and advisory activities, IDA project support and a

series o f annual Poverty Reduction Support Credits, IFC’s investment and technical
vi

assistance services, MIGA activities, partnerships and Official Development Assistance
(ODA) coordination. In each o f the areas, agreements have been reached with
Government and other donors to ensure that duplication is avoided, synergy maximized
and selectivity strengthened.
vii. Country-led Partnership the Basis for Bank Activities in Vietnam. The new CPS
will assist Vietnam and its development partners achieve the Hanoi Core Statement
(HCS) goals on ownership, alignment, harmonization, results and accountability. Donors
have pledged to align their respective ODA strategies to the SEDP, monitor the results o f
their assistance using the Government's results monitoring framework, and jointly
conduct progress reviews on the realization o f the HCS targets. The Consultative Group
meeting, which the Bank co-chairs with the Government, plays an important role in this
regard.
viii. Results. The Government's SEDP uses localized Millennium Development Goals to
develop a system o f indicators to monitor and evaluate progress. The new results-based
CPS program matrix links the SEDP higher-order goals with CPS outcomes and outputs
supported by specific Bank intervention, as well as by other donor partners. I t i s expected
that annual SEDP monitoring reports will guide discussions at Consultative Group
meetings, and provide an essential input to the CPS Progress Reports.
ix. Support for Pillar 1: Improving the Business Environment, Support for this
theme will involve a shift in focus from "design" to "implementation" o f the policy
reform agenda. I t will focus on banking reform and financial sector development,
improved competitiveness with full integration in the world economy, a more level
playing field, better foundation for knowledge-based growth, and enhanced agricultural
competitiveness, and more efficient and reliable provision o f infrastructure services. IFC
and MIGA will continue their work on investment climate reform and expand efforts to
catalyze the private sector response to improvements in the business environment. Most
IDA credits will support policy, institutional and infrastructure support for Vietnam's
ongoing transition, with annual PRSCs playing an especially important role.

x. Support for Pillar 2: Strengthening Social Inclusion. Priorities for Bank Group
support are: (a) better understanding o f poverty and piloting new instruments to reach the
poor; (b) mainstreaming gender issues across the portfolio and including people with
disabilities in the development process; (c) increasing access to quality, basic
infrastructure services for the rural poor; (d) increasing the access to affordable quality
education and health care services; (e) including and empowering ethnic minorities in the
development processes; (0 improving policies and infrastructure to address the needs o f
the urban poor and migrants; (g) reducing vulnerability to adverse shocks, including
natural and climatic hazards and diseases. Some targeted activities - such as a new
Development Policy Operation to strengthen the Government's targeted poverty
reduction program with a particular focus on ethnic minorities - will be initiated.
xi. Support for Pillar 3: Strengthening Natural Resource and Environmental
Management. The livelihoods o f poor people in Vietnam s t i l l depend overwhelmingly

vii

on natural resources. Important issues remain to be addressed to enhance the livelihoodsupporting and public environmental benefits o f natural resources. Bank support will
focus on a range o f challenges related to land, forestry, water resources and integrated
river basin management.
xii. Support for Pillar 4: Improving Governance. The Bank Group will focus i t s
support on improving public financial management, information and transparency, with
emphasis on anti-corruption; and o n improving planning for development objectives with
more participatory approaches and stronger accountability for service providers.
Partnerships with other donors will be key to making progress in the area o f governance.

xiii. The Scale of Bank Group Activities in Vietnam. The CPS operational program
was calibrated based o n an assumption o f annual IDA lending envelopes in the order o f
US$900 million. Actual allocations will depend on Vietnam’s performance relative to
other potential IDA recipients and on the overall resource envelope. During the CPS
period, Vietnam’s GNI per capita i s projected to move steadily towards the IDA
graduation threshold. The Vietnamese government has expressed i t s desire to seek an
opportunity for blending IDA and IBRD resources. In this regard, the World Bank has
scheduled a creditworthiness review in FY08. The IFC and MIGA programs are also
expected to grow in the coming years. The IFC investment program is expected to reach
US$lOO-150 million per annum over the CPS period.
xiv. The Bank Group Portfolio. Vietnam has become the largest IDA-only borrower.
Portfolio performance has been highly satisfactory on outcomes, but less so on elapsed
time and disbursement. Portfolio management over the next few years will focus on
improving the pace o f implementation while retaining sound portfolio quality. The
recently completed Public Expenditure Review (PER), Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (CFAA) and the Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) have led
to important initiatives for change. IFC’s investment portfolio consists o f 12 projects for
a total committed amount o f US$97 million as o f December 3 1, 2006. The quality of the
portfolio i s reasonably good.
xv. Managing Risks. Inadequate progress on the structural reform program, particularly
as i t relates to banking sector reforms, governance issues, and inadequate fiduciary
controls - especially for decentralized projects - are key risks which the Bank Group will
monitor and address.

viii

11. COUNTRYCONTEXT
1.
Vietnam’s poverty reduction and economic growth achievements over the last 15
years are one o f the most spectacular success stories in economic development. During
this period, the World Bank Group’s relationship with Vietnam has matured and grown
considerably. Initially the Bank Group shared i t s international experience and financing
with a newly emerging Vietnam. Today not only are Vietnam and the Bank Group
partners in meeting the country’s development goals, but also Vietnam increasingly
shares good practices with other developing countries. Accordingly, the new World Bank
Group Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY07-11 is fully aligned with Vietnam’s
tenth 5-year Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP), which covers 2006-10. A
Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN) o f the new SEDP as Vietnam’s next Poverty Reduction
Strategy (PRS) was discussed by the Board o f Directors on December 5,2006.
2.
Country-led partnership i s the basis for all Bank Group activities in Vietnam,
including analytical work, lending, and external relations activities. The new CPS will
assist Vietnam and its development partners achieve the Hanoi Core Statement’s goals on
ownership, alignment, harmonization, results and accountability.2 Donors have pledged
to align their respective Official Development Assistance (ODA) strategies to the SEDP,
monitor the results o f their assistance using the government’s results monitoring
framework, and jointly conduct progress reviews o n the realization o f the Hanoi Core
Statement targets. In accordance, the diagnostics for the new CPS were prepared jointly
with several donors including the Asian Development Bank (ADB), Japan Bank for
International Cooperation (JBIC), U K ’ s Department for International Development
(DfID), and the Bank as well as with government counterpart^.^

This strategy was prepared through extensive consultations with government,
3,
private sector, civil society and development partners.
A. SOCIAL AND ECONOMICCONTEXT

4.
The Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (CPRGS) was
the foundation of the last Vietnam Country Assistance Strategy (CAS). I t was an
important milestone in the modernization o f planning processes in Vietnam, focused on
planning for development outcomes as opposed to the previous focus on inputs. The new
outcome orientation facilitated a deeper analysis o f the impact o f government policies,
involving extensive use o f empirical evidence and increased consultation with key
stakeholders. I t also led to the development o f a set o f indicators to monitor and evaluate

’

The last full CAS for Vietnam was discussed by the World Bank Board in September 2002, and a CAS
Progress Report was discussed in February 2004.
The Hanoi Core Statement i s the Vietnamese version of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.
These diagnostics were, most notably, the JSAN; a new Vietnam Development Report (VDR) detailing
the implementationframework for the SEDP; an Investment Climate Assessment; a Poverty Assessment;
Public Expenditure Review and IntegratedFiduciary Assessment (PEWIFA); a Country Environmental
Assessment (CEA); a Country Social Analysis (CSA); and the new country Gender Assessment.

1

progress, including the Vietnam Development Goals (VDGs), a set o f localized and in
some cases more ambitious Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

5.
Vietnam’s overall development achievements during the CPRGS period have
been remarkable. From 2001-05 annual real GDP growth averaged 7.6 percent. This
growth was driven by rapid export growth and private sector development and was
supported by strategies with strong national ownership and by sound macroeconomic
policies. This annual growth rate corresponds to 6.1 percent increase o f per capita GDP.
The combination o f rapid real growth and a gradual appreciation o f the real exchange rate
resulted in an impressive increase o f GNI per capita measured in dollar terms: from
US$415 in 2001 to an estimated US$620 in 2005. Vietnam has proved i t s e l f to be a
resilient economy, as this strong performance was accomplished despite external shocks,
such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), avian influenza, rising o i l prices, and
natural calamities.
6.
Increased competition in product markets was a key driver of reform. Since
2001, tariff reductions under the A S E A N Free Trade Area (AFTA) and the Vietnam-US
Bilateral Trade Agreement have forced adjustments in the state sector. Integration with
the world economy was strengthened significantly, with exports accounting for 7 1
percent o f GDP in 2005, up from 56 percent in 2001, and private business employment
increasing five-fold between 2001 and 2005. Accession to the World Trade Organization
(WTO) was agreed by the WTO General Council in November 2006, and Vietnam
became WTO’s 150th member in January 2007. Because o f i t s wide-ranging implications
behind the border, especially in relation to the legal and regulatory framework, WTO
accession is seen as a mechanism to lock in key economic reforms for subsequent years.
GDP growth was led by a dynamic manufacturing sector, which recorded an
7.
average annual real growth o f 11 percent from 2001-05. W h i l e the most rapidly
expanding products, such as garments and footwear, have benefited from strong exports,
domestic sales also have been robust. The agriculture and fisheries sectors overcame
adverse weather and wide fluctuations in commodity prices to grow by more than 3.5
percent per year on average during 2001-05. Services have picked up in the last 2 years
to record an average annual increase o f 7.2 percent over 2001-05. Tourism-related
services have also been especially buoyant. Investment, as recorded in the national
accounts, increased from 31 percent o f GDP in 2001 to 36 percent in 2005. The share o f
the domestic private sector in total investment rose from 23 percent in 2001 to over 32
percent in 2005. In contrast, the share o f the state-owned sector in total investment
declined from approximately 60 percent in 2001 to 52 percent in 2005.

8.
From a slow start in 2001, export growth accelerated to average 21 percent
per year during 2001-05. In the same period, imports grew by 23 percent per year. The
trade balance deficit widened from 2.5 percent o f GDP in 2002 to 5.2 percent in 2004,
reflecting the import needs o f a rapidly expanding economy, but narrowed to 1.6 percent
in 2005. Strong remittance flows were also recorded in this period. Transfers through
formal channels rose from a little over US$1 billion in 2001 to nearly US$3 billion in
2005. As a result, Vietnam’s current account registered a surplus o f approximately 0.4
percent o f GDP in 2005, compared to a deficit o f 1.9 percent in 2002. Past current
2

account deficits were financed mainly by foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows and
concessional lending. Vietnam’s external debt stood at a manageable 33 percent o f GDP
in 2005, with debt service at approximately 5 percent o f exports. External reserves rose to
US$8.6 billion (approximately 11 weeks worth o f imports o f goods and services),
compared with US$3.4 billion at the end o f 2001.

9.
The economic transition during the last CAS period was accompanied by an
institutional overhaul. With the implementation o f a new State Budget Law in 2004,
Public Financial Management (PFM) has made significant achievements in information
disclosure and public participation in decision-making. The entire 2005 budget was
disclosed to the public for the first time. The National Assembly is now responsible for
the approval o f budget, including allocations to lower levels o f government.
Decentralization i s another important trait o f the ongoing institutional transition. By
now, almost h a l f o f budget expenditures are decided by authorities at sub-national levels.
The new Grassroots Democracy decree mandates considerable disclosure and
consultation in relation to commune-level budgets. The planning process, as evidenced
by the drafting process o f SEDP, has also become considerably participatory.
10. There has been some progress on the public administration reform agenda as well.
Service delivery units have been separated from the administrative organization, and
clear progress has been made in streamlining government procedures with the adoption o f
the One-Stop Shop model. Service delivery units are increasingly held accountable for
their services, as they all are now mandated to have user feedback under the new Decree
43. Improved legal and regulatory policy frameworks for electricity, water, and forestry,
as well as for investment and enterprises, have been established. Looking forward,
Vietnam’s ability to plan and implement investment projects still needs to be
strengthened to further reduce financial risks and potential contingent liabilities.

11. The fight against corruption also has gained momentum with a new systemic,
preventive approach to replace past ad-hoc punitive practices. This new approach
reduces the scope for corruption by simplifying administrative procedures and making
public transactions more transparent. I t relies on new legislation, strengthened
government systems, and increased transparency. A high-level anticonuption committee
with considerable powers, set up under the authority o f the Prime Minister, and
Vietnam’s first anticorruption law are central elements o f the new strategy.
12. Although Vietnam’s development i s rightly regarded as a success story, there
are certain fault lines that could put Vietnam’s future progress at risk. The reform o f
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and state-owned commercial banks (SOCBs) has lagged
behind other reforms. Limited profit incentives in the SOCBs, and their close ties with
local governments and SOEs, have led to a poor quality o f their lending portfolio.
Figures on the share o f non-performing loans (NPLs) vary depending on the definition
used. But a provisioning on the order of 8 to 10 percent o f outstanding credit may be
needed to offset possible losses. The number o f SOEs and their share o f the economy
have declined steadily, but not as rapidly as planned. In the medium term, increased
foreign competition coupled with the enforcement o f hard budget constraints for the

3

SOEs i s expected to lead to a more rapid pace o f reform. Additionally, with WTO
accession, the government i s taking a more decisive approach to banking reform. Based
o n the recently adopted road map for accelerated banking reform, the government sets out
to equitize all five SOCBs and transform the State Bank o f Vietnam's (SBV) mandate to
focus o n banking supervision and the conduct o f monetary policy.
13. A joint Bank-IMF Debt Sustainability Assessment (DSA) placed Vietnam at a
low risk of external debt distress from 2006 to 2011. Vietnam's external debt ratios
will remain below applicable policy-based debt thresholds under the baseline and under
standard stress scenarios provided that external borrowing policies continue to be guided
by the prudence that has characterized Vietnam's policies over the last few years.
However, the expansionary policies contained in the SEDP could endanger this relatively
benign outlook in the event o f a sharp decline in o i l prices, or if the adjustment assumed
to take place from 2010 onward does not materialize.
14. Vietnam's overall Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) rating
improved from 2002 to 2005 due to better business regulatory and governance
performance (figures 2.1 and 2.2). However, financial sector and transparency indicators
remain at or below a ~ e r a g eThe
. ~ above achievements and challenges are illustrated by
Vietnam's 2005 CPIA covering 16 indicators that are essential for growth and poverty
reduction. Compared to other countries at a similar development level, Vietnam has
above-average ratings on most o f the indicators, and leading scores on social inclusion
and equity, macroeconomic management, and public financial management. From 2002
to 2005, the country made progress on business regulatory indicators, while i t remained
firm and prudent in i t s macroeconomic management. At the same time, several
governance indicators, in which Vietnam's ratings were below average at the onset o f the
last CAS period, have improved significantly, However, slower progress on the financial
sector and anticorruption reform program, which only recently have taken on momentum,
kept these indicators at or below average.
Figure 2.2 CPIA: Improvement in Policy Stance 2002-2005

Figure 2.1 CPIA: Comparison with Average I D A Countries

The comparison with 2002 CPIA indicators i s only approximate, since the number o f CPIA categories and
their definitions have changed.

4

B. POVERTY
PROFILE

15. Continued
strong
Figure 2.3 Poverty Trends in Vietnam 1993-2004
poverty reduction. New
household data indicate that
7 0 ~
the general poverty rate f e l l
from 58.1 percent in 1993
to 19.5 percent in 2004, an
average decline o f 3.5
percentage points per year
(figure 2.3). In other words,
the proportion o f poor
people i s a little more than
one-third o f what it was 11 ,
years ago. Furthermore, standard metrics tracking inequality suggest that the high grow n

[

I

16. Poverty reduction has been driven primarily by rapid economic growth.
Sustained and rapid reduction in poverty demonstrates that Vietnam's high economic
growth rate o f the past years continues to translate into better living standards for i t s poor.
Other factors have also been important in explaining the recent improvements in welfare:
0

Massive government transfers to poorer parts o f the country have proven
effective in reducing poverty. Rural infrastructure development has increased
access to schools, health clinics, and markets.

0

Rapid creation of private sector jobs and wage employment. The reduction in
poverty coincides with a massive shift in employment from agriculture to the
wage sector. The proportion o f the working-age population who are farmers
declined from approximately 50 percent in 1998 to less than 40 percent in 2004.
Wage employment rose from 11 percent o f the working-age population in 1998 to
16.5 percent in 2002 and to 18 percent in 2004.

0

A rise in the world market prices o f agricultural export commodities, such as
coffee and rice, has boosted incomes for many o f those who remain in agriculture.

17. Poverty reduction continues to be widespread across the country, but poverty
remains overwhelmingly rural. In the past six years, rural poverty has decreased by
3.4 percentage points per year, which i s faster than for the country as a whole (3.0
percentage points per year). That said, poverty in Vietnam remains overwhelmingly rural,
with rural poverty at 25 percent compared to 4 percent for urban areas.

5

18. While all eight regions have made progress, the poverty rate remains much
higher in some. The North West stands out as being particularly poor, with 59 percent o f
i t s population living in poverty. Only 3 percent o f the total population lives in the North
West, yet the region i s home to 9 percent of the poor. The Central Highlands and the
North Central Coast have made reasonable progress during the past 11 years and have
more than halved the numbers in poverty since 1993. However, both regions record
approximately one-third o f their populations as living in poverty.
19. The gender gap also has been narrowed in a number o f respects. There i s now
little difference between the net enrolment rates for girls and boys throughout the school
system prior to tertiary education, and women participate only slightly less actively in the
labor force than do men. Data on earnings also suggest that the gender gap i s closing.
Vietnam has the highest percentage o f women in a National Parliament in the AsiaPacific region (27 percent since 2002). In all, Vietnam is one o f the countries in East Asia
that has seen the most rapid change in closing the gender gap in the last 20 years. I t has
improved i t s rank o n the Gender Development Index from 89 (out o f 136 countries) in
2001 to 80 in 2004.
20. Strong progress has also been achieved on most other social MDGs. Vietnam i s
expected to attain a number o f other Vietnam Development Goals (VDGs) (Annex 3).
Targets for primary school attendance, universal education, and improved education
quality have already been achieved. Good progress has also been made in reducing child
mortality and malnutrition. There has also been success in controlling vaccinepreventable illnesses, along with progress in diagnosing and curing a high proportion o f
new TB cases, and in controlling micro nutrient deficiency diseases, such as goiter. The
rate o f new HIV/AIDS infections, which rose dramatically between 1998 and 2002,
recently has begun to decline. However, there s t i l l remains a need for determined and
carehlly considered policy responses to meet the targets set for HIV/AIDS.
21. Despite the strong gains in the health MDGs, and budget increases raising the
sector share beyond 5 percent, variations in health indicators by region and province, and
by ethnicity and income, point to continuing differences in the levels and quality o f
health care received. In addition, some longstanding disease threats, such as TB, malaria,
and dengue fever, remain serious threats in many regions, while the last five years have
shown the country’s susceptibility to emerging infectious illnesses. In particular, Vietnam
proved highly vulnerable to HIV which linked up with a resurgent form o f TB, S A R S ,
and Avian Influenza. The 2000-2005 SEDP did not anticipate this need to scale up
disease control activities, nor the associated demands made on sector resources and on
the attention o f health policy makers.
22. Vietnam’s impressive achievements in reducing poverty nonetheless exist
alongside slower progress for an important group of the population: ethnic
minorities. Poverty for both the Kinh and ethnic minority populations has fallen steadily
from 1993 to 2004. However, progress has been more rapid for the Kinh and Chinese
populations. In 2004, 14 percent o f the Kinh and Chinese people were living in poverty,
compared to 61 percent o f ethnic minorities (figure 2.4). Although ethnic minorities

6

account for only 13 percent o f the total population, they constitute 39 percent o f the poor.
Their poverty i s also deeper than the poverty o f other groups.

Figure 2.4: Trends in Poverty for Kinh and Ethnic
Minority Populations 1993-2004
100,

1993

1998

2002

2004

23. Rapid migration generates new vulnerabilities. The Vietnamese population has
become increasingly mobile, both physically and occupationally. I t is estimated that the
urban population is growing at 1 m i l l i o n people a year. A recent census for H o C h i Minh
C i t y showed that nearly one-third o f the population is recent migrants. Yet a system o f
household registration presents significant administrative barriers for those choosing to
migrate in search o f better livelihoods. Urban poverty i s likely to be underrepresented in
most poverty data because migrants often are absent from sample surveys. More
importantly, since migrants are also absent from some o f the data used to plan and budget
the delivery o f services, their access to social services often i s severely restricted.
24. The poor are disproportionately affected by pollution. Despite strong poverty
reduction, the remaining poor groups are disproportionately affected by pollution, notably
water pollution. The poor have substantially less access to clean water and sanitation.
Over the last 10 years, service delivery o f clean water and sanitation to the poorest groups
has grown at a much lower rate compared to non-poor groups.

7

111. VIETNAM’S VISION FOR 2010
25. The Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP) 2006-10 envisages Vietnam
reaching middle-income country status by 2010, with a GNI per capita above
US$l,OOO. The plan emphasizes the overall objective o f achieving sustainable
development based on four pillars: (a) improve the business environment, (b) strengthen
social inclusion, (c) strengthen natural resource and environment management, and (d)
improve governance. A common theme underlining these pillars i s the need to complete
remaining structural reforms while advancing a set o f ambitious second-generation
reforms to establish the institutions for a modem market economy. Through these
reforms, the role o f government would be transformed from producer o f goods and
services to provider and regulator o f foundations for a well-functioning, equitable, and
modem market economy.
A.

IMPROVING THE BUSINESSENVIRONMENT

26. Business development i s the key to building a prosperous and inclusive society.
The new SEDP acknowledges the importance o f private businesses as the engine for
economic growth and j o b creation. The plan clearly defines the role o f the state to create
an enabling environment for business focused on building institutions and implementing
appropriate economic and social policies. The plan specifically refers to fostering private
business participation in all economic sectors, especially in key industrial sectors.
According to the SEDP, the state should support production only in sectors in which
other economic actors do not want, or are unable, to invest.
27. Sustaining business development in Vietnam requires completion of the
structural reform agenda. The key priorities in this respect are fully developing land
markets, restructuring the financial sector, managing state assets in a more efficient and
transparent manner, mobilizing resources to meet the considerable infrastructure
development needs, and implementing reforms to improve the efficiency and timeliness
o f infrastructure investment and services. Both global integration and domestic reforms
are needed to sustain rapid economic growth while avoiding the accumulation o f large
contingent liabilities by the government. Further integration with the world economy,
especially through Vietnam’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO), i s
bound to lock in some o f the required changes and level the playing field between
domestic and foreign enterprises. Also, WTO commitments generates strong incentives
to accelerate reforms in the banking sector. Concurrently, a complementary reform
agenda i s aiming to level the playing field between the domestic private sector and SOEs
to efficiently mobilize and utilize capital, both public and private. Looking ahead, the
country faces a set o f challenges in this area. Vietnam s t i l l lacks a range o f finance and
business related laws, such as a trust law, securitization law, derivative law, and a private
pension law, all o f which will be instrumental in developing capital markets.

8

B. STRENGTHENING

SOCIAL INCLUSION

28. T o ensure that growth continues to be equitable and pro-poor, renewed
emphasis i s required to reach out to marginalized groups. The next five-year cycle
offers the prospect for Vietnam to complete i t s transition across several dimensions:
increased reliance on market mechanisms, full membership in the global economy, and
middle-income country status. However, success in these multiple transitions will also
require that business development benefits the population at large, as it has so far. The
labor market, rural development, and the social sectors are fundamental in this respect.
29. As the economy restructures and Vietnam becomes a global player, effective safety
nets and budget allocation norms can help households and regions cope with adverse
shocks, whether from natural calamities, economic shocks, or increasing economic
disparities. As poverty continues to have a strong spatial dimension in Vietnam, it will be
important to continue previous success in increasing access to basic infrastructure
services for the rural poor. Renewed efforts are also needed to ensure that development
does not marginalize ethnic minorities. Finally, pockets o f deep poverty within cities are
o f growing significance, particularly those associated with migrants, who have limited
access to basic social services. Urban poverty i s likely to increase in coming years.
Because o f the rapid pace o f migration and urban growth, addressing emerging urban
poverty issues will require improvements in local planning and financing to ensure that
infrastructure networks and social services are provided “in time” in the right places.

30.

Looking forward, as part of the second generation of economic reforms, social
services need to be upgraded. Under central planning, Vietnam managed to build
inclusive basic health and education systems that reach the vast majority o f the
population and deliver social indicators comparable to those o f middle-income countries.
However, these systems have not coped well with the transition to a market economy,
and they are ill-suited to address the more complex and expensive needs o f an
increasingly prosperous population. The challenge now is to combine the efficiency o f
market mechanisms with the broad coverage that characterized education and health
services under central planning. Success in this combination could lay the foundations for
universal systems. The objective o f the government should be to move from supply- to
demand-side financing, to foster competition among providers and increase efficiency.
However, the delivery and quality o f basic services has been neglected in favor o f for-fee
services, and the poor have suffered. The recent initiative o f the government to strengthen
the accountability o f service delivery units while introducing potentially more effective
modalities to support the poor i s encouraging in this regard. At the same time, it will be
important to tackle critical public health functions including responding to AI, S A R S , and
other public health risks which by definition pertain to the entire population, and
reorienting some government resources to key public health functions, such as A I control
and prevention.

3 1. The links between social inclusion and business development are stronger than
they may seem at first. Public funding should not be confused with public provision.
Over time, businesses could become important suppliers o f social services. Tertiary
education, health care services, and, maybe in a not-so-distant future, pension programs,

9

all could be supplied by non-state organizations, including private enterprises,
cooperatives and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Meanwhile, if properly
reformed, social insurance could accumulate a massive amount o f resources before the
active workers o f today start retiring. These resources will need to be invested. If
managed in a sound and transparent manner, they could make a major contribution to
capital accumulation. Most obviously, good human resources cannot be dissociated from
a healthy and capable population. In particular, the development o f the education system
i s the key to tap all the talent available and to build up the skills that the business
community needs. Last but not least, inclusive development is at the root o f social
stability. Inclusive development has been one o f Vietnam’s main advantages over other
countries at the same level o f development.

c.

STRENGTHENINGNATURAL
RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL
MANAGEMENT

32. The new SEDP sets out directions to address unsustainable and inequitable
patterns of natural resources use, access, and control. Establishing the framework for
an efficient land market is an important part o f the second-generation reform program.
Land titling is bound to increase efficiency. Land Use-right Certificates (LUCs) can be
used as collateral to obtain credit and help improve the insufficient access to finance,
which is arguably the main constraint to business development in Vietnam. Property titles
should also provide a more sound foundation to develop a real estate market. From a
social perspective, they could help formalize the status o f urban migrants, who continue
to be registered as “temporary residents” despite having lived in the cities for years, if not
decades. However, land titling alone i s not enough to ensure efficiency and equity.
Strengthening land management and administration i s a top priority to consolidate and
safeguard user-rights already issued, to promote efficiency and equity through enhanced
transparency in land records management as well as to strengthen the emerging rural and
peri-urban land markets.
33. While Vietnam’s long decline in forest cover i s being reversed, a major portion o f
the remaining forest land i s degraded, and new plantings tend to have lower species
diversity. Improved forest resource management would benefit an estimated 25 million
rural inhabitants, many o f whom are ethnic minorities, who rely on forests for subsistence
and income as well as for environmental services. Water i s becoming increasingly scarce,
with competing demands from rapid industrial and urban growth as well as agricultural
uses. To improve water resources management, move toward integrated river basin
management, and use water resources more effectively, better cooperation across sectors
and institutional boundaries i s essential.
34. Environmental externalities from rapid industrialization, urbanization and
agricultural growth may lead to increased pollution and environmental degradation.
To prevent these from happening, improved environmental policies and a more
systematic use o f enforceable environmental standards are called for. The standards need
to focus on reducing environmental degradation through better waste management and
reduced air and water pollution within each sector. In recent years, Vietnam’s progress in
achieving i t s ambitious environmental objectives has been strong on the policy front,
including mandating environmental impact assessments (EIAs). However,

10

implementation remains an issue. While the country has made progress on all o f the
environment-related VDGs and targets, including wastewater treatment, solid waste
collection, and increased forest coverage, attainment o f the ambitious objectives will
require additional efforts. Weaknesses remain in the use o f proj ect-level environmental
reviews and mitigation measures, during both project preparation and implementation.
Furthermore, the integration o f environmental concerns in planning at programmatic
levels remains a challenge, especially in public investment planning and in regional
planning for land and resource use. In addition, many regulations for environmental
protection are not fully operational, as provincial and local governments lack
administrative capacity and human and financial resources.
D. IMPROVING GOVERNANCE
AND ANTICORRUPTION

35. Relationship between the state and society i s taking new forms. The
Communist Party continues to be the dominant political force. The three-person
collective leadership consisting o f the Communist Party General Secretary, the Prime
Minister, and the President, was reconfirmed by the outcome o f the loth Party Congress
in the spring o f 2006. But the leadership i s actively embracing the concepts o f
transparency, accountability, and good governance. Juxtaposed to the highly centralized
structure at the center, a decentralized policy-making process - characterized by
consensus-building and devolution o f powers to provinces and further down to districts is evolving. This is, in part, in response to the need for decentralized decision-making in
a market economy. Increasingly, a vigorous public debate i s occurring on issues o f
economic and social policy. The National Assembly has assumed much stronger
oversight and legislative roles. A case in point i s the constitutional introduction o f a
mechanism for a vote o f no confidence, which was used for the first time in 2004, when
the Minister o f Agriculture and Rural Development was held to account for a major
corruption scandal. Moreover, through the nationally televised Q&A sessions o f the
National Assembly, ministers have had to assume responsibility for lack o f performance
in their sectors and functional areas. Furthermore, growing participation o f citizens in
planning and implementation both at the national and local levels, including ethnic
minorities, has systematically occurred during the SEDP preparation. Increasing the
independence for the State Bank o f Vietnam as a modem Central Bank as well as the
establishment o f the new State Audit o f Vietnam i s being actively considered. And
finally, the media is being given more leeway in addressing issues o f malfeasance and
corruption. Their key role in this fight i s now widely recognized.
36. For Vietnam to achieve middle-income status by 2010, it i s imperative that the
foundations of a modern market economy be established. K e y challenges include
completing the reform o f public financial management, reforming tax administration,
setting up mechanisms to manage public debt at all levels, and increasing transparency in
public procurement. There i s also a pressing need to fully implement the Grassroots
Democracy decree and fight corruption, especially at a time in which rapid economic
growth will increase opportunities for graft faster than government systems improve. In
addition, the legal and judiciary reform agenda, which i s much influenced by the
implementation o f the Vietnam-US Bilateral Trade Agreement and the accession to the
WTO, needs to be pursued vigorously. As the economy develops and domestic f i r m s

11

grow, traditional transactions based on trust and relatively simple enforcement
mechanisms will become increasingly ill-suited to the needs o f businesses.

37. I n a country as decentralized as Vietnam, some of the most important changes
will have to take place at the local level. Increased delegation o f decision-making
power to local authorities has created vast gaps in the quality o f business-enabling
environments across Vietnam, while innovative and entrepreneurial local governments
advance reforms and streamline bureaucratic processes to promote businesses. 5
Contiguous provinces, with similar endowments but different commitment o f the local
authorities to economic reform, often are worlds apart in terms o f enterprise registration,
investment by foreign companies, and the availability o f wage employment. Rigorously
measuring the quality o f governance (either locally or at the national level) i s not easy.
However, benchmarking provinces on key aspects potentially affecting business activity
is a step in the right direction. The modernization o f provincial planning processes, along
the lines observed at the national level-relying on consultation with the local business
community and broader civil society-should
encourage additional improvements.
Combined with appropriate budget allocations for the provinces with greater needs, the
promotion o f local leaders who succeed in fostering growth and reducing poverty would
provide a powerful incentive for change.

38.

Corruption remains an important issue, perhaps a more complex one than
may be apparent. Rapid growth creates enormous opportunities for corruption, at a time
when the institutions o f a modern market economy are s t i l l being established. Petty
corruption is rampant, but administrative reforms have brought some improvements, as
evidenced in report card surveys o f several public services. There i s also corruption in
land administration, SOEs, delivery o f social services, and management o f public
investment projects. However, the extent and modalities are not always clear, and a
culture o f "sharing the bounty" further blurs the picture. On the other hand, there seems
to be little state capture. Policy reforms have not favored any obvious interest group; they
clearly weaken the most powerful public sector conglomerates.

39. A clear commitment by the government to tackle corruption i s encouraging,
but firm implementation o f the new strategy will be crucial. The government,
recognizing that corruption undermines investment, growth, and social progress, and also
strongly damages Vietnam's image internationally, has taken a strong resolve to fight
corruption. The introduction o f the first L a w on Corruption Prevention and Control was
a key step in the new strategy.6 The law holds senior civil servants directly responsible
for corruption in the units that they oversee. I t also facilitates whistle-blowing and
introduces a mechanism to monitor the assets o f public officials and their immediate
families. However, the effectiveness o f this mechanism very much will depend on the
specifics. I t s impact will be fully achieved only if it is focused on the most vulnerable
The Provincial Competitiveness Index study developed by the Vietnam Chamber o f Commerce and
Industry and the USAID-funded Vietnam Competitiveness Initiative assesses and ranks 42 provincial
governments by their regulatory environments for private sector development, controlling for differences in
initial endowments.
The Law on Corruption Prevention and Control was passed by the National Assembly in November 2005
and took effect in June 2006.

12

public sector jobs and informed by the important diagnostic study recently carried out by
the Party Central Committee in cooperation with donors.
40. T o reduce the opportunities for corrupt behavior, it will also be important to
continue to strengthen key government systems. The introduction o f the One-StopShop initiative, undertaken as part o f the public administration reform program, was
instrumental in reducing the opportunities for graft. The PFM reform program has led to
the introduction o f a single Treasury account, international public accounting standards,
and modern information management systems. Business processes in customs
administration and tax agencies also are being revamped. Public procurement systems,
too, are being strengthened with new legislation and with e-govemment initiatives,
including the introduction o f e-procurement.

13

Box 3. 1 Understanding C o r r u p t i o n in V i e t n a m

Vietnam often i s portrayed as a widely corrupt country, but the reality o n the ground is more
complex. On the one hand, in 2005 Transparency International’s (TI) Corruption Perception Index gave
Vietnam a rating o f 2.6, o n a scale o f 1 t o 10 in which 10 corresponds t o the highest integrity standards.
Most other countries in the region received better grades, including Malaysia (5.1), Korea (5.0), Thailand
(3.8), Laos (3.3), and China (3.2). Only the Philippines (2.5) and Indonesia (2.2) appeared t o be more
corrupt.
On the other hand, in the W o r l d Bank Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) o f 2006, respondents
attached surprisingly l o w importance to corruption as a business constraint. Vietnam was ranked o n par
with Malaysia, one o f the least corrupt countries in the region (box table 3.1). The ICA uncovered bribes
and gifts in dealings with most government agencies but also found that, in many cases, n o unofficial
payments were made. Across a l l agencies, the average bribe was 1.8 m i l l i o n VND.
Box table 3.1 C o r r u p t i o n in the East Asia Region, [2005] (%)
I s comiption a constmint to business'? (pcrcnnrof responses)
Minor

Seven or niiijor

4.1

39.4

55.9

21.1

18.5

27.3

29.3

29.2

41.5

Malaysia

53.8

81.7

14.5

Philippiiics

40.6

21.3

35.2

Thailaiid

49.7

32.1

18.3

Virtmm

52.3

17.8

14.2

NO

Cainbndin

China
Intloncsia

These findings are consistent with the findings o f a diagnostic study o n corruption recent.: Carrie
out by the Central Committee o f the Party, based o n the “triangulation” o f responses f r o m households,
enterprises, and government officials. This study estimated that the average additional cost per transaction
ranges f r o m 0.1-2.1 m i l l i o n VND. B o t h studies found that the traffic police, land registration offices, and
customs and tax administration often request or accept bribes.
According to these studies, the overall amounts o f bribes paid by enterprises are not high when
compared to those o f other developing countries, and appear lower than could b e expected, given
Vietnam’s development level (box figure 3.1). F r o m this perspective, the picture that emerges i s one o f a
country in which corruption i s widespread, but petty.
However, although s m a l l f r o m the point o f view o f an enterprise, an average bribe o f 1.8 m i l l i o n
VND represents an average monthly salary in Vietnam. The implications o f generalized corruption o f this
sort o n social morality are not petty by any means. Together with unofficial payments in social services,
such as after school “private lessons” by teachers in education and unaffordable health care, petty
corruption o f this sort i s deeply resented by the Vietnamese population. Indeed, t h i s resentment can explain
the gap between a relatively less concerned business sector and the perception o f generalized corruption
reflected in cross-country comparisons such as that conducted by Transparency International. (box cont ’d.)

14

Box figure 3.1 Spending on Unofficial Payments and “Gifts”
12

+

10

1

1

8

Gatema&
+

.C

eft. 6
$

1
.-

*+Ageh

+

+ Cambodia
Kenva

4

.Y

f

2

0
0

5.ooO

10,oM)

15.W

20,OoQ

Per capita GDP (in PPP dolers)

I

Source: ICs dstahase of the World Bank. usiiie un-weighted averages.

A recent scandal around Project Management Unit 18 in the Ministry o f Transport involving the appropriation
o f funds from public investment projects by high-level officials to gamble on European football matches, also has been
taken as an indication that resources are diverted within the state. The government i s investigatingthis case, the details
of which were widely reported in the Vietnamese press and which has already led to the dismissal of several high-level
officials. The result of the investigation as well as the Bank’s concomitant Detailed ImplementationReview (DIR) will
shed further light on the prevalence of corruption.

A fiduciary review carried out in 2003 o f 400 contracts in Vietnam under 6 World Bank credits uncovered no
irregularities in financial management or disbursements and found the overall quality o f the physical works under the
credits acceptable. However, indicators consistent with collusion among bidders were found in most of the transactions
reviewed. T h e findings of the 2003 review were used to develop a set o f concrete measures to increase transparency,
accountability, and competition in the Bank project implementation process, while reducing the opportunities for
fraudulent and collusive behavior.

E. SEDP 2006-10

AS VIETNAM’S NEXT
PRSP

41. The SEDP i s Vietnam’s new Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS). As such, its
strategic focus and proposed path were assessed in the IMF-World Bank Joint Staff
Advisory Note (JSAN) and discussed by the Board on December 5,2006.
42. The JSAN noted that the SEDP i s fully embedded in the government’s
mainstream planning processes. The directions set by the SEDP are broadly sound and
likely to generate growth and reduce poverty. The SEDP also covers the main PRS
principles: incorporating a poverty focus and a results orientation. The preparation
process has been open and participatory, representing a significant change in approach to
mainstream planning.
43. The SEDP covers a range of policy areas and includes an array of measures
for each of them. To guide donor support to Vietnam over the coming years and to help
the government make the most o f i t s strategy, it i s necessary to prioritize policy actions,
clarify their sequence and timing, assess their possible costs, and identify ways to

15

monitor and evaluate their impact. Joint donor-government analytical work presented in
the 2007 Vietnam Development Report addressed these weaknesses and resulted in an
improved implementation framework for aligning assistance ~trategies.~
44. Improving the efficiency and transparency o f investments, and strengthening
governance remain important challenges. The continued rapid economic growth
envisaged in the SEDP i s underpinned by high rates o f investment. Some o f the most
important recommendations in the JSAN relate to the introduction o f measures that
protect the efficiency o f investment and the transparency o f investment decision-making.
45. The governance agenda remains profoundly challenging. Reforms are well under
way to promote more transparent and accountable PFM at all levels o f government.
Service units are now being held more accountable for the quality o f services. The legal
and judicial reform agenda has been less rapid and should be accelerated. Corruption and
perceptions o f high corruption represent two o f the most significant risks to growth and
sustained poverty reduction over the next five years. The government is h l l y aware o f
the threat that corruption poses to the achievement o f planned outcomes. Donor support
to simplify and strengthen improved government systems will be an important part o f the
solution.
46. Although growth will continue to reduce poverty, there are some persistent
pockets of poverty that growth alone will not tackle. Most notably, these pockets
include entrenched poverty among ethnic minorities. Measures to tackle ethnic minority
poverty could usehlly be reassessed, since the slow rate o f progress suggests that not all
past measures have been effective. As poverty falls, strong targeting techniques will
become increasingly valuable in the fight against persisting poverty. It i s necessary to
ensure that the target programs are well monitored and adapted when problems emerge.
The work that the Ministry o f Finance (MOF) and Ministry o f Planning and Investment
(MPI) have undertaken in the past few years to revise the allocation norms for recurrent
and capital expenditures demonstrates that important returns can be obtained by in
improving the poverty focus o f public expenditures. The chosen growth path also may
generate new vulnerable groups. The development o f a land market could result in
landlessness among farmers hit by adverse shocks, and rapid urbanization may lead to
new forms o f poverty. Effective actions to tackle these new forms o f poverty will require
data collection and research into new topics, combined with open debate o n the problems
and possible solutions. Managing the challenges o f rapid migration, urbanization, and
land conversion in a fair, transparent and well-informed manner will be particularly
important.
47. The Joint Staff Advisory Note concluded that (a) the SEDP has incorporated the
necessary elements o f PRS principles and i s a plan that can both deliver growth and
reduce poverty; (b) annual PRS reporting should be done against the SEDP’s overall
results framework. The reporting system should be strengthened, including by unifying
the reports prepared for domestic and external audiences; (c) plan implementation should

’

Initial results o f this work are reflected in the CPS results framework, which will be updated in the first CPS Progress
Report.

16

pay particular attention to issues related to the quality and efficiency o f investment,
tackling the persistent poverty o f ethnic minorities and developing strong systems and
institutions for transparent management o f public funds and state assets that are
accountable to the people o f Vietnam; and (d) given the important role to be played by
faster SOE and SOCB reforms, both in ensuring improved investment quality and in
protecting debt sustainability, the government should consider assessing Vietnam’s
financial system under the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP).

17

IV. BANKGROUP
TRACK
RECORD
A. CAS COMPLETIONREPORT
EVALUATION

48. The CAS Completion Report concluded that the Bank Group’s assistance in
Vietnam to had solid impact. The focus of the CAS, the design o f the overall program,
and the instruments used for interventions were appropriate. The quality o f Bank lending,
Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA), and partnership work were evaluated by the
country team as sound, and their contributions toward policy developments and
attainment o f CPRGS goals were judged significant. The effectiveness o f AAA work to
pave the way for important structural reforms was emphasized, including trade
liberalization, PFM, and the development o f enabling legal and regulatory frameworks
for electricity, land, and water. The Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) process
was associated with important policy breakthroughs as well, including separating policy
and commercial bank lending, increasing education spending, adopting a more decisive
anticorruption strategy with sound analytical underpinnings, and adopting an ambitious
road map for banking reform. The World Bank Institute (MI)was instrumental in
supporting the government’s WTO accession agenda through a sharply focused capacity
building program.
49. I F C activities over the CAS period were well aligned with the Bank Group’s
overall CAS objectives. IFC played a catalytic role in addressing private sector issues
through investments, demand-driven advisory services, and capacity building. I F C kept
i t s balance between investment and technical assistance activities, as Vietnam needed a
better business climate to make i t s economy more market based. IFC’s Technical
Assistance and Advisory Services were frequent and well-targeted to improve the climate
for a market-driven and private sector-led economy. The IFC-led bi-annual Vietnam
Business Forum has fostered dialogue between the government and the business
community, and has played an important role in the reform o f the business environment.
The Mekong Private Sector Development Facility continued to strengthen the capacity o f
local financial institutions to increase financial access for SMEs. I t has established the
Bank Training Center, which has helped train some 7,000 employees o f joint-stock
banks. I F C played a pioneering role in supporting the development o f domestic private
financing institutions with equity investments in two commercial banks,

50. Bank-financed investment projects also contributed to the Government’s poverty
reduction, social, and economic achievements. These projects improved access to
markets, assets, and public services in lagging regions and for the urban poor, and
alleviated growth bottlenecks in infrastructure. Expanding rural electrification, enhancing
agricultural productivity, and raising the quality o f education are examples o f impact
from Bank lending operations that were closely linked to major AAA activities.
Furthermore, a MIGA guarantee leveraged path-breaking private sector participation in
the Phu My 3 B O T Power Project.
5 1. Despite the successes, slow portfolio implementation remains a serious
challenge. Some projects and sectors have significantly improved disbursements, but the
18

overall disbursement rate lags behind the regional target. M o r e concerted efforts are
required to overturn the unsatisfactory disbursement perfomance. In addition, the Bank
was probably overly optimistic in estimating timelines to implement difficult structural
reforms and to implement investment projects. On the positive side, the CAS Progress
Report’s adjustment o f the strategy and reconfiguration o f the operational program was
effective in ensuring a substantial program delivery, commensurate with Vietnam’s
increased IDA allocation.

19

Box 4.1 Implementing Vietnam’s CAS: What Worked Well and What Worked Less Well
What Worked Well
Strong country ownership of the development agenda has been a key factor behind Vietnam’s development
achievements and should continue to be the driving principle for all Bank activities. Institutional and policy
reforms are sustainable only when the country fully commits itself and decides to pursue them. Thorough
consensus building within Vietnam i s imperative in this regard, but the Bank can nurture the process through
carefully timed and targeted advice, such as happened for anticorruptionand banking reform. The CPS will
support reforms that are prioritized in the new five-year plan for 2006-10.
Effective developmentpartnership. Government ownership i s also key for the effective development
partnerships among government, national stakeholders, and donors, another characteristic and strength o f
Vietnam country program. T h e Vietnam country team needs to preserve this strength and deepen and broaden
these partnerships.
Understandingpovei$y. Understandingpoverty in Vietnam continues to be improved through analytical
work that increasingly i s nationally owned. Recent poverty assessments have been conductedjointly by the
government, Vietnamese academic institutions, donors, and NGOs. The latest update was done entirely by
the Vietnamese Academy o f Social Sciences. T h e result has been a shared understanding o f the nature and
causes o f poverty, including on the need to improve the poverty targeting of public investments.
Use of high quality AAA to impactpolicy dialogue. The AAA program was used strategically to advance
Vietnam’s reform agenda. The processes and products were used to engage key policy-makers, academics,
and the business community. Analytical pieces were disseminated to-and often carried out with-targeted
constituents to identify options for key policy decisions. For example, the design of new policies to make
basic social services more affordable to the poor was supported by a number of AAA interventions. The
principles of providing high quality analyses for policy-makers’ debate rather than imposing a course o f
action worked well in Vietnam. T h i s approach need to be maintained.
Bank’s role as convener and catalyst. The World Bank group has played an effective role of convener and
catalyst for policy dialogues. Biannual Consultative Group (CG) meetings with government agencies,
donors, businesses, and NGOs, co-chaired by GoV and the Bank; youth initiatives; and partnerships with
NGOdacademiahave expanded and deepened the scope of dialogue. These dialogues will be continued in
the new CPS period.

What Worked Less Well
Explicit resultsframework to link bank activities to Go V objectives and facilitate selectivity. T h e absence
of an explicit results framework in the existing CAS complicated specific evaluations o f its effectiveness, and
limited its usefulness as a management tool. To support Vietnam’s poverty strategy, the new Country
Partnership Strategy will use an explicit results framework based on the government’s monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) framework
Pace ofpolicy reforms for thefinancial sector and SOEs. While the country has made steady progress in
many areas o f the reform program, the pace has been slower in certain key, sensitive areas. On the economic
reform agenda, a slower pace of financial sector and SOE reform was noticeable. Vietnam’s WTO
accession, however, puts an extra premium to accelerate progress. T h e recent adoption of an ambitious
banking reform roadmap has been an encouraging development, and one of the key objectives of the new
CPS i s to support its firm implementation.
Addressing poverty among ethnic minorities and urban migrants. Recent poverty assessments have
demonstrated that poverty i s not being reduced at a sufficient pace among certain ethnic minorities,
particularly in the Northern Mountains and Central Highlands, and in pockets of deep poverty within cities,
particularly those associated with migrants. T h e JSAN also highlights ethnic minority poverty as an area o f
deep concern. The Bank i s continuing to work closely with government to ensure more effective policy
responses, including to increase the access of urban residents, particularly unregistered migrants, to
government services and to pilot new, more effectively targeted subsidies and output-based aid modalities.
Preparation and implementation ofprojects. As envisaged in the last CAS, the pace of preparationand
implementation of projects needs to be further improved. While addressing routine and periodic delays has
increased disbursements, systemic issues remain. Strengthening Vietnam’s investment approval and
implementation processes i s critical. Vietnam needs to emphasize much more strongly building the capacity
of the counterpart entities to manage investment projects systematically, including their financial, labor, and
technical capabilities to meet operations and maintenance needs.

20

B. LESSONS
FROM
INDEPENDENT EVALUATION
GROUP
EVALUATIONS
AND CLIENT
SURVEYS

52. Evaluations from independent reviewers and feedback from clients confirm
the overall assessment of IDA’S performance as satisfactory. IEG evaluations
indicate the high quality o f the Vietnam portfolio, with all closed projects reviewed
during the CAS period rated satisfactory or partially satisfactory on outcomes and as
likely to be sustainable, where this likelihood could be assessed. The FY04 Annual
Report on Portfolio Performance lists Vietnam among the top three countries in
development outcome ratings during FY00-04.
Especially noteworthy was the
substantial impact on institutional development. A recent AAA country program
assessment by the Quality Assurance Group (QAG) rated the program highly satisfactory,
especially o n the impacts on the country’s policy reforms.

*

53. The strength o f the portfolio is also reflected in i t s realism and proactivity indices,
both rated at 100 percent. QAG assessment reconfirms the good quality o f portfolio. To
date, ten projects have been evaluated for quality at entry, all o f which were rated
satisfactory. For quality o f supervision, ten projects were assessed, and all except one
were rated satisfactory. Furthermore, Bank inputs and processes were judged satisfactory
by the QAG team.
54. The Bank’s clients in Vietnam maintain a very positive perception o f the Bank.
Two client surveys conducted during the C A S period show that the stakeholders
appreciate the Bank’s relevance to the country’s development agenda, effectiveness o f
intervention and knowledge, and the financial resources that it provides. Especially
noteworthy was the value attached to the Bank’s knowledge and policy advice. The
positive perception improved even more over the CAS period. The second survey,
conducted in 2005 showed better ratings for almost all questions related to the Bank’s
role. Follow-up interviews with a limited number o f clients after the second survey
confirmed the findings. In CPS consultations, government officials and other
stakeholders voiced their strong appreciation for the Bank’s financial as well as analytical
contribution to the country’s priority development agenda (Annex 4).

Two client surveys were conducted during the current CAS period, one in 2003 and second in 2005. Respondents
were asked about Bank’s work and effectiveness in the country, general issues facing Vietnam, the Bank’s
communication outreach efforts and its CAS consultations. The 2005 survey receivedresponses from 279 (43%) of the
657 stakeholders surveyed. Government employees accounted for the bulk of the respondents (43%), followed by
NGOs and academics (1 2% each).
Only countries with more than 10 projects were evaluated and compared.

21

v. WORLD BANKGROUPCOUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
55. CPS in support o f the SEDP. Both Bank lending and non-lending activities are
organized around the four SEDP pillars and will assist Vietnam attain i t s desired
outcomes in these areas (Figure 4.1). Across all pillars, support will be provided to the
government's program o f strengthening and establishing institutions to sustain a modem,
equitable market economy in preparation for middle-income economy status.

56.

Bridging first-generation and second-generation reforms to move Vietnam
toward middle-income country (MIC) status. To accomplish its goal o f becoming a
middle-income country by 2010, Vietnam needs to complete the remaining firstgeneration reforms, including the banking sector reform and public asset management,
and improvements in the quality o f programs and services for the poor and vulnerable.
These reforms will remain as the core o f the new CPS, with much o f the Bank assistance
to support them provided through ongoing projects, already approved under the last CAS.

57. At the same time, however, the CPS will assist Vietnam prepare for middle-income
country status through a set o f new activities. They will be initiated during the CPS, but
their impact will reach beyond i t and, in the case o f outer-year projects, not be felt
through this CPS period. To start competing with the regional middle-income countries,
Vietnam will need public institutions and systems that operate under clear rules
comprehensible to all domestic and international parties, with laws and regulations that
set the foundation for economic and social activities. To increasingly tap into nonconcessional and private financial resources for physical and human capital investments,
Vietnam needs a domestic financial system that i s transparent and level for all
participants and a solid, sustainable fiscal framework. To better use available
concessional and non-concessional resources, the government needs to enhance i t s
project appraisal skills and genuinely delegate project management authority and
responsibility, rather than enforce control without responsibility. The CPS will shift its
emphasis toward these second-generation reforms, as the country completes the
remaining first-generation ones.
58. Moving to blend status. During the CPS period, Vietnam's gross national income
(GNI) per capita i s projected to move steadily toward the IDA graduation threshold.
While this progress i s not expected to affect IDA eligibility during the CPS period, the
Vietnamese government has expressed i t s desire to seek an opportunity to blend IDA and
IBRD resources to respond to growing needs for development investments, particularly in
the infrastructure sector towards the latter part o f CPS period. In this regard, the World
Bank has scheduled a creditworthiness review in FY08" to assess the country's capacity
to borrow from IBRD."

loA CPS progress report will be prepared in early FY09 to lay out an explicit IBRD strategy for Vietnam based on the
creditworthiness assessment.
" Vietnam issued its first international government bond in October 2005 in the amount of $750 million. The 10-year
dollar-denominatedbonds were priced at 98.223% with a coupon of 6.875% to yield 7.125%. T h i s was 256.4 basis
points above comparable 10-year US Treasuries, and the spread obtained by Vietnam i s lower than that of Indonesia
and Philippines. Given the country's level of economic development and that this was a first-time offering, the outcome
o f the bond issuance i s considered favorable.

22

Figure 5.1 Vietnam CPS Results Framework

Continue rapid poverty reduction

'
+

Objective 2. STRENGTHEN'
SOCIAL. INCLUSION by
enhancing human resources,
assets, and opportunities for
the poor and vulnerable

'
-+

4-

Objective 3. STRENGTHEN
MANAGEMENT OF
NATURAL RESOURCES,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT

\

I

I

Objective 4. IMPROVE GOVERNANCE b y efficient planning and public resource management
Improved effectiveness o f budget planning, execution, reporting. and accountability (4.1)
Modernized planning toward development objectives, with more participatory approaches (4.2)
Reduced incidence o f corruption (4.3)

23

'
J

IDA 15

IDA 14

IDA eligibility applicable in

FY07

FYO8

FYO9

FYlO

FYll

GNI reporting year

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

GNI per capita, US$

Scenario I: 1989-2005 average growth rate (13.5%)

634

720

817

928

1,052

Scenario II: 1997-2005 average growth rate (8.7%)

634

689

749

815

886

Scenario 111: 2005 growth rate (14.2%)

634

724

827

944

1,07E

59. M o r e selectivity based on partnership and mutual accountability.Bank Group
assistance will focus o n a few, selected CPS sub themes within the four SEDP pillars, in
which the Bank has clear comparative advantages and distinct value-added. Given the
large donor presence in Vietnam, some important r e f o r m s 4 f the overall legal and
judicial system, public administration, secondary education, and agricultural research will be led by other development partners. Such selectivity i s not based on an assessment
o f the relative importance but on a division o f labor within the donor community. The
division o f labor among donors i s based on comparative advantage, past engagement, and
institutional mandates. I t i s coordinated on a regular basis through the ODA donor-GoV
partnership groups (Box 6.2). Within the CPS sub themes, Bank Group interventions
have been selected on the basis o f client demand, comparative advantages, scalability and
cross-sectoral synergies, as well as the past implementation performance o f the different
sectors.
60. Expected results from Bank Group assistance. The CPS program matrix l i n k s
the SEDP higher-order goals with CPS outcomes and outputs supported by specific Bank
inputs as well as by other donor partners (Annex 1),l2 The Bank’s assistance will be
provided to support government in achieving the SEDP outputs and outcomes. However,
eventual progress toward them naturally will be affected by many other factors than Bank
assistance, primarily Vietnamese policies, institutions, and resources. In addition, a core
set o f these results was selected (table 5.2). The CPS results frameworks will be used by
the country management team to measure the progress o f each pillar.

l2The CPS results matrix was prepared as a management tool for the country management unit and sector management
units. As such, the matrix i s comprehensive and detailed. The country team will use the matrix to assess the progress
o f results and regularly adjust the Bank inputs as necessary.

24

Table 5.2
Indicative Priority Milestones

CPS Goals
CPS Pillar I: Business environment improved

Vretnam fully meets WTO ~ m m i t m e n ~Aspast-WTO
~
acceSSton
Action Pian is adopted and impleme~~ed,
SOE e ~ u i t ~ ~OR
~ track
i o n with model p~lvat~~ations
of large SOEX

Improved business climate and stronger
co~~e~j~ive~ess

Financial system more efficient, stable and responsive
Banking Reform Road Map
imp,emented and
met
to business and households' needs
Power demand met in adequate quantity and acmptable quality,
with improved commercial and financial efficiency, and energy
sourms d i v e r s i ~ ~ ~ ~
Efficient and reliable provision of in~rastruc~ure
swvices

84% in 2010. Access to hygienic latrines increased from 25% in
02 to 55% in 2010.

Reducad iogi$~ics~trans~o~
wsts and e ~ ~ a b l i s h ~
ofean ~
priortized transpoft MTEF that includes m a ~ n ~ e n a n ~

inorities more fully integrated into ~ e ~ e l o p m e n ~

~ u ~ n e r ab
~ natural
i l i ~ ~ disasters and other shocks
m i ~ ~ ~ a ~ ~ d

nvestment owners in Program

Targets under the 2nd National Strategy and Action Plan for
Natural Disaster Risk ~ a n a ~ e m eachieved
nt
Coverage of health insurance increased from 28% in 21305 to 555

EMter access to a f ~ o r ~ and
a~~
WJaW
*
basic education fC."O"O:.,~c!u"lng,,"i,~,~,~,~,~,ln.~.~~~~,~,~
......................... ................
Primary school FSQL index increased from 6J in 20135 to 80 in
and health care sewices for the poor and near poor
2010 nation- wide^ and Prom 61 in 2005 to 80 in 2010 in poor
I..

/districts

CPS Pillar HI: Natural resources and environment m a n a ~ ~ ~~t ~r n
~ ft l ~ t ~ ~ f l e ~
t

ana age me^^ e ~ ~ c ~ i v of
e nspecial
e ~ ~use forest areas improved.

~a~age~ent
and water resources

......................................................................................................................

biodiversity, land

~a~ionwide
the permnlage of provincial land registration offices
with fully operational one-door service provision increased from
2% to 50Y0 in 2010.

Reduced urban e n v i r ~ n ~ ~ ndegradation
tal

CPS Piliar IV: Governance ~ t r ~ n ~ ~ ~ ~ n ~ d
MTEFs majn~treamodinto GOV planning and ~ u d g o t procoss
~~g
in four Sectors and four provinces by 2008 and plan prepared for
ma~n$~rea~tng

~ ~ ~e ~ er c t i~v e ~ve of
s sepublic
~ resources
~ a n a ~ e ~ ~ n ~

Improved client ptlrcaptton of customs ~ ~ o r m a n c e
Reduced corrupion

More ~ r a n s ~ a rand
~ n teffective pubXrc ppocuremen~~
as evidenced
by progress on OECDlDAC indicators

* Base6 or! the ciiaes of Dong Hal Quy Nhon and Nga frsog only

25

A. PILLAR 1:IMPROVING THE BUSINESSENVIRONMENT

61. Improving competitiveness with full integration with the world economy, a
more level playing field, a better foundation for knowledge-based growth, and
enhanced agricultural competitiveness. Integration in the world economy has been a
main driver o f economic reform in Vietnam. Despite considerable progress, the country’s
protection rates remain high. Further liberalization should increase efficiency. Another
obstacle to business development i s a customs department focused on control (legal or
otherwise) instead o f on trade facilitation. On the public front, Government’s SOE
divestiture program needs to be completed. To promote competition throughout the
economy, SOEs remaining in state hands need to be managed at arms length from the
ministries regulating their sectors. M u c h the same as adherence to the U S Bilateral Trade
Agreement, accession to the WTO i s about institutional changes, from a more level
playing field among enterprises, to competition in key services such as banking, to
improve sanitary and phytosanitary standards (SPS), to strengthened intellectual property
rights (IPR). These changes will boost productivity in the medium to long term.
62. As integration with the global economy proceeds, the nature o f skills required will
also change. Enhancing the education system to better and flexibly respond to these
changes will help Vietnam establish the basis for a modern, knowledge-based economy
that will extend far beyond the CPS period. With three-quarters o f the population living
in rural areas, enhancing the competitiveness o f the agricultural sector will also continue
to be o f vital importance. The easy gains from agricultural liberalization and
infrastructures rehabilitation have already been reaped. Agricultural growth increasingly
will involve choices driven by market incentives and competitive pressures from world
markets. Future production increases will be based less on bringing additional factor
inputs into production and more reliant on efficiency gains in the use o f public and
private inputs. In these areas, the Bank Group will assist Vietnam to:
Generate an improved analytical base for implementing the WTO
obligations and understanding their possible social implications (AAA, TA,
PRSCs, Multi Donor Trust Fund for post WTO issues)
Deepen its integration into the world economy through IFC’s support to
foreign direct investments, trade finance, and South-South investments
Modernize the customs administration, resulting in reduced shipment clearance
times and improved customer satisfaction (Customs Modernization project)
Expand the social safety net program for redundant SOE workers and
increase the number of equitized SOEs, with model privatization of large
SOEs (PRSCs, TA, AAA, IFC’s investments)
Improve the quality, efficiency, and equity of the higher education system to
produce relevant skill sets and increase the proportion of graduate students
entering skills-relevant employment (Higher Education I and 11, Higher
Education DPL, Tertiary Education AAA, Teacher Quality Project, IFC’s

26

investment and technical assistance support to private education and capacity
building in the business sector)
0

Promote agricultural diversification and extension services, deepen market
systems, and provide rural entrepreneurs and poor households with better
access to sustainable finance and risk management tools to enhance
agricultural competitiveness and income generation (Agriculture Diversification
11, Rural Finance I1 and 111, Piloting index-based flood insurance, IFC TA and
investment in agribusiness and micro finance)
Facilitate agricultural trade integration and the opportunities generated by
Vietnam’s expected accession to the World Trade Organization, in particular
those related to food safety standards (Agriculture Services, Livestock
Competitiveness and Food Safety, I F C investment in agribusiness)
Level the playing field for enterprises that are disadvantaged in the current
business environment in access to land, markets, finance, government
services, and business opportunities through technical assistance for the
business enabling environment (TA, PRSC, IFC TA, and advisory services).

63. Reforming the financial system to make it more responsive to private sector
needs i s a main component o f the unfinished reform agenda. In the short term, firm
implementation o f Vietnam’s newly approved banking reform road map i s one o f the
main priorities o f the new CPS, including equitizing the SOCBs to become autonomous,
profit-making institutions and modernizing the central bank to focus on banking
supervision and monetary policy. Together with other donors, especially under the
framework o f the PRSC, the Bank will support the planned wide-ranging reform o f the
Vietnamese banking sector. This i s critical to safeguard fbture economic growth. In the
medium term, developing a vibrant capital market and supporting comprehensive
financial sector development, including supporting infrastructure financing, will also be
essential, so that Vietnam’s financial sector will be able to continue to develop into an
industry o f international standard. As the reform evolves, the Bank will consider
appropriate assistance in support thereof, including required human resources and
institutional capacity building. Through a variety o f lending, TA, and policy advisory
programs, the Bank Group will assist Vietnam to:
0

Equitize at least 3 of 5 SOCBs to strengthen their corporate governance and
lower their NPLs-to-financial assets ratios by supporting a revised L a w o n
Credit Institutions, preparing an action plan for required regulatory overhaul,
providing targeted support to facilitate specific equitizations, and carrying outwith the IMF-a series o f assessments o f Vietnam’s financial sector under the
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
(PRSCs, PRSC cofinancing
grant, FSAPROSC, IFC TA and potential investments)

*

l3 The Government of Vietnam has already agreed in principle that the FSAP will be implementedunder
the framework o f the CPS for the period 2007 - 201 1. The timing and coverage of the program will be
discussed and agreed with the Government before its implementation.

27

Transform SBV into a modern central bank responsible for bank supervision
and monetary policy by supporting the proposed revised L a w on SBV;
restructuring SBV’s central and provincial organization; strengthening SBV’s
banking supervision; providing TA to upgrade the human resources o f SBV and
support the development o f i t s in-house expertise; and implementing a
comprehensive system o f data collection and management (Financial Sector
Modernization and Information Systems Project, PRSCs, IDF for SBV, FSAP)
Enhance the competitiveness of Joint Stock Banks (TA and capacity building
for I F C partner Joint Stock Banks, I F C Bank Training Center, I F C investments
and technical assistance)
Expand and upgrade pilot interbank payments infrastructure (Payment
System and Bank Modernization Project 2)
Pilot municipal financing markets, based on a sound framework for
nonsubsidized subnational lending facilities (Local Development Infrastructure
Fund Project, AAA, IFC sub-national finance)
Develop the capital markets by issuing and implementing a new capital markets
development road map to enhance capital market infrastructure and institutional
capacity (PRSCs, TA, I F C TA and investments)
Expand the ability o f private financial institutions to reach underserved
segments in areas such as SME financing, microfinance, and housing finance
(IFC)
Strengthen the development of private non-banking financial institutions
through equity investments, TA and other instruments as appropriate (IFC)
Facilitate private-public partnerships in transport and energy, resulting in a
higher private share o f the total financing o f infrastructure (IFC, MIGA, TA,
Mekong Transport, Framework for IPPs, PRSCs)
Ensure that World Bank credit-line operations across the portfolio are
consistent with and contribute to the objectives of sustainable financial sector
development (AAA).

64. M o r e efficient and reliable provision of infrastructure services. At the
beginning o f the reforms, Vietnam had a dilapidated infrastructure. Since then, the
country has coped well with a 16 percent annual growth rate in electricity demand and
has run one o f the most successful rural electrification programs in the world.
Competition (soon to be followed by equitization) in telecommunications has led to the
fastest penetration rate in the world. The road network has developed.
65. However, the needs are enormous, and the public sector alone cannot cope (Box
4.1). Businesses complain about insufficient transport infrastructure, congested ports with
relatively expensive services, and excessively expensive electricity and telephone
services. Dubious financing arrangements at provincial levels have to be brought under
28

control, and private participation encouraged. Infrastructure projects must be delivered on
time to provide the services when they are needed. Accelerating the reform and
equitization o f infrastructure SOEs will greatly improve the efficiency o f infrastructure
service provision and increase the overall competition o f the economy. Proper regulation
o f access and prices for infrastructure services i s a priority. Making further progress in
infrastructure development requires diversifying funding sources and improving
transparency in resource mobilization, especially at the local level. The adoption o f sound
regulatory frameworks, separating the role o f service provider and regulator, improving
cost recovery, and promoting competition also are required to attract private participation
in infrastructure and facilitate additional business development. In these areas, the Bank
Group will assist Vietnam to:
Reduce logistics and transportation costs, improve transport efficiency and
expand role of the private sector, by strengthening the regulatory framework,
developing private sector contracting, and investing in expansion and
maintenance o f roads. I F C will, through strategic investments and advisory
services, work on expanding private participation in ports and logistics (Road
Network Improvement, Mekong Transport, Northern Delta Transport, Public
Private Expressway Development, Ministry o f Transport State-Owned Enterprise
Reform AAA)
0

0

0

Pilot well-planned and integrated urban transport systems (Hanoi Urban
Transport, Danang Priority Infrastructure)
Pilot improvements in efficiency and cost recovery for targeted urban
utilities; strengthen the capacity of cities and towns to plan, manage, and
maintain urban investments; and improve the policy and institutional
framework for commercially viable and sustainable solid waste treatment and
disposal operations, resulting in demonstrable improvements in access to water
supply and sanitation (Urban Water Supply, Three Cities Sanitation, Red River
Delta Rural Water Supply, I F C advisory services and investments)
Better meet the demands for reliable, cost-efficient energy by facilitating the
restructuring and unbundling o f Electricity o f Vietnam (EVN), strengthening the
regulatory framework for electricity to prepare a switch to wholesale competition
and a more efficient tariff structure, and expanding the role o f the private sector in
supplying energy by unblocking obstacles to private participation in the nascent
power market and further supporting development o f gas supply. Bank support
will gradually shift the focus from transmission- and distribution-type activities to
assistance on the production and generation side, including through a new
Hydropower Generation project, and where appropriate, with accompanying
technical assistance and financing for safeguards strengthening and livelihood
restoration in the project area (Second Transmission and Distribution Project,
Systems Efficiency Improvement Equitization and Renewables, Renewable
Energy Development, Hydropower Generation, IPP Guarantee, AAA, particularly
on IPP Framework, Greater Mekong Strategy project, I F C TA and investments).

29

Box 5.1 Vietnam’s Infrastructure: Key Policy Issues
While Vietnam’s infrastructure strategy has been a success, there are many challenges for the next five
years. Listed below are the critical issues that the country needs to address as i t responds t o the fast growth
and demands o f people and businesses.
A. Diversifying financing sources: Vietnam must develop new sources o f financing to replace
concessional financing and t o meet increased investment needs. Greater use o f private finance would
reduce the burden o n public finance and could potentially release funds for use in other sectors. The
government also needs to shift sources that are ultimately funded by taxpayers toward sources that are
funded by users (cost recovery).
B. Strengthen planning and coordination: The planning process needs t o adapt to achieve a more refined
assessment o f investment priorities and t o better integrate budgeting decision with investment plans. There
are general problems o f horizontal coordination across ministries and vertical coordination across levels o f
government. Across a l l infrastructure sectors, there is r o o m for efficiency improvement in project selection,
investment operations, and maintenance. I t is crucial that economic criteria are integrated in project
selection and comprehensive planning mechanisms for urban infrastructure.

C. Improve efficiency: Realizing efficiency improvements is one o f the challenges. Possible solutions
include corporatizing state-owned infrastructure enterprises, introducing greater competition, introducing
greater private participation, improving regulatory incentives for efficiency, and reducing corruption.
D. Targeted intervention and protection for the poor: Careful review across infrastructure sectors i s
required to determine h o w existing subsidies could be better targeted t o address the pockets o f poverty
without avoid wasting poverty alleviation funds o n the non-poor.
Source: Infrastructure Strategy, M a y 2006.

B. PILLAR 2: STRENGTHENING

SOCIAL INCLUSION

66. Better understanding of poverty and piloting o f new instruments to reach the
poor. Increasingly, Vietnam’s poor belongs to “difficult to reach” groups marginalized
by location, ethnicity, and gender. Through analytical and operational work, the Bank
will continue to assist govenunent to explore h o w provision o f social services can better
reach these groups and enhance their human resources, assets, and opportunities. At the
same time, across the infrastructure sectors, while supporting government’s plans to
increasingly charge fees to recover costs o f various services, the Bank will help
government review the cumulative impact o f the combined fees to the poor.

67. Mainstreaming gender issues across the portfolio, The Bank will use the
recently completed Country Gender Assessment to inform its activities in Vietnam across
all four pillars o f interventions. Building o n Vietnam’s past impressive progress toward
gender equality, the Bank will support firm implementation o f the new Gender Equality
Law. Particular focus will be put on helping government reach the groups o f women,
particularly among ethnic minorities, who are not benefiting from the country’s progress
as much as the majority o f women; and level the playing field for all women to take part
in the growing economic opportunities.

30

68. Including people with disabilities in the development process. According to
government figures, more than 6 percent o f Vietnamese, or 5.3 million people, live with
disabilities. They face great difficulties in accessing basic services as well as in joining
and benefiting from the country’s development. During the previous CAS period, the
Bank Group integrated assistance to people with disabilities into Bank operations. This
integration i s reflected in both grant schemes, such as Small Grants Program and Country
Development Marketplace, as well as lending projects, including Primary Education for
Disadvantaged Children, Education for All, Road Safety, and Urban Transport. The Bank
will continue to support the government’s efforts to create equal opportunities and
improve access to social services for people with disabilities. The Bank will also continue
to mainstream disability issues into its operations, from grants schemes to lending
projects to AAA works.
69. Increasing access to quality, basic infrastructure services for the rural poor.
T o ensure that growth i s shared among the wider population, a more focused set o f
interventions will continue to be important to assist the rural areas, which have lagged
behind the overall rapid growth and poverty reduction. As the stock o f basic
infrastructure in lagging areas has risen substantially in recent years, the particular focus
will be put on improving the capabilities o f poor communities to operate and maintain
their infrastructure assets. In this area, the Bank Group will assist Vietnam to:
Expand rural access to reliable and affordable electricity by investing in
distribution, rehabilitation, and expansion o f l o w voltage supply (Rural Energy 11,
Rural Distribution)
Improve the mobility of people and goods in rural areas by investing in and
maintaining all-year round road access to poor communes (Rural Transport 111,
Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction, Community-Based Rural Infrastructure)
Improve rural access to basic water and sanitation services (Water Resources
Assistance, Red River Delta Rural Water Supply)
Strengthen government’s targeted poverty programs with more decentralized
implementation and the use o f participatory approaches to resource planning and
management that empower the rural poor (Program 135-2 Support Credits, CSA).
Expand access to market for farmers through linkages programs and trade
facilities for companies engaged in sourcing, processing and distributing a broad
range o f agricultural commodities grown mainly by SME producers and farmers
(IFC investments and TA).

70. Increasing access to affordable quality education and health care services.
While continuing to support mechanisms targeting the poor in vulnerable provinces, in
the medium term, the government intends to carry out more systemic social sector
reforms, combining the efficiency o f market mechanisms with the degree o f inclusion
resulting from universal programs. These programs (health insurance, old-age pensions)
should have similar features for all participants but allow for different access modalities:
mandatory in the formal sector, subsidized for the poor, and voluntary in between.
31

Implementingthese programs will require a formidable change in the ways that the social
sectors operate. The design o f a viable health insurance program and the revision o f the
old-age pension program will be the main challenges on the policy front. Setting up a
universal social insurance number for the delivery o f benefits and the introduction o f
individual accounts will be technically demanding. However, a universal social insurance
number could replace the current, geographical registration system and increase labor
market flexibility. In education, the Bank will continue to support government’s goals o f
achieving Education for All objectives by focusing on issues o f finance, governance, and
quality. In these areas, the Bank Group will assist Vietnam to:
Support demand-led improvement in the outreach and quality of health
services by expanding the coverage o f health insurance, including for the poor
and near-poor, and enhancing the quality o f health facilities. Special support will
be required for ethnic minorities (Northern Upland Health, Social Security
Reform Project)
0

Support an increase, in targeted provinces, in the proportion o f HIV/AIDS
vulnerable groups who use safer injection practices, and reduced stigma and
discrimination against people living with H I V / A I D S (HIV/AIDS Project)

0

Mitigate the negative effects of traffic accidents by moving toward a more
systematic preventive approach (Road Safety, Hanoi Urban Transport)
Support universal, quality basic education through investing in education
infrastructure improvements and implementing education initiatives that target
vulnerable groups, including ethnic minorities, girls, and children with disabilities
(Primary Education for Disadvantaged Children, Targeted Budget SupportEducation For All Project)

0

Move toward a more equitable and efficient overall allocation o f public
resources to enable G o V to implement successful decentralization through
improved accountability mechanisms (Targeted Budget Support-Education For
All Project, Education For All 11).
Support greater role of the private sector and promote competition in the
provision of health and education services to enhance quality and
affordability (IFC investments and TA).

71. Including and empowering ethnic minorities in the development processes.
Recent poverty assessments have confirmed that poverty incidence among ethnic
minorities remains twice as high as within the rural population as a whole (69 percent in
2002, compared with the rural average o f 36 percent). O f greatest concern, poverty
reduction among ethnic minorities has slowed significantly in recent years. In particular,
the inclusion o f ethnic minorities in development processes seems to have been
constrained by a lack o f social services adequately tailored to ethnic minority needs,
limited involvement o f ethnic minorities in local-level public decision-making, and
insufficient forestry land being allocated to ethnic minorities. Bank Group activities will
assist in alleviating these constraints by helping Vietnam to:
32

0

Better understand the reasons underlying stagnant ethnic minority poverty
reduction and identify improved policies and instruments to address these
reasons (Poverty Assessment, CSA).
Improve ethnic minorities’ voice and participation in the development
processes that affect them by decentralizing control over public expenditure to
communes (Community-Based Rural Infrastructure Project, Northern Mountains
Poverty Reduction Project, Primary Education for Disadvantaged Children
Project, Program135-2 Support Credits)

0

Refine the targeting and monitoring of the targeted poverty reduction
programs (Program 135-2 Support Credits, CSA, PRSCs)

0

Expand ethnic minorities’ access to basic social services, focusing on ethnic
minority women, who lag behind ethnic minority men in accessing education,
health services, and economic opportunities (Community-Based Rural
Infrastructure Project, Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project, Primary
Education for Disadvantaged Children Project)
Increase the allocation to ethnic minorities o f forest land coming out of State
Forestry Enterprises (SFE) reform (Forest Sector Development, Agriculture
Diversification 11, Sustainable Forestland Management Project (GEF)).

72. Improving policies and infrastructure to address the needs of urban poor and
migrants. While poverty in Vietnam continues to be predominantly rural, recent poverty
assessments have confirmed the growing significance o f pockets o f deep poverty within
cities, particularly associated with migrants, who have limited access to public services.
Going forward, rural-urban migration will be a key challenge to manage, as rapidly
expanding urban centers continue to attract migration from rural area. The burden o f
nonresponsive planning and slow infrastructure provision in newly settled areas i s likely
to fall disproportionately on the poor, who are likely to be concentrated in new
settlements. In these areas, the Bank Group activities will assist Vietnam to:
0

Improve the access of the urban poor to basic water supply and sanitation,
assisting in the design and piloting o f more effectively targeted subsidies to reach
the poor, and piloting output-based aid methods (Red River Delta Rural Water
Supply, Urban Upgrading, Danang Priority Infrastructure, Water Supply Project,
IFC investments in water and sanitation)

0

Pilot on-site improvement of targeted slum areas (Urban Upgrading, Danang
Priority Infrastructure)

0

Increase the access of unregistered migrants to public services (PRSCs).

73. Reducing vulnerability to adverse shocks, including natural and climatic
hazards and diseases. In the Bank’s recent Global Risk Analysis o n Natural Disaster
Hotspots, Vietnam was singled out as one o f the countries most vulnerable to natural
hazards. Recent Poverty Assessments have indeed stressed the importance o f the
33

widespread vulnerability o f the poor and near-poor to adverse shocks from natural and
climatic hazards, infectious diseases, and other risks. For large parts o f the poor, risk does
not only result in variability in living standards but lack o f means to cope with risk and
vulnerability can in itself be a cause o f persistent poverty and poverty traps. Risk without
proper risk management tools can result in strategies that avoid taking advantage o f
profitable but risky opportunities. Shocks destroy human, physical, and social capital, to
further limit opportunities. Improving mechanisms to manage and reduce this
vulnerability and increase resilience i s an important challenge for the Vietnamese
Government in the next five years. Bank Group activities will assist Vietnam to:
0

Mitigate the impact of natural hazards by moving toward a comprehensive risk
management strategy and testing the feasibility for index-based flood insurance
(Natural Disaster Risk Management Project, Piloting index-based flood
insurance).

0

Prevent outbreaks of avian influenza and other emerging infectious diseases,
with particular focus on improving national veterinary services, improving
surveillance on human health, and strengthening food safety systems (Avian
Influenza ERL, Avian and Human Influenza Support Project).

c. PILLAR 3: STRENGTHENINGNATURAL
RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL
MANAGEMENT

74. Improving natural resources management. The livelihoods o f poor people in
Vietnam s t i l l depend overwhelmingly on natural resources. Important issues remain to be
addressed to enhance the livelihood-supporting roles and public environmental benefits
o f natural resources. O n land, important challenges are to facilitate the consolidation o f
agricultural land, restructure state forest land, support community-based land
management among ethnic minorities, and recover idle land from urban SOEs. Looking
forward, one o f the most difficult challenges i s the conversion o f agricultural land to
residential and industrial land, which will be needed on a massive scale as Vietnam
develops and urbanizes. In the forestry sector, existing practices often result in land
degradation, increased risk o f flooding, food and public health insecurity, and loss o f
biodiversity. As a result, existing practices jeopardize the security o f current and future
rural livelihoods. On water, improved water resources management and integrated river
basin management have been constrained by lack o f inter-ministerial coordination,
continuing inconsistencies between the institutional set-up with the Ministry o f Natural
Resources and Environment responsible for water resource management, and the
Ministry o f Agriculture and Rural Development, responsible for water resource
utilization, inadequate legal framework, and inefficient use o f water for irrigation
purposes. Inthese areas, Bank Group activities will assist Vietnam are:
0

Increase the forest coverage and improve the management o f special use
forests through finance and advice (Forest Sector Development, Coastal Wetlands
Project, Projects on Protected Areas (GEF))
Improve the coverage of critical natural habitats in protected areas, and
strengthen biodiversity conservation, such as through protected areas, wildlife

34

trade issues, and conservation finance. (Integrated Protected Area and Landscape
(GEF))
Expand the allocation of land titles to smallholders in the uplands, with
choices in reallocation o f forest production land currently under the oversight o f
State Forest Enterprises important both to growth prospects and poverty impacts
in these sizeable geographic areas. (Land Administration, Sustainable Forestland
Management (GEF))
Strengthen water resource and river basin management (Water Resources
Assistance Project, Mekong Delta Water, Mekong Water Utilization Project I1
(GEF)).
Support the development of the real estate and land market (IFC TA and
investment in housing)

75. Reducing environmental degradation for livelihood security. The SEDP
contains strong, encouraging references to sustainable development. For environment,
they include numerical targets, such as for improving wastewater and solid waste
treatment in industrial zones and craft villages. Bank Group activities will build on the
government’s commitment to sustainable development and will assist the government to
achieve its targets to:
0

Improve waste water treatment and solid waste collection (3 Cities Sanitation,
Urban Upgrading, H o Chi Minh City Environmental Sanitation, Coastal Cities
Environment Sanitation Project, IFC investments in waste water treatment and
solid waste)

0

Reduce air and water pollution by improving the air and water quality
management regulatory and monitoring systems and improving public
transportation systems, and promoting better corporate standards and practices in
environmental management (Hanoi Urban Transport, Pollution Management
Pilot, I F C investments and TA)

0

Promote sustainable business practices, and the use of energy saving
equipment and technologies (IFC investments and TA, I F C structured finance
products)

0

Improve PCB handling and treatment/disposal (PCB Management (GEF)),
achieve the targets for the ozone layer protection program (Montreal Protocol)
and establish a solid carbon finds project portfolio

0

Better integrate environmental protection in planning, in particular, expanding
environmental tools to include programmatic assessments such as Strategic EIAs
for Public Investment Plans, for sectoral master plans, and for regional
development plans (PRSCs, TFs for environmental protection)

35

Improve energy system efficiency by reducing peak demand and electricity
consumption through demand-side management activities and supply-side
efficiency gains; and by supporting use o f renewable energy sources (System
Efficiency Improvement Equitization and Renewables, Demand-side
Management and Energy Efficiency (GEF), Renewable Energy Development,
I F C investments and TA in energy)
Increase the share of renewable and clean energy sources through leveraging
private investments, promoting the use o f energy saving equipment and
technologies through structured finance products and other products, and
promoting sustainable business practices through model private sector
transactions (IFC investments and TA)
D. PILLAR 4: IMPROVING
GOVERNANCE

76. Strengthening governance across the program. Underlying the three pillars o f
growth, social inclusion, and natural resource management is good governance. The
Bank has developed the overall program to enhance the Government’s accountability,
enhance stakeholder voice and participation, and improve transparency. Vietnam’s
record in advancing the core governance agenda has been impressive. However, the
country needs to lay the institutional foundation to be a middle-income country by 2010.
This calls for intensifying the work on government systems even more. Here, the Bank
Group aims to focus on further strengthening PFM; improving planning processes,
especially at the sub-national level; and reducing corruption. IFC will support better
corporate governance practices and contribute to greater transparency in the business
sector and i t s interactions with the government.
77. Accountability, participation, voice and transparency. In sum, Bank activities
support the governance agenda. Eventually, this should help improve the capacity o f the
state to deliver on i t s obligations to its citizens, and enhance the citizens’ prospects to
claim their rights to this end. Bank support will also include analytical work o f the legal
and policy framework, including the SEDP, to see how Government’s stated intentions to
meet i t s human rights obligations can best be achieved.
78. Strengthening public financial management. Vietnam has recorded substantial
achievements in public financial management. With the implementation o f the revised
Budget Law in 2004, the 2005 state budget plan was disclosed for the first time in i t s
entirety. Actual expenditures at the central to district levels have also been h l l y
disclosed. Moreover, the Audit Law, effective as o f January 2006, established the State
Audit o f Vietnam as an independent agency reporting to the National Assembly and
publication o f audit reports which will enhance transparency and increased accountability
o f public finance.
79. Nevertheless, the PFM system s t i l l needs a further improved and consolidated
information system, monitoring and evaluation measures to ensure the fiscal transparency
at all levels o f government and by spending units, public accounting standards and
capacity to manage public procurement and monitoring the progress using the public
expenditure financial accountability (PEFA) indicators. Tax administration requires a
36

modernized system to improve compliance and efficiency. In this area, Bank Group
activities will assist Vietnam to:
Further strengthen its public financial management through the
implementation o f an integrated financial management system (Public Financial
Management Project, Public Expenditure Reviews, Public Financial Management
2)
0

Advance financial accounting and reporting based on international
accounting standards and strengthen internal control of public institutions
(Public Financial Management Project, TA on Public Sector Accounting
Standards for State Treasury, and for implementation o f PEFA)

0

Improve revenue collection through strengthened tax administration and
better design of taxes and government fees, reducing the potential for
corruption and increasing compliance o f tax administration with the laws in force
and improve the business climate (Tax Administration Project)

0

Manage public procurement more transparently at the central and local levels
and h l l y implement a new legal framework (Public Expenditure
Reviewhntegrated Fiduciary Assessment, IDF for Public Procurement, TA for
Procurement L a w implementation).

80. Improving planning toward development objectives with more participatory
approaches and strengthened accountability of service providers. Drafting the SEDP
2006-2010 was an example o f improved, evidence-based planning processes that focus
on improving the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, which also was highly
participatory. The challenge now i s to support the same improvements at the sectoral and
local levels, and to ensure that the plans are implemented in reality and accounted for,
integrating the monitoring and evaluation framework in the annual budgets and in the
emerging multi-annual integrated fiscal frameworks.
81, Several sector investment projects will directly impact the planning and execution
o f public programs managed by sector ministries. In addition, the Bank together with
other donors will work in strengthening the O D A budget planning so that the ODA
resources will clearly be aligned to the government’s prioritized programs. In this area,
Bank Group activities will assist Vietnam:
0

0

0

Improve local-level planning and monitoring processes with strong
participation o f local stakeholders (Northern Mountain Poverty Reduction,
CBRIP, Program 135-2 Support Credits, PRSCs and supporting AAA)
Improve the quality o f data for monitoring and evaluation at all levels (TA
with GSO, PRSCs, Program 135-2 Support Credits)
Enhance the administration of the National Targeted Program for Education
with needs based planning in place (Education for All, Primary Teachers,
Primary Education for Disadvantaged Children and supporting AAA work)

37

Improve the provincial governments’ capacity to plan, implement and
maintain public assets in the transport sector (Rural Transport Project 111,
Hanoi Urban Transport, Mekong Transport, Northern Delta Transport)
Improve its ODA management and alignment to the government’s priorities,
planning and budget (Comprehensive Capacity Building Program, IDF for ODA
Management).

82. Reducing corruption. Within the overall framework o f strengthening governance,
anticorruption will remain as one o f the core issues that the Bank together with other
donors will assist Government address, with firm implementation o f the new
anticorruption law a priority. A reliable monitoring system, collecting feedback from
households and enterprises and representative at the provincial level, could be an
important tool to monitor progress and increase accountability. Further simplification o f
administrative procedures i s needed to reduce opportunities for corruption. Business
processes need to be re-vamped, with a focus on the most vulnerable agencies: customs
administration, the tax department, and land administration offices. Strengthening
procurement, streamlining the procedures o f project implementation and management
with a clearly defined accountability, and relying more o n electronic interfaces whenever
possible are also part o f the agenda in this area. Bank group activities will assist Vietnam
to:
Better understand the nature and extent o f corruption to support the
Anticorruption Steering Committee led by the Prime Minister implement the L a w on
Corruption Prevention and Control (a statistical analysis o f procurement contracts,
follow-up anti corruption diagnostic studies to be jointly undertaken with other key
donors)
Simplify business processes o f custom, tax and land administration offices,
deploy E-government services in three cities and enhance accountability in
service delivery (Customs Modernization Project, Tax Administration Reform, Land
Administration Project, I C T Project, Report Card Surveys, I F C business regulation
simplification programs)
Increase transparency o f government financial information, strengthen the
legislation and capacity of procurement and financial management (Integrated
Fiduciary Assessment, advisory work on implementation o f L a w on Procurement,
IDF on Monitoring & Evaluation System for Public Procurement. Technical
Assistance for the State Audit o f Vietnam)
Strengthen the role of National Assembly, Peoples’ Committee and Media (WBI
programs for parliamentarians and journalists, Development Education Program for
Press).

83. Supporting legal and regulatory developments across the Bank Group
operational program. While other donors will take the lead in supporting Vietnam’s
core legal and judiciary reforms, at the sectoral level the Bank will provide support to
strengthening the legal and regulatory framework as an integrated part o f i t s activities in
38

individual sectors, and as a part o f Government 2nd generation institutional reforms.
Examples o f such support will include improving the regulatory frameworks for
infrastructure, strengthening banking sector monitoring and regulation, improving the
systems for providing health care, and improving local governance frameworks to
enhance the voice and participation o f the poor and disadvantaged.

39

VI. DELIVERING

THE BANKGROUP
STRATEGY

A. LENDING
PROGRAM

84. Lending program for the next five years. The CPS operational program was
calibrated based on an assumption o f annual IDA lending envelopes in the order o f
US$900 million (Annex B-3). The amounts shown in outer years (from FY09 onward) are
indicative only. Actual allocations will depend on (a) the country’s o w n performance, (b)
i t s performance relative to that o f other IDA recipients, (c) the amount o f overall
resources available to IDA, (d) changes in the l i s t o f active IDA-eligible countries, (e) the
terms o f financial assistance provided, and (0 the amount o f compensatory resources
received for MDRI.
85. During CPS implementation, the government, the Bank, and other interested donors
will organize joint annual program consultations to assess program implementation and
progress on the SEDP and CPS results framework. These discussions will be reflected in
annual Country Program Reviews and will also be the basis for adjustments o f the outer
year operational program.
86. The PRSC will continue to be a focal point of the Bank’s policy dialogue on the
Vietnamese reform program. At the sectoral level, investment projects and some
sectoral Development Policy Operations will support the CPS goals. A new cycle o f
Poverty Reduction Support Credits will lay the foundation for policy dialogue with
government across the four SEDP pillars, not only for the Bank but also for the donor
community at large. The Bank will continue the past pragmatic division o f labor among
PRSC donors, in which lead donors are designated for sectors and themes according to
donor priorities and comparative advantages. A series o f investment projects will also
facilitate particular development objectives. These operations will support the
government’s sectoral frameworks and will be carried out in partnership with other
donors. A new Development Policy Operation (DPO) to support strengthening a national
target program for poverty reduction i s being prepared jointly with Australia, Finland,
Sweden, and UK DFID. Additional sector-level DPOs may be introduced, albeit
selectively, when policy reforms and program improvement warrant such intervention.
87. Piloting new “wholesale” financing modalities in the urban and water subsectors. The Bank i s exploring new modalities o f financing investment projects in the
urban and water sectors. In contrast to traditional “retail” approaches o f identifying
municipalities and subprojects upfront with the government, in the “wholesale” approach,
Bank financing i s channeled through national and subnational institutions charged with
identifying subprojects according to an agreed set o f guidelines. If proved effective, the
new modalities will rely increasingly on strengthened client’s procedures, appraisal,
financial and fiscal frameworks. Such innovations eventually will accelerate the pace o f
implementation and strengthen the sustainability o f activities. In addition, the Bank is
closely following the experiences from the implementation o f Targeted Budget Support-

40

Education for All project to hrther strengthen the government systems for budget
planning, implementation, procurement, and financial management.

88. IFC strategic priorities will focus on supporting Vietnam’s transition to a more
market-based economy. They include (a) focusing on the development o f the financial
sector, including housing finance, and selectively seeking opportunities in privatized
state-owned banks; (b) strengthening the investment climate through advisory and
capacity building activities, including the Vietnam Business Forum; (c) providing
advisory and investment activities to support private participation in infrastructure and
privatization; (d) supporting SMEs through financial intermediaries and Mekong Project
Development Facility, as well as fostering linkages with larger IFC-invested projects to
outsource ancillary activities to SMEs; and (e) investing in real sectors in which domestic
demand i s growing or in which Vietnam has a comparative advantage: labor-intensive
manufacturing, agribusiness, tourism, and ICT. I F C will continue to support viable
private sector investments in the country, with strong demonstration and mobilization
effects. IFC’s strategic focus on the financial sector, infrastructure, and privatization will
directly address bottlenecks to improving business competitiveness, IFC also intends to
encourage private sector participation in infrastructure. IFC’s investment program i s
expected to reach between U S $ l O O million and U S $ l S O million per annum over the CPS
period.
89. MIGA’s strategy. MIGA’s activities in Vietnam are directed toward improving the
investment climate and supporting foreign direct investment (FDI) in the country. MIGA
achieves these goals by providing TA to the institutions responsible to promote
investment. MIGA also provides noncommercial guarantees to foreign investors
interested in opportunities in Vietnam. Regarding MIGA’s guarantee product, MIGA will
be available to support the inflow o f FDI to the government’s priority sectors, especially
in the infrastructure sector. During the last CAS period, through i t s guarantee product,
MIGA supported the development o f the Phu My 3 Power Project by supporting both the
equity investors as well as the lenders. In addition, MIGA i s actively looking at other
potential power projects. MIGA will continue to work very closely with the World Bank
and I F C to identify other potential sectors in which MIGA insurance can be a catalyst.
Similar to i t s work in other East Asian countries, MIGA i s willing to work at the
subnational level to achieve GoV’s objectives in the infrastructure sector. As MIGA’s
exposure i s well below the country limit, i t will seek opportunities to expand the program.
B. PORTFOLIO
ISSUES

90. Accelerating the implementation o f investment projects. While the quality o f
portfolio implementation continues to be satisfactory, challenges remain from slow
disbursement against rapidly growing commitments, long project preparation, and delays
in implementing investment and TA interventions through trust funds.l4These challenges
are not new. The last C A S K A S Progress Report also addressed these issues, and, indeed,
over the last three years, some improvements in project preparation and disbursement
have been accomplished. However, with the rapidly growing portfolio and expected
l4Concerns

on fiduciary risks are discussed under the anticomption section.

41

continued expansion o f lending under the new CPS, i t i s vital that the Bank team
addresses the remaining challenges with renewed effort.
91. The most crucial task will be to improve and strengthen Vietnam’s own
process of planning and financing investment projects, and safeguards. The key
factors behind the delays in processing are Vietnam’s extensive internal control
mechanisms for ODA implementation and centralized decision-making, coupled with
inconsistent regulations for government-funded investment projects compared to ODAfinanced projects. These thorough control mechanisms, however, demonstrate strong
country ownership o f O D A activities. Donors, in particular through the “5-Banks
Initiative” and the “Partnership Group on Aid Effectiveness,” have worked to (a)
strengthen the government systems to manage public funds and ODA; (b) support the
development o f national fiduciary and safeguards capacities; (c) improve the performance
o f the existing project portfolio; and (d) address the fiduciary risk concern^.'^ A
comprehensive capacity building
Figure 6.1 IDA Commitments and Disbursement
initiative undertaken by the
Ministry o f Planning and
7000
Investment supported by the
6000
donor group as well as IDFs
5000
for procurement and financial
4000
management strengthening are
examples o f this work.
1 3000

z

2000

92. Strengthening
the
1000
government’s systems to
0
manage public funds and
WOO
FYO1
Ff02
Ff03
FYW
Ff05
FYO6
ODA.‘-Since the harmonization
Cumulative
Disbursements
initiative began in 2003, the
Cumulative Commitments
O ~ n u aCommitment
,
Bank and i t s partners, in
agreement with the government, have focused on priority areas with the potential to
streamline and harmonize ODA procedures and improve aid effectiveness.
0

Legal framework Decree 131, the revised Decree 17 on ODA Management and
Utilization, signed in 2006, i s a major milestone for the government. The decree
devolves responsibility from the state to project owners, which will improve
accountability and performance. The new decree will also ensure consistency with
other ODA-related legal documents and compliance with the requirements for
O D A management in line with the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. Other
important milestones in strengthening the legal framework which are expected to
improve overall portfolio performance include the adoption o f the Procurement
L a w (2005) and amendment o f the Environmental Law (2005), as w e l l as the
development o f the Public Investment Decree/Law. Going forward, government’s

l 5 “5-Banks Initiative” i s organized by ADB, JBIC, AFD, KfW and the W o r l d Bank t o enhance the a i d
effectiveness. The Partnership Group o n Aid Effectiveness i s a group o f more than 30 bilateral and multi
lateral donors established t o work o n the aid effectiveness in Vietnam.

42

focus should be o n achieving regulatory and bureaucratic simplifications and on
increasing accountability, particularly among senior managers.
Institutional framework. Government’s Project Management Units (PMUs) also
need strengthening. All sector ministries and provinces have PMUs to undertake
investment management o f both government and donor funds. To date, the legal
status and accountability o f PMUs have been unclear. The government i s preparing
a Circular on P M U Organization, partly in response to the recent incidents
surrounding PMU 18. Analyses o f the PMUs in Vietnam suggest three key
priorities for improvement: (a) clarifying their legal status and decision-making
authority; (b) improving their capacity and professional status; and (c) making them
more accountable to their line ministries, the beneficiaries, and the external
oversight agencies such as the State Audit. The Bank will continue to work with the
government and other donors to strengthen the project management system so that
government investment projects, regardless o f funding sources, will be managed
effectively and efficiently. These improvements will eliminate the need for
“parallel” PMUs set up purely for donor projects.
0

Alignment with government appraisal and supervision procedures. In
connection with the publication o f the Public Investment DecreeILaw, the Bank
and government are developing guidelines for project preparation procedures. The
guidelines will focus on Feasibility Studies for investment projects. Similarly, a
common reporting tool for project supervision to be adopted by the 5-Banks has
been adopted, and the government i s preparing a circular that will institutionalize
this tool across sectors.

93. Supporting the development o f national fiduciary and safeguards capacities.
Implementation o f projects i s affected by long delays in procurement processes,
weaknesses in the public financial management systems, and gaps in the environmental
and social assessments. The Bank has taken a leading role in enhancing dialogue in these
areas.
Procurement management. Since the Procurement L a w was issued, the Bank has
worked with government and other partners to develop the Public Procurement
Decree issued in September 2006; has organized training sessions on the
Procurement L a w and Decree; and i s finalizing standard bidding documents to be
used for national competitive bidding for goods and civil works.
Financial management. The Bank will continue to support various aspects of
strengthening public financial management as discussed before. The Ministry of
Finance has agreed to produce a single document o n PFM that will set out a
capacity building plan to underlie the more coordinated, effective use o f donor
resources and to assess the feasibility o f adopting the Public Expenditure and
Financial Accountability (PEFA) framework.
Environment and social safeguards. The harmonization o f environmental and
social safeguards will continue to be the Bank’s priority through the CPS period. A
gap analysis o f Environmental Impact Assessment regulations identified priorities
for improvement (such as introducing public consultation requirements), and the

43

government i s amending its regulations to be closer to international standards. For
social safeguards, GoV has considerably narrowed the gap between i t s resettlement
policies and international practices. The Bank will continue i t s engagement on
policy reforms. I t will provide assistance to improve capacity for their
implementation.
94. Improving the performance o f the existing portfolio. To improve the overall
performance o f the portfolio, the Bank needs to focus o n the “problem” projects and the
projects at risk that show slow implementation progress. In parallel, the Bank will
continue to rely on annual Country Portfolio Reviews as well as Joint Portfolio
Performance Reviews (JPPR) carried out under the umbrella o f the 5-Banks initiative to
identify generic issues and suggest remedial actions to relevant government agencies, in
particular to the Inter-Ministerial Task Force (IMTF) on ODA Problem-Solving. The
IMTF was established by the Prime Minister in September, 2004, and led by MPI, aims at
helping line ministries and provinces to solve problems arising during the implementation
o f ODA programs and projects.
95. Addressing fiduciary concerns. For the Bank portfolio, an approach paper,
“Reducing Fiduciary Risks under Bank Financed Projects,” was developed in 2004. It
followed the findings o f a fiduciary review undertaken in 2003. While not finding direct
evidence o f corruption, the review did reveal indications in the Bank portfolio o f
collusion across many sectors and provinces investigated. W h i l e noting that an overall
governance program addresses anticorruption issues from a structural perspective, the
country team has used the review to identify ways to mitigate fiduciary and reputational
risks in the portfolio. The paper focused on concrete measures to (a) improve a project
design and risk mitigation arrangement based o n the individual project risk assessment;
(b) strengthen supervision, through integrated financial, procurement, and performance
reviews in higher risk projects, and strengthen auditing requirements, (c) improve
Borrower enforcement and sanction mechanisms, and (d) strengthen the team’s internal
capacity to assess fiduciary risks. These measures are intended to increase transparency,
accountability, and competition in project implementation while reducing opportunities
for fraudulent and collusive behavior.
96. Several recently prepared projects that were assessed to have high risk developed
anticorruption plans and/or measures to improve transparency and participation in the
implementation stage. Because clients see the Bank’s fiduciary control mechanisms for
investment projects as effective tools to control corruption, the team will continue to
work measures at a project level.16 The approach paper and adopted actions will be
assessed and updated as the team gains more experience on the effectiveness o f proposed
measures. An annual stock-taking exercise based on ISRs and integrated fiduciary
supervisions will be used to update the paper.
97. As each project addresses the fiduciary concerns based on the assessment o f the
governance environment, the financial management and procurement team also has
enhanced the work to build the capacity o f project counterparts and government agencies
l62005

Client Survey.

44

in managing the fiduciary risk. The PER and Integrated Fiduciary Assessment Paper o f
2005 identified in detail which improvements and additional work need to be undertaken.
A number o f actions have already been taken based on the Assessment Paper, and the
team continues to provide TA in both areas.

98. IFC’s investment portfolio in Vietnam consists o f 12 projects with a total
commitment o f US$97 million as o f December 31, 2006. The financial sector accounts
for the largest share with 41 percent o f the total. The quality o f the portfolio i s sound and
has shown an improvement over the last year or so. On the loan side, the level o f NPL is
higher than the regional and IFC averages, but this i s driven by one project. The equity
portfolio has the potential to deliver strong capital gains.
C. KNOWLEDGE
PROGRAM

99. Building local capacity through AAA work. The latest client survey recognized
knowledge and technical expertise as one o f the most valuable types o f Bank assistance.
A strong analytical program has been carried out in cooperation with local institutions
participating in domestic policy making. Gradually, the preparation o f core diagnostics
and studies i s being handed over to local research institutions and think-tanks. This active
engagement has enabled the World Bank to align itself behind government-led strategies.
The process has also enhanced the openness o f the domestic policy-making process.
Evidence-based analysis, a strong poverty focus, ample consultation with stakeholders,
and a results orientation have enabled the Bank to support a fblly national planning
document. This country-ownership approach will continue to be implemented during the
CPS period. As discussed above, the program i s geared to (a) enhance the understanding
o f underlying issues, (b) strengthen the evidence-based policy dialogues, (c) pilot new
modalities and approaches, and (d) provide the TA necessary to improve the systems in
each o f the pillars. Based on the strong record o f the previous CAS period, AAA is
integrated into each pillar to help government address the critical constraints to achieve
the SEDP objectives.
100. The Bank team will cluster the M A program around the main CPS objectives
under the four pillars to bring out the synergies and increase the impact. Taken
together, the activities in the clusters equal a comprehensive set o f second-generation
reforms. They improve public and private resource management and mobilization, lay the
foundation for a system o f universal social protection, and strengthen natural resource
management (NRM). The activities will be organized around a series o f annual Vietnam
Development Reports, prepared jointly with donors and government, which will cover
key topics under the four pillars.

101. IFC technical assistance in Vietnam will continue primarily through MPDF during
2007, then via a fbrther five-year multi donor trust fund from January 2008 to December
2012. The estimated budget for the new five-year plan i s around US$50 million for the
three Mekong countries, o f which about 40 percent will be allocated for Vietnam. The
proposed technical assistance for Vietnam focuses on: (i)improving the business
enabling environment; (ii)increasing access finance; (iii)improving infrastructure
services; (iv) promoting sustainable business practices; and (v) value-added services to
45

firms. Business Enabling Environment i s expected to account for the large share o f the
program, followed by Access to Finance and Value addition to Firms.
Table 6.1 Vietnam’s Major Knowledge Products
illar 1: Improving Business Environment

Pillar 3: Strengthening Noturol Resowes ond Environmental Management

Technicol Assirtonce to the Stote Bonk o f Vietnam (IDF, Bonk AAA)

Strotegic E n v i i w w n t AnalysislCowtry E n v i r m n t Analysis

Financial Sector Development

Forest k c t o r SupportlPERIForost Policy/Low Enforcement ad S o v e m r

Copitol Moi,kets Monitoring ad Assistme

A m 1 E n v i r m t Monitor Report

-

.

Vietnm Development Report Copitol Mobiliiotion (FVOB)

Vietnan Development Report Natural Reraurccr (FVlO)

Post W T O Accession (WBI, MDTF finoncod studies)

Sofegwrd Strengthening for Energy Progrun

Investment Climote Assessment/Privoto Sector Dovelopment

Woter Resources Sector Review

Infrastructure Strotegy/Reloted rubsector studies & T A

L m d Policy DiologwlNPn-Movket Lmd Allocotion/Lmd md Credit in Vietnan

Privote Public Portnership for Energy, T r M c p r t , Wotor. (PPIAF, AAAs)

W B I Strotogic E n v i r m t o l Assessment

-

Min. o f T r o n s p r t SOE Reform irsws
Vietnan Food Sofety ad Agriculturol k o l t h Action Plm

Pillar 4: Strengthening bovernonce

Skills for browth & Tertiory Educotion

Vietnan Development Report: R&op

for 2010 (FVO7)

Vietnm k v e l o p n t Report: b o v e i m e (FV06)

illar 2: Strongthening Sociol Inclusion

Corporoto 60vemtnce

-

Povei*ty ond b c i o l Impoct Assessment

W B I Porlicmontory md Modio Prograns

Countivy Sociol Analysis

Notional Policy A c h y Support (IDF. W B I )

C0unti.y bender Assessmant/bondor Portfolio Anolysir

Public Expenditure Review/Integroted FidKiory Assessment

Vietnam Devalopment Report Sociol Sectoi. Issues (FV09)

T A on Public Sector, Accounting S t d r d s , Stote Treowry & Stote Audit o f Vietthsn

Social Security Reform/Sociol Protection

T A for Public Procurement (Implementation o f Low, I D F far Public Procurement M a )

Heolth Irrw P o p

Copocity Building Progran for M P I ad ODA Mcnogoment

-

Anti-Corruption Diagnostic Study/Evolving Relationship between the bov’t o l d Society

D. PARTNERSHIPS, AID EFFECTIVENESS,
AND PARTICIPATION
102. Partnership: Building on past successes. Vietnam’s success in forming wellcoordinated and effective development partnerships i s w e l l known and has been
highlighted in the two High-Level Forums on Aid Effectiveness held in Rome and Paris.
Vietnam receives over $3 billion a year from more than 40 bilateral and multilateral
donor institutions and NGOs (Annex 6). Aligning ODA more closely with the
government’s development strategy and results framework, while improving the
country’s legal and regulatory framework for ODA, will continue to be a priority during
the CPS period. At the same time, the current partnership architecture will need to evolve
in response to the new ODA framework and government’s strengthened capacity.
103. The Bank Group will continue to serve important coordinating and catalytic
roles for ODA to Vietnam. The Bank and IFC will continue to co-chair with
government the biannual Consultative Group and Business Forum meetings, which have
become important vehicles for policy dialogue among government, private sector, and
donor community. The Bank will also continue to lead the PRSC process, facilitate multidonor credits and analytical products, and assist government in maintaining the O D A
partnership working groups.

46

104. Partnership will continue to be the basis o f all types of Bank activities. Joint
financing o f investment projects has been the strength o f the Vietnam portfolio. At a
project level, more than a half o f the Bank’s ongoing investment projects have cofinancing arrangements with other development partners. Initiatives such as the Public
Financial Management Modernization, Education for All, and Forestry Partnership all
benefited from multi-donor support.”
105. When multiple donors support a common initiative, transaction costs are reduced
and policy coherence i s enhanced. As noted in a recent QAG review, the Vietnam AAA
program also made a substantial contribution to the development o f an understanding o f
the workings o f the Vietnamese economy and the reform process among the larger donor
community, NGOs, and professional and academic communities. This deepened
understanding could not have been achieved without the participation o f other donor
partners. Core diagnostic studies, such as the PEWIFA o f FY05, have become joint
products o f the government and donors. The Bank will continue to work with other
partners in deepening the policy dialogue with the government and delivering the
operational programs.
106. The PRSC has evolved as a partnership platform for policy dialogues. From 4
donors co-financing the first PRSC in 2002, the fifth PRSC has mobilized not only 11 cofinanciers with a total o f more than $120 million but also 19 donors actively involved in
the policy dialogues.’* The active participation by major donors for the country brought
coherence to the reform process and strengthened the content o f policy actions, especially
o n cross-sectoral issues such as setting public sector accounting standards and
simplifying administrative procedures.
107. The Bank will also continue to strengthen its partnership with civil society.
The Vietnam Innovation Day (VID), a localized “Development Market Place” organized
by the Bank, has proven a successful mechanism for engaging in dialogues with
emerging NGOs in Vietnam. To date, four V I D s have been organized on themes such as
HIV/AIDS and disability, presenting 146 awards to 122 local NGOs for their activities. A
tracer study i s to be conducted with the assistance o f SFR’s Global Market Place team.
The Small Grants program also provides an excellent opportunity to reach out to
grassroots groups working on development issues. A network o f Public Information
Centers and a speakers’ program at the Centers by Hanoi-based sector specialists have
been used well to understand academic communities’ issues.

” The donors supporting Vietnam’s efforts to improve its PFM are Canada, Denmark, European
Commission, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and United Kingdom. Education initiatives
involve Belgium, Canada, the Netherlands, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. Forestry i s supported
by the EC, Finland, GEF, and the Netherlands.

’*

The 19 donors are ADB, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, EC, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland,
Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and UNDP.

47

Box 6.1 Aid Coordination in Vietnam

Vietnam i s one of the major recipients o f O D A in recent years, reflecting a global trend towards
supporting good performers. Around 25 bilateral and 15 multilateral development partners operate
actively in Vietnam. Between 1994 and 2005, donors pledged around $30 billion in aid, and the
Consultative Group meeting in December 2006 saw a record amount o f pledges o f more than $4.4
billion. Japan i s the leading bilateral donor, and its assistance, combined with that o f the Bank and
A D B account for close to 70% o f ODA. The donors’ assistance programs cover a wide range o f issues
from poverty reduction to public administration reform, depending o n each donor’s development
assistance objectives and comparative advantage (see Annex 6 for donor activities and Bank
collaboration).
Vietnam, however, i s not an aid dependent country. Annual ODA commitments only account for
around 6% o f GDP. This position has enabled Vietnam to move quickly towards a mature aid
relationship, based on strong country leadership. The Government i s open to policy ideas and good at
sourcing relevant contributions from development partners, while donors have recognized the
importance o f providing policy advice and technical input that i s supportive o f the Government’s
development goals.
To coordinate policy dialogue, an elaborate structure o f partnership has been built between the
Government and donors o n a wide range o f issues, with the CG meeting at the top o f the structure.
Based on the Comprehensive Development Framework Initiative, more than 20 Government-donorNGO partnership groups are now actively working on thematic issues. To arrive at a holistic view on
development, 13 donors are working together with the Bank and participate in the policy dialogue with
the Government that leads to the annual Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRCSs). The Partnership
Group on Aid Effectiveness, jointly co-chaired by the Government and one donor representative o n a
rotating basis focuses on the implementation o f the Hanoi Core Statement. The Five Banks (ADB,
AFD, JBIC, K F W and the World Bank) support the Government in improving i t s systems for
procurement, financial management, environmental and social safeguards with a view to moving
gradually to a jointly acceptable quality o f Vietnam’s own systems. Furthermore, an increasing number
of analytical works, including the annual Vietnam Development Report, the Public Expenditure
Review, the Country Environment and Gender Assessments have been conducted jointly with donors
and the Government.

0
0

0
0

Poverty Working Group/Task Force

0

Education Sector Group

Partnership to Support the National
Targeted Programs

0

Forest Sector Partnership

0

Gender Action Partnership
International Support Group for the
Environment

0

Natural Disaster Mitigation
Partnership
Agriculture and Rural Development
International Support Group
Transport Partnership Group

People’s Participation Working Group

0

Working Group on SOE Reform and
Equitization

0

0

SME Partnership Group

0

0

Financial Sector Working Group

0

Trade Reform Working Group

0

Health Partnership Group

Public Administration Reform
Partnership

Partnership Group on Rural Water
Supply and Sanitation

Partnership Group o n Aid
Effectiveness

0

0

Viet N a m Urban Forum

0

48

Legal Reforms Partnership
Public Finance Management
Partnership

108. Trust Fund support to the country program. Vietnam has been one o f the
largest recipients o f World Bank Trust Funds, enjoying over $300 million o f TF
portfolio. TF activities have been well integrated in the country’s overall IDA operations
and AAA activities. Aside from co-financing investment and development policylending, TFs will continue to benefit the country in three major ways. First, they will
augment the resources o f the AAA program. Second, they will continue to serve as a tool
for advancing critical policy dialogues with government. Third, TFs will continue to help
piloting activities that the government otherwise would be hesitant to implement. OutputBased Aid (OBA) pilot programs to improve water supply mechanisms and a JSDF
program for Early Childhood Care and Development implemented by an NGO are good
examples and will be continued.
109. Harmonization: Hanoi Core Statement. The Vietnamese government has taken
strong leadership in embracing the global aid effectiveness agenda. Recognizing from an
early stage the potential complexities o f ODA management processes and faced with
rapidly increasing ODA flows, the government and donors have built strong partnerships
to more effectively use O D A funds and to reduce the management burden on the
country’s administration. Following the 2005 Paris Declaration, the government and
donors agreed on a set o f localized commitments to improve the effectiveness o f ODA
delivered to Vietnam. These commitments were formally established in the Hanoi Core
Statement adopted by the Mid-Term C G Meeting in 2005 and approved by the Prime
Minister. The statement establishes 14 concrete targets to be achieved by 2010 in areas
such as donor alignment, harmonization, and simplification; managing for results; and
capacity building (table 6.2). Annex 5 takes stock o f Bank achievements to date o n
meeting these targets and the actions required to reach them by the end o f the CPS
period. The statement will guide the Bank’s harmonization work during the CPS period.

49

Table 6.2 H a n o i Core Statement

I

Ownership

I

1. Five Year Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP)
targets achieved

SEDP targets achieved

I

Alimment
v

I

2. Donor assistance strategies are aligned with the SEDP
and related to national, regional, provincial, and sector
strategies

100% of donors aligned

100% donors' assistance
strategy aligned to SEDP

3. Donors strengthen GoV capacity b y avoiding parallel
PMUs

N o parallel PMUs

111Parallel PMUs
(incomplete list)

4. GoV integrates capacity building objectives in the
SEDP and related national regional, provincial, and sector
plans; and leads comprehensive capacity-building
programs w i t h coordinated donor support

100% of aid for capacity building per
se delivered through GoV-led and
coordinated programs

84% by value of O D A

5. Donors progressively rely on the GoV's procurement
system once mutually agreed standards have been
attained

50% of aid flow and 50% of donors
using GoV procurement systems

32% b y value
23% b y number

6a. Donors progressively rely on GoV's strengthened
PFM and accounting systems once mutually agreed
standards have been attained

50% of aid flows and 50% of donors
using the national budgeting,
financial reporting, and auditing
system

27% b y value
6% b y number

6b. GoV publishes timely, transparent, and reliable
reports on budget planning and execution

50% of GoV budget accounted for
and audited w i t h systems that met
INTOSAI standards

27.7% O D A audited

7. Donors enhance the predictability of future aid

75% of aid disbursed according to
agreed schedules in annual or
multiyear frameworks

69% by value (recorded b y
GoV)

8a. GoV and donors improve environmental safeguards

9% by number
61.7% w i t h additional
safeguards
0.4% b y number
78.3% w i t h additional
safeguards

30% of EIA used GoV system

8b. GoV and donors improve social safeguards (SIA)

30% of SIA used GoV system

Harmonization and simplification
9. Fewer, better core diagnostic (CFAA, PER, CPAR) and
country analytical reviews of Vietnam's development
needs

100% used Core Diagnostic Work
75% of Country Analytical Work
shared

80% CDW used
32% C A W shared

10. Common project cycle management tools agreed and
used throughout the project/program cycle (planning,
design, implementation, M&E, and reporting)

50% of donc-- **=;-- common
project/program cycle tools

N o t enough data

11.GoV and donors increasingly use program-based
avvroaches

75% of aid i s national or sector
urogram based

~~~~

~~

~~

12. Decentralization and delegation of authority to
country level i s maximized for each donor

uuAA.6

I

34% b y value

~~

75% of aid interventions are
managed at country level

60% b y value

Scoring based on OECDDAC
methodology

N o t surveyed

Annual assessments

First Independent Monitoring
scheduled for l s t Q of 07

Managing for results
13. Results framework developed and used to assess the
performance of the SEDP and sector program

Mutual accountability
14. Periodic mutual assessment of progress in
implementing agreed commitments on aid effectiveness

VII. MANAGING
RISKS
A. SLOW-DOWN
I N IMPLEMENTATION OF STRUCTURAL REFORMS

110. Since the last CAS, progress on the economic reform agenda has been generally
good. Vietnam’s accession to WTO and the concomitant need for substantial behind-theborder reforms give reason for cautious optimism. However, performance in other areas,
particularly SOE and financial sector reform, has been below expectations, despite the
recent adoption o f an ambitious banking reform road map.
111. The existence o f contingent liabilities associated with SOCB reform i s a major
additional risk to medium-term fiscal sustainability. Scenarios presented in the 2006 D S A
demonstrated how, even under the optimistic assumptions o f stepped-up banking reform
and declining credit growth, SOCBs’ capital shortfalls could increase the public debt
stock to almost 70 percent o f GDP in the medium term. If the increase in the deficit were
financed in large part through commercial borrowing, and/or if delays in SOE and SOCB
reforms along with heavy recourse by these sectors to international capital markets
eventually were to lead G o V to assume responsibility for servicing these debts, the risks
to medium-term external and public sector debt sustainability could worsen considerably.

112. In the CPS period, the Bank will continue to closely monitor SOCB reform.
Intensive, targeted support to implement the banking reform road map through the PRSC
program, investment projects, and TA i s a key part o f the operational program. Slippages
eventually would lead to lower support levels, both through the PRSC program and via
the CPIA triggers.
B. ADDRESSING FIDUCIARY
CONCERNS
113, Future Vietnamese development will be threatened if the required reforms in public
administration, legal development, and corporate governance are not firmly carried out. I t
is encouraging that G o V has intensified improving transparency and accountability in the
allocation and use o f public funds, and combating corruption over the past years with a
new preventive approach that complements past punitive actions. However, if progress
falters or does not improve the perception o f corruption, the lack o f progress will affect
not only the country’s development but also the relationship between the Bank and the
government.

114. To help support the government implement the encouraging new initiatives
discussed above, the Bank will continue to address these fiduciary concerns through a
three-pronged approach: (1) direct support for the government’s anticomption measures
with a better grasp o f the nature and extent o f corruption in Vietnam, (b) strengthening
the country systems o f planning, public financial management, and procurement through
PRSCs, PERs, and targeted investment projects; and (c) strengthening fiduciary
arrangements for individual projects. In cooperation with key donors in this field,

51

enhanced support will also be provided to the government to strengthen the oversight role
o f the National Assembly and the government Inspectorate. Success will improve
citizens’ ability to complain and enable a greater role for the media.

c. PREPARINGFOR EXTERNAL
AND DOMESTIC
SHOCKS AND/OR UNCERTAINTIES
115. Despite a number o f shocks facing the economy, Vietnam has fared remarkably
well over the past several years. S A R S , avian flu, and several major natural disasters
struck the country during the past three years; yet, the country showed great resilience to
these extraordinary events.

116. The Bank worked closely with the government to respond to these crises, including
through the Avian Influenza Emergency Recovery Loan and the Natural Disaster Risk
Management Adaptable Program Lending (APL). Both support a comprehensive risk
mitigation approach to natural hazards. The latter i s piloting a post-disaster contingent
disbursement facility that would enable rapid, efficient support in the, event o f a major
disaster. While the government’s awareness o f the need to prepare for natural disasters
and other shocks i s well advanced, the Bank, in cooperation with other development
partners, will continue to advise Vietnam on how best to prioritize risk mitigation and
risk preparedness activities and to use the relevant risk management tools at i t s disposal.

52

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

M

U

E

8
n

E

A

A

A

a

u

2a
E

Z
5

E

0

B
B
Y

8

E

N

3

3

CI

0

v)
Q)

04

E

4

A

A

IA

I

A

A

..

A

A

I

I

A

A

..

A

A

I

I

I

I

.

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

\

A

B

.n

A

A

A

4

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A A

A

A

A

e

g
2

t
0

8

5

8

3

e

z.3
xg

li
9 .e

e

.s
PI
2
Y

s

*

z
t

k

-

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 1 of47

VIETNAM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FYO3-06
COMPLETION REPORT
Executive Summary
Introduction
In September 2002, the Vietnam Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for FY03 to 06 was
endorsed by the Board. A Progress Report (PR) was prepared and discussed by the
Board in February 2004. This completion report evaluates the progress under the CAS
and CAS PR.

CAS Objectives:

The CAS and CAS PR had three broad objectives in support o f the country’s
Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (CPRGS):
Support Vietnam’s completion o f the transition to a market economy by assisting
Government advance its integration into the world economy, reform state owned
enterprises and financial institutions, and create a level playing field between all
business, independent from ownership structures;
0
Enhance equitable, inclusive and sustainable development by assisting Government to
improve the livelihoods o f disadvantaged people, develop lagging areas, promote
sustainable use o f natural resources and ensure that basic social services are
accessible and affordable for the poor; and
0
Promote good governance by assisting the Government modernize the public
administration, improve public financial management and establish a contemporary
legal framework.
Country Outcomes
Vietnam’s overall development achievements have been remarkable. The economy,
driven by rapid export growth and private sector development, grew by 7.8% in real
terms annually during 2002-2005. Integration with the world economy was strengthened
significantly with exports accounting for 61% o f GDP in 2005, up from 47% in 2001, and
private sector employment increasing five-fold between 2001 and 2005. WTO accession
negotiations progressed more swiftly than expected and accession is targeted for 2006.
Macroeconomic policies were sound throughout the period.

Supported by the strong macro economic performance and successfbl implementation of
policies to reduce poverty, the proportion o f people living below the international poverty
line dropped from 29% in 2002 to 19.5% in 2004. Other indicators o f human
development, including primary education enrollment and infant mortality improved as
well. Vietnam has adopted its own and more ambitious version o f the Millenium
Development Goals, Yet a number o f these localized Millenium Development Goals will
be attained even before 20 15.

1

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 2 o f 4 7

The economic transition during the period was accompanied by an institutional overhaul.
Public financial management was significantly strengthened in terms o f information
disclosure and public participation in the decision making processes after the
promulgation o f the revised L a w on State Budget. The adoption o f the CPRGS approach
in the new Socio Economic Development Plan (SEDP) has established the quality o f
growth and i t s relation to poverty reduction as key elements o f the Government’s five
year plan. Legal and regulatory policy frameworks, including for energy, water and
forestry, as well as for investment and enterprises have been strengthened. The fight
against corruption also gained momentum.
Many challenges s t i l l remain, however. Although a promising and ambitious roadmap
for banking reform has recently been approved by the Government, the reform o f State
Owned Commercial Banks (SOCBs) and State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) proceeded at a
slower pace than anticipated at the time o f the CAS approval. Disaggregated data on
’ poverty reduction show uneven achievements across regions and ethnicity, with ethnic
minorities on average experiencing both slower rate o f poverty reduction and deeper
poverty. While new social protection policies to improve access to affordable social
services for the poor were designed during the CAS period, the implementation has been
uneven.
Evaluation o f overall CAS performance and the Bank’s Contribution to Country
outcomes

The team evaluates the Bank performance to be satisfactory. The focus o f the CAS,
design o f the overall program and instruments utilized for interventions were appropriate.
While quantifying the attribution o f donor assistance to particular country outcomes i s
arguable and difficult. Vietnam’s spectacular achievements are first and foremost a
product o f i t s own resources, institutions and policies. However, based o n independent
reviews by IEG, PREM, and QAG as well as the Country Team itself, i t is the overall
assessment that the Bank contributed well to the country outcomes. Noteworthy was the
impact o f AAA activities that paved the way for advancing important structural reforms,
including trade liberalization and public financial management, and supporting the
development o f enabling legal and regulatory frameworks for energy, land and water.
IFC played a catalytic role in addressing private sector issues through demand-driven
advisory services, research, and capacity building, including establishing the Bank
Training Center (BTC), which has helped train some 7,000 participants from joint-stock
banks.
The PRSC process was associated with important policy breakthroughs as well, including
separation o f policy and commercial lending within SOCBs through the establishment of
Development Assistance Fund and Bank for Social Policies, increase in education
spending and, the agreement o n a roadmap for banking reform.
Bank financed investments projects contributed to achieving poverty and social
objectives, by improving access to markets, assets and public services for lagging regions
and for the urban poor, and alleviating growth bottlenecks. Rural electrification,

2

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 3 o f 47

improved agricultural sustainability, and higher quality o f education are examples o f the
Bank’s impact through investment credits that were closely linked to path breaking AAA
activities. I F C investments and advisory services have complemented IDA efforts to
strengthen the banking sector and support private sector development.
Yet there i s room for improvement: The slow implementation o f investment projects in
Vietnam is a serious challenge. Significant improvement o f disbursement in some
projects has taken place but overall the disbursement rate i s lagging behind the regional
target. More concerted efforts by the Country team are also needed to improve the
disappointing disbursement performance. Also, the Bank’s team was too optimistic in
estimating the timeline for structural reforms and implementing investment projects.
On the positive side, the focus on adjusting the strategy and recalibrating the lending
pipeline in the CAS PR, however, was effective to ensure a substantial program delivery,
commensurate with Vietnam’s increased IDA allocation. I t has also helped prepare for a
smooth transition to the next CAS period.
Lessons for future CAS
Strong country ownership of the development agenda and program should
continue to be the driving principle for all Bank activities. Institutional and policy
reforms are only sustainable when the country fully commits itself and decides to
pursue them. Consensus building within Vietnam i s imperative in this regard, but the
Bank can nurture this process through carefully timed and targeted advice. Policies
that are supported by the new five year plan for 2006-2010 and met with widespread
consensus during the consultation process should be supported and facilitated by the
Bank’s new Country Assistance Strategy.
Partnership with the Government, national stakeholders and other donors i s the
strength o f the Banks’s country program. The team will need to preserve this strength
and continue to deepen and widen these partnerships.

The portfolio i s increasing in line with the increased IDA envelope for Vietnam.
While the portfolio i s s t i l l young, i t will undergo significant changes during the next
CAS period. The implementation o f the existing portfolio will be the single most
important determinant o f CAS outcomes during the next CAS period and deserves as
strong a focus in the new strategy as the development o f new lending activities.
Explicit Results Framework to link Bank activities to the Government’s
Objectives and facilitate selectivity. The absence o f an explicit results framework
in the CAS made evaluations o f i t s effectiveness difficult . In support o f Vietnam’s
poverty strategy, the new country assistance strategy should use a result framework
within the strategy timeframe, based on the Government’s monitoring and evaluation
framework.

3

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 4 o f 47

A much stronger emphasis needs to be placed on building capacity o f the
counterpart entities to manage investment projects systematically. Strengthening
Vietnam’s investment approval and implementation processes will be critical for
improving the efficiency and effectiveness o f aid delivered to Vietnam. This will be
in line with the Hanoi Core Statement o n Aid Effectiveness, a localized version o f the
Paris Declaration.

4

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 5 o f 47

VIETNAM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FYO3-06
COMPLETION REPORT

Country: Vietnam
Date o f CAS: August 5,2002
Date o f Progress Report: January, 2004
Period Covered by the CAS Completion Report: July 2002 to June 2006
CAS Completion Report completed by:
Soren Baunsgaard, Country Officer, EACVQ
Keiko Sato, Country Program Coordinator, E A C V Q

I.Introduction
This report represents a self-assessment o f the World Bank’s contribution to
Vietnam’s economic and social development during the last CAS period (FY2003 to
2006). Part I1o f this report focuses on the longer term strategic goals o f the country, Part
I11 on CAS outcomes, and Part I V on Bank performance in terms o f quality o f products
and services, portfolio performance and country dialogue and aid coordination.

W h i l e the report i s a self-assessment, i t draws much from conclusions o f
independent assessments by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG), Quality Assurance
Group (QAG), Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Anchor Unit’ and Country
Portfolio Performance Reviews, a Country Program Review, and Joint Portfolio
Performance Reviews2.
11. Vietnam’s Strategic Goals

Vietnam’s strategic goals were laid out in i t s Comprehensive Poverty Reduction
and Growth Strategy (CPRGS), which was approved by the Prime Minister in M a y 2002.
The CPRGS translated Vietnam’s Socio-Economic Development Strategy o f 200 1-2005
into concrete measures and programs and was the country’s Poverty Reduction Support
Paper. I t was endorsed by the Boards o f IMF and the World Bank in July 2002.
The CPRGS was structured around three pillars:

1.
2.

High growth through a transition to a market economy, which requires firm
implementation o f the structural reform agenda.
An equitable, socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable pattern o f
growth. This requires implementation o f a comprehensive program in support
o f poverty reduction, provision o f services for poor and lagging regions and
protection o f the environment.

’ PREM Anchor Unit made an assessment o f Vietnam PRSCs operations.
Joint Portfolio Performance Review i s conducted jointly by five development banks; ADB, JBIC, AFD,
KfW and WB on an annual basis.

5

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 6 o f 47

3.

Adoption o f a modem administration, legal and governance system. This
requires a system whereby public finance and institutions are operated in
transparent and predictable manner, public institutions and public are
governed by law and are accounted for their undertakings.

The CPRGS was expanded in December 2003 to address issues related to large
scale infrastructure. An important feature o f the CPRGS was the use o f localized
Millennium Development Goals to develop a system o f national-level indicators to
monitor and evaluate progress in implementing the Strategy. The localized MDGs, the
Vietnam Development Goals (VDGs), which in some cases are more ambitious than the
MDGs, are attached as Annex 1.
A. Vietnam’s poverty reduction and growth achievements

Vietnam’s macro-economic performance has been remarkably strong with an
average annual real GDP growth rate o f 7.8% during 2002-2005, single-digit inflation
rates, and prudent fiscal performance, despite several exogenous shocks including the
outbreak o f Avian Influenza, S A R S and o i l price increases which provoked a sharp rise
in prices in 2004 and 2005. In per capita terms, this corresponds to an annual GDP
growth rate o f 6.1% between 2001-2005. The sustained economic growth has been driven
by rapid export growth, particularly to the US, and buoyant domestic activities, especially
investments. Industry has been the fastest growing economic sector, accompanied by
rapid domestic private manufacturing growth.
Supported by the strong macro-economic performance and active pro-poor policy
measures taken by the Government, the poverty rate has dropped dramatically, from 58%
o f the population in 1993 to 29% in 2002 and further down to 19.5% in 2004. The fast
poverty reduction during the CAS period is in line with the acceleration o f economic
growth, and might also reflect the increasing size o f budget transfers to poorer provinces,
greater emphasis o n remote areas in the public investment programs, and the rise in the
world prices o f agricultural export commodities such as coffee and rice. Other indicators
o f human development, including infant mortality rate and primary education enrollment,
also suggest considerable progress. A number o f VDGs are expected to be attained
before the target date, including reducing the percentage o f poor and hungry households,
improving education quality, reducing child mortality and improving governance for
poverty reduction.
Poverty reduction continues to be widespread across the country. Living
standards have increased at a similar pace in urban and rural areas. In the past six years,
rural poverty has decreased at 3.4 percentage points per year compared to 3.0 points per
year for the country as a whole. However, with rural poverty now at 25%, compared to
4% for urban areas, poverty in Vietnam i s s t i l l overwhelmingly rural. And while there has
been progress across all eight regions, the poverty rate remains much higher in the North
West (59%), the Central Highlands (33%) and the North Central Coast (32%), compared
to the South East (5%) and the Red River Delta (12%).

6

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 7 o f 4 7

There has been little or no increase in inequality according to standard measures.
The Gini index, at 0.37, has not varied since 2002 and is only slightly higher than in 1998
when i t stood at 0.35. The ratio that compares the consumption expenditures o f the
richest and poorest quintiles o f the population has increased very slightly between 2002
and 2004. In 2002, the share o f expenditures made by the richest twenty percent o f the
population was 6.03 times the expenditures made by the poorest twenty percent. In 2004,
this ratio stands at 6.27.
These impressive achievements in reducing poverty and the absence o f striking
increases in inequality sit alongside slower progress for an important sub-group o f the
population: ethnic minorities. Poverty for both Kinh and ethnic minority populations has
fallen steadily over the ten year period between 1993 and 2004. Progress has been more
rapid for the Kinh and Chinese populations, however. In 2004, 14 percent o f the Kinh
and Chinese people were living in poverty, compared to 61 percent o f ethnic minority
people. Though accounting for only 13 percent o f the total population, ethnic minorities
now constitute 39 percent o f the poor. Their poverty is deeper, too, than that o f other
groups. The poverty gap for ethnic minorities is 19.2, compared to only 2.6 for Kinh
people

The available data, however, underline the need for accelerated progress to meet
the ambitious milestones for indicators such as the rate o f infection o f HIV/AIDS.
H I V / A I D S indicators actually deteriorated between 1998 and 2002 before starting to
improve in recent years, partially due to more effective policy responses.
O n the structural reform side, there has been significant progress in the areas o f
trade liberalization, private sector development and public expenditure management.
The progress on trade liberalization has been most impressive with the ratio o f exports to
GDP now at 61% from 47% in 2001, and W T O accession expected by end-2006. The
development o f the private sector accelerated further, with the share o f private sector
exports in non-oil exports now at 77%, up from 44% in 2001, and with the private sector
employing 2.8 million people, up from 0.6 million in 2001. The progress on public
financial management has also been significant with notable improvements in
transparency, planning and management o f public finance. The reform o f the financial
system and the SOEs, however, has been slower than expected. Government’s recent
adoption o f an ambitious roadmap for accelerated banking sector reform i s providing
additional reform momentum.
Details o f the country’s achievements under each CAS Pillar are discussed in
Section 111.

111. Country Assistance Strategy Progress and Outcomes
A. Strategic Directions o f the CAS

The strategy laid-out in the CAS, with poverty reduction as the overarching
objective, organized the Bank Group’s support to the CPRGS around three main pillars:

7

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 8 o f 47

(i)

Completing the transition to a market economy.

(ii) Enhancing equitable, socially inclusive, and sustainable development and
(iii) Adopting a modem public administration, legal and governance system
The CAS was designed to help Vietnam attain the Vietnam Development Goals
set forward by the Government to monitor and evaluate progress in implementing the
CPRGS. Out o f the total set o f 11 goals and 32 targets o f the VDGs, the CAS focused in
particular on 5 goals and 10 targets as specified in the “Core CAS Monitoring
Benchmarks”, measuring longer-term country-level development outcomes. Integrated in
the CAS was assistance to improve the statistical capacity o f the Vietnamese Government
in monitoring and evaluating the VDGs. Partially as a result o f this program, data i s
available to assess progress in attaining the CPRGS goals over the CAS period. The CAS,

however, however, was not results-based and did not specify the results-chain from Bank
specific interventions through lower-level CAS outcomes to the attainment o f CPRGS
goalsq3 The country team, therefore, reconstructed country level outcomes from the
CAS sub-themes, the core CAS monitoring benchmarks, the sector priorities listed in the
CAS, as well as subsequent PRSC documents. An attempt to assess progress on
achieving these outcomes4 and the Bank’s contribution is made below based on policy
milestones and intermediate outcome^.^ However, these outcomes have obviously been
affected by many other factors than only Bank assistance.

B, CAS Pillar I:Completing the Transition to a Market Economy.

0

0
0

The following broad country-level outcomes were extracted from the 2002 CAS:
Strengthen the integration with the world economy
Strengthen the capacity o f the financial sector to allocate credit on a sound basis
Reform SOE’s to strengthen their efficiency and competitiveness
Allow the development o f a vibrant domestic private sector by establishing a
more level playing field and strengthening the corporate governance and
corporate social responsibility

The CAS did present the CPRGS policy matrix which laid-out a comprehensive set o f policy actions, t o
which the proposed new CAS-interventions were aligned. The relevancy o f the actions in the CPRGS
policy matrix for the shorter-term results o f Bank operations were not in a l l cases clear. In addition, n o
systematic approach to the presentation o f the CPRGS policy matrix was taken related to the objectives and
expected C A S outcomes. In the main text o f the C A S document, a three-pronged approach was identified,
while the C A S program matrix showed 28 different areas o f work with more than 60 different indicators
not categorized according to the three C A S pillars, nor prioritized, embedded in a hierarchic framework, o r
linked to specific assistance instruments.
4
Progress ranked as “highly satisfactory”, “satisfactory”, “partially satisfactory”, o r “unsatisfactory”.
Implicit in t h i s assessment is the understanding that many activities are likely t o contribute to multiple
outcomes in several pillars, that activities support each other, and that each outcome i s likely to be
influenced by more than one instrument. A detailed account o f the results-chain arising f r o m WB activities
i s presented in Annex 2

8

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 9 o f 47

The 2002 CAS was relatively sparse on quantitative indicators and targets for the
country outcomes under Pillar I,
but referred to more detailed targets that were laid down
in the PRSC-program. Table 1 captures the development country outcomes that could be
extracted from the PRSC-documentation, based on existing Government strategies. The
2002 CAS also referred to a set o f intermediary policy milestones covering trade
liberalization, banking reform, state owned enterprise reform, and private sector
development, drawn from the three-year program 2001-2003 established in the PRSC 1
Letter o f Development Policy and the PRSC2 program document.
Country Outcome: Strengthen the integration with the world economy
Outcome performance. Highly satisfactory progress towards the outcome has
been achieved, with solid progress on most o f the indicators in Table 1. There has been
significantly greater openness to trade, with the ratio o f exports to GDP increasing from
47% in 2001 to 61% in 2005, surpassing the target set for 2006, and also with
substantially higher share o f manufactured products and private sector exports in total
exports, while not yet reaching the very ambitious targets set for 2006. The Government
locked in i t s intention to create a more open and competitive economy by implementing
i t s commitments under the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), and the United States
Bilateral Trade Agreement (USBTA). The commitment o f the Government has remained
strong with the declared objective to j o i n the WTO as early as possible. With all bilateral
negotiations now concluded, accession i s expected by October 2006. The accession will
require determined and comprehensive economic, legal and institutional behind the
border reforms.
Bank contribution. As the WTO-accession became a cornerstone o f
Government’s economic and structural reform, the Bank Group increased its support, as
compared to what was expected at the time o f the 2002 CAS, through the PRSC-program
and a variety o f AAA work. The assistance program was provided in close partnership
with other active donors, including the European Commission, Japan and the USA. The
Bank provided comprehensive analytical support to the Government in establishing and
implementing a roadmap for W T O accession, with a list o f specific policy actions and a
timetable for implementation, and strategic and analytical advice to assess the
consequences o f various policy choices. A study o f Vietnam’s export policy and
performance, and on transport and trade facilitation was also conducted. The AAA
activities were complemented by a comprehensive set o f training courses and other
learning events by the World Bank Institute (WBI) on the readiness for WTO accession,
as well as trade policy courses for key Ministries and institutes.

As the focus has gradually shifted to implementation rather than design issues, the
Bank also carried out studies assessing the poverty and social impact o f WTO accession.
A Customs Modernization project (FY06) was prepared to help Vietnam develop a
modem customs operation, computerize and automate the custom procedures and
information management systems, and handle anti-fraud measures. Several transportprojects have helped lower the costs o f transport and trade logistics, and contributed to a

9

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 10 o f 47

better utilization of available trade opportunities. Outcomes that the Bank contributed to
include a 9% increase in freight volume between Can Tho and H o Chi Minh City, and
cargo volumes in Can Tho increased by 60%. Finally, the Higher Education project has
been helping strengthen Vietnam’s abilities to integrate with the world economy by
raising the professional skills o f graduates and promoting scientific and technical
knowledge responsive to social and economic development needs, with more than 75%
o f graduates obtaining employment within 12 months o f graduation.

10

0

e

iL
k

t
ic
e

i
c
c

P
4

c
c

6
U
4

c
F

c

E

c

B

53

2

x

Y

fi

8

k

rn
-3

Y

8

Ea

I-

\o

Y

8

Ea
t4

rn

$1

5

8

3

J

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 14 o f 47

Country Outcome: Strengthen the capacity of the financial sector to allocate credit on
a sound basis
Outcome performance. Only partially satisfactory progress towards this
outcome has been achieved, based on the indicators and targets set in the PRSC-program.
O n the positive side, confidence in the banking system in general has grown rapidly, the
payment system has improved considerably, credit to the private sector has increased to
67 percent from 58 percent in 2001, and credit to the State Owned Enterprise (SOE)
sector has fallen substantially. However, the share o f non-performing loans (NPLs)
remains high as a fraction o f total credit, and is growing as a fraction o f GDP, and
assessments based o n I A S audits suggest that the overall quality o f the SOCB portfolio is
not improving. The separation o f preferential and policy-based credit activities from the
SOCBs through the creation o f the Vietnam Bank for Social Policies (VBSP) and the
Development Assistance Fund (DAF), and the announcement o f privatization plans for
all SOCBs were positive steps forward towards strengthening the corporate governance
o f the SOCBs. However, the actual implementation o f several important reform measures
are s t i l l pending, including focusing the role o f the State Bank o f Vietnam (SBV) on
supervision and regulation o f the banking system, timely progress with SOCB
restructuring and corporate governance strengthening, and implementation o f the plan to
allow SOCBs to seek equity participation by reputable international partners.

The recent establishment o f a comprehensive roadmap for banking sector reform
issued through Prime Minister’s Decision in M a y 2006, is a decisive step forward and is
expected to add crucial momentum to the reform process. In particular, the road map
mandates by 2010 the issuance o f new laws for the SBV and Credit Institutions based on
W T O requirements and Base1 Core Principles, the transformation o f the SBV into a
modem central bank charged with the conduct o f market-based monetary policy and
financial sector supervision, clearer separation o f SOCB management and supervision
functions o f the SBV, the equitization o f all SOCBs, and a strengthening o f the
commercial orientation o f the SOCBs.
Bank contribution. Bank intervention focused primarily on the improvement o f
the banking regulation framework and combined technical support with policy measures
embedded in the PRSC program. The Bank provided support on a range o f technical
aspects o f the financial reform program, through two IDA projects aimed at improving
the national payment system, TA to SBV for improving banking supervision, accelerating
SOCB restructuring, and enhancing human resource capacities, as well as TA for the
development o f new regulatory frameworks in key areas, such as asset classification and
prudential norms for banks. The diversification o f the financial sector was supported
through TA on enhancing policy and regulatory capacity within the securities market
regulator.

W h i l e important in i t s own right, the TA program also facilitated the Bank
engaging Government on dialogue on how to accelerate the strategically important
elements o f the reform program. This was done through the PRSC program and targeted
policy advisory and analytical services to key reform stakeholders. A recent result was

14

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 15 o f 47

the development o f strategic plans by the central bank and securities regulator as input
into the preparation o f the new SEDP, which led to the newly adopted banking reform
road map.
I F C has also invested up to U S $ 10.2 million in equity to Saigon Thuong Tin
Commercial Joint Stock Bank (Sacombank), along with an equity investment o f U S $ 5
million to Asia Commercial Bank (ACB). These first investments in the Vietnamese
banking sector have directly contributed to strengthen the capital base o f both banks,
expand their operational capabilities and enabled them to become well-managed
commercial banks according to international standards and best practice. IFC’s Mekong
Project Development Facility (MPDF) has been also active in providing various training
in the banking sector, contributing to this sectoral goal, including through training
programs for local banks and managers through the Bank Training Center (BTC) which
PEP-Mekong helped establish; to date some 7,000 participants have been trained, and in
providing advice to regulators such as the State Bank o f Vietnam on a range o f issues
including credit information systems.

Country outcome: Reform SOE’s to strengthen their efJciency and competitiveness

Outcome performance. Only partially satisfactory progress towards this
outcome has been achieved. The divestiture process has recently been proceeding at a
faster pace than before, and there i s an indication that ownership transformation has been
associated with more substantive restructuring at present, as reflected in the operation o f
the social safety net for redundant SOE workers. While the ambitious numerical targets
o f the SOE restructuring plans o f 2002 have not been met, more than 3,000 SOEs have
been equitized over the last 4 years. Initially, the focus o f equitization had been o n
smaller SOEs, but in 2004 the l i s t sectors where 100 percent state ownership is to be
retained was substantially shortened. Since then, the average size o f the SOEs
transformed has been rising. The equitization process has itself undergone major
improvements with appraisals being conducted by outside evaluators, and the share sales
taking place at market values through auctions at the securities trading centers. The
percentage o f shares sold to non-employees or to outsiders (including foreigners) has also
been increasing. Elimination o f direct subsidies, increased competition in product
markets and, to a certain extent, the hardening o f the budget constraint, also seems to
have been exerting pressure on SOEs to become more competitive, as evidenced in a
survey o f 550 equitized SOEs conduced in 2005, following a similar one undertaken two
years earlier. Almost 90 percent o f those sampled reported an improvement in their
financial performance, starting promptly on equitization, turnover increased 13 percent
on average and pre-tax profits by 9 percent. These gains are higher than those observed
among non-equitized SOEs.

On the other hand, there has been less progress in resolving debts under the Debts
and Assets Trading Company framework and in limiting the provision o f preferential
credit from the SOCBs. Improvement o f the efficiency o f public utilities was also a part
o f the CAS SOE reform program. Here, the adoption o f a new electricity law by the

15

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 16 o f 47

National Assembly in November 2004 was an important step forward, facilitating the
restructuring o f the power sector, including the separation o f generation, transmission and
distribution as well as allowing for greater diversity o f ownership and financing.
Bank contribution. The Bank has assisted the Government with technical
support in a range of areas focused primarily o n the implementation o f the SOEs
divestiture and restructuring program, associated with key policy actions embedded in the
PRSC program. Assistance has been provided through a Government-executed ASEM
hnd project to monitor the implementation o f the SOE transformation plans a successful
project expanding social safety nets for SOE workers displaced by reform, and TA for the
restructuring o f three “general corporations”, financed by DFID. For public utilities, TA
was provided for the preparation o f a reform road map for the power sector Cjointly with
ADB) and preparation o f the new Electricity L a w was supported through several projects
in the energy portfolio, including the Transmission and Distribution, the Rural Energy,
and the System Efficiency Improvement, Equitization and Renewable projects. Through
the Forest Sector Development project, an analytical support has been provided to
understand the issues related to the equitization o f state forest enterprises. Moreover, the
institutional effectiveness and tariff policies o f municipal utilities have improved in
project areas, e.g. with utility companies under the water supply company having halved
the number o f staff hours per thousand connections and increased the water billing by
112 percent.
Country Outcome: Establish a more level playing field to support the development of
vibrant domestic private business and improving corporate governance and corporate
social responsibility
Outcome performance. Satisfactory progress towards this outcome has been
achieved, as compared to the ambitious targets set out in the CPRGSPRSC. The flip side
o f SOE reform, and a key aspect o f the transition to a market economy, has been the
rising role o f the private sector. Improved business climate has been reflected in the
growth o f formally registered domestic private firms. In the last five years, about 146
thousand new domestic enterprises were registered, with almost 40,000 registered alone
in 2005. The average capital o f these enterprises, at around 160,000 U S D in 2005,
remains small by international standards. But i t has more than doubled in comparison
with 2001. The relative share o f the private business in the economy has increased
significantly. Between 2001 and 2005 the share o f the private sector in non-oil exports
rose from 44 percent to 77 percent. Private enterprises, excluding farmers and non-farm
self-employment, now account for about 22 percent o f the employed labor force,
compared to 13 percent in 1998. Similarly, the number o f people employed in the private
sector has increased from around 0.6 million in 2001 to 2.8 million in 2005, and the ratio
o f private investment to GDP has risen from 14 percent in 2001 to 18 percent in 2005.
W h i l e these figures are s t i l l below the ambitious targets set at the onset o f the CAS period,
they indicate significant progress nevertheless. Over the CAS period, several policy
actions to level the playing field for access to land, capital, and public contracts were
undertaken, including changing the Vietnamese constitution to recognize private business
as an important component o f the economy, as well as establishing a unified Enterprise
and Investment L a w and a new Land Law.

16

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 17 o f 47

Bank contribution. The Bank has supported these achievements through a m i x o f
activities aimed at improving access to land and key infrastructure services, revising
investment and enterprise laws, and strengthening business climate diagnostics. The
private sector development agenda has been an important part o f ongoing policy
discussion within the PRSC program, including on the issue o f private access to land
through increased issuance of land-user certificates. Targeted AAA, such as the recently
completed Investment Climate Assessment (ICA), helped key Government counterparts
focus their reform efforts. In fact, the dissemination o f the results from the I C A survey
was so successful that the Government has now decided to conduct similar surveys in the
future on a regular basis, using the I C A methodology. Support was also provided to the
preparation o f the new Unified Enterprise L a w (UEL) and Common Investment L a w
(CIL), that were promulgated by the National Assembly in the October 2005 session.
The two Laws represented a major step towards leveling the playing field. A series of
studies on the impediments o f private sector investment and the Investment Climate
Survey provided inputs for the drafting o f the Law. The annual Business Forum
organized by the Bank and I F C also provided a venue for consultation between the
regulatory authorities and foreign investors on the Unified Enterprise Law.

On the lending side, the Phu My 2.2 BOT project piloted the leverage o f private
sector participation in power generation through an IDA guarantee. Similarly a MIGA
guarantee was used to facilitate private sector investments in the Phu My 3 BOT power
project. The Mekong Private Sector Development Facility (MPDF) has continued to
strengthen the capacity o f local financial institutions to increase access to finance to small
and medium enterprises, which are at the core o f the Vietnamese private business. In
addition, the Road Network Improvement project (FY04) i s promoting a framework for
public-private partnership in the road sector and creating a growing market for private
firms. The Forest Sector Development Project (FY04) i s supporting smallholders’
commercial forest plantation; and there are land allocation and land-user-certificate
issuance components under the Forest Sector Development, the Agricultural
Diversification and the Coastal Wetland Protection and Development Projects.
Several infrastructure projects have also helped alleviate infrastructure constraints
on private sector development, including in terms o f transport (Inland Waterways,
Mekong Transport and Flood Protection Projects) and water supply (Water Supply and
Urban Water Supply Projects). In the energy sector, significant support to strengthening
the transmission and distribution networks has been provided through Transmission and
Distribution Iand 11, SEIER and Rural Energy projects. These projects help improve the
availability and quality o f power for industrial production, as evidenced by a reduction in
the number o f transmission line faults by 3-4%, an expansion in high voltage
transmission from 1,480km to 2,660 km and an expansion in transformer capacity from
2,700 MVA to 4,400 MVA.
IFC has also made investments in sectors that harness the country’s natural
resources and competitive advantages such as agribusiness, o i l and gas, manufacturing,
and information and communications technology. IFC’s investment program has been
relevant and investment sponsors and partners appreciate I F C for the value-added o f i t s
appraisals, i t s honest broker role and problem solving abilities. IFC has focused i t s efforts
17

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 18 o f 47

on improving the business environment, capacity-building in the private sector, and
supporting private financial institutions. Naturally, these priorities implied an emphasis
o n technical assistance.
F C ’ s PEP-Mekong has been playing a catalytic role in addressing private sector
issues through advisory services, research, and by fostering policy dialogue. The IFC-led
Vietnam Business Forum has become an important vehicle for policy dialogue between
government, the private sector and the donor community. Capacity building in the private
sector has included managerial training through Business Edge resources-- self-study
workbooks (over 160,000 copies sold), and seminars (over 6,000 S M E managers
participated)

Corporate Social Responsibility

The CAS also described a set o f activities to strengthen corporate social
responsibility in Vietnam, but did not specify any outcomes in this area, which would be
led by other donors. World Bank’s support focused on supporting the Institute o f Labour
Sciences and Social Affairs (ILSSA) to carry out a study to determine appropriate public
roles in promoting Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) in the textile, garment and
footwear sectors. Research took place in about 20 enterprises, including those which had
already adopted voluntary codes o f conduct and those which had not yet engaged in
labour-based CSR. The research was guided by a multi-stakeholder Advisory Group
which brought together buyers, suppliers, auditors, worker’ and employers’ associations,
managers o f EPZ’s and Ministryo f Labour (MOLISA) representatives. The report drew
out a number o f recommendations, and discussions are ongoing with M O L I S A to agree
ways o f taking forward some o f these suggestions through a range o f pilot activities. I F C
has followed-up with training on CSR for relevant private sector enterprises in the
garment sector, focusing on the capacity o f middle managers and supervisors through the
International Garment Training Center, which F C - M P D F helped establish and continues
to support through developing curriculum and trainers.

D. CAS Pillar 11:
Development

Enhancing Equitable, Socially Inclusive, and Sustainable

The following six broad country outcomes were extracted from the CASdocument, o f which the first four were included in the “Core CAS Monitoring
Benchmarks” :
Narrowing the development gap o f disadvantaged and lagging areas by (a)
improving access to services for lagging regions and improving poverty reduction
for the poorest communes, (b) developing agriculture and the rural economy, and
(c) addressing the needs o f the urban poor.
Universalize education and improving education quality

18

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 19 o f 47
0
0
0
0

Improving health outcomes6
Raising the living standards o f ethnic minorities
Realizing gender equality and the advancement o f women
Ensuring environmental sustainability

Table 2 captures outcome indicators and targets identified in the 2002 CAS and
the subsequent PRSC program for pillar 2.
Given the composite nature o f the objective o f narrowing the development gap
between disadvantaged and lagging areas as stated in the CAS document’, the
contributions o f World Bank CAS activities are more easily assessed o n the three
lower-level objectives: (a) access to services for lagging regions and improving
poverty reduction for the poorest communes, (b) developing agriculture and the rural
economy, and (c) addressing the needs o f the urban poor.

The health-indicator was not included in the CAS core monitoring benchmarks.

’Comprising both rural-urban gaps, pockets o f urban poverty, poor local communities, and lagging regions.
19

m
w

o

w
o

*

W

m

W

h

*

0

.B

W

x

3

e,

>

.E
e,

a

m

o!

h

d
0
0

Y
Y

8

ga
r4

r?

a

3
8

Y

k

Q\
F

N
N

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 23 o f 47

(a) Country Outcome: Access to services and markets for lagging regions and improved
poverty reduction for poorest communes

Outcome performance. Satisfactory progress towards this outcome has been
achieved. Available data show steady increase in the core CAS monitoring benchmarks
on access to various infrastructure services, including the proportion o f population living
within 2 km o f an all-weather road, which increased to 83% in 2004 from 76% in 2002,
electricity access for rural households, which increased from 50% to over 82% during the
last half decade, and the proportion o f the rural population with access to clean and safe
water, which increased from 48% in 1998 to 62% in 2005.
Bank contribution. The Bank has provided substantial support to improve access
for lagging regions, and focused o n three parts o f the country: the Northern Mountains,
the Mekong Delta and the North Central Coast. Output-indicators from these projects
indicate that IDA finding has helped Government attain impressive results, through the
Rural Transport I and I1 projects that provided 7,500 km o f access roads to link
communes and district centers, the Rural Energy Iproject that helped to connect over 900
communes (2.5 million households) to the electricity grid, the Mekong Delta Water
project that provided 630,000 people with clean drinking water and improved sanitation
and the Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction project that helped double the extent o f
paved roads in 350 o f Vietnam's poorest communes, reduced travel time to markets by 30
minutes on average, and increased the number o f households using clean water by over
25%. The Rural Transport I1 project offers an interesting insight into the different
development trajectories o f communes that had, and had not received Bank assistance.
The project baseline incorporated data for both sets o f communes, and the data revealed
significant development impact o f IDA assisted communes in terms o f e.g. increase in
school attendance and visits to clinics.

By supporting the capacity o f communes in decentralized and participatory
investment planning and resource allocation, Bank interventions have also helped
improve the quality o f basic infrastructure provision. Analytical support has been
provided to a new decree strengthening community supervision o f basic infrastructure
construction and to an evaluation o f national target programs for poverty reduction
(HEPR-JC and Program 135) and their improved design for 2006-2010.

(b) Country Outcome: Developing agriculture and the rural economy
Outcome performance. The record was satisfactory. During the past six years
rural areas witnessed fast reduction in poverty from 46% in 1998 to 25 YOin 2004. This
was partly driven by a massive movement out o f agriculture and a fast increase in wage
employment. But those who stayed in agriculture also saw their incomes from farming
rise substantially. This was caused by increased agricultural diversification driven by
better market integration o f farmers, which led to a robust agricultural growth rate o f
roughly 4 percent annually during the past six years. Also, the 2004 revision o f the Land

23

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 24 o f 4 7

L a w facilitated land transactions and the use o f land use certificates as security for loans.
However, land use policy, a key factor in increasing agricultural productivity, could be
more responsive to market signals and more supportive o f agricultural diversification.
Moreover, progress has been slower in more remote upland areas in particular for poor
forest dependent communities. This is due to limited forest land allocation to local
communities, in particular in the Central Highlands, lack o f poverty focus o f forestry
development programs and weak extension services that are relevant for upland and
forest-based farming systems. Only around 6% o f public spending was devoted to
agricultural development, l o w by regional and international standards. Moreover, more
resources could be devoted to productivity-enhancing and potentially pro-poor activities
such as agricultural research and extension services or the maintenance and rehabilitation
o f existing irrigation systems.
Bank contribution. Important contributions were made through the Bank’s rural
sector AAA program, including support to the enactment o f a N e w Land Law, supporting
access to land for all sectors including community groups as land-holders, and providing
for a unified land administration system, evaluation o f land policies and programs such as
administrative land-parcel consolidation, and to a new decree establishing a regulatory
framework for the operation and supervision o f microfinance institutions.

Rural sector lending contributed to several related intermediate outcomes,
including 44 irrigatioddrainage schemes newly built or improved in the Mekong Delta
region, resulting in increased cropping intensity and enhancement o f f l o o d drainage
control. Over 23,000 ha o f new rubber smallholdings established and over 10,000 ha o f
existing rubber smallholdings rehabilitated in Central Highlands, over 20,000 farmers in
Central Highlands adopted new cattle fattening techniques and over 17,000 farmers pig
intensification, upgrading o f National Veterinary Diagnostic Center and 4 regional
veterinary centers 70% completed. Through the Rural Finance operation, financial
services in rural areas were improved with more than 100,000 sub-loans granted to rural
households and enterprises resulting in 200,000 jobs. More than 30% o f end-borrowers
report having entered into a credit relationship with a formal banking institution for the
first time, and 60% o f end-borrowers report having opened a savings account for the first
time.
(c) Country Outcome: Addressing the needs of the urban poor

Outcome performance. Only partially satisfactory progress towards this
outcome has been achieved. Available data, which staff suspect fails to capture those
without permanent registration, shows an increase in the related core CAS monitoring
indicator, with 79% o f the urban population having access to clean water and sanitation
by 2005 compared to 41% in 1998. But the most recent poverty assessment confirms that
poverty i s an important challenge given the development path that Vietnam i s travelling.
A recent mid-term Census o f the population o f H o Chi Minh City suggests that close to
one third o f the population has migrated there in the last five years. Many o f these people
lack permanent registration and are inadequately captured in most data sources used for
monitoring poverty and for planning and budgeting for service delivery. I t i s not possible

24

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 25 o f 47

to give an accurate assessment o f poverty levels among migrants because o f their absence
from the data. The concern, however, i s that many may remain vulnerable and may
encounter real difficulties in accessing basic services.
Bank contribution. The CAS identified limited access o f poor urban residents,
including unregistered migrants, to public services as a key constraint for reducing
poverty among urban poor. As part o f the PRSC program, the Bank has been working
closely with the Government to design and implement programs to provide basic services
to the urban population, regardless o f migrant status. The recent mid-term Census o f
H C M C was co-funded by the Bank and led to shift in funding policies by the City and a
revision o f local household registration documentation. There has recently been animated
discussion o f this issue at the National Assembly, partly drawing on work with the Social
Affairs Committee o f the National Assembly that the Bank was associated with.

The Bank also provided significant support to increase the access to basic water
and sanitation services for the urban populations, increasingly targeted to the poorest
groups. Most notable, the Urban Upgrading Project has started assisting in providing
access to basic infrastructure and is expected to improve livelihoods o f around 865,000
poor residents, and enhance the quality o f infrastructure services to a further 1,135,000
residents in four cities. Through the Ho Chi Minh City Environmental and Sanitation and
3 Cities Sanitation projects, 2.6 million people, o f whom many are poor, will benefit from
reduced flooding and will have their wastewater collected and safely disposed of. Finally,
AAA work on “Enhancing Access o f the Urban Poor and Vulnerable Groups in Vietnam
to Basic Infrastructure and Services” and the close dialogue on the preparation o f the
Urban Upgrading Project convinced Government o f the value o f adopting the incremental
improvement o f slum areas as a cost effective and socially favorable way o f improving
the lives o f the urban poor. The project includes a component to help Government scale
up this initiative by developing a National Urban Upgrading Program.
Country Outcome: Universalize education and improve education quality
Outcome performance. Satisfactory progress towards this outcome has been
achieved. Vietnam has continued to demonstrate progress, increasing educational
enrollment at all levels and improving the efficiency and equity o f public spending.
Primary enrollment rates exceed 90 percent for all population groups, except ethnic
minorities and the poorest quintile o f the population. Improving the outcomes for these
lagging groups remains a priority for the next five years.
Bank contribution. One o f the constraints for improving the outcome
performance has been the prevalence o f substantial out-of-pocket payments for social
services, which has prevented the poorest parts o f the population to access education and
health services. Accordingly, one o f the CAS milestones was to design improvements o n
access to affordable social services. Under the PRSC program, specific benchmarks have
been agreed with Government to this effect. These include the adoption o f the Education
for All (EFA) framework, that establishes the educational objectives and targets to be
reached by 2015 and the adoption o f the Fundamental School Quality Levels (FSQL)
regulation. FSQL standards combine indicators related to the management o f a school,

25

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 26 o f 47

the training o f its teachers, the quality o f its infrastructure and the availability o f
classroom material, among others. By 2005, the average FSQL index had increased
substantially.
In addition, the Bank has supported Government’s efforts to address the regional
and ethnic disparities and improve educational quality in several ways. The Primary
Education for Disadvantaged Children project (FY03) i s striving to reduce access barriers
to schooling, enhance educational services in 189 poor districts and target assistance to
disabled children, ethnic minority children, street children and other vulnerable children.
Outputs from this project include almost 5,000 classrooms constructed to achieve FSQL.
More over through the Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction project, almost 110,000
people in the Northern Mountains area have received access to improved schools.
Government’s recent encouraging completion o f a national Education for All Action Plan
2003-2015 was supported by technical assistance from UNESCO/CIDA/World Bank and
was also associated with the PRSC program. A Targeted Budget Support operation to
attain the Education for All objectives i s now under implementation, supporting both the
increase in the sector’s overall share in public spending and raising quality standards. The
program hinges on the combination o f two elements: the adoption o f fundamental school
quality standards and the transfer o f resources towards the achievement o f those
standards, especially in disadvantaged areas, through Government’s own top-up
disbursement channels. These efforts build on to the achievements o f the Teacher
Development project, which i s helping to improve the quality o f primary teacher training.
Country Outcome: Improving health outcomes

Outcome performance. Satisfactory progress towards this outcome has been
achieved. Vietnam’s health indicators are generally better than would be expected for a
country at i t s level o f income per capita and the indicators continue to improve. O n infant
mortality rates, the latest official estimate i s 18 deaths per 1000 life births, compared to
37 in 1998. More precise estimates might not be available until the next population
census, planned for 2009. Still, even taking into account very large measurement errors,
the hypothesis that infant mortality rates declined very rapidly cannot be rejected.
Nevertheless, problems persist, including large disparities in health indicators by urbanrural, regional and income group, reflecting differences in access to health services and
the sizeable out-of-pocket contributions to health care costs, as well as relatively falling
public health expenditures. Despite the relative decline in the incidence o f infectious
diseases, public health problems are arising both from new infectious diseases such as
HIV/AIDS and reemerging diseases such as tuberculosis and dengue fever, as well as
from malaria. In addition, possible outbreaks o f avian influenza epidemics have lately
emerged as a growing concern. On the rate o f HIV/AIDS infection, however, recent data
suggest that the rate has now slowed down, partially in response to a major refocus and
shift in Government’s HIV/AIDS strategy.
Bank contribution. The Vietnam Health sector review, an IDF Grant on
Financial and Expenditure Management in Health, and the Public Expenditure Review,
have helped focusing Bank efforts on addressing growing inequalities through improved
health financing and more targeted resource allocation, as well as addressing the

26

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 27 o f 47

developing HIV/AIDS epidemic. Under the PRSC program, specific benchmarks have
been agreed to improve delivery o f health services, including the issuance o f Decision
139 on the establishment o f health funds for the poor. Decision 139 has the potential o f
improving the delivery o f health services to the poor substantially by providing an
innovative mechanism to tackle out-of-pocket payments. The Mekong Health Support
Project (FY06) will help the government develop a regional tier in the health system
anchored in a medical school, apex referral hospital and a preventive medicine center
serving the entire Mekong Region. In addition, the Urban Water Supply Project (FY05),
Mekong Delta Water and the Rural Water Supply Project (FY06) have started helping
improve the health status o f poor communities in under-served urban and rural areas by
providing access to clean water and sanitation services). Moreover, through the Northern
Mountains Poverty Reduction project, more than 85,000 people have received access to
improved health facilities.
Responding to increasing concerns o f HIV/AIDS developments, a new HIV/AIDS
project (FY05) has started assisting government strengthen the HIV/AIDS program, slow
the spread o f the epidemic and mitigate its effects o n the country’s socio-economic
development.
During the project preparation stage, the Bank also assisted the
Government formulate a new HIV/AIDs strategy. This project carried forward the
activities initiated in the Regional Blood Project. HIV/AIDS was also one o f the main
topics at the CG-meeting December 2004.
Finally, the Bank provided early support to Government’s efforts to prevent
Avian Influenza outbreaks through an ERL to support enhancements o f Vietnam’s
veterinary services and establishment o f early warning system. The Bank also supported
Government’s design o f an enhanced public health approach to Avian Influenza concerns.
Country Outcome: Raising the living standards of ethnic minorities
Outcome performance. Only partially satisfactory progress towards this
outcome has been achieved. Ethnic minority poverty i s reducing and access to basic
services by ethnic minorities i s improving. Most recent data show, for example, that the
net primary school enrollment gap has fallen from 12 percent in 1998 to 10 percent in
2004. But in all regions o f Vietnam, ethnic minorities fare far worse than the Kinh
majority population, and poverty reduction has been more rapid for the Kinh and Chinese
populations, even in remote and mountainous areas. In 2004, 14 percent o f the Kinh and
Chinese people were living in poverty, compared to 61 percent o f ethnic minority people.
Though accounting for only 13 percent o f the total population, ethnic minorities now
constitute 39 percent o f the poor. Their poverty i s deeper, too, than that o f other groups.
The poverty gap for ethnic minorities i s 19.2, compared to only 2.6 for Kinh people.
Uneven progress in poverty reduction between the Kinh majority and the ethnic
minorities translates into important gaps in the extent and depth o f poverty across
regions. Fortunes o f ethnic minorities vary across the country. While ethnic minority
poverty has been on a steady downward trend in the northern mountains, the trends are
less positive in the rapidly-growing central highlands region.

There has also been disappointing progress in the substance and breadth o f
government analysis on ethnic minority poverty. Reviews o f the impact o f past policies
27

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 28 o f 47

tend to be favourable and make minimal use o f robust data, limiting the momentum for
innovation in approaches to ethnic minority poverty.
Bank contribution. Identifying causes for poverty and remedial actions have
been at the center o f the Bank’s analytical work, that has been conducted in close
cooperation with Government and development partners as an input for project design
and policy dialogue. Specific areas o f research have included investigation o f fill user
rights allocation over agricultural, forest, and other lands to ethnic minorities, and the
practice o f “sedentarizing” ethnic minority groups, to assess whether the agricultural
options for upland farming systems and land titling procedures are consistent with ethnic
community traditions and practices.

O n the lending side, most o f the operations in support o f better access to improve
basic rural services access have targeted ethnic minorities. The Forest Sector
Development Project is helping improve the livelihoods o f ethnic minorities, and the
Coastal Wetland Project has supported this objective through an Ethnic Minority
Development Fund. The Agricultural Diversification Project i s also providing support to
the development o f agriculture for ethnic minorities in the Northern Mountains region.
Finally, the basic infrastructure provision and strengthening o f livelihood service delivery
under the Northern Mountainous Poverty Reduction and the Community Based Rural
Infrastructure projects benefit primarily ethnic minorities. Through these projects, in
almost 400 o f Vietnam’s poorest communes in the Northern Mountains region, the
average number o f school aged children not in school has fallen from 9 per village in
2001 to 5 per village in 2005, 62% o f respondents reported receiving higher quality
education services, and the number o f hungry households fell from an average o f 12 per
village in 2001 to 7 per village in 2005. Finally, the Primary Education for Disadvantaged
Children project (FY03) is providing assistance to ethnic minority children in
disadvantaged areas, building on the achievements o f the completed Primary Education
project.
Country Outcome: Realizing gender equality and the advancement of women
Outcome performance. Satisfactory progress towards this outcome has been
achieved. During the CAS period, Vietnam has been able to close gender gaps in areas
such as education, access to health care and some aspects o f employment. According to
recent data, there is now little difference between the net enrolment rates for girls and
boys throughout the school system prior to tertiary education. In2004,66 percent o f girls
and 61 percent o f boys in the relevant age group were enrolled in upper secondary
education. Women participate only slightly less actively in the labor force than men do.
Among people in the 15-to-64 age group, 83 percent o f men and 80 percent o f women
were employed in the 12 months preceding the most recent household survey. Data on
earnings suggest that the gender gap i s closing; while being a female worker in the early
1990s implied earning more than 30 percent less than a man, in 2004 this gender gap in
earnings had diminished to 17 percent. Female political activity at national levels i s also
significant, with 27.3 percent female members o f the National Assembly. In all, Vietnam
i s one o f the countries in East Asia that has seen the most rapid change in closing the

28

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 29 of47

gender gap in the last 20 years. I t has improved i t s rank o n the Gender Development
Index from 89 (out o f 136 countries) in 2001 to 80 in 2004.
While Vietnam has a good basis for gender equality, including in i t s five-year
strategies and laws, strategy implementation and mainstreaming o f gender into sectoral
policies and programs remains an issue. In addition, there i s not yet a level playing-field
for women’s participation in the economic sphere, with women o n average having
unequal access to emerging economic opportunities and assets. In particular, even though
the newly approved Land L a w included a provision o n the desirability o f having Land
Tenure Certificate with both names o f husband and wife, implementation remained slow,
particularly concerning re-issuance o f existing Land Use Certificates (LUCs).
Bank contribution. The Bank has provided support to increase the awareness o f
issuing LUC’s in the name o f both spouses through the PRSC-2 and through technical
assistance. Bank support to this area also included a new Country Gender Assessment
and gender mainstreaming activities in five selected Bank-funded projects, supported by
the gender mainstreaming fund. Furthermore, gender issues have been addressed in five
regional workshops on rolling out o f the CPRGS to the provinces; focusing on roll-out o f
the joint land-titling pilot throughout the country, thereby enhancing women’s access to
credit and security o f tenure; building on our earlier work on gender-based violence to
assist the Government to meet the CPRGS’s gender-based violence target; and working
with GSO and the Poverty Task Force to ensure that appropriate gender disaggregated
data are produced from the Multi Purpose Household Surveys and made available as
widely as possible. The attainment o f gender targets in education have been supported
through several education projects, including the Primary Education for Disadvantaged
Children project.
County Outcome: Ensure environmental sustainability
Outcome performance. Only partially satisfactory progress towards this
outcome has been achieved. There has been progress on all o f the environment-related
VDG’s and targets, including the CAS monitoring benchmarks o f the proportion o f the
population with access to clean water and sanitation (increased in 2004 to 79 percent and
32 percent respectively from 76 and 25 percent in 2002), protected area coverage
(increased to 5.5 percent in 2005 from 4.1 percent in 1999), and forest coverage
(increased to 37 percent in 2004 from 35 percent in 2001), but attainment o f the
ambitious objectives s t i l l require additional efforts. The Government strengthened its
environmental program by creating the Ministry o f Environment and Natural Resources
(MONRE), separating the state management o f a number o f critical natural resources
from that o f users. MONRE also took steps in meeting i t s mandate, including through
the approval o f the National Strategy for Environmental Protection (NSEP), and the
mandating o f environmental impact assessments. In addition, the Government adopted
and started implementing the first comprehensive, inter-ministerial approach to natural
disaster risk management. W h i l e there has been much progress o n the policy front,
implementation capacity still remains a serious constraint.

29

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 30 o f 4 7

Bank contribution. Through the PRSC-program, the Bank supported the
development o f the NSEP and associated detailed action plan based on broad
consultations. The Bank also worked with the donor community o n improvements to
environmental policies, including strengthened Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
requirements, initiation o f “polluter pays” policies for environmental management, and
amendment to the L a w o n Environmental Protection. The AAA activities were
complemented by a number o f WBI learning activities, including a series o f workshops
on sustainable urban development and rural land use policy, management and planning.
Finally, the new Natural Disaster Risk Management project supported Government’s
design and implementation o f a new integrated risk management program.

On the lending side, a series o f GEF grants have supported the conservation and
sustainable use o f biodiversity. The Bank i s supporting improvements in natural resource
management through the Water Resources Assistance Project (FY04), which i s assisting
in upgrading the capacity o f Vietnamese water agencies to plan and manage the nation’s
water resources. The Forest Sector Development project (FY04) i s supporting the
country’s long term goal o f increasing forest cover to historical levels, working with
State Forest Enterprises, the private sector, and landowners, building on achievements
from the Forest Protection Project, including a decrease in barren land by 30% through
plantations in buffer zones, and the proportion o f poor households in the project buffer
zones reduced from 33% to 28%. Building on recent Government efforts to enhance
environmental sustainability, the H C M C Environmental Sanitation and the Three Cities
Sanitation project is helping reduce the incidence o f flooding, improving waste water and
solid waste collection and strengthen the capacity o f the urban environmental companies
(URENCOs) responsible for operating and maintaining sanitation and solid waste
services in five major cities. Finally, several energy projects have helped Government
increase energy efficiency and promote the use o f renewable energy sources.
E. CAS Pillar I11 - Governance
The following broad outcomes were expected under Pillar 3.
0

0

0
0
0

Improving information, transparency, and public financial management
Developing a legal system based on the r u l e o f law and promotion o f
development
Enhancing public administration reform
Promoting information technology and e-Government
Fighting corruption.

Given the nature o f Pillar 3 goals, expected outcomes were not quantified. The
CAS expected a) increased budget transparency at all levels and b) implementation of the
legal reform agenda to be monitoring benchmarks. The policy action benchmarks were
elaborated in a series o f PRSC documents.

30

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 3 1 o f 47

Overall Pillar 3 outcomes were supported by the Bank with a series o f PRSCs
used as the platform for policy dialogues in advancing the necessary policy and
regulatory actions.
Augmenting the dialogues were a number o f AAA activities
including trust fund supported interventions and a small number o f targeted investment
projects that contributed to advancing the Pillar 3 agenda.*
Country Outcome: Improving information, transparency, planning and public
f i n an cia1 management

Outcome performance. Satisfactory progress towards the outcome has been
achieved. With the revised L a w on State Budget, the entire 2005 state budget plan was
disclosed for the first time, including an aggregate amount for defense expenditure. Full
disclosure o f the planned budget as well as actuals at the central to district levels has also
been achieved. The revised L a w further improved the transparency o n budgetary matters
by delineating the roles o f the National Assembly and the Provincial People’s Councils in
budget approval. Members o f National Assembly actively participate in the budgetary
process, especially on the discussion o f resource allocations.

On the management o f public finance and accountability, the accounting system
o f the state budget and the treasury was unified, allowing for better monitoring o f
expenditures. This was enhanced by the completion o f the overall design o f an integrated
Treasury and Budget Management Information System (TABMIS). The targeting o f
spending for poverty has progressed considerably with the establishment o f Health Fund
for the Poor, the adoption o f Education for All framework and focus on improving the
quality o f schools in poor zones, and the introduction o f more poverty-oriented budget
allocation norms. The accountability has also been strengthened with the establishment
o f the State Audit o f Vietnam as an independent entity reporting directly to the National
Assembly. A new Accounting L a w and accounting and auditing standards have also
been issued.
Public planning processes were also strengthened with greater focus on outcomes.
The preparation o f next five year plan provided a good opportunity to strengthen the
national and provincial planning. With Directive 33, the CPRGSPRSP principles were
incorporated into the five year plan preparation process, relying o n the VDGs and other
development outcomes as outcome targets as opposed to production and investment
targets. Based on the experience that 20 provinces had through the CPRGS roll-out,
MPI has expanded the r o l l out process to all provinces and cities. Medium-Term
Expenditure Frameworks that allows for better planning, including improved integration
between capital and recurrent expenditures were being piloted in four sectors and
provinces. Similarly, as part o f the 2006 annual budget procedure, line ministries and
provincial government were asked to prepare a budget framework for the period 20062010, based on the SEDP,
The impact was highlighted by QAG in i t s Country AAA Assessment, QAG rated the AAA portfolio’s
strategic relevance, dialogue and dissemination and likely impact dimensions to b e o f highly satisfactory.
The assessment takes into account the feedback the assessment team had f r o m a diverse group o f
stakeholders in Vietnam.

31

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 32 o f 47

Bank contribution. The Bank contributed significantly to the objective through
a) core diagnostic studies, b) investment projects, and c) other analytical work and
technical assistance activities using trust funds. Most noteworthy was the PElUIntegrated
Fiduciary Assessment (FY05), C F A A and CPAR, which were undertaken to inform the
priorities and actions for improving public expenditure and financial management. These
diagnostics were also used to design a Public Financial Management Reform Project
(FY03), that aims at strengthening and integrating core treasury and budget management
information systems. A number o f other investment projects supported the objective as
well Two community-driven development projects (Community Based Rural
Infrastructure Project and Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project) and related
analytical work enhanced the capacity o f communes in decentralized and participatory
investment planning. The Education for All Project (FY05) explored the adoption o f
SWAP approaches, on planning, budgeting and actual use o f budgetary resources at the
sectoral level, and the HIV/AIDs project (FY06) enhances the decentralized decision
making process o f the Health ministry.

The Bank's contribution resulted in key policy actions, including the revised Law
completion o f the design o f an overall Treasury and Budget
on State Budget
Management Information System (TABMIS), Decision 192"of the Prime Minister on
disclosure o f the state budget, development o f pilot Medium Term Expenditure
Framework for education, the passage o f Audit L a w and accounting and auditing
standards.

9

The revised L a w o n State Budget clearly delineates the roles o f the National Assembly and the Provincial
People's Councils in budget approval, budget execution processes; and i t assigns the Treasury D e p a m e n t
as the lead agency responsible for budget execution and for financial management information
lo
The decision requires that the state budget at a l l levels, as w e l l as for entities using state budget resources,
to be disclosed. With the decision, 100% o f the state budget are disclosed.

32

m
m

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 35 o f 47

Country Outcome: Developing Legal Systemfor a Modern Economy:

Outcome performance. Only partially satisfactory progress was achieved
towards developing a legal system for a modern economy. The government and the
Politburo has recently approved the Legal System Development Strategy (LSDS), based
on a Bank-supported Legal Needs Assessment, and the Judicial Reform Strategy (JDR).
The LSDS will form the country's policy direction for legal development up to 2010, and
the JDR i s an important complement. While the two strategies contain promising
objectives and directions, effective implementation measures are s t i l l needed.
Bank contribution. The Bank's intervention and their outcomes as expected in
the CAS were not entirely successful. The CAS had envisaged that the Bank would
provide advice and funding, including through an IDF, in support o f implementing the
LSDS. There was also an expectation to support the Strategy through a Legal
Development project. While an IDF grant was secured, it was cancelled in M a y 2005
because the underlying Strategy was not approved by the Government", and the Legal
Development project had not been pursued given the slow progress on LSDS. On the
other hand, the recent adoption and public dissemination o f the LSDS and the JRS, based
on the Bank-supported LNA, is a positive development.

However, the Bank continued to support the design o f key sector laws including
the Electricity Law, Land Law and Water Law and outcome has been substantial. The
support for the Electricity Law, for example, effected through a number interventions
including two IDF grants, a series o f energy projects and ESMAP financing.
Country Outcome: Reforming Public Administration:

Outcome performance. Only partially satisfactory progress was achieved. The
Public Administration Reform (PAR) was formulated under the PAR Master Plan o f
2001 - 2010 (PARMP) that was built around (i)
organizational restructuring; (ii)
human
resources reform, including personnel management and salary reform, (iii)
institutional
development, including modernization o f the public administration system; and (iv)
public financial management reform. The Government further defined as the first step in
the implementation o f PARMP the adoption o f simplified administrative procedures.
While the One Stop Shop model was introduced in all provinces to simplify the
administrative procedures, it needs to be followed with a more comprehensive public
administration modernization. In this regard, action plans for simplification and greater
transparency o f administrative procedures are now being implemented by several
ministries and provinces, following a prime-ministerial directive to reduce bureaucracy
and red tape. Progress has already been made in areas such as birth, death and marriage
records; notary services; residential registration permits; business registration and
licenses; land-user certificates; and customs and tax procedures. In the case o f business

" It was only approved in May 2005. By then, the IDF grant had been in place for more than 2 years
without any disbursement. The IDF rules prohibit non-disbursingIDF grants to continue for xx months.

35

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 36 o f 47

registration, investment licenses and construction permits processing times have come
down to 7-to-10 days and even 3-to-5 days in some cases.
Bank contribution. The CAS expected the Bank to focus only on the fourth
pillar; public financial management reform (discussed earlier), with other donors more
active o n the public administration reform to take the lead in other three areas. W h i l e the
CAS, public administration reform was mainstreamed throughout the Bank portfolio and
capacity built for decentralized project design and implementation in rural and urban
areas. In addition, the Bank advanced the agenda through targeted analytical work,
including a series o f analytical work was prepared in preparation for the Vietnam
Development Report 2004 “Governance”, and a Report Card Survey on service delivery
commissioned by the Ministry o f Home Affairs. In addition, the Custom Modernization
Project, approved in November 2005, aims to strengthen the capacity o f the Customs
administration o f Vietnam and contribute effectively to trade facilitation, revenue
collection, and production o f foreign trade statistics, community protection, and national
security. The Bank, through the WBI, also worked to reform and modernize the
curriculum o f the H o Chi Minh City Political Academy, which is one o f the key civil
service training institution in the country.
Country Outcome: Advancing Information and Communication Technology and eGovernment:

Outcome performance. Only partially satisfactory progress was achieved. The
government undertook initiatives to upgrade information and communications
infrastructure and drafted a new Master Plan for National I C T and E-Government.
However, the country s t i l l faces a number o f constraints to “e-readiness”, including high
costs and uneven accedes to communication infrastructure; a shortage o f skilled human
resources and limited diffusions o f I C T within government as well as within the business
community.
Bank contribution. The Bank contributed to the Government’s I C T Strategy,
the National I C T Master Plan for 2006-2010, and an E-Government Master Plan to 2010.
This analytical work led to a new I C T project (FY 06). The project helps the
Government build policy and leadership capacity to develop the I C T sector, improve
competitiveness o f private sector that can contribute to growth and adopt a modem public
administration and governance system. The country team also supports the eprocurement system initiative through an IDF grant which started recently.
Country Outcome: Fighting Corruption

Outcome Performance. Only partially satisfactory progress has been achieved.
W h i l e the government’s strategy for fighting corruption was unclear at the time of CAS,
the resolve to tackle the problem became increasingly strong during the CAS period. A
systemic approach to anti-corruption has now been adopted with an emphasis on reducing
the opportunities for corrupt behavior and increasing the probability o f getting caught. A
new Anti-Corruption L a w was adopted in November 2005, taking effect June 2006. The

36

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 37 of47

law includes articles on asset declaration by high-ranking public servants, whistleblowing and denunciation, and outlawing o f bribery and other related corruption crimes.
The media has also taken a more proactive approach in detecting and reporting corruption
issues. A diagnostic study on the modalities and mechanisms o f corruption using the
WBI methodology was undertaken with Swedish International Development Agency’s
support and the findings were disclosed to public and also discussed with donors in 2005,
paving the way for forming concrete actions to tackle the problem. Progress has also
been made on reforming public procurement management. However, the progress has so
far not been significant enough to result in improved performance o f the procurement
system.
Bank contribution. In response to the Government’s resolve, the Bank stepped
up i t s support through improving transparency and accountability in public finance,
making public services more accountable to users, strengthening the procurement
framework and capacity, and supporting the Government Inspectorate’s capacity building.
Further, a Custom Modernization Project (FY06) was prepared. One o f the objectives o f
the project i s to improve the accountability and transparency o f custom administration
and contribute to reduced corruption.

The results from the Bank interventions are mixed, however, with significant
achievements on transparency and accountability in public finance and the simplification
o f administration processes through the introduction o f One Stop Shop model which
reduces the number o f interactions between service providers and clients thereby
reducing the opportunities for kickbacks. The Bank support for public procurement,
however, has only recently resulted in advancing the agenda. PEWIFA 2005 recognizes
the slower than expected progress and lists the remaining challenges, including
strengthening the legal framework, establishment o f a complaint mechanism and setting
up o f procurement monitoring mechanisms.
IV. Bank Performance
IDA’Soverall performance was satisfactory. In CAS consultations, Government
officials and other stakeholders voiced their strong appreciation for the Bank’s financial
as well as intellectual contribution to the country’s priority development agenda. The
two client surveys undertaken during the CAS periodI2 indicated the clients’ satisfaction
with the Bank’s contribution and preference to work with the Bank. IEG evaluation
shows that the portfolio remained effective with all closed projects reviewed rated
satisfactory on outcomes and as likely sustainable. W h i l e slow implementation remains a
challenge, the absolute amount disbursed over the past three years has increased
significantly reflecting the expanded capacity o f project entities. AAA country program
assessment by Q A G rated the program highly satisfactory especially on the impacts on
the country’s policy reforms.
(a) Quality of IDA operations: Satisfactory Outcome

l2Client surveys were

conducted in 2003 and 2005.

.
37

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 38 o f 47

The Annual Report on Portfolio Performance o f FY04 lists Vietnam as one o f the
three countries having the highest outcomes among all the countries evaluated during
FYOO to 04. l3 Especially noteworthy was the substantial institutional development
impact. The ratings compare well with other IDA countries as well as EAP countries.
The strength o f the portfolio i s also reflected in the portfolio realism and proactivity
index which are both at 100%.

Table 4. IEG Ratings o f Closed Projects

Highway Rehabilitation I
PRSC I
Rural Transport I
Highway Rehabilitation I1
Irrigation Rehabilitation
PRSC I1
Banking System Modernization
Population and Family Health
Primary Education

1213 1101
12/31/02
0513 1/02
0613 0103
0613 0103
1213 1/03
1213 1/03
1213 1/03
12/31/03

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

S
MS
MS
MS
S
MS
S
S
MS

Likely
Non-evaluable

Modest
Modest

Likely
Non-evaluable
Likely
Likely
Likely
Likely
Likely

Modest
Modest
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Modest

’ Average Investment

*

Credits

Outcome Ratings: S - satisfactory; M S - moderately satisfactory

QAG assessments hrther confirmed the good quality o f portfolio. To date, 9
projects have been evaluated for quality at entry, all o f which were rated satisfactory. For
quality o f supervision, 9 projects were assessed and all except for one were rated
satisfactory. Furthermore, Bank inputs and processes were judged satisfactory by the
QAG team.
(b) IDA Portfolio Assessment: Significantly Expanded Portfolio within the Base
Case Scenario

During the CAS period, the IDA portfolio expanded from 27 to 37 operations
with the total commitments increasing from $2.8 billion to $4.1 billion (end FY06). 24
new operations entered the portfolio while 14 operations exited. The sectoral distribution
o f the portfolio i s shown in the figure below.

13

Only those countries with more than 10 projects were evaluated are compared.

38

8.2
1.6
5.4
6.2
8.2
1.5
8.1
7.7
9.2

7.6

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 39 o f 47

-

Table 5. I D A Credit Portfolio FY 02 06
(USD Million)

05

9

699

34

3,525

9

2

22

06

8

768

37

4,075

7

5

71

Vietnam IDA Credit Portfolio
Net Commitments as of July 2006

Energy
25%

Health1
6%

,CT

15%

7%

The target for the base case lending as endorsed by the Board in February 2004,
under the CAS Progress Report was met. Several investment projects as envisaged in the
CAS PR, however, were not delivered as scheduled. partly due to evolving policies such
as in the case o f the Health Care Fund for the Poor, but in other cases, delays resulted
from unforeseen shocks such as SARS14, IDA resource constraints and slow project
preparation processes. The team could have factored in a more realistic timeframe in
preparing the project list.

The instruments discussed in CAS and CAS PR were utilized well, with a series
o f PRSCs used as an underpinning o f IDA operations and the donor dialogue with the
Government on key structural reform issues. The investment operations for infrastructure
l4During the early 2003, the country suffered from the outbreak o f SARS. Missions were banned for four
months in FY03.

39

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 40 o f 47

were expanded in response to the Government’s request for increased Bank support for
large scale infrastructure for the twin objectives o f poverty alleviation and growth. The
new emphasis on large-scale infrastructure was reflected in the CPRGS with the addition

o f a chapter on infrastructure to foster growth and provide better services to the poor.
The use o f a sector wide approach (SWAP) was piloted only for the Education for All
Targeted National Program toward the end o f FY05. The slower than expected
deployment o f SWAP approaches was due to the fact that the medium-term expenditure
frameworks and legal framework for procurement and financial management required
more time to develop than expected..
Notwithstanding the good quality o f the portfolio and expanded operations, the
pace o f preparing projects and implementation, while improving steadily, has remained
slow and remains a key challenge for the team. The issues negatively influencing
implementation performance are well-understood and have been thoroughly analyzed in
different portfolio reviews undertaken by the Bank and the Government.
The
Government i s increasingly concerned about the impact o f slow implementation and a
wide range o f efforts to address both project specific and generic issues i s underway.
These include revisions to simplify and streamline Government procedures for public
investment and ODA management, joint inter-ministerial and donor problem solving task
forces, and project management capacity building interventions. The Government i s also
actively leading the process o f strengthening harmonization and alignment o f O D A
procedures with the Government policies and regulations with a view to accelerate the
implementation and make full use o f O D A resources. To support this effort, a multidonor financed Comprehensive Capacity Building Program i s being implemented.
Based on the findings o f the Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) o f
FY03 and Country Portfolio Review o f FY05, the country team and the Government are
working at three levels: at a project level taking a closer look at the project readiness at
entry and undertaking project specific actions to address implementation bottlenecks; at
the sector level, where monthly portfolio review meetings are being organized; and at the
overall portfolio level where structural impediments to slow disbursement including the
cumbersome and often inconsistent legal framework for ODA management, the multilayered Government approval processes and weak general project management capacity
are dealt with.
The Government and the Bank i s also working on strengthening institutional
arrangements for management o f ODA. There are differences in opinion among the
Government and the donor community as to the definition o f “parallel” and “fbllyintegrated” PMUs, but currently all o f the 66 PMUs responsible for the implementation
o f World-Bank-financed projects and programs can be defined as fully integrated into
Government structures. Nevertheless, some o f these PMUs are created solely for the
purpose o f managing Bank projects and are dismantled after project completion. Given
the significant capacity gaps at both the central and local-level in terms o f project
management capacity, more needs to be done to ensure that capacity strengthening efforts
are strategic and provide sustainable results. The Government is currently undertaking a

40

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 41 of47

review o f different project management structures used for ODA management in order to
identify ways to improve the system.

The high risk fiduciary environment in Vietnam remains a key concern o f the
country team. A fiduciary review o f the Bank portfolio, conducted in 2003 in
collaboration with INT, identified indicators o f collusion in a majority o f the contracts
reviewed. In response to the findings, the country team has since implemented an
approach to reducing fiduciary risks in the portfolio that focuses on concrete measures to
(i)improve project design and risk mitigation arrangements; (ii)
strengthen supervision;
(iii)improve Borrower and Bank enforcement and sanction mechanisms; and (iv)
strengthen the capacity to assess fiduciary risks. These measures are intended to increase
transparency, accountability and competition in the project implementation process,
while reducing opportunities for fraudulent and collusive behavior. In 2006, a major
corruption case in the transport sector highlighted the continuous need for vigilance in
this regard. In dealing with the scandal, the Government has, however, demonstrated a
firm resolve to take action against any implicated officials, and allowed the media an
increased role in uncovering and reporting on cases o f wrong-doing. .

(c) Thematic distribution o f the IDA portfolio

A review o f the IDA portfolio during the CAS period suggests a gradual increase
in support for the “governance” theme, though the support for poverty reduction and
social inclusion remained the mainstay o f the portfolio. The graph below shows the
distribution o f the portfolio across the three CAS pillars. Note that the percentages for
each theme show the share o f projects that supported at least one objective within a given
theme based on the official coding o f the development objectives o f IDA lending
operations, allowing for up to five different objectives per operation.

41

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 42 o f 47
IDA Portfolio Supporting 3 Themes

Parcel

All active projects
0 Portfolio before
before CAS

ecb

Themes

Theme3

The same data set also shows that the new portfolio increasingly addressed
“cross-cutting” issues. In particular, the infrastructure and rural sector portfolio attached
importance to environment goals, the infrastructure portfolio focused on financial sector
and private sector development, and the rural sector to the provision o f infrastructure
services for lagging areas.

(d) IFC Investment: The levels o f IFC investment were relatively l o w owing to a
challenging business environment: the domestic private sector i s young and fragile, with
few strong project sponsors. The financial sector i s state-dominated and private provision
o f infrastructure has been difficult. Government recognition that sustained high growth
and integration with the global economy require significant private investment, is now
translating into progress on market reforms. The growth o f the domestic private sector,
privatization activity in the banking sector and the opening up o f private participation in
infrastructure i s expected to increase the scope for IFC’s activities in the country.
IFC Total Commitments, FY 2003-06 (US$ millions)
Sector

2003

2004

42

2005

2006

I

Total

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 43 o f 47

(e) AAA Assessment - Delivery of High Impact AAA Program

A robust program o f analytical and advisory activities was undertaken during the
CAS period. The program as a whole made significant impacts on policy dialogue in
Vietnam, as evaluated by QAG Country AAA Program asse~sment’~.The AAA program
was highly relevant strategically for the country’s reform agenda. As the client surveys
also indicated, the Bank’s advisory role based on quality products i s greatly valued.
Noteworthy are a series o f annual Vietnam Development Reports, which takes up
a subject each year. In 2003, ‘poverty’ was the subject, followed by ‘governance’ in
2004 and ‘business’ in 2005. The VDR series, produced in collaboration with the
Vietnamese think tanks and a number o f donors, deepened the understanding o f critical
issues such as poverty and impact o f government policies. The Reports were widely
disseminated and discussed with various stakeholders. It i s also important to note that
drafting o f these reports and dissemination are used as a process for building capacity of
local counterparts. For example, there i s an agreement that the next poverty assessment
will be conducted by the Vietnamese counterparts.
The AAA program was also augmented significantly by resources raised through
trust fund arrangements and by partnering with the Government, local institutions and
other donors. About 30% o f the overall AAA program i s financed through trust funds.
However, the impact o f partnership far outweighs the resources utilized for the program.
The partnership in delivering the AAA program has led to a highly effective
Government-donor dialogue as well as serious capacity building efforts for Vietnamese
institutes, as noted in QAG evaluation.
IFC has been very active in the provision o f advisory services. Notably, i t led the
bi-annual Vietnam Business Forum which is now an important vehicle for policy dialogue
between government, the private sector and the donor community. These regular forums
have led to the identification o f policy priorities for business development and provided a
framework for coordinating donors’ efforts in this area, Furthermore, IFC’s Mekong
Private Sector Development Facility (MPDF) has played a catalytic role in addressing
private sector issues through provision o f technical assistance and conducting researches,
(f) Partnership: Effective Aid Coordination
l5 To date QAG assessed 36 country programs. Vietnam AAA program was rated highly satisfactory
overall, along with Strategy Relevance, Dialogue and Dissemination and L i k e l y Impact dimensions.

43

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 44 o f 47

With the Government taking a strong leadership, significant progress has been
made in establishing and implementing a comprehensive aid effectiveness and
harmonization agenda in Vietnam. At the High Level Forums o n Aid Effectiveness held
in Rome and Paris Vietnam was highlighted as a leader in this field. The harmonization
initiative, which started as an initiative o f “three development banksY’l6to identify
opportunities in harmonizing project related procedures, has progressed into a
comprehensive effort led by the Government involving most donor agencies in Vietnam.
In 2005, a localized version o f the Paris Declaration, the so-called Hanoi Core Statement,
was adopted by the Government and the donor community. The Hanoi Core Statement
sets out a number o f joint Government and donor commitments and targets to be
achieved by 2010 in the areas o f alignment, harmonization, mutual accountability and
managing for results. One important commitment worth noting i s the fact that all donors
have agreed to align their programs with the next 5 year Social Economic Development
Plan (SEDP).
Partnership has been embedded in all o f the Bank instruments, from analytical
work, IDA operations to external relations activities. Noteworthy i s the series o f PRSCs
which has become a tool for an increasing number o f donors” to discuss a wide range o f
policy issues with the Government. PRSC4 (FY05 operation) was co-financed by 12
donors including the European Commission, Japan and ADB. The core diagnostic
studies such as the Public Expenditure Review o f FY05 have become joint products o f
the Government and donors with the Government taking the leadership. At the sector
and thematic levels, more than 20 working groups are in place, often working as the joint
Government-donor-NGO partnership group to discuss sector/thematic policy issues and
aid coordination.” The Bank, while not always taking the lead, participates in almost all
the groups. On the external relations activities, the Vietnam Development Information
Center, which also houses the GDLN facility, is jointly run by 5 donors.

(g) Clients’ view:

Clients continue to maintain a very positive perception o f the Bank in Vietnamlg.
The Bank i s viewed as an effective player for development, working on the clients’
priorities for the country, and as an effective catalyst for poverty reduction. Clients also
see the Bank as playing an important role in a range o f other development areas,
including social sector development and improving governance. The 2005 survey also
highlighted the increasing value that clients see in Bank’s policy advice and knowledge2’.

l6The harmonization initiative was first undertaken by the Asian Development Bank, Japan Bank for
International Development and the World Bank.
PRSCS i s expected to be cofianced by 16 donors.
For example, Transport Partnership Group i s led by MOT and JBIC. The group coordinates O D A and
TA activities, discusses measures for improving aid effectiveness and capacity building.
19
Two client surveys were conducted during the CAS period, in 2003 and 2005.
2o 2005 Survey showed that the clients value the Bank’s financial resources and policy advicehowledge
almost equally.

44

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 45 o f 47

V. Lessons for the next Country Assistance Strategy
What Worked Well:
Strong country ownership of the development agenda has been a k e y factor behind
Vietnam’s development achievements and should continue to be the driving principle for
all Bank activities. Institutional and policy reforms are only sustainable when the country
fully commits itself and decides to pursue them. Thorough consensus building within
Vietnam is imperative in this regard, but the Bank can nurture the process through
carefully timed and targeted advice, such as happened for anti-corruption and banking
reform.
Understanding Poverty. The understanding o f poverty in Vietnam continues to be
improved through analytical work that i s increasingly nationally owned. Recent poverty
assessments have been conducted jointly by the Government, Vietnamese academic
institutions, donors and NGO’s, and the latest update was done entirely by the
Vietnamese Academy o f Social Sciences. The result has been a shared understanding of
the nature and causes o f poverty, including on the need to improve the poverty targeting
o f public investments.

Use of high quality AAA to impact policy dialogue: The Bank team utilized AAA
strategically in advancing reform agenda. AAA processes and products were used in
effectively engaging in dialogue with key policy makers, academics, business community,
donors and NGOs on key reform areas. The Bank provided high quality analytical pieces
for targeted audiences for debate, offering choices for policy decisions. The principles
o f providing high quality analyses for policy makers’ debate rather than imposing on a
course o f actions worked well in Vietnamese context. This approach will need to be
maintained.
Expanded capacity in managing investment portfolio with decentralized support
from the Bank: Vietnam has expanded i t s capacity to manage a large Bank investment
portfolio over the past years. For the first time in FY05, the country utilized the full IDA
allocation delivering more than seven investment projects a year. Safeguard policies and
regulations including procurement have been improved and management capacity has
been strengthened, albeit slowly. The Bank supported the Government’s efforts by
decentralizing the operations with more staff in Hanoi managing tasks. 57% o f ongoing
projects are being supervised by staff based in Hanoi. The strengthened capacity in the
field contributed to improved portfolio management.
Partnership: As a CDF pilot, Vietnam managed partnership extremely well. Donors
have gathered around PRSCs as a platform for policy dialogues and with strong country
ownership. The Government and the donor community, with the Bank playing an active
role, have effectively come together in establishing a clear agenda for h o w to enhance the
Government-donor partnership and improve effectiveness o f aid delivered to Vietnam
through the Hanoi Core Statement. The Bank’s dialogues beyond the Government such

45

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 46 o f 47

as with the business community, civil society, press and academia have been expanding
in volume and substance. These interactions also feed back to the dialogue with the
Government and generate healthy debates on the country’s economic and social
development issues.
Bank’s role as convener and coordinator: The World Bank group has played an
effective role o f convener and coordinator for policy dialogues. C G and mid C G
meetings, business forums organized by IFC, youth initiatives and partnership with
NGOdacademia have contributed to expand and deepen the scope o f dialogues.
What Worked Less Well: Need for Improvement for Next CAS
Assessing results arising from the existing portfolio: The review o f the portfolio
shows that 27 investment projects prepared before CAS were being implemented during
the CAS period whereas only 13 projects which were discussed in the CAS as supporting
i t s objectives entered into the portfolio by the end o f FY05. Furthermore, 9 out o f the 13
projects have been implemented for less than two years to date. With the portfolio o f this
mix, i t is not surprising to see that most o f the results were generated by the pre-CAS
projects. However, the CAS paid less attention to the impacts o f the existing portfolio
nor did i t try to align the existing portfolio closely to the CAS goals. For the next CAS, it
i s necessary to carefully examine the intended achievements o f the current portfolio in
comparison with the Government’s intentions in the new SEDP, as the basis for finalizing
the set o f projects to be approved over the next few years.
Establishing a realistic results framework: W h i l e Bank interventions have clearly
contributed to significant progress in a number o f CPRGS goals, documenting and
quantifying these achievements has been a challenge. Despite the short timeframe o f the
CAS and the limited Bank resources, the CAS goals were set ambitiously at the broad
CPRGS national level with a relatively weak explicit link to outcomes arising from
individual projects. The next CAS will need to establish a realistic results framework,
with a more explicit results chain linking operations with a set o f specific and
monitorable indicators relating to the Government’s M&E systems.

Use of CAS as a management tool: The CAS was designed with broad objectives set at
a national level, which allowed for the Bank to respond flexibly and quickly to emerging
challenges and requests for support such as road safety and HIV/AIDs issues. However,
this relative lack o f specificity made i t difficult to use the CAS as a day-to-day
management tool. I t i s only now that PDOs and K P I s are being discussed with specific
CAS sub-theme objectives in mind. I t will be important to make the next CAS a living
document that can be used as an effective management tool whereby incoming and
ongoing projects are continuously assessed against the CAS objectives.
Pace of Policy Reforms for the Financial Sector and SOEs. While there has been
steady progress in many areas o f the reform program, the pace has been slower than
expected in the CAS in certain key, sensitive areas. On the economic reform agenda, this
applies in particular to financial sector and state-owned enterprise reform, The recent

46

CPS ANNEX 2
Page 47 of 47

adoption o f an ambitious banking reform road map has been an encouraging
development. The team will need to further expand its support for the reform in the next
CAS. .
Addressing Poverty Among Ethnic Minorities and Urban Migrants. Recent poverty
assessments have demonstrated that poverty i s not being reduced at a sufficient pace
among certain ethnic minorities, particularly in the Northern Mountains and Central
Highlands and in pockets o f deep poverty within cities, particularly associated with
migrants. The Bank needs to continue working closely with Government to ensure more
effective policy responses, including to increase access o f urban residents, in particular
unregistered migrants, to public services, and piloting more effectively targeted programs
Portfolio management: Slow process, timely intervention Vietnam portfolio still
suffers from slow project preparation and implementation. Despite the improved
capacity for project management and legal and regulatory set up, the country’s record for
preparing and implementing investment projects i s slow. While the CPPR action plans
helped in accelerating disbursement recently, the pace continues to lag behind the
regional and Bank wide averages. Furthermore, the undisbursed balance has started to
rise with an increased number o f investment projects in the portfolio.

The issue o f timely intervention and assistance to the country’s evolving development
needs i s closely related to this.
While the investment projects have achieved the
intended objectives, the significant implementation delays have led to project results
being achieved much later than originally planned. Thus, whether the investment was
undertaken at the time most needed for the country and impacts maximized are open to
debate. The country team needs to continue i t s efforts in supporting the Government
review i t s ODA procedures, improve the Government’s procedures and strengthen the
capacity so that the investment brings about the results within the intended timeframe.

47

P

c

.&

c

&

.L.

.5
h

.z

,%

o c o

N
w

CPS ANNEX 3
Page 1 o f 2

The Vietnam Development Goals

P
Target 1: Reduce by 40 percent the proportion of people living below the
internationallyaccepted poverty line by 2010

37.4 %

19.5 %

Target 2: Reduce by 75 percent the proportion of people living under the
internationally accepted food poverty line by 2010

15.0 %

6.9 %

Target 1: Increase the net enrolment in primary school to 97 percent in 2005
and to 99 percent in 2010

91.4 %

94.6 %

Target 2: Increase net enrolment rate in junior secondary school to 80 percent in
2005 and 90 percent by 2010

61.7 %

90.1 %

Target 3: Eliminate the gender gap in primary and secondary education by 2005,
and the gap with ethnic minorities in 2010

99 %
88.2 %

100 %
90.1 Yo

Target 4: Increase literacy to 95 percent of under-40-year-old women by 2005
and 100 percent by 2010

93.2 %

94.3 %'

Target 5: By 2010 have improved the quality of education and increase full-day
schooling at primary level (exact target depends on funding).

n.a.

n.a.

27% (Nat.
Assembly)

Target 1: Increase the number of women in elective bodies at all levels.
Target 2: Increase the participation of women in agencies and sectors [includes
ministries, central agencies and enterprises] at all levels by 3 4 % in the next 10
years.

n.a.

Target 3: Ensure that the names of both husband and wife appears on the landuse right certificates by 2005

n.a.
n.a.

18*
Target 2: Reduce the under-5 mortality rate to 36 per 1000 live births by 2005
and 32 by 2010

48.4

24'

Target 3: Reduce under five malnutrition to 25 percent by 2005 and 20 percent
by 2010

37 %

25 %**

Target 1: Reduce the maternal mortality rate to 80 per 100,000 live births by

BO**

193,000**

CPS ANNEX 3
Page 2 o f 2

w

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Target 1: Extend forest cover to 43 percent by 2010

30 %

37 %

Target 2: Ensure that 60 percent of the rural population (80 percent of urban
population) has access to clean and safe water by 2005 and 85 percent in 2010.

48%

56 %*

Target 3: Ensure there are no slums and temporary houses in all towns and
cities by 2010

13.6 %

12.2 %*

Target 4: Ensure that all waste-water in towns and cities is treated by 2010

n.a.

n.a.

Target 5: Ensure that all solid waste is collected and disposed of safely in all
towns and cities by 2010

n.a.

15%*

59%
(1999)

64%
(2001)

Target 1: Increase the average income of the lowest expenditure quintile to 140
percent of that in 2000 and 190 percent in 2010 (Growth in per capita
expenditure of the poorest 20% of households)

29%
(1993-98)

8.9%
(1998-2002)

Target 2: Reduce by half the rate of poor people falling back into poverty due to
natural disasters and other risks by 2010

n.a.

n.a.

Target 6: Air and water pollution must attain national standards by 2005

Goal 8: Reduce vulnerability

I998

Goal 9: Improve governance for poverty reduction

Target 2: Ensure budget transparency

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Target 3: Implement legal reform agenda

several
1998

2004

Target 1: Preserve and develop the reading and writing ability of ethnic
languages

n.a.

n.a.

Target 2: Ensure entitlement of individual and collective land-use rights in ethnic
minority and mountainous areas

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

1998

2004

n.a.

n.a.

Goal I O : Reduce ethnic inequality

Target 3: Increase the proportion of ethnic minority people in authority bodies at
Goal 11: Ensure pro-poor infrastructure development
Target 1: Provide basic infrastructure to 80 percent of poor communes by 2005
and 100 percent by 2010

Note:

This table
summarizes
n.a. = not available.
= 2002, ** = 2005

a

fuller

set

of

VDGs

outlined

in

the

Source: Socialist Republic of Vietnam (2002), United Nations Country Team (2003) and GSO data.

CPRGS;

CPS ANNEX 4
Page 1 of 7

CONSULTATIONS ON VIETNAM COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
(CPS)

1. The new World Bank CPS was formulated based on a) a series o f dialogues on
Vietnam’s SEDP 2006-2010, which was prepared after extensive consultations with a
wide range o f domestic and international stakeholders, b) two sets o f consultations, a
Client Survey, and a business formulation dialogue between the Bank and key
Vietnamese government counterparts and c) formal consultations with the government
representatives, donors and NGOs. In particular, the new CPS benefited from ongoing
dialogue between Vietnamese officials and Bank representatives on lending and AAA
programs, as well as ongoing partnerships o n specific lending projects and analytical
work.
Socio-economic Development Plan (SEDP) Consultations

2. The new SEDP 2006-2010 was prepared based on extensive consultations with
domestic and international stakeholders over a two-year period. The Ministry o f Planning
and Investment (MPI) was responsible for drafting the SEDP and leading consultations.
The drafting process was characterized by serious efforts to consult with different groups
o f Vietnamese society on the content o f the draft. In addition to internal discussions
within Government, M P I organized consultation workshops with local officials, groups
o f academics, the domestic business sector, international and local non-Governmental
Organizations (NGOs), people living with disabilities, overseas Vietnamese, women and
women’s groups, and O D A donors. In addition, MPI collaborated with local researchers
and international NGOs to gather feedback from poor communities in participatory
research exercises in 17 sites across the country.
3. Donors were involved in the consultations from an early stage, with the first formal
GoV-donor discussions in July 2004 at the mid-year Consultative Group meeting in
Vinh, involving both central and local Government representatives, and regular GoVdonor consultations carried out over the following two years, including a major workshop
in September 2005
4. Ongoing work preparing a L a w on Planning and a manual on planning in a market
economy indicates that this move to a more open and consultative planning style will be a
permanent change that i s reflected in official guidance to planners.
5. In November 2005, the National Assembly discussed the draft SEDP 2006-2010.
Hence, views o f National Assembly members were incorporated prior to submission to
the Party Congress in April 2006, giving the National Assembly more influence over the
content o f the document than previously. There was also a second round o f consultations
within Government and with donors and NGOs following the first discussion at the
National Assembly. The National Assembly approved the SEDP in June, 2006.
Vietnam Client Survey

6. Two Client Surveys were conducted during the last CAS period; i.e. in 2003 and
2005, as a part o f ongoing dialogues with the government. The 2005 Survey was sent to
657 stakeholders from the central and local Governments, the private sector and c i v i l

CPS ANNEX 4
Page 2 o f 7

society in Vietnam during July/August 2005 to obtain feedback on their attitudes towards
the Bank, important areas for Bank involvement, and the Bank’s effectiveness.
Respondents were also asked about general issues facing Vietnam, the Bank’s
communication outreach efforts, and Bank’s CAS consultations. Responses were
received from 279 (43%) o f the 657 stakeholders surveyed. Government employees
accounted for the bulk o f the respondents (43%), but there was also a good representation
o f NGOs and academics (12% each), the private sector and donors. A similar type o f
survey was done in 2003 in preparation for the FY04 CAS Progress Report.

7. Results from the 2005 survey demonstrated that there i s a continued positive
perception o f the Bank in Vietnam among stakeholders. When asked to provide their
impression o f the Bank’s effectiveness in Vietnam, stakeholders rated the Bank 7.7 (on a
scale o f 1 to 10 with 1 being very unfavorable and 10 being very favorable), a slight
improvement over a 7.5 rating in FY03. Government employees gave the highest ratings
on Bank effectiveness, and the respondents from the donor community gave the Bank
slightly lower ratings. On a scale with 1 being strong disagreement and 10 being strong
agreement, respondents gave a rating o f 8.2 when asked whether the Bank currently plays
a relevant role for development in Vietnam. Respondents also generally agreed that the
Bank i s an effective catalyst for discussions on poverty, that it works to reflect its own
mission on poverty reduction, and that stakeholders like to interact/work with Bank staff.
The Bank was seen as becoming easier to work with, with the score for the cost and time
o f working with the Bank showing an improvement over FY03.

8. The survey indicated that the Bank continues to have an important role to play in a
range o f development areas in Vietnam, including economic growth, transitioning to a
market economy, developing the social sectors, and improving governance. Respondents
saw infrastructure development, poverty reduction, economic growth, and assisting the
transition to a market economy as some o f the Bank’s strengths, whereas Bank activities
in the education and health sectors were perceived as relatively less effective.
9. Respondents also gave favorable ratings to the Bank’s efforts to safeguard against
corruption in i t s own projects and did not see corruption as a major problem within Bank
operations. However, helping G o V reduce corruption in the country through advice and
analytical work was seen as an important area for improvement. At the same time,
reducing corruption country-wide was identified as a key development priority, along
with economic growth and improving government effectiveness. While poverty reduction
remained a highly important and effective area o f Bank intervention, in the new survey
i t s importance was ranked below both growth and governance issues. This represents a
shift in perceptions from FY03, where poverty reduction was ranked as the most
important challenge.
10. In the new survey, financial transfers were viewed as the most valuable type o f Bank
assistance, as was the case in FY03. However, in the new survey stakeholders
increasingly saw value in other types o f assistance as well. Nearly h a l f o f all respondents
indicated that financial resources were the greatest or second greatest value from the
Bank, followed by policy and economic advice, donor coordination, and knowledge.

CPS ANNEX 4
Page 3 o f 7

Between the FY03 and the FY06 (05?) surveys, however, the share o f respondents who
saw finances the as greatest value decreased while those who saw policy advice as the
greatest value increased. The majority o f respondents felt that the Bank’s greatest
weaknesses were imposing technocratic solutions without regard to local realities and not
exploring alternative options.
Client Survey follow-up consultations

11. The client survey was followed by focused interviews with a number o f stakeholders
in central Government, local Governments, and civil society.
12. In general, interviewees confirmed the client survey’s positive view o f the Bank,
providing examples from their daily work that demonstrated the Bank’s value for
Vietnam’s development. Interviewees saw the Bank’s value-added from their respective
points o f view. Project staff emphasized the value o f Bank financing, NGOs emphasized
the Bank’s convener role, and provincial G o V officials emphasized the importance o f
decentralization. In general, the interviewees stressed the importance o f institutional
development and the Bank helping the country (or city) cope with a rapidly growing and
transforming economy.
13. Bank staff were highlighted as a key asset, with interviewees detailing examples o f
their positive interactions with various Bank staff. Respondents also spoke highly o f the
Bank’s convener role, and complemented the Bank for taking an effective leadership role
in the international community. Interlocutors said that the Bank had done a great job o f
opening up the dialogue with government and bringing in the other donors and had a
good approach to consultation. However, civil society complained that local NGOs
should be allowed a better representation at C G meetings.
14. Interviewees also praised the improved impact o f Bank’s economic and sector work,
complimenting the quality o f World Bank reports, and the participation o f local
stakeholders in i t s preparation. Innovation day was also highlighted as an effective World
Bank instrument to put a spotlight on key issues. However, Government officials also
stressed that respecting Government ownership was crucial, and that World Bank project
supervision should respect the Government’s ownership.

15. Discussions on corruption were in lined with the findings o f the survey. Interviewees
stated that the Bank’s procedures were effective in safeguarding against corruption.
16. In general, respondents recalled a good involvement in the previous CAS processes
and gave useful recommendations on how to proceed with consultations on the new CPS,
including facilitating a stronger participation by local NGOs.

CPS ANNEX 4
Page 4 of 7

Consultations with Government

17. In September 2006, a formal CPS consultation retreat was organized. G o V officials
from the MPI, MOF, SBV, twenty other line ministries and agencies participated in
discussions with Bank staff concerning the next CPS for Vietnam.
18. From Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) to Country Partnership Strategy
(CPS): The retreat was built on the two-year consultation process o f strategizing the
country’s development path to 2010, which culminated in the Socio Economic
Development Plan (SEDP) o f 2006 - 2010, and the Bank’s support for that path.
Reflecting the partnership that the Government and the Bank had built in recent years, the
strategy would be titled the Country Partnership Strategy. Government representatives
appreciate this change.
19. Lessons Learned: The Bank’s internal and evaluation department has evaluated the
World Bank assistance as having sustainable impacts at the institutional and policy level
as well as the individual project level. The Bank also enjoyed broad-based support in the
country, as evidenced by the two recent client surveys. However, slow project
implementing diminished the development impact. The G o V and the Bank agreed on the
need to work in finding ways to streamline the process and accelerate project
implementation. The recent work on legal and regulatory reform o f investment
management and implementation would be a good basis for hrther work in this regard.

--

20. Aligning CPS to SEDP from Plan to Action: The clear alignment o f the CPS
concept note to the SEDP was appreciated by the Government. The four pillars o f CPS -business development, strengthened social inclusion, and environment management with
strengthening o f governance as the foundation -- were viewed by the Government
representatives as appropriate and reflective o f the Bank’s comparative advantage. The
SEDP will be operationalized and implemented in accordance with the Government’s
Action Plan, and the Vietnam Development Report 07 will be used as a roadmap. The
next five years will complete the first generation reforms and initiate the second
generation reforms.
2 1. Selectivity: The Bank assistance, while expanded significantly over the years, would
finance only a part o f SEDP’s investment needs. The Government accepted the Bank’s
criteria for selecting projects based on comparative advantage, outcome, scalability and
sector performance. G o V would set the priority for the Bank assistance taking into
account the availability o f other donors’ support. A Hanoi Compact to formalize the
alignment o f donors’ strategy to the SEDP will be further discussed among donors and
with the Government.
22. ImplementationIssues: With decentralization, the emphasis during the CPS period
will be on strengthening the capacity o f institutions at the local level. At the same time,
given the strengthened legal framework for investment projects, procurement, and
financial management, the Bank will work with the Government on the implementation

CPS ANNEX 4
Page 5 o f 7

o f strengthened laws and regulations. The procedural issues o f the Government and the
Bank will be reviewed to W h e r streamline the process.
23. Regular review of performance using the Results Framework: An annual review
o f CPS performance was planned by the Bank, using the results framework developed for
CPS. The Bank review would closely build on to the MPI’s review o f SEDP progress.
The Government and the Bank agreed to use these annual reviews as a means for
adjusting the portfolio and future pipeline.
24. Transition from IDA to IBRD lending: While graduation from IDA would not
materialize during the CPS period, moving to a blend country status would benefit the
country as i t would allow Vietnam to tap additional IBRD resources. The government
will study the experiences o f other countries such as China who graduated from IDA and
further discuss this issue with the Bank.
Cnsultations with Donors and Civil Society

25. Consultations on how to align Donor Assistance Strategies with the new SEDP were
held with several key donors in the spring o f 2006, including through country team
retreats with DFID and ADB in M a y 2006 with in-depth discussion o f the new results
matrices and their alignment with the SEDP monitoring and evaluation frameworks.
Following consultations with Government in October 2006 consultations were held with
ODA donors, international NGOs, local NGOs, and academia.
26. During both consultations, participants repeatedly noted that the GoV-Bank Group
partnership remains strong. They welcomed the shift from an ‘assistance’ to a
’partnership’ strategy, and said that the draft CPS i s well aligned with the priorities o f the
SEDP. Most comments consisted o f suggestions for placing greater emphasis on specific
areas o f assistance or results within the framework o f CPS objectives.
27. Some o f the specific comments from the donors touched upon:

The need to better explain how World Bank policies change as the country
progresses, and to give a better, more explicit account o f how to distinguish
between the World Bank’s activities and those o f other donors.
The need to better include the IFC as an integrated part o f the World Bank
Group’s Pillar 1 activities, notably in the results matrix.
H o w to put more focus on capacity building
principles, objectives.

-

importance, implementation

The need to better describe the Bank’s governance program for local-level
capacity building/empowerment (report-card surveys).

CPS ANNEX 4
Page 6 of 7
0

The need to include specific references to the Hanoi Core Statement
indicatordtargets, and to indicate how the Bank intends to facilitate reaching these
targets.
H o w to strike the right balance between presenting empirical evidence on the
extent o f corruption in Vietnam, and stressing the seriousness with which the
donor community expects GoV to address existing weaknesses.

28. Some o f the specific comments from the C i v i l Society touched upon:
H o w to better reflect the redefined role o f civil society in Vietnam in the WB
program.
The need to detail how the World Bank’s activities are supporting people with
disabilities.
H o w the World Bank i s supporting mental health in Vietnam.
The need to give a more detailed account o f the World Bank’s program o f support
to G o V data generation capacities as part o f the result-based CPS structure.
The need to better describe how the World Bank’s anti-corruption Singapore
paper was reflected in Vietnam strategy, in particular the role o f civil society.

The need to present a more detailed, updated analysis o f ethnic minority poverty.
H o w to expand gender data and refine operational programs based on the findings
from the new gender country assessment.
The need to give a more prominent position to the GoV’s sustainable
development objectives in the SEDP, and to better describe how the Bank intends
to support their achievement.
H o w to better articulate the horizontal (cross-sectoral) linkages in the CPS
document/results matrix.
Consultationswith the Private Sector

29. In October 2006, the IFC and the Bank conducted extensive consultations with
private sector representatives through roundtable discussions and written exchanges o f
views with domestic and foreign business associations.
30. Business leaders were appreciative o f the efforts that the Bank Group has made in the
past to support Vietnam’s development efforts and i t s transition to a market economy.
They emphasized the useful role the Bank Group has played in the areas o f Information

CPS ANNEX 4
Page 7 of 7

Enhancement, Dialogue Enhancement, Legal Reforms and Capacity Building. The
representatives o f the institutions that were consulted were also supportive o f the
proposed orientation o f the Country Partnership Strategies. A general recommendation
was for greater selectivity. Business leaders urged the Bank Group not to try to resolve all
o f Vietnam’s development issues, but to focus on a few areas o f comparative advantage
and work strategically with partners in other areas.
3 1. Business representatives also made specific recommendations regarding the areas o f
focus o f the new CPS:
Business environment. While acknowledging the significant improvements in
the business environment that have taken place over the previous CAS period,
business representatives emphasized the large reform agenda that s t i l l remains.
They urged greater focus on simplification o f procedures; leveling the playing
field by harmonizing the cost o f doing business; improving the functioning o f
land markets; and assistance in the financial, monetary, and banking areas as
those are gradually opened in accordance with Vietnam’s bilateral and
multilateral commitments under WTO. Business leaders acknowledged the need
for new and better regulations, but they emphasized the importance o f focussing
on implementation. A recurrent suggestion was the importance o f strengthening
implementation, especially at the local level, and enforcing the capacity o f local
government agencies.
0

Anti-corruption. A number o f business leaders suggested that the Bank Group
provide more practical support for anti-corruption programs. I t was often
emphasized that anti-corruption reforms should be implemented in tandem with
enhancing the transparency o f businesses through improving corporate
governance and raising social responsibilities. Some business leaders wanted to
see a greater emphasis on court and judicial reform.

0

Equitization. While recognizing past progress in equitization, a number o f
business leaders felt that there still i s a need for more support from international
organizations in this policy, as it is an important and sensitive issue. They also
said that progress in equitization should be judged mainly by the proportion o f
equitized state capital, rather than the number o f SOEs equitized.

0

Improving competitiveness. Useful suggestions were made by business
representatives for greater support in the areas o f vocational training and
agribusiness services, to improve the competitiveness o f the Vietnamese
economy.

CPS ANNEX 5
Page 1 of 9

VIETNAM
H:.\i\;Ol CORESTATEMER’T ON AID

EFFECTIC’EYESS

BAC KGRO 11ND

1.
Vietnam i s in the forefront o f efforts to implement the conclusions o f the High Level
Forum on Aid Effectiveness held in Paris in March 2005 (“The Paris Declaration”) and has been
proactive in localizing the global agenda. At the Mid-term Consultative Group Meeting for
Vietnam, held in Can Tho City on June 2-3,2005, the Government o f Vietnam and development
partners agreed to take far-reaching and monitorable actions to make aid more effective as
Vietnam looks ahead to the achievement o f the Millennium Development Goals by 2015. The
Hanoi Core Statement (HCS) o n Aid Effectiveness translates the “The Paris Declaration” into
“Partnership Commitments ” and recognizes the need to support Vietnam’s effort to strengthen
governance, to improve development performance, and to enhance development outcomes.
Through the HCS, the Government o f Vietnam and development partners commit to increase the
impact o f aid in reducing poverty and inequality, increasing growth, building the capacity o f
human resources and institutions, and accelerating achievement o f Vietnam’s Development
Goals.
2.
The HCS includes 14 indicators with indicative targets for 2010. In many cases, these
targets are more ambitious than those in the Paris Declaration. Inaddition to periodic monitoring
in the HCS, the Mid-term Consultative Group Meeting for Vietnam in June 2006 agreed to
establish an international Independent Monitoring Team (IMT) to review the achievements o f the
HCS. It i s intended that the team will commence monitoring in early 2007. The team will
examine the overall implementation o f “The Paris Declaration ” in Vietnam, including
government and donor performance in implementing the principles and commitments o f the
HCS, supplemented by a more detailed review o f a sample o f donors selected on a voluntary
basis.
OWNERSHIP

Vietnarti defines operntiorial development policies

3.
Coherent long-term vision with medium-term strategy derived from that vision.
Policy formulation and public actions in Vietnam are guided by a range o f well-developed and
interconnected strategies and plans. The Government has articulated its development vision for
the decade 2001-10 in i t s Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SEDS), which expresses a
strong commitment to growth, poverty reduction and social equity. The specific actions needed
to translate the SEDS into reality are described in the constitutionally-required five-year SocioEconomic Development Plans (SEDPs) for 2000-2005 and 2006-10 as w e l l as sectoral five-year
plans. Sectoral medium-term development strategies detailing a large number o f targets and
indicators are prepared by all line ministries to operationalize the SEDS and other longer-term
sectoral plans. These include, for example, five-year plans for rural development, urban
development, transport, energy, education, the environment, and health. Similarly, provinces
and cities are required to formulate medium-term development plans every five years.

CPS ANNEX 5
Page 2 of 9

4.
Country-specific development targets with a multi-sectoral and well sequenced
strategy. The SEDP 2006-2010 outlines an overall framework for economic growth and
industrial development - aimed at guiding Vietnam into the group o f middle-income countries
by 2010 - with a strong pro-poor focus. The SEDP strives toward twelve 2010 Vietnam
Development Goals. These goals and targets are the results o f substantial analytical work that
was carried out under the coordination o f a Poverty Task Force which drew on the MDGs,
assessed their relevance alongside the goals and targets in the SEDS, sector strategies and fiveyear plans, and selected those which most effectively captured progress in reducing poverty and
promoting social equity. Some o f the selected goals are outside the MDGs, but were added on
the basis o f their strategic importance for economic growth, poverty reduction, and social equity.
Good progress has been made towards achieving the targets o f primary school attendance,
universal education, and reduction o f child mortality and malnutrition. However, greater
emphasis is needed in the health sector to address non-communicable diseases as well as new
emerging infectious diseases.
Capacity and resources for implementation. The Government i s guided by the SEDP
5.
while preparing annual budgets and has taken action to adopt a medium-term perspective in
budget preparation in order to allow for better prioritization o f expenditures, improved overall
efficiency in public spending, and a stronger integration between capital and recurrent budgets.
The Government adopted a 2006-08 Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and asked
line ministries and provinces to prepare a budget framework for the period 2006-10, based on the
SEDP. Sectoral MTEFs have been piloted in education, health, transport, agriculture and rural
development, as well as in four provinces. A second phase o f the Public Administration Reform
Master Program i s being launched, built around organizational restructuring, human resources
management and salary reform, and simplified administrative procedures.
Participation of national stakeholders in strategy formulation and implementation.
6.
The SEDP was formulated based on an extensive participation by a broad range o f stakeholders.
The Government organized three regional workshops and several consultations, including with
poor communities in several sites. Information on the SEDP planning process and content was
shared with external and domestic stakeholders throughout the preparation process. In 2006, for
the first time the Government invited comments from the public on a draft political report
prepared for the Tenth Party Congress. Moreover, civil society involvement in SEDP
formulation was significant. Local experts, academics, and researchers, as well as international
and local civil society organizations, assisted in drafting the SEDP. Significant efforts have been
made by the Government to solicit the views o f women, children and disabled people. The
SEDP also reflects the inputs provided by private sector representatives during some o f the
consultations and acknowledges the importance o f the private sector as an engine for economic
growth and j o b creation. Through the Vietnam Business Forum -jointly chaired by the Ministry
o f Planning and Investment (MPI), the World Bank, and the IFC - the Government engaged in a
dialogue with the private sector aimed at improving the legal and institutional framework for
different enterprises. Finally, parliamentary involvement in development planning and mediumterm strategy implementation i s strengthening. In particular, the National Assembly engaged in

CPS ANNEX 5
Page 3 o f 9

lively debates on the budgetary process and resource allocations, including l i n k s to the national
strategy.

ALIGNMENT

Developmerit partrrers align with Vietnam ’s strategies and coitirriit to use
strengthened coiintry systems

7.
Government leadership of coordination. The Government’s role in overall
coordination of development assistance is strong. As the level o f ODA increases, the
Government has urged external partners to build partnerships to ensure effective use o f O D A
funds and to reduce the management burden on the country’s administration. To establish the
strategic direction for ODA use over the coming five-year period, the Government i s developing
a “Strategic Framework for ODA Mobilization and Utilization 2006-1o”, which will identify
guiding principles, priorities and criteria for ODA’s use in support o f SEDP targets. The
Strategic Framework i s currently being reviewed by the Prime Minister for approval. T o provide
a regular forum for dialogue on issues regarding O D A effectiveness, a Partnership Group on Aid
Effectiveness (PGAE) has been established, with a broad representation o f bilateral and
multilateral development assistance agencies. I t s members include the Like-Minded Donor
Group (LMDG: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, and UK), the 5 Banks Group (ADB, ADF, JBIC, KfW and World Bank), Japan,
France, the EC, U S A I D and UNDP.
8.
Aligning aid flows with national priorities. During the 2005 C G meeting, external
partners agreed to align their development assistance strategies to the Government’s 2006-10
SEDP as its Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS). External partners supported the Government in
preparing the SEDP in a results-based, poverty-focused, and participatory manner. The World
Bank and the ADB have developed their Country Assistance Strategies in support o f the SEDP.
The UN Development Assistance Framework 2006-10 to support the 2006-10 SEDP was
approved in June 2005 and UNDP, U N I C E F and U N F P A have prepared Country Program
Action Plans to implement the UNDAF. The E C i s finalizing a new Country Strategy Paper to
promote alignment with the 2006-10 SEDP. Many bilateral partners - including Belgium,
Denmark, France, New Zealand and Switzerland - have aligned their strategy cycle with the
SEDP and are currently developing new assistance strategies. Others are reviewing and updating
current strategies to ensure that they are in line with the SEDP (Australia, Canada and Sweden).
Coordinating support to strengthen capacity. To achieve the objectives o f external
9.
partners to align their strategies with the SEDP, i t i s crucial to strengthen Government capacity
and management systems. A Comprehensive Capacity Building Program (CCBP) to improve
ODA management - supported by a large number o f external partners, including Japan, the
World Bank, and the LMDG - i s underway under the leadership o f the MPI. I t s implementation
started in September 2004 and has had positive impacts in terms o f strengthening the overall
institutional and legal framework for management o f public funds and ODA. In addition, there
have been a number o f joint, externally financed capacity-building activities to strengthen
country systems, including public financial management, procurement, and safeguards
management. A multi-partner effort, led by SIDA, is under way to support the State
Inspectorate.

CPS ANNEX 5
Page 4 o f 9

10.
Building reliable country systems. The first steps toward the use o f country systems
are to strengthen public financial management and budget execution, as well as procurement
legislation. The Government is making significant progress in that direction:
The 2004 State Budget L a w streamlines budget execution processes by creating a single
Treasury account, which allows improved monitoring o f expenditures, I t designates the
Treasury Department as the main agency charged with budget execution and financial
management information.
The establishment o f the State Audit o f Vietnam as an independent entity reporting
directly to the National Assembly strengthens institutional accountability.
The new Accounting Law, together with new accounting and auditing standards,
contributes to improving governance. Similarly, significant progress in terms o f
information disclosure has also been made. Specifically, the entire 2005 planned and
actual budgets, both at the central and district levels, were disclosed for the first time,
including aggregate amounts for defense expenditures.

The overall design o f an integrated Treasury and Budget Management Information
System (TABMIS) is completed. The first phase o f the T A B M I S i s expected to become
operational in 2009.
The new Procurement L a w became effective in April 2006, followed by the issuance in
September 2006 o f i t s Implementing Decree. This legislation consolidated the
fragmented legal framework for procurement, and introduced some important
improvements including complaint handling mechanisms, clearer remedies for violations,
and financial independence requirements for bidders. However, gaps between
Vietnamese regulations and international best practice remain, such as the use o f direct
contracting when competition i s possible, a subjective points system in the technical
evaluation o f goods and works, and price negotiations after competitive bidding.

Standard bidding documents for the procurement o f goods were issued in September
2005 and standard bidding documents for works are currently under development. Since
April 2005, with the introduction o f a Public Procurement Bulletin, bidding opportunities
as well as information on awards o f large contracts have been publicized. The
Government also i s planning to develop a public procurement monitoring system, based
on the O E C D D A C guidelines.
Using strengthened country systems. An increasing number o f development assistance
agencies - including ADB, CIDA, DANIDA, DFID, the EC, France, JBIC, SIDA, the
Netherlands, and Spain - are providing coordinated budget support through the World Bank-led
PRSCs. The PRSCs have become an effective instrument for external partner policy dialogue
with the Government on macro-economic, structural and social reform issues, as well as sectoral
strategic issues. For PRSC5, the latest operation, 12 donors have provided cofinancing. The
dialogue i s organized by policy areas in which donors engage selectively, based on their interests
and technical capacity on the ground. These working groups are led jointly by the Government
and various development assistance agencies. Some targeted budget support has also been
provided by external assistance agencies. The World Bank together with Belgium, CIDA, DFID,

CPS ANNEX 5
Page 5 of 9

the E C and N e w Zealand, has been providing support using the National Targeted Program for
Education for All as a funding vehicle. Furthermore, DFID is providing targeted budget support
for Program 135 since 2005, which has laid down the foundation for the First Program 135 Phase
2 Support Credit currently under preparation with support from six development partners,
including AusAID, DFID. Finland, Ireland, SIDA and IFAD. However, the M a y 2006 survey
conducted to monitor implementation o f the HCS indicates s t i l l limited use o f country systems
for procurement, financial management and safeguards for proj ect-based ODA, mainly because
o f high fiduciary environment risk.
12.
Strengthening capacity by avoiding parallel implementation structures. As
requested by the Prime Minister, MPI is conducting a study on the structure and regulation o f
ODA Project Management Units (PMUs). The findings o f the study are expected to assist both
the Government and external partners in avoiding the creation o f parallel structures for aidfinanced projects and programs. A parall study i s being carried out by JBIC which focuses on
the Transport Sector. There are differences in opinion among the Government and the donor
community as to the definition o f “parallel” and “fully-integrated” PMUs, but currently all o f the
66 PMUs responsible for the implementation o f World-Bank-financed projects and programs can
be defined as fully integrated into Government structures.
13.
Providing more predictable aid. Under the HCS, external partners commit to
enhancing the predictability o f aid by providing reliable indicative commitments o f development
assistance over a multi-year framework, and by releasing aid in a timely and predictable fashion
in relation to the Government’s budget cycle. Issues and options to strengthen the predictability
o f aid are currently being studied. I t i s expected that guidelines will be developed for improving
external partner reporting o n ODA commitments and disbursements, as well as for strengthening
the Government inclusion o f ODA in annual budgets and medium-term expenditure frameworks.

14.
Increasing use o f program-based assistance. To support sector coordination and
alignment, initiatives are underway in various sectors to formulate a common policy framework
supported by joint funding mechanisms. The Government has worked with a group o f
development partners in SWAP-like arrangements for the Education for All Targeted Program.
In the health sector, several bilateral partners are currently investigating the feasibility o f
developing a SWAP. A forestry partnership group has been established by several external
partners who have been looking into the feasibility o f moving to a more programmatic approach.
The World Bank, together with six development partners i s preparing a Development Policy
Credit to support Program 135 Phase 2 (see paragraph 11). These initiatives try to address either
alignment around a common results framework, harmonization o f procedures between external
partners or the use o f Government systems for implementation. There also has been some
progress in developing common procedures for different steps in the project cycle. The 5 Banks
Group i s working with the Government to harmonize requirements for Feasibility Studies. This
i s expected to replace the current dual processes o f documentation, reduce inefficiencies and
improve project preparation quality. Similarly, to reduce the reporting burden o n implementing
units, a common reporting format (the Aligned Monitoring Tool, or AMT) has been developed by

CPS ANNEX 5
Page 6 o f 9

MPI. This format should replace all other reporting requirements as i t i s gradually rolled out in
the ODA portfolio starting from January 2007.
Conducting joint missions. The highly decentralized decision-making authority o f
15.
external partners has contributed to reducing the need for missions. For example, 60 percent o f
World Bank-financed active projects are managed in the field. M a n y external partners manage
all o f their projects in the field. In sum, more than 60 percent o f the O D A volume is managed
from Vietnam. About 15 percent o f missions are conducted jointly. There i s an on-going effort
to increase the number o f joint review and evaluation missions and a mechanism i s being
established by MPI to encourage this.

16.
Encouraging shared analysis. A wide range o f analytical work is being undertaken in
Vietnam, some o f i t jointly through the Partnership Groups. Regular annual joint analytical work
i s undertaken through the preparation o f the Vietnam Development Report led by the World
Bank, with the participation o f other external partners and local research institutions. A
comprehensive Integrated Operational Work Program for Avian and Human Influenza for 200610 was developed by the Government, with support from the joint Government-UN program, the
World Bank, ADB, the E C and other bilateral partners. In 2005, the World Bank jointly with
ADB, CIDA, DANIDA, DFID, the Netherlands, NORAD, SIDA, SDC, and the U N D P prepared
a Vietnam Development Report on “Business.” In 2004 the Government - in partnership with
the World Bank and several bilateral partners - conducted a Public Expenditure Review (PER)
and Integrated Fiduciary Assessment, which also included sectoral analyses in education and
training, agriculture, transport and health. The Government has plans to undertake general
PERs, jointly with external partners, every four years as well as to conduct mid-term thematic
PERs. External partners have posted 64 documents on the Country Analytic Work website.”

17.
Improving the quality of and access to development information. The Government i s
taking action to improve the quality and availability o f data. The General Statistics Office’s
(GSO) capacity to collect, process, and disseminate data i s increasing, partially due to the 2003
National Statistics Law’s focus on transparency and high quality o f data. Criteria for measuring
poverty have been brought into line with international standards building o n the biennial
Vietnam Household Living Standard Survey. The GSO i s in charge o f collecting and publishing
national socio-economic statistical indicators related to SEDP goals, as well as the MDGs.
Baseline surveys o f natural resources and socio-economic features are conducted on a regular
basis in each region and province o f the national territory. A population census is planned for
2009. U N D P has transferred i t s Development Assistance Database (DAD) to MPI to help
enhance its ability to coordinate development assistance. Publicly available development
information has increased over time. Mass media also plays an important role in disseminating
information on relevant political, social, and development issues.
Local language
communication activities have been undertaken in ethnic minority areas. Information on the
2006-10 SEDP, on O D A assistance, o n censuses and socio-economic surveys, o n budget plans,

I

www.countryanalyticwork.net

CPS ANNEX 5
Page 7 o f 9

and on auditing results, is now available on-line in several websites developed and maintained by
central and line ministries.
18.
Improving country-level monitoring and evaluation. The Government has made a
tremendous effort to develop a results framework for the SEDP 2006-2010 that applies sound
principles o f monitoring and evaluation. A team from MPI has trained line ministries and
provinces. I t worked with them to put together a results framework that i s structured logically
around a results chain from inputs to outcomes. This marks a breakthrough in mainstreaming
monitoring in Vietnam, which traditionally has relied on measuring inputs, rather than the
changes generated with those inputs. Though the framework i s still evolving, i t is already clear
that there i s a substantial base that refers to measuring progress in the promotion o f good
governance. This represents important progress, since attempts to measure systematically the
results from governance reforms have been weak until now. Most external partners have agreed
to rely on the SEDP monitoring and evaluation system. .

19.
Developing effectiveness assessment frameworks. The HCS establishes joint local
commitments and targets to be achieved by 2010 in terms o f Government ownership, donor
alignment, harmonization and simplification. Several mechanisms are being put in place to
monitor the implementation o f the HCS. An annual joint assessment is carried out in connection
with the C G meetings to review progress in implementing agreed commitments on aid
effectiveness. In addition, an independent monitoring mechanism i s currently being established
to review the interaction between G o v e m e n t and external partners in specific areas o f the aid
effectiveness agenda. The first independent monitoring exercise i s expected to take place during
the first half o f 2007. To track progress on the HCS indicators, several rounds o f surveys including one undertaken in M a y 2006 - have been conducted and are expected to be updated
annually. The wide range o f activities planned to support the implementation o f the HCS
objectives are summarized in an annual harmonization action plan.
20.
The World Bank contribution to meeting the 2010 indicators for monitoring
implementation o f the HCS i s presented in Table 1.

CPS ANNEX 5
Page 8 of 9

TABLE1: WHERE DOES THE BANKSTAND?

Country Partnership Strategy
to be discussed at the World
Bank Board in February
2007 i s fully aligned with
SEDP 2006-10

100% o f Donors Aligned

66 PMUs, none o f them
parallel

N o Parallel PMUS

100% o f TF Grant
(US$M22 1) are GoVexecuted

100% o f aid for capacity
building delivered through
GoV-led and coordinated
programs

23% o f IDA funds,
corresponding to PRSC

At least 50% o f aid flow and
50% o f donors using G o V
procurement system for at least
50% o f their funds.

23% o f IDA funds,
corresponding to PRSC

At least 50% o f aid flow and
50% o f donors using national
budgeting, financial reporting &
auditing system for at least 50%
o f their funds.

In FY06, disbursement
amounted to US$M408.5
against a target o f US$M454
(corresponding to 90% o f the
annual disbursement plan)

75% o f aid disbursed according
to agreed schedules in annual or
multi-year fiameworks

~~

World Bank Environmental
Safeguards are 60% aligned
with GoV system for the
preparation o f EIA and 10%
for the implementation2’

100% o f EL4 under donor
h d e d projects implemented to
international standards and at
least 30% o f these camed out
using G o V systems

6/10 steps for the preparation o f EIA are the same. Gaps relate to the screening and scoping o f the potential
environmental impacts, public consultation and disclosure requirements for the preparation o f the EIA. In addition,
the G O V procedures do not require the preparation o f an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which includes
specific mitigation measures, a monitoring plan and resources for the implementation o f EMP. Another issue i s the
general poor quality o f EIA, and weak capacity and limited resources to supervise the implementation o f EMP.

CPS ANNEX 5
Page 9 of 9

78.3% with additional safeguards

I

N o Resettlement Plans are
required under G o V system
(0% alignment during
preparation) and about 60%
alignment when
implementing G o V policies
for compensation and
resettlement. World Bank
Safeguards policies for
Ethnic Minorities are 90%
aligned with G o V system3’

100% o f S I A under donor
funded projects implemented to
international standards and at
least 30% o f these carried out
using GoV systems

HARMONIZATIONAND
SIMPLIFICATION
Fewer, better core diagnostic and
country h l y t i c a l reviews

80% used Core Diagnostic Works
and 32% o f Country Analytical
Reviews shared

Since FY05, 100% o f Core
Diagnostics developed with
Donors and G o V and 66% o f
Analytical Reviews carried
out with donors.

Core Diagnostic Work used by
all Donors; at least 75% o f
country analytical reviews used
by 2 donors or more

Common project cycle
management tools agreed.
used

N o t enough data

A common reporting system,
Aligned Monitoring Tool
(AMT) will be used by G o V
and 5 Banks starting in 2007.
Common Guidelines for
Feasibility Studies for
Investment Projects are also
being developed by 5 Banks.

50% o f donors using common
project/program cycle tools

G o V and donors increasingly use

34% o f aid (by value) i s national

23% o f IDA finds,
corresponding to PRSC

75% o f aid i s national or sector
program based

Country Director in Hanoi
and 25 projects out o f a
portfolio o f 37 are managed
from Hanoi Office (68%)

75% o f aid intervention that are
managed at the country level

I

MANACNCFOR
RESULTS

scheduled for First

3/

Gaps relate to treatment o f “illegal” land and structures, land compensation price, consultation, resettlement and
rehabilitation options, and monitoring. For Ethnic Minorities, the policies are almost the same but there i s no
requirement under Vietnamese law for preparation and implementation o f Ethnic Minority Plan (EMP) for investment
project. In addition, similar to EIA, another issue i s the general poor quality o f SIA and RP.

CPS ANNEX 6
Page 1 of 3

4DB

The strategy supports the SEDP. The results based
strategy focuses on (i) business led, pro-poor economic
growth,;(ii) further enhancing social equity and
balanced development; (iii) better natural resource
management and d) close integration of regional
cooDeration activities.

4ustralia

The Development Cooperation Strategy 2003-2007 has
two key objectives, working towards the goal of
reducing poverty: (i) Broad based economic growth by
strengthening the governance of the Institutions
required for competitive market economy; and (ii)
Estimated total aid flows in 2
Improved productivity and links to markets for the rural years 2006-07 is at US$81.5
poor in the Mekong Delta and Central Coast regions.
million

Vietnam receives both ADF
and OCR. The strategy
expects about $300 million
ADF for FY07 and 08 and up to Structural reform issues
$500 million OCR funding per through PRSCs, Gender,
vear.
Infrastructure. Health. Water

China

The Indicative Cooperation Programme supports
Vietnam's CPRGS and aims to focus: (i) financial sector
reform, SOE, promotion of foreign investment; (ii) social
policies ensuring inclusive development; (iii)
lmanagement ofpublic resources
IUS$19.3 million for 2006
/China's cooperation strategy with Vietnam focuses on /US$200 million as pledged
1 construction and trade
lamount for 2006

Canada

Country Development Programming Framework for
Vietnam (2004-2009) supports the SEDP by focusing
on (i) more equitable economic growth with transparent
and accountable governance, emphasizing legaljudicial, public administration and financial sector
reform; (ii) improved rural livelihoods through support
for agriculture, small-medium enterprises, and a c e s to
markets; and (iii) better access to quality basic
education, especially for the rural poor and
Pledge for 2006 is US$31.8
disadvantaged.
million

Belgium

Structural reform issues
through PRSCs, Transport,
Education

Structural reform issues
lthrough PRSCs

I
I

Structural reform issues
through PRSCs, Trade,
Education, Public Finance
Management
Structural issues through
PRSCs, Urban
Development, Rural
Development, Public
Finance Management,
Environment

(40% for Structural issues
through PRSCs, 40% for healtt
and 20% for post WTO issues
and governance).

Structural issues through
PRSCs, Health, Education,
Forestry, Financial Sector,
Public Finance Management

EC

governance of Health Fund for the Poor and
governance. There will be some work on education as
well. EC taking the lead on EU member states'
complementary.

Flnland

Its strategy 2006-2015 focuses on four established
thematic priority areas: (i) multi-sectoral poverty
Euro 13.5 million in 2005 to
reduction programmes; (ii) water supply and sanitation; over 20 million in 2010 and
and (iii) rural development and (v) forestry.
aiming to exit by 2015.

France

The 2006-201 0 strategy defines three priority areas for
cooperation: (i) agriculture and food security; (ii)
infrastructure development and (iii) production
promotion. Projects in support of these areas are a)
transport systems (aviation, railway and urban
transport), b) energy development strategy; c) pollution
Structural issues through
and municipal waste reduction, d) AIDS prevention, e)
Approx. Euro280 million a year PRSCs, Urban
education and training and f) public administration
Development, Agriculture
(grants and loans)
reform.

Germany

German's strategy concentrates on three priority areas:
(i) Sustainable Economic Development; (ii)
Environment policy, Protection and sustainable use of
natural resources, including water supply, waste water Pledge for 2006 is US$114.7
and solid waste disposal; and (iii) Health
million

PRSC, Forestry, Urban

Structural reform issues
through PRSCs,
Health,Education, Public
Sector Reform

CPS ANNEX 6
Page 2 of 3

Tax, Public Expenditure
Management, Banking
reform

Structural reform issues
through PRSCs,
Infrastructure, Rural
Development, Education,
Health, Banking,
Environment

dge for 2006 is US$11.7

Structural reform issues
throuah PRSCs
Structural reform issues
through PRSCs, Forestry,
Rural Development
Structural reform issues
:hrough PRSCs, Rural
)evelopment, Education anc
'ublic Finance Management

Structural ireform s u e s
:hrough PRSC
SlDA strategy period is 2004-2008. The Strategy is to
promote poverty reduction, environmental sustainability
and developments towards democracy and human
rights. The assistance programs support the reform of
economy, legislation and administration; contribute to
democracy through assistance to National Assembly
and media; natural resources management, health care
and medical services, and the energy sector
Pledge for 2006 is US$37.9

iwitzerland

The strategy concentrates on four main areas: (i)
Sustainable management of resources; (ii) Urban
development and Administrative Reforms; (iii)
Institutional development and human resources; and
(iv) Good Governance

US$16.5 million for 2006

Structural issues through
'RSCs, Energy,
jovernance, Education,
'ublic Finance Management

Jrban Development, Public
'inance Management

CPS ANNEX 6
Page 3 o f 3

The Development Partnership Arrangement (DPA) for
the next 10 years will further support the GOV poverty
reduction efforts, health and education services and
local democracy. The support for the next five years
will be directed towards the goals set up by the
Government's SEDP.

IK

Structural issues through
PRSCs, Poverty Reduction,
Rural Transport, Rural
Development, Education,
US$450 million for the next five Governance, HIV/AIDs,
years.
Public Finance Management

he United Nations Development Framework (UNDAF)
006-2010 themes are: equitable, inclusive and

private sector, and to help the GoV to deepen trade and
investment related reforms consistent with its

)xfarn

Oxfam's strategy is to improve: (i) the livelihoods of
poor farmers and labourers: (ii) access to and quality of
education for girls and boys from poor families and
ethnic backgrounds; (iii) saving lives by delivering
humanitarian assisstance; (iv) assisting in shaping
government policies in favour of poor people and
minirities; and (v) addressing the needs and rights of
women and men to achieve gender equality.

Post WTO issues, education
gender

'Ian in Vietnam

Country Strategic Plan (CSP) 2005-2010 is dedicated to
supporting the poor, marganalized and ethnic children
of Vietnam. It incorporates data analysis and
widespread consultation at all levels with an aim to
empower the communities, families and particularly the
children of Vietnam.

Child-centered community
development

;NV
Netherlands
)evelopment
hganization)

The strategy aims at supporting: ( i ) Forest strategy
development and planning; (ii) participatory land-use
planning and forest-land allocation; (iii) nature reserve
management support, (iv) State forest enterprise
renovation; and (v) environmental services.

Forest management, market
access for the poor

iC UK (Save
he Children
J K)

SCUKs strategy focuses on programs supporting
Vietnam's micro-finance, education, HIV, reproductive
health, disaster response and preparedness

Child poverty, early
childhood care and
development, HIV/AIDS

W F

WWF's priority conservation programmes in Vietnam
includes: (i) Forest Conservation Programme; (ii)
Marine and Coastal Conservation Programme; (Hi)
Species Conservation Programme; (iv) Environmental
Education Programme; (v) Environmental Education
Programme: and (v) Policy work in Vietnam

Environmental conservation
and management of natural
resources

-

-

CPS ANNEX 7
Page 1 o f 1

W T I V A M :COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
Date: 17 November 2004

The country financing pmrneters for Viltrtaam set out below have babn approval by the
RegiOnat Vice President, East Asia and Pacific, and are being posted on the Bank’s inlsmal
website.

R r t m k s / Erplwtfon
In Vietnam this policy i s
axpected to be applied ina

€tern

Cost skuring. Limit on the
mportion o f individual pmjtct casts
hat the Bank may finance

Recwrenf costfinoncfflg, Any
limits that would apply to the overall
imount of recumnt expenditures that
h e Bank may finance

targetmi fashion, focusing
primarily on h m v e n t i o ~
in~
social eactors, pmprovinces,
and b n t r a l i z e d prpjects. ’
h
overall Government dim i s
expected to mrnain at cumni
levels.
NONE

InVietnam financing of
reaarrent costs i s expected to be
on a highly wlective basis and
wit1 be within a sound and
sustainable fiscal hmework.
Such financing i s not expeotwi to

be significant.
Local costjlnancfng, Are the
requirements for Bank financing o f
local expenditures met, namely that:
[i)
fmancing requirements for the
:ountry’s development program
would exceed the public &?ctau’s own
resources (e.g., from taxation and
crtber revenues) and expected
jomcstic borrowing; and (ii) tho
financing of foreign cxpmdiwes
alone would not enable the Bank to
assist in the fursncing of individual
projects
T a m and d&m. Are there any
taxes and duties that the Bank would
not finance?

Yes

NONE

None o f the taxes and duties in
Vietnam are judged to be
excessive. While this is not
expected to change adversely, the
situation would be reviewed at
the time of the next CAS and
unreasonabletaxes (if my)
would be excluded from Bank
finall&

CPS ANNEX A2
Page 1 of 2

Vietnam at a glance
Vietnam

East
Asia 8
Pacific

Low.
income

83.1
620
51.5

1,870
1,420
2,647

2,343
510
1,188

I.4
1.9

0.9
1.3

1.9
2.2

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2005
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

2/12/07

Development diamond'
Life expectancy

-

Average annual growth, 1999-05
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1999-05)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Literacy (% of populetion age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

Gross
primary
enrollment

capita

20
27
70
18
25
62
96
98
101
94

42
70
29
12
78
91
113
114
112

31
58
79
43
75
61
I00
105
94

1
Access to safe water

-Low-income group

-Vietnam

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1985

1995

2004

2005

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formationlGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savingslGDP

14.1

20.7
27.1
32.8
18.0
19.2

45.4
35.6
67.5
28.3
32.2

52.9
35.4
70.1
30.2
34.5

Current account balancelGDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debVGDP
Present value of debffexports

-3.8
0.0
0.4

-13.5
0.7
122.6
4.7

-3.4
0.8
33.8
2.6
33.9
50.4

0.4
0.8
32.0

1985-95 1995-05

2004

2005

2005-09

6.9
5.4
15.9

7.7
6.2
27.9

8.4
7.0
16.5

7.9
6.5
15.0

1985

1995

2004

2005

20.5
32.5

15.0
44.1

38.2

36.1

1985-95 1995-05

2004

2005

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

6.5
4.3
25.2

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services
~~~

Economic ratlos'
Trade

c

indebtedness

3.5
7.3
4.3
8.4

4.1
10.0
11.1
5.9

3.5
10.2
10.1
7.5

4.9
10.7
13.9
8.3

25.8
24.2

10.2
4.3
10.0
17.0

12.4
7.8
10.5
25.2

13.0
7.9
10.7
17.6

-Vietnam

-Low-income group

Growth of capital and GDP (%)

"w
I

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

10

0

00
01
-Exports

02

03
04
*imports

05

~

Note: 2005 data are preliminary estimates. Group data are to 2004.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

I

CPS ANNEX A2
Page 2 of 2

Vietnam
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1985

Domesflc prlces
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1995

2004

2005

16.8
17.0

9.5
7.9

8.4
8.4

::w
Inflation (%)

-5
0

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surpluddeflcit (excl. on-iending)

23.3
6.0
0.7

26.8
9.8
0.9

25.9
7.4
-1.2

1985

1995

2004

2005

507

5,489
547
1,063
1,785
8,155

26,507
950
5,671
13,928
31,954

32.442
1,407
7,373
17,519
36,978

856
2,097

3,574
9,208

5,024
9,688

100
100
100

115
111
103

131
120
109

1985

1995

2004

2005

-496

7,607
10,603
-2,996

30,352
33,511
-3,159

36,618
38,560
-1,942

-90
52

-279
474

-891
2,485

-1,218
3,380

Current account balance

-534

-2,801

-1,565

220

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

265
269

3,301
-500

2,259
-694

2,023
-2,243

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, loca/iUS$)

1.376
8.3 11,038.3

6,314
15,704.3

8,557
15,850.1

01

00

02

-GDP

deflator

03

05

04

-CPI

TRADE

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Rice
Fuel
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

930

Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
40.000

,
,
,
I

00

99

01

02

rn Exports

03

04

05

W Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

1985

1995

2004

2005

61
0
54

25,428
0
231

15,360
0
3,039

16,920

2
0
0

364
0
2

780
0
37

38
7
0
0
0

348
58
356
0
0

387
1,278
10
1,610
0

0
7
0
7
0
7

265
47
1
46
2
45

710
444
8
436
29
407

Current account balance to GDP (YO)
6T

-6 1
99

00

01

02

03

04

05

4
Composition of 2004 debt (US$ mill.)

-

A IBRD
B IDA
C IMF

-

-

D Other multilateral

E . Bilateral
F Private
G Short-term

-

2/12/07

CAS Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date 11/30/2006

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by IEG by Number
Proj Eva1 by IEG by Amt (US$ millions)
O
h of IEG Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2004

2005

2006

2007

28
3.7
7.1
7.4
7.1
7.4
15.3

35
3.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
13.2

39
3.6
7.7
7.2
7.7
7.2
12.4

38
3.9
7.9
4.4
10.5
8.5
4.4

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
19
14
1,909.7
1,358.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Including 35 investment projects, PRSC, stand alone GEF and CFC
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andlor implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CPSANNEX 83
Page 1 of 2

-

CPS Annex 8 3 IBRDIIDA Program Summary
As Of Date 12-15-2006

Socialist Republic of Vietnam
Proposed IBRDllDA Lending Program a
Fiscal year
2007

Project Name

US$(M)

VN-Program 135 Phase 2 Support Credit
VN-Avian 8 Human Influenza Control & Prep

50.0

VN-2nd Higher Education
VN-Coastal Cities Environment and Sanitation Project
VN-Hanoi Urban Transport Project
VN-Mekong Transport Infrastructure Dev.
VN-PRSC 6
Mekong TransporVFlood Protection Supplementary Financing
VN-Tax Administration Modernization Project
VN-GEF Hanoi Urban Transportation
Result

60.0
124.7

-

2008

2009

VN-Agricultural Diversification Proj. 2
VN-Local Development Investment Funds
VN-Land Administration Project
VN-Livestock Competitiveness & Food Safety (Standby)
VN-Financial Sect. Mod and Info Mgnt
VN-Northern Delta Transport Development
VN-Northern Uplands Health Support Project
VN-Rural Distribution Project (Standby)
VN-Third Rural Finance Project
VN-Priority Infrastructure investment
VN-PRSC 7
VN-GEF Coastal Cities
VN-GEF PCM Management
VN-GEF lntergrated Protected ArealLandscape
Result
VN-2nd Urban Water Supply Dev
VN-Hydropower Development
VN-Renewable Energy Development Project
VN-School Education Quality Assurance
VN-Program 135 Phase 2 Support Credit
VN-Social Security Reform
VN-Natural Disaster APL 2
RRR Rural Water Supply & Sanitation APL 2
VN-PRSC 8
Result

Overall Result

a

20.0

131.8
207.0
150.0
15.0
80.0
10.9
849.4
55.0
150.0
50.0
65.0
60.0
150.0
60.0
107.0
100.0
100.0
150.0

2.7
13.4
5.0

Strategic
Rewards

Implementation
Risks (HIMIL)

H
H

M

H
H
H
H
H
M
H
H

H
M
H
H
H
M
M
H
M

M
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H

M
H
H
H
M
M
H
M
M
H
M
M
M
MH

1,068.1

110.0
150.0
100.0
45.0
50.0
100
64.0
96.0
150.0
865.0

M
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H

2,782.5

This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).
Resources for AH1 are to be financed out of savings from cancelled IDA resources or closed projects, and are excluded from IDA resource totals.
GEF resources are excluded from IDA totals.

e

'

Total IDA resources for FY07 and FY08, including standby projects, are $1,865.5 m. The timing of standby project delivery will be adjusted to stay
within the IDA 14 resources envelop.
Candidate for IBRD lending.

CPSANNEX 83
Page 2 o f 2

-

Note: The lending program will be discussed and adjusted further with the Government during the CPS period.
Additional projects under consideration to be prepared for FYlO and 11 are::
Public Financial Management Mod. iI
Financial Sector ReforrnlCapital Market
Central Regional Health
Education SWAP II
Urban Water Supply Development II
National Urban Upgrading Program
Rural Energy
Provincial Transport Support
Expressway
GMS Regional Electricity System
Guarantee Operations for Gas

Higher Education DPL
ICTIIIE-Trade
Forestry SWAP
Regional Mekong River Water Res.
Agriculture Technology
VN-Program 135 Phase 2 Support Credit
Water Resources Management
Marine Resources
Regional Water Utilization iI
Forestry
GEF Marine Resources Management

CPS ANNEX B3
Page 1 o f 1

CPS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Vietnam
Vietnam - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2004-2007
2004 2005 2006 2007
IFC approvals (US$m)

21.18 16.04 40.14 6.15

Sector (%)
Agriculture and Forestry
Collective Investment
Finance & Insurance
Food & Beverages
Industrial & Consumer Goods
Transportation and Warehouse

Total

94

100
6

13

8
87

87
100

100

5
100 100

6

87
13

87
12 100

94
100

100

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

99

100

128.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

CPS ANNEX B6
Page 1 of 2

-

VIETNAM: KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS 2001 2010
Rev

Est

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Projected
2008

2009

GDP

6.9

7.1

7.3

7.8

8.4

8.0

7.6

7.7

7.6

7.6

GDP per capita

5.6

5.8

6.2

6.6

7.4

8.7

6.6

6.5

6.5

6.5

Consumer pnce index (Dec. to Dec.)

0.8

4.0

3.0

9.5

8.4

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.5

38.4

2010

Growth and Inflation

Savin9 and Investment bercent of GDP)
Gross investment

31.2

33.2

35.4

35.7

35.2

35.5

36.7

37.5

38.2

Public Investment

10.6

11.7

14.7

12.6

13.2

13.4

12.6

12.4

12.1

12.0

Private Investment (including FDI)

20.6

21.5

20.7

23.1

22.0

22.1

24.1

25.1

26.1

26.4

Gross national savings

32.8

31.3

30.5

32.3

35.6

37.5

37.0

36.1

36.1

36.3

Fiscal (oercent of GDP)

48.7

55.7

63.3

69.7

69.2

71.5

75.0

77.5

80.0

81.8

Government revenues

21.6

22.7

24.9

26.7

25.9

26.8

26.8

25.6

24.6

23.7

Government expenditures

26.6

27.4

31.3

29.5

31.8

33.1

32.3

31.7

31.3

30.5

Overall deficit (excl. on-lending)

-2.8

-1.4

-1.2

0.9

-1.2

-1.3

-1.5

-2.1

-2.8

-3.2

2.2

3.3

5.2

3.7

4.7

5.0

4.0

4.0

3.9

3.6

On-lending

External
Export growth (% p.a.)
Exports/GDP

4.0

11.2

20.8

31.3

22.5

24.0

17.5

14.5

14.0

14.0

46.2

47.6

51.1

58.3

61.3

66.5

67.5

71 .O

72.1

73.2

3.4

22.1

28.0

26.5

15.7

20.0

20.0

17.0

16.0

14.5

49.2

55.7

63.3

69.7

69.2

71.5

74.1

79.6

82.2

83.9

524

-674

-1,932

-1,565

217

1,220

234

-1,063

-1,793

-2,046

1.6

-1.9

-4.9

-3.4

0.4

2.0

0.3

-1.4

-2.1

-2.1

External LT-MT debVGDP

38.5

35.2

34.2

33.8

32.0

32.3

32.1

31.5

31.2

31 .O

Debt serviceIExports goods and services

10.6

8.3

7.5

5.9

5.5

5.6

5.8

5.9

5.4

5.7

8.2

7.2

8.7

6.5

9.8

11.2

12.5

13.5

14.0

14.0

32.5

35.1

39.5

45.4

52.9

60.5

67.8

76.2

85.6

96.1

Import growth (% p.a.)
Imports/GDP
Current account balance
in US$ million
in percent of GDP

Reserves (weeks of goods and services imports)
Memo: GDP (in US6 billion)

Note: On-lending includes ODA on-lending, investment expenditure, DAF on-lending, and provincial bonds
Source: Historical data: GSO, World Bank, and IMF estimates: Projections: World Bank estimates.

CPS ANNEX B6
Page 2 o f 2

-

Annex B6 Selected Indicators. Page 2

-

VIETNAM: BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 2001 2010
Rev

Est

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2006

2009

2010

Exports (fob)

15,027

16,706

20,176

26.485

32,442

40,226

47,266

54,122

61,699

70,337

Imports (fob)

14,546

17,760

22,730

26,772

33.280

39,296

47,156

55,174

64,002

73,263

Trade Balance

461

-1,054

-2,554

-2.287

-636

930

110

-1,053

-2,303

-2,946

Non-Factor Services

-572

-750

-793

-670

-1,105

-1,390

-1,600

-1,600

-2,100

-2,100

Services (net)

-635

-790

-625

-693

-1,220

-1,770

-1,946

-2,150

-2,250

-2,250

Transfers (net)

1,250

1,920

2,240

2.485

3,360

3,450

3,670

3,940

4,660

5,250

150

150

140

175

230

200

220

240

250

250

1,100

1,770

2,100

2,310

3,150

3,250

3,450

3,700

4,610

5,000

Current Account Balance (incl. Grants)

524

-674

-1,932

-1,545

220

1,220

234

-1,063

-1,793

-2,046

Capital Account

-330

1,137

4,062

2,447

1,914

2,735

4,780

5,260

5,660

6,055

Medium and Long-Term

625

520

1,045

1,395

1,405

1,665

2,000

2,120

2,310

2,270

990

1,100

1,540

1,920

1,915

2,440

2,650

2,620

3,060

3,120

960

1,070

1,260

1,395

1,430

1,815

1,600

1,670

1,940

2,010

30

30

260

525

465

625

650

950

1,120

1,110

365

580

495

525

510

575

650

700

750

650

-1,360

-993

1,732

-293

-1,791

-1,335

200

250

250

250

1,245

2,025

1,895

1,660

1,975

2,150

2,560

2,640

3,120

3,435

620

415

590

535

525

645

800

950

1,000

1,200

650

700

600

1,000

1,200

1,300

. Otficial Transfers
. Pnvale Transfers (net)

- Disbursements
ODA Loans
Non-concessional LT Borrowing

.Amrtizations
Short-Term
Direct Investment
FDI loan repayments
Portfolio Investment
Overall Balance
Financing

Projected

194

463

2,150

662

2,131

3,955

5,014

4,197

4,067

4,009

-194

-463

-2,150

-862

-2,131

-3,955

-5,014

-4,197

-4,067

4,009

Note: Figures in US$ million and rounded.
Source:
Actual data: The Government and World Bank estimates; Projections: World Bank staff estimates.

CPS ANNEX B7
Page 1 of 1

VIETNAM: KEY EXPOSURE INDICATORS, 2001-2010
(in US$ million)
~~

Rev
Public and Pub. Guaranteed

Est.

Projected

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

11,436

12,179

14,363

15,614

16,725

19,370

22,322

23,891

26,630

29,750

Official Creditors

9,174

10,527

12,921

14,150

15,157

17.554

20,229

21,651

24,134

26,961

Multilaterals

2,210

2,869

4,070

4,937

5,289

6,125

7,059

7,555

8,421

9,407

2,156

2,794

3,997

4,871

5,218

6,043

6,964

7,453

8,308

9,281

1,344

1,715

2,472

3,039

3,255

3,770

4,344

4,650

5,183

5,790

54

76

73

66

71

82

95

101

113

126

6,964

7,658

8,651

9,213

9,868

11,429

13,171

14,096

15,713

17,553

6,202

6,868

7,859

8,065

8,639

10,006

11,531

12,341

13,756

15,368

761

789

992

1,147

1,229

1,423

1,640

1,755

1,957

2,186

2,262

1,652

1,442

1,464

1,568

1,816

2,093

2,240

2,497

2.789

560

560

560

547

586

678

782

836

932

1,042

1,070

520

372

483

517

599

690

739

824

920

633

572

51 1

434

465

539

621

664

741

827

11,436

12,179

14,363

15,614

16,725

19,370

22,322

23,891

26,630

29,750

38.5

35.2

34.2

33.8

32.0

32.3

32.1

31.5

31.2

31.0

5.8

4.6

4.6

4.0

3.8

4.1

4.3

4.5

4.2

4.4

10.8

0.3

7.5

5.9

5.5

5.6

5.8

5.9

5.4

5.7

Concessional
Of which IDA
Non-concessional
Bilaterals
Concessional
Nonconcessional
Private Creditors
Bonds
Commercial Banks
Other Private

Total Long-Term DOD
Memorandum items:
LT and MT DebffGDP
Debt servicelGDP
Debt service/EXNFS
Note:

Figures are rounded.

Source: World Bank DECDG and IMF

11

0 , 0 0 0 0

J

m

"

3

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

I

31

I

I

I

I

2

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

d

o o o o o o o o o o o o y

3

-

0 0 0 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 0 0

%

'6

P

CPS ANNEX B8
Page 1 o f 1

CPS Annex B8 (IFC) for Vietnam
Vietnam
Statement o f IFC's
Held and DisbursedPortfolio
As o f 11/30/2006
(In U S Dollars Millions)
Held

Disbursed

FY Approval Company
Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
2003 ACB-Vietnam
0
5.02
0
0
0
5.02
0
0
0
0.06
0
0
0
0.06
0
0
2002 CyberSoft
0
0 1.05
0
0
0 1.05
0
2002 Dragon Capital
5
0
3
0
5
0
3
0
2002 F-V Hospital
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
2005 K h a i Vy
0.13
0
0
0 0.13
0
0
0
1998 MFL Vinh Phat
0
0 1.88 10.09
0
0 1.88
1997 Nghi Son Cement 10.09
20
0
0
0 2 0
0
0
0
2004 Olam
7.2
0
0
0
7.2
0
0
0
2005 Paul Maitland
7.25
0
0
0
3.5
0
0
0
200 1 RMIT Vietnam
20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2006 SABCO
0
2.77
0
0
0
2.77
0
0
2003 Sacombank
0
2.31
0
0
0
2.31
0
0
2004 Sacombank
0
0
0
2.05
0
0
2.05
0
2005 Sacombank
0
3.05
0
0
0
3.05
0
0
2006 Sacombank
0
0
2
0
0
0
2
0
2002 VEIL
0
7.41
0
0
0
7.41
0
0
2003 VEIL
0
6.15
0
0
0
6.15
0
0
2007 VEIL
Total Portfolio:

75.67

28.82

6.05

1.88 45.92

Approvals Pending Commitment
2000 MFL-AA
2006 CCS-Asia
2000 Interflour
2006 CII-Vietnam
2000 MFL Mondial
2002 F-V Hospital
1999 MFL Mlnh Minh
1999 MFL Chau Giang
Total Pending Commitment:

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0
0
0
0
15
0
0
0
8
0
0
5
0
1.88 0.21
0
0
0
0
0
1.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

24.5

1.88

0.21

5

28.82

6.05

1.88

IBRD 33511R
102°E

104°E
To
Kunming

VIETNA M

To 106°E
Babao

To
Kaiyuan

To
Tiandong
Ha
Giang

4

PROVINCE CAPITALS

Lao Cai

1

NATIONAL CAPITAL

Bla
c

2

MAIN ROADS

Tuyen
Quang

Yen Bai

k

11

Thai
Nguyen

16

HANOI
Hoa Binh

Ninh Binh

20°N

LAO
P EOPLE'S
PEOPLE'S
D EM . REP.

26

20°N

Gulf
of
Tonk in

28

A

Vinh

Hainan I.
(China)

Ha Tinh

29

To
Khammouan

18°N

18°N

m

C

Dong Hoi

30

o
r

d
To
Savannakhet

THA ILA ND

Dong Ha

le
il

31

Hue

r

32

a

Thua Thien Hue
Da Nang
Quang Nam
Quang Ngai
Kon Tum
Gia Lai
Binh Dinh
Phu Yen
Dac Lac
Dac Nong
Khanh Hoa
Binh Phuoc
Lam Dong
Ninh Thuan
Tay Ninh
Binh Duong
Dong Nai
Binh Thuan
T.P. Ho Chi Minh
Ba Ria-Vung Tau
Long An
Tien Giang
Dong Thap
Ben Tre
An Giang
Vinh Long
Tra Vinh
Kien Giang
Can Tho
Hau Giang
Soc Trang
Bac Lieu
Ca Mau

25

a

32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64

15
Ha Long

Thanh Hoa

n

16°N

33

Da Nang

16°N

Tam Ky

34

Quang Ngai

35

Ngoc Linh
(3143 m)
36 Kon Tum

38

14°N

Pleiku

Cent ral
Central

14°N

37

Quy Nhon

Highlands
39
Tuy Hoa

CAMBODIA

40
Buon Ma
Thuot

41
To
Kampong Cham

12°N
To
Kampong
Chhnang

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

Bien Hoa

Cao Lanh

56

53
Vinh Long

60

Rach Gia

59

Ca Mau

64

Tan An

Tra Vinh

Vi Thanh

58

62

Soc Trang

63

Bac Lieu

Me

n
k o0
0

104°E

51

My Tho

55

61

Phan Thiet

Ho Chi Minh City

Vung Tau

Ben Tre

57

Can Tho

49

50

10°N

lta

10°N

Mot

De

VIETNAM

Phan RangThap Cham

48

Thu Dau47

Long Xuyen

12°N
45

44

Tay Ninh

54

Phu
Quoc

43

Dong
Xoai

52

Nha Trang

Da Lat

46

Mekong

Gu l f
of
Th a i l a n d

42

Gia Nghia

g

Lai Chau
Dien Bien
Lao Cai
Ha Giang
Cao Bang
Son La
Yen Bai
Tu Yen Quang
Bac Can
Lang Son
Phu Tho
Vinh Phuc
Thai Nguyen
Bac Giang
Quang Ninh
Ha Noi
Bac Ninh
Ha Tay
Hung Yen
Hai Duong
Hai Phong
Hoa Binh
Ha Nam
Thai Binh
Ninh Binh
Nam Dinh
Thanh Hoa
Nghe An
Ha Tinh
Quang Binh
Quang Tri

14

Bac Giang
Bac Ninh
17 Hai Duong

Thai Binh
Nam Dinh

n

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

Ma

27

To
Luang
Prabang

22°N

To
Hepu

10 Lang
Son

Hai Phong
Ha Dong 19 20
22 18 Hung Yen 21
Ha Nam 23 24

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

PROVINCES:

To
Nanning

Bac Can

13
12 Vinh Yen

Viet Tri

6

To
Muang Xai

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

9

7

Son La

Dien
Bien Phu

RAILROADS

Cao Bang

8

22°N

RIVERS

110°E

CHINA

5

Re
d
3

Phong Tho

108°E

106°E

50

100

50

150

100

200 Kilometers

150 Miles

108°E
JANUARY 2007

