Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 41310 YF

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF SERBIA
FOR THE PERIOD FYO8-FYll
November 13,2007

South East Europe Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region, ECA
Southern Europe and Central Asia
International Finance Corporation, IFC
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, MIGA

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f their official
Duties. I t s contents mav not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

Date of Last Country Assistance Strategy: November 2004
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective October X, 2007)
Currency Unit = Serbian Dinar (RSD)
RSD 1.00 =US$0.019
U S $ 1 = RSD 53.24
GOVERNMENT’S FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1
ABBREVATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA

Analvtical and Advisorv Activities

AERS

Enerw Agencv o f the ReDublic o f Serbia

CAD

Current Account Deficit

CAS

Countrv Assistance Stratew

CEFTA

Central Europe Free Trade Agreement

CPS

Countrv PartnershiD Stratew

DACU

Donor Assistance Coordination Unit

DDO

Deferred Drawdown ODeration

DIA

DeDosit Insurance Agencv

DPL

DeveloDment Policv Loan

DS

Democratic Partv

DSS

Democratic Partv o f Serbia

EAR

EuroDean Agencv for Reconstruction

EBRD

EuroDean Bank for Reconstruction and Develoument

EC

EuroDean Commission

EIB

EuroDean Investment Bank

EPS

ElektroDrivreda Srbiie (Serbian Electric Power ComDanv)

EU

EuroDean Union

FDI

Foreim Direct Investment

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

GEF

Global Environmental Facilitv

GoS

Government o f Serbia

IBRD

International Bank for Reconstruction and DeveloDment

ICTY

International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia

IDA

International DeveloDment Association

IFC

International Finance Comoration

IMF

International Monetarv Fund

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IPA

Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance

ISG

Infrastructure Steering Grouo

MDG

Millennium Develooment Goals

MIGA

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Aeencv

MOP

Materiialno Obezbedenie Porodice (Familv Allowance)

MTPL

Motor Third Partv Liabilitv

NBS

Narodna Banka Srbiie (National Bank o f Serbia)

NIS

Naftna Industria Srbiie (Serbian Petroleum Industries)

NIP

National Investment Plan

PA

PrivatizationAgencv

PPP

Public-Private PartnershiD

PRS

Povertv Reduction Stratew

PSC

Public Service Contracts

SAA

Stabilization and Association Agreement

SAP

Stabilization and Association Process

SA1

State Audit Institution

SEC

Securities and Exchange Commission

SEE

South Eastern Eurooe

SEEA

Agenciia za Eneraetsku Efikasnost (Serbian Enerw Efficiencv Agencv)

SFRY

Socialist Federal Reoublic of Yugoslavia

SME

Small and Medium Enternrises

UNDP

United Nations Develooment Programme

USAID

United States Agencv for International Develooment

VAT

Value Added Tax

WBI

World Bank Institute

zs

Zeleznice Srbiie (Serbian Railwavs)

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leaders:

World Bank
Shigeo Katsu
Orsalia Kalantzopoulos
Simon Gray/ Robert Jauncey

IFC
Declan Duff
Shahbaz Mavaddat
George Konda

MIGA
Yukiko Omura
Frank Lysy
Mario Marchesini

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
The Republic o f Serbia
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................................

i

I. INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................................

1

I1. COUNTRY CONTEXT .....................................................................................................................
A . Political Background and Recent Developments ........................................................................
B . Recent Economic Developments in Serbia .................................................................................
C . Developments in Poverty Reduction, Social Issues and MDGs .................................................

1
1
3
5

111. COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND OUTSTANDING PRIORITIES ......................... 5
i. Macro-Economic Stability.................................................................................................... 6
ii. Promote Dynamic Economic Growth, through Accelerated Economic Reform.................- 7
iii. Increasing Employment and Living Standards...................................................................
11
iv . More Balanced Regional Development .............................................................................. 13

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY .............................................................
A . Participation and Partnerships...................................................................................................
i. Participatory Process Followed ..........................................................................................
ii. Donor Coordination and Partner Roles ..............................................................................
B . Implementationo f the Last CAS ...............................................................................................
C. The World Bank Group Partnership Strategy FY08 to FY 11 ...................................................
i. Key Features and Themes o f the Partnership Strategy .......................................................
ii. The Financing Framework: Creditworthiness and Terms ..................................................

15
15
15
16
17
18
18
26

V . RESULTS-BASED MONITORING AND EVALUATION ...........................................................

29

V I. POTENTIAL RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES .............................................................

30

VI1. CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................. 3 1
Annexes:
Annex 1: Republic of Serbia CPS Results Matrix .................................................................................
Annex 2: Republic of Serbia CAS Completion Report..........................................................................
Annex 3: Republic o f Serbia Donor Matrix ...........................................................................................
Annex 4: Relations with the European Union and Progress on the Stabilizationand
Association Process................................................................................................................
Annex 5: Key Country Indicators ..........................................................................................................
Annex 6: Indicators o f Bank Group Portfolio........................................................................................

32
37
62
-63
66
75

Table 1: Serbia - Key Economic Indicators............................................................................................. 4
Table 2: Proposed N e w IBRD Lending and AAAESW FY08-FY 11 ................................................... 26
Table 3: Serbia Key Creditworthiness Indicators .................................................................................. 27

Boxes:
B o x 1: Anticipated Development Challenges which the CPS i s Designed to Address ..........................

Mar,

The following World Bank staff contributed to the preparation of the CPS as core team members: Mikko
Vayrynen, Mathew Verghis, Lazar Sestovic, Jovana Stojanovic and Jasna Vukoje. The core team i s gratehl
to the following World Bank staff who contributed to the preparation o f the CPS: Gavin Adlington, Ivana
Aleksic, Tijen Arin, Irina Astrakhan, Varadarajan Atur, Arup Banerji, Marc Blanc, Henk Busz, Emina
Djuricic-Cerovac, Gerard0 Corrochano, Aleksandar Crnomarkovic, Giovanni Daniele, Ana Djordjevic,
Willem van Eeghen, Usaid El-Hanbali, Michael Edwards, Marianne Fay, Charles Feinstein, Miroslav
Frick, Bernard Funck, Michele Gragnolati, Anila Graupp, Jasmina Hadzic, Ardo Hansson, Richard Martin
Humphreys, Nikola Ille, Zana Ivanovic, Sava Jeremic, Olivera Jordanovic, Plamen Kirov, Indira
Konjhodzic, Vesna Kostic, Julian Lampietti, Pradeep Mitra, Aleksandar Nacev, Miroslav Nesic, Alexander
Pankov, Snjezana Plevko, Andrej Popovic, Mirjana Popovic, Desanka Stanic, Emma Svec, Hermina
Vukovic Tasic, Margo Thomas, Siew Chai Ting, Anders Zeijlon, Sally Zeijlon. The CPS team would
particularly like to acknowledge and thank Erika Jorgensen from OPCS and Paul Levy from FINCR for
their advice and guidance.

29

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. Background. Serbia has made significant progress on a wide ranging reform program since 2000.
Macro-economic stability has been restored, and incomes have risen strongly. GDP per capita, estimated at
$2,200 in 2002, i s now approaching $5,400. Poverty has fallen fkom 14.6 percent of the populationto about
8.8 percent. Growth has been underpinned by structural reforms to improve the business environment and
the functioning of the enterprise sector. Public debt has almost halved as a proportion of GDP and reserves
stand at over 30 percent of GDP. At the time of Serbia’s accession to Bank membership in 2001, analysis
was focused on the importance of breaking with the past. Now, however, the theme of this partnership
strategy might more appropriately be to build on the success of recent economic gains and seize the future.
2. Completing the Transition Agenda and Moving Toward Europe. Due to the turmoil of the 1990s
Serbia was one of the last countries in the Western Balkans to embark on the transition agenda. Strong
progress has been made, particularly in expanding private sector participation in the financial and real
sectors. The reform program has helped to underpin the country’s strong economic performance and
reductions in poverty. Nevertheless, risks remain. Serbia faces a challenging agenda if it i s to fulfill i t s
potential and participate in a wider Europe. Further reforms to spur private sector led growth, while
protecting and better managing the environment, will be critical to ensure living standards and quality of life
continue to converge with those in Europe. Particular efforts will be required to ensure that all people in
Serbia have the opportunity to participate in and benefit from growth. Further strengthening of democratic
institutions and overcoming remaining political legacy issues will also be required in the European
stabilization and association process. Serbia concluded technical negotiations with the European Union on a
Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) in September 2007. However the political situation and the
EU accession process in Serbia remains influencedby recent history.
3. The World Bank Group has actively supported Serbia’s transition since re-engagement in 2001.
The Bank has had a discrete program of lending and analytical work for Serbia. Total IDA credits and
grants committed to Serbia since 2001 amount to almost $740 million, with $145 million in IBRD
commitments. As well as IDNIBRD support, the Bank Group provided technical assistance from both IFC
and MIGA to improve the business environment. IFC has invested over $325 million in Serbia, and MIGA
has provided guarantees of over $425 million, in both cases predominantly in the financial sector. The
objectives of the last CAS’S three pillars to: (i)create a smaller, more sustainable, more efficient public
sector, (ii)create a larger, more dynamic private sector, and (iii) reduce poverty levels and improve social
protection and access to public services, were largely met. The economy has grown at an average of 5.5
percent per annum, driven by the private sector. The proportion of the population living in poverty has
fallen by 5 percent, and the Government i s already close to meeting their 2010 target of reducing poverty to
6.5 percent. Consistent fiscal deficits in the early part of the decade were reduced as a result of significant
consolidation of public expenditures in 2004 and 2005, although spending increased in 2006 as a proportion
of GDP in the run-up to the election. Current projections for 2007 suggest that spending has stabilized.
This was accompanied by significant structural public sector reform, and the effectiveness of public
spending has improved, with the share of public investments rising as a proportion of total government
spending. Despite recent progress, there i s the need to continue improving the effectiveness of public
spending by strengthening the Government’s Public Expenditure Management system. The World Bank
Group support i s widely recognized by the authorities as having strengthened the business environment
while maintaining and improving service sustainability and quality in key sectors such as health, transport
and energy. The CAS FY05 was noticeable for the country’s graduation from IDA to IBRD financing due
to Serbia’s relatively strong economic performance since 2000.
4. The new Country Partnership Strategy (CPS). This CPS reflects the coordinated support able to be
providedto Serbia from all parts of the Bank Group. Interventions from IBRD, IFC, MIGA, and WBI, will

i

be coordinated closely and are expected to have strong synergies. Over time, all parts o f the Bank Group,
including IFC, MIGA, and WBI are likely to play an increasingly central role in the Bank Group’s program.
Given Serbia’s relatively strong economic progress to date and the country’s graduation to IBRD this CPS
envisages the Bank working even more closely with the Authorities to ensure that the Bank program i s
demand driven and focused on supporting the Government’s own reform program. The four year CPS i s
designed to ensure that the World Bank programming cycle i s consistent with the anticipated political cycle
in Serbia. Following Parliamentary elections in January 2007, the normal Parliamentary term in Serbia
would run until the end of 2010. The CPS consequently coincides with the current Parliamentary mandate.
Within the overarching framework o f European integration and poverty reduction, the CPS supports three
Government identified priorities.

i. encouraging dynamic private sector led growth to ensure incomes continue to converge with
European levels;

ii. providing opportunities and broadening participation in growth; and
iii. managing emerging environmental and disaster risks.
5. A focused program of investment operations, support for reform efforts, deployment of a range
of financial instruments beyond traditional lending and technical assistance is planned. The CPS
envisages an indicative base-case lending envelope o f $600 million over four years. Within the strategic
framework outlined in the CPS, mechanisms have been introduced to ensure that support i s able to be
tailored and adjusted to meet emerging needs and the rapidly changing circumstances o f a middle-income
country situated in a region still on the road to political stability. This CPS outlines a set o f agreed
investments and analytical support for FY08 and FY09. Indicative areas for potential engagement in the
second half o f the CPS period are also set out. Nevertheless, decisions on interventions in the latter half o f
the CPS period will be made as part o f a mid-term review process anticipated for late calendar 2009. Scope
i s also available to calibrate lending to reflect changes in Serbia’s overall creditworthiness compared to
current projections, and lending volumes will be considered again in the mid-term review. The Government
recognizes the value added and comparative advantages that can be brought by the Bank Group. The Bank
will, however, need to continue to adjust its business model to remain responsive to Serbian requirements
and a rapidly changing environment. This i s likely to require the deployment o f a range o f financial
instruments beyond traditional lending, including possibly deferred drawdown financing and catastrophic
risk insurance. Greater involvement by all parts o f the Bank Group to work with the Authorities to
encourage public-private partnerships, including at the sub-national level, offers particular scope to
encourage further investment in the delivery o f important infrastructure and social services.

6.

Partnerships. The Bank Group will work in partnership with the authorities and other members o f the
international community. Given the over-arching role o f the EU, Bank interventions will be aligned with
EU programs to help Serbia reach European standards. Specific rural and regional development
investments will also be undertaken in close coordination with the EC. The Bank continues to work closely
with the IMF, although Serbia does not currently have a program. The Bank will cooperate closely with the
range o f multilateral and bilateral partners active in Serbia. In light of Serbia’s prevailing strong resource
positionthe Bank will increasingly seek to leverage local resources in support o f investment activities.

7. Risks. Risks remain, particularly given the increasingly uncertain situation in the region arising from
unresolved Kosovo status issues. Serbia also remains vulnerable to exogenous shocks. Managing risks
will require that the Bank Group work cooperatively with the Serbian Authorities in a highly flexible
manner in order to encourage Serbia’s continued international engagement and integration at a
particularly sensitive time. At the same time, Bank Group support i s necessarily dependent on Serbia
meeting international responsibilities. The Bank will need to be agile in responding to changing
circumstance and the demands o f a sophisticated middle income client with a range o f options for both
financial products and advisory services.

*.

11

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1

THE REPUBLIC OF SERBIA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

I.INTRODUCTION
1. Serbia has made significant progress since beginning a wide ranging program of democratic and
economic reforms in 2001. Macro-economic stability has been restored, and incomes have risen strongly.
GDP per capita, estimated at $2,200 in 2002, i s now approaching $5,400. Poverty has fallen from 14.6
percent o f the population to about 8.8 percent. Serbia i s now well placed to move forward toward
integration with Europe, having completed technical discussions on a Stabilization and Association
Agreement. At the time o f Serbia’s accession to Bank membership in 2001, analysis was focused on the
importance o f breaking with the past. Now, however, the theme o f this partnership strategy might more
appropriately be seizing the future.

2. A challenging reform agenda remains if Serbia i s to fulfill its potential. Increasing competitiveness
and attracting further investment i s key to creating more jobs while maintaining strong growth. Serbia was
one o f the last countries in the Western Balkans to embark on the transition agenda. Progress has been
significant, as evidenced in the major improvements in the business environment that saw Serbia ranked as
the top reformer globally in Doing Business 2006, for reforms in 2004-2005. This reform program has
helped to underpin the country’s strong economic performance and reductions in poverty. Still, further
reforms to strengthen the environment for sustained private sector led growth - including structural reforms
and privatization - will be vital to ensure living standards continue to converge with those in Europe.
Particular efforts will be required to ensure that all people in Serbia have the opportunity to participate in
and benefit from growth, including the large number o f poor in rural areas, among minority groups, and in
depressed regions formerly home to large industrial and mining industries. Further strengthening
democratic institutions, public spending, the rule o f law, and overcoming remaining political legacy issues
will also be required.
3. The proposed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) builds on the experience o f the World Bank
Group in supporting Serbian Government led reform efforts since 2001. The CPS aims to harness all
parts o f the World Bank Group, including IFC and MIGA, to support Serbia build on the progress o f the
past few years. Reflecting Serbia’s strong economic progress, this CPS comes at a time of Serbia’s
graduation to IBRD. This will require the Bank to work even more closely with the Authorities to ensure
that the Bank program i s demand driven and focused on supporting the Government’s own reform program.
Over time, all parts o f the Bank Group, including IFC, MIGA and WBI, are likely to play an increasingly
central role in the Bank Group’s program. The CPS aims to support the Government’s key priorities, and i s
focused around the key, and inter-related, themes o f (i)convergence with EU living standards through
private sector led growth, (ii) broadening participation in growth; and (iii)managing emerging
environmental and disaster risks.
11. COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. Political Background and Recent Developments

4. The past few years have seen a degree o f relative political stability in Serbia. Parties from the
‘democratic bloc’ - in varying combinations - have provided the foundation for government since
President Milosevic was forced to step aside in 2000. Democratic institutions have been strengthened.
The current Government includes President Tadic’s Democratic Party (DS), Prime Minister Kostunica’s

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1

Democratic Party o f Serbia (DSS) and the G17+. This followed Presidential elections in 2004, and
Parliamentary elections in January 2007. The Government i s based on a new Serbian Constitution,
adopted by national referendum in November 2006, following the dissolution o f the State Union o f Serbia
and Montenegro in June 2006. Reflecting a growing political maturity in the Balkans, the dissolution o f
the State Union itself followed a democratic process, was generally smooth, and entirely peaceful - unlike
the break-up o f the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s. Under the terms o f the new Constitution,
Presidential elections need to be called before the end o f 2007, and this could result in a degree o f
political uncertainty in the short term.

5. Still, political differences remain evident. The formation o f a Government in early 2007, for
instance, took several months o f difficult negotiations between the parties. Similarly, although President
Tadic and Prime Minister Kostunica have each been in their current offices since elections in early 2004,
the changing formation of the governing coalition over the past few years (this i s now the fourth
Government since 2000), highlights the differences between the parties o f the ‘democratic bloc’.
Divisions in society are also reflected in overtly nationalist parties continuing to win a significant
minority o f seats in Parliament, with the Serbian Radical Party the largest single party in Parliament.

6. Advancing European integration i s a stated priority of the Government, and major progress
was made with the initialing of a Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) in early
November 2007. European integration i s an objective supported by almost two thirds o f society. The
initialing o f the SAA follows almost two years o f negotiations, which started in October 2005. European
Foreign Ministers initially set out principles for a European future for the Western Balkan countries at a
Summit in Thessaloniki in 2003. Ministers reiterated this vision in Salzburg in June 2006, although
noting that the European perspective for the Western Balkans needs to be considered in light o f the
European Union’s absorptive capacity. Nevertheless, the political situation and the EU accession process
in Serbia remains influenced by recent history. While an S A A has been initialed, signing and ratification
will s t i l l take several months, and i s likely to require Serbia to demonstrate even closer cooperation with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Still, Serbia’s strong
administrative capacity may allow quick progress towards candidacy status once political issues are
resolved.
7. Serbia is taking an active role in a range o f international and regional initiatives. At the
regional level, Serbia i s a signatory to Energy Community o f South East Europe Treaty, which creates
legal framework for an integrated energy market in the region. Serbia has recently ratified the Central
Europe Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), which replaces 32 bilateral free trade agreements and aims to
establish a free trade zone in the region by the end o f 2010. Serbia participates in the Stability Pact for
South Eastern Europe. At the global level, Serbia has recently ratified the Kyoto Protocol, and i s
expected to have completed requirements to join the World Trade Organization in 2008
8. The status of Kosovo has become an increasingly prominent issue in political discourse in
Serbia. Under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, Kosovo i s a province o f Serbia under
the autonomous administration o f the United Nations (Throughout the CPS the province i s referred to
as “Kosovo”). Efforts to reach a long term negotiated solution to KOSOVO’S
status are currently being
conducted under the auspices o f the Contact Group, with a troika o f negotiators from Germany (on behalf
o f the EU), the United States, and Russia. A t this stage, the Kosovo and Serbian sides appear to have
fundamental differences o f views on how the situation should be resolved. Achieving a negotiated
solution i s likely to be extremely difficult. All parties in the Serbian governing coalition remain united
that independence for Kosovo i s not appropriate.

2

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYOS-FYII

B. Recent Economic Developments in Serbia
9. After significant declines in the economy during the late 1980s and 1990s, reforms in Serbia
since 2000 have resulted in renewed growth and the restoration of macro-economic stability. In the
past five years, growth has averaged approximately 5.5 percent per annum, and should reach 7.0 percent
in 2007. Growth has been driven primarily by strong domestic demand. Consumption has particularly
underpinned growth over the past five years, although the rate of increase i s starting to slow. More
recently, strong export performance has also supported growth. Investment has remained about 22 to 23
percent of GDP - a relatively solid performance, although below the level of the fast-growing transition
economies, where investment shares have been about 30 percent (Bulgaria, Croatia, Slovakia) or higher
(Estonia). Service sectors have particularly grown strongly. Growth in agriculture and industry was
volatile and on average slower. Key macro-economic figures are set out in Table 1.
10. Renewed growth has been underpinned by significant reform. Stabilization measures introduced
after 2000 have brought the hyper-inflation of the 1990s under control. A series of tax reforms since
2001 (including introduction of VAT in 2005) have created a more efficient and simpler tax system which
has strengthened the revenue base. Extensive restructuringof the banking system has helped to improve
the allocation o f capital, and access to credit. The privatization of about 1,800 socially owned enterprises
has given new l i f e to sometimes moribund companies, and reduced the demand for state subsidies.
Reflecting progress, Serbia was rated by the Bank’s Doing Business 2006 report as the top reformer in
2004-2005. Gains are particularly evident in major reductions in the time and cost required to start a
business, which resulted in 40 percent more businesses being registered in 2005 compared to 2003, as
well as a new civil procedure code that halved the time required to resolve business disputes. Serbia’s
rating slipped slightly in the 2008 report, as the reform agenda slowed in the lead up to elections and as
other countries pushed ahead with reform. Governance indicators for Serbia also continue to improve,
although from a low base, particularly perceptions of strengthened rule of law and control of corruption’.
There was significant public sector reform including much improved public expenditure management with
the passage of a number of critical laws including on budget systems, procurement and debt management
and strengthening of institutions notably in Treasury. A public administration reform strategy i s being
implemented that lays the foundation for a shift to a merit-based and de-politicizedcivil service and for the
rationalization of government structures. A reform of the pension system moves the system towards long
run sustainability, and the ongoing health sector reform i s one of the best in the region.
11. Growth has flowed through to improvements in living standards for most Serbians. In USD
terms, GDP per capita has risen from about $2,700 in 2003 to just under $4,300 in 2006, with GDP per
capita projected to be over $5,400 in 2007. Latest World Bank poverty measures suggest that the
proportion of the population living below an absolute poverty line (roughly $2.15 per day) has fallen
significantly during the CAS FY05 period, from 14.6 percent in 2004 to 8.8 percent in 2006.
Nevertheless, poverty remains a persistent problem in rural areas, which are home to about two thirds of
all poor people in Serbia. This i s particularly evident in depressed regions that used to be home to major
industries (often extractive and industrial) during the Yugoslav period. Poverty also remains very high
among minority groups, with over half o f the Roma population estimated to live in poverty. Real gains in
poverty reduction, however, are accompanied by continued pessimism among much of the population, in
part because average incomes are just returning to the high point reached during the late 1980s.
Unemployment also remains a continuing problem, at about 20 percent of the labor force.

’ World Bank Institute, Governance Matters 2007: A Decade of Measuring the Quality of Governance, July 2007
3

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
Table 1: Serbia - Key Economic Indicators

Economy
GDP, bln USD
GDP per capita, USD
GDP real growth

15.8
2,107
4.2

20.3
2,719
2.5

24.5
3,285
8.4

26.2
3,511
6.2

31.8
4,245
5.7

40.8
5,435
7.0

National accounts (%GDP)
Consumption
Investments
Export of goods and services
Import of goods and services

102.3
17.2
18.7
38.3

96.2
22.6
21.4
40.2

100.1
23.6
22.7
46.3

99.6
22.5
25.2
47.3

97.9
21.9
27.0
46.8

98.6
22.1
28.2
49.0

Public finances
Public Revenues, %GDP
Public Expenditures, %GDP
Fiscal balance, as %GDP

39.1
43.4
-4.3

40.5
43.7
-3.2

41.4
41.4
0.0

41.3
40.6
0.7

40.7
42.3
-1.5

41.2
42.5
-1.3

Prices
Inflation (eop)
Core inflation (eop)

14.8
5.9

7.7
5.4

13.7
10.3

17.7
14.5

6.6
5.9

8.8
4.5

Balance o f Payments
Export, mln USD
Import, mln USD
CAD after grants, as %GDP
FDI, as "LOGDP
Gross official reserves, mln USD

2,420
5,440
-8.8
3 .O
2,280

3,150
7,340
-7.0
6.7
3,550

4,082
10,551
-11.7
4.0
4,245

4,97 1
10,260
-8.5
5.9
5,843

6,487
12,716
-11.5
13.7
11,888

8,585
17,086
-14.6
3.7
13,700

Debt
External debt, %GDP
Public debt, as %GDP

70.9
76.4

66.7
68.4

57.5
53.7

59.0
46.4

61.3
39.6

59.6
35.8

Monetary
M2, as %GDP
Net domestic credit as %GDP
Credit to private sector, as %GDP
Average exchange rate, RSDAJSD
Average exchange rate, RSD/EUR

12.1
18.1
17.8
64.4
60.7

11.4
19.5
20.3
58.8
65.1

11.2
24.4
23.9
58.4
72.7

11.8
28.0
29.6
66.7
83.2

14.2
23.8
28.5
66.9
84.1

22.3
28.0

Source: IMF, World Bank staff and authorities' estimates.

12. Despite Serbia's strong growth performance, significant challenges remain.
External
weaknesses are apparent in double-digit and expanding current account deficits. External debt remains
about 60 percent o f GDP, despite past London and Paris Club debt write downs. Although public debt
has declined significantly, private external liabilities continue to grow quickly. Surging capital inflows
and large current account deficits have unsettled the focus o f monetary and exchange rate policies, which
have alternated between disinflation and exchange rate objectives. Although policy action will be

4

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1
required to address external weaknesses, Serbia’s reserves position i s currently very comfortable as a
result o f strong private sector inflows including foreign direct investment. FDI averaged 6.7 percent o f
GDP over the last 5 years, resulting in Serbia being among the top countries in Europe and Central Asia
with respect to attracting such investment. FDI was especially strong in 2006, as a result o f several large
privatization deals, including the sale o f a mobile telephone operator. Nevertheless, the privatization
agenda remains unfinished. Greater greenfield FDI would also be useful.

C. Developments in Poverty Reduction, Social Issues and MDGs

13. Poverty has fallen over the past four years, from about 14.6 percent of the population in 2004,
to 8.8 percent in 2006. Serbia i s on track to meet the target, set out in its 2003 Poverty Reduction
Strategy (PRS), to reduce poverty to 6.5 percent by 2010. Despite the significant decline in poverty,
however, this needs to be seen in the context o f Serbia only recently returning to the income and poverty
levels enjoyed in the late 1980s. Partly because o f this, a degree o f pessimism i s still evident2.
14. Serbia seems well-placed to meet most, if not all, the MDG targets by 2015. Primary school
completion rates are over 95 percent, and in terms o f statistics do not differ significantly by gender. The
proportion of the population with access to an improved water source i s higher than the average for ECA
countries, as i s the share o f the country’s population with access to sanitation systems. Infant and child
mortality rates in Serbia were quite low to start with in 1990 and have continued to fall since then,
indicating the country i s on track to achieve this MDGn3Finally, with regard to the arresting the spread o f
communicable diseases, prevalence rates of diseases like malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS are quite
low, though warrant close monitoring, particularly for vulnerable and high-risk groups.
15. Regional differences in poverty, with particularly high levels of unemployment in former
industrial centers, remain a particular challenge. Unemployment remains stubbornly high at about 20
percent o f the labor force, and poverty and unemployment are closely linked. Despite high economic
growth in the country overall, poverty remains especially evident in rural areas (such as parts o f
Vojvodina and Central Serbia) and in depressed former mining and industrial regions (such as Bor and
Resavica). As well as high unemployment, there appears to be a significant number o f “working poor” in
such regions. A large number o f people in low wage jobs, often in the gray economy, remain just above
the poverty line, and vulnerable to unexpected economic shocks (such as loss o f employment). Poverty i s
also strongly correlated with education: highly educated workers enjoy considerable wage advantage
compared to those with less education and lower skills. Raising employment rates, and worker
productivity and wages, through a comprehensive approach, including by promoting mobility o f workers
from declining to growing sectors, and upgrading the education and training system to produce a highlyskilled and flexible workforce, are important challenges facing policymakers in the countryO4Other
challenges include very high levels o f poverty among minorities, especially Roma, as well as a rapidly
aging population, which will have implications for the healthcare system and the fiscal sustainability o f
the pension system.
111. COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND OUTSTANDING PRIORITIES

16. The key economic priorities of the new Government are set out in the Memorandum on the
Budget and Economic and Fiscal Policy for the Year (July 2007) and the 2008 Budget (November
2007). Priorities outlined in these documents are set within the Serbia’s strategy for EU integration,
In Serbia, for instance, only 20 percent o f the population currently feels that the economic situation i s better than in
1989, compared to almost 40 percent in other Eastern European transition economies.
See http://www.prsp,sr.gov.yu/download/mdg 2002 ene.pdf The MDGs: How much i s Serbia on track?
World Bank 2006: Serbia Labor Market Assessment, Report No. 3 6 5 7 6 - W , World Bank, Washington DC.

5

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1
adopted in 2005, and the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS), adopted in 2003. K e y economic policy
priorities include:

i. Maintaining macroeconomic stability;

ii.Promoting dynamic economic growth, through accelerated implementation o f economic reforms;
iii.Increased employment and living standards;
iv. More balanced regional development;
17. Accelerated integration with the European Union remains a key over-arching priority that
will shape economic strategy. The new Government has stated that integration i s a central policy goal,
and that it i s committed to undertake necessary actions to harmonize legislation and practices and to make
necessary investments, such as in the environment sector, to accelerate the integration process. Serbia
concluded technical discussions on a Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU in
September 2007, and the S A A was initialed in November 2007. The Agreement i s now ready to be signed
conditional on an assessment o f Serbia’s cooperation with the ICTY. The Government has stated its
commitment to further strengthen such cooperation. The S A A process will influence all aspects o f the
Government’s reform program. Further progress on European integration i s likely to be important to
enhance trade and economic cooperation opportunities for Serbia, and to encourage continued foreign
investment. European principles and standards will also need to f l o w through to a wide range o f reform
programs - from public administration reforms to environmental requirements.

i.

Macro-Economic Stability

18. The Government recognizes that maintaining macro-economic stability is critical to underpin
Serbia’s continued growth and development. In order to maintain hard won macro-economic stability,
the Government has committed itself to maintain appropriate fiscal and monetary policy and accelerate
structural reforms in the financial and public sector. The Government’s Budget Memorandum recognizes
the problems associated with increasing external vulnerabilities, evident particularly in the persistent and
growing current account deficit. It foresees a mix o f macroeconomic measures (fiscal, monetary, and
exchange rate policies) to reduce domestic demand, along with accelerated structural reforms.
19. Conservative fiscal policy will help address emerging inflationary pressures and external
imbalances. The Authorities have been very confident o f Serbia’s prospects. While mindful o f
imbalances and the remaining reform agenda, the Authorities have seen these issues as reflecting normal
transition strains. Focused on infrastructure bottlenecks, reflecting inadequate investment over the past
20 years, and high labor taxation, the Authorities have used the scope provided by strong VAT receipts
and one-off privatization revenues to give precedence in their policy agenda to relaxing the fiscal position
and reducing labor taxation. These policies are likely to have long-term benefits, provided investments
are carefully prioritized. Incorporating investments proposed under the National Investment Plan (NIP)
into the regular budget priority setting process will be critical. Nevertheless, care i s required to ensure
that hard won macro-economic stability i s not put at risk. The public sector in Serbia s t i l l makes up a
very significant proportion o f the total economy, at about 42 percent o f GDP. Fiscal adjustment over
2003-05 brought the fiscal position into a small surplus, before pre-election spending in 2006 led to a
deficit o f 1.5 percent o f GDP, with a similar outcome expected for 2007.
20. The Government’s stated fiscal policy aim i s to reduce public expenditure as a proportion of
GDP and strengthen the revenue base. The Budget Memorandum and 2008 Budget recognize the need
to reduce the burden o f a relatively large public sector. The Government acknowledges the reversals in
fiscal policy after the significant gains in 2004 and 2005. In order to address recent public sector wage
growth, for instance, the Government has indicated i t s intention to develop a wage policy that links wage

6

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
adjustments to productivity increases and the abandonment of a policy o f equal pay for all within the
public administration, public services and public enterprises. Implementation o f the 2008 budget will
provide an important indication o f the ability o f the coalition government to realize politically challenging
economic policies. The Government also plans to reduce fiscal pressures through additional reductions in
subsidies to state and socially owned enterprise. On the revenue side, further reforms should be aimed at
better capturing o f informal activities, reduction o f tax compliance costs and improved collection o f taxes
at municipal level. This will be needed stimulate competitiveness and encourage stronger public revenues
based on a growing economy and a wider tax base. Over the medium term, the Authorities anticipate a
gradual decline in public expenditures as a proportion o f GDP, with public revenues remaining relatively
constant as a proportion o f GDP. The IMF has suggested that additional fiscal measures beyond those
currently anticipated may be required.

2 1. The Government i s committed to improving the quality of public spending. Public investment
has increased as a proportion o f GDP over the past 4 years (from 2.4 percent in 2003 to an anticipated 4.3
percent in 2007). The share o f investment in human capital (health care, education, science) and
infrastructure (energy, transport environment) are targeted to increase, in order to provide the necessary
environment to attract private capital and lay the foundations for sustainable economic development.
Strengthening the operations o f the National Investment Plan (NIP) to ensure that investments are
appropriately assessed and prioritized, will be particularly important in this regard.
22. Strengthened public financial management and reform o f public administration remain key
priorities. The Budget Memorandum acknowledges that “management o f public finance i s subject to
permanent improvement”. Ensuring that the independent State Audit Institution (SAI) established in
September 2007 i s functioning effectively will be central to improve controls on public financial
management. Although the Serbian Government’s treasury system i s relatively strong, there i s a need for
improvement in procurement and internal and external audit. Additional public administration reform i s
intended to continue the ongoing public administration reform program with a focus on creating a more
efficient public administration, based on the principles o f decentralization, depoliticization,
professionalizationand rationalizationo f the civil service.

23. Monetary and exchange rate policies are targeted at stabilizing inflation and ensuring that the
Dinar rate i s established based on supply and demand in the foreign exchange market. The National
Bank o f Serbia (NBS) will continue to implement a policy o f a gradual reduction o f core inflation and its
stabilization at a level that i s comparable with that o f EU countries. Tensions in macro-economic policies
do persist, however, as the authorities try to balance objectives of short-term price stability with the
competitiveness o f the Dinar.
ii. Promote dynamic economic growth, through accelerated economic reform

24. Serbia’s growth rate o f 5.5 percent per annum over the past five years is, by international
standards, a strong but not outstanding performance. Despite impressive achievements, Serbia
remains at an early stage o f the transition process, having started later than most other countries in the
region. Further reform efforts will be required to ensure that incomes can continue to converge with
European averages. The Government has stated its commitment to encourage dynamic private sector led
economic growth through further structural reform to improve the business environment and strengthen
the enterprise and financial sectors, and by undertakingneeded investments and reform to improve critical
infrastructurebottlenecks.

7

Serbia County Partnership Strategyfor FYO&FYll
Improving the Business Environment
25. The Serbian Authorities have made significant progress toward improving competitiveness by
improving the business environment. As noted above Serbia was a top reformer in 2004-2005. Still,
Serbia ranks only 86 out o f 178 countries overall. The Government i s committed to undertaking
additional reform to streamline business entry, including by reducing the time to register a business to 5
days and introduce a one stop shop for business registration. The Government acknowledges the need to
reduce the regulatory compliance burden, with the costs associated with the licensing and permit regime and especially construction permits - highlighted by Doing Business as a particular problem in Serbia and
much o f the rest o f the Western Balkans. Competition legislation will continue to be harmonized with
EU regulations and strengthened, through the establishment in 2006 o f a Competition Protection
Commission, to ensure greater competition for public enterprises, particularly in the telecoms and energy
sectors. A comprehensive regulatory reform strategy and “guillotine” process should also help to reduce
compliance costs for business.

26. Strengthening the capacity o f the judicial system to address business issues will be important.
Contract enforcement and the bankruptcy procedures remain cumbersome and expensive. Doing
Business suggests that enforcing a contract in the courts still takes 21 months, while bankruptcy cases
take over 30 months, are very costly, and generally result in a recovery rate o f less than 25 percent.
Surveys continue to indicate that Serbia citizens are less than fully confident about the impartiality o f the
court system. The Government has prepared a strong judicial reform strategy, which will inter alia help
to address key issues affecting the business environment, including contract enforcement and bankruptcy
proceedings, as well as significantly reduce the current case backlog and delays. As with most reforms,
however, implementation will be critical. As well as strengthening the impartiality o f the judicial system,
streamlining jurisdictions, and ensuring a capacity to deal with complex business and economic cases,
significant infrastructure investments are likely to be required to modernize the court system.
Enterprise Sector Reform

27. Further corporate reforms remain the key challenge outstanding from the pre-2000 period.
Despite the impressive progress evident in the sale o f over 1,800 socially owned enterprises, more than
1,000 enterprises so far remain unsold (in some cases because they have not found buyers after one or
more market tests). There appears to be a reluctance to date to use modern bankruptcy procedures
introduced in 2005, even with the longer-term benefits such actions could generate by freeing up
underutilized but productive assets. In addition, many large utility companies, such as the Naftna
Industrija Srbije (NIS), Elektroprivreda Srbije (EPS), the railway company Zeleznice Srbije (ZS),
Telecom Srbije, and JAT Airways, remain in public ownership. According to Serbian Government
figures, remaining state, socially-owned, and mixed enterprises still require direct fiscal subsidies o f about
2 percent o f GDP, in addition to indirect subsidies provided through non-payment o f arrears to state
owned utilities. Subsidies are especially concentrated on a few companies, including RTB Bor and
Zastava Group, which together accounted for nearly one-third o f the subsidies paid in 2006.
28. The Government has stated its strong commitment to continue with enterprise restructuring
and privatization to improve the overall competitiveness of the Serbian economy. In the new
Government’s first five months the privatization program for socially-owned enterprises has continued
(all remaining enterprises are expected to have been offered for sale by end o f 2008, with unsaleable
companies going into liquidation procedure). The Government has stated i t s commitment to
strengthening bankruptcy enforcement. Proposals for the privatization o f large state-owned enterprises
remain under discussion. The Government appears committed to proceeding with the privatization o f
JAT Airways and the airports. The privatization o f RTB Bor i s almost complete. Options for privatizing
the oil company (NIS) are under consideration. Considerable further reform of the railways (ZS) i s

8

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYObFYll
anticipated, with further efforts to improve efficiency - including redundancies. Further reform of the
electricity sector i s also anticipated. Restructuringof EPS to allow for greater private sector participation
in new generation investments i s well underway. Further efforts to privatize approximately 400
municipal enterprises, following the adoption of the relevant legislation, are also anticipated. Overall, the
Government expects that these measures will allow for a continuing reduction in direct subsidies from
current levels of about 2 percent of GDP.

Financial Sector Reform
29. Growing confidence in the economy, and relatively high levels of global liquidity - at least
until very recently has led to an increase in financial intermediation and has drawn large capital
inflows to Serbia. This has occurred mainly in the form of foreign exchange deposits in the banking
system, and more recently of credits provided by foreign banks to their newly established affiliates
(including leasing companies). These new resources have allowed banks to sharply increase lending.
Credit to the private sector rose from about 18 percent of GDP in 2002 to about 28.5 percent of GDP by
the end of 2006. External debt has increased since 2004 (from 57.5 to 61.3 percent of GDP at the end
2006), despite significant declines in public debt. This partially reflects a shift in corporate borrowing
from European banks rather than their Serbian affiliates to avoid high reserve requirements imposed by
the National Bank of Serbia, leading to a rise in the share of consumer borrowing from domestic banks.
While foreign capital inflows have helped fuel Serbia’s economic recovery, they do raise issues of the
vulnerability of the financial sector to capital flow reversals and exchange rate risks.

-

30. I n the past several years the GoS and the National Bank o f Serbia (NBS) have made
significant progress in restructuring the financial sector, notably through the resolution of a number of
insolvent banks and insurers, the divestment of nearly half i t s banking sector holdings and strengthening
the regulatory regime underlying the banking, insurance and more recently the securities sectors. The
Government has stated its intention to privatize its remaining financial sector holdings in nine banks
representing about 15 percent of the banking sector, and divest the remaining assets held by the Deposit
Insurance Agency (DIA) as a result of previous bank sales and closures. The Government has indicated a
commitment to insurance sector reform, including by enacting the new Motor Third Party Liability Law
(MTPL) and amending the Insurance Law in order to ensure a level playing field between insurance
companies, as well as to privatize the public owned insurer Dunav and i t s stake in DDOR (total
Government holdings currently make up 60 percent of the insurance sector). Strengthening of capital
markets would also help to consolidate and deepen financial sector reforms. By improving firms’ access
to equity and debt financing this could provide new sources of capital and potentially mitigate credit risks
toward large enterprises currently held by banks. Enhancing the regulatory and enforcement capacity of
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) will be especially important.
Meeting Serbia’s Transport Infrastructure Needs
31. Improving the management o f Serbia’s transport assets i s critical to increase economic
growth and regional linkages. Road and rail traffic has been growing significantly, although rail traffic
has mostly been concentrated in the freight sector and remains well below levels experienced in the
1980s. In both cases, significant investment needs are evident. At the same time, however, there i s also
an urgent need to strengthen the management of current assets and improve the efficiency of public
spending. Greater involvement of the private sector in all transport sub-sectors may also offer
opportunities to encourage the construction o f new infrastructure, where financially viable, and allow the
Government to increasingly focus public investment on much needed maintenance. Transport
investments will need to be made within the context of the European Commission’s overall framework
for South East Europe. Initiatives include the establishment of an Infrastructure Steering Group (ISG) in
2001, which also includes representation from all relevant multilateral development banks and the

9

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYOI-FYI1
Stability Pact. A Memorandum o f Understanding on the development o f the South East Europe Core
Regional Transport Network was signed by the ministries o f transports from SEE countries in June 2004
and a Five Year Multi-Annual Plan was agreed with specific actions for each transport mode. The
Memorandum o f Understanding also provides the institutional framework for cooperation through a
Steering Committee which i s served by a Secretariat (SEETO).

32.

Investments in the road sub-sector will need to balance the very high priority placed by the
Government on constructing European Corridor X, with the urgent need for maintenance of
existing assets. Corridor X, which runs from Austria, through Serbia to Greece has significant potential
to increase Serbia’s overall integration into the European transport network, and considerable resources
are being directed at the development of the road network on this route. At the same time, the overall
road system i s deteriorating, due to rapid traffic growth and limited maintenance, with about 40 percent o f
primary roads and 70 percent o f secondary roads estimated to be in poor condition. Possible private
sector involvement in major highway construction could potentially allow a reorientation o f public
spending toward road maintenance that could help clear a significant maintenance backlog and help to
ensure roads are maintained before expensive rehabilitation i s required. There i s also an urgent need to
strengthen the management o f assets and improve the efficiency o f public spending. Road quality i s also
a factor in Serbia’s road safety record, with fatalities per vehicle about five times EU averages, although a
substantial outreach campaign, a cross sectoral approach, and a strengthened legislative framework are
also likely to be required to manage this concern.

33. Railway traffic, especially freight, i s increasing steadily - but a major reform effort remains
to improve efficiency and to put the railways on a sustainable financial footing. Commercial
revenues cover only half o f Zeleznice Srbije (ZS) working costs (excluding depreciation). ZS remains
one o f the largest recipients o f state subsidies, totaling 0.5 per cent o f GDP (1 per cent including
uncompensated asset depreciation). There has been progress in the introduction of much needed reforms
in the railway sector: all the countries in the region have initiated the process towards the separation o f
railway infrastructure from operations in accordance with the broad principles set out in EC Directive
91/440, and some have completed this process. The next stages o f the reform process - the establishment
o f track access regimes and a common network statement - i s starting, with the support o f the EU and the
World Bank - with an Addendum to the SEETO Treaty on this issue to be signed by all the Ministers o f
Transport in the region in Tirana on the 4th December 2007. Still, much remains to be done. Efforts to
increase overall railway revenues and improve efficiency, particularly of the large labor force, will also
need to be accompanied by a transparent system of public service contracts for necessary but loss making
passenger services as well as a restructuring o f the ZS’s historical liabilities and additional maintenance
financing to overcome bottlenecks. In addition, improving the urban transport system i s becoming a
priority, with the commuter rail services serving Belgrade representing an early priority. There i s scope
to engage the private sector in such services, which could potentially be undertaken without financing or
guarantees from the State Government.

34. The inland water transport system has the potential to play a larger role. Annual traffic
volumes have increased significantly, reaching 8.4 million tons in 2005, approximately double 2000
volumes. The Government i s moving to finalize the privatization o f river ports. Most ports have
sufficient cargo handling capacity, but old and inefficient equipment. Privatization could help to bring in
much needed investments to improve efficiency and undertake needed maintenance.

10

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1
Energy Sector Reform and Opportunities

35. Serbia has considerable scope to benefit from participation in the regional energy market
established under the Energy Community of South East Europe (ECSEE) Treaty. Serbia has made
important progress in reforming and upgrading its energy sector over the last few years. The financial
position o f the power utility EPS has been strengthened by tariff increases and significantly improved
payment collection - although further tariff reform will be required to allow EPS to cover its full costs
including depreciation and return on capital. This will need to be accompanied by strengthening o f
appropriate social safety nets to ensure that the poorest consumers are not made more vulnerable.
Restructuring o f the energy sector consistent with EU guidelines and the ECSEE Treaty has resulted in
the establishment in 2004 o f an independent regulator (although s t i l l with limited tariff setting authority),
and the separation o f EPS’s generation, transmission and distribution assets. While the Government i s
not currently considering the privatization o f EPS assets, this structure should help to ensure that there i s
a level playing field to encourage private sector participation in new generation investments, such as the
Kolubara plant which i s among the least cost generation options in South East Europe. An energy policy
framework that encourages new private investment in generation capacity will be especially important to
resolve looming capacity shortages in Serbia, the region, and Europe more broadly, that threaten to
undermine growth.

36. Increased energy efficiency will be a critical element in managing future energy demand.
Relative to its GDP, the Serbian economy i s four times more energy intensive than the EU average. The
Government acknowledges the need to tap new opportunities for improving energy efficiency and for the
development o f renewable and alternative energy resources. The Government i s introducing programs to
improve energy efficiency, in particular in the public sector, as well as encouraging private financing
schemes for energy efficiency investments. Recent ratification o f the Kyoto Protocol could facilitate the
development o f renewable energy and improved energy efficiency through carbon financing
opportunities. Expanded use o f natural gas, including gasification o f central heating for a significant
number o f cities and towns could also improve energy efficiency. This will, however, require increased
security o f supply in gas imports.
37. Further reform of the petroleum industry offers scope for significant benefits. The
Government i s currently reviewing possibilities to privatize NIS. An open and transparent process that
allows for majority private control of NIS or a clear path toward majority control, has the potential to
offer certainty to investors and ensure the best price for the Authorities. Appropriate Government
influence over the sector could then still be based on regulation. Serbian consumers could also save
several hundred million Euros per year through import competition in petroleum products, and the
Government i s considering options to replace the import ban on oil products with a system of import
duties, scheduled to be gradually reduced to low EU levels by 2012.
iii. Increasing Employment and Living Standards

38. The Government’s employment strategy i s focused on the private sector as the major
generator of new jobs, particularly in competitive export oriented small and medium enterprises.
With sustained economic expansion the authorities are expecting to reverse the trend in recent years
whereby employment growth in the “new” industries was counteracted by falling employment in the
“old” industries. Nevertheless with some 250,000 workers (10 percent o f total employment) still
employed in state and socially owned enterprises, there i s still likely to be a need for further redundancies
- with up to 40,000 predicted over the next few years. The National Employment Strategy for the period
2005-2010 sets out the ambitious targets of employment growth o f 1.5 percent a year with the
unemployment rate decreasing from the current level o f 21.6 percent to 15.5 percent in 2010.

11

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1

39.

Increasing employment, especially higher-productivity employment, will be important for
raising living standards. The Government recognizes that significant reforms are still required to ensure
that Serbia’s labor market has access to competitive human capital and that labor markets operate more
efficiently and flexibly. Expandingjob opportunities i s one o f the Government’s main economic policy
priorities until 2010. Currently Serbia’s employment rate lags well below many successful transition
countries and EU targets. Recent official statistics show that unemployment in Serbia remains
approximately 2 1.6 percent. While improved employment performance will require sustained economic
growth and the completion o f the restructuring associated with the privatization program, a number o f
reforms in the labor market will also be crucial. Further reductions in labor taxation will be important, but
would need to be carried out in a fiscally responsible manner. Labor supply also needs to be upgraded and
workers will require better opportunities for training and retraining to adjust to ongoing structural changes
in the economy. Labor market regulations should also be made more flexible, specifically in terms o f
improving possibilities for fixed-term and part-time employment. This would have a particularly positive
impact on job opportunities for women and young people.

40. A particular challenge for Serbia will be to ensure education i s linked more strongly with
labor demand. High youth unemployment (including tertiary graduates) and comparatively poor
performance in international assessments o f student learning, indicate that the education system i s not yet
providing young people with the most appropriate skills and knowledge for a modern economy. These
difficulties are compounded by wide differences in access to quality education. The development o f a
comprehensive education strategy appears to be a high priority for the Government. This will need to
focus on improving teaching and learning standards, promoting greater education coverage and the reform
o f resource allocation within the sector. The education system has a unique opportunity to use the
expected dramatic decline in student numbers (due to falling birth rates) to reallocate resources towards
improving quality, especially for the most disadvantaged students, including Roma population. At the
secondary level, an important challenge will be to expand coverage, including by restructuringthe school
network to reflect the changing geographical distribution o f the population, while scaling back the
dominance o f vocational schools. Tertiary education will need to be aligned along the lines o f the
Bologna process to ensure better harmonization with EU standards. There i s considerable scope to
promote greater regional cooperation in higher education, including greater recognition o f degrees from
regional institutions and by promoting specialized “centers o f excellence” in individual countries.

4 1.

Strengthening training and retraining to increase the knowledge and skills of the labor force
to adjust to ongoing structural changes in the economy and industry will be important. Adult
education and training, even for those employed, i s scarce and does not allow for upgrading o f human
capital in response to market demands. Strengthened programs to support the school to work transition
would be valuable. Supporting the reform of National Employment Service to reorient active labor
market programs that advance female and youth participation in the job market towards those with a
proven record o f greater efficiency and success will be a priority.

42. Ensuring that Serbia’s social protection and pension systems i s better targeted and put on a
more financially sustainable footing will be important to protect the vulnerable. Poverty has fallen
from 14.6 percent o f the population in 2003 to 8.8 percent in 2007.
43. Estimates suggest that the social insurance and social welfare payments have been critical in
ensuring that poverty i s not one third larger than it is. Pension spending makes up the vast bulk over 75 percent - of total social protection payments. Nevertheless, ensuring that the system i s
financially sustainable will remain a challenge given large current deficits (equivalent to about 5 percent
o f GDP) which will be compounded by anticipated demographic changes and the expected aging o f the
population. The Government undertook substantive pension reforms in 2005, including parametric
reforms which will move the pension system from a large deficit into surplus in the long run. As a result,

12

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
pensions will be linked to inflation rather than wage rises and the relatively low retirement age increased.
Improving collections, however, remains a key issue to further improve the fiscal sustainability o f the
current “first pillar” pension system. In the medium to longer-term, the Government i s also considering
options to introduce voluntary - and eventually compulsory - private retirement savings schemes.
International experience suggests, however, that the successful introduction of such “second” and “third”
pillar pensions schemes, however, are likely to require further strengthening o f the regulatory
environment, and a deepening and broadening of financial markets to ensure appropriate longer-term
investment opportunities are available.

44. Further efforts may be needed to strengthen the targeting of other social benefits. Social
welfare schemes such as the family allowance (MOP) and child allowance cover approximately one in
five households. Social welfare schemes in Serbia are o f relatively limited total size relative to
neighboring countries, and cover roughly half as many households as social insurance schemes such as
pension and disability allowances. Except for the family allowance (MOP), social welfare schemes are
not as closely targeted or as progressive as possible. Better targeting o f such social welfare schemes, or
an increase in the relative proportion provided through MOP rather than other mechanisms (possibly
through the introduction o f a single welfare benefit), could help to reduce poverty. Social safety nets to
reduce the impact on poor households o f needed increases in energy tariffs will also be critical.
45. A good health sector strategy i s in place, and the Government’s focus is on continued
implementation. Health outcomes in Serbia are broadly comparable to other middle income countries
with similar incomes. Costs, however, are high: with public and private payments making up
approximately 10 percent o f GDP. The Government i s committed to a strategy that will increase the use
o f primary health care providers and outpatient services, while improving the management o f expensive
tertiary health care facilities. The reform program i s complicated by the fact that the health care system
needs to be rapidly modernized and reconfiguredto make the system able to more adequately respond to
the rapid ageing o f the population, the increasing burden o f non-communicable diseases and to meet the
expectations for quality care o f a well-educated and informed population. The enhancement o f private
sector participation in the health sector provides potential opportunities to improve overall coverage and
services. At the same time, the process o f decentralizingprimary health care has to be managed carefully
so as not to overload municipal capacities and to sustain reforms that have started in the rationalization o f
hospitals and in payment methods at the primary health care level.
iv. More Balanced Regional Development

46. The Government i s focused on the need to overcome significant regional disparities in Serbia.
The Authorities recognize that economic growth in Serbia, while strong and reasonably broad based, has
still been characterized by a lack o f opportunities for people in underdeveloped regions in country.
Despite significant reductions in the proportion o f rural people living in poverty (from 20 percent in 2004
to 14 percent in 2006), the rural poverty rate remains more than treble the poverty rate in Belgrade
(4.2%). Two thirds o f poor households in Serbia live in rural areas and depressed regions. Poverty i s
particularly evident in depressed former mining and industrial centers in Southern and Eastern Serbia.
Unemployment in parts o f the Bor region, for instance, i s as high as 40 percent o f the labor force. To
overcome these challenges, a Regional Development Strategy was adopted early 2007. The strategy
focuses on the upgrading o f regional infrastructure, the provision o f economic incentives and the roll-out
o f active labor market programs to ensure more balanced country-wide development. The strategy i s
fully consistent with EU principles o f localization.
47. The Government recognizes that improved policy and management of Serbia’s natural
resources will be critical to improve the welfare of the rural population and to strengthen Serbia’s
participation in European markets. Serbia i s well endowed with natural resources, including abundant

13

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
agricultural land, forests and water resources. The authorities have developed and adopted an agricultural
strategy in 2005 to increase competitiveness. Land consolidationcould improve agricultural productivity,
with over 70 percent o f farms in Serbia smaller than five hectares. While recent trade reforms have
contributed to the liberalization o f the agricultural sector, more needs to be done to reduce the high levels
o f tariff protection and subsidies which continue to delay the inevitable transformation process o f the
agricultural sector. Serbia’s anticipated joining o f the World Trade Organization 2008 i s an important
milestone in this direction. This transformation will need to be managed in a way that ensures that small
farmers continue to have opportunities, especially given the importance o f the agricultural sector as a
“safety net” for many rural families. Early retirement programs and other forms o f income support for
smaller farmers that encourage land consolidation and create new off-farm employment opportunities
may be important elements o f such a program.

48. Reforms to ensure that EU pre-accession programs and financing can be utilized fully to
support the transition o f Serbian agriculture will be important. This will require shifting fiscal
support away from price based interventions towards support for on-farm investments. This approach i s
also consistent with the Instrument for Pre-Accession for Rural Development and the evolution o f the
Common Agricultural Policy. Further modernizing food safety and quality systems and agricultural
pollution controls will also be essential to increase farmers’ ability to meet rising consumer preferences
for quality products and cross compliance requirements associated with Rural Development funds.
49. Adapting to climate change effects will be especially important for rural communities
dependent on agriculture. Projected climate change effects could potentially allow greater agricultural
production in Serbia if irrigation and other infrastructure i s in place. Improved water resource
management and infrastructurecan also reduce the variability in agricultural yields, increase productivity,
and reduce the risk o f flooding. At the same time, there i s a risk that the frequency and severity o f natural
disasters, such as floods, droughts, forest fires, and landslides could increase. A key challenge will be to
shift public sector intervention from disaster response to disaster risk reduction and climate change
adaptation. Addressing natural hazards effectively will require coordination within and between countries
(such as in weather forecasting, early warning, the development o f plans for river catchments, including
flood protection measures, and coordinated response to disasters). Such cooperation i s o f particular
importance for the countries sharing river basins such as the Danube. Disaster insurance schemes and
strengthened building codes could also be a central element in strengthening Serbia’s hazard risk
mitigation and adaptation strategies.
50. At the same time, significant environmental issues associated with the legacies from heavy
mining and industrial industries in regional towns, as well as in urban areas such as Belgrade will
also need to be addressed. Mining operations such as Bor and Resavica have significant environmental
legacies that will need to be addressed as part o f a broader regional development strategy. Attracting
credible international investors to the 1,000 or so socially or state-owned enterprises that are slated for
privatization requires an inventory o f environmental liabilities attached to them and a strategy to address
these liabilities. The mining and energy sector will need particular attention based on global best practice.
In addition, Belgrade i s also confronting increasing environmental issues, including air quality.

5 1. Effective fiscal decentralization and municipal reform and strengthening will be crucial to
reduce regional disparities. The new Local Government Finance Law that came into effect in January
2007 has improved the fiscal framework for municipalities by improving the transparency and
predictability o f revenue transfers to local governments, and more equitably distributing revenues
between municipalities. Significant disparities in per capita municipal revenues remain, however. In
addition, strengthening the capacities o f municipalities and local service providers such as schools and
hospitals to manage and implement their new responsibilities in an environment o f decentralized service
delivery will be critical. Finally, municipalities will need to increasingly take the opportunities available

14

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
to increase financing for investments or to reduce local tax burdens to encourage investment. Following
the approval o f the new Constitution, municipalitiesnow also have more options to generate revenue from
the sale o f land and companies. Better management o f approximately 400 municipally owned companies
through restructuring, privatization or modernization could free up significant amount o f resources.
Currently, a significant share o f municipality expenditure appears to be covering the operating losses and
capital needs o f municipality owned enterprises

IV.

WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

A. Participation and Partnerships
i.

Participatory Process Followed

52. A World Bank client survey was conducted in June 2007. In order to actively include clients,
stakeholders and partners in the World Bank’s strategic planning processes and get feedback on the
Bank’s track record and future role in Serbia, a client survey was carried out in June 2007.

53. The majority of the respondents assessed the World Bank’s role in Serbia as positive. The
World Bank was seen as most effective in reinforcing the financial system. A total o f 291 respondents
responded to the survey, covering all economic sectors, organization types and geographical parts o f
Serbia. Some 63 percent o f the respondents assessed the efficiency of the World Bank’s work in Serbia
in a positive manner, with most positive scores coming from Government representatives and other
donors, and more negative assessments from academia, the media and NGOs. With regard to past
activities, the respondents assessed the World Bank as having been the most effective in reinforcing the
financial system. A sizable portion of respondents thought that the World Bank has not been efficient
enough in increasing transparency in governance and in reinforcing the education sector. However, the
World Bank was seen as effective in the reduction o f corruption due to its strict procurement rules. The
World Bank’s technical expertise, its knowledge (studies and analyses) and its ability to share best
practices were highly appreciated.
54. M o r e than half of respondents thought that economic growth i s the most important
development priority for Serbia. Economic growth was followed by job creation and improved
incomes as the most important priorities. Fighting corruption, improving government effectivness,
reducing poverty and improving the justice system were also seen as important foci for Serbia. Increased
employment possibilities and the development o f the private sector were seen as two key development
areas likely to contribute most to reduction o f poverty.

55. Respondents thought that the World Bank should play an active role in the future to support
Serbia’s development efforts. An overwhelming majority (8 1 percent) of the respondents thought that
the World Bank will play an important role in Serbia’s economic development and convergence with
Europe. Respondents agreed that the World Bank’s mission in Serbia, as in other mid-income level
countries, has yet to be completed. Respondents from governmental institutions attached the greatest
importance to the World Bank contribution to Serbia’s future development, while respondents from other
donor organizations saw the World Bank’s role as slowly diminishing. Respondents thought that the
World Bank should focus its resources mainly on spurring economic growth and in promoting policies
that stimulate foreign direct investment and create employment. Institutions who have worked closely
with the World Bank believe that the Bank’s future analytical work in Serbia should focus on job
creation, enhanced business environment and poverty surveys. I t was widely seen that South Eastern and
Eastern Serbia are most in need o f the World Bank’s assistance.

15

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1

56. Consultations with the Serbian Government and key partners and stakeholders were held to
discuss the priorities for the World Bank’s engagement in Serbia. A set o f roundtable discussions
were organized in July and October 2007 between the representatives o f the World Bank and the Serbian
Government to discuss the priorities for future cooperation and how the World Bank could best support
Serbia in i t s development efforts. Discussions have also been held with other major donors in Serbia.
The EU has been consulted in the preparatory process o f the CPS, including in consultations on the World
Bank’s future engagement in Serbia held in Brussels in late October 2007.
ii. Donor Coordination and Partner Roles

57. The Government manages and leads donor coordination in Serbia. In order to promote country
ownership, the World Bank, along with other major donors, has recently been encouraging, empowering
and supporting the Government to adopt a leading role in donor coordination and harmonization. A
Donor Assistance Coordination Unit (DACU), initially under the Ministry o f International Economic
Relations, was established in November 2000 to act as a focal point for donor assistance coordination.
DACU was later transferred to the Ministry o f Finance which also i s charged with managing EU funds for
Serbia. DACU i s tasked with facilitating and coordinating all donor support for Serbia. Furthermore, an
informal intra-donor group meets regularly, comprising the 15 biggest bilateral and multilateral donors in
Serbia. This group’s activities are jointly coordinated by UNDP and the World Bank. The Office o f the
Deputy Prime Minister has also now established a focal point for EU and PRS implementation, and this
has helped to ensure a “whole o f government” approach.
58. Increased efforts are being made to harmonize the activities of different development
partners in Serbia and to align their programs with the Government priorities. After the adoption o f
the Paris Declaration on donor assistance harmonization and in line with Serbia’s EU accession goals,
DACU has been paying more attention to the harmonization o f donor assistance. With Serbia beginning
to benefit from the EU’s Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA) funds, greater efforts are needed
to strengthen donor coordination. The Government, recognizing this need, i s developing a three-year
inter-sectoral programmatic planning tool, which will be updated on a yearly basis, aimed at facilitating
the programming o f donor funds. Donors have welcomed this approach and expressed their willingness
to seek further alignment o f their programs with the Government’s own priorities and programs.
59. Serbia has received a significant amount of international aid since the democratic transition
in 2000, but aid volumes are decreasing. The Bank and the EC jointly chaired two major donor
conferences in 2001 and 2003 to support Serbia in i t s development efforts. Serbia has received a total o f
4.1 billion Euros in international assistance between 2000 and 2007. Aid volumes are, however, expected
to decline in the medium to long term. The Government’s objective i s to mobilize around 400 million
Euros annually in external financing until it gains EU membership. The Government has expressed that it
hopes to receive half o f the sum in grants and the other half in loans and credits. A Serbia donor matrix
(annex 4) gives an overview the activities o f different donors in Serbia. In terms o f disbursement
volumes, the four biggest bilateral donors in Serbia are the USA, Italy, Germany and Sweden. Many
other European donors also provide valuable EU pre-accession support. Additionally, the UK supports
the Government’s efforts to implement the PRS in Serbia. The United States, while maintaining a strong
presence, plans to phase out support in 2010-201 1. The IMF currently has no program with Serbia - the
previous arrangement between the IMF and Serbia expired in February 2006. Regular Article I V
monitoring, however, provides a platform for continuing discussion between the Authorities and the IMF.

60. The European Union i s clearly Serbia’s most important current and future development
partner. In this regard, practically all World Bank assistance i s aimed at helping Serbia in the process o f
convergence with the European Union. EC assistance i s going through a transition from being provided
through the European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR) to being channeled through IPA, with

16

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
Government responsibility for implementation. As much as 195 m i l l i o n Euros could be received through
IPA on annual basis. A significant strengthening in public institutions i s required across the Government,
however, if P A funds are to be effectively mobilized. P A i s made up o f five components: (i)support for
transition and institution building; (ii)cross-border cooperation; (iii)regional development, (iv) human
resources development; and (v) rural development. The first two components concern all beneficiary
countries, whereas the three latter components are aimed at EU candidate countries only. Therefore
Serbia, being a potential candidate country to EU accession, only benefits from activities under the two
first components.

B. Implementation of the Last CAS
61. The previous CAS program from FY05 to FY07 was delivered largely as planned during the
first half of the program period, although improvements in the Government’s financial position led
to the replacement of an ambitious serious of planned development policy operations in the second
half o f the CAS period by additional financing for well performing investments. With Serbia s t i l l at
the early stages o f the transition process, continued support for policy reform will be required - although
this may need to be pursued through analytical and advisory services as well as by the use o f new
instruments such as deferred drawdown D P L operations. Investment operations, when carefully targeted
and designed, also provided considerable scope to support difficult and complex reforms, such as
decentralization, rationalization o f railways operations, and energy market reform. Even greater
integration across all parts o f the Bank Group can potentially offer synergies to support the reform
process, including market opening o f the rail sector and the private provision o f infrastucture and social
services, especially in an environment on relatively high public sector spending.
62. The investment portfolio i s generally performing well. IEG has confirmed satisfactory or
moderately satisfactory ratings for all activities exiting the portfolio since the Bank resumed engagement
with Serbia in 2001. A Joint Portfolio Performance Review (JPPR) undertaken in March 2006, for
instance, confirmed satisfactory progress on 10 out o f 12 operations current at that time. Efforts to
strengthen the portfolio ensured that only one current operation remains unsatisfactory. Operations in the
social sectors, however, have proved to be subject to performance difficulties. Performance o f the
education, health and pension reform projects, for instance, have all been unsatisfactory at some period.
The portfolio review also highlighted the importance o f strictly assessing project readiness, with several
investments subject to initial delays in effectiveness and disbursements - although performance on almost
all has subsequently improved significantly.
63. The CAS Completion Report (Annex 2) identified a number o f lessons that have been incorporated
into the design o f this CPS. These lessons include:

(i) The areas of focus in the CAS were appropriate, and the mix o f interventions ultimately
approved supported objectives well. Given the substantial progress made by Serbia, and the
contributions made by the Bank to that progress, CAS implementation can be considered overall
satisfactory.

(ii) Bank support should focus increasingly on Serbia’s integration with the EU. W i t h the
initialing o f a S A A in November 2007, support for EU integration should be an explicit objective
for the Bank. Closer integration with the EU will require significant investments to harmonize
legislation and standards and to meet stringent environment and food safety standards. Support to
build the capacity o f the Serbian Government to use potential increases in P A financing will also
be crucial, given the experience o f other countries in the region, which were not able to utilize an
average o f 40 percent o f the financing made available.

17

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYOS-FYI1
With Serbia still at an early stage in the transition process, continuing the outstanding
structural reform agenda must be a critical element in the forthcoming CPS, in order to
encourage continued growth and increase jobs. Further enterprise reform, financial sector
reform and improvements in the business environment will be vital to help ensure current levels
of growth can be sustained. Continuing efforts will also be required to help ensure that all parts
o f the population have the skills and ability to share in and benefit from economic growth.
Development policy lending can be a useful instrument to support reform, although
Serbia’s current economic position will require the use o f innovative financing modalities,
such as potentially deferred drawdown DPLs. The Government has indicated that a Bank
program with specific benchmarks and timetables could assist them in pursuing a reform agenda,
particularly on the private sector side. Nevertheless, the Government does not need significant
balance o f payments support at this stage. While development policy lending can play a valuable
role, the experience in the last CAS also suggests that it should not be overused. Investment
instruments, when well targeted and designed, can also be useful to assist the reform agenda.
The Bank will need to ensure that assistance i s able to be provided in response to client
demand. With the transition from IDA to IBRD financing, as well as the range o f financing
options available to Serbia, it i s imperative that the Bank be even more responsive to Serbian
priorities. Careful dialog with the client will be required to ensure that the Bank can stay
relevant, as will greater flexibility. Identification o f new products, including deferred drawdown
development policy operations, insurance and sub-national lending products will require close
consideration. At the same time, care will be required to balance the need for flexibility and
responsiveness with the need to ensure that Bank financing does indeed help to promote reform.
Flexibility will be critical given regional uncertainties and risks o f possible political
instability. Even in a time of relative stability, as during the past CAS period, the need to replace
adjustment operations with new and scaled up investments emphasizes the need for flexibility.
Engagement across the Bank Group, has been strong and will continue to be important in
meeting varied client demands through combining a depth of country knowledge with
global expertise. IFC and MIGA will become an increasingly central element o f the Bank
Group’s engagement in Serbia over the coming years. There i s considerable scope to exploit
potential synergies between different parts o f the institution to encourage the further development
o f the financial sector (pensions, insurance, housing), and to support the private provision o f
infrastructureand social services.
C. The World Bank Group Partnership Strategy FYOS to F Y l l
i.

Key Features and Themes of the Partnership Strategy

64. A four year program of support i s designed to ensure that the World Bank programming
cycle is consistent with the anticipated political cycle in Serbia. Following Parliamentary elections in
January 2007, the normal Parliamentary term in Serbia would run until the end o f 2010. The CPS
consequently coincides with the current Parliamentary mandate.
65.

The World Bank Group will support Government priorities in three key areas:

i. encouraging dynamic private sector led growth to ensure incomes continue to converge with
European levels;

ii. providing opportunities and broadening participation in growth; and
iii. managing emerging environmental and disaster risks.

18

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1

66. The Bank Group’s strategy is broadly structured around the Serbian Government’s
development strategy as set out in the PRS, EU integration strategy, and the 2008 Budget
Memorandum and 2008 Budget. The Government’s strategy has the key aims of: (i)maintaining
macro-economic stability, (ii)promoting dynamic private sector led growth through accelerated economic
reform, and (iii)increasing employment and living standards and encouraging more balanced regional
development.
Among the international community, key responsibility for supporting Serbian
Government efforts to maintain macro-economic stability rests with the IMF, although the Bank Group
will provide advice and support consistent with its mandate. Other themes in the Bank Group strategy
correspond with the Government’s overall priorities. The Bank will also work with the Serbian
Government to manage emerging environmental and disaster risks in order to address key global and
regional public goods.
67. The World Bank Group program will support Serbia in its efforts to join the European
Union, consistent with the Bank Group’s comparative advantages. Integration with Europe will
require significant efforts to harmonize regulations and standards as well as significant investments,
including to improve environmental management. EU accession requirements will be integrated into all
aspects of the Bank Group’s program, and there i s scope for the Bank to assist the Authorities to
strengthen the structures and systems that will allow Serbia to take full advantage o f the opportunities
potentially offered by EU IPA financing, should Serbia continue along the European process. At the
same time, Bank support will need to be carefully targeted to complement the Government’s own
resources and financing, support available from the EC, and other multilateral and bilateral assistance.
Bank support i s not intended to address all aspects of Serbia’s outstanding reform agenda. The EU, for
instance, i s generally best placed among the international community to support overall reform of public
administration, with the Bank enhancing capacity and promoting reform at the sectoral level. Similarly,
the Bank will support the IMF in its lead role in working with the Authorities to maintain macroeconomic stability.
68. Support for Serbian Government priorities will be coordinated and integrated across all parts
of the World Bank Group. Bank Group support i s intended to be mutually reinforcing and
complementary. Interventions from IBRD, IFC and MIGA will be coordinated closely and are expected
to have strong synergies - although it also needs to be recognized that IFC financing and MIGA
guarantee products are to some degree driven by private sector demand, investment opportunities
available through the privatization process, and the scope made available by legislative reform in Serbia
to widen options for public-private partnerships and expand. MIGA’s involvement will also be affected
by investors’ perceptions o f political risk. Particular scope exists for collaboration on sub-national
financing, including to the City o f Belgrade. Joint analytical products are also proposed, such as to
explore opportunities for encouraging greater private sector involvement in the delivery o f social services
such as health, education, and private pension funds. Scope also exists for complementary support in the
energy and transport sectors, particularly with the greater use by the Serbian Government o f publicprivate financing arrangements for new infrastructure investments.
69. Support will need to use a full range of financial and non-financial instruments to respond to
client demand. Particularly with Serbia’s graduation to IBRD, the Bank will need to be even more
flexible to ensure that support i s responsive to Government priorities. New pricing o f IBRD financing
products will especially help to ensure that the Bank i s competitive with other sources o f financing
available to Serbia. The Government has expressed its preference for a continued relationship with the
Bank Group, involving both financial and analytical assistance, as well as support to encourage further
private sector led investment. The Government recognizes the value added and comparative advantages
that can be brought by the Bank Group. Nevertheless, given Serbia strong financial position, access to
alternative sources o f financing, and significant EC grant funds, the Bank will need to continue to adjust
its business model to remain responsive to Serbian requirements. This i s likely to require the deployment

19

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
o f a range o f financial instruments beyond traditional lending. Options such as deferred drawdown
development policy operations to support the Government’s reform program while allowing for
disbursement flexibility are likely to be central to the IBRD program. The Bank will also explore
innovative financial products, including disaster and catastrophe risk insurance. Options to use fee for
service arrangements might also allow greater scope to respond to Serbian Government requirements for
analytical support in specialized areas, including privatization.

70. World Bank support will need to be flexible to respond to changing demand and the evolving
situation in Serbia and the Western Balkans region. Within the strategic framework outlines in this
CPS, mechanisms have been introduced to ensure that support i s able to be tailored and adjusted to meet
emerging needs. This CPS outlines a set o f agreed investments and analytical support for FY08 and
FY09. Indicative areas for potential engagement in the second half of the CPS period are also set out.
Nevertheless, decisions on interventions in the latter half o f the CPS period will be made as part o f a midterm review process anticipated for late calendar year 2008. Additional financing options also provide
scope to respond flexibly and scale up support for well performing investments, within the total financing
envelope available. Adjustments will be possible within the CPS period.

71. As well as a core program o f IBRD and IF C financing and M I G A guarantees, the World
Bank Group will undertake analytical work and advisory services to help encourage an authorizing
environment for reform. A large element of the World Bank’s analytical work and technical assistance
will be linked to the proposed lending and investment program. At the same time, however, analytical
work and technical assistance can also be provided in areas that the Bank Group considers critical, but
where there may not yet be a clear consensus for reform. The Serbia Economic Memorandum, scheduled
for FY08, and a Public Investment and Expenditure Management Review scheduled for FY09 particularly
provide vehicles for the Bank to engage the Government in a broad based dialogue on policy issues. This
will be supplemented by separate analytical pieces considering specific policy issues. Analytical services
and technical assistance can also potentially be provided in areas in which financing limitations may
prevent investments in the early years o f the CPS period. IFC advisory services will continue to be
focused in 4 business lines: SMEs and linkages; business enabling environment; access to finance; and
infrastructureadvisory operations
Priority 1: Dynamic Private Sector Led Growth to Ensure Incomes Converge with Europe

72. Although Serbia’s economic transition i s relatively recent, the country has come a long way.
Economic growth has been strong, and average incomes continue to increase. Progress has been
underpinned by significant structural economic reform, with major improvements in the business
environment, a vibrant financial sector, and significant enterprise restructuring and privatization.
Continuing the next stage o f the transition agenda, however, will be vital if Serbia i s to encourage
dynamic private sector led growth that will be able to ensure that average GDP per capita, currently about
$5,400, continues to converge with EU member states.

73. A proposed series o f development policy operations (DPLs) are intended to anchor I B R D ’ s
support to Serbia through the initial stages of the CPS period. While Serbia currently has limited
financing needs, the Government has suggested that a World Bank DPL program could support the
overall reform program. At least in the initial stages o f the CPS period, the Government’s limited
financing requirements mean that such a DPL series might be structured as deferred drawdown operations
(DDOs), although DPLs could also involve direct financing if required (further details o f how DPLs
might be structured i s provided in paragraph 102 below). A maximum o f one DPL would be disbursed in
the first half o f the CPS period, and only one DDO would be outstanding at any one time. The potential
use o f DPLs in the second half o f the CPS period will be considered in the mid-term review. Even if
DDOs are not drawn down, Bank engagement could potentially provide an important signaling effect to

20

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO&FYII
other international actors to help demonstrate the seriousness and commitment with which the
Government plans to pursue reform. As with all DPLs, such operations will depend on a satisfactory
assessment on the overall macro-economic situation in Serbia, and the completion o f appropriate reforms
to justify financing before operations are brought to the Board. I t will be important that these operations
are not overloaded and concentrate on supporting reforms which are both critical for Serbia’s overall
development as well as in which the Government i s committed to moving forward.

74. Initially, DPL operations will focus on supporting Government efforts to promote private
sector led growth. This will include: (i) further improving the business environment, particularly
cumbersome licensing and permit arrangements identified by Doing Business as a difficulty throughout
the Balkans region; (ii) completing divestiture of socially-owned enterprises; (iii) strengthening
enforcement of bankruptcy and other mechanisms to ensure the assets o f insolvent socially-owned
enterprises unable to be sold can be freed up for productive use; (iv) divest remaining financial sector
holdings; and (v) continuing the process o f privatizing and restructuring o f large state-owned enterprises
following the sale in 2006 o f the mobile telephone operator.
75. There i s scope for development policy operations and investments in future years to support
Serbian Government efforts to strengthen governance, which will facilitate growth. Strengthening
the functioning o f the State Audit Institution (SAI) will be central to the Bank’s DPL series o f operations,
and associated technical assistance in this regard will also be provided. The Bank will also engage
through its analytical and advisory services to highlight areas in which further streamlining o f public
administration could help to reduce the overall fiscal burden in Serbia. This work, however, will need to
be undertaken in support o f the IMF’s lead role in this area. Should the Government demand, DPL
operations could also increasingly be focused on supporting the public sector reform agenda. A strategy
to strengthen governance and anti-corruption might focus on: (i)justice sector modernization; (ii)
controlling corruption; and (iii) improving economic transparency including public sector financial
management, the business environment and the privatization process. The Government has initiated
efforts to improve on all three dimensions, and Bank support will work in coordination with other donors
to accelerate reforms. In addition, following the completion o f the Accounting and Auditing Report on
Standards and Codes (ROSC), the Bank will provide assistance, through an institutional development
fund (IDF) grant, to support the establishment o f a Steering Committee to develop a Country Action Plan
(CAP) to enhance the quality of corporate financial reporting. This will need to be done within the
framework o f the EU body o f law related to companies, financial reporting, auditing, and financial
institutions complemented by International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), International Standards
on Auditing (ISA) and good international practice. In addition, consistent with the Governance and Anticorruption (GAC) Strategy ImplementationPlan being developed for the Europe and Central Asia region,
opportunities for individual investments to strengthen governance and reduce rent seeking opportunities
in specific sectors will be considered at the time o f project development.

76. All parts o f the Bank Group, including IFC, M I G A and W B I are likely to play an
increasingly central role in the Bank Group’s overall efforts to support the remaining transition
agenda and stronger growth in Serbia. IFC’s focus in Serbia includes two major objectives: (i)
facilitating restructuring and ownership change in the enterprise sector; and (ii) helping Serbia improve its
competitiveness. IFC, in cooperation with the IBRD, will offer its global expertise and analytical
capacity to support government’s initiatives to speed up the process of restructuring and ownership
change. IFC expect to play a crucial role in infrastructure (airports, ports, and logistics), and the further
development o f the financial sector. At the national level, IFC advisory services jointly with the Bank, i s
providing assistance on the regulatory reform to improve the quality o f regulations affecting the cost and
risk o f doing business in Serbia. In addition, Sweden has provided trust fund financing to assist the
World Bank Group (including IFC and WBI) to assist in the design and implementation o f a guillotine
review o f the existing regulations and to provide technical assistance to encourage regulatory reform in

21

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYOI-FYI1
order to improve the existing regulatory environment, and to introduce a regulatory impact assessment to
ensure new regulations are not unduly burdensome for business. At the sub-national level, IFC has
embarked on a pilot project to assist 4 municipalities in streamlining and simplifying regulations affecting
business operations. Through the alternative dispute resolution (ADR) program, the stock o f outstanding
disputes will also be addressed, thereby releasing additional capital for investment. Also, IFC i s
commercializing through its recycling linkage program the small street collectors who in Serbia are
significantly comprised o f the Roma population. MIGA will also continue to support foreign investors
through the provision o f political risk guarantees.

77. The Bank Group will support further strengthening of the Serbian financial sector. The
financial sector i s vibrant, with extensive participation by foreign institutions. Extremely strong credit
growth, although from a relatively low base, has helped to drive recent economic growth in Serbia. IFC
will seek opportunities to offer analytical and advisory support for the privatization of some remaining
state owned banks and insurance companies though pre-privatization investments and advisory services.
IFC proposes to partner with its existing and new bank clients to expand access to finance for key
segments such as energy efficiency, housing, agribusiness and SME sectors. In addition IFC can support
development o f non-bank financial institutions such as private voluntary pension funds, leasing
companies, factoring companies and insurance companies. IFC will consider opportunities to support the
state owned First Mortgage Insurance Company through technical assistance and, if the company i s
privatized, through an investment. By improving corporate governance, and introducinglsupporting new
financial instruments, IFC could also play a role in facilitating capital markets development. For
example, IFC will continue to provide its support to the government to improve the legal framework in
the financial sector such as the preparation o f the new securitization law. MIGA will consider
opportunities to support foreign investors in the financial sector, focusing on projects which promote the
development of non-bank financial institutions, such as leasing companies, improve SMEs’ access to
finance, and strengthen banks’ capitalization.
78.

Improving infrastructure will be important to support economic growth and promote
regional integration. Greater use o f public-private partnerships (PPPs) offer particular scope to improve
infrastructure given public sector budgetary limitations, and the scope for greater efficiency in the
delivery o f infrastructure services. The Bank Group i s providing coordinated advice to the Government
on options for strengthening such engagement in a way that also minimizes contingent liabilities on the
budget. In addition, IFC, in cooperation with the Bank and in coordination with EBRD, EIB and the EU,
i s open to offer its advice to the Government to structure PPP transactions in a transparent, competitive,
sustainable and prompt manner. IFC will seek opportunities to offer support through its pre-privatization
investments as well as advisory services in the oil and transportation sectors. This can build on the work
undertaken by IFC in the JAT airways pre-privatizationprocess.

79. A proposed IBRD railways investment, potentially in the form o f 2 phase Adjustable
Programmatic Loan (APL), will support key infrastructure needs, as well as supporting the significant
outstanding reform agenda o f the authorities. Currently, the Serbian railways sector i s a significant loss
maker, with annual operating losses in the order o f $200m. The “balkanization” o f the former Yugoslav
railways system has fragmented rail services and led to declining competitiveness and considerable
inefficiencies. As well as financing needed infrastructure investments on the primary rail corridors, this
will support the rationalization and potential privatization o f parts of the rail operating system, and
encourage greater regional cooperation in the Balkans (such as equipment pooling and joint marketing).
80. Support for the energy sector could assist Serbia to maximize the potential benefits from
participation in the South East Europe regional energy market. Serbia, with Bank support, i s continuing
with the restructuring o f Elektroprivreda Srbije, in order to allow an equal playing field for private
investments and better cost recovery. A potential additional IBRD financed investment to rehabilitate the

22

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
Zvornik hydro-power plant offers scope to increase generating capacity, although Bank support i s likely
to have to be based on Serbia’s continued participation in the Energy Community o f South East Europe.
Planned new thermal generation investments are likely to be more appropriately financed by new private
sector investment, although there may be some need for continued public financing. Subject to
government’s progress with the reforms in this sector, the Bank Group could potentially support such
investments through the provision o f a partial risk guarantee, or through a MIGA guarantee or IFC
financing for potential private sector investors. IFC will also actively pursue opportunities for
investments to support other private sector infrastructure provision. At the same time, the Bank will also
provide analytical and advisory support to the Authorities regarding options to strengthen the social safety
net to offset the impact o f required tariff increases on the poorest households.

81. Financing and analytical support to strengthen Serbia road transport links with the region could be
provided in the latter part o f the CPS period. In particular, the completion o f Corridor X from Austria,
through Serbia to Greece remains a very high priority for the Government. This link i s part o f the
European highway network. Completion i s likely to require some form o f public-private partnership.
Bank financing could potentially support the public sector engagement in such a development. IFC and
MIGA could also potentially support private investments. Further support for maintenance, and a much
needed investment in road safety, have also been requested by the Government o f Serbia.
82. At the sub-national level, there i s scope for further Bank Group support for needed infrastructure
investments without a sovereign guarantee. IFC expects to continue its successful cooperation with the
City o f Belgrade and work on completing the concession o f the Belgrade solid waste services by March
2008, and will explore opportunities for extending such support to other municipalities, either directly or
in partnership with banks. There i s also potentially scope for support to strengthen urban transportation
systems in Belgrade. One o f the impediments to PSP at the sub-national level has been the legislative
framework, including requirements in the Concession Law for extensive and detailed involvement o f the
Central Government, including in municipal projects. MIGA could potentially play a role in promoting
foreign infrastructure investments at the sub-national level through the provision o f political risk
guarantees, including in the solid waste sector.
83. There i s scope for IFC and M I G A to provide additional support for successful and growing
local companies. IFC investments are likely to focus particularly in sectors where Serbia has been
competitive in the regional market such as agribusiness and I T sectors, in sectors that have a multiplier
affect on economic growth such as real estate and construction materials, as well as in sectors which
generate significant employment. In addition, IFC will support green-field FDI, including the expansion
o f regional players in Serbia, which are important to balance the large current account deficit. IFC will
continue to target SMEs, channeling more financing to them through commercial banks and microlending institutions. In addition, IFC i s looking for other instruments to support SMEs such as through
risk sharing facilities and leasing. MIGA i s open to support foreign investment in the manufacturing and
agri-business sectors. MIGA will also consider opportunities to support SME development through its
Small Investment Program.
Priority 2: Providing Opportunities and Broadening Participation in Growth

84. Strong and broad-based growth needs to be accompanied by measures to ensure wider
participation in productive economic activities. Growth in Serbia has flowed through to significant
increases in average incomes and reductions in poverty. Still unemployment remains stubbornly high.
Regional differences in poverty remain a challenge, particularly in depressed former industrial and mining
centers. Providing opportunities and retraining to allow mobility o f workers from declining to growing
sectors will be important, especially given the urgent need for further restructuring o f the enterprise
sector. Ensuring young people have the necessary skills join the workforce will be crucial to overcome

23

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
high youth unemployment and maintain social cohesion. And further efforts will be needed to strengthen
the provision o f social services, particularly, but not only, in the context of decentralization.

85. The Bank will support Serbian Government efforts to strengthen the delivery of improved
social services at a decentralized level. The decentralization process in Serbia enjoys broad political
support, and should help to bring service delivery closer to clients, consistent with European principles.
Experience elsewhere in Eastern Europe suggests that careful implementation i s needed to ensure that
limited capacities at the local level do not adversely impact service delivery in the short term. The Bank
will work with the Authorities to help to ensure that education, health and social protection service quality
can be maintained as financing and responsibilities are transferred to the municipal level. This will build
on the Bank’s previous and current engagement in the education, health and pensions sectors. Such an
investment will help to increase the access o f households - and particularly households from marginalized
groups - to quality health, education and social protection services delivered at the local level.
86. The Bank will respond to Government requests for support to provide opportunities for
people in poorer areas in Southern and Eastern Serbia. Bank support will extend the model currently
being used in the former mining region o f Bor to the Resavica region. In addition to assisting the
Government to restructure loss-making state owned mining companies and address environmental and
social legacies associated with restructuring o f mining and other heavy industries, investments will focus
on fostering new sources o f economic growth and job creation in the region. This could include microfinance and SME development, retraining and targeted active labor market programs for former mine
workers. The investment will build on the Bank’s extensive experience in supporting mining sector
restructuring, including in Poland, Romania and Russia.

87. Additional support could be provided during the CPS period to support educational reform
aimed at ensuring that school leavers have the skills to more easily enter the job market and
participate in the growing economy. Options might include support to restructure the secondary
vocational education system to ensure that skills provided better meet the need o f a rapidly changing
economy, assistance to help school leavers make the transition from school to work, and support to
refocus active labor market programs toward those activities that have been proven to be relatively more
effective. This could build on the Bank’s previous engagement in education reform, as well as testing o f
active labor market approaches. Options are also being explored to encourage greater regional
cooperation in reform o f the higher education system, possibly including greater specialization between
institutions, as well as efforts to ensure wider recognition o f degrees, and reform consistent with the
European Bologna process. Some targeted support may be provided to continue reforms o f hospital
payment methods, which have just started and need to be sustained over the medium term to result into
more efficient use o f resources and better quality o f services

88. IFC and the Bank propose to collaboratively explore the opportunities for greater private
participation in social service delivery. Introducing private health and education services could
strengthen overall service delivery. The introduction o f private pension schemes also potentially offers
scope for greater engagement by the private sector. This work will build on the Bank’s extensive
engagement in each of the sectors in Serbia. Such an analysis could provide a platform to support greater
investments by IFC in these sectors.
Priority 3: Managing Emerging Environmental and Disaster Risks

89. Addressing emerging environmental issues and managing risks of natural disasters are
becoming increasing priorities in Serbia. Since the early 2000s, Serbia has made significant progress
in reforming its legal and institutional framework for environmental management along EU lines. Also
notable i s the progress made in incorporating environmental concerns into key economic sectors, through

24

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
strategies and investment projects, such as in agriculture (sustainable landscape management as integral
part o f rural development in South-East Serbia and agricultural pollution control) and energy (notably
energy efficiency and dust reduction at a thermal power plant). Serbia also distinguishes itself in the
Western Balkans by beginning to address ongoing and legacy environmental issues as part o f the
privatization process (Bor mining and smelting complex). However, significant policy, implementation
and enforcement challenges remain with regard to water pollution from municipal and industrial sources,
air pollution from industry, thermal energy generation and transportation, municipal and hazardous waste
management, biodiversity and natural resource management. Increasing investments will be needed to
implement the EU environment Acquis as it i s transposed into Serbian legislation. Recent floods,
droughts and fires have highlighted the need for effective regional disaster preparedness and response
capabilities. These issues are also thrown into relief by the increasingly apparent need for climate change
mitigation and adaptation measures.

90. A South East Europe Regional Disaster Mitigation Initiative has the potential to reduce the
vulnerability of countries in the region to natural disasters by building preparation and response capacities
and promoting a coordinated approach to disaster risk mitigation. Initial investment could potentially
support hydrological and meteorological forecasting and flood early warning systems, strengthening
regional disaster response capacities, and using innovative insurance and other financial products to
finance disaster losses and spread risk. A framework for such an initiative i s already under discussion
among regional countries, and there i s scope for the Bank in partnership with other bodies - particularly
the EC - to support these common efforts. Serbia i s also starting to be affected by climate change.
Strengthened irrigation facilities will be especially important for Serbia to manage climate change, and to
potentially increase crop yields. The Bank has been extensively engaged in supporting irrigation and
flood control work in Serbia, but this could potentially be expanded even further in the latter period o f the
CPS through efforts to scale up an initial disaster preparedness investment.
91. The introduction of an energy efficiency fund, similar to that supported by the GEF in Bulgaria,
could provide opportunities for Serbia. Such an investment could potentially support a large increase in
energy efficiency investments in Serbia through initial grant support to establish a self-sustaining, market
based financing mechanism that could develop and implement financially profitable energy efficiency
activities, which could help to ensure sustainable reductions in greenhouse gas emissions without relying
on public subsidies. Such a fund would be complementary to, and could work in parallel with, potential
credit lines to commercial banks for energy efficiency activities being explored by EBRD. IFC also
proposes to play an increasing role in Serbia in commercialization o f new climate friendly technologies
especially in sectors such as power generation, transportation and energy use. Recently, IFC provided a
loan and advisory services to Procredit Bank Serbia to implement its energy efficiency improvements
program. The project, the first IFC’s loan in Serbia promoting energy efficiency improvements and
facilitating the use o f cleaner and renewable sources o f energy in housing and in micro and small
enterprises, i s expected to have significant demonstration effect in the market in Serbia. IFC will continue
to provide both funding and advisory services to local institutions to develop and mainstream energy
efficiency focused funding programs.

92.

Serbian Parliamentary ratification o f the Kyoto Protocol in September 2007 sets the stage for the
country to participate in flexible carbon trading mechanisms. This could potentially allow Serbia to
benefit from the sale o f emission reduction units associated with new project investments. The ability to
benefit from the Kyoto Protocol will also provide incentives for the publicly owned forest utility to
undertake increases re-forestation. Grant funds are available from the Global Environment Facility (GEF)
to assist countries that have ratified or acceded to the Stockholm Convention on persistent organic
pollutants (POPS). This could potentially assist Serbia to manage obsolete stockpiles o f POPS(such as
pesticides, industrial chemicals, and unintentional toxic industrial byproducts which are of global concern
and which remain active over long periods o f time) and demonstrate best available technologies to

25

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
mitigate unintended chemicals release. Once Serbia has ratified the Stockholm Convention and prepared
national implementation plan for POPS (currently underway with UNEP support), the Bank would be
prepared to assist the Government to access GEF funds for implementation.

ii. The Financing Framework: Creditworthinessand Terms

93. Serbia continues to face external financing needs, although the Government’s significantly
improved financial position means these are more limited than in the past. The Government has
indicated that it particularly values the “bundled” knowledge and lending products able to be offered by
the Bank. N e w pricing o f IBRD financing products will especially help to ensure that the Bank i s
competitive with other sources o f financing available to Serbia. To remain responsive, however, the Bank
will need to deploy a range o f financial instruments beyond traditional lending. Options such as deferred
drawdown development policy operations to support the Government’s reform program while allowing
for disbursement flexibility are likely to be central to the IBRD program. The Bank will also explore
innovative financial products, including disaster and catastrophe risk insurance.
Table 2. Indicative IBRD Lending and Analytical Products FYOS-FY11
AAA/ESW

Lending

Private Sector DPL
Railways
Delivery Integrated Local Services
Health Improvement Add Financing

US$M
50
75
40
15

DPL
Resavica Regional Development
Regional Disaster Preparedness
Energy Generation Rehabilitation

US$M
50
40
25
55

FY08

FY09

Serbia Economic Memorandum
Justice and Governance IDF
Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation (Regional)
South East Europe Regional Higher Education Study
Road financing and institutional study
Programmatic poverty assessments

Public Investment and Expenditure Management Review
Employment Generation Options
Private Sector Participation in Social Services (with IFC)
PPP Analysis: Opportunities and Contingent Liabilities
Capital Markets Development TA
Public Financial Management (SAI) TA
Corporate Financial Reporting IDF
Municipal Enterprise Restructuring/ Privatization
Programmatic poverty assessments

FYlO
FYll
(indic
ative)

TBD according to the Government’s needs
Potential Options
- Knowledge economy assessment
- Education reform options
- Health/ Pensions Fiscal Sustainability and
Efficiency
- Managing Environmental Liabilities

DPL
Road SafetyIHighways
Potential options:
- Judicial Sector and e-Government
- Employment Promotion
- Railways APL I1
- Danube Ports/ Inland Water Transport
- Gasification
- Renewable Energy/ Environment
- Water Supply, Flood Control, Irrigation
(2ndphase Regional Disaster Mangmnt)
- Regional Higher Education
- Pensions Reform

26

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1

94. The CPS envisages an indicative base-case lending envelope o f $600 million over four years,
distributed relatively evenly between years. Reflecting Serbia’s improved economic position,
financing will be on IBRD terms, as with other middle-income countries. The availability o f IBRD
financing will allow an increase in the envelope that would have been available from constrained I D A
resources. At $150 million per annum, the base case envelope i s equivalent to a 25 percent increase on
the average provided in the previous CAS period from 2004 to 2007. Proposed investments and
analytical and advisory support during the course o f the CPS are set out in Table 2 (above). Investments
in the latter part o f the CPS period will be decided flexibly based on priorities determined in a CPS midterm review scheduled for late calendar 2009.
Creditworthiness Issues

95. Anticipated lending volumes are based on Serbia’s creditworthiness position continuing to
improve from the current situation. Serbia’s creditworthiness has improved considerably since it
became a member o f the Bank in 200 1. In USD terms, GDP in 2007 i s more than double that in 2002.
Growth has been accompanied by serious structural reforms to improve the business environment and the
functioning o f the enterprise sector. Public debt has almost halved as a proportion o f GDP. Reserves
have increased significantly, to now stand at $13.7 billion - over 30 percent o f GDP, or more than
Serbia’s total stock o f public external debt. In 2006, Serbia prepaid approximately Euro 320 million to
the World Bank to cover obligations falling due on 2 o f 3 IBRD consolidation loans until the end o f 2009.
On the other hand, risks to Serbia’s creditworthiness position remain, particularly given external
imbalances. This i s evident, in the rapid increase in private external debt, resulting in overall external
debt falling only slightly over the past five years despite a significant improvement in the Government’s
own debt position. Real exchange rate appreciation and, after a significant adjustment between 2003 and
2005, recent relaxation in fiscal policy, i s also putting pressure on a persistent double digit current
account deficit that i s starting to again widen. And total World Bank (IDA and IBRD) exposure, at
approximately $2.8 billion, remains significant - although i s projected to continue to decline as share o f
GDP. Historical data and projections regarding key macro-economic indicators are set out in Table 3.

Table 3: Serbia K e y Creditworthiness Indicators
Indicators

GDP Real Growth

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009
Projections

2010

2011

2.5

8.4

6.2

5.7

7.0

6.0

5.5

5.5

5.5

40.7
43.7
-3.0

41.4
41.4
0.0

41.3
40.6
0.7

40.5
42.0
-1.5

41.2
42.5
-1.3

40.9
42.8
-1.8

40.6
42.3
-1.7

40.4
41.8
-1.4

40.2
41.5
-1.3

CAD after grant (%GDP)
Reserves ($billion)

-7.0
3.6

-1 1.7
4.2

-8.5
5.8

-1 1.5
11.9

-14.6
13.7

-14.9
13.7

-14.5
13.7

-14.1
13.7

-13.7
13.7

Debt
Gen Govt Debt (%GDP)
External debt (%GDP)
Public external debt

74.7
66.7

63.1
57.5
39.4

54.2
59.0
34.9

39.6
61.3
26.6

35.8
59.6
20.5

33.1
58.5
18.5

32.4
60.8
17.3

31.8
61.4
16.1

31.4
61.2
15.1

0.3
2.3

0.4
2.5

0.5
2.1

0.6
2.2

0.6
2.2

0.6
2.2

0.7
2.3

0.7
2.3

0.7
2.3

Public Finance
Revenues (%GDP)

Expenditure (%GDP)
Fiscal Balance, before
grants (%GDP)
External Position

-

World Bank Exposure
IDA ($ billion)
IBRD ($ billion)

27

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1

96. Projections are based on a continuation o f the reform program, as outlined in Serbian
Government economic policy documents. Growth i s projected to decline from 7.0 percent in 2007 to an
average of 5.5 percent in 2009-1 1, close to historical levels for the first half of the decade. Due to modest
declines in both the tax burden and public expenditures relative to GDP, the consolidated fiscal deficit i s
projected to remain broadly unchanged. Modest deficits, combined with the effects of continued growth
and availability of non-debt financing (esp. privatization proceeds), are projected to lead to further
decreases in public debt as a share of GDP. Current account deficits are set to decline slightly from a high
14.6 percent of GDP in 2007, but to levels which s t i l l remain significantly above those observed in the
first half of the decade. Following their massive buildup in the period to 2007, external reserves are
projected to remain constant during 2007-1 1, working to curtail external financing needs. Inflows of
foreign direct investment are projected to average 4.3 percent of GDP over the period 2007-11, partly
supported by a s t i l l significant pipeline of large-scale privatizations, including the Bor mining complex,
two large insurance companies, half of the oil and gas company NIS, and minority stakes in the power
company EPS, the main telecoms utility, and other large firms. While below levels observed in the recent
past (FDI averaged 6.7 percent of GDP over 2002-06), such FDI projections would be sufficient to
maintain external debt as a share of GDP at broadly current levels.
97. The perceived level of political uncertainties creates scope for divergences between these
projections and actual outcomes. In the event of serious regional instability or perceived risks to
Serbia’s European prospects, capital inflows could become more limited and/or more skewed towards
debt-creating forms. This could slow growth, increase risk perceptions and erode Serbia’s
creditworthiness. In contrast, a more favorable evolution in these areas, combined with sustained progress
in economic reforms, could raise non-debt creating flows above projected levels, leading to reduced risks
and further improved creditworthiness.Such projections will continue being reviewed.
98. Continued policy reform will be central to the design o f the CPS program. The policy
priorities of the Government and reform efforts will flow through directly to the DPL program. In
addition, individual sectoral investments will be structured to support the Government’s reform program
and regional integration. Decentralization of social services and railways reform investments planned in
2007, for instance, are critical, sensitive and complex reforms being undertaken by the Authorities.
Similarly, engagement in the energy sector i s intended to support, and will be dependent upon, Serbia’s
continued efforts to position itself as a supplier of energy to an integrated South East Europe regional
market, as established by the Athens Treaty.
99. A substantive review of creditworthiness and overall lending volumes will be undertaken
during the mid-term review in late calendar year 2008. Should creditworthiness improve
substantially, there i s scope at that stage for the Bank to consider moving to a high case lending program.
This will, however, require a significant improvement in Serbia’s overall economic position from that
currently anticipated. Strong implementation of the Government’s enunciated reform program will also
be important to ensure that creditworthiness improves. This i s likely to include: (i)public expenditure
declining as a proportion of GDP, (ii) Serbia’s overall external debt declining as a proportion of GDP;
(iii)strengthened financial management, particularly the effective functioning of the newly established
State Audit Institution and the integration of the National Investment Plan into the budget process; and
(iv) continued structural reform, particularly efforts to privatize and restructure large state owned
enterprises and strengthened resolution to free up the assets of unsold socially owned enterprises through
bankruptcy and other proceedings. Increases in lending volumes will also need to be dependent on
increased demand for financing from Serbia.
100. Any significant deterioration in Serbia’s policy and macroeconomic performance against base
case creditworthiness considerations would require careful consideration of lending volumes, and a
reduction in the financing that could be made available.

28

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1

101. The continued servicing o f obligations associated with IBRD Consolidation Loan C will be
crucial to allow continued Bank engagement. Loan C i s linked with IBRD loans taken out by the
former Socialist Federal Republic o f Yugoslavia (SFRY) for activities in Kosovo. As the borrower o f
record, Serbia currently has legal responsibility to ensure continued service o f this loan, as well as similar
Paris and London Club obligations.
Development Policy Loans, and possible Deferred Drawdown Options

102. The lending program i s anticipated to be anchored, at least in the initial years of the CPS
program, by a series of annual development policy loans (DPLs). While Serbia currently has limited
financing needs, the Authorities have requested such a program in order to set benchmarks that can
strengthen the credibility and implementation o f their own reform program. Such operations are most
likely to be provided as deferred drawdown operations (DDOs), at least in the initial stages o f the CPS,
although the Government has indicated a possible interest in drawing down funds in 2009 and beyond.
As with all DPL instruments, the presentation o f any DPL operation (DDO or otherwise) will be subject
to a satisfactory macroeconomic assessment by the Bank, and the completion o f appropriate policy
reforms to justify a DPL prior to presentation o f such an operation to the Board. As DDOs are anticipated
to be a series o f annual operations, expiring after 12 months if not utilized, it i s envisaged that only the
value o f the exposure held by the Bank at any particular time will be counted against the CPS lending
envelope. While any such DDO DPL i s active, or should financing be drawn down by the Authorities, it
would count against the CPS envelope. Should a loan lapse after 12 months without being drawn down,
however, it would no longer be counted against the overall envelope. At this stage, such operations are
not expected to exceed approximately $50 million per annum. A maximum o f one DPL would be
disbursed in the first half o f the CPS period, and only one DDO would be outstanding at any one time.
The use o f DPLs in the second half of the CPS will be considered in the mid-term review.
V. RESULTS-BASED MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Box 1. Anticipated Development Challenges which the CPS i s Designed to Address
~

~

Priority 1: Encouraging dynamic private sector led growth to ensure incomes converge with Europe
0
0

0

Improve the business environment
Strengthen the competitiveness of the enterprise sector
Strengthen financial sector intermediation
Contribute to improved, well maintainedand efficient infrastructure

Priority 2: Providing opportunities and broadening participation in growth
0
0
0

Contribute to balanced regional development
Improve effective social protection for the vulnerable
Strengthen social service quality and access in a decentralized environment

Priority 3: Managing emerging environmentaland disaster risks
0
0
0

Improve environmental management
Enhance the efficiency in the use o f natural resources
Stronger ability to prepare for, manage and mitigate unexpected environmental and disaster risks

29

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1

103. The measurement of results i s an essential component to improve accountability and
effectiveness of the Bank involvement in Serbia. Box 1 aggregates the major results and outcomes
expected to be achieved by the Government, with the World Bank support, during the CPS period. A
more detailed results framework setting out the expected outcomes of individual interventions under each
Pillar i s included in Annex 1. The Bank will rigorously monitor the progress made under each pillar
throughout the CPS period.
104. The Bank and the Government will engage in annual consultation process to assess progress
of the CPS and make possible adjustments to the Bank program. The authorities have indicated their
wish to hold annual round table discussions with the World Bank on outstanding sectoral reform issues
and the overall status of the Bank portfolio in Serbia. These discussions provide an opportunity to review
the status and assess progress of the CPS, make possible adjustments to both the Government and the
Bank program and reflect new information and developments that might affect the Bank’s portfolio.
Consultations will also provide input for updating the CPS results framework to reflect possible
adjustments to the individual sectoral objectives and milestones.
105. The Bank will monitor results in the framework of its own monitoring mechanisms. With
regard to lending volumes, the Bank will undertake an annual creditworthiness review and adjustments to
the base case lending scenario will be made on the basis of the review outcomes, within the lending
parameters established above. A CPS mid-term review i s foreseen to take place in mid-FY09. This will
provide an opportunity to assess CPS progress and, as appropriate, move to high case lending, or
reallocate resources and fine-tune the directions and objectives for the outer years of the program. In
addition, the Bank will carry out results based portfolio reviews on an annual basis to assess the status o f
the various projects in the portfolio. The results and monitoring frameworks for individual Bank
interventions will be aligned with the CPS results framework to facilitate portfolio monitoring.
106. The Bank will primarily depend on Government systems and agencies for obtaining statistical
data for the compilation and verification of CPS results and milestones. Serbia has strong statistical
capacities and the Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia i s a well organized unit that provides
reliable and accurate statistical data. The EU and Eurostat are supporting the Statistical Office to adopt
European standards in data gathering and processing. A British trust h n d administrated by the World
Bank i s assisting the Statistical Office to strengthen i t s capacities in carrying out poverty measurements
with the aim to produce better quality data on poverty in Serbia. However, mainly IMF figures will be
used when assessing the macroeconomic developments in Serbia.
VI. POTENTIAL R I S K S AND M I T I G A T I O N MEASURES
107. Regional stability. The potential for regional instability and political uncertainty in Serbia arising
from unresolved Kosovo status issues i s the key risk to the CPS. Efforts to reach a long-term negotiated
solution to Kosovo’s status are currently being conducted, but the scope for agreement appears extremely
limited. At this stage, the Serbian and Kosovo sides have fundamental differences of views on the basic
question of autonomy or independence. Divisions are also apparent within the international community.
The possibility exists of a unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo. The status of Kosovo has
become an increasingly prominent issue in Serbia, to the extent that this may override the Government’s
other stated reform priorities. Regional uncertainty could potentially deter investment, leading to a
deterioration in Serbia’s overall economic position. A potential reduction in regional cooperation,
including in sectors such as energy where Serbia has considerable potential, could have an adverse
economic effect. At the extreme, isolated violence associated with continued uncertainty remains a
possibility. Kosovo i s likely to be an issue in forthcoming Presidentialelections, and have the potential to
lead to an increasing radicalization of Serbian society.

30

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOS-FYI1

108. Serbia remains vulnerable to exogenous economic shocks. Economic performance over the past
few years has been very strong. Nevertheless, rapidly growing credit and associated private external debt
and a stubborn current account deficit illustrate Serbia’s continuing vulnerability to external shocks. A
sudden increase in lending spreads or a decrease in liquidity could limit continued growth in Serbia and
projected improvements in overall creditworthiness.

109. Continued policy reform will be required to strengthen macro-economic stability and further
improve Serbia’s creditworthiness. In particular, the government will need to recalibrate
macroeconomic policy in order to reduce the imbalances that have emerged over the last two years,
primarily due to fiscal stimulus. Greater fiscal restraint, consistent with the Government’s stated
intentions, will be important to reduce risks, as will continued structural reform. In addition further
efforts to ensure rapid domestic credit growth and increases in private external borrowing are put on a
more sustainable footing, and that credit increasingly finances productive investment rather than
consumption. If these issues are not tackled, real vulnerabilities remain from the widening current
account deficit and rapidly growing private external debt.

110. Managing risks will require that the Bank Group work cooperatively with the Serbian
Authorities in a highly flexible manner in order to encourage Serbia’s continued international
engagement and integration at a particularly sensitive time. At the same time, Bank Group support i s
necessarily dependent on Serbia meeting international responsibilities, particularly in relation to debt
servicing, or an agreement being reached that allows an orderly resolution o f this issue. Given the very
high level o f uncertainty in the region, this CPS i s perhaps best seen as setting out broad “rules o f
engagement” rather than as a detailed blueprint for Bank Group support.
VII. CONCLUSION
1 1 1. Serbia i s well poised to continue its strong economic performance and make progress toward
the goal of full European integration. While the transition program began relatively recently,
significant economic reform has underpinned strong economic growth and real reductions in poverty in
Serbia over the past few years. The Government has demonstrated a degree o f commitment to undertake
difficult but necessary “second generation” reforms that should help to ensure a sustainable growth path
for the economy led by a dynamic private sector. Efforts are also evident to ensure that the benefits o f
growth are distributed widely, and that opportunities for disadvantaged households to participate in the
economy are increased. Nevertheless, Serbia and the region have not yet fully moved beyond the difficult
legacies resulting from the turmoil of the 1990s. A key challenge will be to ensure that this reform
momentum i s able to be continued, and that international confidence and regional stability i s maintained,
at a particularly sensitive time for Serbia. The World Bank Group has the potential to continue to be a
strong partner for Serbia as it faces these challenges. This will, however, require the Bank Group to be
even more responsive to the demands o f a sophisticated middle income client. Further strengthened
cooperation with other multilateral and bilateral partners, particularly but not only the EC, will also be
critical to strengthen the overall effectiveness o f the support that can be provided. Most critically, the
World Bank Group will need to be able to respond flexibly in order to calibrate engagement with Serbia
in an environment o f high uncertainty.

31

E

m
m

d

m

8

5

8

a

e

.e

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
Annex 2

REPUBLIC OF SERBIA CAS COMPLETION REPORT
Country:

Date o f CAS: November 19,2004

Republic o f Serbia

Period Covered by the CAS Completion Report: November 2004 - November 2007
CAS Completion Report prepared by:

I.

Robert Jauncey, Senior Country Officer

Introduction

1. This CAS Completion Report evaluates the impact and effectiveness o f the World Bank Group’s
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) prepared for Serbia and Montenegro approved in November 2004
(hereafter referred to as CAS FY05). Serbia was the successor state to the Union o f Serbia and
Montenegro and retained membership of the World Bank following the dissolution o f the State Union in
2006. A separate CAS Completion Report was prepared for Montenegro as part o f a new Country
Partnership Strategy for Montenegro discussed by the Bank’s Executive Board in June 2007.
2. This CAS Completion Report has been retrofitted to evaluate the results from the previous Serbia and
Montenegro CAS that correspond to Serbia alone. This i s feasible since all new lending and advisory
services in CAS FY05 were designed separately for each o f Serbia and Montenegro. In volume terms,
just under 90 percent o f lending during the CAS was for operations in Serbia.
3. While the CAS FY05 was not prepared using a formal results-based methodology, this report
attempts to retrofit a results-based framework in order to provide a basis for a new Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) covering FY08 to FY 11. The retrofitted CAS FY05 Results Matrix has been prepared as
if it had been done when the CAS was originally prepared in FY05.
11.

Country Context

A. Political Developments

4.
The past three years have seen a degree o f relative political stability in Serbia, at least compared
to the tumult throughout Balkans during the 1990s and early 2000s, and in Serbia following the 2003
assassination o f President Djindjic. Reflecting a growing political maturity in the Balkans, the dissolution
o f the State Union o f Serbia and Montenegro in June 2006 followed a democratic process, was generally
smooth, and entirely peaceful - unlike the break-up of the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s. Serbia
adopted a new Constitution in November 2006, following a national referendum.

5.
Elections in January 2007 resulted in the formation o f a coalition government by the ‘democratic
bloc’ of parties, comprising President Tadic’s Democratic Party (DS), Prime Minister Kostunica’s
Democratic Party o f Serbia (DSS) and the G17+, led by current Minister o f Economy Dinkic. Some
combination o f parties from this bloc have made the Government in Serbia since late 2000, when the
nationalist President Milosevic was forced to step aside following allegations o f electoral fraud.
Nevertheless, political differences remain evident. The formation of a Government in early 2007, for
instance, took several months o f difficult negotiations between the parties. Similarly, although President
Tadic and Prime Minister Kostunica have each been in their current offices since elections in early 2004,
the changing formation o f the governing coalition over the past few years (this i s now the fourth
Government since 2000), highlights the differences between the parties o f the ‘democratic bloc’.

37

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYOI-FYI1
Annex 2

Divisions in society are also reflected in overtly nationalist parties continuing to win a significant
minority of seats in Parliament, with the Serbian Radical Party the largest single party in Parliament.
New Presidential and municipal elections are due, most likely in early 2008.
6.
Advancing European integration i s a stated priority of the Government, and i s an objective
supported by almost two thirds of society. Serbia recently resumed negotiationswith the European Union
on a Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA). Technical discussions regarding the SAA were
concluded in September 2007, and initialing of the SAA occurred in November 2007. European Foreign
Ministers initially set out principles for a European future for the Western Balkan countries at a Summit
in Thessaloniki in 2003. Ministers reiterated this vision in Salzburg in June 2006, although noting that
the European perspective for the Western Balkans needs to be considered in light of the European
Union’s absorptive capacity.

7.
Nevertheless, the political situation and the EU accession process in Serbia remains influenced by
recent history. While technical talks on an SAA have been concluded, initialing of a document will
require Serbia to demonstrate cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Recent moves by Serbia on this front did allow the resumption and conclusion of
technical discussions, but further efforts are likely to be required. Serbia remains, with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, one of only two countries in the region not to have yet signed a SAA. Still, Serbia’s strong
administrative capacity may allow quick progress along the European path once political issues are
resolved.
8.
The status of Kosovo has become an increasingly prominent issue in political discourse in Serbia.
Under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, Kosovo i s province of Serbia under the
autonomous administration of the United Nations. Efforts to reach a long term negotiated solution to
KOSOVO’S
status are currently being conducted under the auspices of the Working Group, comprising the
US, Russia, Germany, France, Italy and the UK. This followed an impasse in discussions in the United
Nations. The “troika” of negotiators from Germany (for the EU), the US and Russia are to report back to
the UN Secretary General on progress by December 10, 2007. At this stage, however, the Kosovo and
Serbian sides appear to have fundamental differences of views on how the situation should be resolved.
Achieving a negotiated solution i s likely to be extremely difficult.

B. Economic Developments
9.
After two decades of decline, reforms in Serbia since 2000 have resulted in renewed growth.
Since the last CAS was approved in late 2004, growth has averaged about 7 percent per annum. Growth
has been driven by large capital inflows, and significant reform to improve the business environment.
Nevertheless, external imbalances are widening and remain a potential risk for sustained growth.
10.
Renewed growth has been underpinned by significant reform. Stabilization measures introduced
after 2000, have brought the hyper-inflation o f the 1990s under control. A value added tax (VAT)
introduced in 2005 has simplified tax procedures and strengthened the revenue base. Extensive
restructuring o f the banking system has helped to improve the allocation of capital, and access to credit.
The privatization of about 1,800 state and socially owned enterprises has given new l i f e to sometimes
moribund companies, with all small and medium sized socially owned enterprises expected to have been
offered for sale by 2008. Reflecting progress, Serbia was rated by the Bank’s Doing Business 2006 report
as the top reformer in 2004-2005. Gains are particularly evident in major reductions in the time and cost
required to start a business, which resulted in 40 percent more businesses being registered in 2005
compared to 2003, as well as a new civil procedure code that halved the time required to resolve business

38

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1
Annex 2
disputes. Governance indicators for Serbia also continue to improve, although from a low base,
particularly perceptions of strengthened rule of law and control of corruption5.

11.
Growth has flowed through to improvements in living standards for most Serbians. In USD
terms, GDP per capita has risen from about $2,700 in 2003 to just under $4,300 in 2006 and a projected
$5,400 in 2007. Latest World Bank poverty measures suggest that the proportion of the population living
below an absolute poverty line of approximately $2.15 per day has fallen significantly during the CAS
FY05 period, from 14.6 percent in 2004 to 8.8 percent in 2006. Nevertheless, poverty remains a
persistent problem in rural areas, which are home to about two thirds of all poor people in Serbia. This i s
particularly evident in depressed regions that used to be home to major industries (often extractive and
industrial) during the Yugoslav period. Poverty also remains very high among minority groups, with over
half of the Roma population estimated to live in poverty. Real gains in poverty reduction, however, are
accompanied by continued pessimism among much of the population, in part because average incomes
are just returning to the high point reached during the late 19808’.

12.
Despite Serbia’s strong growth performance, significant challenges remain. External weaknesses
are apparent in double-digit and expanding current account deficits. External debt remains about 60
percent of GDP, despite a series of London and Paris Club debt write downs. Although public debt has
declined significantly, private external liabilities continue to grow quickly. Large current account deficits
have unsettled the focus of monetary and exchange rate policies, which have alternated between
disinflation and exchange rate objectives. As with much of the Western Balkans, unemployment remains
high at approximately 20 percent of the labor force.

13.
To address these issues, further corporate reforms remain the key challenge outstanding from the
pre-2000 period. While all small and medium sized socially owned enterprises are expected to be offered
for sale by 2008, buyers have not been found for many of these. Despite the adoption of considerably
strengthened bankruptcy legislation in 2004, there has been a reluctance to use such procedures for
companies which have not been able to be successfully sold, even with the longer-term benefits such
actions could generate by freeing up underutilized but productive assets. Many of the largest and most
difficult state-owned companies also s t i l l remain in public ownership. Despite restructuring, large stateowned enterprises such as the Oil Industry of Serbia (NIS), ElectroprivredaSrbije (EPS) and the railways
remain in public ownership. According to Serbian Government figures, remaining state, socially-owned,
and mixed enterprises generate corporate losses equivalent to 1.9 percent of GDP in 2006, although this i s
a significant reduction on 2003 (estimates of subsidies in 2003 ranged from 3 percent by the Government
to as much as 5 percent of GDP by the IMF based on data from the National Bank of Serbia’s Solvency
center). In addition, while significant improvements have been made in the overall business environment,
further gains are possible: Serbia still ranks only 86 out of 178 countries in overall Doing Business
indicators, in large part because of complicated business licensing permit procedures that generate
opportunities for rent-seekingbehavior.
14.
The Authorities have been very confident of Serbia’s prospects. While mindful of imbalances
and the remaining reform agenda, the Authorities have seen these issues as reflecting normal transition
strains. Focused on infrastructure bottlenecks, reflecting inadequate investment over the past 20 years,
and high labor taxation, the Authorities have used the scope provided by strong VAT receipts and one-off
privatization revenues to give precedence in their policy agenda to relaxing the fiscal position and
reducing labor taxation. These policies are likely to have long-term benefits, provided investments are
carefully prioritized. Nevertheless, care i s required to ensure that hard won macro-economic stability i s
not put at risk. The public sector in Serbia s t i l l makes up a very significant proportion of the total
~

World Bank Institute, Governance Matters 2007: A Decade of Measuring the Quality of Governance, July 2007.
In Serbia, for instance, only 20 percent o f the population feel that the economic situation i s better than in 1989,
compared to almost 40 percent o f the population in other Eastern Europe transition economies.

39

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FY08-FYI1
Annex 2

economy. While public expenditure declined from 43.7 percent of GDP in 2002 to 40.7 percent in 2005
(with a fiscal deficit of 3.0 percent of GDP in 2003 being transformed into a small surplus in 2005),
spending in 2006 and 2007 i s again starting to increase. In 2006, public expenditure reached 42.3 percent
o f GDP, and i s expected to remain at comparable levels in 2007 - although this i s s t i l l 1 percent of GDP
below 2003. After a small surplus in 2005, a limited deficit of 1.5% of GDP remerged in 2006, and a
similar figure i s expected for 2007. Still, deficits are considerable smaller than in the period immediately
prior to the CPS. There has, however, been a reorientation in spending.
Government investment
spending has increased as a proportion of GDP over the CAS period, from 2.4 percent in 2003 to a
projected 4.3 percent in 2007.

111.

Serbian Government Priorities

15.
Serbia’s development priorities are defined by two pillars - the European Integration process and
the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. These are complementary and compatible.
16.
In June 2005 the Government of Serbia’s Council for European Integration adopted the National
Strategy of Serbia for Serbia and Montenegro’s Accession to the European Union. This Strategy was
subsequently adopted by the Government. Serbia also subsequently completed technical discussions on a
European SAA in September 2007.
17.
Serbia’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper was completed in late 2003. A new Strategy i s
currently under preparation. Responsibility for “whole of government” coordination o f the
implementation of the PRS rests with the Deputy Prime Minister, who also has responsibility for
coordinating European integration efforts. This has ensured a strong degree of consistency between the
key strategies. Probably more than anywhere else in the Western Balkans, the PRS has been embedded in
Serbian Government decision-making processes, and has reflected broad government priorities. The PRS
sets out three over-arching goals for Serbia:
(0

establishing the conditions for dynamic and equitable economic growth, through the creation
of a stable macro-economic environment and favorable investment climate, that will create
employment and reduce economic vulnerability, as well as the establishment of key programs
to directly promote employment among the poor;

(ii)

preventing new poverty resulting from the modernization and restructuring of the economy
through targeted training and social measures enhancing this group’s ability to take advantage
of new opportunities created in the reformed market economy.

(iii)

improve access to social services bv the poor, such as health, education, water and other key
infrastructure needs, through improved targeting of existing programs, and actions that
improve the efficiency and quality of services delivered, particularly to the most vulnerable
groups in society. The goal of these activities i s to initiate a long- term process of
empowering vulnerable groups to move out o f poverty, through the development of new
market-orientedskills, and the provision o f minimum standards of living.

18.
Key success measures set out in the PRS are on track to be met. At the time o f preparing the
PRS, the Government noted that the successful implementation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy should
result in a reduction in poverty to around 6.5 percent of the population by 2010 with average annual
growth of around 4 to 4.5 percent, without an increase in overall inequality in society.

40

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO&FYll
Annex 2

IV.

World Bank CAS FY05 Objectives

19.
The CAS FY05 was built around the Government’s complementary European integration
priorities and the PRS. Reflecting the aims of the PRS, the CAS was structured to support Serbian
Government efforts to:

(i)

Create a smaller, more sustainable, more efficient public sector, through: fiscal consolidation,
leaner and more efficient public administration, better delivery of state services and improved
financial sustainability of pensions, healthcare and education.

(ii)

Create a larger, more dynamic private sector, through: continued progress on restructuring
and privatization o f real and financial sector assets, restructuringand resolution of large lossmaking state-owned enterprises, improved access to finance, particularly for the SME sector,
energy sector restructuring and, where appropriate, private participation in infrastructure.

(iii)

Reduce uovertV levels. and improving; social protection and access to public services, through
improvements in support for rural communities, the coverage, targeting, and reliability of
transfers for social protection and the quality, access, and financial sustainability of health
and education for all citizens.

A. IDANBRD Engagement

20.
CAS FY05 objectives were supported by IDA credits and IBRD loans that utilized the Bank’s
comparative advantage and experience, backed up by analytical and advisory support. During the period
from FY05 to FY07, much of the Serbia portfolio was made up of continuing activities approved prior to
the CAS. These pre-CAS FY05 projects include both the trade and transport facilitation program
(TTFSE) and export finance facilitation (SMECA) IDA credits that supported investments in both Serbia
and Montenegro, as well as seven discrete IDA credits for Serbia, including: support for reform in the
education and health sectors, efforts to encourage corporate restructuring, reform of employment services,
and property registration, as well as infrastructure investments in transport and energy efficiency. Details
of lending activities current at the time CAS FY05 was presented to the Board are set out in Table 1.
Table 1: Active Operations During FY05-07, Approved Prior to CAS FY05
Activity

Serbia and Montenegro
Trade/ Trans Facilitation
Export Fin Facilitation
Serbia
Education Improvement
Employment Promotion LIL
Privatization/ Restructuring
Banks & Enterprises TA
Health
Energy Efficiency
Real Estate Cadastre
Transport Rehabilitation

Funding
USD million

Started

Finished/
Due tofinish

5.4
12.3

FY02
FY03

FY07
FY07

10.0
2.8

FY02
FY03

FY07
FY07

11.0
20.0
21.0
30.0
55.0

FY03
FY03
FY04
FY04
FY04

FY07
FY08
FYlO
FYll
FYll

22.
New financing anticipated during the course of the CAS FY05 included a mix of policy based
lending and investment operations. Given the outstanding policy reform agenda, as well as Serbia’s

41

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
Annex 2
external financing needs at the time of CAS preparation, the CAS envisaged a very substantial program o f
development policy lending. A series o f programmatic development policy loans (DPLs) were intended
to anchor the CAS program and World Bank policy dialogue, and were initially envisaged to make up
over half o f all base-case lending. With a high-case linked to Serbia meeting policy triggers, the CAS
FY05 high case scenario envisaged policy based lending making up as much as 70 percent o f the total
financing package. Supporting policy based finance, the CAS FY05 anticipated investment financing in
strategic sectors, including: (i) support for Serbia to enter the South East Europe regional energy market;
(ii) irrigation and drainage rehabilitation to strengthen food security and flood protection given recurrent
floods and drought; (iii)investments to promote agricultural production and reform, especially in light o f
the requirements and opportunities posed by Serbia moving toward the European Union; (iv) pension and
health sector reform to strengthen the quality o f service and the financial sustainability o f these sectors;
and (v) regional development activities in the depressed former mining region o f Bor. Planned and actual
lending during the course o f the CAS i s set out in Table 2.

FY
Planned Program
FY05 Structural Adjustment 2
Regional Energy*
Pension Reform
T O T A L FY05

FY06 Programmatic DPL 1
Irrigation/ Drainage
Bor Regional Develop

I TOTALFY06

FY071 Programmatic DPL 2
Primary Health Care
Rural Business Envt.
T O T A L FY07

IDA

IBRD

Actual Program

Total

47
21
25

47
21
25

Structural Adjustment 2
Regional Energy*
Pension Reform
Danube River Pollution

93
41
25

TOTALFY05

30
44
44
35
40

93
55
25
30
110
90
35
40

119

165

66
46

46

14

IDA
47
21
25

Programmatic DPL 1
Irrigation/ Drainage

93
55
25

I TOTALFY06
I Bor Regional Develop

80
10

23.

Transition Agriculture
Energy Efficiency AF
Irrigation/ Drainage AF
Transport Rehab AF
TOTALFY07

10

20

IBRD

GEF

9
9

33
16
18
50
50
167

4.5

4.5

Total

47
21
25
9
102
55
25
80
43
20.5
28
50
50
191.5

The CAS lending program was delivered largely as planned during approximately the first 18
months o f implementation, although with some delays associated with preparation for the complex Bor
regional development project. Nevertheless, the increasingly strong financial position o f the Authorities
as a result o f VAT introduction, strong growth, and privatization receipts resulted in development policy
lending becoming less relevant during the course o f the CAS. This was compounded by the difficulty o f
proceeding with development policy loans during FY07, given internal differences between the coalition
partners, and electoral uncertainty resulting from the Constitutional Referendum in November 2006 and
subsequent Parliamentary elections in January 2007. Given this uncertainty, a conscious decision was
made to reorient lending toward investment activities and to use the flexibility available under the new
additional financing instrument to scale up well performing energy efficiency, irrigation and drainage,
and transport rehabilitation activities. The use of additional financing and adjustment instruments has
also resulted in a relatively streamlined portfolio o f continuing operations in Serbia: as o f September
2007, for instance, there are 10 active investment operations, with a total commitment value o f $398
million (including IDA, IBRD and GEF). This i s both the smallest number o f activities, as well as the
highest commitment value, for any portfolio in the Western Balkans.

42

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO&FYll
Annex 2

24.
The additional financing instrument proved particular useful given the relatively strong
performance o f the investment portfolio. A Joint Portfolio Performance Review (JPPR) undertaken in
March 2006, for instance, confirmed satisfactory progress on 10 out o f 12 operations current at that time.
Operations in the social sectors, however, have proved to be subject to performance difficulties.
Performance o f the education, health and pension reform projects, for instance, have all been
unsatisfactory at some period. Nevertheless, significant efforts have seen a turn around in education and
health investments identified in the JPPR as experiencing difficulties. The consolidated collection and
pension administrationreform project i s now the only activity in the portfolio where performance remains
unsatisfactory. The portfolio review also highlighted the importance of strictly assessing project
readiness, with several investments subject to initial delays in effectiveness and disbursements - although
performance on almost all has subsequently improved significantly. To date, IEG has endorsed
satisfactory or moderately satisfactory ratings for all projects that have closed in Serbia.

25.
The CAS FY05 was noticeable for Serbia’s graduation from IDA to IBRD financing. Serbia had
previously received exceptional access to IDA on modified terms due to creditworthiness concerns
resulting from the large external public debt overhang from the former Yugoslavia, compounded by
significant declines in capacity to service such debt as a result o f the tumult o f the 1990s. Nevertheless,
relatively strong economic performance since 2000 allowed a transition to IBRD financing during the
course o f the CAS period. Initially, it was envisaged that IBRD financing would be made available in
FY06, although this was ultimately delayed by a year due to delays in project preparation. Serbia did,
however, gain access to IBRD in FY07. From FY08, all new financing will be on IBRD terms. Serbia’s
successful graduation to IBRD, together with renewed access to financing from international markets, has
been a particular success during the CAS period.
26.
Improvements in Serbia’s credit-worthiness were highlighted during the CAS FY05 period by a
decision by the Serbian Government to pre-pay outstanding debt to the IMF and the World Bank. During
2006, Serbia pre-paid approximately $1.2 billion in obligations to the IMF, and now has no outstanding
liabilities to the Fund. In late 2006, the Serbian Government also paid Euro 320 million (over $410
million based on exchange rates at the time) into a trust fund to support payments falling due over the
next few years on IBRD loans inherited from the former Yugoslavia. As a result, Serbia’s outstanding
obligations to the Bank are now smaller than at the beginning o f the CAS FY05 period. These prepayments were allowed by significant privatization revenues.

Table 3. Key Analytical and Advisory Work

FY05

FY06

FY07
Ongoing
Additional

Planned in CAS FY05
Serbia Economic Memorandum
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Private Sector Study

Public Expenditure Update
Agricultural Competitiveness Study
Labor Market Study
Social Services Delivery
Integrated Public Financial Management
Programmatic Poverty Assessments
Decentralizationand Local Services

Status at September 2007
Completed December 2004
Completed August 2005
Completed April 2005
Investment Climate Assess: Dec 2004
Privatization Study: February 2005
Completed March 2006
Completed June 2006
Completed June 2006
Completed June 2006
November 2006
Continuing
Comdeted June 2007

27.
World Bank dialogue and lending has been underpinned by a comprehensive program o f
analytical and advisory services. Key analytical work (as set out in CAS FY05), was delivered essentially

43

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
Annex 2
as planned (Table 3). Analytical work allowed the Bank to prepare a series o f very well received policy
notes for the incoming Government, discussed in July 2007. These notes, highly commended by the
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister and his colleagues, have formed the basis for discussions about the shape
o f the Bank’s new partnership strategy. Notes covered: (i) overall public investment planning and
priorities, (ii) private and financial sector development issues, (iii)decentralization, (iv) governance and
anti-corruptionprograms, (v) infrastructure issues, (vi) agriculture, and (vii) health and education.

B. IFC Engagement
28.

The International Finance Corporation (IFC) has a significant investment portfolio in Serbia,
which has contributed to strong private sector led economic growth. As o f June 30 2007, IFC had 16
projects in its Serbia portfolio, with total commitment of $321 million. The vast bulk o f this investment
has occurred during the period o f the past CAS. During FY05-07, IFC committed $264 million in Serbia,
compared to $41 million during FY02-04. In addition to Serbia specific investments, IFC has also
invested in three private equity funds, which operate in Southeast Europe, including Serbia. Details o f
IFC’s investment portfolio in Serbia are provided in Figure 1.

Figure 1: IFC Investments in Serbia
IFC In Serbia
IFC Portfolio b y Sector
A s of August 24th, 2007 ( U S )
Total o f 5325M

IFC A n n u a l C o m m i t m e n t s ( U S $ M )
180
160
140

CGM

120
100

80
60
40
20
0
2002

2003

2004

2006

2006

2007

CGF

< Macro Spreads = 175

4 Forelgn Currency Risk Ratlnp: Moody‘s =Not Rated and S I P = BB-

I

CGF
BANCA INTESA SPA
Continental Bank
Panonska
Pnwedna Banka
Procredit Serbia
Ratleisen Yug
RBKO
RIB II
RLSerbia
Unicredit Bank
Vojvodjanska
Total CGF

51,879,252

51,879,252

81,915,000
30,489,556
3,384,631
1,049,030
24,733,605
12,790,362
13,652 500
13,652,500
40,957,500
39,674,697
5,337 370
267,636,751

Tigar M H
Total CGM
TOW committed

5,974 360
5,974,360
67.853.612

267,636,761

I

133,794,252
30,489,556
3,384,631
1,049,030
24,733,605
12,790,362
13 652 500
13,652,500
40,957,500
39,674,697
5,337,370
319,516,003

ea%

CGM
5,974,360
5.97430
326,490,363
248.543.357
7,104,063

2%

1W.G%

29.
IFC investments have particularly focused on the financial sector. IFC has supported
development o f microfinance institutions, the introduction and expansion o f new financial products
including mortgage financing, consumer finance, energy efficiency financing and SME finance. IFC
contributed to the cleaning-up, rehabilitation and privatization o f the banking sector through restructuring
i t s claims to a few Serbian banks. IFC’s largest single investment has been made with Banca Intesa,
enabling the Bank to strengthen its capital base and significantly increase its lending and financial service

44

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYOI-FYI1

Annex 2

activities particularly to SMEs, retail clients and residential mortgages. Other investments have included
Raiffeisen Bank, Continental Bank, HVB Serbia, and Pro-Credit Bank. Investments have particularly
encouraged the expansion o f long-term lending, particularly to SMEs, mortgage operations, and lending
relating to commercial and residential real estate development, and the development of energy efficiency
products. IFC has also invested $37 million in the European Fund for Southeast Europe (EFSE), $7.4
million of which i s for Serbia. This collective debt investment will channel long term resources for onlending to SMEs through banks, specialized microfinance institutions, and viable microfinance non-profit
organizations in the Southeast European region including in Serbia.

Table 4: IFC’s CAS Objectives
CAS Objectives

Completion

Creating a larger, more dynamic private sector

Financial sector and SME:

8

Committed US$228 million in the financial sector in Serbia.

Continued progress on restructuring and
privatization o f financial sector

Contributed to the cleaning-up, rehabilitation and privatization of the
banking sector through restructuring o f IFC’s claims on Serbian banks.

Improved access to finance particularly for
SME sector

Supported strong foreign strategic investors to establish new financial
institutions (Banka Intesa, HVB Serbia);

Promote participation o f foreign strategic
investors in the financial sector

, Supported

the introduction and expansion o f financial services
including mortgage financing, consumer finance, and SME finance;

Support development o f housing finance,
leasing, and securities market development

Introduced new products to the market, such as credit lines to support
energy efficiency program with micro and small companies;

Continue with efforts aimed at institution
building and the introduction o f new products.

Helped the government with leasing regulation;
Started in June 2005 the Private Enterprise Partnership Southeast
Europe (PEP-SE) facility which i s focused in 4 business lines: SMEs
support and linkages; business enabling environment; access to
finance; and infrastructure advisory operations.

Corporate sector:

Equity investment to support the growth and strategic development o f
Tigar, an IFC’s existing client and a leading regional producer of high
quality car tires.

Post privatization support to export-oriented
companies to enhance their competitiveness in
the EU markets
0

Mercator will also support the Slovenian company’s expansion to
establish new hypermarket stores in Southern Europe, including $30
million in Serbia.
Through its investments in regional Private Equity Funds, IFC has
supported 3 companies in the manufacturing sector.

Infrastructure sector:

Attract private sector financing through public
private partnership (PPP).

Through PEP Southeast Europe Infrastructure, IFC was engaged in 3
signed advisory mandates: (i) Belgrade Municipal Solid Waste
(MSW); (ii) Belgrade Water and Waste Water; and (iii) JAT Airways,
advising the Government and the Company in a restructuring plan
aimed at the participation o f the private sector at a later stage.
IFC activities in this sector were limited due to slow paste o f
Government’s reform agenda in this sector. As mentioned in the CAS
document, IFC’s investments in the infrastructure sector, including in
the energy and telecommunication sectors, would most likely happen
in the longer term.

45

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1
Annex 2

30.
In the real sector, IFC supported the growth and strategic development o f Tigar, a leading
regional producer o f high quality car tires. Also, IFC supported Mercator, a Slovenian company, to
establish a new hypermarket stores in Serbia. This investment i s expected to stimulate competition in the
sector and improve the variety, price, quality and delivery o f consumer goods. In addition, through its
investments in regional Private Equity Funds, IFC has supported 3 other companies in the manufacturing
sector. IFC has been looking for opportunities to support companies in the pharmaceutical and paper
sectors. Nevertheless, investments being considered in both sectors did not proceed given issues
regarding minority shareholder rights and reputational considerations. As a result, IFC’s strategy i s to
focus selectively on direct investments in mid-sized companies as well as to support reputable investors.
3 1.
Serbia i s among IFC’s client countries which most benefit from IFC’s advisory services program.
To support SMEs, IFC started the Private Enterprise Partnership Southeast Europe (PEP-SE) facility in
June 2005. This i s focused on: SME support and linkages; business enabling environment; access to
finance; and infrastructure advisory operations. Through PEP-SE, IFC has also been active in supporting
judicial reform, particularly alternative dispute resolution mechanisms. Three mediation centers in Serbia,
supported by PEP-SE, have helped to resolve over 1,600 cases. Under the recycling linkage program, IFC
i s commercializing the small street collectors, who in Serbia are significantly comprised o f the Roma
population. IFC Advisory Services assistance projects are set out in Table 5.
32.
IFC i s committed to providing advisory services aimed at the participation o f the private sector in
the infrastructure projects through concessions. PEP-SE Infrastructure (PEP-SE I)was appointed lead
advisor in the restructuring o f Serbia’s national carrier, JAT Airways. PEP-SE Iprovided the government
with a review o f the airline and the sector, identifying critical issues and suggesting recommendations
aimed at transforming JAT into a viable enterprise through private sector participation. Based on IFC
study the Government has launched the privatizations o f JAT Airways and JAT Tehnika (the maintenance
company). The Government has now sought offers for advisory services from commercial institutions,
and both privatizations are currently being implemented.

33.
In addition, IFC has been helping the City o f Belgrade with the privatization (concession) of the
Belgrade solid waste disposal services, scheduled to be completed this fiscal year after some delays. IFC
also has a mandate to advise the City of Belgrade on the implementation o f PPP for the water and
wastewater sector, although this faces legislative impediments associated with the cumbersome
Concession Law, which requires extensive and detailed involvement o f the Central Government,
including in municipal projects. The Ministry o f Economy and Regional Development expressed its
willingness to amend the law. PEP-SEI has offered to help to help the Government to amend the law, to
establish a PPP unit within the Government, and to implement one or more pilot transaction - although
this would require the Government to contribute one fifth o f the total cost.

34.
While Serbia has developed its institutions framework to implement the privatization reform in
the real sector, still it i s lacking capacity to structure and attract PSP in the infrastructure sectors. The
institutional bottleneck in this area has been the main reason o f serious issues experienced with the
concession o f Horgos-Pozega highway.
35.
Through the Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS), analytical and advisory support has
also been provided to assist the Serbian authorities in their successful efforts to improve the investment
climate. With support from the European Agency for Reconstruction, FIAS has been engaged in assisting
the Serbian Investment and Export Promotion Agency, as well as in following up on Doing Business
reports to analyze investment constraints in Serbia, especially at the sub-national level.

46

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
Annex 2
Table 5: IFC’s PEP-SE Advisory Services Projects in Serbia

FY
2005-07

*

Focus

Alternative
Dispute
Resolution
(ADR)

Description
Canada and Objective: Improving businesses enabling environment by
the
offering faster,less expensive and more efficient access to justice
Netherlands for businesses.
Results: IFC advised on necessary changes in legislation. Four
pilot centers were opened and 120 mediators and 90 judges were
trained. Over 1600 cases have so far been resolved, releasing
over Euros7 million in value.
Donor

2006-07

Recycling
Linkages

2006-07

Corporate
Switzerland Objective: Enhancing corporate governance practices through
Governance
company-level interventions, workshops and strengthening
knowledge/awareness o f corporate governance among the key
stakeholders/players, including board o f directors, management
board members and shareholders.
Results: Started in January 2006. Four signed mandates,
including Tigar, a leading regional producer o f high quality car
tires. Co-organizing the Economist Conference on Financial
Sector in December.

2006-07

International Norway
Standards

Austria

Objective: SME promotion, focusing on the financial, training,
consulting, and market needs o f every segment o f the scrap metal,
paper, plastic and glass value-chains.
Results: Contracts signed with the Recycling Association and the
Plastics Industries Association. Started advisory mandates with
several companies (including a Roma cooperative). Will support
the Chamber o f Commerce to promote recycling.

Objective: Build awareness o f international standards and
technical regulations and provide both companies and local
business service providers with a range o f topical training and
consulting services relevant to specific industries.
Results: 4 company mandates signed. Will support the Chamber
of Commerce to promote adoption o f standards.

C. MICA Engagement
36. The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) has been active in providing guarantees,
mostly in financial sector, and also in providing technical assistance aimed at capacity building. During
the period o f the CAS FY05, MIGA issued six contacts o f guarantee for investments in Serbia, with a
total value o f $229 million. Guarantees supported foreign investments to develop and expand the Serbian
banking and leasing system. MIGA’s focus on finance projects in a country like Serbia with a young
financial sector are intended to deepen and broaden a market currently dominated by banking.
Guarantees are especially focused on helping financial institutions to expand the range o f loan options
available to clients, including SMEs, and particularly to widen options for longer-maturity loans. Four o f
the guarantees during the CAS FY05 period, totaling $2 13 million, were provided to Raiffeisenbank. The
fifth, worth approximately $12 million, was provided to Bank Austria Creditanstalt, and the sixth o f
nearly $4 milion in the manufacturing sector was issued to Alpos, a Slovenian investor. Prior to the CAS

47

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYObFYII
Annex 2

FY05 period, MIGA had developed a close relationship in Serbia and the region with Raiffeisenbank,
Bank Austria Creditanstalt, and Hypo-Alpe-Adria Bank.

V. Retrofitting the Results Framework
A. Goal 1: Create a smaller more sustainable, more eficient public sector
Performance: Moderately Satisfactory

37.
Serbia made progress in the period between 2003 and 2005 in fiscal consolidation, increasing the
efficiency of the public sector, providing quality services more efficiently and improving the longer-term
sustainability of the pension system. Nevertheless, gains in the overall fiscal situation 2004 and 2005
started to be reversed in late 2006 and 2007.

38.
A significant fiscal consolidation in 2004 and 2005, under the auspices of an IMF program,
resulted in the overall public expenditure falling from 43.7 percent of GDP in 2003 to 40.7 percent in
2005. Persistent fiscal deficits were turned into a modest surplus, due to a combination of fiscal restraint
in this period and the introduction of a VAT in 2005, which simplified tax collection and ensured a sound
revenue foundation. Nevertheless, expenditure pressures remerged in late 2006 and 2007, with
expenditures again rising to 42.3 percent of GDP in 2006, with a similar proportion of GDP expected in
2007. The budget has again slipped slightly into deficit, of about 1.5 percent of GDP - s t i l l less than half
the size in 2003. Expenditure pressures have been driven in part by rapid wage growth, with the total
public sector wage bill increasing over the CAS period from 9.5 percent of GDP in 2003 to an estimate of
10 percent o f GDP in 2007. Nevertheless, the budget i s increasingly focused on longer-term investments
rather than transfers or consumption: public investment, for instance, has increased from 2.4 percent of
GDP in 2003 to a projected 4.3 percent of GDP in 2007. The Authorities are also increasingly moving to
ensure that investment promises made during the election campaign are integrated into a cohesive overall
national priority setting mechanism. Partly as a result of this expansion, inflation i s again starting to
increase, with the burden for ensuring price stability falling on to monetary policy.
39.
The World Bank’s overall policy dialogue with the Authorities on broad fiscal and public
administration issues was underpinned in the initial stages of the CAS period by the Structural
Adjustment Credit 2, approved in December 2004, as well as by a series of analytical products, including
the PEIR update PEIR Update (March 2006), and an integrated public financial management analysis
(November 2006). This dialogue helped to encourage the authorities to undertake a significant public
administration reform program designed to lay the foundation for a professional, merit-based civil service
based on European standards, while rationalizing administrative bodies and decompressing salaries to
better attract high quality professionals. Some gains were made in all of these areas.
40.
Through the CAS period, public sector development policy loans (envisaged in the high case in
FY06 and the base case in FY07) were initially intended to support the authorities to take this agenda
forward. Reduced need for fast disbursing financing, governmental reconfigurations and electoral
uncertainty, the increase in the wage bill in late 2006 (and associated fiscal loosening), and the limited
movement until very recently in establishing a State Audit Institution and strengthening overall fiscal
oversight, however, meant that these operations did not proceed as planned. Despite these difficulties,
however, a reasonable degree of reform continued on the public administration front, including
substantive pension and health insurance reform that will make these systems more fiscally sustainable
over the longer term, and continued efforts to promote further civil service reform. Serbia has also not
had an IMF program since the conclusion of the last arrangement in early 2006.

4 1.
Investment operations helped to make a contribution to strengthened fiscal sustainability during
the period of the CAS FY05. Health service reform, for instance, has helped to improve quality of service

48

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1
Annex 2
delivery while containing costs. Similarly, pension reform, including efforts to undertake parameter
changes and strengthen collections, has significantly improved the medium-term fiscal sustainability of
the pension system, although the short-term impact has been more modest.

42.
The Serbia health project (FY03) has assisted the Authorities to restructure health services to
improve quality (discussed in greater detail under goal 3) and to reform health finance and management.
Expenditures on health in Serbia are relatively high as a proportion of GDP, with about 10 percent of
GDP spent on health, about half of which i s public financing. On the other hand, expenditures remain
relatively low in absolute terms when compared with OECD countries. The Bank’s health investment i s
consequently focused on reducing inefficiencies in the health system to control expenditure growth, while
also improving care. The central thrust of the project has been to increase the use of primary health care
providers, with less of the burden falling on relatively high cost treatment at tertiary health care
institutions, such as hospitals and the Belgrade Clinical Centre. At the same, it i s also promoting
improved hospital management, with greater use of outpatient services and better utilization of facilities.
Performance of the Health Insurance Fund has also improved, with arrears being cleared in 2006.
Financial audits o f 15 major health facilities are underway to help ensure arrears do not reemerge.
Overall, this project has been successful in assisting the authorities to contain Health Insurance Fund
expenditures at about 5.5 percent of GDP while at the same time increasing client satisfaction with their
health providers.

43.
The pension administration reform project (FY05) aims to improve collections and enforcement
of pension contributions, including by consolidating pension collection. On the legislative side, a new
pension law was passed in October 2005 and became effective in January 2006. This will gradually
eliminate the fiscal deficit in the pension system. Parametric changes introduced under this legislation
eliminate the option of retiring at 63/60, reduces indexation to semiannual increases rather than quarterly,
and reduces indexation of both the pension post-retirement and the pension point to inflation. These
changes are significant and will have important impact in the medium and long term. Nevertheless,
changes have yet to show up in current pension spending. For 2006, the law envisaged a one time
increase in minimum pension, which raises costs, and which will only gradually be reduced by the other
measures in the law. Between 2003 and 2005, pension spending fluctuated between 13 percent and 14.5
percent of GDP, with no clear trend. In addition, implementation of administrative changes to consolidate
pension collections have been significantly delayed. Despite these difficulties, however, the medium term
outlook i s much improved by the passage of the pension law.
B. Goal 2: Create a larger, more dynamic private sector
Performance: Satisfactory

44.
Serbia was one of the last countries in the region to embark on the transition process, which did
not begin until 2001. As a country that i s s t i l l in the relatively early stages of transition, the outstanding
reform agenda remains significant. Nevertheless, progress over the period of the CAS FY05 has been
very strong.

45.
Most notably, the business environment in Serbia i s very substantially improved since the CAS
was presented to the Board in November 2004. Doing Business 2006 indicates that Serbia was the faster
reformer globally in 2005. Major reductions in the time (from 51 to 15 days) and cost required to start a
business resulted in 40 percent more businesses being registered in 2005 compared to 2003. A new civil
procedure code halved the time required to resolve business disputes through court processes (from about
4 years to less than 2), with IFC support for alternative dispute resolution mechanisms further
streamlining process for over 1,500 disputes. Improvements in the Labor Law increased labor market
flexibility. More recently, during the course of 2007, there have been significant improvements in the
availability o f credit information, particularly the quality of information available through private credit

49

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYObFYII
Annex 2

bureaus. Still, business licensing and permits remains a key challenge, as with other countries in the
Western Balkans. The current Government has indicated a strong willingness to engage on this issue.
46.
Enterprise sector reform has been significant. Although again a large reform agenda remains,
this should be seen in light of the gains over a relatively short period. The overall scope, pace and
transaction quality of the privatization process compares very favorably to similar stages o f reform in
other transition economies. Over the CAS period, the Privatization Agency, assisted by the World Bank
and other donors, achieved significant progress in implementing the Government’s privatization program.
Since mid-2004, more than 1,800 socially-owned SMEs have been sold in open auctions and tenders,
with all remaining socially-owned enterprises expected to have been offered for sale by end 2008. A new
Bankruptcy Law passed in 2004 provides a strong instrument for dealing with SOEs for which buyers
cannot be found. Full utilization of this instrument, however, will require strengthening of the capacity of
commercial courts to deal with complex bankruptcy cases, and a commitment by the state creditors to
initiate bankruptcy proceedings.

47.
Over 60 large SOEs have been sold without restructuring, many of them to international strategic
investors. The largest was the sale completed in July, 2006, of the mobile telecoms network to Telenor of
Norway for over Euro 1.5 billion. Another 50 large SOEs were restructured and offered for sale, of
which 25 were sold. This includes RTB Bor, the large copper mining and processing complex in eastern
Serbia, which the Government i s again offering for sale after the first attempt f e l l through in early 2007
due to the buyer’s failure to come up with adequate financing for the deal. RTB Bor i s one of the main
loss making industrial conglomerates and the second largest recipient of state subsidies, averaging over
$10 million per annum with approximately the same amount in arrears to state owned energy utilities.
Still, restructuring and subsequent divestiture of a number of large, loss-making industrial conglomerates
continues to present a major challenge, even following the passage in Spring 2005 of the debt
restructuring amendments to the Privatization Law. Privatization of major companies, such as the Oil
Refinery of Serbia (Nis) remains subject to political differences within the governing coalition, while the
core assets of the largest recipient of subsidies, Zastava Group, s t i l l have not found a buyer. Over the
period of the CAS, however, the Government has reduced i t s subsidies to loss making SOEs from
approximately 3 percent to just under 2 percent of GDP.
48.
Energy Sector Restructuring: Although private sector involvement in the energy utility sectors
(power and gas) s t i l l i s very small, steps have been taken to facilitate such involvement and competition
in the future. Consistent with Serbia’s commitments as part of the Energy Community of South East
Europe, establishing a regional energy market, a regulatory agency has been established which works on
developing adequate tariff structures for incumbents and new entrants. Power transmission services have
been separated out from EPS into a new transmission company EMS. EPS has been separated into
individual legal entities for generation and distribution. Commercial losses are moderate for both gas and
power, and collections are high for virtually all consumer groups. The private sector i s present in the oil
sector in retail marketing (notably gasoline stations). The Government also appears committed to
accepting private investment in generation activities, such as the Kolubara lignite mine and associated
power plant - although this significant private investments in the sector have yet to be realized.

49.
Financial Sector Reform: The Government has divested most of its banking sector holdings to
international strategic investors, retaining control over 4 (small) majority owned banks and minority
stakes in 5 other banks, which respectively total 3% and 12% of the banking system assets at end-June
2006. In addition, the Deposit Insurance Agency has launched the sale of Serbia’s second largest insurer,
DDOR. The banking sector i s predominantly privately owned, with a large influx of foreign banks.
Through implementation o f the recently effective new Law on Banks, the National Bank of Serbia has
continued to strengthen i t s bank and insurance supervisory regimes with external inputs provided by a

50

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYOI-FYI1
Annex 2

number of donors. Partly as a result of these reforms, credit growth in Serbia has been extremely rapid,
although from a low base, increasing from 20 percent of GDP in 2003 to over 80 percent of GDP in 2007.
50.
World Bank Group engagement has played a considerable role in assisting the Authorities
undertake such reform efforts. Much of the overarching framework for Bank engagement was set in the
2004 Serbia Economic Memorandum “An Agenda for Economic Growth and Employment” as well as
analysis conducted in FY05 on the privatization process and the Investment Climate Assessment. The
Structural Adjustment Credit 2 (FY05) supported the enactment of a new Company Law, significantly
easing business entry by reducing minimum capital requirements and strengthening corporate governance
requirements, strengthening the scope for creditors to seek redress, and building regulatory impact
assessment capacity. A private and financial sector development policy credit (FY06) supported efforts
by the Authorities to reduce subsidies to corporate loss makers, continue the privatization program, and
strengthening bankruptcy procedures, and deepen financial sector reforms. Energy sector reform was
supported through both the SAC 2 and the PPFDPL, as well as an energy investment operation (FY05)
supporting unbundling and restructuringof energy assets consistent with the South East Europe regional
energy market treaty signed in Athens. Technical assistance investments by the Bank have supported the
work of the Privatization Agency. IFC has provided technical assistance to help prepare JAT, the state
airline company, for privatization. IFC investments and MIGA guarantees have significantly expanded
foreign investment in the financial sector and the scope for SMEs to access credit to build their
businesses.

5 1.

In addition to support for overall reform efforts, Bank investments (FY02) and MIGA technical

assistance supported the establishment of the Serbian Export Credit Agency (SMECA). In 2006, SMECA

provided insurance to support exports of over Euro 510 million, or 13 percent of Serbia’s total exports.

52.
Bank support through a cadastre investment (FY04) has made registering property easier, with an
associated rapid growth in property transactions and the use of mortgages. The real estate cadastre now
covers over 80 percent of the country. Transactions involving land increased from just under 300,000 in
2005 to 330,000 in 2006, and are likely to reach almost 400,000 in 2007 (the original target for 2010).
Improved cadastral services have resulted in mortgages being provided for over 5 percent of all land
transactions in 2007, compared to less than 3 percent in 2006 (exceeding conservative original targets).
Registrationtimes have fallen from 27 to 23 days for land sales, and from 13 to 9 days for mortgages.
53.
The trade and transport facilitation project (FY02) has helped to reduce customs processing times
by an average of 73 percent. Revenue collected per staff member increased from $50,000 in 2000 to $1.3
million in 2006. Declarationsper customs staff increased to 373. 75 percent of importers surveyed noted
an improvement in transparency of customs services since 2002. BEEPS also highlights significant
improvements in perceptions by users of the extent of corruption at customs. The Transport
Rehabilitation Project (FY04) has supported the institutional strengthening of the Public Enterprise
‘Putevi Srbije’ (PEPS), after i t s establishment following the passage of the new Law on Public Roads in
November 2005. The project has assisted the establishment with technical assistance, training, services,
and goods to strengthen the management and planning of the road network in Serbia. The project has also
supported the rehabilitation of priority sections of the primary and secondary road network, totaling 140
km in length, and assisted the PEPS staff to pilot performance based contracts for winter maintenance and
routine maintenance for 1,200 km of roads in the MaEva and Kolubara regions. These contracts proved
so successful, in terms of the efficiency gains - comparison of unit costs for pilot regions with average
costs for Serbia in the winter season of 2006-2007 reveals salt consumption in the pilot regions was 0.685
ton/km compared to 2.536 ton/km in Serbia; unit cost of winter maintenance in pilot territory was
207.806 Euro/km, while overall in Serbia it was 572.328 Euro/km - the approach has recently been
extended to the remainingtwenty five regions of Serbia, starting from April 2008.

51

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYObFYIl
Annex 2

C. Goal 3: Reduce Poverty and Improve Social Protection and Social Services
Performance: Satisfactory

54.
Poverty has fallen from 14.6 percent of the population in 2004 to 8.8 percent in 2006 - well on
track to meet Government’s target - set out in the 2003 PRS - to reduce poverty to 6.5 percent by 2010.
55.
The Bank’s support for Serbia’s successful efforts to reduce poverty has been provided in the
framework of the Government of Serbia’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (2003). The PRS
recognizes the need to focus on economic development and it represents a plan of activities aimed at
reducing key types of poverty by creating financial and other preconditions and by offering everyone the
opportunity to support themselves and their families. Key pillars of the PRS include: (i) dynamic
economic growth and development with an emphasis on job creation; (ii) the prevention of new poverty
that will result from necessary modernization and restructuring of the economy; and (iii)the efficient
implementationof existing programs and development of new programs directly targeting the poorest and
the most vulnerable groups, particularly in the least developed regions. Responsibility for implementing
the PRS currently rests with the Deputy Prime Minister. This has allowed the PRS objectives and
activities to be integrated into overall Government programs in Serbia more effectively than perhaps any
other country in the Western Balkans region. A first PRS progress report was submitted to the World
Bank and IMF in October 2005 and the joint IDA-IMF staff advisory note was issued on February 16,
2006. The Bank has been actively supporting PRS Team working under DPM’s office. The Bank has
been managing a donor supported Trust Fund to support PRS implementation.

56.
A particular concern in Serbia, given already high unemployment (which remains a persistent
problem at about 20 percent o f the labor force) and the correlation between poverty and employment, has
been to strengthen opportunities for workers made redundant from the necessary but painful process of
privatization and corporate restructuring. Under the employment promotion learning and investment
credit (FY03) the Bank supported the establishment of 13 Work Transition Centers (WTCs) in 10 regions
established (rather than 10 in 4 regions as planned). WTCs assisted those laid off as a result of
restructuring and privatization. Support to redundant workers included financial compensation as well as
the opportunity for redeployment, training and self-employment. An estimated 7,000 workers received
counseling services and information, 2,000 workers were retrained, and around 800 new jobs were
created or saved in pilot enterprises. Previously, such services were nonexistent. Government amended
relevant legislation to recommend that all enterprises undergoing restructuringand privatization establish
WTCs. Piloting and testing of a full range of employment services under this investment has also
allowed the Government to restructure ALMPs towards those with greater demonstrated effectiveness.
The results o f three waves of tracer surveys of redundant workers confirm much lower placement rates of
non-participantsthan almost any of the ALMPs implemented (except vacancy fairs).
57.
Despite considerable improvements, poverty remains persistent in rural areas and among
minorities, particularly Roma. Rural poverty declined from 20 percent in 2004 to 14 percent in 2006, but
i s significantly higher than urban (5 percent). The depth of poverty i s also more severe in rural areas.
Responding to this, the Bank has prepared a new investment aimed to assist predominantly small farmers
in Serbia make the most of the opportunities offered by greater European integration, and to respond to
increasingly stringent food safety and quality standards being imposed. Scheduled for FY07, this
investment was approved in June 2007. Impact has consequently been limited. Irrigation and flood
control investments, however, have helped to improve crop yields by approximately 10 percent in 5,000
hectares under irrigation - especially important given widespread drought in 2007 - as well as to reduce
the risks associated with floods. Reflecting solid performance, this project was scaled up in 2007.
58.
Financing for social protection schemes in Serbia continued at approximately 17 percent of GDP
for the course of the CAS period (including pensions). Social assistance programs are well targeted.

52

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYOS-FYI1

Annex 2

Estimates suggest that poverty would increase by a third on current levels if it was not for such social
protection programs. Nevertheless, while well targeted, coverage i s limited, and not all the poor receive
social assistance. During the course of the CAS, SAC2 supported the expansion of Serbia’s main social
safety net program, the Material Support to Families program (MOP), allowing a modest expansion of
coverage from 43,000 to 56,000 families. SAC2 also supported Government efforts to introduce a new
scheme to mitigate the impact of electricity tariff increases on the most vulnerable. Under this program,
recipients of child benefits, the minimum pension, and the MOP, receive a 30% discount on the first
300kW of monthly electricity consumption. This has provided additional support to between 80,000 and
100,000 poor families. As discussed under goal 1, changes in parametric pension parameters have also
increased pensions initially for current retirees, in part by raising the retirement age for current workers.
Nevertheless, while ensuring the pension system i s more fiscally sustainable, this i s likely to have to be
accompanied in the medium-termwith the introduction of greater voluntary retirement savings options for
those currently in the workforce.
59.
Health and education investments approved immediately prior to the CAS FY05 period have also
helped to improve the quality of social service delivery. Serbia i s on track to meet education MDGs.
Primary school completion rates are over 95 percent and do not differ significantly by gender.
Nevertheless, education investments have been particularly important to strengthen curricula and to
ensure that the skills provided through the school system adequately prepare young people for the
workforce. There have been some gains in this regard, although further efforts to reform secondary
schools, particularly the vocational education system, i s likely to be required. Nevertheless, national
standards have been established for grades 3,4 and 8 and sample based assessments have been conducted.
In 2006, national average for mathematics was 60 percent, and Serbian 69 percent. Approximately half of
Serbia’s 1,600 primary schools have met standards, and were provided with grants under the project exceeding the target of 700. Serbia i s also track to meet health MDGs. Infant and maternal mortality i s
low and falling. Communicable disease prevalence i s low, although monitoring i s warranted, especially
for high risk groups. Building on this, a health investment has helped to ensure increased use of primary
care physicians rather than expensive tertiary clinical centers, while also improving management of key
hospitals. This has helped to improve service quality, with higher numbers of visits to, and better service
from, primary health physicians, Users surveyed have generally indicated improved satisfaction with
health services: a NHS survey shows increase in user satisfaction from 74 percent in 2005 to 79 percent in
2006, and a U S S survey shows increase from 79 percent to 81 percent between 2005 and 2006. A
particular challenge will be to maintain the quality of health and education service delivery in an
increasing decentralized system. A new Delivery of Local Social Services (DLS) investment, scheduled
late 2007, i s intended to assist the Authorities with this challenge.
60.
Investments have been supported by analytical work, including: (i)annual programmatic poverty
assessments, (ii) monitoring of, and reporting on PRS implementation, and (iii)notes on social service
delivery, delivery of social services in a decentralized environment, and rural and Roma poverty issues.
V.

Overall Bank Performance

61.
Overall Bank performance i s considered to be satisfactory. At the highest level, CAS indicators
have essentially been met. Public expenditure has fallen from 47 percent of GDP in 2002 to 42 percent in
2006 - although with recent slippages likely to see expenditures creep slightly over the 43 percent target
in 2007. Growth averaging 7 percent during the CAS period has been strong, underpinned by significant
structural reforms. While a large reform agenda remains, the extent of reform at this early stage o f the
transition period has been impressive. From 2003 to 2006, poverty f e l l from 14.6 percent to 8.8 percent
of the population, and the Government i s already close to meeting the target of 7 percent set in the PRS
for 2010. In all cases, although direct causality can sometimes be difficult to determine exactly, Bank

53

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
Annex 2

development policy loans, investments and analytical services appear to have made a contribution to these
outcomes.

62.
The CAS FY05 was, in retrospect, overly ambitious in the anticipated delivery o f development
policy operations at a time when the overall financial and economic situation in Serbia improved to the
extent that Serbia was able to pre-pay the Bank, and given political uncertainty even in a time o f relative
political stability - at least by the standards o f the Balkans in recent history. On the other hand, the Bank
was able to respond effectively by meeting demand to scale up well performing activities. Although the
need to replace development policy operations with new and scaled up investments resulted in some
delays in the delivery o f operations, the base case program was fully delivered. Delays were also due in
large part to the political uncertainty in late 2006 and early 2007 associated with the Parliamentary
elections and the formation o f a new Government.

63.
Portfolio performance has generally been strong, with problems that did emerge being quickly
and, in most cases effectively, addressed. Particular problems identified in the JPPR related to the
education and health investments, for instance, have been addressed. In the current portfolio, only one
investment - pensions reform - i s currently under-performing, although even that has helped to support
significant legislative and parametric reform. IEG has considered that all projects exiting the portfolio
have had a satisfactory or moderately satisfactory development outcome. Disbursement rates have also
improved significantly since the JPPR, and the conclusion o f the JPPR that low disbursement rates in
mid-2006 generally reflected the young age o f the portfolio seems justified. Current disbursement rates
o f approximately 20 percent suggest that implementation o f the portfolio i s proceeding approximately as
planned. Nevertheless, further attention will be required to address some o f the reasons for initial delays
identified by the JPPR in project implementationafter Board approval and effectiveness. These include:
cumbersome effectiveness procedures, projects not being sufficiently ready for implementation at the
time o f Board approval, inadequate procurement and project management capacity, high turnover o f key
staff (both Government and Bank), unclear roles and responsibilities, and vested interests.
64.
The Bank made good use o f analytical products. The program o f economic and sector work was
delivered in full. Core analytical work, including the Serbia Economic Memorandum, the Public
Expenditure and Institutional Review update, the integrated public financial management assessment, as
well as notes on privatization, financial sector, and labor market issues, underpinned the Bank’s policy
dialogue, including that conducted as part o f the successful SAC2 and PPFDPL programs. Other
analytical work, including on decentralization and service delivery, and agricultural competitiveness in
the European context, have led directly to investment operations.

65.
The work o f different parts o f the Bank Group has generally been mutually complementary.
Bank engagement on financial sector issues has helped to open the way for financial sector investments
by IFC and MIGA, and such investments have in turn strengthened the overall banking and financial
sector in Serbia. At a time when the National bank o f Serbia i s now becoming increasingly concerned
about overly rapid credit growth, however, there will be continuing needs to ensure that Bank policy
advice and investments and guarantees by other parts of the Bank group are well coordinated. Over time,
new investments by IFC and guarantees by MIGA are likely to become and increasingly central element
o f overall Bank Group engagement with Serbia. There i s considerable scope for the Bank and IFC to
work closely as IFC seeks to expand investments beyond a traditional focus on the financial sector to
support private provision o f infrastructure services (including roads and energy), as well as private
provision o f social services (including education, health, private pensions). Efforts will be required to
ensure coordination o f IFC, MIGA and Bank technical assistance, although MIGA’s support to SMECA
and to analyze business environment issues, IFC’s engagement on the privatization o f JAT, and Bank
assistance for SMECA and the privatization agency demonstrate the scope for synergies.

54

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
Annex 2

66.
Donor coordination has been gradually improved. The central role being played by the office o f
the Deputy Prime Minister in the coordination o f the PRS strategy and implementation has particularly
helped to ensure that these issues are better integrated across “whole o f Government” policy than in many
neighboring countries. Still, there remains space for further enhancement. Given Serbia’s European
perspective, the SAA agenda and the European Commission i s likely to be taking an increasingly central
role. Further linking Bank support to EU priorities and improving coordination with the EC will be
important to ensure complementarity. With the EC, the Bank i s also working with Serbian authorities in
order to facilitate harmonization and public sector reform. Cooperation with EBRD and EIB i s mostly
focused on private sector development, while PRS agenda i s supported jointly by the Bank, UNDP, DFID
and bilateral donors. The Bank has generally worked closely with the IMF, although even closer
coordination will be important, especially given the centrality o f the structural reform agenda in Serbia.

VI.

Lessons for Subsequent CPS Design

67.
The areas of focus in the CAS were appropriate, and the mix o f interventions ultimately
approved supported objectives well. Given the substantial progress made by Serbia, and the
contributions made by the Bank to that progress, CAS implementation can be considered overall
satisfactory.
68.
Bank support should focus increasingly on Serbia’s integration with the EU. With the
conclusion o f technical discussions on the SAA, support for EU integration should be an explicit
objective for the Bank. Closer integration with the EU will require significant investments to harmonize
legislation and standards and to meet stringent environment and food safety standards. Support to build
the capacity of the Serbian Government to use potential increases in IPA financing will also be crucial,
given the experience o f other countries in the region, which were not able to utilize an average o f 40
percent o f the financing made available.

69.
With Serbia still at an early stage in the transition process, continuing the outstanding
structural reform agenda must be a critical element in the forthcoming CPS, in order to encourage
continued growth and increase jobs. Further enterprise reform, financial sector reform and
improvements in the business environment will be vital to help ensure current levels o f growth can be
sustained. Continuing efforts will also be required to help ensure that all parts o f the population have the
skills and ability to share in and benefit from economic growth.
70.
Development policy lending can prove to be a useful instrument to support reform efforts,
although Serbia’s current economic position will require the use of innovative instruments, such as
potentially deferred drawdown operations. The Government has indicated that Bank program with
specific benchmarks and timetables could assist them in pursuing a reform agenda, particularly on the
private sector side. Nevertheless, the Government does not need significant balance of payments support
at this stage. While development policy lending can play a valuable role, the experience in the last CAS
also suggests that it should not be overused. Investment instruments, when well targeted and designed,
can also be useful to assist the reform agenda.

71.
The Bank will need to ensure that assistance i s able to be provided even more flexibly and in
response to client demand. With the transition from IDA to IBRD financing, as well as the range o f
financing options available Serbia, it i s imperative that the Bank be even more responsive to Serbian
priorities. Careful dialog with the client will be required to ensure that the Bank can stay relevant, as will
greater flexibility. Careful exploration o f new products, including deferred drawdown development
policy operations, insurance and sub-national lending products will require close consideration. At the
same time, care will be required to balance the need for flexibility and responsiveness with the need to
ensure that Bank financing does indeed help to promote reform.

55

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
Annex 2

72.
Flexibility will be critical given regional uncertainties and risks of possible political
instability. Even in a time o f relative stability, as during the past CAS period, the need to replace
adjustment operations with new and scaled up investments emphasizes the need for flexibility.

73.
Engagement across the Bank Group has been strong and will continue to be important in
meeting varied client demands through combining a depth of country knowledge with global
expertise. IFC and MIGA will become an increasingly central element o f the Bank Group’s engagement
in Serbia over the coming years. There i s considerable scope to exploit potential synergies between
different parts o f the institution to encourage the further development o f the financial sector (pensions,
insurance, housing), and to support the private provision o f infrastructureand social services.

56

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
Annex 2

CAS Completion Matrix
CAS FY05 Outcomes and IntermediateIndicators Results
GOAL 1: Creating a smaller, more sustainable, more efficient public sector
CAS Outcomes
the Bank expects
to influence

Intermediate
indicators to track
implementation

Reduction in public
expenditures to GDP
from 47% (2003) to
43%

Public expenditure
reoriented toward
investment, with
salaries more closely
linked to performance.

Improved fiscal
sustainability of
pensions, health.

Results
Public expenditure fell to less than 4 1% o f GDP in 2004 and
2005, but has since started to rise to just over 42% o f GDP in
2006 and 2007 (projected). Nevertheless, GDP adjustments
during the course o f the CAS period lowered the 2003 starting
point from 47% to 43.7%. As well as an overall decline in total
public expenditure, strengthened public revenues transformed a
deficit of 3% of GDP in 2003 into a small surplus in 2005,
before a limited deficit o f 1.5% o f GDP re-emerged in 2006.
Public expenditure i s increasingly oriented toward investment,
which now comprises 4.3% o f GDP - double the level of 2003.

Reduction in public sector
wage bill as a share o f
GDP by 1 to 1.5 percent.

AFter a decline in 2004 and 2005, public sector wages grew
sharply in 2006-2007. Between 2003 and 2006, public sector
wages remained constant at 9.6% of GDP, but are projected by
the IMF to increase to 10% o f GDP in 2007.

Progress on wage
decompression

Public sector wage decompressionhas improved. Ratio now 1:7
compared to baseline of 1:6.

Pension contribution
collections up 5% by end
of 2006
Pension deficit reduced by
1% of GDP, with
expenditures on pensions
to decline between 2004
and 2005.

A new Pensions Law passed in October 2005 and made
effective in January 2006 will gradually eliminate the fiscal
deficit of the pension system. For 2006, the Law envisaged a
one time increase in minimum pensions, to be offset over time
by other measures. The number o f retirees has also increased
faster than anticipated, in part due to job losses associated with
privatization. While the medium-term outlook has been
significantly improved by the new Pensions Law, short-term
indicators in the CAS FY05 have proved overly optimistic.

Health Insurance Fund
expenditures contained as
a proportion o f GDP.

HIF expenditures have remained relatively constant between
5.3% and 5.5% o f GDP, at a time when quality o f health service
delivery has been improved (see goal 3).

HIF annual deficit
reduced. Baseline: Euro 9
million (2002).

Arrears cleared in 2006. Financial audits o f 15 major health
facilities underway to ensure arrears do not re-emerge.

Reduction in drug
expenditures paid by HIF.
Baseline: Euro 25 million
(2003)

Pharmaceutical expenditures since 200 1 have fluctuated
between 10.8% and 15.5% o f total expenditures, but are
generally on a downward trend. Expenditure control i s a result
of streamlined procedures for registration and licensing o f
imported drugs to reduce market entry barriers, and new
procurement practices for pharmaceuticals consistent with the
new Law on Public Procurement.

57

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO&FYII
Annex 2

GOAL 2: Creating a larger, more dynamic private sector
CAS Outcomes
the Bank expects
to influence

Intermediate
indicators to track
implementation

Improve the business
environment

Accelerate
privatization, including
restructuring of the
financial sector

Results
Doing Business 2006 suggests Serbia was the faster reformer
globally in 2004-2005. Major reductions in the time (from 51 to
15 days) and cost required to start a business resulted in 40
percent more businesses being registered in 2005 compared to
2003. A new civil procedure code halved the time required to
resolve business disputes. Improvements in the Labor Law
increased flexibility.

Increased number andor
value o f large
conglomerates restructured
and business units and
assets sold, andor put into
bankruptcy with at least 3
large SOEs offered for
salelthree majority
state/owned banks offered
for sale

More than 1,800 socially owned enterprises sold, with all
remaining enterprises to be offered for sale by end 2008.
Over 60 large SOEs have been sold without restructuring. The
largest was the sale in July 2006 of the mobile telecoms network
to Telenor o f Norway for over Euro 1.5 billion.
Another 50 large SOEs were restructured and offered for sale, of
which 25 were sold. This includes RTB Bor, the large co per
mining and processing complex in eastern Serbia (the 2
largest recipient o f subsidies - at over $1Om per annum)

.B

The government has divested most o f its banking sector
holdings to strategic foreign investors, retaining stake only o 4
(small) majority owned banks and minority stakes in 5 other
banks, which respectively total 3% and 12% o f the banking
system assets at end-June 2006.
Total privatization receipts between 2002 and 2006 amounted to
approximately Euro 3 billion.
Overall subsidies to SOEs declined from 2.7% o f GDP in 2004
to 1.9% in 2006 (Serbian Government Data).
Improved access to
finance

Increased volume of
finance available for
exports

Access to finance has been markedly improved through the
entry o f new foreign owned banks. Total banking sector assets
have more than doubled since 2004. Doing Business 2008 ranks
Serbia as 13 globally in terms o f ease o f obtaining credit in
2006-07, a significant improvement even over the previous year.

Export activities
expanded with support
o f Serbian and
Montenegrin Export
Credit Agency

Increased value o f
insurance for political risk,
import credit and exporter
performance

Serbian export credit agency (SMECA) insured transactions
totaling Euro 5 10 million in 2005, or 13% o f total exports - a
significant expansion on previous years. Exports increasing
from 16% to 20% o f GDP from 2003 to 2006.

Reduced non-tariff
costs to trade and
transport

Decrease in import
clearance time

Customs processing times reduced by an average o f 73%.
Revenue collected per staff member increased from $50,000 in
2000 to $1.3 million in 2006. Declarations per customs staff
increased to 373.
75% of importers surveyed noted an
improvement in transparency o f customs services since 2002.

Annual number o f
declarations/customs staff

58

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1
Annex 2
systematically increased:
from baseline of 148

BEEPS also highlights significant improvements in corruption
perceptions at customs.

Reduction in roughness on
rehabilitated road
segments and roads in
pilot areas (baselines: 5
and 6 respectively on the
IRI scale).

Average on rehabilitated sections now 3.7 on the IRI scale and
4.26 on the roads included in the pilot regions

Fewer traffic deaths.
2003 baseline: 6 per
10,000 vehicles

Average on rehabilitated and maintained road segments 3.5 per
10,000 vehicles during 2006.

Reduced transport cost
principal commodity
traded with 3 main trading
partners (baseline $100)

No data

Improve agricultural
outputs and exports,
with farmers meeting
EU standards.

Increased competitiveness
o f farmers and agroprocessors.

Gross agricultural output has increased by about 10% since
2000 - but remain subject to annual weather variations. Yields
are increasing, but remain below EU averages. Growth in
agricultural exports resulted in an agricultural trade surplus in
2005. Tariff and non-tariff barriers plus market support
continue to limit exposure o f farmers to competitive forces.
Nevertheless, continued implementation o f the Government’s
agricultural reform program i s increasingly requiring
predominantly small scale farmers to improve productivity and
quality and meet stringent EU food safety requirements.

Increase in private
sector involvement in
infrastructure.

Restructuring in the energy
sector, measured by the
separation of ownership o f
generation, distribution
and transmission assets,
and a reduction in EPS
staffing.

A regulatory agency has been established to develop tariff
structures for incumbents and new entrants. I n line with Energy
Community of South East Europe requirements, power
transmission services have been separated from EPS into a new
transmission company, EMS. EPS has been separated into
individual legal entities for generation and distribution.
Commercial losses are moderate, and collections are high for
virtually all consumer groups. Private sector participation i s
noticeable in the oil sector in retail marketing. Privatization of
the State Oil Company (NIS) i s still being considered. Private
involvement in new generation investments (such as the
Kolubara mine and plant) i s likely.

Improved land titling.

Lowered property market
transaction costs.

The real estate cadastre now covers over 80% of the country.
Transactions involving land increased from just under 300,000
in 2005 to 330,000 in 2006, and are likely to reach almost
400,000 in 2007 (the original target for 2010). Improved
cadastral services have resulted in mortgages being provided for
over 5% o f all land transactions in 2007, compared to less than
3% in 2006 (exceeding conservative original targets).
Registration times have fallen from 27 to 23 days for land sales,
and from 13 to 9 days for mortgages.

[mproved road
infrastructure and
safety.

59

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO&FYII
Annex 2

GOAL 3: Reducing poverty levels, and improving social protection and access to social services
CAS Outcomes
the Bank expects
to influence

Intermediate
indicators to track
implementation

Results
Poverty has fallen from 14.6% o f the population in 2004 to
8.8% in 2006. Nevertheless, poverty remains persistent in rural
areas and among minorities, particularly Roma.

Reduce poor and “at
risk” population.

Reduction in rural poverty,
including in Bor region,
and increased agricultural
competitiveness

Rural poverty declined from 20% in 2004 to 14% in 2006.
Rural poverty rates remain significantly higher than urban (5%),
and two thirds o f the poor are located in rural areas. Poverty i s
also more severe in rural areas. Poverty in the Bor region i s
worse than the national average, and shows limited
improvement (a bank investment scheduled for FY06 was
approved in June 2007). Agricultural productivity i s improving
slightly (see goal 2) although challenges remain. World Bank
irrigation investments have helped to improve crop production
by 10% on over 5,000 ha.

More effective labor
market interventions and
more innovative
employment services.

13 Work Transition Centers in 10 regions established, rather
than 10 in 4 regions as planned. WTCs assisted those laid off as
a result of restructuring and privatization. Support to redundant
workers included financial compensation as well as the
opportunity for redeployment, training and self-employment,
An estimated 7,000 workers received counseling services and
information, 2,000 workers were retrained, and around 800 new
jobs were created or saved in pilot enterprises. Previously, such
services were nonexistent. Government amended relevant
legislation to recommend that all enterprises undergoing
restructuring and privatization establish WTCs.

New menu o f ALMPs
developed and tested to
allow introduction o f more
cost-effective interventions
and innovative
employment services.

Piloting and testing of a full range o f employment services has
allowed the Government to restructure ALMPs towards those
with greater demonstrated effectiveness. The results of three
waves o f tracer surveys o f redundant workers confirm much
lower placement rates o f non-participants than almost any o f the
ALMPs implemented (except vacancy fairs).

Improve delivery of
social services for the
poor and vulnerable.

Improved coverage and
targeting o f social
protection programs.

2003 LSMS data: social insurance programs (predominantly
pensions) provided to individuals in 5 1% of households,
including 89% in the poorest quintile, declining to 21% o f the
richest quintile. Social welfare and child assistance payments
cover 21% o f households, and 23% o f poor households. 2007
LSMS data not yet available.

Strengthened capacity
o f the education system
to make continuous
improvements in the
quality of teaching and
learning at schools and
in the efficient use of
budgetary resources

Systematic information to
support education reforms:
(i)independent
assessment established
and standards set for
selected grades based
on curriculum
objectives.

Serbia i s on track to meet education MDGs. Primary school
completion rates are over 95% and do not differ significantly by
gender.

Mitigate social impacts
of economic
modernization and
restructuring.

National standards have been established for grades 3, 4 and 8
and sample based assessments have been conducted. In 2006,
national average for mathematics was 6O%, and Serbian 69%

60

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO&FYll
Annex 2

(ii)
700 schools have
approved development
plans

Improved health care
service delivery:
(0
(ii)
(iii) increased
effectiveness o f
health insurance

Education information system operational.
832 schools approved through successive grant applications
rounds, out o f a total o f 1,680.

Serbia on track to meet MDGs. Infant and maternal mortality
low and falling. Communicable disease prevalence low,
although warrant monitoring, especially for high risk groups.
Increased utilization rates
for Primary Health Care
(PHC) especially by the
poor (including the Roma
and IDPs)

Annual utilization levels in PHC centers are relatively high with
7 visits per capita per year.
2007: Utilization rates o f PHCs i s 90% (2003 baseline: 79% o f
the population utilize PHC centers). U
Use by the Roma populations was 52% in 2003. 2007 LSMS
data for Roma not yet available.

Proportion o f patients
satisfied with PHC doctor

NHS survey shows increase in user satisfaction from 74% in
2005 to 79% in 2006. USS survey shows increase from 79% to
81% between 2005 and 2006.

In four pilot hospitals,
improvements in
occupancy, beds per
patient, average length o f
stay and outpatient visits.

Improvements in all indicators. Between 2005 and 2006, beds
reduced from 2,300 to 2,200, average length o f stay declining
from 7.8 to 7.5 days, occupancy rate increased for 68% to 70%,
over 3.6 million outpatient visits.

Licensing bodies are
established, staffed and
operating for health
professionals.

Chamber o f MDs and Chamber of Nurses established in 2006.

Increasedutilization of day
care services by the elderly

The elderly (60+) are more likely to seek outpatient care (83%
in 2007 compared to 57% in 2003) than the average population
(76% in 2007 compared to 54% in 2003).

61

X

x x x

x
x

x x
x

x

x

xIx

x

x x x

x x x

x x x x

x

x x x x x x

x

x x x

x x

x x x

x x

x

x x x

x
x

x x x

x
x x

x

x
x

x x x

x

x

x x x x x x

x

x
x x x x x

x

x
x x

x x

x x x x

x
x x x
x x

x x
x

x

x x x x
x x x

x

x x x
x

x x

x x x

x

X

x x x

x x

x

x

x x
x x x

x x
x x

x

x x x x

x x

x x

x

x

I

<
x

<

< x
* x x x

x
x $
W
N

x x z

s
0
m

d
'A

0

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1
Annex 4
Relations with the European Union and Progress on the
Stabilization and Association Process ( S A P )

I.

S A P and SAA

The Stabilization and Association Process (SAP) i s a special regional approach o f the European
Union (EU) designed exclusively for the Western Balkan countries to pave their way for membership
in the EU. I t i s the cornerstone of the EU’s policy towards the region and it aims to promote stability
while also facilitating closer association with the EU.
The concept of SAP dates back to the Zagreb summit in November 2000 when the EU and the
Westem Balkan countries agreed on the guiding principles of SAP. These principles include the
recognition that: i) the main motivator for reform in these countries i s a relationship with the EU,
based on the credible prospect o f membership; ii) the countries need to establish bilateral
relationships between themselves to allow greater economic and political stability in the region to
develop, and iii)given the diversity o f the countries in the region, a more flexible approach i s needed
from the EU’s side to allows each country to move ahead at i t s own pace.
The EU had previously stated in its Council meeting in Feira in June 2000 that the future of the
Western Balkans countries lies within the European Union. The Zagreb summit provided the
necessary instruments for the EU to fulfill the Feira commitments. Since then the EU has reaffirmed
on many occasions that i t s ultimate goal i s the full integration o f the Western Balkan countries into
the EU, once the countries have fulfilled the necessary conditions for membership.’
A key element o f the SAP i s the Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) which represents a
far-reaching contractual relationship between the EU and the candidate country, entailing mutual
rights and obligations. The SAA i s signed with countries that have made sufficient progress in terms
o f political and economic reform and building administrative capacities necessary for convergence
with Europe. The SAP also offers a mixture o f trade concessions and a financial assistance programs
to the countries included in the SAP. Once the SAA has been signed and ratified, the country i s
eligible to become a candidate country. The SAA foresees the establishment o f a free trade area
between the candidate country and the EU by the end o f a five-year transition period and enhanced
cooperation in the economic field. The SAA also stipulates increased cooperation in the fields of
environmental protection, justice and security.
According to the EU, the main benefits o f the SAA: i)economic development through enhanced trade
and economic cooperation and the creation o f a business environment facilitating investments,
encouraging individual entrepreneurial initiatives and generating employment; ii)enhanced political
stability and security due to good relations with neighbors, greater regional co-operation and deeper
integration into the EU; and iii)progress in the process o f political and economic reforms, including
in the areas o f institution building, public administration reform, respect o f human rights and the rule
o f law, which are necessary to improve the quality o f l i f e for all citizens. The SAP was expanded to
include a new instrument, the European Partnership, at the EU Thessaloniki Council meeting in 2003.
These conditions include the Copenhagen criteria that outlines the core accession conditions for candidate countries: i)
stability o f institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule o f law, human rights and respect for and protection of minorities;
ii)existence o f functioning market economy, as well as capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within
the EU; and iii)ability to take on the obligations o f membership, including adherence to the aims of political, economic and
monetary union.

63

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
Annex 4

11.

Current status of the S A P in Serbia

Serbia initialed a Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) with the European Commission in
November 2007.
The SAP process was officially launched in Serbia in 2001. Relations between Serbia and the EU
followed a generally positive trend until 2006. The country made rapid advances on the EU’s
political and economic criteria and implemented several key reforms urged by the EU. An EC
feasibility report recommending the launch of SAA negotiations with Serbia was endorsed by the EU
Council in May 2005. This was based on the conclusion that Serbia had advanced sufficiently in key
areas to start S A A negotiations.
S A A negotiations were officially launched on October 10, 2005, using a twin-track approach, with
negotiations conducted with the Serbia and Montenegro State Union and individually each of the
constituent republics, depending on the field of competence. The EC and the EU Council, however,
stated explicitly that the continuation and the pace of the SAA talks would depend on Serbia’s
compliance in highlighted issues, especially with regard to Serbia’s cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). During the first eight months of the SAA
negotiations the technical talks advanced quickly and large parts of the agreement text were agreed
upon. However, following a negative assessment on Serbia’s cooperation with the ICTY, the SAA
negotiations were put on hold in May 2006. Negotiations resumed in June 2007 following
improvements in Serbia’s cooperation with the ICTY, including the arrests two ICTY fugitives.
Upon restarting the SAA negotiations, the EC stated that the conclusion of the S A A negotiations
would depend on Serbia’s progress in developing the necessary legislative framework and
administrative capacity to implement i t s obligations under the SAA, as well as on i t s future
cooperation with the ICTY Technical negotiationswere concluded in September 2007.

.’

The next step will be for the SAA to be signed, which should occur in early 2008, subject to
continued Serbian cooperation with ICTY. Ratification will then require the SAA to be approved by
national parliaments in EU member states. The Serbian government has stated that it hopes to receive
the status of candidate country during 2008 and enter the EU between 2012 and 2014.
In i t s latest progress report released in November 2007, the EU Commission commended Serbia for
i t s good economic performance, constructive approach to regional cooperation projects and for
showing that it has a good administrative capacity to progress towards the EU and to implement a
future SAA. Progress was also achieved in areas such as free movement of goods, customs and
taxation, Industry and SMEs, agriculture and visa facilitation. Nevertheless, the EC i s concerned
about lack of process in judicial reform, enforcement of human rights (especially minority rights),
high unemployment, lack of flexibility in the labor market, and widespread corr~ption.~
111. EU financial assistance to Serbia
Since 2001, the EC has provided very significant financial assistance to Serbia. Between 1998 and
2006, the EC committed nearly 1.3 billion euros to support reforms in Serbia alone, with annual
commitments between 150 and 220 million euros. These figures include the EC’s macro-financial
support and funds disbursed under the CARDS program.

* EU Council Conclusions on Western Balkans, External Relations Council Meeting, 18 June 2007, Luxembourg

9

Serbia 2007 Progress Report, November 6,2007.

64

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
Annex 4

The focus areas of EC financial assistance has evolved since the 1990s, switching from humanitarian
aid, conflict management and post-conflict reconstruction towards supporting political, institutional
and economic reforms, with the overall objective to facilitate a closer association with the EU. In
recent years the CARDS assistance program has focused mainly on the European Partnership
priorities, while taking also into account the requirements Serbia will have to meet to conclude the
SAA negotiations and implement the agreement. In addition to having its own CARDS program,
Serbia also benefits from a regional CARDS scheme that supports actions in the interest for the whole
Western Balkans region in the fields o f infrastructure, institution building and cross-border
cooperation.
In order to simplify and harmonize the different external aid components, to facilitate coherence and
improve consistency and to achieve better results and to improve consistency, the EU i s currently
adopting a new financial aid mechanism to replace all previous external assistance programs for
candidate and potential candidate countries. The new mechanism, called IPA (Instrument for PreAccession Assistance) will replace the CARDS program in the Western Balkan region and it will be
operative during the period o f 2007-20 13.

The total financial allocation granted to Serbia under IPA amount to 976,8 million Euros during the
period o f 2007 - 201 1, with average annual allocation o f around 195 million Euros during the fiveyear period." IPA i s made up o f five components: (i)support for transition and institution building;
(ii)cross-border cooperation; (iii)regional development, (iv) human resources development; and (v)
rural development. The first two components concern all beneficiary countries, whereas the three
latter components are aimed at EU candidate countries only. Therefore Serbia, being a potential
candidate country, only benefits at this stage from activities under the two first components. In this
framework, IPA will support Serbia to:

1. Fulfill the political requirements of the SAP and lay foundations for the fulfillment of the
Copenhagen criteria. In order to achieve this goal, the EC will focus on the following areas in
Serbia: i)strengthening democratic institutions, decentralization and local governments, budget
and fiscal management, rule o f law, reform o f the judiciary and public administration reform; ii)
intensify the fight against corruption, reform o f the police; iii) advancing human rights and
protection o f minorities, antidiscrimination; and iv) supporting civil society and the media.
2. Improve the socio-economic situation. P A will finance activities in the areas o f i)employment
generation; ii) education; iii) social inclusion; iv) health; v) business environment, S M E
restructuring and competitiveness; vi) infrastructure and inland waterway transport; vii) flood
prevention; and viii) rural development.

3. Approximate to European Standards in sectors related to the introduction and
implementation of the EU Acquis in all areas, including the overall coordination of the
European integration process. This component aims to strengthen Serbian administrative
capacities to implement the SAA once it has been signed.

With IPA, the EC also wants to develop local ownership in the fund management framework and to
help prepare the authorities for the introduction o f the Decentralized Implementation System (DIS) to
self-manage EC funds. However, administrative capacities need to be further strengthened
throughout the administration in Serbia to implement the IPA program. According to the EC, further
measures should also be identified to address the continued weak inter-ministerial relations,
coordination and communication which undermine implementationo f EU policies.

loEU Commission

MEM0/07-446, November 6, 2007.

65

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1

Annex 5

Serbia a t a glance

lllYO7
Eumpe d
Cenbaf
Asia

UPW
nuddre
inmw

7:
77
02
56

460
24.1 14
00

810
41,460
07

84

75

30 0

2.206
4.796
9.662

4 7YO

5,913
10,817

6e
68

58
49

Key Qevelopmciit Indicators
Serbia

ri-7r
Age distribution, 2006

(2006)

PoouLaIm, mid-year ( m i l h s l
Surface ere8 (Uwuaand sq hmj
Powtabon gmwth (%I
Urban popul&on (%of tota population)
GNl (&$eaniethod, USS btlmns)
GNI ucf cap& (&Was method US$)
GNI p u capita (PPP intenattonal 9)

4000

GDP groVm, (%)
GDP psr capita gru& (%)

57

55

71.74

W-M
35-X
49-44

a-Y
8-21
12-11

D.4

(inst rawrf estirnatet2000-2006)
Poverty headmunt rem et 31 a a y (PPP, %:
P o v m headcount ram 5t $2 a day IPPP, %;
Lth expectancy at bsih (flaw1
Infant m a ity fpef 1.00 lwc bms:
Chiid malnutt~troo(% of childref1uider 51

73
8

&duttIneracy, male (%of ages 15 and mderi
Ad& Ider5Cj, f m l a (% of ages 15 and older)
&os0 prinlsry enrollment, male (% of age gmup)
Qom pnnMry enrollment, fern& (% of age group)

99

99
96
153

1980

Under4 mwcolity rats (per 1,000)
7D
26

94

100

Y?
106
104

69

92
&5

93
61

1990

WOO

ZOO6

184

E52

94

ACCESS to an impmved water source (% of gopul.riboo1
Acceas lo wnprwed sandatan tauilk (% of popuiationl

Net A i d Flows

1
10
69
28
5

(US5 rn;l!ws)
Net ODA srd OITcial ard
T y 3 rrorOrs (m 2005)
European Union
‘WWM Bank
EBRD

’
Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

418

s7
7t
2.1
24

21
87

ea 7
81 0

12 7
15 6

44 4

669

Loiig-Term Economic Trends
Coowow pnces (annual % cbnge)
GDP imp’ictt deflator (annual %change)

.w 0

590 2

-

Exchange rate iannud average local wr US0 t
100)

Temrs of trade lndex (2OW

Powlatien, mhd-yssr (milhmisi
GDP ( U S millwrw)

1980-90 1890-2000
2000-06
lowage annual p w h h 96)
77

76

71
8 963

75
31.YS9

19 4
29 6

12 7
25 5

51 0

61 9

ea7
18 B
a4

776

46

2QY
21 2

34
20 Y

23 0
39 1
37

26 9
46 5

11 a
136

-0 4
53

(% Ol GDPl

Agficulhrre
Industry
Manufacturing
services

Note Figures In italien arc fw yeam omer than thoen spclcrfied 2006 data are weltmimy
a Ard dah are for 2005
Deveiopmrd Economn DewlopnlAnt Dato Group IDECDG)

66

90
iradicatfsdata a n rot available

I

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO&FYll
Annex 5
Serbia
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2006
Governance indiceton,2000 and 2005

(US6 rnlons]
T&I me~handiuexports (fob)
Total merrhandise impom (ctf~
Net trade m goocb ansi S e M E e S

1,645
3.227
.1.441

6,486
12.7t5
-6.292

-153
.1.7

-3,664
-11 5

t,m2

4,355

524

11,888

I% of GDPI
Curcant revenw (includmg grants)
Tax revewe
Current expenditure

324
23.9
296

40 I
339
371

Overall surpluddefic~I

-0.2

-1 5

Current e c m t balance
as a %of GQP
Workers' remittances and
mnpmsatton d ampbyeus (receipts)
Reserves. mcluding gad

T

I

Central Governnwnt Finance

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2005

3.2

56

Hiphest marginal lax rate (%)
lndivldual
corpaste

External Debt and Reoource Flows
Environment
(US6 mXIionsl
T&l debt o u k W i r q and disbursed
Total W t setviw
Debt rubf 6HlPC, MDRlj

Agncultwral land {X of tand area;
Forest area (%of land m a )
Natmaifyprotected ereas (%of land area

10,830
-85

19,606
-3,I5B

lW.B
-1 9

61 3
-240

Fresbater rewurcea per ca@a (cu metnsl
Fresbater mthdrawal (% of intern1resource3

50

4,389
200

C 0 2 emn%ms per mpna (mt)

-

TOW debt (% ol GDP)
Totel debt service (% of exports)
Foretgn direct investment he1 ln%ows)
Porttoiio equnf (ne! urflowa:

..

-

GDP per unil ol energy use
(2000 PPP Iper kg of ai equrvolenl!

Composrtconof total external dab6 2006
I&W 2.129

Energy use wr tspita (kg of MI equrvaknt)

*m,w

2006

IBRD
Totat debt wlstandrq and disbwsed

1,538
0
0
0

2,129

IDA
Total debt outstandmgarnj disbursed
D~bummnb
Total d&t w i c e

0
0
0

550
40
4

IFC (fisc0f year)
Total diDursed and artstanding pa-tfolio
of whrch IFC own acccunt
Dtsbumementt for IFC own account
Pwltollo sales, p r e p p e n t 8 and
repawnta for IFC own accwnl

-

Q&UrSaments

Prinefpal repayments
Inter& ~ynanfs
US$ m lll0nS

Private Sector Devebpnient
Time requrred to start a business (days'
Cost to siarl a business (% of GNI per cap&!
Time required to regnter property Mays:

2000

2006

-

23
102
111

Ranked as a major constrsnt to bwineu,
(% of managers surveyed who agreed:
na
na

SIOCk IWrkel CWlbfKzSbon(% Of G W )
Bank capitel to asset ratlo (X)

46
183

-

242
104

181
171
131

44

-

206
972

Note Fgures in ltalxcs we for years other th8n those speoficd ?OD6 data are pIeliminirsy
ndicstea dsia are not available mdicates ob%ervatlon1s n d appimble

-

bvulopmanl Economics Dsreiopment Data Grwp (QECDGI

67

11/5/1317

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
Annex 5

Millennium Development Goals

Serbia

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(es2lmate closest to date 5hum

t/-

2 pars)

Goal 1: halve the rates for $1 a day poverty and malnufntior
Paerty headcount mtb at S I a day (PPP, K of wpulabon)
headcwnt ram at n m a l povew bine (% of popuiebon)
Share 08 r n c m or consumption to the poorest qwnible (%)
Prevaienn of mainutnhoo (% a6 chlrdren under 5)

1995

1990

Goat 2: ensure that children are able to complete pnmary schoolrnp
Prm1aV school mrotlment (rat. C )
P m x q conlpletimrate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary schoca enrollment (groas, %)
Youth literacy rille (% of peopk 6ges 15.24

2000

2005

10 6

91
90

96

94
95

99

Goal 3: ettmtnate QMtder disparity in education and empower women
Ram of girls lo boys n pnrnaly and secondary educalrcn (%)

95
42
if

Goat 4: reduce under4 mortality by two-thirda
Uixkrd mwtality rate (par 1 000)
Infant nwtatily rete (per 1.ooO lm birIhs)
Measles mmzatcon (proporton 06 me-year olds imnwntzed, %

13
15

tl

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourth
Materna mortality reto :mode ed estimate per 1W CQD (he births)
Births attended by sktlled health staff (% of Mal)

6

Goat 6: hatt and begin to revem the spread of HNlAtDS ond other major disease
Prevalanoti of HIS (% of pcpucstion ages 15-493
Contraceobvt !xevsience (Oh of m
n ages 15-49:
lncdence of~bercu1OSia{per 100,OE people)
Tubercumfscmes OeIectM under DOTS (%!

69

Goal 8: develop a global p a m n h i n for develwment
Fixed lot snd nwbile phone sd~scnkrs(per 1 ,OCQ peopte)
Inernel uswrs (per 1,000 peogle)
P-al
computers (per 1 000 p w k )
Youth unemployment 1% of i o U Iabw force ages 15-24)

Education mdicators (K)

,year olds)

:iL
5ocp

m2

6
99

33
32

Goal 7: h @ wthe proportion of w l e wtthout sustainrMe access to basic ncedr
.4cceos io an rnproved water source I% of poprklrcn)
Access to improved sandatton facilshes (% of populabn)
Fmsl area (% ot total tand area}
Maaonalfy protected areas (% of total (and area)
C 0 2 e m i s m s (metric tons pes capita)
GDP per unll of energy use (constant 2000 PPP Iper hg of od equivalent)

I

a
96

26 a
46

25 6
46
44
a9

53

203
22Q
47 6

ICT indtcaton (per 1,000 people)
250

aw
tSO
100

MMb

30
0

Noh Figures in &atalas&re fcd yean other man those speufied

indicares data afe not amilabk

Deveroprnent E m c s Devtropment Data Grwp (DECDG)

68

111W7

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
Annex 5
SERBIA: DOING BUSINESS INDICATORS

-

Summary of indicators Serbia
Starting a Business

Dealing with Licenses

I

Procedures (number)

11

Duntion (days)

23

Cost (“A GNI per capfta)

8.9

Paid in l i n . Capitol (X of GNI per capita

8.0

I

Procedures (number)

204

Cost (% of income per capita)

Employlng workers

Registering Prop.*

2713 1

D17ficulty of Hiring Index

67

Rigtdity Of HOUE index

40

Difficulty of Firing Index

30

Rigidity of Employmom Index

46

Nonwage labor cost (“hof salary)

18

Firing costs (wwks of wages)

25

Promduns (number)

6

Duration (days)

Getting Credit

111

I costI( of propem value)
I Legat Rights Index
Credit Information Index

Prot-ing

Investors

I
I
I

5.4

I

71
51

Publlc registry coverage (% adults)

01

Private bureau coverage (% adults)

5 I.3

I

Disciosure Index
Director Liirbilrty lndrx

6

Shareholder sutts Index

3

Investor Protection lndex
Paying Taxes

I

I

Duration (days)

I

Payments (number)

I

Time (hours)

I

5.3
66

I

279

I

Proflt tax (*A)

11.7

Labor tax and contfibutlont (%)

20.2

Other taxes (%)
Total tax rate (% protit)

69

I
I

I

I
35.8 1
3.9

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYObFYll
Annex 5

Trading Across Borders

Documents for export (number)
time for export (days)
Cost to export (Us3 per container)

Documents for impart (number)
Time for import (days)
Cost to import (USS per contalner)

Enforcing Contracts

closing a Business

Procedures (number)

6
12

1240

6
14

1440

36

Duratlon (days)

635

Cost (YOof claim)

28.4

Cost (% of income per capita)

23

Time (years)

27

Recovery rate ( c e m on the cbtlat)

70

23 1

Serbia Country Partnership Strategv for FYO8-FYI1
Annex 5
Serbia - Key Econoinic Iudicators

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed m e s t m a
Gowmment westinem
Pnvate mvestrneni

96
16
2
14

100
I8
3
IS

100
17
3
15

98
18
14

99
19
4
14

Exports (GNFSf
Imports (GWS:

21
40

23
46

25
47

27
47

28
49

Gross donresuc Salrtng
Gross national saving4

4
13

0
12

0
11

2
9

20340

24518

26232

.tiemorandm rtet))s
Gross donresac product
(US8 inilhon at current priccr
GXI per capita (US$, Atlas method

5

5

1s

15

97
20
5
15

25

28
49

2s

2s

49

49

49

1
7

2
7

2
8

3
9

4
10

31989

40808

47197

50993

55129

59943

4

98
19

98
20

96
21
i
16

2130

2970

3560

4000

4620

5540

6430

7060

7610

Real annual growth rated
Gross domestic product at rnarkct pncc
Grosr Domesw h c o m

25
1.2

84
8.6

62
3.8

57
7.0

75
90

6.0
5.8

5.5
5.1

5 5

5.0

5.5
5.0

Real annual per capita growth rates
Gross domestic product at market price
Total consumption
Pnvate consumphor

3.0
-3.3
-5.0

8.7
11.0
16.8

6.1
06
-1.2

55
5.5
6.3

66
11 0
16 7

57
65
72

5.2
57
6.2

52
51
56

52
49
53

Balance of Paqments &'s$mitlion~)
Errports (GNFSJ
Merchan&se FOE
Impons (GNFS~
Merchanchse FOE
Resource bal;mce
Net cmnt m f e r s
Current account balance

4358
3319
8177
7340
-3819
2535
-1420

5559
4082
11853
10551
-6294
3641
-2869

6606
4970
11902
10260
-5296
3396
-2224

8593
6486
14886
12716
-6292
3023
-3664

11523
8585
19983
17086
-S4#
3089
-5950

13218
9781
23179
19828
-9961
3 808
-7017

14306
10550
25121
11501
-10815
4471
-7391

15446
11331
27010
23089
-11564
5119
-7798

16899
12383
29256
25000
-12357
5736
-8200

Net pnvate foreign d m a ulvcsma
Long-term loans (net:
Other capital ( ~ tUC!. O P X ~B ~ S L U ]
C h g e in reserve4

1365
1095
230
-1270

966
1619
979
-695

1549
2621
-348
-1598

43 89
4001
1318
-6045

1530
4694
1538
-1812

2025
3494
1504
4

1207
4050
1143
-8

2620
4168
1002
7

2690
4728
750
32

-18.8

-25.7

-20.2

-19.7

-20 7

-21.1

-21.2

-209

-20.6

M e w o w n h i n t fteins
Resource balance (90 o f GDP:

71

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO&FYll
Annex 5

Serbia - Key Economic Iiiclicators
(Contiuued)

Inhcatoi

5003

Pubtic finance tar W of GDP at mrket piicesf
Current revenues
403
Current e x p & t u r e s
407
Cunrntaccortnt surplus(-)orctefic~t(-04
Capital espenditlw
30
Foreign f i n a n c q
11

Actual
LOO4
2005

2006

Esnmare
2007

2008

Protected
2009
LO10

2011

410
388
23
27
09

409
377
32
29
07

401
377
24
44
05

407
381
25
33
15

405
380
25
48
01

402
376
26
48
00

400
370
29
48
-01

35
3C
3
4

209
278

226
319

262
42.1

19.8
39.1

303
148

31 2
185

323
155

333
150

33
1C

11.7

10.1

17.3

12 7

6.1

S.4

6.1

S5

4

-C

Monernry indicators

M2iGDP
Growth o f h42 ( O b )
Price indices
Consumer pncc tndex

(YO

change;

e GDP at factor COS!
b ”GhTS“ denotes “goods and nonfactor semceS
c Includes net unrequited trausfers excludmg official capital pram

d Inclvdes u5e o f IM€ resources
e Cmwlidared cmrral govenunent
f “LCU” denotes “local cumucy Units “ An ittcrea~eID US&ZCVdenotes appreciano

72

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1

Annex 5
Serbia - Key Exposure Indicators

Total debt out5tandmg and
darbursed(TDO) (VSIII)~

Net drsb~umcnts(US$m)’

13575

14099

15467

19606

24328

27613

30984

33910

36695

186

2002

2646

4062

4691

4050

3779

2908

3208

1653

2431

3862

5155

6011

1503
596
102
140

1484
585
13 1
126

1522
608
190
113

1531
614
233
103

1513
612
248
95

323
678

117
209

71
125

49
85

39
65

13
2131
2
594

11
2175

11
‘220
2
669

10
2251
2
696

09
2290

Total debt =nice (TDS)

Ws$rn)’
Debt aid debt m i c e tndicators
(O 0 )

TDO XGSb

Tw GDP
TDS XGS
CoixesuoidTDO
IBRD e x p 5 m indrcators (90)
IBRD D S public DS
Prefmedcreditor D S public
DS (76)‘
IBRDDS XGS
IBRD TEO (vS$m)d
share of IBmportfoho (0.)
IDA TDO (VSSni)”

1906
667

1270
2
273

1471
575

2472
2
432

1458
590

11
2133
7

468

1.192
613

26
2129
2
550

2
634

IFC (USSm)
h
s
Eqwv and quau-equtty ’e
MXGA
MIGA gwmitcrs (VSSm)

a Xncltdes publrc and publiclyguaranteed debt. ynvate imiguaraiteed, use of IMF aemts and uct sitort-

term capital

b “XGS“denotes exports of pods and SHMC~S, includingw o r k s ‘ remittances
c Preferred credrron %e defined a5 BRD.IDA, the rcplonal tlluhslateral development b d 5 . the IMF. and the
Bank for Inremartonal Settlements

d bcludes prrsenr value of guarantees
e Includes quay and quasi-eqwty types o f both loan and eqtnw insmuimits

73

-

-l

715

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1
Annex 5

Serbia Social Indicators
Same regionfincome group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total populataon, md-year (m!//ionsl
Gram rate I%annual average for p e w / )
Urban populatron (94 olpopulatianl
Total fertflity rate (brrths per w-nafl)

198085

199045

1999-05

Europe &
Central
Asia

77

76

48 6

546

75
-07
564
16

472 9
00
63 7
16

2,474 7
10
49 5
22

4,113
I30

1,918
1 3

4.4

4.3

la

POVERTY
(% ofpopulabon)
National beadcount mdex
Urban beadcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per cap& (US5)
Consunier pnce index (ZoOo=fOOJ
Food pnce index (XK7O=-t00)

Lowermiddleincome

91

69

14

3.m
331

INCOMElCONSUMPTION DISTRlBUTlON
Gin1 index
Lowst quinttle (% ofrncome ot consumpfron)
Highest qurn@e (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health of GDPZ
Education (% of GNI)
Net primary school enrolfment rate
(% of age group]
Tetal
Nab
Female
Access To an improved water source
(% of popu&bon)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
f% of chfldren ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnuMon (% under 3 years]
Lrfe expectancy at birth
IYearSl
Total
Male
Female
Yortolity
Infant (per f,OOO Lve bsrths]
Under 5 (per 1,OW)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per f, 000 population)
F m a k (per 1,ooO popufatron)
Maternal (per 100 000 he brrths)
Births attended hy skilled health staff (%f

6.9

95

90
91
90

69

92
99
80

a2
94
71

93
93
5

55
88
12

69
74

73
70
75

89
64
73

70
68
73

15

a

28
34

33
42

316
134
58
94

184
117
163
86

CAS Annex 55 This table was produced frum the CMU LDB system
11/06r07
Note 0 or 0 0 means zero or less than half the una shown Net enrollment rate break in Senes beween 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCEO76 to ISCED97 lmrnunlzatm refers to children ages 12-23 m M s who received vaccinamns before one
year of age or at any trme before the surrey

74

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO&FYlI
Annex 6

Selected Indicators" of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 1013012007

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

'

2005

2006

2007

2008

18
1.5
5.6
7.4
5.6
7.4
10.6

19
2.2
26.3
14.4
26.3
14.4
I8.4

10
2.2
10.0
6.3
10.0
6.3
20.1

10
2.5
10.0
6.3
10.0
6.3
6.5

a

Memorandum Item
Proi Eval bv OED bv Number
Proj Eval b; OED b; Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
13
11
404.3
245.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

75

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYOI-FYI1
Annex 6

IBRDllDA Program Summary

Serbia

As Of Date 1013012007

Proposed IBRDllDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year
2008

2009

Pmj ID

US$(MI

Private Sector DPL

50.0

Railways
DlLS
Health improvement Additional Financing

90.0
40.0
10.0

Result

190.0

DPL
Resavica Regional Development
Regional Disaster Preparedness
Energy

50 0
40 0
25 0

Result

185 0

70 0

Overall Result

375.0

76

g:i$b
,w/MII

H
H

Implementation 6
Risks (HMA)

M

H
M

H
M
M

H

M

H

M

H

M

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYO8-FYI1
Annex 6

4

h

l-

77

Serbia Country Partnership Strategyfor FYObFYll
Annex 6

E

4

a
P
J

0

Y
5

0

Y

+

0

Y
J

0

E
4
3

E

Y

Y

g

V

Pv
E

Y

3
E

;
i

tn

2

f-

ll

n

ii

78

Serbia Country Partnership Strategy for FYO8-FYI1
Annex 6

SERBIA: IFC Investment Operations Program
FY 2005 FY 2006 FY 2007 FY 2008*
44.5
168.9
49

Original Committments (US$m)
Net Committments by Sector (%)
Financial Sector
General Manufacturing

89
11

100

39
61

I

96

75

100

Net Committ by investment Instruments (%)
Loans

1

*As of October 31 2007

Serbia: M I G A Operations Program

M I G A Outstanding Exposure (Gross Exposure, $ million)
As of end o f fiscal year

Sectoral Distribution
Finance
Agribusiness/Manufacturing/Services
Total
MIGA's Risk Profile
Transfer Restriction
Expropriation
War & Civil Disturbance
Breach o f Contract
MIGA's Gross Exposure in Serbia

YOShare o f MIGA's Gross Exposure
M I G A Net Exposure in Serbia
Oh

Share o f MIGA's Net Exposure

FY2003

FY2004

FY2005

FY2006

FY2007

16.9

175.0

324.1

378.3

247.9

20.6
37.6

21.9
196.9

25.3
349.4

26.7
405.1

24.2
272.1

20.6
37.6
37.6
0.0

168.0
196.9
60.0
0.0

320.7
349.4
74.7
0.0

365.0
393.0
75.7
0.0

272.1
272.1
47.2
0.0

37.6

196.9

349.4

393.0

272.1

0.7%

3.8%

6.9%

7.3%

5.1%

33.8

121.8

163.8

179.5

100.5

1.1%

3.7%

5.2%

5.4%

3.1%

79

MAP SECTION

IBRD 34847
19°E

ˇ
Kanjiza

Subotica

46°N

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

To
Arad

OKRUG (DISTRICT) CAPITALS

Senta

Bajmok

Apatin

SERBIA

To
Szeged

HUNGARY

POKRAJINE (PROVINCE) CAPITALS

To
Timisoara

Kikinda

Backa
ˇ
Topola

Sombor

21°E

20°E

To
Kiskoros

Ada

NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

Ve
liki
Kula

Sivac

RO MA NIA

Becej
ˇ

MAIN ROADS

VOJVODINA
Tis

Temerin

CROATIA

ˇ
Backa
Palanka

To
Vinkovci

Zrenjanin

To
Bijeljina

Vla
Loznica

sic

Pla

Pancevo
ˇ

Sremska
Mitrovica
Sav
a

Zminjak
Prnjavor

nin

Mladenovac

SERBIA

Rogacica
ˇ
Uzice

Ravni Gaj
Jagodina
(Svetozarevo)

rn
o

lk

Nisˇ
Niš

P l aS u v a
nin
z
a

Bela
Palanka

Prepolak

an
Leskovac

Kosovska
Mitrovica

Beli D
rim

KOSOVO
Orahovac

.
43°N
To
Sofia

BUL GAR I A

Surdulica

Priboj
Vranje

Bosilegrad

Gnjilane

To
Pernik

Bujanovac

ˇ
Urosevac

Ljuboten
(2486 m)
Lake
SERBIA

ts

To
Sofia

Pristina
ˇ

Dakovica

M

Vlasotince

Pec´

Daravica
(2656 m)

an

va
ra
Mo
na

ik
o n Sitnica

Rad

Midzor
(2168 m)

Pirot

ˇ
Vucitrn

MONTENEGRO

Presevo
ˇ

Prizren
To
Kukes

r
S a i n a To
n
Tetovo
la

P

Scutari

ALB ANI A
19°E

ˇ
Knjazevac
Aleksinac

Ju

pa

To
Podgorica

oz

Soko
Banja

Prokuplje
Beloljin

Ko

g
Ro

43°N

na

ˇ
Zajecar

Rtan

´
Paracin

Ve l i k i
trebac
Jas

gin
Zel

r
Novi Pazar

44°N

Ba

me

vo

Golija

To
Vidin

Bor

ak

Ce

Ja
Sjenica

Negotin

To
Vidin

Krusevac
ˇ

ˇ
Usce

ˇ
Raska

na

ca

Ju
Za
pad
na M
orava

Kraljevo

Ivanjica

Prijepolje

jani

hor

r

ni

lav

bo

Majdanpek

Zag

ati

Pla

´
Cuprija

ˇ
Pozega

Zl

Bel

Kragujevac

Cacak
ˇ

ke

De
Jov li
an

ˇ
Zagubica

n

Gornji
Milanovac

ljs

Petrovac

Morava

al

mo

Velika

VelikaPlana

je

To
Gorazde

M

PValjevo
ov
l

Kladovo

Golubac

Ho
a

To
Gura Vail

Danube

ˇ
Pozarevac

en

BOSNIA
44°N
AND
HERZEGOVINA

To
Carbunari

Kovin

Smederevo

D

To
Sarajevo

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Bela Crkva

BELGRADE

ˇ
Zeleznik

Obrenovac

rina
Ljubovija

Vrsac
ˇ

Alibunar

Indija

Ruma

ˇ
Sabac

POKRAJNE (PROVINCE) BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

Fruska Gora

45°N

OKRUG (DISTRICT) BOUNDARIES

To
Timisoara

Novi Sad

ˇ
Sid

To
Vinkovci

RAILROADS

Elemir

a

20°E

21°E

To
Kumanovo
To
Skopje

FY R
MA CEDO NIA

0

0

25

50

25

75 Kilometers

50 Miles

22°E
AUGUST 2006

