Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 38625-TZ

JOINT ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE

UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
FY2007 - FY2010

March 1,2007

Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
Tanzania Development Partners Group
World Bank Group
Eastern Africa Country Cluster 1, Africa Region, the World Bank
Sub-Saharan Africa Department, the International Finance Corporation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without the
W o r l d Bank’s authorization.

CURRENCY
EQUIVALENTS
Currency unit = Tanzania shilling (Tsh)
U S 1 = 1294 (February 12,2007)

FISCALYEAR
July l-June 30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Context. Through in-depth consultations, the Government o f Tanzania finalized in June 2005 i t s
second poverty reduction strategy called the “National Strategy for Growth and Reduction o f
Poverty”, or MKUKUTA, covering 2005-2010. The strategy identifies three clusters o f broad
outcomes: growth o f the economy and reduction o f income poverty; improvement o f quality o f
l i f e and social well-being; and governance and accountability. The M K U K U T A aspires to a high
degree o f cluster and cross-sectoral coherence across a very broad policy range. Government has
embarked on an ambitious program for MKUKTA implementation, attempting a comprehensive
and innovative approach on linking MKUKUTA to planning, budget and monitoring systems.
World Bank Group Program. Over the past several years, the World Bank Group has been
actively engaged across a wide range o f sectors and thematic areas in Tanzania. Given this level
o f engagement, significant lessons have been learned which offer a solid platform for the WBG’s
strategic approach in Tanzania during the FY07-10 period, including: 1) a focus on results i s
critical to achieving the desired outcomes and usually requires a multi-sectoral approach; 2)
partnerships, including harmonized aid modalities and an increasing move to budget support, are
important for making the best use o f resources and comparative advantages, reducing transaction
costs for government, and building the capacity to deliver results, and 3) analytics and advice
(AAA) are key to providing a solid foundation for informed policy decisions and investments.

WBG’s engagement i s based on: (i)Government expectations; (ii)IDA’S broad mandate and
technical capacity within the country office which enables active IDA participation in
government-led working groups at both the program and sector levels, and facilitates access to
the WBG’s global reach and technical depth; and (iii)
the relative mandates and capacity o f other
DPs. By maintaining a broad engagement across sectors, the WBG i s well placed to support
Government as i t implements one o f the largest and most complex programs in Africa,
experimenting with new approaches on results, alignment and harmonization untested elsewhere.
In support o f M U K U T A Cluster I: Growth of the Economy and Reduction of Income Poverty,
the WBG will strive to further improve prospects for growth, especially improvement o f the
investment climate, through better informed choices and better financed programs in agriculture,
forestry, environment, and mining; reduced infrastructure bottlenecks, notably in transport and
energy; a stronger focus on improving labour force skills; deepening reforms in the financial
sector and enabling environment for private sector activities; and increased regional integration.
In M K U K U T A Cluster 11: Improvement of Quality of Life and Social Well-being, the WBG’s
strategic focus will be to strengthen health financing and human resources, and technical, tertiary
and secondary education, improve capacity at local government level to deliver services, together
with improved monitoring and reporting; and support social protection with a focus on analysis
and advice on how to better manage social risk and reach the vulnerable members o f the
community. In M K U K U T A Cluster 111: Governance and Accountability, the WBG strategy will
help improve governance at national, district and village levels, through both supply- and
demand-side assistance; and promote greater use o f country systems, and more effective use and
strengthening o f domestic capacity and accountability, notably in key governance institutions,
e.g. accounting, auditing, financial management, procurement, and social safeguards.

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The Bank i s aligning behind Government’s programs and strategies, increasingly using
harmonized aid modalities, such as development policy lending, basket funds, and joint
analytical and advisory services, and relying more and more on Government processes and
systems. This approach reduces Government’s transaction costs and increases aid effectiveness
by strengthening Government’s systems, including sector review processes, financial
management, accounting, auditing, procurement and M&E. In addition, it encourages greater
attention to cross-sector linkages. Ensuring strong WBG expertise in-country for key sector and
cross sector work i s critical to sustaining the policy dialogue, supporting program
implementation, and contributing to improved outcomes.
The Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania (JAST) comprises four parts, which collectively
will serve as the World Bank Group CAS for FY07 to FY10:
Part I i s the national medium-term framework established by Government for managing
development co-operation with i t s Development Partners (DPs) so as to improve the
collaboration in achieving national development and poverty reduction goals. In discussion o f
the draft JAST, Government and DPs agreed on the need for further joint work on parts 11-IV
below, engaging the entire DP community and focusing on the Government’s own planning
process, the MTEF in particular. The appropriate balance o f roles between Government and DPs
in the JAST and wider planning process has been a fruitful area o f dialogue, under continuing
review through the Government-led JAST Working Group.
Part I1 and Part I11 are the Joint Program Document (JPD) developed in consultation with
Government by the Development Partners Group (DPG) as a response to Tanzania poverty
reduction strategies (MKUKUTA for mainland Tanzania; MKUZA for Zanzibar) and the JAST.
Part I1 i s a joint country analysis describing Tanzania’s development achievements and
challenges. Part I11 i s the joint program part, reflecting DPG planned support and aid
effectiveness commitments to Tanzania over the 4 remaining years o f MKUKUTA, FY07-10.
Part IVs are agency specific supplements, building from the analysis, commitments and
undertakings in parts I,I1 and 111. The World Bank Group (WBG) Part I V describes the WBG’s
strategic approach and proposed program over support over the FY07-10 period (advice, analytic
work and financing, both ongoing and planned). Based on the Results Matrix for all DPs in Part
111, Part I V also includes a W B G specific results matrix with milestones that facilitate monitoring
o f progress during the FY07-10 period.

Vice President
Director
Task Team Leaders

IDA

Hartwig Schafer (Acting)
Judy O’Connor
Allister Moon
Kathryn Hollifield
Astrid Ruge

IFC

Edward A. Nassim
Thieny Tanoh
Jean Philippe Prosper

MIGA

Yukiko Omura
Frank J. Lysy
Thomas A. Vis

..

11

JOINT ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE

UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
FW2007 - FW2010

PART I:JOINT ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR TANZANIA (JAST)

Government of the United Republic o f Tanzania
November 2006

UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

JOINTASSISTANCESTRATEGY
FOR TANZANIA(JAST)

November 2006

List o f Abbreviations
African Development Bank
Association o f Local Authorities o f Tanzania
Bank o f Tanzania
C i v i l Society Organisation
cso
Decentralisation by Devolution
DbyD
Development Co-operation Forum
DCF
Development Partner
DP
Development Partners Group
DPG
European Union
EU
Financial Year
FY
General Budget Support
GBS
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
HIPC
Human Immunodeficiency VirudAcquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
HIV/AIDS
IFMS
Integrated Financial Management System
International Monetary Fund
IMF
Independent Monitoring Group
IMG
Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania
JAST
Local Government Authority
LGA
Local Government Reform Programme
LGRP
Legal Sector Reform Programme
LSRP
Ministries, Departments and Agencies
MDAs
Millennium Development Goals
MDGs
MKUKUTA Mkakati w a Kukuza Uchumi na Kupunguza Umasikini Tanzania
Mkakati wa Kukuza Uchumi na Kupunguza Umasikini Zanzibar
MKUZA
M P A M I T A Mkakati wa Pamoja wa Misaada Tanzania
Medium-TermExpenditure Framework
MTEF
National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan
NACSAP
Non-Governmental Organisation
NGO
National Poverty Eradication Strategy
NPES
National Strategy for Growth and Reduction o f Poverty
NSGRP
Official Development Assistance
ODA
Opportunities and Obstacles for Development
O&OD
Performance Assessment Framework
PAF
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Review
PEFAR
Public Expenditure Review
PER
Public Financial Management Reform Programme
PFMRP
Poverty and Human Development Report
PHDR
Performance Improvement Fund
PIF
Project Implementation Unit
PIU
Performance Management System
PMS
Poverty Reduction Strategy
PRS
Policy Support Instrument
PSI
Public Service Reform Programme
PSRP
Regional Administrative Secretary
RAS
Revolutionary Government o f Zanzibar
RGoZ
Sector- Wide Approach
SWAP

AfDB
ALAT
BOT

..

11

TA
TAS
TNBC
TOR
UK
UN
URT
USAID
VFM
ZPRP
ZSGRP

Technical Assistance
Tanzania Assistance Strategy
Tanzania National Business Council
Terms o f Reference
United Kingdom
United Nations
UnitedRepublic o f Tanzania
United States Agency for International Development
Value for Money
Zanzibar Poverty Reduction Plan
Zanzibar Strategy for Growth and Reduction o f Poverty

iii

Table o f Content

1. What i s the JAST? ..................................................................................
1
2 . Background to the development o f JAST ......................................................... 3
3 . Objectives o f the JAST .............................................................................. 5
4 . Roles o f actors in implementing the JAST ....................................................... 5
4.1. The Government ............................................................................... 5
4.2. Parliamentarians, Councillors and politicians ..............................................
5
4.3. Development Partners ..........................................................................
6
4.4. Communities ....................................................................................
6
4.5. C i v i l society organisations ..................................................................... 6
4.6. Academic and research institutions ........................................................... 7
4.7. Private sector .................................................................................... 7
4.8. Media............................................................................................. 7
5 . Government commitment to development and poverty reduction............................ 8
5.1. National development and poverty reduction goals ........................................ 8
5.2. Development Partner alignment with national strategies and processes.. ...............9
5.3. National capacity development ..............................................................
10
5 -3.1. Government commmitments ........................................................... 10
5.3.2. Development Partner support ........................................................ -11
. 5.3.3.
. . The role o f technical assistance...................................................... -11
6 . Division o f labour ..................................................................................
12
6.1. Division o f labour within Government ...................................................... 12
12
6.2. Division o f labour among Development Partners .........................................
6.2.1. Two levels o f division o f labour., ....................................................
12
6.2.2. Selection criteria and process ......................................................... 12
7 . Financing instruments and arrangements., .....................................................
16
7.1. Modalities for delivering development assistance to the Government ................-16
7.2. Commitment and disbursement arrangements ............................................. 19
7.3. Disbursement arrangements for the Revolutionary Government o f Zanzibar .........20
7.4. Procurement arrangements. .................................................................. 20
7.5. Accounting and auditing .....................................................................
20
7.6. Financing arrangements for non-state actors .............................................. 20
8 . Dialogue ............................................................................................. 21
8.1. Objectives and principles o f dialogue ...................................................... 21
8.2. Dialogue structure ............................................................................. 22
8.3. Sector dialogue ................................................................................. 24
9 . Risk mitigation .................................................................................... -24
9.1. Political risk................................................................................... -24
9.2. Institutional and operational risk...........................................................
-25
. .
9.3. Fiduciary risk ...................................................................................
26
10. Monitoring and evaluation o f the JAST ....................................................... 27
29
Annex 1: Annual Government calendar o f processes...........................................
Annex 2: K e y stages in the JAST development process ........................................
30
Glossary of Terms ...................................................................................
31

iv

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

1. What i s the JAST?
The Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania (JAST), in Kiswahili ‘Mkakati wa Pamoja w a
Misaada Tanzania’ (MPAMITA), i s a national medium-term framework for managing
development co-operation between the Government o f the United Republic o f Tanzania
(Government) and Development Partners so as to achieve national development and
poverty reduction goals. I t however also outlines the role o f non-state actors to the extent
that they contribute to the successful implementation o f the Strategy.
The JAST has been formulated in the spirit o f national and international commitments
and initiatives on aid effectiveness - most notably the Tanzania Assistance Strategy
(2002), the Monterrey Consensus on Financing for Development (2002)’ the Rome
Declaration on Aid Harmonisation (2003)’ the Marrakech Memorandum on Managing for
Results (2004) and the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005). I t spans a
renewable cycle o f five years and outlines the main objectives, principles and broad
arrangements o f Tanzania’s development partnership. It i s complemented by an Action
Plan that specifies concrete activities and timeframes for implementing JAST and a
monitoring framework with indicators to measure Government and Development Partner
performance.

The JAST will be implemented at all levels o f the Government within the existing
national, sector and local processes for all aid relations with Development Partners.
Development Partners will adopt the Strategy as a basis for guiding the management o f
their development co-operation with the Government. Bilateral agreements and country
assistance strategies will be brought in line with the JAST and will specify concrete
arrangements in implementing the JAST for individual Partners. All partners recognise
that implementing JAST i s a gradual process o f moving towards higher levels o f
development co-operation.

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

1

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

Figure 1: Alignment o f Development Partners’ assistance with national development
goals under the JAST
M o v e from..

.

, . . each Development Partner with own priorities, requirements, practices, systems, procedures and
processes

,. .to alignment o f Development Partners’ assistance with national development goals and
processes..

policies, strategies and
programmes, district plans
etc.

National budget / MTEF / PER process

AfDB
USAID
Sweden UK UN
World Bank

,

)

..under a single guiding framework for effective aid management

Part I:Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

2

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

2. Background to the development o f JAST
Tanzania has been carrying out aid management reforms as part o f the broader economic
reforms undertaken since the mid 1990s. They have been part o f its efforts to make aid
more effective for achieving development and poverty reduction and supportive o f
country systems, structures and processes. In January 1997, the Government and i t s
Development Partners jointly adopted the recommendations o f the Report o f the Group o f
Independent Advisors, led by Professor Gerard K. Helleiner, who were commissioned in
1994 to evaluate and come up with proposals on how to improve development cooperation in Tanzania. The Group among others had recommended that the Government
formulates clear medium- to long-term national development priorities and undertakes
necessary reforms in public service and financial management. Development Partners had
been urged to take actions to better coordinate and harmonise their development
assistance including practices and procedures as well as to increase the predictability o f
aid flows.
The adoption o f the Report’s recommendations in the ‘Agreed Notes’ - an agreement
between the Government and i t s Development Partners on 18 actions to be taken to
improve their relationship - set in motion a process o f redefining the relationship between
the Government and i t s Development Partners and the management o f aid on the basis o f
principles o f national ownership, government leadership, harmonisation and alignment.
This process o f enhancing partnership relations and aid effectiveness was supported by
further independent assessments o f Tanzania’s development partnership, undertaken by
Professor Helleiner in 1997, 1999 and 2000 and followed by an institutionalised
Independent Monitoring Group (IMG) since 2002.

One major outcome o f the process was the establishment o f the Tanzania Assistance.
Strategy (TAS), which was launched in 2002. From 2002/03 until 2004/05, the TAS
served as the medium-term framework for development co-operation, aiming at
strengthening aid coordination, harmonisation and alignment as well as national
ownership and Government leadership o f the development process. A TAS Action Plan,
developed during FY 2002/03, set out practical steps for implementing TAS. Actions
were grouped in four priority areas, namely (1) increasing the predictability o f aid flows,
(2) integrating external resources into the Government budget and Exchequer system, (3)
harmonising and rationalising processes, and (4) improving national capacities for aid
coordination and external resource management.
The implementation o f the TAS has contributed to considerable progress in the above
mentioned areas. The Government has strengthened public financial management and
accountability. Predictability o f external resources has improved and external funds have
increasingly been integrated into the Government budget and Exchequer system, thereby
strengthening Government ownership over resource allocation as well as budget
contestability o f external resources. Development Partners have increasingly aligned their
activities with national systems and processes. National ownership and Government
leadership o f the development process have been enhanced, along with an improved

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

3

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

relationship in development co-operation. Capacity needs have been addressed through
various Government core reform programmes.
One o f the major activities under the TAS harmonisation efforts was a joint GovernmentDevelopment Partner study in FY 2002/03 on the rationalisationharmonisation o f
existing Government and Development Partner processes. Overlapping and duplicative
processes have since been re-organised to be more in line with the national budget and
poverty reduction strategy processes. Development Partner missions have been reduced,
especially during the period o f ‘quiet time’, which i s reserved for national budget
finalisation by the Government.
The idea to formulate ajoint assistance strategy was born in this process o f rationalisation
and hmonisation, as the Government and i t s Development Partners aimed to further
reduce the s t i l l high transaction costs that are incurred through the pursuit o f different
strategies with multiple and often overlapping processes. Despite progress made under
the T A S , parallel systems and procedures for delivering, managing, monitoring and
evaluating development assistance as well as multiple missions, meetings and analytical
studies have remained burdensome for the Government. The s t i l l widespread provision o f
off-budget financing, most notably for projects, has impeded strategic resource allocation
in the national budget process as well as transparency and domestic accountability in the
utilisation and performance o f external resources. In addition, the Government and
Development Partners intended to establish a joint assistance strategy in order to extend
progress in enhancing national ownership and Government leadership o f the development
process to all levels o f society and the Government respectively and to increasingly shift
Government accountability from Development Partners to domestic stakeholders.
In comparison to the TAS, the JAST has aimed to be more comprehensive, going beyond

the 13 best practices and four priority areas o f the TAS and covering all aspects o f the
development partnership between the Government and Development Partners as well as
the role o f non-state actors therein. I t has meant to bring together all Development
Partners under a single strategic framework that guides their development assistance in
line with the cluster-based and outcome-oriented National Strategy for Growth and
Reduction o f Poverty (NSGRP or MKUKUTA in Kiswahili) and the Zanzibar Strategy
for Growth and Reduction o f Poverty (ZSGRP or MKUZA in Kiswahili). I t has also
aimed to fully take into account the international aid effectiveness commitments made in
Monterrey, Rome, Marrakech and Paris and to adopt them to the Tanzanian context.
The Government-led process o f formulating the JAST (see annex 2) started with the
preparation o f a JAST Concept Paper, which guided the development o f this JAST
Document. The process involved extensive and broad-based consultations o f the
Government with Development Partners and non-state actors.

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

4

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

3. Objectives o f the JAST
The overall objective o f the JAST i s to contribute to sustainable development and poverty
reduction in line with the National Vision 2025 and the Zanzibar Vision 2020 by
consolidating and coordinating Government efforts and Development Partners’ support
under a single Government-led framework to achieve results on the National Strategy for
Growth and Reduction o f Poverty (NSGRP/MKUKUTA) and the Zanzibar Strategy for
Growth and Reduction o f Poverty (ZSGWMKUZA) as well as other national
development and poverty reduction programmes.
The intermediate objective o f the JAST is to build an effective development partnership
in line with national and international commitments to aid effectiveness by
Strengthening national ownership and Government leadership o f the development
process,
Aligning Development Partner support to Government priorities, systems,
structures and procedures,
Harmonising Government and Development Partner processes,
Managing resources for achieving development results,
Ensuring mutual accountability o f the Government and Development Partners,
and
Strengthening accountability o f the Government to the citizens o f Tanzania.

4. Roles o f actors in implementing the JAST
4.1. The Government
The Government at the respective levels o f MDAs, Regions and LGAs assumes
leadership over managing the development process including the implementation o f the
MKUKUTN MKUZA and the JAST and over formulating, implementing, monitoring
and evaluating policies, strategies, plans and programmes in line with the MKUKUTN
MKUZA. I t takes responsibility for effective and equitable service delivery and for
ensuring that public expenditures adequately reflect economic growth and poverty
reduction targets outlined in the MKUKUTN MKUZA. I t i s also responsible for further
enhancing i t s own capacity to effectively manage the development partnership as well as
for facilitating capacity development among non-state actors and for strengthening their
ownership in the development process. I t leads, guides and coordinates dialogue with
Development Partners and non-state actors at the respective levels, and accounts for i t s
decisions and actions including the use o f public funds, the provision o f public services,
the attainment o f development results and outcomes o f implementing JAST to domestic
stakeholders.
4.2. Parliamentarians, Councillors and politicians

Parliamentarians are responsible for overseeing Government activities and scrutinising
the national budget with attention to i t s strategic direction. They hold the Government to

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

5

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

account for public spending and i t s performance in achieving development results and
answer back to the electorate on these issues, thus facilitating domestic accountability.
They also communicate national strategies including the MKUKUTN MKUZA and
JAST to their constituencies in order to facilitate understanding and translation into
action at local level.

At local government level, Councillors play a similar role in overseeing council activities
and ensuring that councils are accountable for their spending and performance in service
delivery and in implementing local plans, programmes and projects within the framework
o f national strategies and policies.
Politicians in general play a role in shaping and reflecting public opinion on development
and aid effectiveness and in influencing development policy formulation and
implementation.
4.3. Development Partners
Development Partners support the achievement o f results on the MKUKUTN MKUZA
and the further development o f existing capacities in the country by providing financial
and technical assistance to the Government and non-state actors as well as advice in
dialogue with the Government and other domestic stakeholders. They do so on the basis
o f an agreed division o f labour. Development Partners are mutually accountable with the
Government to domestic stakeholders and to each other for their actions in fulfilling their
shared commitments in development co-operation. They furthermore facilitate domestic
accountability by being transparent in the provision o f their development assistance, by
making increasing use o f Government systems in terms o f financing, procurement,
accounting, auditing, monitoring and evaluation, as well as by engaging in open dialogue
with the Government and other domestic stakeholders.

4.4. Communities
Local communities participate in formulating local government plans and in identifying,
planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluating local development activities that are
supported by the Government and Development Partners. They contribute own resources
to development activities and hence play an important role in creating sustainable
development outcomes. They also engage in local level stakeholder dialogue, especially
with local government, monitor and evaluate the quantity and quality o f service delivery,
and hold the Government as well as civil society organisations (CSOs) to account for
provided services.
4.5. Civil society organisations

Local and international CSOs mobilise and enhance community participation and
resource contribution in development activities and act as partners o f the Government and
Development Partners in delivering community services. CSOs also participate in local
government planning and in reviewing development strategies including the

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

6

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

MKUKUTN MKUZA, programmes and projects, the national budget process, and JAST
implementation, and disseminate relevant information with attention to i t s credibility and
user-friendliness to the public. They thus facilitate mutual accountability o f the
Government and Development Partners as well as domestic accountability o f the
Government. In turn, they are themselves accountable for their actions and public
resource utilisation to their constituents and to the Government. In addition, they engage
in dialogue with the Government and Development Partners and consolidate and present
community views to the Government and Development Partners. They also serve as
domestic and international advocates for development and aid effectiveness, stimulate
public debate and raise understanding on these issues.
4.6. Academic and research institutions
Academic and research institutions play an important role in generating and sharing
knowledge and offering advice to the Government, Development Partners and other
stakeholders on managing the development process and JAST implementation. They
furthermore act as independent monitors and evaluators o f development co-operation and
provide their findings to the general public, thus facilitating domestic and mutual
accountability o f the Government and Development Partners.

4.7. Private sector
The private sector is involved in formulating, planning, implementing, monitoring and
evaluating national policies and strategies and co-operates with the Government in
poverty reduction efforts through public-private partnerships. As the engine o f economic
growth, it facilitates the expansion o f the domestic resource base and thus helps to reduce
aid dependence. Furthermore, representatives o f the private sector engage in dialogue
with the Government through their participation in various consultative fora, such as the
Tanzania National Business Council and the Zanzibar Business Council.
4.8. Media

The media informs the public o f Government and Development Partner activities and o f
development related issues and reports on citizens’ views. In i t s reporting, it pays
attention to public benefit and quality o f information. I t thus facilitates transparency and
domestic accountability as well as capacity development through awareness creation
among society.

Part I:
Government of Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

7

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

5. Government commitment to development and poverty reduction
5.1. National development and poverty reduction goals
The Government is highly committed to sustainable development and poverty reduction.
In a broadly participatory process involving domestic and international stakeholders, i t
has formulated a range o f long- and medium-term goals and strategies that articulate
Tanzania’s vision and agenda for national development and poverty reduction and for
whose implementation the Government i s accountable to i t s citizens.
The country’s overall development framework and long-term social and economic
development goals are laid out in the National Vision 2025 and Zanzibar Vision 2020.
The National Poverty Eradication Strategy (NPES) provides the long-term framework
for guiding poverty eradication efforts in order to reduce absolute poverty by 50 percent
by 2010 and eradicate absolute poverty by 2025.
Tanzania’s medium-term development and poverty reduction goals are articulated in the
National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty - the MKUKUTA, which i s
the second-generation Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) o f the Government o f Tanzania,
and the Zanzibar Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty - the MKUZA,
which i s the second phase Zanzibar Poverty Reduction Plan o f the Revolutionary
Government o f Zanzibar (RGoZ).
The MKUKUTA has moved away from the priority sector approach o f the first PRS and
focuses on outcomes in three broad clusters:

1. Growth and reduction o f income poverty
2. Improvement o f quality o f l i f e and social well being
3. Governance and accountability
The outcome-based MKUKUTA, spanning a five-year cycle (2005/06 - 2009/10), allows
for more effective linkages with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), resultsbased management and a balanced focus on the contribution o f all sectors and crosscutting issues such as HIV/AIDS, gender, environment etc. to growth and poverty
reduction. Progress in implementing the M K U K U T A i s reviewed in a broad-based
participatory process through the MKUKUTA Monitoring System.
The MKUZA translates the Zanzibar Vision 2020 into implementable programmes
focusing on enhancing economic growth and reducing poverty through empowering and
creating opportunities for the people, increasing production and household income,
improving living conditions, and protecting the poor, disabled, elderly and other
vulnerable groups. In line with the MKUKUTA, the MKUZA also adopts an outcomebased approach in three clusters and emphasizes cross-sector collaboration and intersector linkages and synergies. The three clusters o f the MKUZA are:

1. Growth and reduction o f income poverty

Part I:Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

8

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

2. Social services and well being
3. Good governance and national unity
The MKUZA will be implemented for four years (2006/07 - 2009/10) in order to
coincide with the implementation cycle o f the MKUKUTA. The monitoring framework
for the MKUZA i s as comprehensive as that o f the MKUKUTA and aims to produce
outputs in the same timeframe in order to enable better coordination in implementing the
two strategies.
The Government i s committed to implementing the MKUKUTN MKUZA and will
continue to strengthen the mobilisation o f domestic resources for this purpose. I t will
continue to strengthen the linkage between the MKUKUTN MKUZA and the national
budget, among others by enhancing sector- and cluster-based strategic planning and
budgeting, in order to ensure that the MKUKUTNMKUZA are translated into firidable
and implementable activities and that public resources are effectively and strategically
allocated and managed for the implementation o f the Strategies.

The Government will align all national and sector policies, strategies and programmes as
well as plans o f MDAs, Regions and LGAs with the MKUKUTN MKUZA and
harmonise them around the national budget process. The MKUKUTN MKUZA in turn
will feed into sector and local processes through the outputs o f the monitoring systems o f
the MKUKUTNMKUZA, which will inform the planning processes o f MDAs, Regions
and LGAs. The Government will provide transparent, timely and clear information on the
outcomes o f the MKUKUTN MKUZA, the national budget and other processes to all
relevant stakeholders.
5.2. Development Partner alignment with national strategies and processes
Development Partners will filly align their support with the MKUKUTN MKUZA and
other national as well as sector strategies, policies and programmes and local government
plans. They will demonstrate in their individual’ fimding agreements with the Government
that the activities they support are part o f these strategies, policies, programmes and
plans. Development Partners will harmonise their processes around the MKUKUTN
MKUZA and the national budget and will follow the Government calendar o f processes
(see annex 1). This includes the period o f ‘quiet time’ during which GovernmentDevelopment Partner interactions are to be minimised to allow the Government sufficient
time for budget preparation and approval.
Table 1: Timetable for the Government ‘Quiet Time’
Period
September - December

January - March

April - M a y

June - August

Activity
Consultative Processes

Status
Busy

Concluding Policy Discussions, Missions etc.

Busy

Finalise Budget Formulation

Quiet

Budget Debate and Approval by Parliament /

Quiet

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

9

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

I RGoZ House o f Representatives
5.3. National capacity development
5.3.1. Government commitments
In order to achieve Tanzania’s development and poverty reduction goals and strengthen
national ownership and Government leadership o f the development process, the capacity
o f individuals, organisations and institutions to efficiently and effectively manage the
development partnership and perform their functions in the development process needs to
be strengthened at all levels o f Government and across society.

For this purpose, the Government will further develop i t s capacity at the levels o f MDAs,
Regions and L G A s to formulate, implement, monitor and evaluate policies, strategies,
plans, programmes and projects. I t will enhance i t s capacity to produce and implement
strategic budgets and to appropriately and timely account for their activities, expenditures
and results. I t will improve its capacity to deliver high-quality, timely and effective
public services, in particular at LGA level under central government support in line with
the Government’s Decentralisation by Devolution (D by D) policy. I t will furthermore
enhance i t s ability to meaningfully engage in dialogue within Government as well as with
other domestic stakeholders and Development Partners.
I t will do so among others through continuing to implement the on-going public sector
reforms and programmes as well as progressing on mainstreaming them, where
applicable, into the normal structures and systems o f MDAs, Regions and LGAs. The

reforms include the Public Service Reform Programme (PSRP), the Public Financial
Management Reform Programme (PFMRP), the Legal Sector Reform Programme
(LSRP), the Local Government Reform Programme (LGRP), the National AntiCorruption Strategy and Action Plan (NACSAP), and for the RGoZ Economic and
Financial Reforms, Institutional and Human Resource Reforms, and the Good
Governance Reform. In the context o f the PSRP, the Government will enhance the
incentive structure to recruit and retain qualified personnel by continuing to undertake
civil service pay reform and by further strengthening and extending the Performance
Management System, which has been introduced under the PSRP.
The Government will also support measures to strengthen the capacity o f
Parliamentarians, Councillors and politicians to effectively play their role in the
development process and the implementation o f the JAST, including their ability to raise
public awareness o f aid effectiveness issues and to ensure domestic accountability o f the
Government. I t will do so among others through awareness creation, training, and the
provision o f timely, transparent and clear information on all relevant issues.
Furthermore, the Government will work with non-state actors to address their capacity
needs in order to enable them to actively and efficiently play their roles in the
development partnership. I t will do so by providing an enabling policy and institutional

Part I:Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

10

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

environment, appropriate public services, training and advisory support, by sharing
relevant information with them, and by actively engaging them in dialogue. To facilitate
local ownership o f the development process and enable the Government to better
understand and respond to local needs, in line with its policy o f D by D, i t will continue
to improve capacity in community based planning through extending the use o f the
O&OD methodology to all councils. The Government also recognises the important role
that civil society organisations play in enhancing capacity among local communities and
will support CSOs in their efforts.
Overall, the Government regards capacity development as one o f the central objectives o f
i t s development partnership. It acknowledges the long-term nature o f the undertaking and
commits to effective leadership throughout the process as well as to continuously
reassessing capacity needs and ways o f addressing them.
5.3.2. Development Partner support
Development Partners will support the Government efforts to develop sustainable
capacity in the public sector and across society. They will do so by responding to national
capacity needs with financial and technical assistance to the Government and to non-state
actors. They recognise that capacity development i s a long-term effort and will design the
timing and scope o f their support so that i t i s consistent with the country’s capacity to
implement change. In addition to supporting specific capacity development programmes,
Development Partners will in all their activities pay attention to attaining sustainable
capacity development outcomes, among others by effectively coordinating and
complementing their support with each other.
Development Partners will also contribute to capacity strengthening by increasingly
relying on Government systems and structures to deliver and manage their assistance to
the Government. In particular, they will work closely with the Government to eliminate
parallel Project Implementation Units (PIUs) and integrate project management in the
structures and systems o f the implementing Government agency. Wherever in effect, the
Government’s O&OD approach rather than Development Partners’ own methodologies
will be used for project and programme planning.

5.3.3. The role o f technical assistance
Development Partners will provide technical assistance as a means to facilitate
sustainable capacity development. Technical assistance (TA) to the Government will be
demand-driven and respond to Government needs. I t will be increasingly untied from the
source o f financial assistance and procured in a fair, non-discriminatory, competitive,
transparent and accountable manner under the leadership o f the Government, ensuring
value for money (VFM) and the ability to meet identified capacity development
requirements. This will be achieved among others through arrangements o f pooling
Development Partner finances for TA. For this purpose, possibilities to use the
Performance Improvement Fund (PIF) for pooling funds for TA will be explored.
Procurement o f TA will use national rather than foreign expertise or supplies whenever

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

11

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

these are able to meet VFM and capacity development requirements. The Government
and Development Partners will undertake measures to strengthen national TA in these
respects.
TA personnel will primarily be used for capacity development rather than for project or
programme execution. Experts may however also be recruited as a temporary gap filling
measure, particularly in highly specialized areas, whereas they will pay attention to skills
sharing in the process. The recruitment, deployment, management, supervision and
performance assessment o f technical assistants will increasingly be led by the
Government and integrated in the regular Government administrative system while
Government structures and mechanisms to coordinate and manage TA resources will be
strengthened in the process. The Government and Development Partners will also work
towards providing a conducive incentive structure for TA personnel to effectively share
their expertise and for counterparts to adapt and retain skills and knowledge from them.
The Government will furthermore work closely with Development, Partners and other
stakeholders to formulate a national T A policy that outlines TA objectives, priorities and
concrete guidelines for selecting, managing, monitoring and evaluating TA.

6. Division o f labour
6.1. Division of labour within Government

Within i t s broadly identified roles in the implementation o f the JAST (see section 4), the
Government will work towards a more effective division o f labour, co-operation and
coordination among and between MDAs, Regions and LGAs in order to avoid overlaps
or gaps in carrying out necessary tasks. I t will do so by taking into account the principle
o f subsidiarity embodied in the Government’s policy o f Decentralisation by Devolution,
whereby responsibility for the management and delivery o f services is, wherever
possible, devolved to the lowest units o f governance. I t will clearly define each
Government agency’s roles and responsibilities, in particular in the MKUKUTAI
MKUZA and other existing frameworks and processes such as PER and GBS. I t will
assign lead Government agencies in sectors and cross-cuttingthematic areas and will
enhance their effectiveness as well as the effectiveness o f existing lead Government
agencies at cluster level to take a supervisory and coordinating role. I t will furthermore
work to strengthen other involved agencies in a sector, cross-cuttingthematic area or
cluster to undertake joint planning, budgeting and implementation. Government activities
will take into account sector contributions to cluster strategies and outcomes as well as
thematic/cross-cutting areas such as H I V / A I D S, gender, environment, and public
financial management. The Government will furthermore strengthen the mechanism for
collaboration between sectors/thematic areas o f a particular cluster and between different
clusters as well as for coordinating the planning and implementation o f cross-sectoral
issues.

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

12

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

6.2. Division o f labour among Development Partners
6.2.1. Two levels o f division o f labour
In order to achieve a more even engagement o f Development Partners in sectors and
thematic areas and reduce transaction costs for both the Government and Development
Partners, Development Partners will rationalise the number o f sectors or crosscuttinghhematic areas that they engage in. At the same time, the number o f Development
Partners that are ‘active’ in a sector or thematic area will be limited to an appropriate
level, depending on the needs and capacity o f the sector/thematic area. Development
Partners outside a particular sector/thematic area will be represented by those Partners
that are ‘active’ in the area o f concern and will assume the role o f ‘delegating partners’.
They can nevertheless provide assistance to any sectorhhematic area within a framework
o f delegated co-operation, as division o f labour does not concern the amount or
distribution o f Development Partner support.

At a second level o f division o f labour, ‘lead partners’ will be appointed in each sector,
thematic area and, where necessary, sub-sector to lead and coordinate other Partners that
are active in that area in all matters. Depending on the case, the role o f ‘lead partner’ may
be rotated among different Partners that engage in a particular sector/thematic area. In
addition, responsibility can be delegated to different Partners for administering or
carrying out specific activities (e.g. analytic work, monitoring and evaluation) or guiding
specific aspects o f dialogue within the area o f concern.

‘Active’ Development Partners in a sector/thematic area will represent others in
sector/thematic dialogue with the Government, whereby ‘lead partners’ will act as focal
point in communication with the Government. They will timely share all relevant
information among each other and with ‘delegating’ Development Partners and assure
that the views o f ‘delegating partners’ are equally heard and reflected in the position
presented to the Government. Development Partners aim to reach a consensus among
themselves and present consolidated views to the Government, but also report existing
divergent opinions where consensus cannot be attained.

Within and across sectors and thematic areas, Development Partners hannonise their
activities, funding decisions, requirements, analytic work, meetings, missions, reviews
and other processes and align them to Government strategies, systems and processes. As
part o f division o f labour arrangements, terms o f reference including a code o f conduct
for delegated co-operation and harmonisation arrangements will specify the roles and
responsibilities o f ’lead’, ‘active’ and ‘delegating’ partners.
6.2.2. Selection criteria and process
The selection o f the areas o f focus for individual Development Partners and their roles as
lead or delegating partners will be based on their comparative and, where applicable,
competitive advantage. This i s determined by a Development Partner’s established
international and field office expertise, based on past successful experience, in a

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

13

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

particular sector, thematic area or sub-sector. It also includes in-depth knowledge o f local
conditions at mission level. It does not depend on a Development Partner’s funding
capacity.
Other selection criteria to be taken into account for Development Partners’ engagement in
sectors or thematic areas are:
Development Partner organisational capacity;
The appropriate total number o f Development Partners in a sector or thematic
area, taking into account the size, nature, needs in line with Government policies,
and capacity of the sector or thematic area o f concern;
Established relationships with Government, other Development Partners and nonstate actors;
Development Partners’ willingness to cooperate with each other in a particular
sector or thematic area;
Development Partner headquarter mandate;
The extent o f decentralised authority enabling field offices to make decisions; and
Willingness to sustain support and invest in the agency’s competencies in the
long-term.
With regards to taking on a leading role, factors to consider in addition to the above are:
Development Partner organisational capacity to assume leadership;
Other Development Partners’ willingness to recognise and trust a Development
Partner as leader; and
The distribution o f lead responsibilities among Development Partners so as to
facilitate equitable sharing of work.
In each sector/thematic area, relevant M D A s in consultation with L G A s and in agreement
with Development Partners will decide which Development Partners will actively engage
in the area and who will assume the role o f lead Partner. In this context, the Government
and Development Partners will consider the suitability o f existing division o f labour
arrangements in D P G sectodthematic working groups and will draw on their experience
as much as possible. Throughout the implementation o f JAST, the Government and
Development Partners will continue to jointly reassess the adequacy o f existing division
of labour arrangements, taking into account and adjusting to possible changes in
Development Partners’ comparative/competitive advantages or other selection criteria
and changing Government needs.

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

14

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

Figure 2: Division o f labour among Development Partners under the JAST
From multiple Development Partners with own requirements, processes, etc. placing a high burden

...to a harmonised and rationalised division o f labour

a
Agriculture

Managing funds o f delegating
partners, undertaking joint funding
decisions, analytic work, reviews,
missions and meetings etc.

Active Partners
(A, B, c, D, E)

\

\

DelegatingPartners (F, G, H, J, K)

Part I:Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

15

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

7. Financing instruments and arrangements
7.1. Modalities for delivering development assistance to the Government
At the heart o f the national development process in Tanzania are the national budget and
the MKUKUTN MKUZA processes, with the national budget being the primary means
for reaching MKUKUTN MKUZA objectives. The major links, which inform the
implementation o f the MKUKUTN MKUZA and the commitments made in the national
budget, are the annual Public Expenditure Review (PER) and the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework (MTEF), which translates the MKUKUTN MKUZA into
findable and implementable activities. The output o f these processes informs all
stakeholders including Development Partners o f the progress achieved and therefore
resource commitments for the implementation o f the strategies. Full integration o f
external resources into the Government budget and Exchequer system i s therefore crucial
for achieving effective planning, implementation and monitoring o f the MKUKUTN
MKUZA.

The Government receives external resources under three modalities, namely General
Budget Support (GBS), basket finds, and direct project finds.
General Budget Support

GBS i s the Government’s preferred aid modality. I t has been associated with greater
ownership, harmonisation, alignment, managing for results, mutual and domestic
accountability. I t is thus consistent with the TAS (2002), the Monterrey Consensus
(2002), the Rome Declaration (2003), the Marrakech Memorandum (2004) and the Paris
Declaration (2005) commitments on aid effectiveness. Specifically, GBS has
demonstrated the following advantages over other instruments:
0

I t is consistent with the Government legal framework:
.\/ The Constitution o f the United Republic o f Tanzania, Chapter 7, Articles 135

and 136 on the control o f the legislature on public finances, which state that
all revenuedfinances derived from various sources for the use o f the
Government shall be deposited in the Consolidated Fund and be appropriated
by the Parliament.

.\/

The Public Finance Act No. 6, 2001, Part 11-Control and Management o f
Public Finance, which states that the Parliament should maintain control over
public money and the Minister for Finance should provide fill and
transparent accounts to Parliament for the use o f resources and public
moneys.

I t increases the proportion o f external resources subjected to the national budget
process, thereby increasing national ownership o f the development process by
emphasizing the national budget as the framework for identifying priorities and
programming resource use. This allows for a more equitable distribution of

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

16

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

development funds within and across MDAs, Regions and LGAs, as all funding
allocations are planned and decided in a single process - the national budget.
I t places the Government more fully within the scrutiny o f the Parliament and civil
society, as more decisions have to be taken within the framework o f a transparent
budgetary process. This in turn enhances domestic accountability.
I t strengthens the Parliamentary role for decision making in resource allocation by
including more external resources into the national budget approval process. I t thus
contributes to shifting Government accountability from Development Partners
to citizens through the Parliament.
I t strengthens the national budget process by limiting the access o f Government
agencies to extra budgetary finance and by making the national budget the main
source o f resource allocation. As a result, it will be given more attention by all
stakeholders and will thus be strengthened.
I t promotes a coherent planning process, consolidating the resource envelope and
diminishing the distinction between recurrent and development finance as well as
assisting in reducing the gap between external resource flows recorded in the
budget and in the balance o f payments.
I t strengthens national public financial management and accountability
systems by providing funds directly to the budget to be utilized through
Government’s own systems and by using national accounting and audit procedures
and systems.
I t increases the predictability of external resource availability and
disbursements by basing funding decisions on outcomes o f a joint review o f
performance based on a commonly agreed Performance Assessment Framework,
which takes place prior to the financial year in which disbursements are to be made.
This in turn facilitates more strategic and realistic budget planning as GBS funds
are known in advance.
I t directs the focus o f dialogue on national strategic issues o f policy and economic
management, and in the process makes significant contributions to the design o f
policy.
I t directs the focus o f technical assistance and capacity development on core
public policy and public expenditure management processes, thus contributing
to the process o f institutional renewal which the Government has undergone since
the early 1990s.
I t contributes to transaction cost reduction, Development Partner
harmonisation and the alignment process through adopting a common
Performance Assessment Framework, holding joint dialogue, and by using
Government systems for disbursement, procurement, accounting and auditing.
Basket funds

Basket funds have played a big role in financing core public reform programmes and
development activities at the sector level. During the implementation process, the
following shortcomings have however been experienced:

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

17

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

They have created unnecessary parallel implementation and management systems
and structures as well as financing mechanisms, thus adding transaction costs to the
Government.
They have limited the degree o f Government ownership over resource allocation
across and within sectors and reforms.
Lack o f complete and comparable information across sectors and reforms has
created difficulties in reducing the duplication o f activities and maximizing
complementarities.
Direct project funds

Direct project funds have also been important in financing development expenditures in
the country. However, they have demonstrated the following disadvantages:
The persistent high volume o f off-budget project financing arrangements has
provided many Government agencies with continued access to financing channels
that largely bypass and therefore undermine the national budget process.
The dominance o f foreign project financing which continues to predominantly
reflect the priorities o f Development Partners has limited and undermined the
discretion that i s available to the Government to allocate finds in accordance with
national priorities. This in turns has prevented the Government from taking fill and
effective ownership and leadership in managing the development process.
Projects have often lacked transparency and Development Partners supporting the
projects have been better informed about their implementation than the Government
and other domestic stakeholders. Hence, accountability to Development Partners
has been given priority over domestic accountability.
Project finding has been more unpredictable than other modalities, as i t depends on
implementation progress that i s difficult to bring in line with the national budget
calendar.
The setting up o f costly Project Implementation Units (PIUs) parallel to
Government systems and structures has undermined Government structures and
systems and prevented project sustainability.
In respect o f the above outlined advantages o f GBS and limitations o f other modalities,
Development Partners will increasingly move to GBS from other modalities and adhere
to criteria o f ‘good practice’ for using basket funds and direct project funds. In the
medium-term, basket funds will be limited to those contexts where it i s seen appropriate
by the Government and significant transaction cost savings are possible, particularly in
protecting public reforms and/or thematic areas which are not yet mainstreamed in
normal Government activities. The already existing basket funds that do not meet these
criteria will therefore be utilised as much as possible as a transition measure to GBS.
Direct project funds to the Government will be utilised for large-scale infrastructure
investment, for piloting where particular service delivery innovations or policies need to
be tested before being mainstreamed in the normal Government system and machinery,
and for emergency aid where quick and localised service delivery is needed. They will

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

18

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

also continue to be used to directly support non-state actors. Existing direct project
funds that do not fit in these categories will be phased out over the medium-term.
In addition, basket funds and direct project funds that are provided to the Government
will adhere to the followingprinciples' :
0

0

0

0

0

They support national, sector and local priorities, strategies, plans and programmes,
and are based on the Government's request to undertake such activities outside
GBS. The request among others should explain why the basket fund or direct
project fund approach i s necessary or appropriate and how i t i s designed to support
and be integrated in local, sector and national strategies and plans.
They are integrated in the national budget process and hence subjected to
contestability o f resources within the Government budget process.
They operate within Government structures, systems, regulations and procedures
and are consistent with achieving sustainability, complementarity, l o w transaction
costs and local ownership.
They are designed and implemented under the same conditions as other
Government funded activities.
They follow the proper Government process for project and programme approval.

7.2. Commitment and disbursement arrangements
In order to facilitate effective budget planning, execution and accounting, all external
resources to the Government will be integrated into the Government budget and
Exchequer system. This i s in accordance with the Constitution o f the United Republic o f
Tanzania, Chapter 7 , Articles 135 and 136.

Development Partners will inform the Government, according to the agreed timetable
through the annual PER process, o f the full amount o f funds committed over the threeyear MTEF period, with minimum year-to-year variations in the rolling three-year MTEF
commitments in order to increase predictability for outer years. This will also include
Development Partner funds provided to non-state actors in order to enable the
Government to take these into account when planning i t s own activities and thus to avoid
duplication or gaps.

All ODA disbursements to the Government will be made through the Government budget
and Exchequer system, whereby the Government will ensure timely release o f
Development Partner funds that are disbursed through the Exchequer from receiving to
spending agencies. GBS disbursements will be frontloaded in the first h a l f o f the fiscal
year and will be in line with the confirmed GBS schedule o f disbursements in order to
allow for a smooth release o f resources for budget implementation. Basket and project
fund disbursements will be made in accordance with the existing agreements or as
amended. Aid disbursements made to the Government and to non-state actors will be
reported by Development Partners on a quarterly basis within the PER process.

' The principles are not applicable t o emergency aid.
Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

19

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

Information on aid commitments and disbursements as well as disbursement modalities
will be made available in a timely and transparent manner to all relevant stakeholders.

7.3. Disbursement arrangements for the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar
External hnding to the RGoZ for programmes and projects being implemented by the
Government as well as GBS grants will be disbursed through the Government budget and
Exchequer system. Financing for programmes and projects implemented directly by the
RGoZ will be disbursed through the RGoZ budget and Exchequer system.

7.4.

Procurement arrangements

Development Partners will work towards providing development assistance to the
Government that is freely and fully available to finance procurement o f goods and
services from any country and source. Government procurement systems will be used to
manage procurements in accordance with the Public Procurement Act No. 21 o f 2004
(URT) and the Procurement and Disposal o f Public Assets Act No. 9 o f 2005 (RGoZ) and
their regulations and procedures, which provide for the application o f fair, competitive,
transparent, non-discriminatory and value for money procurement standards and
practices, whereby preference may be given to local suppliers under specified
circumstances . Decisions to rely on Government rather than Development Partner
procurement systems will however also consider their efficiency and effectiveness and
ability to ensure value for money.

*

Development Partners will work closely with the Government to address weaknesses and
hrther strengthen Government procurement systems so as to attain international
standards. Actions and processes for improving them will continue to be implemented
and monitored jointly within the PFMRP.
7.5. Accounting and auditing
Development Partners will increasingly use Government accounting and auditing
procedures and systems in line with the Public Finance Act No. 6 o f 2001 (URT) and the
Public Finance Act No. 12 o f 2005 (RGoZ). The Government will enhance i t s capacity to
provide reliable and timely accounting and audit reports at all levels. Actions and
indicators for the Government (National Audit Office / Controller and Auditor General’s
Office o f RGoZ) to improve accounting and auditing in line with international standards
have been developed within the PFMRP process, which will continue to be jointly
monitored.
7.6. Financing arrangements for non-state actors

The Government will maintain the independence o f non-state actors in managing their
own resources. This entails that Development Partners will continue to provide direct
Sections 49 and 50 o f the Public Procurement Act, 2004, state that a “margin o f preference” or “exclusive
preference” may be given to local persons or fm, also in joint venture with foreign providers.
Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

20

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

development assistance to non-state actors. However, in line with existing policies and
regulations (e.g. the NGO Act o f 2002 (URT), the Zanzibar N G O Policy), non-state
actors will be required to maintain a high level o f transparency and accountability and
share information on their activities and financial resources with their own constituents
and the Government. This will allow the Government to take non-state actors’ activities
into account in i t s own planning process and thus to avoid duplication o f efforts.
The Government will work closely with non-state actors and other stakeholders including
Development Partners to facilitate the development and adoption o f standarddcodes o f
conduct for non-state actors’ transparency and accountability, including the specification
o f narrative and financial reporting formats. A framework for incentives that rewards
high accountability and adherence to good practices will be put in place.

8. Dialogue
8.1. Objectives and principles o f dialogue
Dialogue is a discourse between stakeholders o f particular issues with the view to
learning, exchanging o f information and views, and guiding the development policy
making process. High quality and regular dialogue between the Government,
Development Partners and domestic stakeholders based on already existing national
processes i s crucial for the successful implementation o f the JAST and the MKUKUTN
MKUZA. Such processes include MKUKUTN MKUZA, GBS, PER, national budget,
sector processes and reform programmes. In this regard, the Government, Development
Partners and non-state actors will use dialogue in order to:
Strengthen their partnership around common goals;
Improve public policy choices and the effectiveness o f Government planning,
budgeting and public service delivery;
Strengthen national ownership and the Government’s role as leader in the
development process;
Improve information sharing within their agencies and thus facilitate the adoption o f
consolidated views; and
Facilitate Government accountability to the citizens o f Tanzania and mutual
accountability o f the Government and Development Partners.
view o f the above objectives, dialogue between the Government, Development
Partners and non-state actors will be guided by the followingprinciples:
0
Dialogue takes place under Government leadership at the respective level, i.e.
national, sector and/or local government, through good coordination and organisation
providing predictability and an appropriate level o f participation.
0
Dialogue involves all relevant stakeholders in order to facilitate national ownership,
and stakeholders have a clear understanding o f the objectives o f each dialogue forum
and their roles and responsibilities therein.
0
All stakeholders participate in dialogue with the view to facilitate domestic
accountability.

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

21

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

Dialogue i s open and frank and based on mutual trust and respect in order to
allow for a fruitful exchange o f views and, where necessary, for formulating
consensus. Every participant has an equal opportunity to share their views.
Dialogue seeks to minimise transaction costs through simplification and
rationalisation around the national calendar o f policy and consultative processes.
Issues discussed in dialogue are subject to thorough scrutiny in order to enhance
accountability and the quality o f final agreements.
Information i s shared among stakeholders in a transparent, timely, clear and
accessible manner. This includes advance communication and dissemination o f
material in preparation o f dialogue fora.
Dialogue has established follow-up mechanisms for the outcomes o f dialogue and
dialogue outputs feed into policy making.
The Government and Development Partners will establish an objective mechanism for
monitoring adherence to these principles in the context o f monitoring JAST, whereby
results are considered by all stakeholders in order to ensure mutual accountability.
8.2. Dialogue structure

Dialogue between the Government, Development Partners and other stakeholders will
take place at various levels within the already existing structures under the national
budget, MKUKUTN MKUZA and other processes. The Government will strengthen
dialogue mechanisms at all levels as well as their linkages around the national budget and
MKUKUTN MKUZA processes. Key national multi-stakeholder fora are outlined in
table 2 below. All stakeholders respect these fora as the primary tool for entering
dialogue on the respective issues.

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

22

M

N
v)

M
u
0

Y

E

2

s3

.s

.

B

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

In addition to the above listed multi-stakeholder consultative fora, the Government will
maintain and further strengthen internal dialogue mechanisms at national, sector and local
level, between central and local government authorities, following the appropriate
channels o f communication. Where applicable, this will take place through established
umbrella bodies, e.g. ALAT. Development Partners will also maintain an effective
dialogue structure among their agencies, in particular within arrangements o f delegated
co-operation.

8.3. Sector dialogue

As the overarching strategy for guiding the use o f external resources to support the
implementation o f the MKUKUTN MKUZA, the JAST promotes the strengthening o f
underlying sector processes through effective participation in dialogue by all
stakeholders. Based on the concept o f division o f labour outlined in section 6 and the
principles for effective dialogue specified in section 8.1 ., relevant Government,
Development Partner and non-state actor stakeholders are expected to participate in
sector dialogue especially by using Sector-Wide Approaches (SWAPS). SWAPSwill thus
serve as instruments for organising sector dialogue around strategic issues and overall
policy directions rather than for deciding on the provision o f funding. Stakeholders will
engage in transparent and timely sector dialogue, particularly for scrutinising spending
plans, for assessing performance in implementing sector policies, strategies and plans, the
effectiveness o f budgeting and execution and its link to the MKUKUTN MKUZA as
well as linkages with other sectors, and for informing decision-making at sector level.
Sector reviews will also consider the effectiveness o f Development Partner supported
programmes and projects in contributing to MKUKUTN MKUZA outcomes. Outputs o f
sector dialogue will feed into cluster and national processes (e.g. MKUKUTN MKUZA,
national budgetFER, GBS review). Their timing and scope will therefore be aligned to
these processes. Although JAST will guide overall sector-level dialogue improvement,
specific actions to enhance dialogue will be decided by each sector, reflecting different
degrees o f maturity in terms o f capacity and institutional setup.

9. Risk mitigation
Various factors may put the implementation o f the JAST at risk. The main risks to be
addressed are political, institutional and operational, and fiduciary.
9.1. Political risk
Political risk relates to the non-implementation o f JAST or reversal o f the Government’s
commitment to i t s implementation due to political instability or other adverse political
events, changing political leadership or problems o f political governance. This includes
the Government’s move away from its stated goal o f working towards national
development and poverty reduction. Political risk also includes the risk that different
interest groups within Government and domestic stakeholders may not support the JAST.
These risks are addressed and mitigated in the following ways:
Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

24

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

(1) Cabinet approval o f the JAST gives the JAST a firm political grounding and will
make reversal difficult, as the JAST will be a binding national strategy for the
Government.
(2) Divergence from JAST partnership arrangements will be dealt with through
consultation and dialogue between the Government and Development Partners at
the appropriate level for decision-making.
(3) The Government i s committed to improving governance, accountability and
national unity, which are addressed in the MKUKUTM MKUZA as well as in
various reform programmes (e.g. the PSRP, PFMRP, LSRP, NACSAP, LGRP
and RGoZ reforms) and are subject o f continuous high-level dialogue between the
Government and Development Partners.
(4) The Government will continue to raise Parliamentarians’, Councillors’ and
politicians’ awareness o f the JAST and will support the strengthening o f their
capacity in hlfilling their role in the JAST process.
(5) All levels o f Government as well as non-state actors have been consulted in and
have supported the formulation o f the JAST. Throughout the JAST
implementation process, Government and non-governmental stakeholder support
will continue to be forged through on-going awareness and capacity building,
information sharing as well as their participation in various consultative fora,
including the JAST review.
Political risk also occurs on the part o f Development Partner country governments, for
example through government change or other internal political events that weaken or
reverse commitment to the JAST or to previously promised ODA. To mitigate the risk
that Development Partner countries or headquarters reverse their commitment to the
JAST,
(1) Bilateral agreements and country assistance strategies o f Development Partners
will be brought in line with JAST;
(2) The Government and Development Partners will engage in consultation and
dialogue at the appropriate level for decision-making in case o f a divergence from
JAST partnership arrangements by Development Partners; and
(3) Development Partners will take their commitment to the Paris Declaration and
other international aid effectiveness initiatives seriously and will continue to
advocate at headquarter and international level for adherence to these
commitments.
9.2. Institutional and operational risk
The Government at national, sector and local level and Development Partners at country
and headquarter levels face institutional and operational risks in implementing the JAST,
as the JAST i s highly demanding o f both Government and Development Partner capacity.
I t requires substantial changes in the way things are done including improvements in
individual, organisational and institutional capacity and the incentive structure that
motivates people and organisations.
To mitigate this risk within Government agencies, the Government will

Part I:Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

25

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

(1) Continue to raise awareness among Government officials in all MDAs, Regions
and L G A s o f the content, benefits and functioning o f JAST;
(2) Clearly identify and communicate their roles and responsibilities in implementing
JAST;
(3) Strengthen Government ownership and leadership o f the JAST through capacity
development, as outlined in section 5.3;
(4) Work to achieve better organisation and better horizontal co-operation within and
between Government agencies including more effective information sharing and
consensus building; as well as
(5) Regularly monitor and review together with Development Partners and non-state
actors, including the IMG, Government agencies’ performance under the JAST,
which will allow for risks to be identified on a continuous basis.

The JAST also requires that Development Partner agencies change their practices as well
as their attitude toward the Government and development co-operation, adopt a flexible
approach to their development operations and accept that doing business in Tanzania may
differ from other countries. The risk o f non-compliance with the JAST and o f loss o f
institutional memory will be mitigated by
(1) Better handing-over procedures,
(2) Adequate training and agency capacity development,
(3) Appropriate recruitment policies and staff performance assessment in line with
the requirements o f JAST, as well as
(4) Greater devolution o f authority from headquarters to field offices.
9.3. Fiduciary risk

Fiduciary risk arises from public expenditures: (a) not being properly accounted for, (b)
not being used for i t s intended purposes, and (c) not representing value for money.
Fiduciary risk covers the budgetary process, effectiveness o f the financial and legal
system and other areas. The Government will take ownership over fiduciary risk
assessment and will establish or strengthen appropriate systems for this purpose.
Development Partners will harmonise their fiduciary requirements and safeguards.
Measures to be undertaken by the Government with the support o f Development Partners
to address fiduciary risk are:
(1) Ongoing efforts to strengthen strategic budget planning and execution as well as
effective operation o f the Government’s financial management and accountability
systems at central, sector and local government levels under the MKUKUTN
MKUZA, PFMRP and LGRP;
(2) Building an efficient and effective procurement system by implementing the
Public Procurement Act No. 21 o f 2004 (URT) and the Procurement and Disposal
o f Public Assets Act No. 9 o f 2005 (RGoZ), so as to ensure competitive and open,
decentralised procurement and cost-effective purchases in line with international
standards;
(3) Improving transparency in public spending;

Part I: Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

26

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

(4) Ongoing national anti-corruption measures under the MKUKUTN MKUZA and
the NACSAP;
(5) Strengthening the technical and administrative capacity o f Government agencies
through on-going implementation o f the PSRP;
(6) Open and frank policy dialogue on public financial management, accountability
issues and corruption;
(7) Monitoring and evaluation o f the effectiveness o f public financial management
and accountability systems in the MKUKUTN MKUZA, PER and PFMRP
processes; as well as
(8) Periodic harmonised diagnostic reviews under Government leadership within
existing Government processes.

10. Monitoring and evaluation o f the JAST
The Government and Development Partners will regularly monitor and evaluate their
performance relative to the jointly agreed actions, indicators and targets outlined in the
JAST Action Plan and Monitoring Framework in order to assess their progress towards
achieving JAST objectives and commitments. JAST indicators and targets will be drawn
from six broad categories and also reflect the internationally agreed Paris Declaration
indicators as adapted to the Tanzanian context:
1. National ownership and Government leadership o f the development process and o f
aid management. Areas o f concern under this area include: Government planned and
organised dialogue process, national capacity development, and domestic stakeholder
involvement in managing the development process.
2. Alignment o f Development Partner support and processes to Government priorities,
strategies, structures, systems and processes. Some o f the issues to be monitored
under this theme are: Development Partner processes respect the Government
calendar o f processes, move towards budget support modality, contribution o f
programmes/projects to specific MKUKUTN MKUZA operational targets and
cluster strategies, timely MTEF commitments and disbursements, and Government
strengthening o f public financial management systems.
3. Harmonisation and rationalisation o f Government and Development Partner
processes around the MKUKUTN MKUZA and the national budget. Some o f the
monitoring areas are: harmonising sector ministry and local government processes
around MKUKUTN MKUZA and national budget processes, streamlining
missions/meetings/reviews, delegated co-operation and division o f labour, sharing
information and country analytic work.
4. Managing for results on MKUKUTN MKUZA. In this area, monitoring under the
JAST will among others look at Development Partner focus o f support on results in
the MKUKUTN MKUZA, their reliance on Government monitoring and evaluation
frameworks and systems, and the hnctioning o f these systems including the
MKUKUTN MKUZA monitoring system and review processes, as well as
Government strategic resource allocation for implementing the MKUKUTN
MKUZA.

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

27

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

5 . Operational functioning of JAST including the effectiveness
mechanisms, institutional structures and risk mitigation measures.
6. Mutual and domestic accountability.

o f dialogue

Monitoring and evaluation o f the JAST will take two forms: (1) Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation, and (2) an assessment by an Independent Monitoring Group (IMG).

1. The Government and Development Partners in consultation with non-state actors will
undertake a joint annual review o f the JAST. The review will be coordinated by a joint
Government-Development Partner JAST Working Group. It will to the greatest extent
possible use the existing Government processes as the main avenues for detailed
discussion, dialogue and information generation. They include the national
budget/MTEF/PER, MKUKUTN MKUZA and GBS processes. JAST monitoring and
evaluation will be integrated in the regular monitoring and evaluation systems o f MDAs,
Regions and LGAs. For this purpose, internal monitoring and reporting mechanisms will
be established and strengthened.
An annual JAST report will bring together the results including progress, challenges and
the way forward and will be made available in a timely manner to all stakeholders and the
general public in order to facilitate domestic accountability. In addition, a comprehensive
joint mid-term and final review o f JAST implementation will be undertaken in each fiveyear cycle.

2. The Government and Development Partners will jointly commission an Independent
Monitoring Group to undertake an independent mid-term and final assessment o f the
performance o f the Government and Development Partners in implementing the JAST in
line with the agreed JAST actions, indicators and targets. I t will also look at country
progress towards meeting the international objectives and commitments on aid
effectiveness. The IMG exercise will contribute to strengthening mutual accountability
between the Government and Development Partners. It will also facilitate increased
domestic accountability through dissemination o f the IMG report to the general public
and stimulation o f public debate on the findings.

The frequency and outputs o f the JAST monitoring and evaluation process are outlined in
the table below.
Table 3: JAST Monitoring Process
Actors

Government,
DPs, nonstate

Year 1

I Year 2

bl

Report 1

I Year 3

&

Report 2

I Year 4

I

I Year 5

bl

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

I Year 1
Report SFinal Report

28

I

I

c

o

nl

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

ANNEX 2: Key Stages in the JAST Development Process
June 2003

PRS/Harmonisation Technical Retreat discusses joint GovernmentDevelopment Partner study on the scope for harmonising and rationalising
Government and Development Partner processes and raises idea to
develop a JAST

Sep 2003

Rationalisation High-Level Forum agrees on the development o f a JAST

Aug 2004

The Government prepares zero draft JAST Concept Paper and discusses it
at the level o f Directors o f Policy and Planning

Dec 2004

The Government prepares first draft JAST Concept Paper and circulates i t
to MDAs, Development Partners and non-state actors for comments

Apr 2005

First high-level JAST Consultative Meeting between Government,
Development Partner head and field offices, and non-state actors

M a y 2005

The Government prepares first draft JAST Document and circulates i t for
comments to MDAs, Regions, LGAs, Tanzanian Embassies, Development
Partners and non-state actors

Sep 2005

JAST Consultation with non-state actors

Nov 2005

The Government prepares second draft JAST Document
JAST Consultation with Directors o f Policy and Planning

Feb 2006

JAST Consultation with Parliamentarians
JAST Consultation with Permanent Secretaries

M a r 2006

The Government prepares third draft JAST Document

Apr 2006

JAST Consultation with Principal Secretaries and Directors o f Planning
and Administration o f the RGoZ
Second high-level JAST Consultative Meeting between the Government
and Development Partners

M a y 2006

JAST Document i s presented to the RGoZ Planning Commission
Finalisation o f JAST Document

Jun 2006

JAST i s approved by the Cabinet o f the RGoZ

Oct 2006

JAST i s approved by the Cabinet o f the Government o f the URT

Dec 2006

JAST i s officially launched

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

30

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

GLOSSARY OF TERMS
In the context o f development partnership in Tanzania, the below listed terms have the
following meaning:

Aid modality: An aid modality is a mode o f providing development assistance, e.g. (1)
general budget support, under which aid i s provided to the general budget; (2) basket
funds, under which support i s provided to a programme or sector; and (3) direct project
finds, under which assistance i s provided to a particular project.
Basket Fund: A basket find i s a funding modality under which more than one
Development Partner collectively funds a country’s development programme or sector as
a whole with harrnonised procedures, processes, etc.
Capacity development: Capacity development is the process o f unleashing, creating,
strengthening, adapting and maintaining the capacity o f individuals, organisations,
institutions and society as a whole.
Comparativekompetitive advantage: Comparative advantage i s defined as an
aredactivity in which an agency is considered to be at its most effective in relation to all
other areadactivities in which the agency i s or could be engaged. Competitive advantage
refers to an agency’s ability to perform an activity better than other agencies do. For
deciding a rationalised division o f labour in the context o f JAST, both criteria apply such
that where several agencies’ comparative advantage lies in the same area, competitive
advantage may be used as the overriding criteria. Where an agency has a competitive
advantage in several areas, i t s comparative advantage will determine the agency’s area o f
focus.
Consultant: A consultant i s defined, according to the Public Procurement (Selection and
Employment o f Consultants) Regulations (2005) o f the Public Procurement Act No. 21 o f
2004 (URT), Section 3, as “a firm, company, corporation, organisation, partnership or
individual person registered or capable o f being registered by the relevant professional
regulatory body engaged in or able to be engaged in the business o f providing services in
architecture, economics, engineering, surveying, accountancy, auditing, taxation,
management or any field o f professional activity including technical assistance, and who
is, according to the context, a potential party or the party to a contract with the procuring
entity”.

A national consultant is defined by the above mentioned Regulation as “an individual
consultant whose nationality i s that o f Tanzania or a consulting firm whose majority
share capital, as far as the ownership thereof is or can be publicly known, is owned by
citizens o f Tanzania”.
A foreign consultant i s defined by the same Regulation as “either an individual consultant
whose nationality is that o f a foreign country or a consulting firm whose majority o f its

Part I:Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

31

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

share capital, as far as the ownership thereof is or can be publicly known, is owned by
citizens o f foreign countries”.
Consultancy service: A consultancy service i s defined, according to the Public
Procurement (Selection and Employment o f Consultants) Regulations (2005) o f the
Public Procurement Act No. 21 o f 2004 (URT), Section 3, as “a service o f an intellectual
or advisory nature, provided by a practitioner who i s skilled and qualified in a particular
field or profession and includes, but not limited to, engineering design or supervision,
architecture, quantity surveying, accountancy, auditing, financial services, procurement
services, training and capacity building services, management services, policy studies,
and advice and assistance with institutional reforms”.
Development Partners: Development Partners are members o f the Development
Partners Group (DPG) and other bilateral or multilateral agencies that provide official
development assistance to Tanzania.
Domestic accountability: Domestic accountability refers to the responsibility and
answerability o f the Government to i t s citizens for i t s decisions and actions including the
use o f public resources, the provision o f public services and the implementation o f its
commitments to the attainment o f development results.
Exchequer System: The Exchequer System i s a system for capturing and accounting for
all resources available to the Government and expenditures by the Government. I t
involves the depositing/channelling o f public financial and non-financial resources
through the Government Consolidated Fund and appropriation from i t by the A c t o f
Parliament and accounting for them by the Minister for Finance. The current Government
Exchequer system i s managed in a computerised Integrated Financial Management
System.
Financial Year (FY): The financial year o f the Government starts on 1 July and ends on
30 June.
General Budget Support (GBS): GBS i s an aid delivery modality which provides
financial assistance to the overall national budget (Government Consolidated Fund). I t i s
allocated by the Government according to i t s legal and budgetary process and hence
subjected to the same degree o f contestability as domestic resources.
Leadership (of the Government): Government leadership refers to the Government’s
responsibility to effectively guide and manage the country’s development process and i t s
precedence over other stakeholders in deciding development priorities, policies, strategies
and actions.
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF): The MTEF is the Government’s
budget planning tool, providing a resource framework for three financial years on a
rolling basis.

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

32

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

Monterrey Consensus: The Monterrey Consensus on Financing for Development,
agreed by donor agencies and developing countries at the United Nations International
Conference on Financing for Development in Monterrey, Mexico, in March 2002,
emphasises among others the importance o f developing countries to take the lead in
managing their development process and o f developed countries to provide increased and
more effective aid.
M u t u a l accountability: Mutual accountability refers to the responsibility and
answerability o f both the Government and i t s Development Partners to domestic
stakeholders and to each other for their actions in fulfilling their shared commitments in
development co-operation.
National Poverty Eradication Strategy (NPES): The NPES, prepared in 1997, spells
out Tanzania’s long-term poverty reduction targets. It provides a guiding framework for
coordinating and supervising the formulation, implementation and evaluation o f policies
and strategies for poverty eradication and identifies three areas for strategic intervention:
(1) creation o f an enabling environment for poverty eradication; (2) capacity building for
poverty eradication; and (3) poverty eradication.
National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty (NSGRP/MKUKUTA): The
MKUKUTA i s Tanzania’s second-generation PRS. I t i s the central coordinating
framework for growth and poverty reduction initiatives in the country. I t i s set out for
five years and adopts an outcome-based rather than a sector-oriented approach, based on
three broad clusters: (1) growth and reduction o f income poverty; (2) improvement o f the
quality o f l i f e and social well being; and (3) governance and accountability.
National Vision 2025: The National Development Vision 2025, established in 1999, is
Tanzania’s overall development framework that lays out long-term national social and
economic development goals. I t envisages that by the year 2025, Tanzania will have
graduated from a least developed country to a middle income country with a competitive
economy capable o f producing sustainable growth and shared benefits, a high quality
livelihood, a well educated and learning society, peace, stability and unity, as well as
good governance.
Non-governmental organisation (NGO): NGOs are according to the NGO Act, 2002,
Section 2, defined as “a voluntary grouping o f individuals or organization which i s
autonomous, non-partisan, non-profit making, which is organized locally at the
grassroots, national or international levels for the purpose o f enhancing or promoting
economic, environmental, social or cultural development or protecting environment,
lobbying or advocating on issues o f public interest o f a group o f individuals or
organization, and includes a non-governmental organization established under the
auspices o f any religious organization or faith-propagating organization, trade union,
sports club, political party, or community based organization; but it does not include a
trade union, a social club or a sports club, a political party, a religious organization or a
community based organization.”

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

33

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

Non-state actors: Non-state actors are local communities; CSOs including nongovernmental organisations (NGOs), community-based and faith-based organisations;
academic and research institutions; the private sector and the media.
Official development assistance (ODA): O D A consists o f grants and concessional loans
(i.e. loans with a grant element o f at least 25 percent) that are provided by the official
sector (bilateral or multilateral agencies) to developing countries for the purpose o f
supporting economic development and welfare. In addition to financial flows, O D A
includes technical assistance.

O&OD planning methodology: The Obstacles & Opportunities for Development
(O&OD) approach i s a participatory planning methodology that consists o f a
comprehensive assessment o f community needs and capacities in a particular council,
which can be updated periodically. I t i s the Government’s approved planning
methodology at local government level.
Ownership (national): National ownership means that citizens through their
Government take responsibility in managing the country’s development and poverty
reduction processes according to national priorities and citizens’ needs. I t includes the
active participation o f citizens in formulating, implementing, monitoring and evaluating
the country’s development and poverty reduction policies, strategies and programmes. I t
also means that citizens hold the Government to account for the use o f public funds and
its commitments, including the provision o f public services and the attainment o f
development results.
Performance Assessment Framework (PAF): The P A F consists o f a range o f
performance indicators for the Government. I t i s used by GBS partners as a basis for
deciding their provision o f general budget support for the next financial year.
Paris Declaration 2005: The Paris Declaration was adopted at the Second High-Level
Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Paris in March 2005. It commits donors and developing
countries to take far-reaching and monitorable actions to reform the ways in which aid i s
delivered and managed for greater aid effectiveness. The Partnership Commitments o f the
Declaration focus on national ownership, harmonisation, alignment, managing for results,
and mutual accountability.
Performance Management System (PMS): The PMS i s a planning and monitoring
framework that l i n k s institutional plans to individual responsibilities by relating what
individuals do to what institutions aim to achieve. I t was developed in 1999 during the
first phase o f the PSRP and includes the following components: service delivery surveys,
self assessments, MDA strategic plans, operational and action plans, client service
charters, an Open Performance Review and Appraisal System, and a Monitoring and
Evaluation System in the Policy and Planning Departments o f MDAs.
Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS): The PRS i s the national medium-tern framework
for poverty reduction. The country’s first PRS, the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper,

Part I: Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

34

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

was drawn up in 2000 in the context o f the enhanced HIPC Initiative covering a period o f
three years. It focused i t s interventions for poverty reduction on seven priority sectors
(Basic Education, Primary Health, Water, Rural Roads, Judiciary, Agriculture Research
and Extension, and HIV/AIDS).
Project Implementation Unit (PIU): A PKJ i s a dedicated management unit designed to
support donor funded projects or programmes.

Parallel PIUS are created outside the existing structure o f the national implementing
agency or duplicate or recreate ministry functions and capabilities.
Rome Declaration 2003: The Rome Declaration on Aid Harmonisation was adopted at
the First High-Level Forum on Harmonisation in Rome in February 2003. It commits
developing countries and donors to taking action to enhance developing country
ownership in the development process and to improve the management and effectiveness
o f aid by implementing a range o f good practice principles and standards for
development cooperation. These include among others: ensuring that harmonisation
efforts are adapted to the country context and that donor assistance i s aligned with the
recipient's priorities and systems; expanding country-led efforts to streamline donor
procedures and practices; reviewing and identifying ways to adapt institutions' and
countries' policies, procedures and practices to facilitate harmonisation; improving
transparency, accountability and predictability o f aid including the use o f national
financial systems in aid delivery; providing budget, sector and balance o f payments
support; as well as strengthening the capacity o f aid recipient governments.
Sector-Wide Approach (SWAP): A SWAP i s a mechanism for organising dialogue
between the relevant Government agency, Development Partners and non-state actor
stakeholders around a particular sector and i t s policies, strategies and programmes.
Development Partners adopt a harmonised approach to their engagement in the sector. A
SWAP i s not a funding instrument and all aid modalities (GBS, basket and project funds)
can be used under it.
TAS best practices: The 13 TAS best practices are (1) the Government takes leadership
in developing policy priorities, strategic frameworks and institutionalised co-operation
mechanisms in various areas and sectors; (2) the Government involves civil society and
the private sector in developing national policies, strategies and priorities; (3) the
Government prioritises and rationalises development expenditures in line with stated
priorities and resource availability; (4) resources are integrated into a strategic
expenditure framework; (5) reporting and accountability systems are integrated; (6)
resource disbursements are adequate relative to prior commitments; (7) the timing o f
resource disbursements i s responsive to exogenous shocks to the Tanzanian economy; (8)
Development Partner policies complement domestic capacity building; (9) firm aid
commitments are made for longer time periods; (10) public financial management is
improved; (11) the Government creates an appropriate national accountability system for
public expenditure; (12) Ministries, regions and districts receive clean audit reports from

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

35

Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

the Controller and Auditor General; and (13) reporting and accountability at national and
sector level is transparent.
Tanzania National Business Council (TNBC): The T N B C i s the main forum for
consultation between the public and private sectors on strategic issues o f economic
growth and development. I t consists o f representatives from the Government, the private
sector, organised labour and academia and i s chaired by the President o f the United
Republic o f Tanzania.
Technical assistance (TA): TA i s defined as the provision o f local or foreign personnel
for advisory or consultancy services, o f equipment, training, research and associated
support with the aim to share, adapt and develop ideas, knowledge, skills or technologies.
Untied technical assistance: Untied TA is technical assistance that i s not bound to the
source o f financing and not part o f a fbnding conditionality but can be freely procured
from any source (including the financing provider) depending on the Government’s
choice.
Zanzibar Vision 2020: The Zanzibar Vision 2020 i s a long term plan for eradicating
absolute poverty and attaining overall sustainable human development in Zanzibar by the
year 2020.
Zanzibar Poverty Reduction Plan (ZPRP): The ZPRP was the RGoZ’s first mediumterm plan for the implementation o f the Zanzibar Vision 2020. The Plan had a span o f
three years (2002-2005), focusing on reducing income poverty, improving human
capabilities, survival and social well-being, and containing extreme vulnerability through
selected priority areas o f health, water, agriculture, infrastructure (in particular rural
roads), combating HIV/AIDS and promoting good governance.
Zanzibar Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty (ZSGRP/MKUZA): The
MKUZA i s the second generation o f the Zanzibar Poverty Reduction Plan (ZPRP),
aiming at enhancing economic growth and reducing poverty. I t i s a results-based strategy,
emphasising cross-sectoral linkages and focusing on attaining outcomes in three broad
clusters, namely (1) growth and reduction o f income poverty, (2) social services and well
being, and (3) good governance and national unity.
Zanzibar Business Council: The Zanzibar Business Council i s a dialogue forum for
enhancing public-private partnerships in order to achieve poverty reduction through
promoting and building a conducive policy and regulatory environment to support the
development o f a vibrant and competitive private sector. I t consists o f representatives o f
the Government and the private sector and i s chaired by the President o f the RGoZ.

Part I:
Government o f Tanzania-Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania

36

JOINT ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR THE
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

FY2007 - FY2010

PART I 1 and 111: TANZANIA JOINT PROGRAM DOCUMENT

Tanzania Development Partners Group
December 2006

December 2006

Acronyms and Abbreviations
ADB
BEST
CAT

CCM
CPIA

csos

DOL
DPG
DPs
EAC
EEZ
EMA
EPA
FDI
GBS
GOT
GWG
HPC
HQ
IFMS
IMF
IMG
JAST
JPD
LGAs
LGRP
LSRP
M&E
MDAs

MDGs
MDRI
MKUZA
MOHSW

African Development Bank
Business Environment
Strengthening for Tanzania
United Nations Convention Against
Torture
Chama Cha Mapinduzi
Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment
Civil Society Organizations
Division o f Labour
Development Partners Group
Development Partners
East African Community
Exclusive Economic Zone
Environmental Management A c t
Economic Partnership Agreement
Foreign Direct Investment
General Budget Support
Government o f Tanzania
Governance Working Group
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
Headquarters
Integrated Financial Management
System
International Monetary Fund
Independent Monitoring Group
Joint Assistance Strategy for
Tanzania
Joint Program Document
Local Government Authorities
Local Government Reform
Programme
Legal Sector Reform Programme
Monitoring and Evaluation
Ministries, Departments and
Agencies
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Zanzibar Strategy for Growth and
Reduction o f Poverty
Ministry o f Health and Social
Welfare

WEE

MTEF
MKUKUTA
NACSAP
NAO
NEP
NEPAD
NPV
ODA
PAF
PCB
PEFAR
PER
PFM
PFMRP
PHDR
PMO
PMTCT
PRS
PSD
PSRP
SADC
SBAS
TANESCO
TAS
TASAF
T U
USD
VCT
ZPRP

Ministry o f Planning, Economy and
Empowerment
M e d i u m T e r m Expenditure
Framework
Kiswahili for: National Strategy for
Growth and Reduction o f Poverty
National Anti-Corruption Strategy
& Action Plan
National Audit Office
National Environment Policy
N e w Partnership for Africa’s
Development
N e t Present Value
Official Development Assistance
Performance Assessment
Framework
Prevention o f Corruption Bureau
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability Report
Public Expenditure Review
Public Financial Management
Public Financial Management
Reform Program
Poverty and Human Development
Reports
Prime Minister’s Office
Prevention o f Mother t o Child
Transmission
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Private Sector Development
Public Service Reform Programme
Southern African Development
Cooperation
Strategic Budget Allocation System
Tanzania Electric Supply Company
2002 Tanzania Assistance Strategy
Tanzania Social Action Fund
Tanzania Revenue Authority
United States Dollars
Voluntary Counseling and Testing
Services
Zanzibar Poverty Reduction Plan

Table o f Contents

................................................... ..............I
INTRODUCTION: BACKGROUND AND STATUS OF THE DOCUMENT .......................................1
JOINT COUNTRY ANALYSIS ................................
......................................................... ...........2

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

I.
11.

.....................................................

A. BACKGROUND
AND CONTEXT .........
..........
............................................. 2
...................................................................................... 2
1. Political Context ........................
2
2. Economic Overview ............................................................................................................................
3. Poverty and Inequality...........................................................
B. THE GOVERNMENT’S
STRATEGY RESPONSE ...............................

D. MKUKUTA CLUSTER 11: IMPROVEMENT IN THE QUALITY OF LIFEAND SOCIAL WELL-BEING............. 13
E. MKUKUTA CLUSTER 111: GOVERNANCE
AND ACCOUNTABILITY
............ 16

.................................................................................

111. JOINT PROGRAM

.................................................... 21

A. ENHANCING AID EFFECTIVENESS
- H O W AD
I I S DELIVERED .................
.............
...............21
1. History of Aid Effectiveness in Tanzania.......................................................................................... 21
22
2. Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania (JAST) .................................................................................
3. Division o f Labour, Planning and Budgeting....................................................................................
23
2. MKUKUTA Cluster 11: Improvement o f Quality of Life and Social Wellbeing

c.

RESULTS BASED MONITORING
AND EVALU

1. Tanzania’s monitoring and evaluation c
2. Assessing MKUKUTA/MKUZA/Joint

D. JOINT RISK ANALYSIS.................................................

............................................................................

35

Annex B: Division o f Labour Matrix
Annex C: Results Matrix ........................................................................................................................ 47
Annex D: Tanzania Country Strategy Evaluations ..............................................................................
105
108
Annex E: Aid Projections FY06/07 - FY09/10 ...................................................................................
LIST OF TABLES

Table 1: Tanzania’s MKUKUTA and MDG targets and status ........,.................................... ................................. 5
Table 2: DP MTEF Projections ............................................................................................................................ 25

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1: Total External Financing(actual + projections) .................................................................................... 26

LIST OF BOXES

Box 1: Tanzania’s Debt Sustainability....... ..... ...... ....................................... ..... .................. ............................. ......3
Box 2: Measurable Impacts- Aid Effectiveness in Tanzania ............................................................................... 21
. . ... . .., . .. ....
Box 3: UN and EU Division o f Labour Processes ..
Box 4: Millennium Challenge Corporation

Executive Summary
Context. Tanzania i s an international leader in aid effectiveness and donor harmonization,
with joint Government-development partner commitments, undertakings and activities dating
back to 1997. In July 2006 the Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania (JAST) came into
force. JAST i s a Government-led, national medium-term framework for managing
development co-operation and achieving national development and poverty reduction goals.
JAST includes commitments on alignment, increased use o f government systems, increased
aid predictability, open dialogue between government and domestic stakeholders, improved
division o f labour, and a move towards the government’s preferred aid modalities.
Joint Promramming Document. As the next logical step in improved aid effectiveness,
Tanzania’s Development Partners Group (DPG) has prepared a results-based Joint Program
Document (JPD) as a response to Tanzania’s second generation, results-based Poverty
Reduction Strategies (MKUKUTA for mainland Tanzania, MKUZA for Zanzibar) and the
JAST. The JPD provides a common frame for DPs to locate their individual agency plans.
The JPD’s objective i s to reduce transaction costs to Government, and to continue to improve
the alignment o f development partner support with MKUKUTA and MKUZA. The JPD
reflects DPG planned support and commitments to Tanzania on aid effectiveness over the 4
remaining years o f MKUKUTA, FY06/07-09/10.
Development Challenges and Government Response. The JPD offers a concise overview o f
the development challenges facing Tanzania, organized around MKUKUTA’s three clusters:
Growth and Reduction o f Income Poverty; Improvement o f Quality o f L i f e and Social WellBeing; and Governance and Accountability. I t summarizes Tanzania’s political, economic
and poverty context, and describes the Government’s strategic response as articulated in
MKUKUTA and MKUZA. The JPD describes Tanzania’s history with harmonization and aid
effectiveness, offers a summary o f recent JAST commitments, and describes the processes
ahead, including both implementation and monitoring and evaluation o f these commitments.
N e w DPG Commitments. The JPD includes specific DPG commitments on: (i)
sector review
processes; and (ii)
DPG support to budgeting and planning.

i) Sector reviews: DPG commits to work with Government and other stakeholders to
ensure that sector reviews are:
0

0

Developed as a means o f ensuring: (a) effective feedback for national planning,
budgeting, monitoring and evaluation, translating the MKUKUTA into high quality
sector expenditure plans; and (b) provision o f broad public information and dialogue
on key sector performance and policy issues; and

Designed so that D P requirements for monitoring and dialogue are addressed in an
efficient and complementary way recognizing capacity constraints.

Part II+III: Development Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

i

ii)Budgeting and Planning: The DPG i s committed to seeking improvement in the

coverage and quality o f D P support to planning and budgeting. The D P G commits to:
Encourage individual agencies to provide projections o n the basis o f commitments,
indicative pipeline and unallocated categories, establishing disbursement estimates
which can be used as a prudent basis for Government expenditure planning;

0

Support Government in leading a process in which the Government and DPs jointly
assess the coherence o f agency projections, o n grounds o f consistency with the
macroeconomic framework, the MKUKUTNMKUZA, compliance with JAST, etc;
identifying and addressing financing gaps, where possible;

In the event o f an unforeseen shortfall against past agreed projections (unrelated to
program performance or political developments in Tanzania) the D P G will seek to
identify additional financing to ensure that agreed projections are fulfilled; and
0

Work with Government through the PER macro group to develop detailed proposals for
an effective stabilising mechanism (with D P or Government resources), aiming to
ensure that medium term financing projections can be protected. The financing
mechanism would be ring fenced, triggered only by deviations in external financing
flows from agreed projections, and limited to a maximum o f restoring the projected
flow.

The JPD also explores additional aid effectiveness commitments on: joint analysis and
missions, advice and communication; joint evaluations, improving cross-borderhegional
coherence; improving coherence between bilateral and multilaterals approaches;
programmatic approach to support to CSOs; and global funds.
’

DPG Supuort/Promams. The JPD offers a summary o f current and planned DPG support
aligned across MKUKUTA cluster strategies and specific goals. I t lays out a results matrix
which aligns D P G projects and programs w i t h the MKUKUTA cluster goals, strategies and
targets. All forms o f external support are included, from general budget support, sector
programs, individual projects, technical assistance and analytic work.
Monitorinn and Evaluation. The JPD describes Tanzania’s monitoring and evaluation
systems and capacity. It discusses mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation implementation
o f the JPD itself, and assessment o f the operational effectiveness o f individual DPs.

Risks. The JPD also includes a joint risk assessment across five categories o f risk: political,
political/economic, fiduciary, institutional and operational, and external. I t assesses the
likelihood and potential impact o f each risk, and offers risk mitigation measures and
monitoring mechanisms. In the event that these strategies and mechanisms do not mitigate or
contain these risks or other new risks emerge, DPs commit to work together within the JDP to
identify, assess, and communicate with Government o n emerging risks, while retaining the
ability to implement individual responses in an open and transparent manner.

Part IItIII:Development Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

ii

I. INTRODUCTION: BACKGROUND AND STATUS OF THE
DOCUMENT
In July 2006, the Government o f the United Republic o f Tanzania (Government) established
a national medium-tern framework for managing development co-operation with i t s
Development Partners (DPs) so as to improve the collaboration in achieving national
development and poverty reduction goals. The framework also outlines the roles o f various
stakeholders, including non-state actors, and outlines principles for how financial and
technical assistance should be provided. This framework is known as the Joint Assistance
Strategy for Tanzania (JAST).’

The D P G has prepared a Joint Program Document (JPD) as a response to Tanzania’s second
generation, results-based Poverty Reduction Strategies (MKUKUTA for mainland Tanzania,
MKUZA for Zanzibar), and the JAST. For many DPs, the JPD provides a common frame in
which their individual agency programs are embedded. The JPD reflects D P G planned
support and aid effectiveness commitments to Tanzania over the 4 remaining years o f
MKUKUTA, FY06/07-09/10.2
The Government o f Tanzania and civil society organization (CSO) representatives were
consulted during the drafting o f the JPD. Early in the drafting process, the CSOs and the
Development Partners Group participated in a Government chaired workshop to discuss the
approach o f the document and key issues, in particular how to improve MTEF projections.
CSO representatives have contributed text to the document and the Government has provided
extensive comments on successive drafts o f the document.
The JAST should be seen as Part I.The current document contains Part 11, which i s a joint
country analysis describing Tanzania’s development achievements and challenges; and Part
111, which i s the joint program part, reflecting consistency o f D P plans with MKUKUTA and
JAST. T h e JPD does not explicitly include discussions o n Zanzibar, but it i s expected that
over the next two or three years, new work under JAST will see a convergence o f the
principles of harmonisation and aid effectiveness on both the mainland and in Zanzibar.
Some DPs will use Parts I1 and I11 verbatim as core elements o f their o w n program
documents; others may use Part I1 and I11 as reference documents. Individual DPs might
develop a Part I V as a supplement, addressing agency-specific issues, including more detailed
descriptions o f their specific assistance programs, etc. Part IVs are expected to build from the
analysis, commitments and undertakings in parts I1 and 111, and they are not expected to
require substantial consultation with government to ensure that the joint programming
exercise does indeed reduce transaction costs for the Government.

’

*

The JAST in Kiswahili is: ‘Mkakati wa Pamoja wa Misaada Tanzania’ (MPAMITA).
FY06/07-09/10runs from July 1,2006 through June 30,2010.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

1

11.

JOINT COUNTRY ANALYSIS
A. BACKGROUND
AND CONTEXT

1. Political Context
Surrounded by a number o f conflict-prone neighbours, Tanzania has enjoyed virtually
unintempted political stability and peace apart from a brief but bloody revolution in
Zanzibar in 1964 and a short and victorious war with Uganda in 1978. Recognising the
importance and precariousness o f regional stability, Tanzania has played a significant role in
the Great Lakes peace process and i s currently home to more refugees - 346,000 - than any
other African country. Tanzania also enjoys internal peace and stability. With some 120
tribes, Tanzania i s ethnically and religiously diverse. The country manifests a tradition o f
strong ethnic and religious tolerance.
Tanzania i s an emerging multiparty democracy. Executive power rests with the President and
ruling party Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM; Party o f the R e v ~ l u t i o n ) . The
~
C C M has
effectively dominated Tanzanian politics since shortly after independence in 1961. President
Mkapa governed for 10 years, from 1995 through two terms, leaving an impressive track
record on economic growth, fiscal management (including recognized leadership in aid
effectiveness), governance, and steady progress on a number o f the Millennium Development
Goals (such as primary education, water, and child health). In late 2005, President Jakaya
Kikwete, the C C M candidate, won an overwhelming victory in Tanzania’s third elections.
Observers concluded that voters were able to cast their ballots according to their choices.
President Kikwete has committed to continue the strong reforms and policies o f his
predecessor and to accelerating the process o f reconciliation on the i s l a n d ~ . ~
2. Economic Overview

Economic growth averaged 4 percent in the mid to late 1990s rising to an average 5.8 percent
since 2000, reaching 6.8 percent in 2005. Over the past five years, growth has been led by
mining (1 5 percent), construction (10.2 percent), trade (7.2 percent) and communication (6.1
percent). Agriculture grew more slowly, at an average annual rate o f 5.1 percent, although
s t i l l high by regional standards. Agriculture remains the largest sector, contributing more than
40 percent o f GDP, employing up to 80 percent o f the population, while trade and financial
services account for about 27 percent and industry, including mining, about 12.5 percent.

Fiscal Policy: Over the last five years, revenue has performed well, rising from 11.3 percent
o f GDP in FYOO, to 13.6 percent in FY05, with an estimated 14.2 percent in FY06. These
gains have been made through improvements in tax administration, reducing exemptions, and
broadening the tax base. Nonetheless, the revenue/GDP ratio remains l o w by regional
standards in part due to the estimated higher share o f subsistence agriculture and other
informal sector activities. The last five years have also seen a significant increase in
government expenditure rising from an average o f 17 percent o f GDP in the 1990s to an
estimated 28 percent in FY06. This has been fuelled by: increases in domestic revenue;
Official Development Assistance (ODA - grants and concessional loans increased from 11.6
percent o f GNI in 1999 to 16.2 percent in 2004); debt relief (see B o x 1); and domestic
borrowing (negligible in recent years). O D A has risen from about 6 percent o f GDP in FYOO
to 11 percent in FY05 (equivalent to levels experienced in the 1980s and early 1990s.) The
The CCM was built from a merger between the mainland’s Tanganyika African National Union (TANU)
and Zanzibar’s Afro-Shirazi Party (ASP).
Speech to inauguratethe Fourth Phase Parliament on December 30,2005.
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

2

key challenge for fiscal management i s to further enhance the quality and efficiency o f public
expenditure and ensure that efforts to strengthen Tanzania’s absorptive capacity keep pace
with increases in government spending. Tanzania’s high aid dependency makes i t vulnerable
to fluctuations in aid flows, and puts a significant burden on Tanzania’s budget management,
requiring it to remain flexible enough to accommodate changes in the resource envelope
without creating macro-economic distortions, and necessitating the enhancement o f aid
predictability and domestic revenue.

Box 1: Tanzania’s D e b t Sustainability
Tanzania’s total external debt at end December 2005 was at US$7,93 1.4 million (about 65 percent of
GDP) with total domestic debt at TSh.1,625.1 billion (about 12 percent o f GDP). After receiving
HIPC debt relief in 2001, Tanzania’s NPV o f debt-to-export ratio declined to about 130. B y 2004, i t
had hrther declined to 118.
Relief under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) will see Tanzania’s debt burden (up until
December 2005) cancelled with the World Bank (IDA), African Development Bank (ADB) and
IMF. Under the MDRI, the World Bank will cancel about SDR 1,898 million or (US$ 2,804.07

million); African Development Fund UA 415.27 million or (US$644.92 million); and the IMF,
US$336 million. Total cancellation under MDRI i s expected to amount to about US$3,785 million;
leading to a reduction o f total external debt by over 45 percent. The IMF MDRI was given in a one
upfront debt cancellation in January 2006, and the World Bank relief will be spread over the period
2007-2044 with an average annual saving o f $74m each year.
Following the implementation o f the MDRI, Tanzania’s debt sustainability indicators are well below
the debt sustainability thresholds. The NPV o f debt-to-export ratio i s estimated to have declined to
64 percent in 2006. The most recent debt sustainability analysis prepared by IMF and World Bank
staff concludes that Tanzania’s external debt position i s sustainable, with low risk. However, this
favourable development o f debt indicators depends critically on sustained economic growth and
enhanced export performance.
Russia has also announced its intention to cancel bilateral debt and Spain i s expanding i t s debt r e l i e f
to cover 100 percent o f debt. In addition, progress in securing debt relief from non-Paris Club
creditors i s critical to ensure the continued sustainability o f Tanzania’s debt. Negotiations have been
concluded with eight creditors (Kuwait, India, Bulgaria, China, Hungary, Libya, Slovak Republic,
and Czech Republic). Negotiations are underway with two creditors (Iran, and United Arab
Emirates) and negotiations are pending with seven other non-Paris Club creditors.
Monetary Policy. Despite expansion o f the money supply (28 percent in 2005/06), Tanzania
has generally managed to maintain l o w inflation. Inflation rose to 8 percent in 2006, fuelled
by the impact o f the recent drought on food prices, and increases in international o i l prices.
Private sector credit i s still very l o w (10 percent o f GDP in 2005) but growing fast (36
percent growth over past 12 months). There remain concerns that an expansionary fiscal
stance by the authorities will crowd out increasing private sector borrowing. The sharp rise in
government spending (from 22 percent o f GDP in 2003/04 to 25.7 percent o f GDP in
2004/05) has necessitated rising sales o f Treasury bills to sterilize liquidity. As a result, the
Treasury bill rate had been increased from a weighted average o f 7.7 percent in 2003 to 9.6
percent in 2004, and 14.8 percent in 2005. However in the recent past i t has started to decline,
and stands at about 10 percent, due to the unwinding o f election uncertainties and increased
competition at T-bill auctions.

A primary challenge for monetary policy i s management o f large aid inflows and their
potential impact on the exchange rate, interest rates, and the rate o f inflation. Until recently,
high rates o f monetary growth have been consistent with relatively l o w inflation rates. The
Bank o f Tanzania i s now considering reducing sterilization while continuing to closely
monitor the inflation rate. Financial deepening o f the economy, together with structural
reforms that will strengthen i t s international competitiveness, are critical to mitigating
potential negative impacts o f large aid inflows.
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

3

3. Poverty and Inequality

Poverty remains a critical concern for Tanzania, with income levels s t i l l amongst the lowest
in Africa. Between 1992 and 200 1, the proportion o f people living below the national poverty
line fell slightly from 39 percent to 36 percent, while the number o f people living below the
international “dollar a day” poverty line was 58 percent. Strong sustained growth since 1995,
o f almost 6 percent per annum, has not yet been captured in the poverty estimates. While
poverty today i s likely to be below 2001 levels, the lack o f up to date data i s a problem for
policy making. The next HBS will be fielded in 2007 and updated poverty estimates will
become available in 2008.
Progress has been recorded in non-income aspects o f well-being, especially health and
education. N e t primary school enrolment increased from 57 percent in 2000 to 95 percent in
2005; life expectancy from 44 years in 1978 to 54 years for males and 56 years for females in
2002; infant mortality dropped from 100 to 68 per 1000 between 2000 and 2004, while child
mortality dropped from 141 to 112 per 1000 in 2004. The fraction o f chronically
undernourished or stunted children declined from 44 percent in 1999 to 38 percent in 2004.
However, infant, child, and maternal mortality rates remain amongst the highest in the world,
literacy rates are l o w and more than one third o f all children under five are malnourished. The
proportion o f the rural population with access to safe water remains l o w (47% in 2001).
Income inequality in Tanzania appeared fairly stable during the 1990s, with the Gini
coefficient5 increasing from 0.34 in 1991 to 0.35 in 2001. This compares favourably with
increasing inequality in Tanzania’s East African Community neighbours Uganda and Kenya.
However, it conceals significant regional differences: in Dar es Salaam poverty fell from 28
percent to 18 percent while in rural areas income poverty remained more or less unchanged
during the same period. The 2001 poverty map6 shows how district poverty incidence varies
from less than 20 percent (Arusha, Bukoba) to more than 50 percent (Lindi, Singida Rural).
Poverty remains largely a rural phenomenon as 87 percent o f the poor live in rural areas.
N o w that agriculture has started to record growth rates significantly above population growth
rates, the overall rate o f poverty reduction should start to decline, helped by rural-urban
migration. Tanzania needs real per capita rural growth rates o f 2-3 percent if it i s to halve the
incidence o f poverty by 20 10.
Exposure to climatic and price risks, to human, animal and crop disease are important causes
for downward income mobility and poverty. In combination with imperfect financial
intermediation, exposure to uninsured risk i s an important impediment for households to
attain their growth potential. Recent research has shown, however, that the most important
risks affecting households are preventable.’ As a consequence social protection policies will
need to pay more attention to risk prevention and mitigation through improved service
delivery in health, nutrition, agriculture and water and through improved market access and
better financial services.
On current trends, Tanzania’s population i s likely to increase by 4 to 5 million by 2009/10.
Such a high rate o f increase dilutes the impact o f GDP growth o n individual welfare, creating
additional challenges for youth employment as well as tensions between resource

’
’

The Gini coefficient i s a measure of inequality of a distribution. It i s often used to measure income
inequality. It i s a number between 0 and 1, where 0 corresponds to perfect equality (i.e. everyone has the
same income) and 1 corresponds to perfect inequality (i.e. one person has all the income, while everyone
else has zero income).
See “Poverty and Human Development Report 2005”:
http://www .tanzania.go.tdpdf/PHDR%202005%2OFINAL.pdf
See for instance: Christiaensen L.,V. Hofmann and A. Sarris 2004. Coffee Price Risk in Perspective:
Vulnerability Among Small Holder Coffee Growers in Tanzania or Hoogeveen, J. 2005. Risk, Growth and
Transfers. Prioritizing Policies in a Low Income Environment with Risk. The Case of Tanzania.

Part II+III
Development
:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

4

requirements needed for private consumption and those available for private investments.
T h i s tension i s exacerbated by the fact that almost h a l f (48 percent) o f the population i s now
in the dependent age groups with the young requiring primary and secondary education and
the old seeking health care.
Table 1: Tanzania's M K U K U T A and MDG targets and status
1990 (or

closest
available)

mi%

i,.

&em,

-

- %below dollar a day poverty line
Child malnutrition
- % o f children under 5 underweight
- % of children under 5 stunted
- % o f children under 5 wasted

Itiii42tAc&ve

u o i v e d primary education

Yet enrolment in pnmary school

'

CdaII: Pramktcgender equality, empower women

39%

36%

61%

58%

29%

22%

43%

38%

69.,

39 0

II 9 0

i*P:

20%

No

Uncertain

290

Yes

15%

-

-

m enrollmento f $OW,
~

I000 0

equal gender ratio

.( -

Yes
.' s * ; ~ - ~ $ * ~ .$.

Met

;rf ?- t

'

Yes
3 ~ -

.

*.e

*$
,

1

Met

Yes

1

1

Yes

Yes

112

79

47

No

Uncertain

529

578

265

132

No

Uncertain

n.a.

7.0

92%

91%

90%

90%

Met

Yes

36%

41%

65%

90%

No

Yes

98%

96%

95%

Met

Yes

91%

92%

95%

Yes

0 70

0 81

Under five mortality @er 1000)

141

Reduce maternal mortality by three quarters (per
100,000 births)

HIV prevalence in the total population (%)

_."._I

Debt service (% o f exports o f goods and services)

..:.

1I .
Yes

20 1 5 target
1

Girl /boy for enrolment m secondary school

ddvelopment

-

Target
with better
policies,
instit. and
addtional
funding

Uncertain

99%

0 99

._

-

2010

MKUKUTA
Target at
current
trend

31%

9 10'0

101

n1rsl nreplls

24%

2015 target

Girls /boy ration for enrolment in pnmary school

,,G a l 8.; Develop, global partnershipfor -

2015

MDG
target

,

j,

Proportion with access to clean and safe water in
urban areas
Proportion with access to clean and safe water in rural
areas
Proportion of people with access to basic sanitation in
urban areas
Proportionof people with access to basic sanitation in

2010

MKUKUTA
Target

2015 target =halve 1990 level o f income poverty and m&u&6n,

poverty and hunger

Income
%below the national poverty line

2006 (or
closest
available)

Yes
"

. , , 3 . % <

2015 target = susrainable debt, make available benefitsofacw~tachr;pl$cs
32.9%

6.8%

Note: MKUKUTA and MDG targets differ. Blanks indicate that an indicator IS not a MKUKUTA or MDG indicator.
Data Soures: the HBS 199112 and 2000/l (Poverty; clean water; sanitation); DHS 1999 and DHS 2004 (malnutrition, child and maternal
mortality); THIS 2004 (HIV prevalence). Data on school enrollment and gender equality are from the Ministry o f Education Statistical
Abstract. Information on Debt Service is from SIMA.

Progress towards achieving MDG Targets. The country i s making progress towards
achieving the MDG targets (consistent with targets articulated in Tanzania's own poverty
reduction strategies, MKUKUTA and MKUZA - see section 2 below). More needs to be
done if all targets are to be achieved. As Table 1 illustrates, Tanzania has achieved some
selected targets already: Goal 2 (universal primary education); Goal 3 (gender equality in
primary schools, although not in secondary schools); Goal 7 (proportion o f urban population
with access to safe water and basic sanitation); and Goal 8 (Global partnership for
development). Where goals are not yet achieved, ongoing trends make i t likely most if not all
are achievable by 2010. With an increased focus on (rural) growth, and implementation o f
improved policies, strengthened institutions, and additional funding, Goal 1 (eradicate
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

5

3%

:

extreme poverty and hunger) i s feasible. Progress i s most problematic with the health-related
Goals 4, 5 and 6 (reduction o f child and maternal mortality, combating HIVIAIDS, malaria
and other diseases) even with improvements in policies, institutions, and finding and despite
the significant progress that has been made to date, especially in combating child mortality.

B. THEGOVERNMENT’S
STRATEGY RESPONSE
1. MKUKUTA
Tanzania’s National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty, known as the
MKUKUTA (Mkakati w a Kukuza Uchumi na Kupunguza Umaskini Tanzania) was
completed in June 2005 for implementation over the period 2005-2010. I t i s the successor to
Tanzania’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (a first generation PRSP, formulated in 2000).
I t builds on Tanzania’s Development Vision 2025, especially in i t s emphasis on growth and
long term strategy for reducing aid dependence.8 MKUKUTA has an increased focus on
equitable growth and governance, and i s an instrument for mobilizing efforts and resources
towards targeted poverty reduction outcomes. MKUKUTA includes targets and poverty
reduction outcomes which are consistent with, and indeed in many cases go beyond, the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

MKUKUTA was based on extensive consultations within government, with Parliament, civil

society, faith based groups, private sector, districts and villages, and development partners. I t
i s based on the principles o f national ownership, political commitment to democratization and
human rights, maintenance o f macroeconomic and structural reforms, building o n sector
strategies and cross-sectoral collaboration, building local partnerships for citizens to engage
in policy dialogue, harmonization o f aid, equity and sharing o f benefits, sustainable
development, strengthening o f macroeconomic l i n k s and decentralization, and mainstreaming
cross-cutting issues.

MKUKUTA identifies three clusters o f broad outcomes: (i)
growth o f the economy and
reduction o f income poverty; (ii)
improvement o f quality o f life and social well being, and
(iii)
governance and accountability. Each cluster has a set o f goals and targets, as well as
related cluster strategies (see Annex C.) The Government recognizes that the monitoring and
evaluation o f MKUKUTA i s essential in promoting accountability and in assessing
developmental effectiveness. Tanzania has made considerable efforts to develop i t s
monitoring and evaluation systems and practices, including the strengthening o f the statistical
system, although considerable work remains (see Section 111. C.)
Development and implementation o f the MKUKUTA has taken place in the context o f a
significant overhaul o f national planning and budgeting systems with the intention o f
boosting results based management, increased domestic accountability and greater alignment
and harmonization o f external financing. The Government has prioritized the task o f building
national planning and budgeting institutions which fully integrate MKUKUTA, recognizing
the need for ownership not only o f the policy content but also o f the instruments and
processes for i t s effective implementation. In line with this approach, the Government has
pursued an ambitious program for integration o f external financing within national systems,
while also attempting to carry through reforms in a manner which builds domestic
accountability.
Development Vision 2025 envisages Tanzania in 2025 as a nation with social and economic justice, rule of
law, peace, stability, and unity. It foresees an educated population, a cultural renaissance, and a strong,

self-reliant, competitive and sustainable economy. Specific targets for 2025 include: universal primary
,educationand the eradication of illiteracy, universal access to primary health care and quality reproductive
services, universal access to safe water, gender equality and empowerment of women, reduction o f infant
and maternal mortality rates by three-quarters o f current (1998) levels, food self-sufficiency and food
security and elimination of corruption.
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

6

2. Zanzibar Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty (MKUZA)
In Zanzibar, similar strategy responses have been developed. Zanzibar Development Vision
2020 provides the over-arching framework to reduce poverty. I t focuses on improving
purchasing power, ownership o f productive resources, quality o f welfare, and freedom and
peace. In 2005, the Revolutionary Government o f Zanzibar embarked on a major review o f
the first generation Zanzibar Poverty Reduction Plan (ZPRP, 2002-05) with the primary
objective o f accelerating progress towards Vision 2020. Additionally, there was commitment
to enhance participation in the review process, to better reflect national priorities in a revised
Plan, and to better ‘localize’ the MDGs. Just as on the Mainland, specific attention was paid
to the importance o f growth, as well as harmonization and alignment. The objective and
modalities o f the review have been articulated in a Strategic Framework, Guidelines and a
W o r k Plan.

The review process sought ways to align and harmonise the new strategy with core reforms
and policy processes that have been undertaken both o n the Mainland and in ZanzibarngIn
line with the MKUKUTA, the second phase MKUZA has adopted an outcome-oriented
approach with emphasis o n cross-sector collaboration and inter-sector linkages and synergies.
It will be implemented over a four-year period (2006/07 - 2009/10), to coincide with the
MKUKUTA implementation cycle. The monitoring framework for the MKUZA i s intended
to be as comprehensive as that o f the MKUKUTA and aims to produce outputs in the same
timeframe in order to enable better coordination in planning and implementing the two
strategies.

c.

MKUKUTA CLUSTER I:GROWTH
OF THE ECONOMY
AND REDUCTION IN INCOME
POVERTY

High rates o f growth are essential to reducing income poverty. Making growth more pro-poor
implies improved production, marketing and trading conditions in those sectors on which the
majority o f the poorest people depend, and in particular agriculture and fisheries. The
multilateral trade system has created preferences for least developed countries in terms o f
market access. While there remains room for expansion o f these advantages, the key to
optimizing the benefits to Tanzania lies in addressing supply side constraints that hold back
competitiveness o f exports, both within regional and global markets. This implies continuing
investment in infrastructure, including energy and water, in modernizing the logistics chain,
in meeting demanding standards set by export markets, in working towards a user-friendly
and efficient customs system and in consolidating the gains already made at regional level, in
particular the Customs Union operating in the EAC. Continued poor service delivery, notably
in public utilities, has a negative impact on inward investment and public confidence, and are
in all surveys recognized as a significant constraint. Finally, the public sector’s ability to
create an enabling environment for growth o f the private sector remains a priority, including
at the grass roots level where access to credit and advice remains a priority.
Tanzania’s impressive global growth since the mid-1990s conceals significant disparities.
Six” out o f twenty regions account for over half o f the annual national GDP (1992-2003).
The wealthier regions generally have better infrastructure, climate and natural resource
endowments and are less dependent on l o w productivity agriculture.
Investment CZimate. The overall investment climate reflects the cost o f doing business and

the attractiveness o f the country to outside investors. Since 1999, both public and private
sector investment have increased significantly reaching 22.2 percent o f GDP by 2005.

IO

These include the MKUKUTA, Local Government Reform Programme (LGRP), the Public Expenditure Review (PER),
the Public Financial Management Reform Programme (PFMRP), and the Joint Assistance Strategy (JAS).
Dares Salaam, Mwanza, Shinyanga, Arusha, Mbeya and Iringa.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

7

During that period, public and private sector investment increased by 2.1 and 4.4 percentage
points, respectively. Foreign direct investment (FDI) was sustained at a fairly high level in
regional comparison at 3 percent o f GDP, with an estimated inflow o f US$488 million in
2005/06 - the majority going into the mining sector, with manufacturing, tourism, agriculture,
the financial sector, and trade benefiting less. The predictability and credibility o f
Government polices, and a sound legal and regulatory framework, are key elements in
targeting the investment climate. While Tanzania was among the world’s to ten reformers in
the World Bank’s 2007 Doing Business report, Tanzania s t i l l only ranked 142nd out o f 175
countries in terms o f the ease o f doing business. A further constraint to domestic investment
i s the high real interest rate underpinned by high t-bill rates as well as l o w levels o f access to
finance.
Financial Sector. The financial sector in Tanzania i s growing, albeit from a very l o w base.
Bank assets are 20% o f GDP, compared to 44% in Kenya and 35% in Ghana. Reforms over
the last decade have focused o n privatization o f the state-owned commercial banks,
enhancing the capacity o f the financial sector regulators, and promoting the development o f
contractual savings and capital markets. Over the past two years, private sector credit has
nearly doubled (to 9.4 percent o f GDP 2004) and financial intermediation i s deepening. Rural
deposits have increased by more than 80 percent. Even with these improvements, the overall
stock o f credit to the private sector outstanding in Tanzania as o f 2004 remains exceptionally
l o w and large swathes o f the economy (agriculture and rural) are s t i l l working with little
formal credit - only around 6 percent o f the population have access t o a bank account. The
Government’s Second Generation Financial Sector Reforms outline an ambitious program o f
financial sector deepening. The new agenda i s to make financial markets work and to develop
new business models and lending technologies. This will facilitate provision o f term capital
for infrastructure and enterprises and provide access to financial services for rural and urban
households.
Trade Competitiveness. Exports o f goods and services have contributed nearly 60 percent o f
overall GDP growth since 1990. Non-traditional exports (tourism and gold) have taken over
the dominant share once enjoyed by traditional exports (coffee, cotton, tea, tobacco, and
sisal). Pro-poor growth will require greater export diversification with manufacturing and
agriculture (particularly value-added) exports as potential growth areas. Tanzania’s export
growth i s constrained mainly by a vast “behind the border agenda”, which includes high
transport costs, poor access to transport in rural areas, human capital constraints (including a
lack o f adequate skills for horticulture, floriculture and tourism); and inadequate trade
facilitation, including lack o f management capacity to address sanitary and phyto-sanitary
standards requirements, and slow customs processes, though the customs part o f the TR4
reform programme i s showing improvements. Trade policy issues constrain Tanzania’s
exports less than the behind the border problems, except for a few problem areas. Export
taxedroyalties o n raw hides, fish, raw cashews, and cotton constrain exports in these sectors.
India and China, important emerging markets for Tanzanian exports, charge high tariffs on
some o f Tanzania’s important export goods, namely cashews, cotton, coffee, tea, gemstones,
fish and horticulture. Tanzania also needs to reap more benefits from i t s participation in
regional and multilateral trading systems. Tanzania’s i s a member o f two regional trade
agreements (East African Community (EAC) Customs Union, and the Southern African
Development Cooperation (SADC) Preferential Trade Area). Participation in multiple
regional trade agreements i s a potential risk, particularly if both E A C and SADC deepen their
regional integration towards a common market and a customs union. This will stretch limited
capacity and can create potential incoherence in tariff rates and rules o f origin.” Tanzania
can also increase and intensify international economic linkages through the upcoming
Economic Partnership Agreement (EPAs) with the EU. Tanzania currently plans to enter into
11

See: “Tanzania Diagnostic Trade Integration Study,” World Bank. November 2005.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

8

EPAs as part o f the SADC negotiating group. This raises the problem o f potential
inconsistencies o f Tanzania’s commitments vis-a-vis the other E A C member states, as they
have decided to negotiate their EPA as part o f the Eastern and Southern African (ESA) group.
The E P A negotiation configuration thus presents another important reason for Tanzania to
develop a coherent regional integration strategy that might entail consolidation of i t s
membership in regional bodies and the EPA negotiation group.

Agriculture and the rural economy. Agriculture i s the largest sector in the economy, with
primary agriculture contributing more than 40 percent o f GDP and employing up to 80
percent o f the labour force. Nearly 90 percent o f the poor in Tanzania are in rural areas and
the sale o f crop and livestock products accounts for about 75 percent o f rural households’
cash income. Growth in agriculture and the rural economy generally i s central to Tanzania’s
overall growth performance and to reducing poverty. The decline in traditional agricultural
exports appears to have been compensated by increasing trade in food crops to urban areas,
especially Dar es Salaam, and cross border. M u c h o f this trade i s informal. There has been a
recent recovery o f traditional agricultural crop exports and continued expansion o f nontraditional off-farm sales, which together are expected to contribute significantly to overall
growth and poverty reduction, although the degree and dimensions will only be known with
the new household survey. Key policy actions to enable this include: reduce transport
bottlenecks; better access to support services for the agricultural sector, in particular research
and extension services need to be strengthened with a view to responding to market demands,
better access to rural finance; implementation o f land reform with security o f tenure;
rationalized local taxation and regulation. Emerging non-traditional floriculture and
horticulture exports to Europe are constraint by problems with high cost and limited
availability o f freight services in Tanzania, a shortage o f skilled workers, slow duty and VAT
refunds, and limited access to agro-chemicals.
Fishing. Fisheries i s one o f the major emerging non-traditional exports o f Tanzania. I t
accounted for 15 percent o f exports in 2003 (US$154m) and employs 150,000 artisan
fishermen. The predominant sources o f fish are Lakes Victoria, Tanganyika and Malawi,
averaging approximately 300,000 tonnes per year. This fishery i s dominated by artisan
fishers, in particular Lake Victoria (for N i l e Perch). However, the fishing o f N i l e Perch i s
believed to be at or above maximum sustainable yield as there are no quotas and inadequate
fishing controls and surveillance. The marine fishery i s dominated by artisan fishers (reef
fish) fishing from 0-12 miles and foreign fleets (tuna) from 12-200 miles. The marine artisan
sector i s faced with illegal and unregulated practices (e.g. dynamite fishing). The lack o f a
common governance regime for fisheries between Mainland and Zanzibar impacts the
management o f both inshore and Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) fisheries, leading to
inefficiencies in generating licence revenues. There i s potential to further exploitation o f the
offshore Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) along with fish farms in the shallow waters
surrounding offshore islands.
Food Security. Tanzania’s agricultural system i s rain-dependent and highly susceptible to
climatic shocks, particularly in the semi-arid and arid areas o f central and northern Tanzania,
where chronic and transitory food insecurity significantly hampers household’s ability to
meet their food needs at all times. Over the past decade, many parts o f the central and
northern regions have experienced food shortages, although the country has been selfsufficient in i t s staple crop, white maize, during normal years. Since 1996 Tanzania has
experienced a series o f poor harvests caused by a combination o f droughts and floods,
leading to a loss o f productive assets for many households. Poor infrastructure in rural areas
which leads to high transportation costs, malfunctioning markets, and the fact that the most
vulnerable rural poor cannot afford to purchase food has limited internal food distribution
from surplus areas to deficit areas. As a result, most o f the surplus ends up being traded
across borders to food deficit countries.
~~~

~~~~

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

9

Manufacturing. Tanzania’s manufacturing sector i s small, contributing only about 8 percent
to GDP although i t has recovered in recent years, following a downturn in the early 1990s.
Production i s concentrated in Dar es Salaam and a few urban centres and in three types o f
firms: agro-processing and food; textiles and other light industry; and heavy industry
producing metals, cement, paints and plastics. The main constraints for manufacturing
exports are: limited availability o f graduate and post-graduate education and computer
literacy; limited access and high prices for power and transport infrastructure; and limited
integration into global production chain which restricts technology transfer.
Tourism. T h i s sector, which experienced rapid growth during the 1990s,‘* saw a slow down
in the rate o f growth during the first h a l f o f the 2000s. In 2000 the tourist arrival rate fell by
2.2 percent, partly as a result o f the August 1988 terrorism attack in Dar es Salaam. By 2005
tourism receipts had reached US$823 million, generated by about 613,000 visitors, and the
sector employed 199,000 people. Tanzania i s a relatively high-end destination with average
daily expenditure per tourist a healthy US$140 in 2005. There i s general consensus that
Tanzania has significant potential in tourism through: (a) tapping underused assets such as
the Southern Circuit; and (b) increasing domestic value added in the tourism product.
Tanzania’s international competitiveness is, however, being jeopardized by poor service
levels hence the need for upgrading teaching standards, introducing a national curriculum and
establishing an institutional framework for tourism training. Furthermore, there are
opportunities for strengthening tourism backward linkages in agriculture, manufacturing and
services sector. This would lead to increased local value-addition, assuming key constraints
are overcome, such as l o w quality local produce, poor communication between suppliers and
tourism businesses, and a shortage o f skilled workers.
Mining. From 1997 to 2004, mining exports increased from US$26 million to US$690
million (just over h a l f o f all merchandise exports), mostly due to increased gold exports
(annual gold output increased from 2 to 48 tons over the same period.) Tanzania i s now the
fourth largest African gold producer, due mainly to growth in large scale gold mining, with
US$1.5 billion o f foreign private capital. However, large scale mining i s generally importintensive and currently employs only around 10,000 people with limited linkages to the local
economy. Government revenues from mining in 2005 were only approximately $45 million
(3.5% o f domestic revenue) coming mainly from production royalties. Most mines are new,
owned by international mining companies, and have not yet paid income tax as they have not
yet made a profit due to high operating costs and depreciation o f capital costs. Artisan and
small scale mining employs many more (estimates range in the hundreds o f thousands).
However, small scale operations lack adequate controls and monitoring, adhere only
minimally to safety and environmental standards, and face a virtual absence o f supporting
physical or institutional infrastructure. Over the last ten years the Government put in place a
first generation o f improvements to the frameworks o f the mineral sector, including
development o f institutions and agencies. However, the rapid growth o f the sector,
particularly small-scale, artisan mining, swiftly overextended the existing institutional
capacity. Government institutions are under-funded and lack the instruments, know-how and
organization required to oversee and support a modem, market-driven mineral sector.
Government i s reviewing mining contracts and policies to address concerns o n benefits and
examine if changes are needed.
Transport. Transport infrastructure in Tanzania i s insufficiently developed to support
balanced growth, notably in the less populated areas o f the country. The condition o f 84
percent o f main roads (including 4,000 km o f paved main roads and 25,000 km o f allweather main and regional gravel roads network) i s rated as good to fair. However, the major

’’

From 1990 to 1999, tourist arrivals and foreign exchange earnings increased by an average annual rate of
15.15 percent and 27.41 percent, respectively. Source: World Bank Country Economic Memorandum.

Part II+II
Development
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

10

part (75.4 percent) o f the 50,000 km network o f rural roads i s in poor condition. Rail
transport i s hampered by the poor condition o f permanent way and rolling stock, and the
volume o f goods transported by rail i s stagnant. The Dar Es Salaam port has seen rapid
growth particularly in the container sector (19.5 percent per annum), which i s now operating
to capacity. The rapidly growing traffic in the Dar Es Salaam urban area i s causing severe
congestion on the main urban arteries. Currently the Government spends about $300 million
per annum in the transport sector (both at central and local level). The 2006 draft Transport
Sector Investment Programme estimates the current funding gap at 77.5 percent. T o cover
the cost o f road maintenance, a fuel levy has been put in place at TShs. 100 (equivalent o f
US$ 0.07) per litre. However, monetary erosion and tax evasion mean that this levy only
covers 40 percent o f the road maintenance needs. Inadequate trade and transport facilitation
i s one o f the most serious constraints for Tanzania’s export competitiveness. T o address this,
key issues o f intermodality, interoperability, sound management and good governance both
along the corridors, at the border (customs and other border agencies), and at Dar Es Salaam
port have to be tackled simultaneously since competitiveness depends upon maximizing
efficiency across the whole logistics chain.
Energy. Tanzania’s per capita energy consumption i s amongst the lowest in the world. The
energy balance i s dominated by biomass (firewood and charcoal), amounting to 90 percent o f
total energy supply. Overdependence on hydropower electricity generation coupled with a

series o f droughts, and underfunding o f transmission and distribution (both maintenance and
expansion), has led to severe generation capacity shortages, poor quality and reliability o f
supply and service. Reductions in energy supply and consequent power rationing have
lowered economic output by up to 4 percent o f GDP. High world o i l prices and l o w
electricity tariffs that do not fully recover costs have contributed to poor financial
performance and lack o f investments by TANESCO (Tanzania Electric Supply Company).
The Power Sector Development Plan (updated in 2003 - further update due in 2007)
recommended additional generation investments adding 1500 MW o f new generation
capacity over the 2004 to 2027 period to the current installed capacity o f 947 MW. Progress
to date has been slow, reflecting a lack o f strategic focus and changing priorities, as well as
short term crisis management. T o address the crisis, the government has prepared a Financial
Recovery Plan (FRP) for TANESCO covering the period 2006/07-2009/10. The FRP
incorporates actions aimed at expanding both public and private generation capacity,
lowering costs, and increasing the customer base. Implementation o f the FRP’s substantial
investment and financing program, together with augmented management capacity and
clarified sector responsibilities, will be critical. Future priorities include increasing access to
commercial energy sources, competition in electricity supply, alternate energy resources
(geothermal, renewables, etc.); setting energy prices to recover operating, maintenance and
investment costs; promoting demand side management; strengthening the regulatory regime;
and capacity building.

Forestry and Beekeeping. Forests and woodlands are key elements in the livelihoods o f
hundreds o f thousands o f households across Tanzania and cover an estimated 38.5 million
hectares. They provide a wide range o f benefits both directly-timber,
forage, fruits, honey

and beeswax, charcoal, traditional medicines, and gums and resins-and indirectly through
regulating water catchment, erosion control, nutrient
their ecosystem functions-including
cycling, maintaining local climates, and supporting rich biodiversity. Notwithstanding their
importance, about two-thirds o f the forests and woodlands are currently unreserved and lack
effective management. The sector’s true value to Tanzania’s development remains largely
unrecognized. Recent estimates that also include the illegal use o f forest products as well as
tourism-related income, suggest that the forest sector’s total annual contribution may be as
high as 10 to 15 percent o f total GDP. Although revenue generation from forest-related
activities i s improving, i t i s estimated that only 5-10 percent o f the potential revenue i s
actually collected. Technical capacity in the forestry and beekeeping sectors i s
Part II+II
Development
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

11

inadequate at all levels, particularly regarding land-use planning, forest management systems,
processing o f bee products, business and financial management, participatory methods for
planning, resource inventories and valuation, monitoring and evaluation and datamanagement. Despite the problems in the sector, the legal and policy framework i s largely in
place with the National Forest Policy (1998), the National Beekeeping Policy (1998), the
National Forest A c t (2004), the National Beekeeping A c t (2004), together with the National
Forest and Beekeeping Programme.

Wildlij?eLHunting. Wildlife i s an important source o f income in Tanzania. The primary
sources o f income are hunting concession leases, game fees, trophy licenses, export o f live
animals, and the expenditures o f an increasing number o f tourists that visit the country’s
unparalleled game parks and wildlife reserves. In rural Tanzania, moreover, most local
people depend to a considerable extent o n wildlife for their livelihoods. Sustainable
management o f the country’s wildlife i s not only an issue o f conservation, but also one o f
ensuring that wildlife contributes to sustainable rural livelihoods and poverty reduction.
Regrettably, the wildlife hunting sector i s characterized by: an inefficient system for
allocating concessions, as well as for establishing and enforcing quotas; imperfect rates o f
revenue recovery; a lack o f transparency and accountability; and a limited participation o f
local communities in management decisions. Poaching also continues to be a threat,
particularly outside game parks and reserves.
Cross-cutting Growth Challenges. MKUKUTNMKUZA and recent growth analyses offer
useful inputs to sharpen the focus on priority growth actions.
Address the most pressing structural constraints to growth. This will require massively
investing in, and better maintaining infrastructure especially road, rail and air transport,
and electricity. Such infrastructure spending should be done in the context o f a consistent
macroeconomic and regulatory framework. Private involvement in these sectors i s both

needed and possible. Given the heavy investments required, this will also require an
appropriate regulatory framework; increased access to capital and finance services; less
red tape especially in customs and tax administration; and faster commercial dispute
resolution, business registration and licensing, and land administration.
Support innovation by investing in secondary and higher education, strengthening
Tanzanian firms’ capacity to adopt new technology and processes, and by strengthening
the linkages between education and the private sector.

Enhance the capacity of the poor to participate in growth, with broader, ‘enabling’ policy

actions for pro-poor growth including macroeconomic stability and infrastructure
investment. Whether and how to target these broader investments requires consideration
of: improving the quality o f health and education services for all; increasing agricultural
productivity and stimulating diversification into off-farm income generation; and
providing social protection.
Address the quality o f growth by: (1)
emphasising sustainability o f investments through the incorporation o f high quality and
timely environmental impact assessments; and (2) by improved natural resources asset
management, focusing on both household incomes from natural resources and national
revenue extraction related to key growth sectors, such as tourism, mining or fisheries,
which are all natural resources dependant.

Address Environmental drivers for growth.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

12

D. MKUKUTA CLUSTER II:IMPROVEMENT I N THE QUALITY
BEING.

OF LIFEAND SOCIAL WELL-

The quality o f life and social well being cluster puts emphasis on outcomes that can reduce
vulnerability, and ensure access to quality services. Improving efficiency in the delivery o f
social services i s given a special focus. Attention i s being be paid to the promotion o f clean
and healthy environment and sustainable use o f natural resources. The aim i s to minimize
disparities between rich and poor, persons with disabilities, across age groups, and between
urban and rural citizens in access and use o f social services. The cluster has two broad
outcomes: 1. improved quality o f life and social well being, with a focus on the poorest and
vulnerable groups; and 2. reduced inequalities across regions, income, age, gender, and
disability. Progress on these two broad outcomes will also directly contribute to achievement
o f Cluster Igrowth and income poverty targets.

Education. As the basis for a sector wide policy for education, Tanzania has used global and
national policies - Education for All (Jomtien, 1990), Dakar Framework for Action (Dakar,
2000), the National Education and Training Policy (1 9 9 9 , and the Education Sector
Development Programme. Education i s also a key plank o f the government’s growth agenda.
Statistics show significant gains in the sector since 2002, particularly with regards to
enrolment in primary, and recently secondary, education. However, significant challenges
remain with respect to retention o f students in primary, the transition to secondary, and
gender equity in achievement. Scaling up o f secondary and further education (particularly
science and technology) i s a particular issue as the government pursues i t s ambitious targets
for economic growth.
The sector i s facing huge pressures as government attempts to increase access to secondary
education from a very l o w base while maintaining the gains made in primary education and
improving quality. The sector overall remains under-financed, comprising about 18 percent
o f government expenditure. A key challenge i s to work with sector processes to ensure that
planning i s robust enough to make a rational case to the Budget Guidelines Committee for
sufficient funds. The government’s ambitious target o f fifty percent enrolment in secondary
education by 20 10 will require substantial investment in teacher training and improved
policies around recruitment and retention if quality i s not to suffer. The links between
secondary education and economic opportunity will also need to be significantly
strengthened. Finally, exclusion from education continues to be a challenge for vulnerable
and marginalised groups (including the blind, orphans and vulnerable children).

Health. The government’s health sector development programme aims to improve the
accessibility, delivery and quality o f health care services available in the country,
underscored by far-reaching reforms at all levels. In-line with the devolution policy o f the
government, the sector has decentralised power and authority to all 121 district councils.
These district councils now plan, budget and implement health care services for the
communities that they serve. The sector i s supported by a m i x o f financing: domestic
resources (tax-based), external resources (general budget support, health sector basket and
projectlprogramme support) and complementary financing (fees for services; pre-payment
schemes and national health insurance). While there has been a substantial increase over the
last few years, financing available to the sector i s extremely l o w in relation to the costs o f
delivering on health sector goals (including the MDGs). In 2004, health comprised 9.7
percent o f total Government spending, which i s well below the internationally agreed target
o f 15 percent.
Over the last five-years there have been some remarkable gains in health: infant and underfive mortality has declined significantly and childhood malnutrition has also showed
improvement although i t s t i l l remains an underlying factor o f almost 50 percent o f under-five
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

13

mortality (see Table 1.) At the same time there has been significant progress in preventing
and treating malaria with a large increase in the proportion o f children under-five that sleep
under an insecticide treated net: Tanzania i s o n track to meet the Abuja target. Unfortunately,
there has been much less progress in the area o f reproductive health with the rate o f maternal
mortality stagnating. However, an encouraging effort underway i s the development o f a
Maternal and Newborn Road M a p which, with adequate support will help to address the
challenges. Finally, so-called “neglected tropical diseases” such as Trachoma, Onchocerciasis
and Lymphatic Filariasis have had a social impact and deserve appropriate treatment in the
future.
The sector has experienced a substantial decline in availability o f human resources over the
last decade, to the point that Tanzania has one o f the lowest per capita medical practitioner
ratios in the developing world, which has impacted the quality o f health care services. Lack
o f skilled staff i s further complicated by inadequate distribution and lack o f flexibility in
decentralised human resource management. At the same time, the financing o f health care
services remains a significant challenge with competing priorities, increasing demands, new
technologies and growing drug resistance. Important cross-cutting issues, such as the
inclusion o f a disability component in health programmes, do not receive the attention they
merit.

HIV/AIDS. MKUKUTA includes a clear articulation o f the H I V / A I D S burden and
subsequent implications across the MKUKUTA clusters. H I V I A I D S i s a leading health,
social and economic problem, affecting health, growth, quality o f life and social well-being.
About 7 percent o f the adult population o f 15 to 49 years i s HIV infected. Women are more
likely to be infected than men. There are also large regional differences with urban residents
having prevalence rates twice those in rural areas. Latest data show signs o f a possible
stabilisation o f the epidemic. For the wider age group o f 15 to 49 year olds, there was a small
fall from 9.6 percent to 8.7 percent. However, with successful introduction o f Antiretroviral
Therapy, overall prevalence will tend to rise as less people are dying.
Government spending on H I V i A I D S has increased by 79 percent since 200213, and was
budgeted to nearly triple in 2005/6. Donor spending on H I V / A I D S has increased even faster,
representing over 90 percent o f total expenditure and expected to rise to 15 percent o f total
ODA during 2005/6-2007/8 MTEF period. However, secure (external) funding pledges only
last until 2008 / 2009, thereafter funding falls o f f which i s alarming given the long-term and
recurrent nature o f the spending requirements. Further, the divergent timing o f disbursements
weakens the Government’s planning exercises. Experts foresee the need o f about US$lOO M
(external) funding annually, provided it i s spent efficiently. There i s need to rationalize
diverse HIV/AIDS budgets across government, and to increase the capacity o f Local
Government Authorities, with local civil society organizations, to plan and deliver services.
Finally, the district response continues to be the most elusive and critical piece to lowering
prevalence and providing care and treatment.

Social Protection. The Government i s concerned with social equity, and believes that social
protection i s integral to a broad based growth strategy. Tanzania has a diverse collection o f
arrangements combining l o w coverage in provisioning with high fragmentation and dispersal
o f efforts involving a multitude o f actors. The Tanzania Social Action Fund’s (TASAF’s)
social protection elements and food distribution from the National Grain Reserve to deal with
the consequences o f drought are the Government’s largest interventions in monetary terms.
There are also some limited small scale transfer schemes. Going forward i t i s important to
rationalize the sector, including expenditure and policy reviews, develop a national policy
framework to improve coherence, focus on risk prevention and mitigation through sectors,
and identify social assistance mechanisms for social transfers that suit the Tanzanian
environment.
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

14

Environment. The National Environment Policy (NEP) o f 1997 identifies six environmental
challenges: land degradation and erosion, deforestation, lack o f clean water, pollution, loss o f
habitats and diversity, and deterioration o f water quality in sea, lakes and rivers - challenges
which remain to date, as evidenced in the recent energy-water crisis, daily press recordings o f
illegal logging, and obvious pollution problems in the cities. While the 2004 Environmental
Management A c t (EMA) grants rights and responsibilities to individuals and national and
local institutions with respect to the challenges mentioned above, MKUKUTA recognizes the
possibility for the sector to increase i t s contribution to reduction o f poverty: by increasing
incomes and revenues from natural resources and wetland resources, by protecting the
environment and providing environmental services with benefits for the well-being o f
Tanzanians, and by addressing equity and transparency issues in the access and control o f
resources. With MKUKUTA’s successful mainstreaming o f environment (1 5 environment
targets out o f a total o f 108 targets), and NEP and EMA in place, Tanzania is in a good
position to address i t s environmental challenges.

Natural resources are o f great importance to the development o f Tanzania. The top 3 growth
sectors (mining, tourism and fisheries) are all natural resources based. The recent energy
crisis, partly due to environmental degradation, has greatly impacted industrial production
and competitiveness, as well as household economies. The potential revenue from the
resources are much higher than amounts actually collected and there i s limited information
about h o w to ensure revenues are re-invested in the sector. In addition, there i s a gap between
policies and legislation and action on ground. Finally, capacity constraints are significant, in
terms o f staffing and skills, and are due in part to the cross-cutting nature o f the sector.
Water and Sanitation. The Government o f Tanzania has made significant strides in i t s water
sector policy environment over the last decade, from water resources management to
sanitation services delivery with good results and with the support o f many development
partner^.'^ However, reforms have been slow to show concrete results in terms o f either the
Government’s water sector targets or the MDGs. About 16.6 million o f 30.8 million people in
rural areas and small towns, and 7.5 million o f 9.7 million urban people, have access to safe
drinking water. T o achieve the MKUKUTA targets (65 percent o f rural and 90 percent o f
urban population has access to clean and safe water by 2010)14, 11.2 million more people will
need access by 2010, and to reach MDG targets an additional 11.6 million will need services
by 2015. Finally, to meet the Development Vision’s target by 2025, a hrther 24.6 million will
need improved water supply. Sanitation coverage i s good but more in quantity than in quality
o f the services. Among the key constraints to effective sector development are the following:
(i)
insufficient mobilisation and targeting o f resources for investments and capacity building;
(ii)
weak water resources governance framework; and (iii)
inadequate sector coordination and
institutional capacity.
Urbanisation. Urbanisation increased when Tanzania moved towards liberalization and
market based economy. In the years and decades to come, urban centres are expected to play
an increasingly role in Tanzania’s economic development. Urban growth rates are more than
double rural growth rates. According to United Nations’ population projections, the
percentage o f people living in urban areas in Tanzania will grow from 24 percent in 2005 to
38 percent in 2030. Despite the positive effects o f economic growth, Tanzania’s urban
centres are increasingly characterised by unplanned settlements with insecure tenure. These
areas often lack basic services including water supply, sanitation, access roads, drainage and
waste collectiodmanagement. Dar es Salaam hosts 56 unplanned settlements accomodating
70% o f i t s population. T h i s situation influences water-borne disease rates, H I V / A I D S rates,
l3
l4

See also: Human Development Report 2006 -Beyond Scarcity: Power, Poverty and the Global Water
Crisis, United Nations Development Programme, 2006. p. 104.
See MKUKUTA Matrix, Cluster 11, Goal 3, Operational target 1 and 2 under “Water”.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

15

security and crime rates. Furthermore, urban centres depend on the delivery o f goods and
services from the rural areas, such as charcoal, food, and water, and urban centres contribute
to the on-going degradation o f the environment.

MKUKUTA includes targets related to urbanisation (with links to MDG targets on slums,
water and sanitation), and distinguishes between reduction o f poverty in rural and urban
areas. Over the past year the Government has developed an Urban Development and
Environmental Management programme which addresses the investment burden o f urban
local government authorities by making additional financial resources available within the
block grant system, to build capacity, and to initiate a policy process.
Gender. Tanzania commits in the Constitution to the eradication o f all forms o f
discrimination against any person on the grounds o f gender. The National Vision 2025
pledges that by 2025 gender imbalances will have been redressed. In the medium term, the
MKUKUTA recognizes that gender issues are crosscutting in nature. Tanzania has ratified
The Universal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR), UN Millennium Declaration;
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Convention on the Elimination o f All
Forms o f Discrimination Against Women; Convention on the Rights o f the Child; among
others. The government has been active in responding to rectify gender inequalities,
encouraging women to increase their participation in economic, social and political
undertakings. Institutional mechanisms have been put in place to facilitate gender equality,
including: the Gender Policy (2000), a Ministry responsible for mainstreaming and
monitoring gender accountability in all other sector Ministries, and Gender Focal Points at
ministerial, regional and district levels. The Constitution includes a quota system for
nominating women to political power: 30 percent for Parliament and 33.33 percent for local
government. The current government has 97 women and 227 men MPs; 6 women and 23 men
Ministers; and 10 women and 20 men Deputy Ministers. Ho’wever, challenges remain in
implementation and monitoring o f existing international and national commitments, whilst
ensuring gender concerns and targets are adequately addressed and reported. Violence
against women i s also a continuing problem.

E. MKUKUTA CLUSTER
111: GOVERNANCE
AND ACCOUNTABILITY
MKUKUTA focuses on four broad governance and accountability outcomes: good
governance and the rule o f law, accountability o f leaders and public servants to the people,
deepening democracy, political and social tolerance and cultivating and sustaining peace,
political stability, national unity and social cohesion. This cluster i s the bedrock for the first
and second clusters. For broad-based growth and improvement o f quality o f life and social
well-being to take place, good governance has to prevail. The focus on governance centres on
economic structures and use o f public resources, natural resources, personal security,
tolerance and inclusion, and participation in decision making. Key elements include: human
rights; a fair justice system; and the war against corruption. Tanzania aims for effective
public administration so that systems o f government are managed openly and in the interests
o f the people they serve.
President Mkapa made good governance a central theme o f his presidency (1995-2005),
achieving progress across most governance indicator^.'^ In 1999, he introduced a more
disciplined approach to macro-economic and structural changes and a constellation o f
reforms set within the National Framework for Good Governance. Taken together, these
reforms arguably constitute the most ambitious and comprehensive restructuring o f the state
in sub-Saharan Africa. President Kikwete has assured parliament o f continued focus o n good
governance and accountability; the rule o f law and respect for the human rights o f all people.
Is

Including the World Bank Institute’s (WBI) governance indicators.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

16

Government effectiveness. Tanzania’s progress on economic growth and in some social
development indicators demonstrates increasing government capability. The government has
improved i t s effectiveness by rationalizing and restructuring the civil service. More efficient
executive agencies have been created and jobs across the civil service have been evaluated to
match outputs. A “decentralisation by devolution” policy was developed in 1998 and there
has been rapid progress particularly in decentralising finances for social sectors. Financial
management continues to improve and efforts have begun in implementing international
procurement norms, although in this area there remain important capacity constraints which
require further sustained effort, at local as well as central government level. Significant
challenges remain in improving the performance o f the public service: service delivery
surveys conducted in 2004 indicate that between 25-50 percent o f central government service
users are dissatisfied with services, while 50-75 percent o f local government service users are
dissatisfied.
Public Service Reform. Tanzania’s Public Service Reform Programme i s considered one o f
the best in Africa. However, present challenges in improving public service performance
hinge on three areas: pay reform, streamlined planning and budgeting, and increased
accountability. Pay reform has been slow and many public sector workers have to supplement
their incomes from other sources. Poor pay has, among other things, resulted in a distorted
wage structure with progressively increasing discretionary allowances. Rapid implementation
o f the Medium Term Pay Strategy 2003/4-2005/6 i s critical as i s a pay policy to retain key
technical staff in middle management. Weak planning systems have also contributed to poor
performance and an inability to attribute results to public sector reforms. In 2006, the
Ministry o f Finance, President’s Office, Public Service Management and Ministry o f
Planning, Economy and Empowerment developed a strategic planning manual. The manual i s
a key first step to linking MKUKUTA to the budget at the level o f Ministries, Departments
and Agencies (MDAs). Developing guidelines to this manual and linking it to an
accountability framework will deepen performance management in the public sector.

Accountability along the hierarchy o f the public service, to Parliament and to the public i s
weak. Performance contracts exist in a few Ministries at the Permanent Secretary level, but
these have been observed only sporadically. An enhanced planning system should make these
contracts more meaningful and easier to enforce. Phase I1 o f the Public Service Reform
Program should include fresh and deeper approaches o f enhancing accountability to
Parliament and the public, including improving client feedback systems and creating
complaints mechanisms, particularly at the local level.

Local Government Reform. Resource allocation to local government and related planning
and accountability systems continue to be driven by the central government. Additionally,
large resources for social development are channelled to the local level through parallel
structures o f line ministries. Local government elections o f November 2004 witnessed high
voter turnout, demonstrating strong grassroots interest in local government. In 2005,
President Mkapa’s government set up a reference committee to stimulate devolution along
the 1998 policy. Financial decentralization has been rapid. Total central government transfers
to Local Government Authorities (LGAs) have doubled between 2000/2001 and 2004/05
from Tsh 180bn to Tsh 360 bn. In 2005/6, new capital and capacity development funds
totalled Tsh 66 billion o f which Tsh 55 billion i s discretionary. However, local authorities are
experiencing significant challenges managing and accounting for the increased flow o f
resources. Weaknesses include poor cash management, multiple data sets and large amounts
o f idle cash in numerous bank accounts.’6 Twenty-three LGAs (those in peripheral and
otherwise disadvantaged ,areas) also have persistent and significant staffing problems due to:

l6

Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Report (PEFAR) 2006.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

17

limited opportunities for spouse employment, lack o f amenities (including schools), and
political interference in their operations. 17

Public Financial Management (PFM) Reform. Reforming public financial systems i s a
work in progress. Tanzania has made great strides in expenditure control (the first objective
o f good PFM) and i s o n the way to the second objective: the allocative efficiency o f resources
through improved distribution to the different sectors in conformity with government
policies. Achievement o f the third objective-the
efficient and effective use o f public
resources for public services, through improved operational management-is s t i l l a way off,
as i s the case in most other developing countries.I8 Notwithstanding these weaknesses, the
system i s working better than expected. The Government continued to improve i t s
management o f public expenditure, including in 2005, an election year.lg
Tanzania has elaborated the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), and has rolled
i t out throughout central government and parts o f local government. Budget preparation has
also progressed. Predictability o f resources to the MDAs and the appropriate timing or
resource transfers are s t i l l impaired by the late approval o f the budget. Implementation o f the
Procurement Act 2004 has now also begun. Human resources for managing the new
procurement regime are urgently required. In 2006, the National Audit Office (NAO)
produced an audit report on time, for the first time. Important challenges remain in the
independence o f the NAO and the quality o f the audit reports.

Legal Sector Reform. The legal system i s particularly weak and inaccessible to the majority
o f Tanzanians. A concerted effort to improve the legal sector i s only now beginning and will
require significant co-ordination and commitment among a range o f government departments.
I t i s an ambitious sector wide program aimed at improving legislation including for business,
accessing justice to the poor, improving the observance o f human rights and enhancing the
legal profession. The first year o f the program will include clearing the large backlog o f cases
in remand and prisons.
Corruption and Anti-Corruption, As in many other countries, corruption i s widespread in
Tanzania. Recognising this, the National Anti-Corruption Strategy 8z Action Plan was
launched in 1999. Tanzania has seen an improvement in the control o f corruption.20 I t i s one
o f the top rated low-income countries in the World Bank’s “Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment” and has one o f the best ratings o f all HIPC countries in the World Bank-IMF
poverty expenditure tracking assessment. The Prevention o f Corruption Bureau (PCB) has
recently been decentralised and there are now PCB offices in all regions and districts.
Tanzanians surveyed in 2006 felt that corruption i s decreasing.21 However, there have been
few convictions o n corruption. President Kikwete has stated that the anti-corruption strategy
for 2006-20 11, currently under preparation, will attack root causes in a more systematic way.
Issues to address include: a weak anti-corruption act, a lack o f access to public information
legislation, a lack o f systematic corruption surveying and reporting, weak sanctions, and
internal and external audit and accounting standards, as well as legal sector reform mentioned
above.
Parliament. The state i s not yet seen to be responsive and accountable to i t s citizens. Whilst
Tanzania i s now a multiparty democracy, and local and national leaders submit themselves to
elections every five years, the traditional dominance o f the ruling party,** as well as the

l9
20
21
22

Staffing Problems of Peripheral or Otherwise Disadvantaged Local Government Authorities Report, 2005
Tanzania’s Public Financial Management Reform Program; An External Review, 2006
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Report (PEFAR) (2006). World Bank.
See World Bank Institute Governance Indicators.
Afrobarometer and REPOA Briefing Paper N o 33,2006
In the December 2005 Parliamentaryelections, the ruling CCM party won 206 of the 232 contested seats.

Part II+II
Development
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

18

strongly consensual culture o f political debate, means that leaders are rarely called to
account. Parliament’s structures and process have generally stagnated, the separation of
powers between the Executive and the Legislature i s limited, and the Legislature has limited
powers. However, Parliament continues to modernise i t s e l f as a multiparty assembly. There
has been gradual review o f parliamentary procedures (Standing Orders). Parliamentary
committees have been re-introduced and their membership i s no longer rotated but fixed to
the full life o f a Parliament. Parliamentary debates are also covered by the media and bills are
posted o n a website. I t i s expected that the enhanced role o f Committees and Parliament in
providing a check to the Executive w i l l increase with a stronger political opposition.
However, systematic training o f MPs and the administration, improved research capacity,
continued reforms to the Standing Orders and some changes to the Parliamentary calendar
could create significant shifts in parliament’s legislative and oversight role.

Civil Society Organizations. In recent years CSOs have increased in number and capability,
and are active in policy analysis, advocacy and citizen engagement roles. This has increased
the potential for policy dialogue, monitoring and citizens holding government accountable,
with some impressive results. However, overall capacity remains weak and will need time to
evolve. While primary responsibility for capability development lies with CSO leadership,
Government has a role in providing enabling environment, including improved legislative
framework. Recent moves to develop a self regulatory code o f conduct and t o increase the
transparency o f CSO governance structures should be fostered and will help develop
confidence. Development partners generally do not have a coherent strategy and
correspondent funding policies for CSOs, yet the development o f these i s acutely needed in a
context o f harmonization and increased budget support.
Mass Media. Newspapers, TV and radio have grown exponentially in the last decade in
Tanzania and represent one o f the more exciting development opportunities in the country.
There are dozens o f newspapers and radio stations, and 5 national TV stations. 79 percent o f
the population has access to at least one form o f media (usually radio). While there are
constraints, media are to a large extent able to publish information free o f overt censorship,
though concentration o f media ownership may be a concern. The main challenge i s the
overall quality o f media content, which remains largely mediocre, although improvements
have been recently noted. Investigative quality journalism i s rare. The general tendency i s to
cover views o f leaders in urban capitals (rather than ordinary citizens), cover meetings and
workshops (rather than life as i t i s lived) and fail to independently substantiate and triangulate
information. L o w staff capabilities, which may arise due to the extremely tight revenue
options for media organizations, contribute to this problem. Recent awards for quality
journalism and other initiatives may improve the situation. However, given i t s vital role in
promoting democratic expression and accountability, independent media should perhaps be
considered a public good worth funding.

Human Rights. The Tanzanian constitution provides the basic provisions o n civil and
political human rights. Since 1995 the human rights situation in Tanzania has improved.
MKUKUTA includes rights o f the poor and vulnerable group as a focus area. The
establishment o f a Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance in 2000 was
another important step. Civil society, media and the Parliament are increasingly questioning
the government on human rights issues. Since his inauguration, President Kikwete has made
significant commitments in terms o f strengthening of, and non-interference with, the
judiciary and respect for rule o f law. The recent quick decision by the President to investigate
and prosecute prejudicial killings by policemen was a landmark event and sent a strong
message for respect o f human rights by the government.
Tanzania has ratified various core international and regional human rights instruments but i s
s t i l l to ratify key instruments such as the United Nations Convention Against Torture
Part II+II
Development
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

19

(CAT) and the Second optional protocol to the International Covenant o n Civic and Political
Rights aiming at the abolition o f death penalty (ICCPR-OP2).23 Furthermore, the
government does not yet adequately report on vital records o f legislative, judicial and
administrative measures.
Implementation o f human rights commitments has been poor. Shortcomings include
widespread corruption and inefficiency within the police and the judiciary, use o f excessive
force by the police and security forces and lack o f respect for freedom o f expression and
freedom o f assembly. Independent local research points to use o f torture and abuse o f power
by the police, limitations in access to justice, harsh prison conditions, prolonged pre-trial
detention and restrictions on press freedom and freedom o f speech and assembly. Violence
against women, trafficking in persons and child abuse continue to take place. The legal sector
reform initiative will be a useful entry to addressing human rights violations.

23

Status o f Ratification o f the Principal International Human Rights Treaties can be found at:
http://www,ohchr,orgienglishlbodies/docs/status.pdfand OAUiAU Treaties, Conventions, Protocols and
Charters at http://www.africa-union.orgirootlaulDocuments/Treaties/treaties. htm.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

20

111.

JOINT PROGRAM

T h e Joint Program i s divided into four sections: 1) Aid effectiveness; 2) D P support for
MKUKUTNMKUZA; 3) Framework for results-based monitoring and evaluation; and 4)
Joint r i s k analysis and response.
A. ENHANCING
AID EFFECTIVENESS
- H O W AID I S DELIVERED

1. History o f Aid Effectiveness in Tanzania
Tanzania i s widely seen as a leader in aid effectiveness, with a track record going back some
ten years. In the mid-l990s, as a result o f a crisis in the relationship between development
partners and Tanzania, a team o f independent advisors led by Professor Gerald Helleiner
proposed measures to improve relations between Government and development partners.24 In
1997, the Government and DPs agreed on a way forward (“Agreed Notes”): Tanzania’s
ownership and leadership in the development process was recognized; the Government was
encouraged to set out a vision and priorities for development; Development Partners (DPs)
agreed to rationalize assistance and coordinate aid modalities; and all agreed to strive for
greater transparency, improved accountability and to promote increased involvement o f civil
society.
The Government has formulated a National Vision 2025 for Tanzania Mainland and
Development Vision 2020 for Zanzibar,
which set out long term aspirations for Box 2: Measurable Impacts- Aid
economic and social development. I t has Effectiveness in Tanzania
also
formulated
second-generation,
Increased predictability o f aid flows contributes
results-oriented PRSs for both the
to better planning.
Greater integration o f external resources within
Mainland (MKUKUTA) and Zanzibar
government budget allows greater alignment o f
(MKUZA), described in Section 11. I t has
budget
with PRSP priorities, and greater public
established various fora to further
scrutiny.
improve dialogue on budget formulation
Increasing proportions o f aid provided as budget
and implementation, as well as financial
support enables Government to allocate fimds
management o f budget resources,
according to country priorities and enhances
macroeconomic and sector specific issues
budget contestability.
geared to improve implementation o f the
Use o f Government systems (exchequer system,
MKUKUTNMKUZA. These meetings
public procurement, financial management,
have helped to facilitate greater
accounting, auditing, etc.) contributes to more
ownership by national stakeholders,
efficient use o f country systems, greater scrutiny
including civil society. Government has
on core country and government systems, and
insisted that the MKUKUTN MKUZA
more focus on strengthening country systems.
be used by development partners as their
Agreement on policy and consultative processes
within Government, and between Government
framework for support. A Government‘
and DPs, has potential to reduce transaction
Development
Partner
Development
costs, and helps to align interventions at key
Cooperation Forum (with the Chief
times
in the annual budget process.
Secretary representing Government) has
DP
respect
for Government “quiet time”
been reinstated to address the lack o f
supports
improved
budget planning as key
systematic high-level policy dialogue,
officials are able to focus on internal budget
although it has not yet been meeting
preparation.
regularly.
24

Report of the Group of Independent Advisors on Development Cooperation Issues Between Tanzania and
Its Aid Donors (the Helleiner Report). Copenhagen: Royal Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, June, 1995.
~

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

21

Development Partners (DPs) have put in place structures to promote development
effectiveness and increasingly speak with one voice o n key development issues. A
Development Partner Group (DPG) i s the coordinating body for Tanzania’s thirty-five
bilateral and multilateral development partners.25 The D P G meets monthly and i s jointly
chaired by the UN and a bilateral DP (rotating). I t has a permanent Secretariat and a number
o f sector/topic specific sub-groups. General Budget Support (GBS), the Tanzanian
authorities’ preferred aid modality, i s provided by fourteen D P s ~ up
~ , from five DPs in 2000,
based o n a common performance assessment framework and joint annual review processes.
The D P G i s also reflecting on a mechanism for coherent and efficient dialogue with Zanzibar.
DPs are, to the extent permitted by their o w n mandates, increasingly using govemment
treasury, procurement, and financial management systems, and are applying programmebased approaches aligning their financial support behind Government strategies and programs
in health, education, transport, public sector reform, public financial management reform,
water, HIV/AIDS, Local Government, forestry, private sector reform, and agriculture.

2. Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania (JAST)
The JAST27 i s a compact between Government and DPs for managing development cooperation so as to achieve national development and poverty reduction goals. I t came into
force in July 2006, and builds o n the 2002 Tanzania Assistance Strategy (TAS). The T A S
outlined ‘best practices’ in development co-operation and included an Action Plan with four
priority areas for immediate action: (1) increasing aid predictability; (2) integrating external
resources in the Government budget and Exchequer system; (3) harmonizing and
rationalizing Govemment and Development Partner processes; and (4) strengthening capacity
for external resource management and aid coordination. Many o f these practices have found
their way into the Paris Declaration on Harmonization and Alignment for Development
Results, to which DPs are institutionally committed.28 Government has led the development
o f the JAST, with broad-based consultations within Government, with development partners,
and with non-state actors.
Under the JAST, DPs have committed to align their support to Government poverty
reduction priorities and to facilitate domestic accountability by being transparent in the
provision o f their development assistance - notably by making increasing use of
Government systems in terms o f financing, procurement, accounting, auditing, monitoring
and evaluation, as well as by engaging in open dialogue with the Government and other
domestic stakeholders. The JAST requires technical assistance to become more demanddriven and increasingly untied from the financing source; and express the need for the
elimination o f parallel Project Implementation Units. The JAST calls for increased aid
predictability through enhanced reporting o f three-year MTEF financing commitments to
facilitate improved budget planning. JAST rationalisation includes a move towards the
Government’s preferred aid modalities and further progress in implementing the division o f
labour. The JAST i s being operationalized through the completion o f an Action Plan and
Monitoring Framework.

25

26
27
28

The Development Partner Group includes: Belgum, Canada, Denmark, European Commission, Finland,
France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Netherlands,Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United
Kingdom, United States, United Nations (UNDP, UNICEF, ILO, IFAD, UNFPA, UNIDO, UNAIDS,
UNCDF, WFP, UNHCR, FAO, UNESCO, WHO, UN-Habitat), African Development Bank, International
Monetary Fund, and World Bank.
African Development Bank, Canada, Denmark, EC, Finland, Ireland, Japan, Germany, The Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and Word Bank.
More information, including a full copy of the JAST, can be found at:
http:/iwww.tzdpg.or.tz/index.php?id=8.
Information on the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness i s available at:
http://www.oecd.orgidocument/l8/0,2340,en~2649~201185~35401554~1~1~1~1
,OO.htmI

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

22

Although the Zanzibar’s MKUZA and MKUKUTA poverty reduction plans are
complimentary, the efforts to harmonise aid management systems o n the mainland with those
o n Zanzibar are s t i l l only at their early stages. The Government o f Zanzibar i s expressing
strong interest in implementing these practices and i s seeking to introduce the union-wide
principles o f the JAST in Zanzibar. I t i s expected that over the next two or three years, new
work under JAST will see a convergence o f the principles o f harmonisation and aid
effectiveness o n both the mainland and in Zanzibar.

3. Division o f Labour, Planning and Budgeting

A key goal o f the JAST i s to ensure more effective Division o f Labour (DOL)and D P
complementarity. By limiting sector involvement, each DPs would have more scope to

specialise and provide greater in-depth expertise in the policy dialogue, helping to reduce
transaction costs for both the Government and DPs, and alleviate human resource constraints
and aid administration costs in the context o f increasing ODA budgets and public service
employment ceilings. This process aims to rationalise the engagement in sector dialogue,
rather than limiting D P funding, as delegated DPs can continue to support any sector through
delegated cooperation agreements.

Government strategies at both national and sector levels have made i t easier for DPs to work
together in support o f these strategies. I t i s expected that MDAs, in consultation with Local
Government Authorities, and in agreement with DPs, will determine which DPs will be
actively engaged, including as lead partner. Selection will be based o n an assessment o f each
DPs comparative and, where applicable, competitive advantage, which in turn will be based
on: a DP’s established international and field office expertise, past engagement in a particular
sector, thematic area or sub-sector, and extent o f in-depth knowledge o f local conditions at
field office level. I t does not depend o n a DP’s funding capacity.

have expressed intentions to withdraw
from specific sectors: EC plans to
withdraw from six sectors, Germany
from three, Denmark and Sweden from
and Ireland,
and
U S A fkom one sector (Annex B).

Further work o n DOLi s planned by the

GovernmenVDP JAST Working Group
(and by the DPG) to achieve greater
efficiency
and
efficiency
of
interventions. This includes developing a
basis for determining comparative and
competitive advantages so that agencies
can
plan
their
future
staffing
needs/processes and reduce duplication
and transaction costs, a l l with the
objective o f producing better, more
sustainable development outcomes.

BOX3: UN and EU Division o f Labour Processes

United Nations agencies are harmonising their
activities. The second phase UN Development
Assistance Framework for the period 2007-2010
identifies priority areas o f UN support to the
implementation o f the M K U K U T A and MKUZA.
This i s effectively the ‘Business Plan’ o f 17 UN
Agencies - FAO, IFAD, ILO, UNAIDS, UNDP,
UNESCO, UNFPA, UN-HABITAT, UNHCR,
UNICEF, UNIDO, UNIFEM, WFP, WHO, UNV,
UNCDF, and UNICEF.
EU Member States and the European Commission
have engaged at the political level to improve the
complementarity o f their interventions in partner
countries, with the goal o f increased aid
effectiveness. In Tanzania significant progress has
already been made in developing an E U Division o f
Labour, allowing a rationalisation of support.

Planning and Budgeting. National processes aim to combine Government leadership with
D P dialogue and increasingly effective domestic participation, so as to strengthen
accountability to domestic stakeholders. Accountability to DPs for the use o f aid draws
increasingly o n performance monitoring and other accountability instruments within
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

23

domestic systems. The authorities rely on the MKUKUTA as the integrating framework for
policy formulation, planning and budgeting, and have revised national budgetary guidelines
to align expenditure allocations with MKUKUTA outcomes. An annual Public Expenditure
& Financial Accountability Review (PEFAR) allows detailed discussions among domestic
stakeholders and DPs on the links between the Government’s budget, outturn, and the
underlying MKUKUTA and sector strategies.

Sector Reviews. Sector reviews are critical for effective integration o f aid into policy
formulation, and planning and budget systems. They are expected to be integral components
o f the national planning and budgeting process. In combination with cluster level integration
processes, sector reviews are expected to include feedback on sector performance and broad
dialogue o n sector policy and expenditure plans, providing essential inputs to annual budget
preparation. Sector reviews need to be based on publicly available information and allowing
broad based domestic feedback. They are a key instrument for strengthening domestic
accountability, contributing to a broad public awareness o f sector issues that can strengthen
the role o f formal institutions o f accountability, especially Parliament (or House o f
Representatives). Finally, sector reviews need to serve as the base for performance
monitoring and policy dialogue for DPs, allowing accountability to DPs to be fulfilled in a
way that i s supportive o f broad accountability to all stakeholders. As such they require
effective M&E, and sector analysis. While public meetings between government, DPs and
other stakeholders can bring together the results from M&E, policy and sector analysis, they
cannot substitute for such processes.
For many if not all sectors, full realization o f these objectives remains some way o f f and
reviews remain primarily a vehicle for donor dialogue. The D P G commits to working with
Government and other stakeholders to ensure sector reviews provide:
0

0

0

effective feedback for national planning, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation,
translating the MKUKUTNMKUZA into high quality sector expenditure plans;
broad public information and dialogue on key sector performance and policy issues;
and
efficient and complementary ways to meet the monitoring and dialogue requirements
o f DPs, recognizing capacity constraints and the need for this instrument to develop as
an integrated component o f national planning and budget systems.

Predictability of Aid. Total aid to Tanzania has risen in the past five years from around 6
percent GDP to just over 12 percent in 2005/6, and i s n o w more than 40 percent o f public
expenditure. DPs provide projections o f future aid levels early in the planning and budgeting
cycle which are used by Government as inputs to their three year expenditure plans. (See
Table 2 for aggregate FY06107-FY 10 projections and Annex E for detailed information).
At the beginning o f the planning period every fiscal year over the past five years,
disbursement predictions show a declining trend - see Figure 1. Conversely, realized aid
flows show steady growth over the same period (also illustrated in Figure 1). T h i s
inconsistency presents a severe constraint on the effectiveness o f Government planning and
budgeting. Even with much better planning this year, and notwithstanding commitments to
increase aid flows, disbursement predictions indicate a declining trend (see Table 2.)

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

24

Table 2: DP MTEF Projections
Commitment, PipelineDndicative and Un-allocated (in ‘000’ USD)
DP
ADF
ADF
Belgium
Belgium
Belgium
Canada
Canada
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
DFID
EC
Finland
Finland
Finland
Germany
Germany
Ireland
Ireland
JAPAN
JAPAN
Netherlands
Norway
Norway
Sida
Sida
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
UN
UN
UN
USAID
IDA
IDA
France
IMF
IMF East AFRITAC

Commitment
Pipeline
Commitment
Pipeline
Unallocated
Commitment
Unallocated
Commitment
Pipeline
Unallocated
Commitment
Commitment
Commitment
Indicative
Unallocated
Commitment
Pipeline
Commitment
Unallocated
Commitment
Pipeline
Commitment
Commitment
Unallocated
Commitment
Unallocated
Commitment
Pipeline
Unallocated
Commitment
Indicative
Unallocated
Commitment
Commitment
Pipeline
Commitment
Commitment
Commitment
Total cornmitmenl
Total pipeline
Total unallocated

Grand total

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

152,578
0
7,688
8,675
3,363
20,341
33,998
111,447
0
0
222,338
189,937
24,5 16
0
0
60,432
0
3 1,204
269
5 1,748
0
68,091
92,907
0
115,634
0
16,961
2,427
2,680
106,027
15,344
0
107,073
582,186
16,000
6,457
850
47 1

105,097
0
7,404
9,348
0
18,457
38,145
114,708
6,484
0
240,976
162,806
22,559
6,725
0
36,554
18,158
38,804
135
61,113
2,204
95,248
102,044
0
112,229
10,823
20,880
2,181
2,538
61,208
2 1,982
0
125,365
374,414
269,600
6,457
0
480

88,027
60,776
4,256
4,120
0
7,293
51,588
88,65 1
23,937
0
235,667
105,937
7,299
19,017
7,607
28,896
19,017
39,683
127
48,071
10,089
89,2 16
69,982
10,868
95,527
23,253
2 1,435
2,3 12
2,538
28,702
22,082
1,020
101,669
301,8 I 6
426,800
6,457
0
488

44,594
78,990
929
1,029
0
3,995
44,553
59,367
46,685
6,791
235,667
109,830
634
21,553
20,919
22,057
19,968
43,866
127
22,978
10,443
87,937
6,249
74,523
69,870
48,909
20,792
1,607
2,462
14,55 1
2 1,902
561
101,669
243,650
454,800
6,457
0
495

1,968,887
42,446
37,629
’ 2,048,962

1,706,801
336,682
49,970
2,093,453

1,369,071
588,150
98,146
2,055,367

1,095,589
656,978
200,066
1,952,633

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

25

Figure 1: Total External Financing (actual + projections)
140

12 0

10.0

h

8.0

;

'

6.0

4.0

2.0

0.0

p

.p

\

+Actual
Donor Suppon
-' W E F Projecoon 05

*MTEF Projectan 07

MTEF Projecnon 06
MTEF Projechon a4 -C MTEF Projecnon03

The D P G i s committed to seeking improvement in the coverage and quality o f D P support to
planning and budgeting. The DPG commits to:
0

0

0

0

Encourage individual agencies to provide projections on the basis o f commitments,
indicative pipeline and unallocated categories, establishing disbursement estimates
which can be used as a prudent basis for Government expenditure planning;
Support Government in leading a process in which the Government and DPs jointly
assess the coherence o f agency projections, on grounds o f consistency with the
macroeconomic framework, the MKUKUTNMKUZA, compliance with JAST, etc;
identifying and addressing financing gaps, where possible;

In the event o f an unforeseen shortfall against past agreed projections (unrelated to
program performance or political developments in Tanzania) the DPG will seek to
identify additional financing to ensure that agreed projections are fulfilled; and
Work with Government through the PER macro group to develop detailed proposals for
an effective stabilising mechanism (with D P or Government resources), aiming to
ensure that medium term financing projections can be protected. The financing
mechanism would be ring fenced, triggered only by deviations in external financing
flows from agreed projections, and limited to a maximum o f restoring the projected
flow.

Other problems o f integrating aid in the budget include the lack o f sufficient information on
projects where funds are provided directly by the D P to the respective project, leaving the
MDA unable to plan comprehensively or fully account for resources. The D P G will work
with Government on this and other issues in aid integration in the context o f the JAST
implementation plan.
JPD discussions have led to the identification o f some additional areas where D P G can
commit jointly to improve aid effectiveness.
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

26

Joint Analysis, Advice and Communication. DPs can more effectively communicate with
clients and Tanzanian stakeholders, and with authorizing environments (including head
offices, domestic policy makers, and taxpayers.) DPs currently deal with communications on
an individual basis. T h i s will continue to be necessary to some extent but we are agreed on
the importance o f communicating results jointly, especially where this also strengthens
Tanzanian institutions and underlines the importance o f the key messages. The D P fact sheets
o n the environment are recent joint examples. Other joint activities could include: joint press
releases; short notes explaining key development concepts; case studies - providing evidence
o f development progress, in areas such as health, education, and a regular open meeting for
press and CSOs with presentation o f a topical development issue.
Joint Evaluations. In line with international good practice, the D P G i s committed to
encourage more systematic use o f joint evaluations. This has both methodological and
practical advantages.
Improving cross-border/regional coherence. Many DPs are active in adjacent countries
and support regional organisations such as SADC and EAC. Migration, conflict prevention,
and environmental and natural resources management are emerging cross-cutting issues.
Given the proven importance o f cross-border co-operation in trade-related areas,
infrastructure, fisheries and environment, as well as the evolution o f customs unions and
common policies, D P G commits to support Government in ensuring that maximum
coherence i s achieved in planning and programming, including incorporating regional
challenges and opportunities in MKUKUTNMKUZA. DPs will also work to ensure that
regional instability i s not inadvertently brought about by allowing "aid orphans" to persist
within Eastern and Southern Africa.
Improving coherence between bilateral and multilaterals approaches. There i s scope for
developing more coherent joint approaches among all bilateral and multilateral partners on
improving aid effectiveness and for bilateral agencies (through head offices) to improve
multilateral effectiveness in Tanzania through their representation on Multilateral Agency
Boards. In the coming four years, on issues concerning Tanzania, bilateral D P G partners will
commit to prepare and agree jointly locally submissions to headquarters from local bilateral
partner representatives, with goal o f having joint submissions comprise 50 percent o f their
submissions to the Boards o f multilateral agencies (ADB, EC, IDA, IMF, UN agencies).
Programmatic support to CSOs. Uncoordinated funding mechanisms for CSOs
(strengthening demand-side accountability) pose significant challenges. DPs as a group have
not developed a joint strategy to support CSOs. This leads to disjointed and uncoordinated
CSO contributions to national development, particularly with respect to service delivery
CSOs. I t also makes it extremely difficult for CSOs to plan and implement priority
programmes. For stronger overall contributions by DPs and CSOs to development, the D P G
plans to work with CSOs to develop a longer-term approach to institutional development and
capacity building that i s consistent with nationally owned vision and strategy.
Global Funds. Over the past decade, the structure o f aid has changed with introduction o f a
large number o f global programmes and private initiatives in response to the perception that
not enough was being done to alleviate poverty, particularly in the social sectors. Tanzania i s
targeted by many o f these initiatives as a pilot country: the consequence i s a multitude o f
unpredictable aid inflows and external priority setting. Although sometimes clearly
beneficial, there are dangers that global initiatives may be superimposed on existing country
programmes, distorting priorities, avoiding country systems, increasing transaction costs and
further challenging the DOL. Improved alignment o f global initiatives with
MKUKUTNMKUZA and JAS remains a priority. Government should decline aid when

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

27

far as possible into the MTEF. This will
require a more systematic dialogue
between DPs at country level
and their
Headquarters, as
as encouragement to
Fund management to disseminate
id%rmation in timely fashion, and engage
in regular sector dialogue. DPs commit to
alert the Government and the D P G early
on when they see a global fund including
Tanzania in a new initiative or program.
sponsoringD P ~also
committo working
with Global Funds to ensure to the largest
extent possible that any new initiative fits
existing Government processes,and
i s consistent with MKUKUTA/MKUZA
and the JAST commitments and goals.

Box 4: MillenniumChallenge Corporation
Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) i s a new
US. Government initiative making best efforts to
operate in Tanzania in a manner consistent with the
JAST. Named MCC-eligible in November 2005,
the Government has asked to use MCC funds to

address priority sectors: energy, water, and
transportation. MCC assistance under an MCA
Compact would be untied, f d l y committed UP front
to enable predictable aid flows over the expected
five Year term of the Compact, and, Where possible,
distributed and managed using existing country
systems to reduce transaction costs and improve
efficiency.
MCC-supported projects should
emanate from existing sector strategies or priority
investment ulans.

B. JOINTDP SUPPORT TO M K U K U T N M K U Z A
T h i s section describes the nature o f D P assistance across each o f the MKUKUTA clusters
and goals. Annex C maps D P activities across MKUKUTA clusters and goals.
1. MKUKUTA Cluster I:
Growth of the Economy and Reduction in Income Poverty

MKUKUTA cluster 1 underlines the importance o f further improving macro-economic
stability as well as achieving higher levels o f efficiency and competitiveness in all productive
sectors, expanding trade, services and the access to markets, as well as improving the
business environment needed to attract private investment. The D P G has the following subgroups working on this: macro, private sector developmentltrade, infrastructure/transport,
agriculture and environment.
Goal 1: Ensuring sound economic management. DPs will continue providing financial
and technical support to improve budget and public financial management, ensuring debt
sustainability and enhancing analytical capability, support sustainable use o f natural
resources and Multilateral agreements. Institutions o f focus include: Ministries o f Finance,
Planning, Trade and Industry, Agriculture, Energy and Minerals, Infrastructure, Environment,
Bank o f Tanzania, Tanzania Revenue Authority, Natural Resources Tourism, and the East
African Community.
Goal 2: Promotion of sustainable and broad-based growth. DPs will continue to support
the Government in reducing the cost o f doing business in Tanzania, and in strengthening the
framework for private sector development. DPs are using a basket fund to support the
Business Environment Strengthening for Tanzania (BEST) program, which aims to lower the
cost o f investing in, establishing, and operating a business in Tanzania by eliminating policy,
legal, regulatory and institutional constraints that inhibit a growing and competitive private
sector. Activities focus on implementation o f the Land Laws, business registration, legal
reform, including commercial and criminal justice, regulation o f utilities, and reform o f TRA,
including customs reform. DPs will enhance their support for financial sector deepening,
including expanding the financial sector to the rural areas, to small and medium enterprises,
and developing affordable financial products. DPs will follow up the Diagnostic Trade
Integration Survey concluded in 2005, and facilitate development o f public-private
partnerships and innovative sources o f financing, especially in infrastructure sectors.
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

28

Financing will also be provided for establishing a fibre optic and I C T network coverage in
Tanzania, also supporting Tanzania’s participation in regional ICT/connectivity initiatives.
DPs will continue to support implementation o f the Environmental Management Act,
including Environmental Impact Assessment regulations and Strategic Impact Assessments,
and commit to move to a jointly financed program o f support to the forest sector (a Sectorwide Approach). DPs will support further expansion o f the road network and improving
transport systems. DPs work with the AIDS Business Coalition o f Tanzania (ABCT) and
private enterprises to mainstream AIDS in the private sector. DPs will continue to support the
Government through various regional programs for the East Africa Community (EAC),
including institutional support for the E A C Secretariat, support for further regional
integration, and support for the Lake Victoria basket fund.

Goal 3: Improve food availability and accessibility. DPs w i l l contribute to the
identification and promotion o f modem farming methods (including irrigation) and the wider
use o f technology in crop and livestock production, supporting technologies designed to bring
environmental benefits, and supporting efforts to monitor the food situation and upgrading o f
reserves to facilitate decision-making on the basis o f reliable and timely information.
Through humanitarian and emergency related operations, the UN will continue to support
Government in the area o f food security, ensuring access to vulnerable groups.
Goal 4: Reduce income poverty o f men and women in rural areas. DPs will provide
finance, policy advice, and technical support (training, exchange o f comparative experience,
appropriate technologies, assessing supply-demand constraints, improving market access,
environmentally sustainable growth notably in mining and tourism) to enable both farm and
non farm (including fisheries) enterprises to raise productivity and to compete more
successfully. DPs will promote access to finance o f small and medium enterprises, private
provision o f business development services, support rural roads, and support for non-farm to
farm linkages. Partners will support the Government’s Agricultural Sector Programs in the
Mainland and Zanzibar, providing support to both the local and national levels. DPs will
support the capacity o f Local Government Authorities to plan, support and co-ordinate
agricultural services and investments in a more efficient, participatory and sustainable
manner. Support at the national level will include agricultural services, irrigation, market
development; and improved monitoring and evaluation. DPs will also continue to encourage
the Government to support the involvement o f communities and the private sector in natural
resources management, including marine resources.
Goal 5: Reduce income poverty o f men and women in urban areas. DPs are supporting
the development o f an integrative, cross-sectoral urban strategy. As a first step, DPs are
working with Government to study urbanisation challenges and outline strategic choices to be
made in the policy process, to ensure that urban growth continues to generate economic
growth and poverty reduction. In the context o f the Urban Development and Environmental
Management programme, DPs will also support SMEs and the informal sector, better
development and implementation o f land use and management plans, schemes for selfemployment, vocational training and apprenticeships. DPs will support sustainable
management o f natural resources within and surrounding urban areas, and public services,
notably energy, roads, drainage, water, and solid and liquid waste.management.
Goal 6: Provide reliable and affordable energy to consumers. DPs are supporting
Government efforts to: address urgent, short-term energy needs (including financing for
additional generation and critical transmission and distribution investments); the financial
sustainability o f the sector; and to prepare an update o f the national power sector reform
strategy. Based on agreement on a Financial Recovery Plan and a clarification o f sector
responsibilities, DPs are supporting TANESCO’s plan to expand and improve generation,
distribution and transmission (including rural connectivity). DPs will also support the
Part II+III
Development
:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

29

implementation o f energy sector reforms in Zanzibar. The partners will continue to offer
analytical and policy advice in infrastructure planning, and the establishment o f public
private partnerships with the aim o f increasing and improving service provision. DPs will
support further development o f natural gas and help to explore and exploit renewable energy.
DPs will support the EAC’s energy master plan and other cross-border initiatives which offer
greater security o f supply in Eastern and Southern Africa (including development o f Rusumo
Falls and the East Africa power pool). DPs will also continue to support sustainable forest
management in order to improve forest’s contribution to energy provision.

2. MKUKUTA Cluster 11: Improvement of Quality of Life and Social Wellbeing
T h i s Cluster’s objectives and strategies target (i)improved quality o f life and social
wellbeing with a particular focus on the poorest and most vulnerable groups, and (ii)
reduced
inequalities across geographic, income, age, gender and other strata. I t encompasses
education, health, water and sanitation, social protection and some o f the environment
sectors, as well as components related to energy and roads. DPG groups for AIDS, education,
health, water and environment are focused on Cluster I1 strategies. Most H I V / A I D S targets
also fall under this Cluster, however, AIDS and environment are addressed as “cross-cutting
issues” along with gender.
Goal 1: Ensuring equitable access to primary and secondary education for boys and
girls, universal literacy among women and men, and expansion of higher education,
technical and vocational education. DPs are committed to supporting government in i t s
efforts to scale up access to, and improve retention and quality o f primary, secondary and
tertiary education. Notwithstanding the spectacular growth in secondary education in the past
few years, secondary and tertiary education i s characterized by very l o w enrolment levels in
relation to age cohort, and quality suffers. DPs support expansion in the supply o f qualified
teachers, reduce regional disparities in terms o f availability o f qualified teachers, learning
materials and infrastructure, as well as encourage more professional support from the
Inspectorate. Promotion o f full integration o f vocational, adult and non formal and preprimary education, and reduction o f illiteracy rates are other important elements in improving
quality. DPs will assist government in i t s initiatives to mainstream crosscutting issues,
including gender, vulnerable groups (including increased attention to children with special
needs through inclusive and special education), H I V i A I D S and the environment. DPs support
development and implementation o f a strategic plan, including: the integration o f AIDS into
curriculum, finding a solution to reduce the impact o f H I V / A I D S on trained teachers, skillbased HIV education targeted to youth; development and implementation o f a life-planning
skills programme; training o f school teachers who will teach youth about H I V / A I D S
prevention, peer to peer education, and development o f teaching materials.
DPs will help to build the capacity o f PMO to perform i t s co-ordinating role for the education
sector, work with government to establish an effective dialogue structure for the sector, and
assist in the development o f a sector-wide management information system. DPs will focus
o n furthering involvement o f local government authorities (as main actors in the delivery o f
primary education) and o f civil society in the sector.

Goal 2: Improved survival, health and well-being of all children and women, especially
o f vulnerable groups. Priorities are human resources for health, maternal and reproductive
health. Although significant progress has been made in harmonization, the sector s t i l l
encompasses an extraordinary number o f projects, many o f which do not meet the criteria for
projects as described in the JAST. However, the lack o f resources during the first quarter o f
each fiscal year, the time required to process simple payments approved in the budget and the
remaining challenges in procuring large consultancy contracts through government create
disincentives to shift to budget support, and creates incentives for DPs and the M O H S W to
maintain special project accounts in order to protect delivery o f critical health services.
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

30

A critical challenge i s the persistence o f large, earmarked external funds (specifically for
A I D S and malaria), which distort health sector spending and crowd out discretionary funding
for health. Joint Health Sector Reviews have been held for seven years, PERs are conducted
annually and partners employ a common list o f indicators. M&E and engagement o f civil
society are areas for strengthening. Sector dialogue and division o f labour i s facilitated by the
DPG-Health and working groups within the sector, but DPs and the M O H S W (Mainland and
Zanzibar) have committed to strengthening the role o f working groups in facilitating sector
dialogue and coordinating inputs. DPs provide technical support, policy analysis and system
strengthening, technical and policy inputs through the Care and Treatment Task Force,
support strengthening o f capacity o f districts in providing Voluntary Counselling and testing
(VCT) services, sexually transmitted infection screening and promoting condom use. DPs
provide funding and technical support for the expansion o f services including screening,
treatment, antiretroviral drugs, social marketing o f condoms, laboratory services. Prevention
activities include VCT, Prevention o f Mother to Child Transmission (PMTCT), and blood
safety and injection safety interventions. DPs provide support to palliative care, and to the
improvement o f the health status and well-being o f patients living with H I V / A I D S and other
major diseases. DPs are also providing support against major health risks, such as avian flu,
assisting with the development o f a national response plan and standing ready to support
implementation o f the plan as required.
Goal 3: Increased access to clean, affordable and safe water, sanitation, decent shelter
and a safe and sustainable environment and thereby, reduced vulnerability from
environmental risk. The Water Sector Development Program i s the main focus o f DPs in
their support for the Ministry o f Water’s sector strategy. I t i s guiding national investment as
well as development partner technical and financial inputs. The National Water Sector
Program addresses water supply and water resource management -- linking with agriculture,
energy and fisheries, as well as sanitation -- in partnership with the Ministry o f Health. D P
support will also address the importance o f water resources (supply and management) to meet
agricultural growth targets and address rural poverty. DPs will assist Government in
addressing the urbanisation and environmental challenge by supporting the new Urban
Framework, with investments funds for councils and an urban policy process resulting in
consistent guidance and capacity building o f councils for planning. T h i s will address the
unplanned settlements, improve the urban service delivery, and aim at reduction in pollution.
DPs will also support the implementation o f the Environmental Management A c t at urban
council level, and work with Government on preventive and response measures to
environmental shocks and disasters, including climate change. DPs will also support the
implementation water sector reforms and development programs in Zanzibar.
Goal 4: Adequate social protection and rights of the vulnerable and needy groups with
basic needs and services. DPs will continue to engage in policy dialogue with M P E E and
MDAs to build commitment and progress to developing social protection approaches and
measures. K e y objectives include: reducing current fragmentation and duplication,
harmonising implementation o f programmes; to test, identify and expand cost-effective
interventions; and to improve monitoring and evaluation. I t i s proposed that MPEE sets up a
working group to develop strategy and DPs interface with this group. Support will continue
on research and analysis, and to facilitate government exposure to international good practice
on social protection. DPs providing GBS also support delivery o f this goal, although MDAs
covering social protection have relatively weak capacity to contest for adequate resources
through the national budget. DPs are considering government request for financing a process
to develop an overarching social protection framework. DPs continue to support strategies to
keep up OVCs and households affected by A I D S and efforts to scale up home-based care.
D P programmes that are addressing specific operational targets, such as evidence for
addressing legal barriers and socio-cultural dimensions related to wider social protection

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

31

coverage. DPs are extending support to the informal economy, working children, young
women and men.

Goal 5: Effective systems to ensure universal access to quality and affordable public
services. DPs are working with Government to expand infrastructure, schools and health
facilities while also addressing the concomitant expansion in operating costs (drugs, books,
maintenance) and in staff (many facilities lack staff) together with incentives for staff to work
in rural areas.
3. MKUKUTA Cluster 111: Governance and Accountability
Interventions are intended to support achievement o f four broad outcomes: (i)good
governance and the rule o f law; (ii)
accountability o f leaders and public servants to the
people; (iii)
deepening democracy, political and social tolerance; and (iv) cultivating and
sustaining peace, political stability, national unity and social cohesion. The strategy to
enhance good governance and accountability i s being underpinned by a frank and open
dialogue with government and capacity development o f key institutions. Support to
strengthening the demand-side o f accountability should improve government’s transparency
and accountability to i t s citizens. D P G sub-groups active in this area are: the Governance
Working Group and the Public Financial Management Working Group. Both groups have a
responsibility t o ensure that their work cuts across the other MKUKUTA clusters to ensure
the relevance and sustainability o f the overall poverty reduction strategy.
The majority o f D P financing for this cluster will be provided to the core reforms, provided
through ‘basket’ funds. DPs will continue to press for greater budget funding for these
reforms, whilst recognising the difficulties they face in securing core government funding.
DPs are committed to providing more predictable and harmonised financing for other
governance/ accountability activities in l i n e with JAST principles. DPs w i l l also support the
continued rolling out o f the core reforms to Zanzibar.

Goal 1: Structures and systems of governance as well as the rule of law should be
democratic, participatory, representative, accountable and inclusive. DPs will support
core reforms, including the National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan as a
framework for fighting corruption at both central and local levels. DPs will also support
Zanzibar in developing i t s anti-corruption and leadership ethics strategy. DPs will support
strengthening c i v i l society organizations and oversight and watchdog institutions such as
Parliament and the National Audit Office to improve the feedback system and ensure
representative, inclusive and accountable institutions operating at all levels. D P will continue
providing assistance to improving governance at the local level.
Goal 2: An equitable allocation of public resources with corruption effectively
addressed. DPs will continue to support implementation o f the public financial management
reform program including strengthening o f procurement and external audit systems, in
addition to all aspects o f financial management. Through analytical work, including the DP
supported PEWPEFAR, the dialogue on public finance and resource allocations will be
broadened and further opened to domestic stakeholders. In addition, DPs are harmonizing
their support to greater public involvement in the routine monitoring o f progress in poverty
reduction and budget implementation, as well as more access to information particularly for
non-state actors.
Goal 3: An effective public service framework in place to provide foundation for service
delivery improvements and poverty reduction. DPs will continue to support the Public
Service Reform Programme and the Local Government Reform Programme, including better
pay and a meritocratic environment in order to attract and retain skilled professionals, and the
establishment o f a stronger dialogue with citizens. Such a framework would allow
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

32

districts greater autonomy to match staff to service delivery needs. Alongside this human
resource decentralisation, DPs will support the equitable and transparent recurrent and
development fiscal transfer system to districts and promote decentralisation across all sectors
to improve service delivery.
Goal 4 i s to ensure that rights of the poor and vulnerable groups are protected and
promoted in the justice system. DPs will continue to support the Legal Sector Reform
Programme (LSRP) in the mainland and review o f laws, legal processes and procedures in
Zanzibar, which seek to improve access to justice for all. Close collaboration between DPs
involved in the BEST program2’ and the LSRP i s essential if all aspects o f the justice system
are t o be modernized. DPs are collaborating through sector-wide approach programs in the
implementation o f both programmes. Bilateral partners and the UN are particularly interested
in human rights aspects o f the legal/judicial systems and will ensure that implementing
agencies are well resourced to improve access to justice o f the poor and vulnerable groups
and that data i s available to monitor implementation progress.
Goal 5: Reduction of political and social exclusion and intolerance. DPs will support
endeavours that seek to include gender, disability and H I V - A I D S considerations into political
and social systems, and the inclusion o f these concepts into appropriate legislation and
enforcement mechanisms. Analytical work will be carried out to understand more deeply h o w
to enhance the understanding and insertion o f these notions throughout government and to
have in place credible data to monitor progress. Stronger dialogue with non-state actors will
be encouraged through developing mechanisms to protect citizens and through building the
capacity o f media to ensure the dissemination o f quality information. DPs will support efforts
to deepen democracy in Tanzania, including through strengthening the formal electoral
process and multi-partyism, as well as through civic education to inform people o f their
rights. DPs also support the development o f a specific A I D S A c t and correlated changes in
other law.
Goal 6: Improved personal and material security, reduced crime, and the elimination o f
sexual abuse and domestic violence. Bilateral donors and the UN will provide support to
human rights component o f the LSRP. Special attention will be paid to the needs, rights and
security o f vulnerable groups. The support to the LSRP will also provide the means for the
justice system to operate more efficiently, thus ensuring that institutions and agents o f
government such as the police, courts and prisons observe human rights and ensure justice
and security o f a l l citizens. DPs will also provide assistance to ensure greater reporting in the
area o f human rights. DPs w i l l provide support to strengthen national disaster preparedness
and response capacity which may affect the average Tanzanian, or at the minimum,
communities in a particular geographical zone.
Goal 7: National cultural identities t o be enhanced and promoted. DPs will support
endeavours by the State to enforce the principles o f the freedom o f expression and
information in particular media pluralism, as well as the right o f the Government to
implement policies and measures they consider appropriate to preserve, fund and develop
their cultural and artistic expressions.

c.

RESULTS BASED
MONITORING
AND EVALUATION
FRAMEWORK

Independent evaluations on Tanzania-on general budget support, support to specific sectors,
or individual donors’ country programmes-have provided lessons o f experience which have
been used to adjust the approach in Tanzania (See Annex D). These evaluations highlight the
need for comprehensive results framework and clear link between intermediate outcomes and
29

See also Goal 2, MKUKUTA Cluster 1.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

33

country goals; the need for routine monitoring o f implementation progress, the need for a
better monitoring and evaluation system, including gathering o f relevant data and
information, and they note that harmonization and associated general budget support still
have to prove their effectiveness especially in terms poverty reduction.

1. Tanzania’s monitoring and evaluation capabilities:
Tanzania has made considerable progress in developing i t s monitoring and evaluation
systems and practices, including strengthening i t s planning, budgeting and statistical systems.
Tanzania produced Poverty and Human Development Reports (PHDR) for 2002, 2003 and
2005. From 2005 onward, PHDRs will be produced every second year. The authorities have
developed, with D P support, a Medium Term Strategic Planning and Budgeting Manual
which provides a framework for evidence based planning and budgeting by MDAs. The
Strategic Budget Allocation System (SBAS), run by the Ministry o f Finance, provides a
strategic link between planning and budgeting by ministries, agencies and departments, and
regions, and the MKUKUTA objectives. Similar systems and tools will be developed for
Zanzibar’s MKUZA and harmonized with MKUKUTA. The government has started
developing a more systematic approach to data collection through the MKUKUTA
Monitoring Master Plan and the Tanzania Statistical Master Plan. Important outcomes o f this
increased attention to data collection are the annual Household BudgedIncome and
Expenditure Surveys, greater focus on impact evaluations, amongst others through the
National Panel Survey, improved economic data collection and the implementation o f public
service beneficiary assessments through voices o f the people surveys, conducted every
second year. Finally, Government has made progress o n a robust reporting system that will
enable reporting by MDAs and LGAs, which together with PHDRs will facilitate the
production o f Annual Implementation Reports on MKUKUTA. I t i s aligned with the SBAS,
and i s built around the clusters, goals and objectives o f the MKUKUTA.

T h i s greater focus o n results and strengthened monitoring and evaluation systems have led to
improved accountability and greater rationality in public expenditure management. The
system also provides a strong foundation for results-based management. There remains,
however, a proliferation o f discrete initiatives: MKUKUTA monitoring, SBAS, Strategic
Planning, Statistical Master Plan, often backed by DPs. This has led to duplication o f efforts
and waste o f resources. T o better coordinate monitoring and evaluation initiatives, the
Government in early 2006 integrated the MKUKUTA secretariat in the Ministry o f Planning,
Economy and Empowerment (MPEE) and has instituted a working group for the
harmonization o f monitoring across government. M P E E seeks to bring together the users and
producers o f information and ensure that the data collected i s relevant, timely, o f high
quality, and accessible for policymaking. Successful implementation o f the strategy and a
consolidation o f the various initiatives should provide the basis for improving results through
better-informed decision-making. DPs are committed to supporting this process.

As mentioned under section III.A.4, the D P G i s committed to encourage more systematic use
o f joint evaluations, which has both methodological and practical advantages.
2. Assessing MKUKUTA/MKUZA/Joint Program results:
Progress towards the MKUKUTA/MKUZA results will be assessed through the information
generated as part o f the government’s overall monitoring and evaluation effort. The
MKUKUTNMKUZA policy and results matrix, the associated MKUKUTA key indicators
and the sector progress reports will be the reference documents for these annual
MKUKUTNMKUZA reviews. DPs support i s a major contributor to MKUKUTNMKUZA
outcomes. With external financing contributing approximately 40 percent to the overall
government budget and DPs operating in almost every sector, DP-supported programs cannot
be assessed independently o f MKUKUTNMKUZA implementation. Effectiveness o f
Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

34

the joint program will therefore be assessed with the aid o f the MKUKUTNMKUZA results
matrix. A joint program results matrix (Annex C) has been created to build from the
MKUKUTA monitoring framework, by identifying D P contributions towards achieving
specific MKUKUTNMKUZA objectives.

3. Assessing the Operational Effectiveness o f DPs
Tanzania has several years o f experience in monitoring and assessing the implementation o f
agreements o n aid effectiveness. Since the establishment o f T A S in 2002, the Government
has reported o n progress in annual T A S Implementation Reports. In addition, an Independent
Monitoring Group (IMG), appointed jointly by the Government and DPs, has conducted
independent evaluations every second year on progress in implementing national and
international agreements on aid effectiveness, harmonization and alignment. The IMG places
Development Partners under the same degree o f scrutiny as that to which they subject the
Government.
The D P G i s committed to meeting the global targets o f the Paris Declaration o n Aid
Effectiveness, as well as any more ambitious Tanzania specific targets that may be agreed
between the Government and the DPG, through the JAST process. The joint Government-DP
JAST Working Group intends to establish arrangements to monitor on an annual basis mutual
compliance against the principles outlined in the JAST including progress o n harmonisation
and aid effectiveness through a Monitoring Framework and JAST Action Plan. A draft JAST
Monitoring Matrix i s attached as Annex B. The matrix draws from existing processes and
mechanisms in Tanzania, and it incorporates the 12 Paris indicators (second column from the
left in italics) and includes baselines drawn from the recent Paris Baseline survey exercise
(second column from the right, covering FY04/05). This draft matrix, which will be
developed further by the joint Government/DP Working Group, shows that Tanzania has
already achieved four o f the twelve Paris indicators (indicators 1,4, 11 and 12).
In addition, the IMG will undertake an independent mid-term and final assessment o f the
performance o f Government and DPs in implementing the JAST and meeting international
objectives and commitments on aid effectiveness. A Peer Review within NEPAD's African
Peer Review Mechanism will also be undertaken.

D. JOINTRISK ANALYSIS
1. Risk Identification and Monitoring.
The following table summarises potential risks to D P programmes, the probability o f those
risks occurring, the impact those risks would have for on-going or future programmes,
mitigating measures that DPs will take to manage specific risks, and proposals for
monitoring.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

35

Risk
Political

political instability

political governance
(e.g. adherence to
democratic practices
starts to decline)

Government reduces
i t s commitment to
national development
and poverty reduction
Contagion effects of
regional instability
(e.g. armed conflict in
neighbouring country)
Human Rights abuse
Delays or
unpredictability in
regional integration/
international trade

Fiduciary
Public expenditure
not properly
accounted for (e.g.
slow progress in
implementation of
anti-corruption
measures)

I Probability

Risk Matrix
~

Impact

Low medium

High

Medium

High

I hlitigation measure
Encourage all geographic areas and all
stakeholders to be included in
discussions on and design of the JAS
instrument, core reforms, ‘deepening
democracy’ work, and other
development processes;
Regular high-level dialogue between
DPs and Government through the
Development Cooperation Forum
WF);
Continue to support strengtheningthe
role of Parliament and the media;
Assist implementation of
recommendations from APRM and
other measures;
Regular dialogue with Government
through annual reviews such as
PEWPEFAR, GBS Review and Sector
Review/dialogue.
UNHCR contingency measures in place
for western Tanzania regions

GWG
Regular feedback
from political
departments of
missions (under
GWG
coordination)

Low

High

Low

High

Medium

High

High-level dialogue between DPs and
Government through DCF Development

Medium

High

High-level dialogue with government
and through EACISADC fora

PSD/Trade

Medium

High

Influencing greater transparency in
budget formulation;

PER

--

Supporting the development o f strong
public financial management systems;
Encouraging access to information
initiatives including in the media and at
the local government level;
Monitoring implementation o f national
anti-corruption initiatives;
Strengtheningo f parliament and
parliamentary committees to scrutinise
audits and censure relevant govt.
departments;

Public expenditure
not used for intended
purpose

I Risk Monitoring

Medium

High

Supporting analysis on corruption to
improve the evidence base for
programming.
Ensure national budget approved in
Parliament- dialogue through
PEWPEFAR and other annual reviews.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

PER
MKUKUTN
MKUZA Reviews
Sector Reviews

PFMRF’
PEWPEFAR
NACSAP
Zanzibar AntiCorruption and
Leadership Ethics
Programme,
APRM (NEPAD
Peer review)
PEWPEFARWorld
Bank Indicators

PER
PEWPEFAR
Core Reforms

36

Public expenditure
not representing
increased value for
money, as
institutional capacity
constrains effective
planning,
prioritisation and
delivery of pro-poor
public policies

Probability
Low
Medium

Institutional & Opera onal
Flawed
Medium
implementation due to
limited Government
administration
capacity
Medium
DPs parallel systems
not reducing

Reversal of
commitments from
DP HQs

Perceptionthat
harmonised aid i s not
delivering results fast
enough

Medium

High

Impact
Medium
High

High

I Mitigation measure
I Continue efforts to strengthen strategic
budget planning and execution as well
as effective operation of the
Government’s financial management
and accountability systems at central,
sector and local government levels
under the MKUKUTA/MKUZA,
PFMRP and LGRP;

PER
PEFAR
Core Reforms

Ensure a functioning MTEF;

MTEF

Track efforts of Government’s
‘Harmonisation WG’ led by PO-PSM to
harmonise planning architecture.

PSRP

Strengthen Government’s ability to
deliver through capacity development;

PSRP
Core Reforms

Assist in provision of additional short
term support to boost capacity.
High

Ensure DPs reduce parallel systems;
Ensure DPs have proper hand-over
procedures;

High

Medium

Ensure that at least 2 DPs involved in
providing support i n all key areas.
Ensure a functioning MTEF (DPs to
honour commitments and improve
disbursal times);

MTEF

Bring bilateral agreements and country
assistance strategies of DPs in line with
JAS commitments;

JAST monitoring
matrix

DPs to take their commitment to the
Paris Declaration and other international
aid effectiveness initiatives seriously
and to continue advocating at
headquarter and international level for
adherence to these commitments.
Strategic and regular information flow
to HQ to explain long-term nature of
development;
Jointly accumulate evidence on what i s
changing in Tanzania and the
contribution that DP support makes.
Put greater emphasis on joint
communicationproducts going to the

Regular
independent
evaluation of GBS
(every 3 to 5 years)

nuhlic.

External
External shocks
(adverse weather
patterns, terms of
trade and other global
developments) cannot
be effectively
managed

Low

Medium

Continue to monitor Tanzania’s
resilience - Tanzanian economy has
shown increasing robustness to external
shocks, Bank of Tanzania has shown
high capacity to manage
macroeconomic fundamentals. Reserve
levels stand at 6 month import cover.

Part II+IIDevelopment
I:
Partners Group-TanzaniaJoint Program Document

37

2. Joint Response to Risks
Through operating the risk mitigation strategies noted above, DPs believe that the identified
risks can be managed and ultimately reduced. However, risk management i s a dynamic
process and new risks may emerge or the risks identified may evolve, becoming more or less
acute, over the period o f the JAST. DPs will continue to monitor major risks and work
together to identify pragmatic mitigation strategies. In the event that the mitigation measures
prove inadequate for managing existing or new risks, DPs will respond through the following
process:
0

0

D P G will carry out joint analysis o f new or evolved risks. All DPs will be made aware
o f the situation and consensus will be sought o n how to resolve the matter.
D P G will nominate a small team to lead discussions with Government and seek to
agree o n corrective action. The team will seek to resolve the issue through dialogue,
including at the highest political level.
Should the matter not be resolved, DPs will collectively explore options around
modifying the modalities they use for providing support, and the level o f support. T o
the extent possible, DPs will protect disbursements in the current fiscal year.

e

On the basis o f joint risk monitoring, analysis, assessment, and joint efforts for issue
resolution (as described above), individual DPs will determine which steps they will
take based o n agency-specific mandates and programs. Steps will be taken in an open
and transparent manner.

Part II+II
Development
I:
Partners Group-Tanzania Joint Program Document

38

h

c

3
3

4

'r.
I-

&

I

I-

c

N

"-

E ,

I

r;

L . . .

h

s

v)

2
u

-3

Y

a

3u

a

W
0

a,

C
C

cd

a,

b

m

0

E

-3

F4

g

a,

f

h
P

4

n

a,

>
w

n

;r,

d
0

.3

VI

2

5:

P

a

8

n

'd

9

2

3

eP
P

h
o

. n

.3

U
3

8

a,

v

U

El

.w

U
E
crl

VI

.3

. h

n

Y

.r(

3

Y

cd
V
0

8

.3

v

VI

. n

83

Y

3

a,

$

n

n

a,

.*>
Y

s
0

54
El
.3

c

.C

2

a

Y

8

a

w

c:

3

i

a

Y

5

i

cd

5.

0

.i

B

3

Y

* .

3
w

v)

L
L

8 E
u
% M
VI

w..
I

B

Y

i

cd

8

3
2

3

3

n

n n

v

w w

3

n n n

w i o t w w w

a

3

h h

3ta .Gu 3u
a,

m
b W

5

0

C

Y

.r(

4 ..
0
U

VI

0

E

L2

0

2

n nn n n

W

3
W

2

3

2 2 2 v
2
v v v

'Y
C

.3

a,

n

g

.Y
3

n n n
00

2

w

3

W

3

W

la

0 0o0 o0 io. 0
~
~ 0o0 o0 -o 0 oy o
- o o o

u,

On
-

..

0

i

0

0

I

s

s

p!

0

0

c

4

0

0

0

0

o w r-i
ti

$ 0

a

d

Y

0

f

.

0

0

2:

0

h

a

go

R0

x

o o o o o m m
0 0 0 0 0 0 0

~

0

0

0

o

o c o o o o o

~

f

0

g o o

wo =

goo
h

wo

0

zz

O

w

[Z 2
c

go?

wo
n

E

O

VI

3.
VI

f N g o 0
$r',moo

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

~

O
m

N O O O O N

g a o d d d d

E q o o q 0 "
00

R°Coooo

0

0

a

0

0

~ o o q o o o 0 0 0 ~

EO

m

- 0 0 0

0 0 0 P

h

g O o y P 0 0 - 0 0 -

EOPnOOO-OOm

- * 0 0 0 0 0 0
~

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0 0 "

00 0 0

0

0

0

x

.

a

d

0

0
- 0 0 0 0 0 0

goo0
- 0 0 0
0

~

0

0

0

0

0

0

a

a

$ 0 0 0 0 0 0

Rooooco
00

gs.?.?

XCCO
6,,-0-,

go

I.

goo0
o - y q

0 0 -

N

.r
e

e

g.....
e

f

0

3

e

o

I

2"
4

L

P
-

3

2%

"

20

~ o o o o o c o o

E0

0 0 0 0 0 0 0

s o o o o q 0 o o

o
? o
- ?
o o
S o? l ?n ~

0 0 0 0 0 0 0

00

~ o 0 o w o - o m
% O d d d 0 0 0 0

D

8""
3

.e

d
W

~ Y
~
~ o
o qNooo og , ooooo oo oo oo o
o o
o o o
o o
o o ~

% d
~
o o
O* ~
o o
O 0 oo ~ &c qm
0 r .or . o
000
o0 o o o o ~

;~ o o
0 o "o o
mq m
~

~

f oo. mo. oo .oo o.oao

m w y q m m m q - o ?
~ o w
- - - m m v a o s

, ~- o ~- - ~- m ~o a" s -

m

m

m

"

0

0

m

0

0

-

0

0 0,

0 0 0

10mz

~ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0

RON0

0 0

-

~ o o o l - . o o m ' O
? O N 0

0

goo

R0

O

!$2 2

I

I

.c

0

10mN

s o -r i ow, - o w * ~
0
0 0

a

0

0 0 10

$.
N
0

$

4

- 0 0 0 0 0
0

e o o o o o

a

3

0.0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0

x

m

O O r n O O c l

~ o o o o o

2
6

.E

- 0 0 0 0 0
0

~

0

0

0

$ 0 - 0 0 ~ 0 0 0 0

0

00
0 0

~

PI
0

0

0

m

-

0

w m

-

0

0

0

0 0,

g G . 0 0 - w

f....

"
,

0

0

0
b

s

.
I
0

s

OI
0

-

-

0
~
h 000 0
0 0
0 00

0

0

o-CIr-m*~
x o o o o O 0 X

Y)

~

I

v

v

v

v

v

v

a

~

2

0 m 0 0 0 0 0 q 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 *

*

--

0, m rD 0 0 PI 10 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o - N ~

0

C

a

0

0

0

P

*

h

vi N

~

~

N

0 0 - 0 0 o - o N u ~

0

*

c w,

0

".

-

o o o o o o o - N u ~

u u u o u u v u u

1.

0

U

~

I

I

0

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 . 0 0.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0 0.0 0 0 0 0
~ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

m

g 0 0 0 0 ~ 0 ~ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

k

I
r-

~

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 - - - - - r i ~ * * ~ ~
O O O O O O O O O O o O o O O O o O O O o o o o 0 o o m

I

k

l

.

~

0

- 0 0 0 0 .
~ 0 0 0

goo0
- 0 0 0
0

0

- 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0
$ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

m

0 0,

'?

0 0

-

0 0.0 0 0.0

*

g o o o o 0 o o o o o o o
g m m o o q o o o o o o m

R0

O 0 O 0

O O O o 0

O -

=

- 0 o L D 1 0
e

Q o o o o
u.
= o o w w

~

0
00
~

0

0

0

0

0

koo0O

W

U

O

0

N

B

5

0 t-

-

'". u.

Q\
b
0 0 0 0 0 0 p! 0 0 m

00
0

~ 0 0 , 1 0 ~ F I , ~ , ~ 0 0 , 0 0 0 " 0 , 0 , m , 0 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 0
~ O O O O N O O O O O O O O O O O O O O o o o o o

PI

g
~

0 p! p! p! FI

-

0

3

y

0 0 0.0

--

Do

q p! q

10 0 . 0

-

N

m

'4 w

O - o O N O O o o o 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o o o o o

0

0

0

0

0

v

~

*

~

0

V

::

0.0 0 0

0

;

s

0,o0 0

~ ~ o c O N O o O O O o 0 c 0 0 0 0 0 0 o o o o o

0 o . n w
0

m

0

0

f

*

f

0

0

0

"

~

v

"

I

"

0
~
0

0 0 o N O o O O o O O O U m 0 0 0 0 0 o o

% o o o o o o o o o o o a - ~ o o 0 0 0 0 ~
u.
~ ~ ~ o N o - o o o o o o u q o o o o o o ~
~ o m o o o o o o o o o o - N O O O O O O ~
h

s

Ici

00

.

m
0

e000000
- 0 0 0 0 0 0
0

m
~ *

%*

q

o

O 0

o

O

O O

~

00
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Rooo0
w

m
~

g o o 0 0

l o o 0 0

PI
0

-

0 . 0 . 0 ? 09
g m o o o o m

~

0

0

0

pzzsz
PI

h

3"""

0

0

~

m

o

o

M

0

0

w

~

0

0

'

o

y

y

o

o

~

o

o

U

o

~ l . 0 0 0 0 0 l . N O o O o m m 0 0 m N O m o l - o o m ~ h

i

i

m

~

o

~

~

~

*

- o n m a o o o ~ o w o r . 4 m o n o o o ,
>

N

0

0

0

0

~

O

~

O

C

Q

0

.

0

0

0

U

~

0

0

~

3

oe q 0 '0 0 0 ".
0 0 . 0 p! M p. 0: 0 0 0
3 o o - o o ~ N ~ o ~ o o o ~ m 0 0 0 0

-

? 0 . 0 N N p. 0 0 0 0 0 m m -? m '0 '0 0
w
, o o o o o ~ m ~ o o o o o = N - o o q
v1

J

o o o v o o v n o n o n n o o

n o v

c l v o n

2

:c

g:
0

EO
0
m

0

8

;oooo
~

h

0
m

0 0

t.

s

0

- -

0

0, 0,

o m o q q
~

O

:

0

0

0

0

t.
0 - e r 4 - J

g o o 0 0
Y

1,
!i

0

0

00

goo

i$:

0

$ 0 0 0 0
h

0

OD

R"

0

guoo

s
Ei

c

ae!

00
00

I

s

N
0

s
N
0

0

- 0 0 0 0 m 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 m 0 0 0 0 r 4 0 m . q 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
$ 0 - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

m c Q O m m m - 0 0 o o 0 0 0 0 0 0 m 0 0 o o m o m ~ o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
~
o - o - o o o o o o o o o o o O O o o o o o O o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

3

~

o o o 0. o o m. m m m
0

0

0

0

0

0

-

-

N

O

10

m

- 0 0 0
0
$ 0 0 0

Too0
0
m

v o o v o u o a a n o

0 0 0

0
- 000 0
~
0 0
0

~
0

0

w o o o - f o o o o

E-oo

O 0 O 0

O O

[ x z z z z z zz
00

-

s o
a
0. N0
00 0
d0
00
0.
0000

s

z

sm
.p::

g

2

00

h

oe.
& O

v)

0

1

1

I

o o q

O O N

C O N

O O r n

0

0.0 0 N 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 N
$ 0 0 0 - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -

h

~ r - O ~ r - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 c a

R-OOOOOOOOOON

0010
O O N

m o r ?

0 0 9

0

0

t.
~

ca r- N u y 0 0 0
-

0

c

0

-

0

0

- 0

,

0

q

0

0

~

I

,
i

I
?

9

E

i

I

:

¶i

:

i.e

0
- 0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

~

~
' 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 , 0 ~ 0 p - b , 0 - r 0 b 0 0 0 v i *

$ o o o o o o o o m o o o o ~ ~ - o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o ~

-- -

u.

o vi m o m *, 0, 0 p- 5 ?
o o
0 o 0 0 0.0, M 0 p- w, 0 ". o c o 0 0 7 0
g o o o o o o o - n o o - - ~ - - o o o o o o o o o - o o o o o o o o o o o ~
0 0 0 0

x

-

00

0 p! m m m, 0 0 q 0
0 1q
~ O o o O O - O - O - o - - N

sY -o
x

~

v

-

2

22

--

-

0 0 m, 0,
0 N d w q 09 w 0 d 0 c, 0 0 0 vi
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ~

= --

m ". vi 0 yI q 0,
0 7 0
d m,
N p! q ". ". q a 0 N 0 m 0, N y r? w w 7 y m
o o o o - - - o - o o o ~ o o o o o o o o o o o N N o o o o o o - m o o ~

N

v

o

o

o

o

o

o

n

v

v

o

o

o

v

o

o

v

v

v

v

v

v

v

v

v

o

~

v

v

n

v

n

o

v

v

v)

--

0

0

0

0

0

o

0

* o r r i a o o o o m ~ -

~ o o c a d o o o o e :
m m m l n o o o o m m
O
~ o o u r o o o o o m
ca

0 e, oi

y

0 0 0 0 VI 10

s o o ' 6 o o o o o m

g

Ioi 01

Z u u o o n o u o

I

.Y

0

0

y o,

N

m o, q m,

0 0 - r 0 0 0 0 0 r -

L

0

0

0

0

0

R"

0

0, P-

O 0

9 9 P-

w o o

ro

0
~

0

0

0

0

-

~

0

0

0

0

0

s

8 0
0 00 O0,W
p 'O
oO
0 Q
y

3 -0 00 0, 0O~

g,,,

3

O

-m
3

0

0 0 0 0 0 0 0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

e
0

0 . 0 0 . 0 0,

0

0

0

0

0

0

0 m, 0 . 0 . 0 0

0

0

0

0

0

m

' N 0 ~ O , O , ~ , M O , ~ , O , 0 0 0 0 N , O ~ , O , O , 0 ~ ,

a o o o o o o o o c o o o o o o o o o o o m

0

~ o
O Oo N
c O
o O
o O
O N
o e
O .c qm oo oo O
o o
O ?
o o
O o
O o
O oo o
O oo o
~ ,~ ~ ~

~
0
0
$ 0 0 0

0

o o s q
m
l o - -

I

0

3

E!

I

--

-

w 0
0.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 c
~ 0 0 - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 m
o

W 0 - O O O W O ~ O ~ W O O O O O O O O M
g 0 0 - 0 0 0 0 o O O O N O 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ~

~
00

~

O

-

-

O

-

~

M

~

O

~

O

O

O

,

O

O

O

O

O

g o o - O O O O O O O ~ M O O O O O O O O W

I
.

~

~

Y

0

O

0

O

~

O

~

O

0

O

-

O

w

~

P

O

C

O

N

-

o

0

M

0

0

O

0

O

0

O

0

O

0

O

0

O

-

O

N

O

~

O

~

1

-

0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 ~
0 0 0 0 0 ~ 0 0 0 0 0 0
N

0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 ~ 0 0 0 0

0

~

ui
+
cd

8

3

s

a

fi
Cn

3
0

Y

e,
cd

Y

2

.3

€

e,

Y

El

.3

8

E
e,

P

'

'I

I'

.

..

d

'

I.

8

.

9

m

c,
3

0

c,

m

3

s
a,

3

3

.I

4-3

3

a,

3

ia!

G
m
.3
.3

%

P

&

a
s
P
a

9

,3

i

3

a
a,

”,

0

G

.3

cd

g

I

x

3

3
a,

i

Y

a,

>

8
a,

3

x

P

a

3i
m
e,

d

$

3

%

0

.s

39

JOINT ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE

UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
FY2007 - FY2010

PART IV: WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM W I T H TANZANIA

World Bank Group
Eastern Africa Country Cluster 1, Africa Region, the World Bank
Sub-Saharan Africa Department, the International Finance Corporation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
March 2007

PART IV: WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM W I T H TANZANIA
A. INTRODUCTION

....................................................................................................................

1

..............

B. LEARNING FROM THE FY01-06 COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY....
2
1. Outcomes............................................................................................................................................................................ 2
2. Lessons Learned.................................................................................................................................................................

2

..................................................................

4

C. WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM FY07-10

1. Strategic Focus .....................................................................................................................................
2. Aligning with MKUKUTA...........................................................................
..................................
MKUKUTA Cluster I:Growth of the Economy and Reduction in Income
erty. ..........................
MKUKUTA Cluster 11: Improvement of Quality of Life and Social Well-Being............................................................. 7
MKUKUTA Cluster 111: Governance and Accountability.........................................................................
3. PartnershipPrinciples...................................................................................................
4. Harmonized Aid Modalities ......
....................................
5. Financing of Future Operations ........................................................................................................................................ 16

.......................................................................................................................

D. CONCLUSION

Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:
Table 5:

LIST OF TABLES
FYO 1-06 Outcomes ........................................................................................................................................
Baseline and Targets for Monitoring the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness .......................................
WBG Tanzania - Division o f Labour & Aid Modalities ..............................................................................
Planned AAA ...............................................................................................................................................
Proposed Financing Program .......................................................................................................................

18

2
11
14
15
18

LIST OF BOXES
Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:
Box 5:

Zanzibar ............................................................................................................................................................
Growth-RelatedFindings ofthe 2006 Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) ............................................
Energy...............................................................................................................................................................
ExpandingDemand for Governance and Anti-corruption (GAC) ..................................................................
Draft Principles for Shifting to Budget Support (DPL) ..................................................................................

Annex A:
Annex B:
Annex C:
Annex D:
Annex E:
Annex F:
Annex G:
Annex H:
Annex I :
Annex J:
Annex K :
Annex L:
Annex M:
Annex N:

1
7
9

12
14

ANNEXES
World Bank Group Results Matrix
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (FY200 1-2006)
Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators o f IDA Portfolio Performance and Management
Tanzania - IFC and MIGA Program, FY2004-2007
IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Tanzania Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Balance of Payments
Operations Portfolio
Country Financing Parameters
Debt Sustainability Assessment (DSA)
Map

i

Acronyms and Abbreviations

AAA
AIST
ATIP
CAS
DP
DPG
GAC
GBS
GOT
GWG

Analytics and Advice
African Institute for Science and Technology
Accountability Transparency and Integrity project
Country Assistance Strategy
Development Partners
Development Partner Group
Governance and Anti-Conuption
General Budget Support
Government o f Tanzania
Governance Working Group

IDA
IDF
IFC
JAST
JPD
M&E
MDG
MIGA
MKUKUTA
MKUZA

International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania
Joint Program Document
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Kiswahili for: National Strategy for Growth and Reduction o f Poverty
Kiswahili for: Zanzibar Strategy for Growth and Reduction o f Poverty

HBS

MSMEs
MTEF
PBA
PSRP
PRSC
PFMRP
PSIA
RGoZ
SWAps
TASAF
WBG
WBI

Household Budget Survey

Micro, Small and Medium Sized Enterprises
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Performance Based Allocation
Public Sector Reform Program
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Public Financial Management Reform Program
Poverty and Social Impact Assessment
Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar
Sector Wide Approaches
Tanzania Social Action Fund
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute

..

11

PART IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

A. INTRODUCTION
1. Part I V describes the World Bank Group (WBG) program with Tanzania over the FY07 - FYlO
period. I t builds from the analysis, commitments and undertakings in Parts I(partnership principles), I1
and I11 (joint analysis and joint program), reviewed with the authorities. Part I V focuses on the WBG’s
program and strategic approach, based on lessons from the FY01-06 Country Assistance Strategy. I t
includes a description o f on-going and planned analytic work and financing over the FY07-10 period and
a WBG-specific results matrix.

2.
WBG support includes: policy advice, analytics and financial support from the International
Development Association (IDA), International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA); promotion o f the private sector and building o f investment capacities by IFC
and MIGA; as well as learning opportunities by the WBG, including the World Bank Institute (WBI).

3,
The WBG overall strategic focus in Tanzania i s to support, along with other Development Partners
(DPs), implementation o f Tanzania’s strategies for growth and reduction o f poverty - M K U K U T A for
mainland Tanzania and MKUZA for Zanzibar,
Box 1: Zanzibar
Zanzibar, which comprises the islands of Unguja and Pemba as well as a number of adjacent islands, i s a highly
autonomous part of the United Republic o f Tanzania. Zanzibar and the mainland state of Tanganyika united on April
26, 1964, to form the United Republic of Tanzania.
Zanzibar has an estimated population o f about one million people, some 2.5 % of the total population. Although it i s
part of Tanzania, it has its own government, the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar (RGoZ) and elects its own
president who i s the head of government. RGoZ has responsibility for matters internal to the island and for overseeing
development in some key sectors in Zanzibar. I n light of this responsibility, RGoZ has developed its own poverty
reduction strategy, called Zanzibar Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty or MKUZA.
Following finalization of the MKUZA in early 2007, and joint work on mapping existing assistance to Zanzibar, the
authorities and the DPs plan to review their future aid to better align with Zanzibar’s MKUZA. DP support to Zanzibar
is, for the most part, reflected under the equivalent MKUKUTA clusters. Where Zanzibar presents special issues or
opportunities these are flagged separately in the text.

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

1

B. LEARNING
FROM THE FY01-06 COUNTRY ASSISTANCESTRATEGY (CAS)
4.
The CAS Completion report, focusing on outcomes and lessons from FYO1-06, i s included as
Annex B.
1. Outcomes
5.

Table 1 below provides a summary o f key outcomes achieved during the FY01-06 period.
Table 1: FY01-06 Outcomes

Growth: Increase per capita GDP 1.3 percent (1997-99)
growth
Roads: Increase the number o f
50 percent o f rural infrastructure
rural roads maintained
nehvork in poor condition
Finance: Improve micro and rural I N o microfinance loans by National
services
Microfinance Bank (NMB)
Investment Climate: Increased
FDI - $229m average yearly inflow
private investment
(1995-2000)
Cluster Two: Improvement of Quality of Life and Social Well-Being
Education: Increase gross
78 percent
primary enrollment rates
Increase transition rate to
15 percent
secondary schools
71 percent
Health: Increase percentage o f
children under 2 receiving
measles and DPT vaccinations
Increase the percentage o f
44 percent
pregnant women delivering in
health facilities
HIV/AIDS: Reducedprevalence
7.7 percent
by 25 percent by 2002
Water: Increase the percentage o f Rural: 50 percent
the population with access to safe Urban: 70 percent
and clean water
Cluster Three: Governance and Accountability
Decentralization: Implement
L o w financial position and
local fiscal transfers to local
capacity o f local authorities.
councils, and transfer control o f
staff to local councils
Justice: Harmonize the legal and
Weak and fragmented legal
regulatory framework by 2002
framework

I

Corruption: Improve
accountability and reduce

cornintion

Weak controller and Auditor
General

4 percent (200 1-2006)
16 percent o f rural infrastructure

I nehvork in poor condition (2005)

I $89 million worth o f microfinance

loans through NMB since 2000.
FDI - $470m average yearly inflow
(2000-2006)
112.7 percent in 2006
39.8 percent in 2006

80 percent coverage rate for measles
and 86 percent coverage for DPT in
2004
47 percent in 2004
7 percent (2004)
Rural: 55 percent in 2003
Urban: 73 percent in 2003
Implementation o f Local Government
Capital Development Grant system
underway
Legal Sector Reform Program to
harmonize legal framework and
improve legal institutions developed.
National audit office in place with
trained staff

2. Lessons Learned
6.
Lessons learned from WBG work during FYO1-06 are grouped around five themes: a) outcome
focus; b) partnerships; c) harmonized aid modalities; d) analytics and advice (AAA); and e) portfolio
management.

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

2

Outcome Focus. The FYOl CAS aligned the WBG’s program with broad objectives rather than
outcomes. Progress was to be measured through achievement o f CAS benchmarks, often output rather
than outcome oriented, or not sufficiently linked to CAS objectives. Some CAS benchmarks were
overly ambitious, others not ambitious enough. Building on the Results Matrix for all DPs in Part 111,
Part IV includes a WBG specific results matrix (Annex A) that directly l i n k s WBG activities with
milestones and outcomes that the WBG expects to influence over the FY07-10 period, which are
directly related to MKUKUTA goals and targets. As a result, the WBG matrix facilitates monitoring
o f progress. Further, as o f FY06, all WBG activities (financial support and AAA), the annual budget
allocation process (for Bank budget), and the Tanzania country team are organized around
MKUKUTA cluster goals and strategies.
Partnerships. The FYOl CAS provided a broad framework for areas o f WBG engagement, allowing
flexibility in responding to new developments, such as significant changes in government priorities.
Preserving such flexibility going forward i s important in the WBG program with Tanzania. Given the
strong commitment o f the Government and DPs to the MKUKUTA and the JAST, both are expected
to remain ‘living’ documents, updated as necessary to remain relevant. The WBG intends to continue
to work closely with Government, DPs and other stakeholders in areas o f Bank priorities, to monitor
and ensure alignment o f the program with MKUKUTA outcomes.
Aid ModaZitiesMarmonized Approaches. The FYO1 CAS established important foundations for
“new ways o f doing business” with respect to aid modalities, focused on increasing the use o f
mainstreamed government systems - financial management, accounting, auditing, procurement and
monitoring and evaluation - through sector-wide approaches and budget support. The effectiveness o f
these approaches compared with previously isolated operations became increasingly evident during
the FY2001-2006 period, particularly in the health, education and financial sectors. This was also
noted in the 2005 joint evaluation o f General Budget Support (GBS) to Tanzania’. The WBG intends
to continue with aid modalities aimed to achieve greater efficiency and impact, working closely with
the authorities and other DPs.
Analytics and Advice. The Bank’s analytic and advisory activities provided strong support in key
economic reforms in Tanzania during the FYOl-06 period, notably in the agriculture, water, private
and financial sectors. Maintaining strong sector dialogue will be critical to the WBG’s future
engagement, informing Tanzania’s decision-making processes, and providing analytical
underpinnings for IDA financing.
PortfoZio Management. In January 2007, the IDA portfolio in Tanzania included 20 programs and
projects, with 2 projects at risk, and 6.3% commitments at risk (see Annex D). The portfolio also
included 6 regional projects with activitieskomponents in Tanzania (see Annex K.) Tanzania’s risk
management performance has been above average for the Africa Region. The strong performance i s
attributed to improving quality o f project preparation, implementation and supervision. Government
leadership o f the development agenda and strategic choices has meant stronger country ownership.
While much remains to be done, there has also been somewhat greater emphasis on harmonization and
alignment and on designing and implementing results-based Monitoring and Evaluation systems at the
onset o f projects. More fundamentally, the WBG country team i s highly decentralized with most
sectors represented in Dar es Salaam. This enables the Bank to play an on-going role in sector
1 “Joint Evaluation of GBS to Tanzania, 1995-2004” by Daima Associates Limited and ODI, April 2005. The work was
funded by UK DFID and NORAD, with terms of reference developed by the Tanzanian authorities and PRBS DPs.

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

3

dialogue and in implementation support to operations in the Bank’s portfolio. Increasing focus on
decentralization to the Country Office o f both staff and decision-making power will remain key during
the FY07- 10 period.

c. WORLD BANKGROUPPROGRAM FY07-10
1. Strategic Focus

7.

WBG engagement in Tanzania i s broad, covering a wide variety o f sectors and thematic areas. This
engagement is based on: (i)
Government expectations; (ii)
IDA’Sbroad mandate and technical capacity
within the country office which enables active IDA participation in government-led working groups at
both the program and sector levels, and facilitates access to the WBG’s global reach and technical depth;
and (iii)
the relative mandates and capacity o f other DPs. By maintaining a broad engagement across
sectors, the WBG i s well placed to support Government as it implements one o f the largest and most
complex programs in Africa, experimenting with new approaches on results, alignment and harmonization
untested elsewhere. The MKUKUTA aspires to a high degree o f cluster and cross-sectoral coherence
across a very broad policy range. Further, Government has embarked on an ambitious program for
MKUKUTA implementation, attempting a comprehensive and innovative approach on linking
MKUKUTA to planning, budget and monitoring systems.
8.
The WBG’s strategic areas o f engagement (as outlined in section 2 below) have been developed in
collaboration with Government, and in discussion with other DPs. The WBG will continue to explore in
the FY07-10 period both the efficiency and effectiveness o f proposed support to each sector and thematic
area in line with Government priorities, the WBG’s overall mandate, and other DPs’ willingness to make
long term commitments to key sectors in sufficient amounts.
2. Aligning with M K U K U T A

9. The WBG i s aligning its support to the three MKUKUTA clusters. However, many ongoing and
proposed WBG-financed programs support all three MKUKUTA Clusters, including the Poverty
Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs), the Local Government Support Program, capacity building programs
such as the Public Sector Reform Program, support for M&E, and much o f the WBG’s Analytical and
Advisory Activities (AAA) - see Table 4.
MKUKUTA Cluster I: Growth of the Economy and Reduction in Income Poverty.

.
..
.

Key MKUKUTA Outcomes
Increased foreign direct investment
Increased growth o f MSMEs
Increased agriculture productivity
Improved natural resources management
Reduced cost o f doing business:
o Improved reliability o f energy supply
o Increased number o f customers connected to the national electricity grid
o Reduced costs through enhanced roads, ports, railways and airports
o Increased credit to private sector

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

4

10. Key growth and poverty reduction development challenges are described in more detail in Part 11,
and include priorities identified in the 2006 Country Economic Memorandum - see B o x 2.
Box 2: Growth-Related Findings of the 2006 Country Economic Memorandum (CEM)
Recent acceleration in growth i s grounded in macro-economic stabilization and far-reaching structural reforms.
Growth has also benefited substantially from demand-side impulses - increased government spending financed by
higher tax revenues and aid flows. As growth in government spending slows, the locomotive for growth w i l l need to
shift to increased demand for exports and domestically produced goods, requiring Tanzania to strengthen
substantially its international competitiveness, accelerate structural change, and safeguard the environment while
maintaining macroeconomic stability.
Faster progress i s needed on reducing the cost o f doing business, inter alia by simplifying the regulatory and
licensing regime and improving access to justice, which w i l l improve access to credit. Government has the
opportunity, with substantial aid, to remove key energy and transport bottlenecks in a environmentally sustainable
manner.
Long-term structural change requires expansion and quality improvements in post-primary education. In addition,
government support i s needed for communication, infrastructure and innovation, including foreign direct investment
that brings increased access to and adaptation o f new technologies, and incentives for entrepreneurial activities.
These measures are expected to support production o f a widening range o f products and services in Tanzania.

The C E M underlines that continued fast growth o f the manufacturing sector i s critical for Tanzania’s sustained
economic growth and structural transformation. However, in order to generate shared growth that benefits the poor,
greater attention to sustainable development o f rural areas i s necessary. Census and poverty surveys show strong
inter and intra regional differences in poverty and growth.
To date, the impact o f reforms has been visible primarily in urban areas, especially Dar es Salaam. The C E M
highlights four areas where the authorities should scale-up reforms with a rural focus:
0

0

0

0

improved access to markets - this requires investments in trunk and feeder roads and removal o f licensing
constraints to establishment o f storage facilities and market facilitation;
financial sector reforms - t o bring financial services closer to rural communities, to facilitate added value in farm
and non farm activities;
financing o f local governments - further progress i s needed to develop a sound and predictable intergovernmental
fiscal framework, a necessary precondition to strengthening delivery o f local infrastructure and services;
policies to support agriculture - as agriculture i s essentially a private sector activity, the authorities can directly
help the sector by simplifying the tax, regulatory and licensing regimes needed to facilitate domestic production
and value added, in addition to public expenditures on research, extension, irrigation and drainage, which play an
important role in supporting sustainable agriculture.

11. The WBG, in collaboration with DPs, is supporting government efforts to address the challenges, as
described in Part 111. WBG intends to build on the following areas:
i. financial sector, by supporting expanded services to entrepreneurs and Micro, Small and Medium
Sized Enterprises (MSMEs);

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

5

ii. transport sector, by scaling up investments and furthering efforts to strengthen the finances and
independence o f the Road Agency, and by reducing inter-modal rail and port bottlenecks, with a
focus on strengthening transport links;
iii.legalhegulatory environment, where Tanzania was among the top 10 reformers last year (2007
Doing Business indicators), although still lagging in performance at 142 out o f 175 countries;
iv. rural productivity, principally through support for the agriculture sector development program;
v. energy, to overcome the huge backlog in financing o f maintenance and distribution, to identify a
least cost investment plan, and to strengthen key sector institutions, such as TANESCO and the
Regulator, EWURA;
vi. protecting the natural resource base through: a sustainable minerals project to help improve
corporate governance in mineral extraction, and address environment, safety and value addition
challenges o f small-scale mining; a follow-on Lake Victoria program dealing with increasingly
difficult inter-sector issues; and sustainable management o f coastal and deep sea fishing resources,
together with protection o f the livelihoods o f small scale fishing communities, through the
ongoing Marine and Coastal Environmental Management Program - mainland Tanzania and
Zanzibar recently agreed on a revenue-sharing formula that had hitherto hindered cooperation, and
on creation o f a shared Deep Sea Fishing Authority; and
vii. regional integration, building from the solid portfolio o f activities that support East African
integration (eg. the Trade and Transport Facilitation Project and the Lake Victoria Environmental
Program), with new support for the East Africa Power Pool and a Regional Communication
Infrastructure Project, complemented by analytical work to support policy and financing choices.
Box3: Energy
Energy i s a key constraint to growth in Tanzania, notably for energy-intensive businesses such as mining, and to
ensuring a healthy, well-educated workforce, and achievement of the MDGs. Particularly in urban centers, growing
at twice the overall economic growth rate of Tanzania, there i s huge unmet electricity demand among small and
medium businesses - these otherwise have to rely on generators costing twice to three times as much as grid
electricity. Currently overall access to electricity in Tanzania i s estimated at lo%, with only 2% in rural areas, and
overall generating capacity i s 1084 MW, including 561 MW hydro and 180 MW leased for a relatively short period.
Expanding access requires substantial investment in generation, transmission and distribution given the country’s
size and low connectivity. Recurrent droughts have highlighted the vulnerability to dependence on hydropower. In
2006, as in other drought-prone years, there was massive load-shedding, compounded by inadequate investment in
alternatives to hydro-power, and poor management of the sector, including of Tanzania’s Generation, Transmission
and Distribution company (TANESCO). While the economic impact i s difficult to quantify, given the informality of
much business, GDP growth could have been 2 percentage points less as a result o f problems in the power sector.
Rainfall in 2007 has improved considerably. This, together with the 180 MW of emergency generation capacity, the
planned addition o f 145 M W from new permanent plants later this year, and new management at TANESCO,
provides a new opportunity to put the sector on a sound footing for the longer term. Among the key challenges are:
(i)need for suitable PPP framework to encourage provision of least cost generation by the private sector; (ii)
independence of TANESCO to operate commercially; (iii)agreement on least cost investment plan for generation,
transmission and distribution, together with finance at an affordable price; (iv) regional electricity interconnection,
through East and Southern African power pools; and (v) access expansion, includingprimarily intensification among
the high growth areas o f the country.

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

6

12. IFC and MIGA, working with the Bank, are supporting the financial, infrastructure, mining and
service sectors, including tourism, to support scale-up o f private investments and increased domestic
value added. Both IFC and MIGA also expect to promote FDI through the provision o f investments,
guarantees and technical assistance, and support for MSMEs. Examples o f IFC investments include: a $10
million hotel loan in Zanzibar, expected by end FY07; an MSME business development support unit in
the Exporters Association and Chamber o f Commerce; a credit line targeted to women entrepreneurs
through EXIM Bank; and product development and export training for Zanzibari women. MIGA's
recently-created Small Investor Program is available to assist small and medium investors with their
foreign direct investment o f up to US$5 million. The Bank, IFC and WBI will continue to support the
Government in their public-private partnerships (PPPs), while I F C and MIGA will continue to support
promotion o f Tanzania as an Investment Destination, through the Tanzania Investment Center. IFC/FIAS
plans a rapid bench-marking o f Zanzibar against 'Doing Business' Indicators, to update the agenda for
private-public sector dialogue there. With other DPs and the private sector, the Bank, IFC and the WBI
are expected to support a Tanzanian campus o f the African Institute for Science and Technology (AIST)
so as to strengthen science and technology skills for technological innovation and advancement, building
o n planned WBG support for tertiary education.

13. To strengthen government, civil society and DP understanding o f the strategic and emerging
opportunities and challenges for growth and to sharpen the focus o f interventions in response to these, the
Bank Group will provide selective analytic and advisory work that can be used to improve strategy policy
actions. These will include macro/fiscal management studies, growth studies (including growth and
poverty, sub-national growth, tourism, gender and growth), investment climate analyses (including annual
Investor Roundtables, investment climate assessments), financial sector assessments, labour market
assessments, infrastructure analyses (particularly energy, telecom and transport), and agriculture sector
analyses (see B o x 4).
MKUKUTA Cluster 11:Improvement of Quality of Life and Social Well-Being.
o
o
o
o
o

Key M K U K U T A Outcomes
Increased enrolment in and quality o f post-primary education
Improved provision o f quality health services
Increased coverage/use o f HIV/AIDS preventive, treatment and support services
Improved access to water and sanitation
Increased capacity o f poor households to care for vulnerable groups.

14. A key challenge for improvement o f quality o f life and social well-being, as outlined in Part I1 and
summarized below, is to minimize disparities between rich and poor, urban and rural populations, across
age groups, genders and disability, in access to, and use of, social services. Expanding access for all-to
quality post primary education, quality health services (especially for pregnant women), HIV and AIDS
prevention and treatment, as well as to social protection services-is an increasingly important focus for
achieving the MDGs. To address the above challenges, the WBG will continue to support Government
efforts as defined in Cluster I1o f the MKUKUTA.
15. In education, the WBG will focus on: (i)
addressing system wide issues, such as supply and quality
o f teaching staff, materials and education outcomes; (ii)
expanding access in post-primary education; and
(iii)
ensuring education responds to the changing demands o f the labour market. Support for secondary

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

7

education, which i s currently provided as sector budget support, i s likely to be folded into the PRSCs,
whereas support for tertiary and vocational education and training i s expected to be in the form o f analysis
and investment financing, as i s support for Zanzibar’s basic education improvement program.

16. The Bank’s support to health focuses on improving the system’s capacity to deliver quality services
by improving allocative and technical efficiency. This i s expected to strengthen capacity o f both public
and private providers to deliver quality health services to a growing and urbanizing population, with
particular attention to the poor and vulnerable. An on-going investment program in health w i l l be
extended through FY 10 with supplemental financing to address short term financing gaps in AIDS and
malaria. Thereafter, the Bank’s health financing i s expected to be provided through PRSCs. The Bank will
continue to provide expertise and global experience on reproductive and maternal health, health financing
and health insurance, human resources, and public-private partnerships. In addition, the Bank w i l l support
improving Tanzania’s capacity to respond to and mitigate the effects o f regional and global epidemics.
IFC support i s being explored for private hospitals and pharmacies, and the production o f long-lasting,
insecticide-treated malaria bednets. An improved multi-sector response to malnutrition in Tanzania
(supported through analysis and a Dutch Trust Fund) i s expected to contribute toward greater educational
attainment, productivity and growth. The Bank will also provide analysis and advice on how to better
manage social risk and reach the vulnerable members o f the community.
17. The Bank i s currently supporting development o f the second National Multi-sector Strategic
Framework for HIV/AIDS under the Tanzania Multisectoral Aids Project (TMAP), which w i l l continue
through FY08. Given the large number o f DPs with earmarked financing for HIV/AIDS, the Bank intends
to mainstream i t s financing through PRSCs, as well as through components in ongoing and pipeline
programs such as TASAF 11, energy, mining and transport. The Bank will continue to provide technical
advice on HIV/AIDS financing and M&E, and together with WBI, i s also exploring options to jointly
support capacity building on governance and accountability for HIV/AIDS programs.
18. The Bank i s supporting a recently approved comprehensive 5-year Water Sector Development
Program. This program, put together over the past two years based on analytical work by Government and
the Bank, has led to a comprehensive Water Sector Policy and investment plan. Financing i s being
complemented by technical support in sanitation and hygiene promotion, through the Bank’s Water &
Sanitation Program - Africa, with support from the Gates Foundation and the regional N i l e Basin
Initiative. IFC i s supporting development o f five “small town” water utility models on public-private
partnerships (PPPs) to improve water and sanitation services and to promote commercial utility practices.
W B I expects to help enhance community service delivery by facilitating community participation in
implementation/ management o f on-going water projects.
MKUKUTA Cluster III: Governance and Accountability

..
..

Key MKUKUTA Outcomes
Strengthened fiscal decentralization
Improved use o f local development funds
Improved public service delivery by improved public sector managementhapacity
Improved management, transparency and accountability o f public resources
Timely and appropriate justice for all
Strengthened national monitoring and evaluation systems

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

8

19. The MKUKUTA recognizes Cluster I11 as the bedrock for achieving growth and efficient service
delivery, and President Kikwete has made many statements confirming his government’s focus on
governance and accountability. The authorities have made commitments to improving the performance o f
the public service and moving services closer to the people through “decentralization by devolution”.
Although slow to take-off, there i s also commitment to revamp the legal/judicial system.

20. As discussed in Part I1 and summarized below, significant challenges remain, notwithstanding
progress. These include: (i)
poor public sector pay and accountability; (ii)
weak public sector capacity to
manage and account for resources, including at local government level; (iii)lagging legal reforms
requiring strengthening o f various government departments; (iv) weaknesses in the anti-corruption
legislation and strategy requiring a new Anti-Corruption Act and strengthened institutions; and (v) weak
demand-side accountability, for example Parliament, the media and civil society, as was borne out by
recent G A C consultations summarized in B o x 4 below.
Box 4: Expanding Demand for Governance and Anti-corruption (GAC)
The WBG i s committed to help develop more capable and more accountable states and institutions that can devise
and implement sound policies, provide public services, set the rules governing markets, and control corruption.
Governance and anti-corruption (GAC) are an integral part of the development challenge. State and non-state
stakeholders can help shape the quality of governance and impact development outcomes.
DPs have harmonized their dialogue on GAC through the Tanzanian Governance Working Group (GWG), currently
led by Denmark, with the WBG as an active participant. In December 2006 and January 2007, the GWG convened a
series o f consultations with Government, Parliamentarians,Non-State Actors and DPs on the Bank’s role.
Participants valued the opportunity to speak about Governance issues openly in an informal environment.
Government welcomed the Bank’s global knowledge and support on these topics, as well as the synergy from
common DP financing that helped to strengthen key governance and accountability systems, including the budget,
financial management, audits, procurement. Parliamentarians appreciated being included in a dialogue from which
they indicated they are often marginalized, and recommendedthat this type of exchange continue. Non-State actors
reflected a strong analytic grasp o f the GAC issues and echoed many of the same concerns as the parliamentarians.
DPs used this process to help further improve coordination of their GAC efforts.
The following were key recommendations to DPs: (i)support strengthening of fiduciary systems; (ii)reduce DP
conditionalities; (iii)support better definition o f results and monitoring of achievements, including qualitatively on
how results are achieved, how much i s achieved, and at what cost; (iv) support Parliament and Civil Society’s
capacity to hold the executive accountable; and (v) help with reforms aimed at upholding rule o f law, reforming the
legal framework, providing quality public information in a sufficiently disaggregated and timely fashion, and
monitoring service delivery at the district and village levels. In addition, stakeholders reiterated the need for the
country to remain in the driver’s seat and for development partners to support domestic initiatives.

21. Over the FY07-10 period, the WBG will continue to work with the authorities and implementing
agencies to minimize corruption risks in use o f public funds, including in WBG-financed
programs/projects, notably by strengthening public financial management, audit, and procurement
functions. Support i s already being provided through the Public Sector Reform Program, the Local
Government Support Program, and the Public Financial Management Reform Program. This support is
expected to be deepened during the FY07-10 period. Financial support for e-Government may be
considered to strengthen service delivery, depending on adequacy o f funding from other sources.
Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

9

22. Support to the demand side o f good governance, including strengthening the capacity o f non-state
actors, contributes to greater transparency in the use o f public funds. The Bank i s providing financial
support to demand-side accountability through an Accountability, Transparency, and Integrity Project. I t
supports strengthening the legal sector, a National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan, and
Oversight and Watchdog Institutions - such as Parliament, the media and civil society organizations.
W B I plans complementary support for a stronger media and Parliament. The Bank’s on-going financial
support to community-based development through TASAF I1 (which includes support to Zanzibar), i s
also designed to strengthen demand-side accountability. When TASAF I1 i s mainstreamed (most likely by
FY10) the Bank will remain engaged through a strong AAA program - see Table 4.
23. Joint DP financial and procurement management assessments will continue, with a view to
mitigating risks o f weak fiduciary capacity. Analyses are also planned on the governance challenges o f
rapid urbanization and on deepening our understanding o f the political economy (including Zanzibar), so
as to help guide appropriate policy and program choices. Building on work already undertaken by the
DPG, the Bank, in consultation with DPs, also plans to study governance issues related to the
management o f natural resources in two or three sectors (forestry, fisheries and/or minerals), covering a
broad range o f issues such as public financial management, human resources management, legal aspects,
etc. To mitigate perceived extra fiduciary risks on Zanzibar, due to limited capacity building over the past
several years, additional support and oversight i s being provided for projects and programs there at both
design and implementation stages. Ongoing analytical work i s expected to lead to financial and technical
support for public service and public financial management reforms.
Strengthening Tanzania’s M&E systems will be particularly important to enhance the focus on
results and improved governance over the FY07-10 period. Delay in carrying out a Household Budget
Survey (HBS) has meant that there i s no update on poverty in Tanzania since 2001, a real drawback for
decision-making. The HBS survey i s currently ongoing. In 2008, a National Panel Survey will be rolled
out. This w i l l facilitate annual data and analysis on poverty and income dynamics, better tracking o f
trends, and more timely feedback on the impact o f policy choices. The Bank i s well placed to support the
results agenda through advice and financing for the statistical master plan, as well as capacity
improvements at national and sector levels.

24.

-

3. Partnership Principles and Practice
25. To meet Tanzania’s development goals, Government and DPs have co-signed a set o f partnership
principles that are, in some cases, more ambitious than the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.’ Table
2 contains baseline data on the Paris indicators for the Bank’s support to Tanzania. It also contains Bankspecific targets for 2010 based on an assessment o f foreseen developments, notably planned change in aid
modalities. Compliance i s to be monitored annually through the JAST Monitoring F r a m e w ~ r k . ~

’

The Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness i s available at: http://www,aidharmonization.org/.
See Part 111, Sections A.2 and C.3.

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

10

4. Harmonized Aid Modalities

26. The Bank i s aligning behind Government’s programs and strategies, increasingly using
harmonized aid modalities, such as development policy lending, basket funds, and joint
analytical and advisory services (see, for example, indicators 9 and lob, Table 2), and relying
more and more on Government processes and systems. This approach reduces Government’s
transaction costs and increases aid effectiveness by strengthening Government’s systems
(including sector review processes, financial management, accounting, auditing, procurement
and M&E). In addition, it encourages greater attention to cross-sector linkages (such as the
impact o f water availability o n health and educational outcomes). Table 3 provides an overview
o f the planned evolution o f aid modalities over the FY07- 10 period.
27. Development Policy Lending. General Budget Support (GBS) i s the preferred aid modality
o f the Tanzanian authorities, and i s currently provided by fourteen DPsY6up from five in 2000.
Decisions are based on a common performance assessment framework and joint annual review
processes, designed to engage the authorities at regular intervals during the budget cycle on key
development issues - such as energy, transport, fiduciary reforms. This dialogue culminates each
year in DP commitments to the authorities about the amount o f their budget support, used in
preparing the budget guidelines. The GBS dialogue i s led by a rotating Troika o f DPs, currently
Sweden, Switzerland and UK, plus the Bank as a permanent member. While progress has been
made in making the dialogue more strategic and substantive, and more open to civil society, as
well as in providing more timely analytical inputs, all are agreed that more could be done both on
the Government and the D P side to further improve its effectiveness.

28. Assuming continued progress o n public financial management, procurement, budget
planning and implementation, as well as in development outcomes, the Bank plans to increase
the amount o f financing through the Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) over the FY0710 period to as much as $400 million in FY10, underpinned by strong analytic work. Financing
for the following sectors are expected to move to budget support: agriculture; health; HIV/AIDS;
local government; and social protection.
29. Discussions are underway in Tanzania to determine how and when specific sectors might
move to budget support. In this context, the Bank has proposed a set o f key principles - see B o x
5, derived from the broader framework to assess country readiness for making productive use o f
development policy operations discussed with the IDA Deputies in November 2006.’

African Development Bank, Canada, Denmark, EC, Finland, Ireland, Japan, Germany, The Netherlands,
Norway, Swed’en, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and Word Bank.
“A Framework to Assess Country Readiness for Making Productive Use o f Development Policy Operations”
available at: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/IDA/Resources/Semin~~2OPDFs/734491164920 192653DPO.pdf.

’

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

12

Box 5: Draft Principles for Shifting to Budget Support @PL)
The shift in aid modalities-away from specific investment operations to development policy financing-requires
individual sectors/programs to be able to use such funds effectively. An appropriate policy and institutional
framework i s needed. The following optimal principles are unlikely to be fully met, but taken together, should help
assess whether a particular sector or context i s ready for budget support, and also flag where there may be need for
risk mitigation measures and capacity development.

.
.

1. The Policy and Institutional Framework
Policy Framework - an acceptable policy and institutionalsector framework which includes the set o f laws,
regulations, practices, and institutions that make the system work.
Sector Strategy - a costed medium- to long-term sector strategy, consistent with overall macro/fiscal
framework, also addressing distributionaland environmental aspects, including an M&E Framework.
Budget Framework and Expenditure Control. A r e mechanisms in place for sector to appropriately utilize
adequate financing through annual Government budget process (both allocations and final outturn)?
Annual Review - are there inclusive, annual review processes which assess the status of the sector strategy
implementation (both progradproject implementation and outcomes)?

.

2.

3.

..
...

Ownership
Track Record - does the Government program show solid progradproject implementation and results?
Participatory Processes and Consultation - i s policy formation, program design, program implementation
and M&E conducted in an open and transparent manner?
Capacity of Ministries, Departments and Agencies
Program Design
Program Implementation
Public Financial Management and Fiduciary Capacity, including transparency and external oversight
Program Monitoring and Evaluation

30. Investment lending through Baskets in Support of Sector Wide Approaches (SWAps).
The Bank i s providing financing through basket funds in support o f SWAps for the following
sectors: private sector development (including support for the Business Environment
Strengthening for Tanzania), together with Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden and UK;
agriculture, together with Denmark, EC, IFAD, Ireland and Japan; financial sector, together with
Canada, Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden and UK; tax modernization, together with Denmark,
EC, Germany and UK; water, together with the African Development Bank, Belgium, EIB,
Germany, Japan, the Netherlands and Switzerland; health, together with Canada, Denmark,
Germany, Ireland, Netherlands, Switzerland and UNFPA; public service reform, together with
Canada, Denmark and UK; and legal sector reform together with Denmark and Sweden. Basket
funds in support for SWAps are also expected for public financial management reform, forestry,
transport and the next generation o f public sector reforms.
31. Investment lending outside of Baskets. In line with Partnership Principles, stand alone
investment financing will continue to complement sector and general budget support, for
example, for large-scale infrastructure, for piloting new approaches, and for particularly complex
investments where other regional country partners are involved.Where investment financing i s
maintained, IDA financing i s likely to remain large relative to other DPs - historically five times
the average annual resource flow per donor per operation, and almost twice that o f the next
largest donor. Inputs at this scale help keep overall aid transaction costs low, and underline the
need for any changes in IDA financing modalities and sector choices to be gradual and carefully
planned.
Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

13

p

32. Analytical and Advisory Activities. The WBG remains well placed to provide policy advice
and analysis. Such work i s increasingly undertaken jointly with Government and other DPs (see
Table 2, indicator lob.) The WBG i s also exploring ways to partner with local think tanks and
academia so as to strengthen local technical expertise, with support also from the World Bank
Institute (WBI). Both the need and scope for analysis and advice to guide policy and expenditure
decisions i s expected to become an increasingly key aspect o f the Bank's program as financing
becomes more programmatic. In addition, the WBG i s supporting program-specific 'impact
evaluations', for example in the Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF) and in the water sector.
In response to emerging problems and priorities, the analytical and advisory work-program
outlined below may be adjusted during the FY07- 10 period.
Table 4: Planned Analytical and Advisory Activities

'Sector Dialogue
.PEFAR*
'Human Development
Report (HDR)

Sector Dialogue
* PEFAR *
HDR
*Poverty and Social Impact
Analysis
*National Panel Survey on
Poverty
.District PEWMDG Report
' A i d Predictability

'Sector Dialogue
*PEFAR*
* HDR
'Poverty and Social Impact
Analysis
'Statistical Capacity
-Output-BasedAid

'Sector Dialogue
*PEFAR*
a HDR
.Poverty and Social Impact
Analysis
= CEM
*District PER Follow up

Policy Notes:

Policy Notes:

Policy Notes:

'Growth and Poverty

Policy Notes:
'Export Competitiveness

Private/Financial Sector:

Private/Financial Sector:

Sustainable Agriculture:
'Agriculture Policies for

Sustainable Agriculture:
mAgriculturalPolicies for
Sustainable Growth

'Sub National Growth
*WomenEntrepreneurs'
Voices (IFC)
.Regional Trade

'Tourism & Shared Growth
*EAC Labor Market
Integration

Private /Financial Sector

.Labor Market
'Doing Business (WB/IFC)
'Investment Climate
Assessment (ICA)
'Investor Round Table
Financial Update
'Public-Private Partnership

'Doing Business
(WB/IFC)
'Investor Round Table
.Gender/Growth
Assessment (IFC)

Sustainable Agriculture:

'Fertilizer Study
'Rural ICA
Infrastructure

'Energy Efficiency

Private/Financial Sector:

Sustainable Agriculture:

'Farm Productivity and
Commercialization
.Charcoal and Fuel Wood

Infrastructure
'Energy Sector Performance
over past 10 years

'Doing Business (WB/IFC)
'Investor Round Table
Financial Sector Assessment
(Corporate Governance,
ROSC, Creditor Rights)

Sustainable Growth
'Agricultural Growth, Food
Security, Market Demand
'Socio Economic Impact of
Land Degradation

Doing Business (WBIIFC)
.ICA
'Investor Round Table
'Long-Term Finance

Infrastructure
.Inter Model Transport
Chain

[nfrastructure
'Global and Regional
Teleconz Connectivity

PEFAR integrates two diagnostic exercises: Public Expenditure Review (PER) and Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA) to facilitate a comprehensive assessment o f Public Financial Management.

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

15

Table 4: Planned Analytical and Advisory Activities (cont.)
Health
‘Human Resources
‘Nutrition Study

Education
*TechnicalEducation and
Vocational Training Study

-

Health
.Drug Tracking Study
*Nutrition Commitment &
Capacity

Social Protection
Orphansivulnerable
children
Water
*Africa Sanitation and
Hygiene Promotion
-Water Resource Mgt

Social Protection
*Social Fund Conditional
Cash Transfers
Water
Africa Sanitation and Hygiene
Promotion

.wBI Governance
Indicators
.Local Revenues
GAC Consultations

.wBI Governance Indicators
.Zanzibar Local Government
-Zanzibar - Public Service
Mgmt/Governance
‘Sector Governance Review

- State of the Cities Report

Education
‘Secondary Education PER
Health
.Health Financing (insurance)
Water
*Africa Sanitation and
Hygiene Promotion

Health
‘Institutional Assessment o f
Tanzania Food and Nutrition
Council
Water
.Africa Sanitation and
Hygiene Promotion
’ Urban Water Sustainability

AIDS
-AIDS PER
‘Governance and
Accountability for HIV/AIDS
Programs (WBI)

- WBI Governance Indicators - WBI Governance Indicators
-Public Service ReforndTen
Years On
-Innovative Ways to Address
Demand side Accountability

*Urban Transition
’GAC FoIIow-UP

‘Sector Governance review
Political Economy and
Governance - Update

5. Financing o f Future Operations
3 3 . IDA Financing Envelope. IDA’s FY07 performance based allocation (PBA) for Tanzania,
after netting-out the impact o f the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative, i s SDR366 million, or
approximately $550 m i l l i o n at today’s rate o f exchange. IDA also intends to frontload resources
from FY08 to FY07. For the years FY08 through FY10, Tanzania’s financing envelopes will
continue to be determined based o n the IDA P B A system, with actual financing limits
determined annually, dependent on: (i)
the country’s performance as assessed annually by the
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) and the WB’s Annual Report on Portfolio
Performance; (ii)
Tanzania’s performance relative to that o f other IDA countries; (iii)
the overall
resource envelope available t o IDA during the FY07-10 replenishment periods; (iv) changes in
the list o f active IDA-eligible countries; and (v) the terms (grants or loans) for which Tanzania
qualifies under the grant eligibility and allocation framework. Financing envelopes for FY08- 10
are expected to be similar to those in FY07, although FY09 and FY 10 allocations also depend on
the outcome o f I D A 15 negotiations and possible refinements to the PBA system.

34. IDA’s performance-based allocation cannot provide firm predictions o f future financing
commitments for Tanzania over the full FY08-10 period, making it difficult for the country to
plan with a degree o f certainty, a key development challenge outlined in Part 111. As a result o f
concerns raised during the JAST preparations about the reliability o f DP projections for the
government’s medium term financial projections (MTEF), the Bank intends, under the auspices
o f the DPG, to undertake a Tanzania-specific study on aid predictability (FY08).
Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

16

35. IDA commitments and disbursements to Tanzania in any given fiscal year will be managed
using the joint risk approach outlined in Part 111, within the overall IDA funding envelope. This
outlines a joint assessment across five categories o f risk: political, political/economic, fiduciary,
institutional and operational, and external. Part I11 provides an assessment o f the likelihood and
potential impact o f each risk, together with risk mitigation measures, and monitoring
mechanisms. In the event these mechanisms do not mitigate these risks or new risks emerge, the
WBG will work with DPs to identify, assess, and communicate consequences to Government,
retaining the flexibility to adjust the nature and level o f actual IDA financing accordingly. The
WBG has committed t o take action in an open and transparent manner. In keeping with the
WBG’s commitments o n alignment and harmonization, IDA financing may be adjusted
downward in any given year if there are significant negative deviations .with respect to:
1. continuing sound macroeconomic policies and management;
2. government commitment to achieving MKUKUTA objectives and MDGs;
3. continuing peace and the rule o f law and the independence o f the judiciary; and
4. good governance, accountability o f the Government to the citizenry, and integrity in
public life, including the active fight against corruption.
These overarching principles are a subset o f the General Budget Support principles agreed
between the Government and Tanzania’s GBS donors.
36. Assuming Tanzania continues to perform well, and additional IDA resources become
available, these could be absorbed by Tanzania to accelerate reforms in key sectors. Cost
estimates o f achieving the M D G s exceed currently available resources. The recent C E M
examined the potential for scaling up. An analysis o f real exchange rate movements and
developments in the tradable sector do not suggest a negative impact o f official development aid
flows o n competitiveness in Tanzania. The impact o f additional aid o n the real exchange rate is
likely to be modest and more than offset by aid-induced productivity increases. However, this
requires additional expenditures to be spent efficiently o n areas that quickly reduce supply
constraints, with high import content, such as large scale transport and electricity investments.
37. Proposed IDA Pipeline. Consistent with discussion o f IDA financing above, the Bank
expects to provide specific p r o g r d p r o j e c t support as follows over the FY07-FY10 period:

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

17

Table 5: Proposed Financing Program
^^

-

_.

"
"
_
l
l
"
_
_
_
l
_
.
_
I
-

FY07

US%

US$

FY08

PRSC 5

190

PRSC6

Water Sector Support
Program
Zanzibar Basic
Education

200

Secondary Education
Supplement
Energy Access

42

1
1
1

I

"

FYOi

" "

.---

250 PRSC7

US$
300

50

Transport APL

47

Sustainable Minerals

-

'FYI0

-pTS$

PRSC8

20

Energy Access

40

38. Programs in the environment, energy and water supply are currently programmed for
FY 11. If additional IDA resources should become available, one or more o f these programs
might be financed during the FY07-10 period, depending o n sector needs and alternative
financing. Proposed financing for Science, Technology, and Vocational Training, might be split
into two. If funding from other sources for Statistical Capacity and e-Government i s inadequate,
financing from IDA may be considered.

D. CONCLUSION
39. The proposed WBG program with Tanzania during the FY07-10 period has been built o n
the experience and knowledge gained over the previous six years, recognizing the importance o f
government ownership, sound partnerships, flexibility, a greater focus o n outcomes, and the need
to be effective and efficient in delivery o f WBG support. Enhancing Bank expertise in-country
for key sector and cross-sector work is critical to sustaining the policy dialogue, supporting
program implementation, and contributing to improved outcomes.

Paul Wolfowitz
President
Washington, D.C.
March 1,2007

Part IV: World Bank Group Program with Tanzania

400

100

220 Agriculture

by Juan Jose Daboub

18

*
v)

e

2
2

*
v1
e

3

3

h

!5

0
c.1

I

.

.

I

I

I

0

0

.

.

I

I

I

I

I

.

l

.
e,

'
.-

.d

.e

c)

E:

w

.-c
3
m

-z

;:........
e,

.e

C

W

e

W

o

.

W

.

I

0

0

0

0

W

W

W

N

N
N

. . . .

I AI

d
N
cc
U

%

.

.

.

.

.

.O

n

0

0

I

m

N

2 0

I

0

0

I

0

0

.

I

0

I

I

I

I

is

0

0

0

0

I

I

I

I

I

c

t

64

Y

I

.

I

I

I

00

N

I

.

I

I

I

I

rn

3

5
l a

0

a

0
W

m

m

Annex B: Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (FY 2001-2006)

TANZANIACAS COMPLETIONREPORT
Date o f CAS: June 30,2000
Period covered by the C A S Completion Report: FY 200 1-2006

Overview
1.
This report represents an assessment o f the World Bank Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) fiscal
years 2001-2003 for the United Republic o f Tanzania. Given the need to align with the Government’s
new Poverty Reduction Strategy (MKUKUTA after its Swahili acronym) and Joint Assistance Strategy
for Tanzania (JAST), as w e l l as the agreement among development partners (DPs) to prepare a joint
partnership program, the Bank postponed development o f i t s new C A S beyond the formal CAS period.
This CAS Completion Report (CAS CR) and any reference to the “CAS periods” therefore cover fiscal
years 200 1-2006.

The key objective o f the CAS C R is to evaluate the Bank’s contribution toward outcomes within
2.
the CAS framework (see Annex F11 o f the 2000 CAS). The Tanzania CAS framework followed the
standard format o f such frameworks at the time. I t was organized around objectives rather than
outcomes and highlighted strategies and actions, adjustments/ benchmarks, measurement tools, partner
programs and Bank instruments aligned with these objectives.
3.
Part A o f this CAS C R discusses the country’s long- and medium-term strategic goals to which the
Bank’s strategy was aligned. Part B focuses on the strategic objectives o f the CAS and discusses
whether or not the Bank contributed to outcomes within these objectives. Part C evaluates the Bank’s
portfolio performance over the CAS period. Part D provides lessons learned and highlights the issues
that should be dealt with in the next CAS.
A.

Long-Term Strategic Goals, CAS Objectives and CAS Implementation

4.
Tanzania’s Development Vision 2025 from 1995 envisions “[. . .] that Tanzania will have
graduated from a least developed country to a middle income country by the year 2025 with a high level
o f human development”. In 1997, Tanzania developed the National Poverty Eradication Strategy
(NPES) as an action plan to advance the objectives for poverty eradication as spelled out in the
Development Vision until 2010. The NPES identified three areas o f strategic interventions namely: (i)
creating an enabling environment for poverty eradication; (ii)
building the capacity for poverty
eradication; and (iii)
eradicating poverty.

5.
Tanzania finalized its first Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) in October 2000’. As an
integral part o f the Highly Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) initiative, the PRSP was prepared with the
active involvement o f national and international stakeholders (including c i v i l society). Drawing from
the Development Vision and the NPES, it defined short- and medium-term targets on poverty reduction
An Interim-PRSP was discussed by the IDA Board on March 2000.

31

and human development. In addition, the PRSP defined the required budgetary allocations, specific
policies, actions and institutional changes necessary for reducing income and non-income poverty and
improving living standards.
6.
The strategic directions o f the first PRSP encompassed three broad priority areas: i)increasing
growth and creating economic opportunities for the poor; ii)enhancing human capabilities; and iii)
increasing empowerment and accountability. Furthermore, the PRSP defined priority sectors for
poverty-focused budget expenditures namely health, primary education, water, legal and judicial
systems, rural roads and agriculture. Since the launch o f the PRSP, the Government issued three PRSP
Progress Reports, followed by IDA-IMF Joint Staff Assessments.

7.
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have guided PRSP targets, although the two
timelines are different - the time horizon o f the latest PRSP, aka MKUKUTA, is 2010, while the M D G s
timeline i s 2015. The PRSP targets are more ambitious than the M D G s in some areas, less in others.
For example, while the MDGs aim at halving the percentage o f people living below the national poverty
line by 2015 (from a 1990 baseline), the PRSPs aim at achieving this target by 2010. The PRSPs aim at
a reduction o f maternal mortality to 265 per 100,000 live births by 2010, while the MDG target i s 133 ?4o f the 1990 baseline o f 530 (see table 1 o f the Joint Program Document for a comparison between all
MKUKUTA targets and the MDGs including their current status).
8.
In parallel with the PRSP, the Government launched a Tanzania Assistance Strategy (TAS) in June
2002. This provided a framework for organizing donor assistance around PRSP priorities and gave
directions for increasing the percentage o f aid going through the budget. The 2000 CAS was informed
by the strategic priorities defined in the TAS and in the PRSP.

B.

CAS Outcomes by P R S P Priorities

9.
This section discusses CAS outcomes based o n the CAS framework. The C A S was organized
around the three PRSP priority areas with several development objectives under each priority area (a
total o f 24 C A S objectives). In some cases, only qualitative benchmark indicators were identified and
many indicators lacked clear targets. The CAS recognized the inadequacy o f data and M&E systems to
report o n outcomes particularly with respect to Bank outcomes. In addition, results-based partnership
programs remain challenging, as it is difficult to isolate World Bank Group contributions Erom other
influences. Either the Bank’s contributions are easily tracked at a task level, but it remains relatively
hard to trace causality, or they require a separate M&E system that distracts from contribution to
country-based goals.

10. Based on the following assessment o f CAS benchmarks in addition to the outcomes achieved
within each CAS objective, this CAS C R rates the Bank’s contribution to results over the CAS period as
satisfactory.

11. Country performance benchmarks are listed in table 1 below. With respect to these indicators, the

CAS stated that: “Many o f these benchmarks are qualitative (or represent process indicators), a
reflection o f the inadequate statistical base, particularly for human development, and the fact that reform
outcomes need to be measured over a long time horizon”.

32

Table 1: CAS country performance benchmarks
CAS Benchmark

2000 Baseline

Outcome
(latest year available)
Priority 1: Increasing Growth and Creating Economic Opportunities for the Poor
Growth: Increase per capita GDP 1.3% (1997-1999)
4% (2001-2006)
growth to about 3% in 2002-03
Roads: Increase the number o f
50% o f rural infrastructure
16% o f rural infrastructure
rural roads maintained by 50% by [trunkhegional roads managed
network in poor condition in
2003
by Tanroads] in poor condition
2005
N o microfinance loans by
Finance: Improve micro- and
US$89 million worth o f
rural financial services
National Microfinance Bank
microfinance loans through
(NMB)
NMB in 2006
Investment Climate: Increased
FDI U S 2 2 9 million average
FDI U S 4 7 0 million average
yearly inflow (1995-2000)
yearly inflow (2000-2006)
private investment
Priority 2: Building Human Capabilities
Education: Increase gross
Primary gross enrollment: 78%
112.7% in 2006
primary enrollment rates by 2.5
percentage points a year

-

Increase transition rate to
secondary schools from 15% in
2000 to 20% by 2003
Health: Increase YOo f children
under 2 receiving measles and
DPT vaccinations from 7 1 in
2000 to 75 by 2003
Increase YOo f pregnant women
delivering in health facilities
(from 50 in 2000 to 55 in 2003)
HIV/AIDS: Reduced prevalence
by 25% by 2002
Water: Increase % o f population
with access to safe/clean water
from 48.5 in 2000 to 55 by 2003
in rural areas, and from 68 to 75
in urban areas
Priority 3: Increasing Empowerr
Decentralization: Implement
local fiscal transfers to local
councils, and transfer control o f
staff to local councils
Justice: Harmonize legal/
regulatory framework by 2002
Corruption: Improve
accountability and reduce
corruption

-

Benchmark met?

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes - average
annual increase b y
5.8 percentage
points.
Yes

15%

39.8% in 2006

7 1%

80% coverage rate for measles
and 86% coverage for D P T in
2004

Yes

44%

47% in 2004

7.7%

7% in 2004

N o - increased,
but from lower
base and less than
envisaged.
No

Rural: 50%
Urban: 70%

Rural: 55% in 2003
Urban: 73% in 2003

Yes

Implementation o f Local
Government Capital
Development Grant system
underway
Legal Sector Reform Program
to harmonize legal framework
and improve legal institutions
developed
National audit office in place
with trained staff

Yes

ent and Accountability
L o w financial position and
capacity o f local authorities.

Weak and fragmented legal
framework.
Weak controller and Auditor
General

No

Yes

12. The only “benchmarks for Bank performance” that were mentioned were Bank-internal portfolio
indicators, Le. “[. . .] decrease the percentage o f risky projects from 14 to 10 percent o f the portfolio,
sustain the disbursement ratio at about 22 percent, maintain audit compliance, and shorten the time

33

between Board approval and effectiveness from the current six to seven months to fours months”. Table
2 shows that the Bank met or surpassed these benchmarks during the C A S period. Overall, the Bank’s
analytic and advisory work in addition to the performance o f its lending portfolio over the CAS period
was satisfactory (see section C for a more comprehensive discussion o n Bank performance).
Table 2: CAS Benchmarks for Bank Performance

CAS Benchmarks
Decrease percentage o f risky projects from 14% to
10% o f the portfolio.
Sustain disbursement ratio at about 22%.

Maintain audit compliance (with 90% o f on-time
audits).
Shorten the time between Board approval and
effectiveness from 6-7 months to 4 months.

Status

Average percentage o f risky projects over CAS
period was 9.5% o f the portfolio.
Average disbursement ratio o f 2 1% over CAS
period.
98% o f on-time audits during CAS period.
Average lag between approval and effectiveness
was 3.2 months over the CAS Deriod.

13. An important aspect o f the CAS was i t s focus o n new modalities to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness o f Bank financing. Its high-case scenario envisaged budget support, through annual series
o f Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs). In addition, the CAS envisaged programmatic
approaches in several sectors, e.g. health, primary education, and c i v i l service reform. These new forms
o f aid delivery are judged t o have contributed to decreased infant mortality rates, improved enrollment
and quality o f primary education, and improved public service delivery.

14. In Tanzania 14 Development Partners (DPs), including the Bank, are providing general budget
support within the Poverty Reduction Budget Support (PRBS) facility.2 An independent evaluation o f
GBS impact was finalized in 2005 (Joint Evaluation ufGBS tu Tanzania, 1995-2004 by Daima
Associates Limited and ODI, April 2005. The work was funded by UK DFID and NORAD, with terms
o f reference developed by the Tanzanian authorities and PRBS DPs). The report documents
improvements in effectiveness and efficiency o f the policy dialogue and resource transfers to Tanzania,
which has resulted in an improved financing and institutional framework for public policy and spending.
Budget support also enhanced the capacity o f government to influence the proximate determinants o f
poverty reduction.
FIRSTPRIORITY AREA:INCREASING GROWTH
AND CREATING ECONOMIC
OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE
POOR

15. Overall progress under the first priority area has been satisfactory. The CAS contributed to
high economic growth rates averaging 6.5 percent in 2001-2005. The last household budget survey was
conducted in 2000/200 1 and recent poverty numbers are therefore lacking. However, projections show
that-thanks also to high agriculture growth rates o f 4.8 percent during the CAS period-poverty was
reduced above all in rural areas. In addition, the CAS contributed significantly to improvements in the
national fiscal and macroeconomic framework, the tax regime, the financial sector (including micro-

The 14 DPs currently providing budget support include: African Development Bank, Canada, Denmark, DfID/UK,
European Commission, Finland, Germany (KfW), Development Cooperation Ireland, Japan (JICA), Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, Swiss Development Cooperation and the World Bank.

34

rural financial services), the national road network, the business environment and the development o f
social safety nets.

CAS Benchmarks
Reduction o f poverty incidence, especially in rural
areas, consistent with PRSP objectives.

Increase in per capita GDP growth rate from 1.3%
(1997-99) to about 3% in 2002-03.
Maintenance o f macroeconomic stability and
implementation o f full complement o f s-tructural and
social sector reforms.

Status
Estimates suggest a decline in poverty from 36% in
2000 to 30% in 2005, with simulations from the
2001 H B S suggesting a reduction in rural poverty
from 40.5% in 2000 to between 36.1 and 33.8 YOin
2004. Agriculture growth o f 4.8% during this
period i s estimated to have contributed to this result.
Increase in per capita GDP growth to 4% in 200 12006.
Macroeconomic stability achieved. Structural
reforms continued in addition to reforms in the
social sector.

16. According to a 2000/2001 household budget survey (HBS), 58 percent o f Tanzanians lived on less
than one dollar a day and 36 percent were below the national poverty line. Delayed 2006 H B S results
are expected later in 2007, as the authorities introduce national panel data, with planned annual updates.
Economic growth rates averaged 6.5 percent in 2001-2005, dropping slightly to 5.9 percent in 2006, but
are expected to reach 7.3 percent in 2007. High economic growth rates were reflected in high growth in
GDP per capita averaging 4 percent between 200 1 and 2006. Based o n these numbers poverty levels are
estimated to have decreased during the period 2000-2006 (see more below). The evidence for reduced
poverty i s backed by the significant increases in GDP per capita growth over the CAS period as the
second CAS benchmark. The third C A S benchmark was very broad, but significant evidence (further
discussed in the following sections) points toward good progress.
17. Assessing the Bank’s contribution to broad poverty reduction and growth objectives requires a
discussion o f the entire range o f Bank activities captured in the subsequent sections o f this report. As
the following analysis suggests, IDA made poverty eradication a central focus during implementation o f
the 2000 CAS - in some areas more successfully, in others less successfully. The baseline for
Tanzania’s development status as well as the analytic underpinning for policies was provided by a
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM)-Tanzania at the Turn of the Century carried out in 2001.
The study identified inadequate capital accumulation, productivity growth, poor support for the
transformation o f agriculture, disrupted progress in building human capital and delayed demographic
transition as the main factors behind Tanzania’s slow development progress. A more recent C E M and
Poverty Assessment (Sustaining and Sharing Economic Growth) was carried out during 2005-2006.
According to this study, recent growth is expected to have brought a decline in poverty to approximately
30 percent from the 36 percent measured for 2000/2001.
18. The CEM/Poverty Assessment projects that Tanzania will be able to attain the Millennium
Development Goal o f halving poverty by 2015, assuming an average growth rate o f 5.4 percent and a
population growth rate o f 2.9 percent (Le. the average population growth rate observed between the
1998 and 2002 censuses). However, this baseline scenario incorporates differential rural-urban growth
rates, which lead to a worsening o f inequality. It assumes that the Gini coefficient increases from 0.337
in 2001 to 0.352 in 2015. If inequality increases even more, the MDG target will be missed. The study

35

also attempts to determine rural poverty by projecting rural per capita consumption forward and
backward using the 2000/2001 HBS data. The analysis suggests a decline in rural poverty from 38.6
percent in 2001 to 33.8 percent in 2004. However, due to uncertainties with assumptions, a lower
decline to 36.1 percent may be realistic. There i s evidence o f progress in reducing poverty, as the
country achieved impressive growth rates in both urban and rural areas over the C A S period.
Inequality continues to present challenges. A lack o f new poverty numbers makes it difficult to
draw definitive conclusions on income poverty, but based on related surveys it appears that the
C A S objective can b e considered partially achieved.

CAS Benchmarks
Results o f the Household Budget Survey by 2001.

Approval o f operational poverty monitoring
indicators and survey methods.
Results o f pilot labor survey by 200 1.

Status

I
I

HBS conducted in 2000101; full report published in
July 2002.
MKUKUTA includes comprehensive results
framework linked with a comprehensive poverty
monitoring system.
Integrated labor survey conducted 200010 1.

19. CAS benchmarks were met. Progress in collecting and publishing survey data has been good,
notwithstanding delays in carrying out a new HBS after 2001. Since 2001 , the authorities have
published a labor force survey, population census, agricultural census, census o f business
establishments, Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) and HIV indicator survey. Using this
information, Tanzania prepared important survey and poverty monitoring reports including three
Poverty and Human Development Reports. In addition, a poverty map and social accounting matrix
were produced and the GDP was rebased. Government also prepared annual PRSP progress reports,
reviewed and substantially improved the poverty monitoring system, and prepared the MKUKUTA.
20. Notwithstanding progress in collecting and publishing economic statistics and administrative data,
quality and timeliness remain uneven. Also the frequency o f poverty statistics (currently every 8 years)
needs to be improved. To address this, the National Bureau o f Statistics has embarked on a statistical
master plan, whose development and implementation i s fully integrated in the M K U K U T A monitoring
system. A new labor force survey was fielded in 2006, another HBS will be fielded in 2007, and new
labor and poverty statistics are expected for 2007 and 2008 respectively. A national panel survey i s
being prepared to: strengthen monitoring o f MKUKUTA, facilitate impact evaluation, and provide
quality data on changes in household welfare (including high frequency poverty statistics).
21. The World Bank’s contribution came in the form o f technical and financial support to strengthen
capacities for statistical, economic growth and poverty monitoring and evaluation, including a grant for
STATCAP. Also, the current PRSC dialogue highlights the need for improved economic statistics and
routine data gathering on income poverty and other poverty indicators. As highlighted in the PRSC, the
Bank supports creation o f a national panel data set and a continuous HBS to provide monitoring
indicators on an annual basis. This objective can be considered substantially achieved, recognizing
that evaluation o f the poverty impact o f the Poverty Reduction and G r o w t h Policy (PRSP) and
IDA’Scontribution since 2001 suffers f r o m the delayed update in poverty numbers.

36

CAS Objective 3: Shift budget resources toward activities benefiting the poor
CAS Benchmarks
Adoption o f MTEF for FY2001-03 that sets
priorities with the PRSP.
Adoption o f 2001/02 budget in line with MTEF
priorities, and implementation o f PERs to confirm
adherence to priorities established.

Status
Adoption of MTEF set priorities with the PRSP
throughout CAS period.
Adoption of budgets in line with MTEF priorities
throughout CAS period, annual PER process
continued and further developedto improve
adherence to PRSP priorities.

22. The CAS benchmarks were met: Annual medium t e r m expenditure frameworks (MTEF) aligned
expenditures with PRSP priorities and the budget continues to comply with these priorities. Further, as
highlighted in various PRSP Progress Reports, the composition o f general public expenditure has
improved in favor o f priority sectors identified in the PRSP (primary education, health, agriculture
research and extension, rural roads, water, judiciary, and HIV/AIDS). Between 2000 and 2004,
expenditures in these priority sectors increased from 45 to 52 percent o f the national budget. However,
there has been a lack o f definition and classification to appropriately capture priority sector
expenditures, and the impact o n poverty reduction o f expenditures in priority sectors vis-a-vis other
sectors remains unclear.
23. The Bank's contribution to progress under this CAS objective took place within the annual public
expenditure review (PER) process, which also includes other stakeholders (see more below). The 2003
PER provides a good example o f impact beyond the CAS benchmarks. In addition to laying out the
limits and obstacles o f defining priority sectors for public expenditures mentioned above, the PER gave
concrete suggestions o n h o w to improve the alignment o f budget resources with the reduction in income
poverty. Based o n this analysis, the Government, together with the revision o f the PRSP and drafting o f
the MKUKUTA, initiated the Strategic Budget Allocation System (SBAS), which l i n k s budget
allocations with the MKUKUTA. Among other things, SBAS requires each agency to link proposed
allocations back to specific MKUKUTA objectives. Any requests for funding under the SBAS have to
be made with reference t o MKUKUTA goals and outcomes. T h e CAS benchmarks were m e t and the
Bank contributed to alignment o f budget resources t o w a r d poverty reduction. T h e objective was
therefore achieved.

CAS Benchmarks
Fulfillment o f Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF) and PRSP targets.

Replacement of cash management system with
efficient expenditure management based on budget
and spending priorities.
Full implementation o f Integrated Financial
Management System (IFMS).

Status
Completed review o f Tanzania's economic
performance under the PRGF in July 2003
(followed by new PRGF arrangement); completion
o f fifth review under subsequent PRGF arrangement
in August 2006.
Over the CAS period, the cash budget system
moved from monthly releases to quarterly releases
for many ministries, departments and agencies
(MDAs).
Implementation of IFMS in a l l ministries over the
CAS period; ongoing roll-out o f IFMS to agencies
and districts.

37

24.

The first CAS benchmark was met. Formulation o f the second CAS benchmark was not precise.

The objective was not to replace the Government’s cash management system, but to move from a shortterm system-providing only monthly releases-to a framework that would provide agencies with more
space for medium-term planning. According to the 2003 PER, ministries, departments and agencies
(MDAs) reported that quarterly releases initiated during the CAS period improved their planning and
strategic resource allocation to better support achievement o f PRSP goals.

25. A look at more tangible outcome indicators shows the strong fiscal performance and continued
macroeconomic stability during the CAS period. Overall government expenditures increased from 17
percent in fiscal 2000 to about 28 percent in fiscal 2006. Revenues increased from 11.3 percent o f GDP
to about 14.2 percent over the same period largely due to improvements in the tax regime (see below).
Inflation averaged 4.8 percent between 2000 and 2005, with a decline f r o m 6 percent in 2000 to 4.3
percent in 2005. With prudent fiscal and monetary policies, inflation remained l o w in fiscal 2003 and
2005, although it increased again t o 6.7 percent in December 2006 due to remnant effects o f a drought in
2005/2006 and high world o i l prices.
26. The Bank contributed to maintenance o f macroeconomic stability through i t s policy dialogue,
informed by a variety o f analysis and reports. The Bank has supported an annual PER process since
1997 to help deepen understanding and commitment among key domestic stakeholders to fiscal reform.
The initial key objective was to help establish priorities within an overall expenditure ceiling, as well as
monitor progress and assess results. In Tanzania, this process evolved into a comprehensive
consultation process between the Government and various stakeholders including c i v i l society, private
sector, parliamentarians, and DPs. The PER working group meets regularly throughout the year, with
formal consultations in M a y that focus o n finalization o f the Government’s MTEF. In addition, the PER
working group has become an important forum to discuss public financial management performance
within the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability framework. The PER has helped generate
greater trust and accountability among these groups, as well as commitment to the reforms these
stakeholders are supporting. Although recently weaknesses in the PER process have been identified, it
i s expected that these will be addressed by the authorities.
Box 1: Openness o f Tanzania’s budget

The 2006 Open Budget Index, a budget transparency ranking by the International Budget Project o f the
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP), ranks Tanzania 25’ out o f 59 countries (France i s f r s t and
Vietnam ranks last). Out o f the 17 African countries on the index, Tanzania shares 4’ place with Kenya
(South Africa i s f i r s t and Angola last).

The study that accompanies the rankings on the openness o f the budget process in Tanzania highlights the
fact that the country has several processes (such as the PER) “that provide opportunity for the public to
become aware and for greater accountability [of the budget process]”. Nevertheless, the study also points
out various remaining challenges, including the need for easier access to budget documents, limited
authority b y parliament in the budget process, and weak l i n k s between the budget and the Government’s
policy goals.
Source: Haki Elimu/CBPP How open IS the budget in Tunzuniu? Available at http://www.hakielimu.org

27. Since 2005, the PER process has included a Country Financial Accountability Assessment and a
Country Procurement Assessment, with a leading role for IDA. This integrated study, called the Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability Review, helped to better align the budget with the growth
focus, including exploratory work o n fiscal space for public investment in infrastructure. I t also
provided guidance o n improved government capacity for public finance management. A 2003 Zanzibar
38

public expenditure review-the first o f its kind for the island-assisted the Zanzibar government in
improving fiscal and public expenditure, as well as providing an assessment o f the wider public sector in
the Zanzibar economy. T h e C A S benchmarks were met and the Bank provided significant
contributions to Tanzania’s strong macroeconomic and fiscal performance over the C A S period.
T h e objective i s therefore considered to b e achieved.
CAS Objective 5: Improve tax regime by modernizing tax administration, rationalizing tax regime, containing tax
evasion and review tax policy to reduce trade taxes and remove nuisance taxes
CAS Benchmarks
Establishment o f unified tax appeals mechanism.

Implementation o f guidelines on rationalization o f
local taxes and fees.

Review and reduction o f remaining statutory
exemptions (including those affecting
- the
govemment and NG&)
Introduction o f unique taxpayer identification
numbers (TINS)for administration and registration.
Abolition o f withholding tax on goods and services;
limit on other taxes and levies to-import duty,
product-specific excises, Energy Fund, Road Toll;
and reduction o f the number o f excise taxes to six.

Status

Revenue Appeals Act was passed in 2000, covering
all taxes, providing for unified tax appeals
mechanism,
Moderate progress in three reform phases: June
2003 reforms included abolition o f flat rate
development l e v y and removal o f a range o f
nuisance taxes; June 2004 reforms resulted in
abolition o f business license fees below a threshold
turnover, and a much reduced flat rate license fee
above that level: June 2005 reforms included fbrther
reduction in nuisance taxes.
Review and reduction o f exemptions i s ongoing.
Unique TIN for all tax payers was introduced by
TRA.
Numberhariety o f taxes reduced. Other
amendments proposed. Miscellaneous Taxes
Amendment Act drafted in 2005. Following i t s
enactment, each principal Act to be updatedprinted.

28. CAS benchmarks under this objective were comprehensive, making monitoring challenging. At
the time o f CAS design, the Tanzania Revenue Authority’s (TRA’s) weak institutional capacity
hampered i t s efforts to increase revenue collection and curtail tax evasion. The CAS did not provide
separate benchmarks for capacity building at the TRA from those in the Tax Administration project, and
i t s successor, Tax Modernization Project, both supported by IDA. These projects supported alignment
o f existing tax regulation and broadening o f the tax base, e.g. through significant reduction o f the
number o f deductions and improved registration mechanisms. The institution building component o f the
project was aimed at ensuring sustainability o f the reforms over the medium-term. Progress was to be
assessed through improvements in revenue collection and other outcome indicators.
29. Annual tax revenue collection increased by roughly US$600 m i l l i o n between fiscal 2003 and fiscal
2006. In addition, the number o f registered income tax payers increased f r o m 190,000 in 2003 to
290,000 in 2006 and the number o f designated large tax payers (corporations) increased from 100 in
2003 to 286 in 2006. The percentage o f customs clearances made within 24 hours increased from 30
percent in 2003 to 95 percent in 2006. The percentage o f VAT refunds made within one month
increased from 36 percent in 2003 t o 62 percent in 2006. There has been significant progress in tax
administration supported by the Bank’s financing and advice. T h e C A S objective i s therefore
considered achieved.

39

CAS Objective 6: Address issue o f heavy external debt burden
CAS Benchmarks

Status

30. At time o f CAS design, Tanzania’s debt burden was considered unsustainable. At end-June 1999,
Tanzania’s external public debt amounted to US$6.9billion in nominal terms or 439 percent o f the threeyear average o f exports. One o f the key goals o f the CAS was therefore to reach HIPC completion point
by the end o f fiscal 2001. After receiving HIPC debt relief in 2001, Tanzania’s NPV o f debt-to-export
ratio declined to about 130. B y 2004, it had further declined to 118.
3 1. Relief under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) will see Tanzania’s debt obligations
(up until December 2005) cancelled with the World Bank (IDA), African Development Bank (ADB)
and IMF. Under the MDRI, the World Bank will cancel about US$2,804 million. Total cancellation
under MDRI (including ADB and IMF) i s expected to amount to about US$3,785 million; leading to a
reduction o f total external debt by over 45 percent. Following the implementation o f the MDRI,
Tanzania’s debt sustainability indicators are well below the debt sustainability thresholds. The NPV o f
debt-to-export ratio i s estimated to have declined to 64 percent in 2006. The most recent debt
sustainability analysis prepared by IMF and World Bank staff concludes that Tanzania’s external
debt position i s sustainable, with low risk. The objective i s therefore considered achieved.
CAS Objective 7: Promote environmentally sustainable rural development, sustainable rural growth and reduce rural
poverty
CAS Benchmarks
Rationalization o f levies, fees, and taxes paid by
farmers and traders; reduction in multiple taxation;
and establishment o f uniform fiscal treatment.

Removal o f trade barriers across regions,
elimination o f temporary export bans, removal o f
Commodity Boards and Strategic Review Scope for
Gran Reserve.

Divestiture for cashew-processing factories and

state farms.
Publication o f rules and regulations, based on work
by Ministry o f Agriculture and Cooperatives.
Involvement o f export crop industry in research.

Status
[see above] Moderate progress in three reform
phases: June 2003 reforms included abolition o f flat
rate development l e v y and removal o f a range o f
nuisance taxes; June 2004 reforms resulted in
abolition o f business license fees below a threshold
turnover, and a much reduced flat rate license fee
above that level; June 2005 reforms included further
reduction in nuisance taxes.

Temporary districtlregional export bans (as well as
cross border bans to Kenya) were largely removed.
They recur in some regions during perceived local
food shortages. South-west Tanzania, depending
heavily on cross-border food exports, has
consistently supported an open border; Commodity
Board reforms accelerated since 2006; Strategic
Grain Reserve study has been completed after many
delays, but findings are yet to be shared and acted
upon.
Cashew processing divestiture completed.
Substantial progress with divestiture o f state farms.
Publication o f rules and regulations took place
during the CAS period.
Substantial progress in areas financed by private
sector ( e g tea), less progress in others (e.g. cotton).

32. There was progress toward the first CAS benchmark (rationalization o f levies, taxes and fees). In
early 2005, the Bank jointly with the UK’s Department for International Development finalized a

40

Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) o n Local Government Taxation Reform i n Tanzania. The
study examined the “intended and unintended consequences o n poverty reduction and growth in
Tanzania o f the tax reforms implemented in June 2003 and 2004”. Some o f the more tangible reform
outcomes include: (i)
sampled households recorded a relatively small 0.8 percent decline in tax
businesses
payments overall, although the impact across social groups was “steeply progressive”; (ii)
recorded a 14 percent decrease in tax burden overall-medium size businesses recorded 11 percent less
tax, small businesses 36 percent less, although micro businesses (with under Tsh 54,000 turnover)
recorded 11 percent more tax; and (iii)
evidence from district councils suggest that they have been
innovative in replacing lost income from the development levy and market dues by introduction or
increase in formerly scarcely-used taxes that remained on the permitted schedule. These include parking,
billboard, and bus-stand fees.

33. There i s some danger that the previous multiplicity o f local council taxes will be reproduced in the
form o f a different array o f minor and “nuisance” taxes that represent imaginative use o f tax types
permissible in law. The study found out that “a progressive property tax would be popular amongst
Tanzania’s citizens and businesses, with the proviso that this would need to substitute for, rather than
add to, multiple other taxes and dues and levies”. Overall the study concludes that: “the 2003 and 2004
tax reforms were a large step in the right direction towards a local government taxation system that
could embody good tax principles. However, the manner o f i t s occurrence unfortunately disempowered
and irritated local councils, who subsequently had to resort in an uncoordinated way to increasing the
tax take from the remaining l i s t o f permissible taxes, threatening to reverse the gains made by the
reforms.”
34. The second CAS benchmark showed progress. Trade barriers were formally removed, but they
reoccurred in some regions during times o f perceived food shortages. Commodity Board reforms
accelerated only in 2006 and their outcomes remain uncertain. A delayed strategic grain reserve study
has been completed, but i t s findings-including major policy recommendations-have yet to be
discussed and acted on.
35. The third CAS benchmark shows broadly positive results overall. Divestiture o f cashew
processing has been completed and a number o f the new private owners are doing well. Government
management o f foundation seed farms, not explicitly mentioned in the CAS, continues to constrain seed
dissemination and innovation. With respect to the fourth and fifth CAS benchmarks, rules and
regulations continued to be published during the CAS period and the export crop industry successfully
engaged in research financed by the private sector in commercially viable areas such as tea, with less
private research on other crops like cotton.
36. Rural growth and reduction in rural poverty were CAS objectives; benchmarks did not include
tangible outcome indicators in these areas, however. Over the CAS period, agriculture continued to
generate the main contribution to overall GDP growth at 45 percent in 2000 and 46 percent in 2005.
Agriculture growth rates averaged 4.8 percent between 2000-2005-among the highest worldwide-a
satisfactory achievement considering intermittent droughts in different parts o f the country, l o w global
prices for major export commodities (coffee, cotton, cashews, tea and tobacco), and appreciation in the
Tanzanian shilling in the latter part o f the period (see fiscal 2006 C E M for a more detailed discussion).
While up to date information o n income poverty i s lacking, it i s mainly a rural phenomenon with 87
percent o f the poor living in rural areas according to the 2000/2001 HBS. Based o n GDP and

41

agriculture growth data, World Bank simulations show that rural poverty may have declined from 38.6
percent in 2001 to between 36.1 and 33.8 percent by 2004.
37. Multiple Bank interventions contributed to the rather broad objective o f sustainable rural
development, increased rural growth and reduction in rural poverty, in addition to the numerous
activities by other development partners. Most o f these are captured more comprehensively under other
objectives, but the following are particularly relevant: (i)
rehabilitation o f trunk and feeder roads under
the supervision o f the national road agency (TANROADS), with international evidence that
improvements in the road network increases the connectivity between urban centers and rural areas,
improves farmers’ access to markets and the delivery o f social services t o rural communities-rural
roads under supervision o f local authorities, however, lagged in quality improvements; (ii)
divestiture o f
the national telecommunications company led to a surge in cellphones from 38 thousand mobile phone
subscribers in 1998 to 1.6 m i l l i o n in 2004, with improved rural communications having had a great
impact on improved agriculture trade and marketing; and (iii)
improved water supply in rural areas had
a strong effect o n growth (use o f water for irrigation) and reduction in rural poverty (increased
availability o f drinking water and improved sanitation - see more below). Overall, there was progress
across most CAS benchmarks. Outcome indicators show strong agriculture growth rates, but lack
sufficient evidence o f progress in rural poverty reduction, due to lack o f poverty data over the
CAS period. The objective i s considered partially achieved, but important challenges remain.

CAS Benchmarks

Status

farmers groups visited and assisted by extension
agents.

private service providers as w e l l as extension
agents. There has been an increase in number and
activity o f farmer marketing groups. M a n y o f these

improved seeds, and small implements.

animal traction and equipment, and more recently
improved seeds, supported by IDA financed
PADEP. Government policy o f subsidizing
fertilizer appears ineffective - review o f its impact
will, it is hoped, produce agreement o n an effective
approach t o this objective over the next few years.

38. Overall, there i s anecdotal evidence o f limited progress under both o f these benchmarks. A new
agriculture census i s expected in 2007, which will provide additional information regarding i t s
benchmarking. The second phases o f the Agriculture Research Project and the Extension Services
Project together achieved various intermediate outcomes and outputs which likely contributed to an
increase in smallholder productivity. Promising approaches for improved extension services and a more
significant contribution by the Bank in this area come from the ongoing Participatory Agricultural
Development and Empowerment Project (PADEP - see B o x 2). N e w technologies, varieties and
resource management practices were developed, and the delivery o f extension services on the local level
was improved and expanded. Among other outcomes, a 2003 survey showed that yield rates for
seventeen crops were o n average 34 percent higher among participating farmers versus farmers that did
not participate in PADEP.

42

Box 2: Participatory Agricultural Development and Empowerment

The Participatory Agricultural Development and Empowerment Project (PADEP) uses a farmer
empowerment approach within agro-climatically diverse areas in over a quarter o f Tanzania’s districts. The
project implements small agricultural development subprojects planned and managed by community
members and farmer groups. Examples o f innovative subprojects include: an Artemisium project in
Arumeru district as a new crop for the China market; an oxenicartlplow subproject in Uyui district; a milk
marketindfodder production project in Zanzibar; and a 6.5 km village access road built in Masasi district
that reduced transportation costs from the village to Masasi town from 70,000 to 30,000 shillings and
bicycle travel time from 5 hours to 2 hours.
W h i l e comprehensive studies to evaluate impact are underway, it might be best summed up by a quote
from a participating farmer in Mandawa Village, Lindi Region (Southern Tanzania): Baada y a miaka
michache atabadilisha nyumba yake kuondoa nyasi kuweka mabati. Umasikini ulijaa kiloba, sasa
unapungua kiasi kikubwa. (“After a few years the house has an iron roof instead o f a thatch, and poverty
has reduced a lot”).

39. A recently approved Agriculture Sector Development Program-supported by the World Bank and
five other development partners-will scale-up the empowerment approach nationwide as well as
promote agricultural private investment based o n an improved regulatory and policy environment. It i s
closely aligned with the key MKUKUTA goal for the sector aimed at keeping agriculture growth at 5
percent minimum. Improved smallholder productivity remains a major challenge and progress
over the CAS period has been slow, despite some successes in agriculture research and with the
PADEP empowerment approach. Overall, the objective i s considered partially achieved.
CAS Objective 9: Improved rural infrastructure particularly trunk and feeder roads
CAS Benchmarks
Increase in number o f kilometers o f rural roads
(trunk and feeder) maintained each year by 50
percent by 2003/2004, with a breakdown by level o f
government and district.

Status

Rural infrastructure (trunk and feeder roads)
maintained by TANROADS (29,OOOkm) from 50
percent in poor condition to 16 percent in 2005.

40. The CAS benchmark has been met. The most important part o f the rural transport infrastructure in
Tanzania i s approximately 29,000 kilometers o f trunk and regional roads managed by the national roads
agency TANROADS. Since 2000-after years o f decay-substantial progress has been made in the
road sector in Tanzania, and reforms inspired by the Bank’s Sub-Saharan African Transport Program
have contributed to this.
41. The Bank’s contribution includes support provided through investment lending, mainly the Central
Transport Corridor project. In addition, the Bank supported the creation o f TANROADS and the
establishment o f a Road Fund-an example o f good road management in Afi-ica that has greatly
improved funding for road maintenance. Since TANROADS commenced operation, the condition o f
the trunk and regional roads has improved from 50 to only 16 percent in poor condition, with anecdotal
evidence o f decreased rural transport costs and enhanced competitiveness o f agricultural production.
TANROADS has also managed to curb overloading o f lorries from 30 to 6 percent, exemplary
compared to other African countries. The Road Fund has ensured, for the first time, that small but
regular funding i s available for the maintenance o f local government roads by channeling an average o f
US$150,000 to each o f Tanzania’s 121 districts per year. A recent technical audit revealed that these
amounts are used efficiently. However, significant challenges remain and the road network in Tanzania
continues to be “work in progress”, crucial to the country’s sustainable development. For example, rural

43

roads managed by local government authorities remain in appalling condition. In addition, while there
has been traditional good progress in maintaining the East-West axis o f road networks, the North-South
axis, which i s crucial for increased food supply among Tanzania’s regions and increased trade within the
East African Community, remains less well developed. Efforts are being made to scale-up financing
within a sector wide framework jointly with other DPs. The CAS benchmark was met and the
objective achieved. However, r u r a l road infrastructure remains a crucial challenge and major
focus for scale-up of financing.

CAS Benchmarks
Issuance o f preliminary regulations for micro- and
rural finance institutions.

Recapitalizations and transformation o f National
Microfmance Bank (NMB) into microfmance
institution.

Status
Outcomes went well beyond issuance o f preliminary
guidance. Under Rural- and Micro-Financial
Services project, a comprehensive national
microfinance policy fiamework was adopted in
2004.
NMB fully recapitalized by 2003. In 2005,49% o f
NMB shares were sold to a strategic investor R A B O B A N K o f Netherlands. Prospectus being
prepared to sell another 2 1% to Tanzanians in 2007
through stock exchange. US$89 million worth o f
microfinance loans through NMB in 2006 fiom zero

42. The first CAS benchmark was surpassed, supported by the IDA-financed Rural and Micro
Financial Service Project and related analytical work. The project’s main objective-development o f
rural and micro-finance policy framework-was achieved. A national microfinance policy was adopted
in 2004 following a broad consultative process among major stakeholders. This policy provides
guidelines o n pricing, delinquency control, financial reporting, information management, gender and
governance. The Banking L a w was amended to integrate microfinance institutions and savings and
credit cooperatives societies into Tanzania’s financial sector and provide for their effective licensing and
supervision by the Bank o f Tanzania. A regulatory framework for microfinance institutions and
cooperatives consistent with international guidelines was adopted. In addition, the project built capacity
at the Directorate o f Microfinance at the Bank o f Tanzania to monitor and supervise licensed
microfinance institutions in Tanzania.
43. Regarding the second C A S benchmark, the IDA-financed Second Financial Institutions
Development project supported transformation o f the largest state-owned savings bank into a privately
managed and owned microfinance bank-the National Microfinance Bank (NMB). NMB was created
from a split and sale o f the National Bank o f Commerce (NBC) in 1997. The Bank supported design o f
the NMB business model, and attraction o f equity investors to NMB, with both analytical work (the
Financial Sector Assessment in date, and update in 2004) and IDA financing. This supported the
professional management team that ran the NMB in accordance with best practices in microfinance,
pending i t s divestiture. Bank support during the pre-divestiture period helped to achieve financial
viability and to attract investors with strong reputation and relevant banking skills. Partial divestiture o f
NMB in 2005 with 49 percent o f shares sold to R A B O B A N K was an important step to improve rural
financial services. NMB i s the only bank in Tanzania with a countrywide branch network, and business
lines targeted to small depositors. Since August 2000, NMB microfinance loans went from zero to 117
billion Tsh (US$89.1 million), reaching more than 165,000 borrowers in 2006 with 106 NMB branches

44

offering a micro loan product. N M B s rural branch network grew from 95 in 2000 to 115 branches in
2006. With 22 percent o f assets and 16 percent o f deposits o f the banking system, NMB i s also a major
source o f payments in the country and related services to all its depositors. Overall, there has been
significant progress under this CAS objective. Two Bank-financed projects as well as associated
analytical work (FSAP and update) contributed significantly to outcomes under the two CAS
benchmarks. The CAS objective i s therefore considered achieved.
CAS Objective 11: Improve natural resource management
CAS Benchmarks
Preparation o f biodiversity conservation strategy
and action plan.

Adoption o f national action plan to combat
desertification.

Presentation o f environmental framework
legislation to Parliament.
Finalization o f Environmental Impact Assessment
Guidelines.
Adoption o f environmental standards.

Preparation o f National Priority Environmental
Management Program.
Rationalization o f donor program from current $400
million with 60 percent coming from outside the
government’s budget.

status

Preparation, completion and implementation o f
biodiversity strategy and action plan during the
CAS period, supported through the Forest
Conservation and Management Project and Marine
and Coastal Environment Management Project.
National Action Program in place since 2004.
Action plan has not yet been developed. In
response to drought and subsequent energy crisis in
2005/2006, GOT responded with development and
implementation o f a “Strategy for Urgent Actions to
address Land Degradation”. Support i s being
provided indirectly through Forest Conservation and
Management Project and other Development
Partners.
Environmental Management Act approved by
Parliament in November 2004; entered into force in
July 2005. Supported through PRSC 1-3.
Regulations on Environmental Impact Assessment
and environmental audit put in place end 2005.
Supported through PRSC 1-3.
Environmental Impact Assessments and standards
for biosafety developed. C D M guidelines prepared,
but implementation and enforcement weak due to
lack o f institutional capacity. Supported by
DANIDA, UNEP and GEF.
Implementation o f Environmental Management Act
ongoing with support through various projects
(Bank and Development Partners,. e x- . DANIDA,
USAID) and budget support.
Environmental sustainability was included in the
PRSC to provide support within the government’s
budget.

44. CAS benchmarks were output- rather than outcome-oriented, focused o n “preparing” action
plans/strategies, “presenting” legislation, “adopting” standards, etc. Major achievements included
“passing o f the new National Environmental Management Act, 2004, and the establishment o f an
appropriate institutional framework”.
45. Original expectations for the Forest Conservation and Management Project appear in retrospect to
have been unrealistic. T o date only moderate success has been registered in establishing an improved
institutional framework and creation o f the enabling environment in the sector. The sector continues to
be negatively affected by forest related corruption. A recent report commissioned by Government o f

45

Tanzania and Development Partners found that “[. ..] governance shortfalls are not necessarily an
accidental artefact o f institutional arrangements or capacity constraints, but a result o f selfish
exploitation o f opportunities availed by decentralization, globalization and delayed completion o f forest
sector institutional reforms for the gain o f both individuals and organized networks.” In collaboration
with UNDP, the Bank’s support for forest biodiversity conservation o f the Eastern Arc Mountains has
resulted in establishment o f a GEF-financed Pilot Conservation Endowment Fund. If sustained and
scaled up, it can meet the need for a sustainable approach to funding forest conservation. Under the
Lower Kihansi Environmental Management Project, the authorities adopted a Kihansi Gorge ecosystem
monitoring program. The program also supports the captive breeding o f the Kihansi Spray Toad
species.

46. The Bank contributed to natural resource management in areas not originally envisaged in the
CAS, responding to emerging analysis and concerns. A Government- Bank report (Blueprint 2050:
Sustaining the Marine Environment in Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar) outlined problems as well as a
vision for sustainable protection and management o f Tanzania’s seas and coastlines. It was intendedto
guide decision-makers and stakeholders o n economic opportunities, and the enhanced revenues to be
gained through sound governance o f marine resources and areas. The Blueprint emphasized a need for
joint governance regime between Zanzibar and mainland Tanzania for sustainable management o f high
value tuna and other commercial fisheries in i t s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), the 200 nautical miles
o f ocean space under Tanzanian jurisdiction. The strategy also noted opportunities for tourism and
employment, through a network o f marine-managed areas near the shore. This study was disseminated
through three launch workshops in Tanzania, and one at the Bank’s Infoshop in Washington, and i s a
textbook for environmental management at the University o f Dar es Salaam. The resulting Marine and
Coastal Environment Management Project (MACEMP), financed by IDA and GEF, is geared to help the
authorities respond to these challenges and vision, but it has been very slow to get started.

47.

Most CAS benchmark indicators were met, despite sustainable development and
implementation challenges in Bank-financed projects. Notwithstanding good analytical work and
substantial I D A financing, including in response to new challenges, evidence o f lack o f
environment sustainability has grown in the 2000 to 2006 period. Accordingly, this objective i s
considered only partially achieved.
CAS Objective 12: Develop social safety nets to assist the rural poor and vulnerable

CAS Benchmarks
Increase in capacities o f communities to prioritize,
implement, and manage sustainable development
initiatives to improve socioeconomic services and
opportunities.

Status

TASAF operated within the decentralized structure
o f Local Governments and supported capacity
building through training implementers at District
and community levels. Community participation at
all stages and levels promoted social cohesion,
developing o f social capital as well as ownership o f
the development process, demonstrated by the level
o f community contribution and adherence to the
sub-project cycle. Community development
initiative under TASAF reached 1,482 communities,
creating 7,212 assets. Access to health facilities
improved for 1 million people. Access to learning
environments improved for 116,000 children; and
2,000 teachers and health workers have improved
accommodation.

46

Zonal workshops for development o f district action
plans for poverty eradication, using participatory
methodologies in TASAF.
Increase in percentage o f development projects to
combat AIDS.

A large number o f regional workshops were
conducted, although TASAF was not organized in
“zones” unlike other social action funds (e.g.
Malawi).
Regional workshops resulted in 60 subprojects
supporting the HIViAIDS affected and infected
under TASAFl ,

48. The first CAS benchmark (increase in capacities o f communities to prioritize, implement, and
manage sustainable development initiatives to improve socioeconomic services and opportunities) was
much broader than the actual CAS objective (develop social safety nets). B o t h were closely aligned
with the objectives o f the IDA-financed Tanzania Social Action Fund projects (TASAF Iand 11).
“Creation o f temporary safety-net programs for the poorest and most vulnerable sections o f the
communities” was one component o f TASAF.
49. The Bank’s contribution to the CAS objective and the first CAS benchmark are associated with
TASAF’s progress. T A S A F Iexceeded i t s initial targets for creation o f temporary safety-net programs
for the poorest and most vulnerable, by financing sub-projects in a total 58 1 communities instead o f the
originally envisaged 328. There were many more beneficiaries than planned. Hard evidence about what
proportion o f beneficiaries were the poorest and most vulnerable i s not available. With respect to the
first CAS benchmark, T A S A F contributed to significant improvements o f socioeconomic infrastructure.
The community development initiative under the project reached 1,482 communities, short o f the 2,2 12
target. A total o f 7,212 assets were created, exceeding the 3,906 target. Access to services improved: 1
million people have improved access to health facilities, 116,000 children have improved access to
learning environments and 2,000 teachers and health workers have improved accommodation, especially
in rural areas. The CAS benchmarks were met and Bank contribution can be directly linked with
progress under the objective. The objective was achieved.
CAS Objective 13: Improve food security
CAS Benchmarks
Elimination o f regions’ prerogative to impose
export and import bans on food trade.

Statlls

Progress has been mixed. Prerogatives remain, and
are used during drought years by some regions.

50. There has been mixed progress within the narrow CAS benchmark (other indicators for food
security were not mentioned) as drought years over the CAS period impacted o n the region’s ability to
impose export and import bans o n food trade. The recent C E M showed the beneficial effects o f regional
food trade, in which Tanzania i s substantial net exporter. The policy dialogue has continued to be
difficult because Government has not shared i t s policy o n the Strategic Grain Reserve, and export and
trade bans on food trade have been imposed by a few regions during drought years - despite evidence
that it i s not helpful to food security.

5 1. In addition to i t s analytic work o n food trade, the Bank’s contribution can be linked with its policy
dialogue. One outcome was a decree by President Mkapa in 2003 that eliminated border controls
between Rukwa and the Democratic Republic o f Congo as well as Zambia, after realizing the
importance o f cross border exports in this particular region. Unfortunately, this successful experience
has not always been followed by other regions, notwithstanding its profound positive impact on
southwest Tanzania. In addition, increased border trade has been linked to policy reforms on trade
liberalization supported by the Bank since the 1990s, which continued over the period. There remains a
47

considerable unfinished agenda. Most food security problems are localized and this needs to be
documented so that local, demand-side solutions (income supplement, food for work, etc.) can be
implemented, instead o f regional trade barriers that have a negative impact. Overall, there has been
progress (albeit slow) within the objective with significant Bank contribution. The objective was
partially achieved.
CAS Objective 14: Increase private investment and improve business environment
CAS Benchmarks
Reduction in delays in investment sanctioning and
simplification o f procedures for private sector entry.

Revision o f company ordinance.
Opening up o f stock market to foreign participation.

Amendment o f act governing Tanzania Investment
Center (TIC); restructuring o f TIC.
Establishment and operationalization o f Credit
Information Bureau (CIB).
Wide dissemination o f new land law and
regulations.
Creation and implementation o f plan for Land Acts.

Revision o f labor laws.

Establishment o f national policy on transport and
creation o f transportation master plan.
Approval o f national power sector strategy.

Status

Improvements to Companies Act, Business Names
(Registration) Act, Business Licensing Act, and
National Industries (Licensing and Registration)
Act. Improvements in ease o f doing business fi-om
150" position in 2005 to 142"d in 2006.
Company ordinance passed in 2002 and
implemented since 2004.
Equity and corporate bond markets opened in 2003.
Foreign participation not to exceed 60% for equity
securities and corporate bonds, although exceptions
for comorate bonds are granted.
TIC was restructured including a revised corporate
strategv.
Legal framework regulation in the process o f being
comdeted. but vet to be ODerationalized.
New land law was completed in 2004.
Enactment o f Land Act and Village Act in 1999.
Land Use Planning Act, Town Planners
(Registration) Act and Urban Planning Act finalized
in 2006. Implementation slow.
Two phased reforms. Phase 1 included 2 labor
regulations acts passed by Parliament in 2004,
establishing core labor standards and employment
conditions, as well as a dispute mechanism. Phase 2
focused on occupational health and safety, workers'
compensation, employment-related social security,
labor market policy and employment promotion,
skills development, labor market information and
statistics and employment services.
Transport national policy approved and master plan
for mainland developed. Transport master plan for
Zanzibar i s being drafted.
Power Sector Development Plan approved in 2002,
as one o f the Government's high priorities. Access
to reliable grid electricity i s scarce outside Capital.
TANESCO serves 550,000 households, some 10%
o f Tanzania's 37 million people. 2005 Rural Energy
Act permits private parties to supply electricity
outside TANESCO service areas (opening way for
sustainable off-grid electrification). Rural Energy
Agency and Fund createdibecoming operational.

52. Except for the first CAS benchmark, indicators focused heavily o n outputs rather than outcomes.
Recent review o f the Business Environment Strengthening for Tanzania (BEST) program, the main
48

Government/DP (including IDA) vehicle for reforms o f the business environment, concluded that:
“Changing legislation i s not sufficient in achieving a sustainable reduction in the cost o f doing
business”.

53. Between 1995 and 2000, average yearly inflow o f Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) to Tanzania
was about US$229 million. This figure more than doubled since then, to an average o f about US$470
million. The ‘Doing Business’ indicators started in 2004 showed steady progress, albeit from a very l o w
base. Between 2005 and 2006, Tanzania abolished license fees for small- and medium enterprises,
centralized and computerized tax registration, introduced electronic data interchange and risk-based
inspections at customs, and reduced time to clear imports by 12 days. In the current 2007 Doing
Business Report Tanzania i s highlighted as one o f the top ten reformers worldwide. Notwithstanding
commendable progress, Tanzania’s performance i s still poor, and it r a n k ~ 1 4 2 among
”~
175 countries in
2006, much below i t s fellow East African Community countries-Uganda at 103 and Kenya at 80.
54. The Bank’s most important contribution over the period was its analytic and advisory work. In
addition to ‘Doing Business’, the Bank in 2003 carried out an Investment Climate Assessment (1CA)Improving Enterprise Performance and Growth in Tanzania-which laid out key business constraints.
The following I C A policy recommendations remain highly relevant: (i)
reduce taxation burden; (ii)
improve power sector’s performance; (iii)
enhance effectiveness o f financial services and access to
credit, notably in rural areas; (iv) reduce corruption; (v) maintain macroeconomic stability; (vi) improve
ties to the international economy; and (vii) increase productivity. These recommendations have helped
the Bank to better focus i t s dialogue with Government, and also assisted the private sector to better
prioritize their inputs in the domestic policy dialogue. A key channel for this dialogue has been annual
‘Investor Roundtables’, organized with assistance from the Bank and other DPs.
Box 3: Tanzania’s energy challenges

In retrospect, the CAS failed to highlight energy as a focal area for the Bank. Some attempts were made to
correct this, including the emergency power project and the Songo Songo Gas Development and Power
Generation project.

Tanzania reduced i t s reliance on l o w cost hydro power - from 80 percent to less than 40 percent between
2002 and 2006. However, this was not enough to avoid massive load shedding in 2003 and again in 2006,
due to droughts, high worldwide o i l prices, and lack o f action on the cost and pricing front (leading to
deferred investment, repairs and maintenance). The cost o f load shedding to the economy i s estimated to
be about 2 percent o f GDP in 2006, without factoring in the costs o f poor quality o f electricity and unmet
demand, and a pro-rich pricing policy.
The poor performance o f the sector was exacerbated by management changes in TANESCO, the
Government-owned Electricity Generation and Distribution Company. At the same time, demand for
electricity i s growing at about 10 percent each year, with only 10 percent o f the population having access.
There appear to be good prospects for an expansion in reliable electricity supply in 2007, due to improved
rainfalls, acquisition o f emergency generation capacity, strengthening management and oversight o f the
sector, including the Electricity Regulator, EWURA. Systemic sector challenges remain, calling for both
short and longer term actions, which the Bank Group i s well placed to support.
In the short term key support i s required for: (i)
ensuring adequate quality o f supply to key small and
medium businesses, inter alia through financing for deferred urgent transmission and distribution repairs;
(ii)
putting TANESCO on a sound management, technical and financial footing; inter alia through
implementation o f realistic Financial Recovery Plan (FRP); and (iii)
further reforms in the regulatory and
policy environment, led by the Ministry o f Energy and Minerals (MEM) and EWURA - through a new

49

Electricity Act together with a Power Sector Strategy, Master Plan, and Lease Cost Investment Plan.
In the longer term, efforts need to focus on the right policy and institutional environment for securing
additional low-cost financing from both public and private sectors to the huge investments required for
scale-up - US$1.3 billion for transmission and distribution alone during the next 4 years.

The IDA-financed Privatization and Private Sector Development Project reported cumulative total
FDI o f US$2.7 billion between 2000 and 2005, with the aim o f reaching US$5 billion by early fiscal
2008. The Tanzanian component o f the Regional Trade Facilitation Project was expected to contribute
to this objective by providing insurance against losses caused by political risk in cross-border
transactions. The value o f insurance policies written under this project-the only indicator o f project
progress-increased only marginally during the period.
55.

56. The Private Sector Competitiveness Project, approved in fiscal 2006, has helped reduce the
numbers o f days required to start a business to 30, from 35 days in 2004, with the aim o f getting to 10
days by 2010. In addition, the Bank has targeted improvements to the legal and regulatory framework,
licensing, and removal o f physical bottlenecks to reduce the cost o f doing business from 161 to 92
percent o f per capita income. T h e CAS benchmarks make it difficult to assess the Bank's
contribution, although there i s considerable evidence that the Bank contributed to increased FDI
and a better business environment. T h e objective i s considered partially achieved.
Box 4: IFC activities

Small and medium-size enterprises (SME)
From 2001 to 2003, IFC's involvement in SME investment across Africa underwent a hiatus as the Africa
Enterprise Fund (AEF) program was wound up. During this period, IFC financed one medium sized enterprise in
Tanzania. IFC focused on stemming losses from i t s SME investment portfolio in Tanzania (as in all other
countries across Africa). During the same period, IFC's Africa Project Development Facility (APDF) vigorously
contributed to capacity building for SMEs by providing technical assistance at both the enterprise and the
wholesale level. Given the small size o f a number o f projects, IFC in most instances provided the technical
assistance support whilst local banks and other DFIs provided the financing. IFC's technical assistance activities
in the SME area have widened to include strengthening o f the investment climate for SME's and improving their
access to finance. IFC also completed two investments during the 2000 to 2006 period in Eximbank Tanzania,
helping this small SME oriented bank to grow significantly and successfully. As a result, I F C has grown
investments in Tanzania from $35 million for the period FY00-FY05 to $20 million in FY06 and a projected $30
million in FY07.
Tourism
In the tourism sector, IFC continued to support the Serena Hotel Group in Tanzania and Zanzibar by restructuring
their capital on two occasions. IFC also invested in the Golden Tulip Hotel in Dar-es-Salaam subsequently having
to restructure i t s investment. Between 2000 and 2004, the tourism sector went through a particularly difficult
period hence the need for the fmancial restructuring o f some o f the projects.
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
IFC through the Investment Climate Group conducted a number o f initiatives focused on FDI. These included: (i)
a conference in 2004 to analyze the relationship between competition, productivity, competitiveness, economic
growth, and poverty reduction; (ii)
a study in 2002 to assess the relationship between competition policy and F D I
to improve the existing institutional fkamework and encourage competition in product and service markets; and
(iii)in 1999, a review o f the country's investment promotion agency and i t s proposed strategic plan as well as a
review o f Zanzibar's draft investment law.
Telecommunication
In 1999 and 2001 IFC indirectly financed Celtel Tanzania through an equity investment in the parent company.

50

1 Aside from this investment in Celtel, IFC has not financed private telecom operators in Tanzania since 2000.
CAS Objective 15: Privatize parastatals and encourage private sector participation in infrastructure
CAS Benchmarks
Concession (bringing to point o f sale) o f Tanzania
Telecom Company, Ltd. (TTCL); Marine Services
Division o f Tanzania Railway Corporation (TRC);
Technical assistance to TANESCO (Tanzania
Electrical Generation and Distribution Company)
DAWASA, and port services.

Determination o f future role o f state mining
company (STAMICO).

Status

T T C L concession with full management control to
private investor in 200 1; TRC concession started in
2001, with marine services hived o f f and
corporatized as Marine Services Company. TRC
concessioned to RITES o f India in 2005, but deal
yet to be signed, due most recently to problems with
local shareholder; TANESCO management
contract in 2002, terminated December 2006, led
initially to improvements in financial management,
but due to repeated droughts, lack o f attention to
investments in urgent maintenance, technical
performance never kept up. N e w management now
in place, and added aspects o f the sector reforms
being put in place - Electricity Act, Least Cost
Investment Plan, etc.; D A W A S A lease concluded in
2003 and cancelled in 2005 with operations
subsequently assumed by a public operator;
Container port (TICTS) successfully concessioned
in 2002.
Although s t i l l state owned, STAMICO now receives
no state funding. It does not operate as a mining
company, and returned i t s mining licenses to
Government, although it provides mining service to
small and large-scale mining operators, e.g. drilling,
with minoritv interests in ioint venture Droiects.

57. The CAS benchmarks were met, but their narrow focus did not reveal the entire scope o f work in
this area. In the 1990s, Tanzania embarked o n a very ambitious reform program. Following 13 years o f
divestiture, today a total o f 320 enterprises have been sold in whole or part (and 775 non-core assets o f
public enterprises and government agencies were sold). O f the 320 enterprises: domestic investors
bought 55 percent; foreigners alone bought 8 percent; and joint foreign and national investors bought 36
percent.
58. While divestiture in the industrial and commercial sectors went relatively well, it proved much
more difficult for key infrastructure utilities - in Tanzania as elsewhere. At the end o f the 1990s,
Tanzania started to concession its infrastructure enterprises. By 2003 , five key infrastructure enterprises
had some form o f private participation: Tanzania Electricity Supply Corporation (TANESCO); Tanzania
International Container Terminal Services (TICTS); Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority
(DAWASA); Tanzania Telecommunications Company Limited (TTCL); and Air Tanzania, the national
airline.
59. A Privatization Impact Assessment carried out in 2005 rated two transactions-the management
contract for TANESCO and the concession for TICTS (see box)-as clear successes. TANESCO’s
subsequent performance deteriorated rapidly. One transaction-the D A W A S A lease-was a clear
failure, while divestitures o f T T C L and Air Tanzania had elements o f both success and failure. For the
two railroads, Tanzania Railways Corporation (TRC) and Tanzania-Zambia Railway (TAZARA), as
51

well as the Tanzania Port Authority (TPA), transactions have taken much longer than expected, and are
yet to be completed.

60. In 2003, the authorities accepted a bid for DAWASA operations from Citywater, a consortium o f
national and international investors. This came to an end in 2005, due to results disputed by both sides as these are the subject o f ongoing arbitration, the Rank has decided to focus o n improving the new
company, pending resolution o f the arbitration. Citywater’s operations were subsequently assumed by a
public operator, DAWASCO. There i s evidence o f a decreased availability o f water in many parts o f
Dar es Salaam, despite a 15 percent increase in water production.
Box 5: Privatization o f Tanzania container terminal

Contracting private operators to manage the port o f Dar Es Salaam has transformed the facilities over a
five-year period. Since placing operations in the hands o f a private operator, the Dar es Salaam container
terminal has: doubled the container throughput in 5 years, a 106 percent increase between 2000 and 2004;
and reduced dwell time for containers by 70 percent. Dar has emerged as the fastest port in Sub-Saharan
Africa, and compares favorably with ports in Europe and Australia.
Today, the terminal employs some additional 500 people, with salaries that have increased by an average o f
300 percent. Instead o f paying subsidies to a loss making enterprise, over the first five years the
Government o f Tanzania collected US$136 million in taxes from the private operator.
Delays in concessioning the Tanzanian Rail Corporation has put some o f these remarkable achievements in
jeopardy, as the lack o f investments in rolling stock and engines has curtailed traffic on the line and has
reduced the ability o f importers to use Dar as a transit port.

61. In mid-2005, TANESCO was highlighted as an example o f “competent and committed private
management, under a well-designed and executed management contract.” However, by October 2005 ,
following prolonged drought, and lack o f action to avoid the impending load shedding, TANESCO’s
operational performance had deteriorated significantly. Total system losses increased from 24 percent in
2003 to 26 percent today, and tariff levels have not kept pace with the massive increased operating costs
given the move from l o w cost hydro to higher cost alternatives. As o f December 2006, the management
contract with the private operator was terminated. The Bank is currently assisting the Government to
support the new management. TANESCO asked the Bank to finance two financial experts with strong
accounting and modelling experience, and a tariff specialist. Funding for this has been identified and
TANESCO i s processing the recruitment o f the experts.
62. T T C L divestiture had mixed results. In line with experience in many countries, the company’s
fixed line business and financial performance did not improve, despite an increase in quality and
reliability o f service, and the fixed l i n e work force was reduced. TTCL’s mobile subsidiary (CELTEL),
competed successfully in a fully liberalized market for mobile phones and services, and almost doubled
i t s workforce from 127 in 2001 t o 242 in 2005. Partial divestiture o f Air Tanzania initially turned the
airline around from an almost bankrupt state into a better performing company, with increased national
and regional flight frequencies and improved performance. However, due to a change in management at
the top o f the main shareholder, South African Airways (SAA), and divergent views o n the company’s
role between SAA and the Tanzanian authorities, the progress was not maintained, and failed to generate
the expected revenues. An agreement to buy back the SAA shares by the Tanzanian authorities i s close
to being finalized, with the intention to find another strategic investor, sharing the same strategy as the
Tanzanian government. The company’s financial situation remains dire. Overall, divestiture o f
manufacturing and service companies has proceeded well, but utility reform with private
52

participation has had mixed to poor results. While the narrowly defined CAS benchmarks were
met, the overall objective was only partially achieved.

CAS Benchmarks
Creation o f regulatory institution(s) covering
telecommunications, rail, ports and shipping, energy
and water.

Full staffing of regulatory institution(s).
Passage o f laws governing regulatory framework for
infrastructure sectors.

Establishment o f roads agency (TANROADS).

Status
Energy and Water Regulatory Authority created in
2001, operational in 2006; Tanzanian
Communications Regulatory Agency-previously

2004, operational in 2006.
Slow progress in staffing at regulatory agencies.
Sound national privatization policy with clear
objectives, enabling legislation and institutions.
However, a number o f sector policies and
regulations need to be updated. New regulatory
authorities, e.g. in communication and energy, s t i l l
need time to become operational.
TANROADS established July 2000.

63. Progress under this and the previous objective are closely related. C A S benchmarks were met,
although the regulatory framework for utilities and infrastructure remains ‘work in progress’. This was
in part due to a multiplicity o f regulatory agencies established by the authorities, notwithstanding advice
from the Bank to concentrate o n a multi purpose agency, so as to limit coordination and staffing
constraints. In addition, because regulatory agencies report to their parent ministry rather than a more
neutral central ministry, such as planning or finance, this can reduce the independence or the appearance
o f independence o f the regulatory regime. While the Tanzania Communication Regulatory Agency i s
fully operational, the Surface and Maritime Transport Regulatory Authority, and the Energy and Water
Utility Regulatory Authority only became fully operational in 2006, and s t i l l lack key staff, although
they have managed well several recent licensing and tariff applications. A s with the previous objective,
this objective i s judged partially achieved.

CAS Benchmarks
Revision o f bank licensing requirements, prudential
regulations, enforcement, and capacity for both offsite and on-site supervision.

Revision o f Banking and Financial Institutions Act
to institute legal framework for regulation and
supervision o f microfmance institutions.
Complete revision o f prudential banking
regulations.

Status
BOT revised i t s licensing regulations, and regularly
updated i t s prudential regulations. Bank supervision
greatly enhanced through recruitmenthaining. Each
commercial bank i s inspected at least once a year,
and i s required to provide a monthly return to BOT
for purposes o f off-site inspection.
Banking Law Amendment 2004 included
microfinance institutions, and savings and credit
cooperatives societies. Regulations for legal and
regulatory fiamework o f microfmance institutions
and savings cooperatives gazetted in March 2005.
Prudential banking regulations regularly revised.
BOT trained in supervision using new regulations,
and i s moving to risk-based swervision.

53

Development and evaluation o f options for
restructuring and divestiture o f People’s Bank o f
Zanzibar (PBZ), restructuring Tanzania Postal Bank
(TPB), and privatizing Tanzania Investment Bank
(TIB).

Restructuring and divestiture options for the 3 banks
were identified. PBZ divestiture (sale o f 60% to a
strategic investor) expected by mid 2007. Preferred
TPB divestiture option under consideration.
Authorities decided to turn TIB into a Development
Finance Institution, likely to focus on wholesale
financing. Modalities being studied.

Overall, the CAS benchmark was output-focused, although there was substantial progress in the
outcomes achieved in the financial sector over the period. Revisions o f banking regulations were part o f
the key reforms, but provide no indication o f progress towards quality o f the financial institutions
themselves. Due to increased competition in the financial sector following improved governance in
privatized banks, linked in part to regulations and improved performance o f Bank o f Tanzania (BOT),
credit extended to the private sector increased from 5 percent o f GDP in 2000 to 10.9 percent by the end
o f 2005. In addition, the level o f non-performing loans in the banking system reduced from 4 percent o f
total assets o f the banking system in 1998 to about 1 percent in 2006.
64.

65. The Bank continued to provide financial and technical support in support o f the Government’s
financial sector development strategy. Successful implementation o f the banking reforms and increased
private investment in the financial sector was a requirement to improve broad-based access to financial
services. The joint IMF-World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) carried out during
fiscal 2003 recommended a number o f legal, judicial and institutional reforms to remove the main
obstacles to lending, deepen financial intermediation and help develop the financial system - altogether
known as second generation financial sector reforms. The Second Financial Institutions Development
Project supports implementation o f many FSAP recommendations. In addition to financing the
transformation o f NMB and improve microfinance services (see above), the project aims at completing
the agenda o f sector and institutional reforms started in the 1990s. In addition to the outcomes listed
above the project contributed to an increase in bank numbers (including community banks) from 17 in
1999 to 33 in 2006, with the total number o f bank branches increasing from 198 in 2001 to 240 in 2006.
Financial sector depth measured as M2/GDP increased from 15 percent in 1999 to close to 20 percent in
2005. The share o f deposits in private bank to total deposits increased from 5 1.5 percent in 1999 to 80
percent in September 2006. Rural deposits increased by more than 80 percent over the past six years.
Public participation in capital markets increased with market capitalization for local companies at Tsh
849 billion or US$0.7 billion (and Tsh 2,887 billion or US$2.3 billion when cross listed companies are
included) and 97,000 shareholders in 2006, compared to Tsh 135.6 billion (US$l82.07 million) and
30,500 shareholders in 1999. The performance o f the financial sector enhanced considerably during the
CAS period as evidenced by several tangible outcomes achieved in the sector. T h e Bank contributed
significantly through analytic w o r k and investment related support. T h e C A S framework was too
heavily focused on outputs, nevertheless the C A S objective i s considered achieved.
CAPABILITIES
SECOND PRIORITY AREA:BUILDING (HUMAN)

66. Overall progress under the second priority area has been satisfactory. The CAS contributed
to significant reductions in infant and child mortality rates between 2000 and 2005 from 99 to 68 (per
1,000 live births) and from 156 to 112 (per 1,000 live births), respectively. Challenges remain with
respect to maternal mortality and HIV/AIDS. In education, the CAS contributed to an increase in gross
primary enrollment from 78 percent in 2000 to 113 percent in 2006 and laid important foundations for

54

improvements in secondary and tertiary education. While outcomes o n improved water access were
mixed, the overall access to water in rural and urban areas increased meeting the CAS benchmarks.
CAS Objective 18: Improve health outcomes: reduce malnutrition, lower infant, child and maternal mortality rates,
and reduce HIV/AIDS infection rates
CAS Benchmarks
Completion o f national health accounts and
development o f public resource envelop for health
within MTEF.
Assessment and improvement o f efficiency o f
hospitals’ revenue collection.

Extension o f cost-sharing to dispensaries and health
centers.
Establishment o f targets for intrasectoral allocations
o f resources, with priority to basic health services
and nonsalary items.
Increased % o f children under 2 immunized against
measles and DPT from 7 1in 1996 to 75 by 200 1.
Increased % o f pregnant women delivering in health
facilities from 50 to 55 by 2003.

Implementation o f malaria control plan.
Increase in public awareness o f H I V i A I D S
epidemic.
Reduction in number o f people infected with
HIV/AIDS by 25% by 2002.
Establishment and implementation o f procedures
ensuring safe blood for transfusions at all hospitals.

status

MTEF for health includes most health financing,
including district baskets. Agreed health sector
reviews, including agreed monitoring framework
and procedures, as well as annual PERs subscribed
to by majority o f health DPs and Ministry o f Health.
Not major focus o f Bank’s program although Health
APL project contributed to increase in
Government’s health budget per capita to US$9.9 in
fiscal 2006, from US$6.6 in 2003.
Establishment o f 12 1 Council Health Management
Teams (exceeding appraisal target), as part o f the
district health system.
Institutionalization o f health sector medium-term
expenditure framework (MTEF), with almost 80%
o f donor finding reflected in MTEF -which
budgets for sector activities against stated targets.
In 2004, coverage o f immunization for measles was
80% and 8 1% for DPT3.
This i s not indicator reDorted in 2005 HDR.
According to HDR, ofbirths in health facilities
increased from 44% in 1999 to 47% in 2004.
Coverage o f births attended by trained personnel
increased from 36% to 46% over same period.
Implementation o f first national Malaria strateev.
Increase in the proportion o f young people
practicing safer sex between 1999 and 2004.
Decrease between 7.7% in 1999, estimate from
blood donors, and 7% in 2004 estimate from
Prevalence Survey. Overall, indicator too
ambitious.
All centers with blood transfision services equipped
with facilities to ensure safe blood transfusion, but
due to irregular supply o f reagents and equipment,
and unreliable power supply in some centers, some
risk o f transfusing contaminated blood continues.

67. The CAS benchmarks were not well aligned with the CAS objective - for example, while lower
infant and child mortality rates were mentioned as broader CAS objective, targets were not specified.
Nevertheless, there have been a range o f positive improvements in key health indicators during the
the percentage o f underweight children under age five decreased from 29 to 22
period 2000 to 2005: (i)
percent; (ii)
infant mortality rates dropped from 99 to 68 per 1,000 live births; and (iii)
under-five
mortality decreased from 156 to 112 per 1,000 live births. This positive trend is encouraging, especially
against a backdrop o f slower or no progress in many other Sub-Saharan countries. However, maternal
mortality rates showed no improvements, and the authorities have put together a cross-sector task force
to advice o n reasons and possible responses. HIV/AIDS infections rates showed only minor

55

improvements, albeit the more recent data, from a national prevalence survey, i s likely to be more
reliable.
68. The Bank has continued t o support Tanzania’s systematic efforts t o increase access to and improve
the efficiency o f health services. Over the last 10 years, access t o essential medicines has increased,
diagnosis and treatment o f the most common killers o f children (malaria, pneumonia, diarrhea, measles
and malnutrition) have both improved, a larger share o f the population i s protected from
impoverishment due to illness with the introduction o f social insurance, and districts have a somewhat
greater capacity to plan, budget and monitor the implementation o f decentralized service delivery. The
Bank’s policy advice, knowledge transfer and convening power has supported development o f
sustainable health financing strategies, improved budgeting and monitoring, public-private partnerships
and efforts to improve the production, deployment and retention o f health professionals.
69. The first Health Sector Development Program-a sector wide approach with pooled funding from
the Bank and five other DPs-laid out a good institutional foundation for health interventions through a
functioning district level health planning, delivery and financing mechanism. In addition to supporting
lower infant and child mortality rates, as mentioned above, the project supported: (i)
increasing
Government’s per capita hea1th”oudget to US$9.92 in fiscal 2006, f r o m US$6.6 in fiscal 2003; (ii)
mainstreaming a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) for the health sector, which now
captures almost 80 percent o f donor funding, and which budgets for sector activities against stated
targets; (iii)
establishment o f a National Health Insurance Fund, which already covers all public sector
employees, and i s expanding to cover those in the private sector; (iv) establishment o f 121 Council
Health Management Teams (exceeding the target at appraisal) as part o f the district health system these teams prepare comprehensive health plans annually against which they receive block grants; (v)
implementation o f the Roadmap to Reducing Maternal and Neonatal Mortality; (vi) expansion of a
program called I M C I (integrated management o f childhood illness) and vitamin A distribution
nationwide; and (vii) expansion in treated bednet use for protection against malaria through an
innovative bednet program which partners with industry and retailers to provide vouchers for nets to
pregnant women. Under this program, which started only in 2004, some 38 percent o f pregnant women
slept under a net in 2005 and 52 percent in 2006.

70.

The ongoing second Health Sector Development Program successfully shifted the focus from

outputs to measurable outcomes with a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework,
encompassing 3 3 input, process, output, and outcome/impact indicators. The program continues to

provide basket funding for health.

7 1. The Tanzania Multi-Sectoral HIV/AIDS Project helped the authorities achieve results through
creating: (i)
the National AIDS Council (TACAIDS); (ii)
the first national HIV and AIDs strategy; and
(iii)
opportunities for c i v i l society and all ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) to assume
greater responsibility for both HIV prevention and addressing AIDs’ impact. T A C A I D S was
subsequently able to leverage substantial resources from the Global Fund to fight AIDS, tuberculosis
and malaria, as well as f r o m many bilateral DPs. Today, 114,000 people are enrolled in treatment
programs and 54,000 receive anti-retroviral therapy. The 2004 D H S concluded that, compared to the
1999 DHS, across the proportion o f young people (age 14-25) practicing safer sex had increased. The

Bank contributed to improved infant and child mortality rates. However, notwithstanding Bank
support, there has been less progress in maternal mortality rates and HIV/AIDS. The objective i s
therefore considered partially achieved.

56

CAS Objective 19: Improve quality and availability o f drinking water and sanitation services
CAS Benchmarks
Support o f decentralization o f water and sanitation
services, creation and consolidation o f financially
autonomous water boards, subcontracting o f
operations to professional (preferably private)
operators, promotion o f sound pricing policy, and
development o f local capacities in urban areas.
Transfer o f management o f D A W A S A to private
sector.

Increase in access to safe water from 2000 levels o f
48.5% in rural and 68% in urban areas, to 55% in
rural and 75% in urban areas by 2003.
Development o f demand-driven community
identification, preparation and implementation o f
water and sanitation projects through local
government authorities and private sector in rural
areas. Introduction o f community management.

Status

Support from both financing and analysis helped
decentralize responsibility o f WSS provision to
local government level and to Ministry o f Water
(MOW) in adapting to i t s new role-policy and
strategy development, quality assurance, capacity
building, and performance monitoring.
In 2003, the authorities accepted a bid for
D A W A S A operations from Citywater, a consortium
o f national and international investors. This came
to an end in 2005, due to results disputed by both
sides. Citywater’s operations were subsequently
assumed by a public operator, DAWASCO.
Access to safe water increased from 50 to 55% in
rural and from 70 to 73% in urban areas during
2000-2003 (latest year for which data i s available).
In areas supported by WSSP, there was a smooth
transfer o f responsibility for water services to
LGAs. M O Wcapacity improved in policy and
strategy development and performance monitoring.
Communities contribute to managing and financing:
5% o f capital and 100% o f O&M costs.

72. Access to safe water improved somewhat during 2000-2003 according to routine data from the
GOT, although census data provided a different picture - with water access in rural areas decreasing
from 46 to 42 percent in rural areas and from 90 to 85 percent in urban areas. Further work i s needed to
establish a reliable baseline and track trends.
73. The Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (RWSSP) objective is to create the platform for
expanding water services through a roll-out o f the decentralized services delivery strategy from 3 to 14
districts, together with formulation o f a scale-up strategy (national rural water supply and sanitation
program). This objective has been achieved, with service expansion in all 14 districts-for example, in
Mpwapwa district, water and sanitation access has gone up from 35 to close to 75 percent within 4
years.
74. The Dar Water Supply and Sanitation Project did not directly commit to an increase in urban water
access. Some 50 percent o f customers o f the Dar Water and Sewerage Authority obtained 24 hour water
supply in 2006, up from 40 percent in 2002. In addition, 70 percent o f water samples conformed with
quality standards in 2006, compared with 20 percent in 2002.
75. A s responsibility for WSS service delivery increasingly falls to the local authorities and
communities, the M o w ’ s role has been shifting to one o f policy and strategy guidance, quality
assurance, technical support for complex systems, capacity building, and performance monitoring. Both
policy and implementation are supported by IDA-financed programs and analytical work. The Ministry
has now prepared a SWAP in the form o f the 20-year National Water Sector Development Program
(WSDP), with IDA support recently approved, as part o f a jointly financed program with other DPs.
Overall, progress under this objective was mixed and outcomes did not improve as much as
expected. The objective was partially achieved.

57

CAS Objective 20: Improve access to quality and cost effective basic education, and improve secondary education
CAS Benchmarks
Implementing action plan to decentralize education
financing and management in 35 Phase 1 LGAs.
Completion o f primary school mapping in 50% o f
districts.
Completion o f secondary education master plan and
adoption o f framework for cost-haring among
government, private sector, and local communities.
Increase in enrollment rate by 2.5% a year by
FY2003.
Increase in transition rate to secondary schools from
15% to 20% by 2003.

Status

Rationale for this indicator i s unclear, not aligned
with IDA-financed primary education program.
Primary school mapping by UNICEF in cooperation
with Japan International Cooperation Agency.
SEMP was completed and framework for cost
sharing has been adopted. This became the basis for
designing the SEDP.
Primary gross enrollment increased from 78% in
2000 to 112.7% in 2006 (5.8% per year).
Transition rates to secondary schools increased from
22% in 2000 to 39.8% in 2006. .

76. Good outcome indicators were identified in the diagnostic section o f the C A S framework, e.g.
primary school examination pass rates, entry rates to secondary education, literacy rates, although they
were not specifically referred t o as monitoring benchmarks. Progress against both less ambitious CAS
benchmarks and more ambitious outcome indicators was impressive. Pass rates for primary school
leaving examinations increased significantly from 22 percent in 2000 to 6 1. 8 percent in 2005 and 70
percent in 2006. Gross primary school enrollment went up from 78 to 113 percent between 2000 and
2006 and net enrollment from 59 t o 96 percent over the same period.
77. Various education indicators, especially pupil-classroom and pupil-textbook ratios, also improved.
Transition from primary to secondary level education increased from 22 t o 39.8 percent between 2000
and 2006. Secondary education numbers increased dramatically, with negative consequences on quality
and on the pupil-teacher ratio. Overall progress in improving quality has been understandably slow, an
important priority o f the current focus o n secondary and tertiary education. Currently, the gross
enrolment ratio for secondary education i s 14.8 percent, up from 10 percent in 2002, and access to
higher education i s only 1.3 percent.
78. The Bank’s contribution was in the form o f a series o f analytic pieces leading to the Primary
Education Development Program (PEDP) in fiscal 2002, followed by a Secondary Education
Development Program (SEDP) in fiscal 2004. The initial focus was o n reforming delivery o f primary
education and decentralized service delivery, including introduction o f capitation grants directly to
schools, and establishment o f an accountability mechanism at school level. A Bank study o n linkages
between post-primary education and the labor market highlighted the pressures and demands generated
by globalization, and concluded that Tanzanians would need higher educational skills to be able to
compete in the modern labor market.
79. The PEDP constituted an innovative SWAP including a mechanism for pooling funds o f eight DPs.
IDA financing, co-financed with the Netherlands, was not part o f the pooled funds, due to policy and
procedural difficulties in pooling funds and using country systems at the beginning o f the CAS period.
Ongoing preparations for financing o f Zanzibar’s SEDP as well as a Higher Education Project aim to
round out the system-wide improvements in Tanzania’s education sector, in order to help the young and
growing population to compete in global markets. Progress in primary education was significant
over the CAS period with direct contribution f r o m the Bank together with other donors. To build
on this progress, and based on analysis pointing to a need for increased access and quality in other

58

parts o f the system, the B a n k shifted i t s focus to secondary and tertiary education. T h e objective
i s considered achieved.

THIRDPRIORITY AREA:INCREASING EMPOWERMENT
AND ACCOUNTABILITY.

80. Overall progress under the third priority area has been moderately satisfactory. Tanzania
achieved significant progress in the control o f corruption as evidenced by continuous improvements in
various global rankings. The CAS significantly contributed to public sector reforms-even though
progress was slower than expected-with a reform program that is highlighted as best practice. Progress
in decentralization was mixed and important challenges remain in the area o f public financial
management.

CAS Benchmarks
Adoption o f plan for strengthening local
government capacity in three phases.
Clarification o f decentralized service delivery
framework through reform o f L G A grant system,
and parallel sector reforms.
Building capacity for effective f i a n c i a l
management.

Status

Action plan was implemented during CAS period.
Evolution from ‘area based programs’ financed in
particular districts to L G Capital Development
Grant (LGCDG) System.
CAS lacked specific indicators to assess progress.

8 1. The CAS benchmarks lacked outcome indicators o n delivery o f social services. This reflected an
accurate assessment o f the state o f Tanzania’s decentralization program at time o f CAS design, as the
Local Government Reform Program (LGRP) had only been launched in January 1999 and initial
progress under the program was very slow.
82. The Bank was not involved in LGRP design, nor did it contribute to i t s initial funding. The Bank
carried out a comprehensive study assessing Tanzania’s decentralization process at the start o f the CAS
period. The study highlighted the weak financial position and capacity o f local authorities as a major
obstacle to implementation o f ‘decentralization by devolution’. Both the Bank and DPs used the report
recommendations to inform their policy dialogue with the authorities. Some DPs were critical o f the
Bank’s inability to j o i n the LGRP pooled funding arrangements. As the LG financial management
system has improved over the C A S period with support from DPs, albeit from a l o w base, it i s expected
that the next stage o f Local Government reforms will see the Bank j o i n its funding with that o f other
DPs, perhaps in the form o f development policy financing.

83. Additional studies funded by DPs helped to design the proposed “Capital Grant Program and
Capacity Building Program for Local Governments,” which ultimately became Government’s Local
Government Capital Development Grant (LGCDG) System - this i s funded by many DPs, including the
Bank. It has largely replaced the ‘area based programs’ that DPs formerly financed in particular
districts. The L G C D G System includes both a capital development grant and a capacity building grant
for local government authorities (LGA). The system, via i t s annual assessments, provides a useful
measure o f the performance o f local governments, in terms o f financial management, planning and
budgeting, procurement, project management, and capacity. Over the first three years o f the program
the percentage o f LGAs meeting minimum conditions to qualify for the capital grants has increased

59

steadily-in 2004/2005 some 53 percent o f a total o f 47 assessed LGAs qualified, compared to 69
percent o f 12 1 assessed in 2006/2007.
84. The LGSP project i s focused not o n strengthening service delivery outcomes, but o n strengthening
the institutional and financial capacity o f LGAs. This complements T A S A F Iand 11, which help
communities to identify their critical needs, and demand better services, including from LGAs. In 2003
and 2004, a number o f LGA taxes were abolished or significantly reduced, increasing their dependence
o n central government transfers. T o understand better the impact o f these changes, the Bank undertook
a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) o n local government taxation reform, which assessed the
distribution o f the tax burden across different social groups and small businesses, and informed further
reforms in this area. As a follow-up to this study, a new PSIA to look at policy options for local
government finance in Tanzania and Uganda i s currently underway, and is expected to be completed in
fiscal 2008. Overall, progress has been mixed. The objective was partially achieved.

CAS Benchmarks
Dissemination o f national anticorruption strategy
and action plan to all districts.

status
National Anti-corruption Strategy and Action Plan
(NACSAP) developed in 1999, implemented during
2000-2005. Tanzania’s second anticomption
strategy was launched in December 2006.
Adoption o f sector-specific anticorruption plans for
NACSAP provides framework for MDAs to initiate
tax administration, national tender system, judiciary, measures to address corruption and develop agencyspecific action plans.
and public works.
Diagnostic surveys in judiciary, as well as ministries Diagnostic work on governance in MDAs was
undertaken under the Public Service Reform
o f works, education, health, regional and local
government, home affairs, attorney general’s office,
Program (PSRP), supported by the PRSC.
TRA, Controller’s and Auditor General’s Office,
together with operational strategies.
Amendment o f Public Leadershiu and Code o f
I Public Leadershiu Code o f Ethics L a w amended in
2001 gave more powers to Ethics Secretariat - it
Ethics Act.
can act on anonymous complaints against leaders
suspected to be in breach o f Code o f Ethics.
Leaders now required to state value o f their assets.
2004 Public Procurement Act (PPA# 2 1) became
Approval and passage o f new procurement law and
operational on M a y 1,2005 through Public
regulations.
Procurement Regulations 2005.
Publication o f all significant contracts.
Requirement under PPA# 2 1 regulations.
Publication o f all tender results.
Requirement under PPA# 2 1 regulations.
Strengthening o f office o f the controller and auditor NAO took over fiom Office o f Controller and
general.
Auditor General, following enactment o f Public
Finance Act o f 200 1 and 2004 amendment, as well
as enactment o f Public Procurement Act., has
recruited and trained staff, N A O to play important
role in holding government accountable to
Parliament for use o f tmblic funds.

I

85. All CAS benchmarks were met. As measured by the WBI Governance Indicators, during the CAS
period Tanzania improved in “control o f corruption”, ranking same as the regional average in 2005 and
remained steady and above regional average in “voice and accountability”. Afrobarometer Surveys
since 2001 showed that public perceptions o f Government’s efforts to combat corruption are improving,
while reported experiences with corruption appear to be o n the decline. Surveys suggest that Tanzania
60

i s on the right track in tackling corruption, even though it started from a l o w base. A baseline survey
was carried out o n public servants’ behavior in 2005, and a repeater survey i s planned to assess progress.
Overall performance for ethical conduct, the Ethical Conduct Index, was based o n stakeholders’ opinion
about the Public Service’s principles, i s only 56.9 out o f a total o f 100.

86. During the C A S period the Bank contributed to advice o n governance reforms through policy
dialogue within a general budget support framework, together with other DPs. Among key reforms
supported by the PRSC, approval o f new procurement legislation and i t s implementation, as well as
launching a comprehensive Public Financial Management Reform Program, were particularly
noteworthy. Strengthening the Prevention o f Corruption Bureau and implementation o f anti-corruption
strategies by MDAs are important steps, complementing the draft Anti-Corruption bill. The impact o f
these reforms has been considerable. There has been encouraging progress under this objective,
although the authorities need to continue to m a k e progress. T h e objective i s considered as having
been achieved.

CAS Benchmarks
Full implementation o f Integrated Financial
Management System (IFMS).

Roll out o f IFMS to all ministries and regions and to
at least 50% o f districts by 2003.

Status

Implementation o f IFMS in all ministries over the
CAS period; ongoing roll-out o f I F M S to agencies
and districts. Full implementation i s s t i l l lacking.
Roll out to all ministries and regions and to
approximately 50% o f districts by 2006.

87. During the CAS period, the Tanzanian PER developed into an integrated review process, focused
o n aligning the budget with PRSP goals, based o n government-led and participatory process in
collaboration with other internal and external partners. In addition, government has started to operate a
more integrated financial management system (IFMS), allowing for more effective control and
monitoring o f expenditures o n a daily basis. T o date only the system’s accounting and budgeting
modules have been implemented - integration with the payroll and revenue collection systems has yet to
be undertaken, and the inventories and assets modules have s t i l l to be initiated.
88. In 2001, the Bank recommended improvements in the public financial management system
(PFMS) through a County Financial Accountability Assessment, carried out in cooperation with the
UK’s Department for International Development. Government implemented most recommendations,
including a number aimed at improving the internal audit function - such as established audit
committees, as well as training to improve the capacity o f technical accounting and internal auditing
staff and Accounting Officers, Audit Committees and Local Authorities. Timeliness o f financial
reporting has improved in L G A s and at Central Government level. In addition, an ongoing Public
Financial Management Reform Program i s supported by the Bank in collaboration with other DPs
through a pooled funding S WAp arrangement.
weak internal audit
89. However, despite these improvements, the following key issues remain: (i)
capacity-many internal auditors are new and require training in public financial management and IT;
(ii)l o w levels o f compliance with financial regulations and rules by the Accounting Officers; (iii)
inadequate follow-up o n audit recommendations and enforcement o f compliance with financial
regulations and rules; and (iv) inadequate scrutiny and oversight o f public finances. Progress toward

61

the CAS objective and meeting the CAS benchmarks has been slower than expected and
significant challenges remain. The CAS objective i s considered to be partially achieved.
CAS Objective 24: Improving Governance: Establish efficient and motivated civil service, improve quality and
effectiveness of delivery of public services, and improve governance

CAS Benchmarks
Reduction in current public service employment by
at least 10% by FY2004

Introduction o f performance management in
ministries, departments, and agencies (MDA) with
75% developing strategic plans by 2002. Half o f
ministries, departments and agencies should show
results by end-2004.
Establishment o f systems to improve performance,
personnel management, and compensation.

Creation o f at least 37 executive agencies by
FY2004.

status

Public service employment levels reduced from
355,000 to 264,000 between 1992 and 1998,
supported by PRSP predecessor, Civil Service
Reform Program (1993-99). PRSP focuses on
better capacity/performancerather than staffing
levels.
Good progress, but slower than envisaged. Between
2000 and 2006, number o f MDAs with strategic
plans went from 7 to 34, linked to annual budgets
and MTEFs. Half MDAs with strategic plans are
expected to show results in line with agreed
performance targets in 2007.
Performance improvement fund established to
support MDAs in improving their capacity to
implement strategic plans. In addition, a human
capital management information systems installed
in three ministries. Public servant pay enhanced,
more incentive oriented, with average salary being
96% of medium term policy target.
Good progress, but slower than expected. By 2006,
26 MDAs became executive agencies.

90. Overall, there has been good progress toward the CAS benchmarks even though progress was
usually slower than envisaged. The first benchmark was not in line with the Public Sector Reform
Program (PSRP), as the latter did not support a continued narrow focus o n decreasing public
employment levels - notably because o f the huge increase in public provision o f health and education
services. Other C A S benchmarks were well aligned with reforms supported by the Bank.
Afrobarometer surveys between 200 1 and 2005 showed positive trends in perceptions regarding
government performance, with the proportion o f people responding “fairly well” or “very well” to how
well the government performed in addressing educational needs increased from 59 to 85 percent, and in
improving basic health services from 50 to 70 percent. However, perception decreased with regard to
delivering household water - from 46 to 43 percent between 2003 and 2005. The WBI ’s governance
indicators showed progress in government effectiveness - in 2000 Tanzania ranked 41.6 percent, in
2002, 33.5 percent, in 2005 42.1 percent. Results are subject to a substantial margin o f error.
9 1.
The Bank financed the PSRP through an adaptable program loan since 1999, with a program that
i s envisaged to take 15 years. The Bank’s long-term commitment has been instrumental in mobilizing
funding from other DPs. Four other DPs participate in the PSRP with pooled funding in a basket
arrangement to facilitate use o f the combined resources in support o f the strategy. The Bank’s Q A G
recently highlighted the approach as best practice - see Box 5. So far, this combination o f programmatic
lending in support o f Government’s reform program, together with strong partnership between
Government and DPs, has made a positive contribution to the results mentioned above. Particularly
successful was establishment o f a performance improvement fund that i s being replicated in other parts
o f the world. The program increased the number o f MDAs with service delivery commitments from
62

zero in 2000 to 34 in 2006, and service delivery commitments were being met 60 percent o f the time.
The average public sector pay went from 69,000 Tanzanian shillings per month in 2000 to 2 14,180
shillings per month in 2006. Overall, there has been good progress under this objective, although
slower than expected, because the benchmarks were too ambitious. T h e Bank’s program i s
considered best practice and highlighted as a model for other countries. T h e objective i s therefore
considered achieved.
Box 6: Tanzania’s civil service reform program as best practice
The fiscal 2006 Annual Report on Portfolio Performance by the Quality Assurance Group (QAG)
highlights the Bank’s programmatic support to civil reform in Tanzania as ‘best practice’.
The program has been implemented over several years. By definition, the scope o f reforms i s broad, with
the need to address linkages between incentives, policy change, modernization o f systems and processes,
and capacity reinforcement. Design challenges included the need to have an ambitious series o f goals over
a reasonable time-frame so as to affect tangible differences in accountability, performance, and delivery o f
public services, while ensuring ownership o f borrower implementing staff and local agencies.

Q A G noted several areas o f excellence in supervision, including how decentralization, support for
programmatic rather than project financing, and partnerships have influenced results. In particular, Q A G
noted that a combination o f sector specialists and fiduciary staff skills in the country office helped focus
attention on both policy reform and problem solving. Q A G noted that some areas o f M&E and feedback
could be improved.
Borrower ownership was consolidated by real-time joint interventions with the client, along with other DPs
and the Bank, in addressing issues and in moving to the next stage o f reform. Supervision i s joint,
considerable resources are leveraged through other DPs, who have delegated responsibility for follow-up
on procurement and financial management to the Bank because o f demonstrated capacity.
QAG considered the balance satisfactory between key development issues and impact, including (i)
rationalizing public sector pay and i t s link with performance; (ii)
launching an M&E system after initial
delays/failures; and (iii)
modernizing payroll/HR management systems. Although results are delayed
compared with initial expectations, they were over-optimistic. The Bank, it was felt, should be more
realistic about the time needed to effect a transformation o f the public service and to build capacity.
Implementation has been integrated into country dialogue, taking account o f macro and fiscal constraints.

C.

Measuring Bank Performance

91. Analytic and Advisory Activities: The Bank considers i t s analytic and advisory work as a key
instrument to inform the government’s decisions and underpin Bank financing. A 2004 review o f the
Bank’s analytic work by the Quality Assurance Group (QAG) highlighted the Bank’s strong
engagement with Government, DPs and other stakeholders-an objective articulated in the CAS. As the
QAG report pointed out, particular attention was given to ensuring the Bank’s comparative advantage
was exploited. QAG’s overall assessment o f AAA was satisfactory, highly satisfactory for strategic
relevance.
92. Annex Table 3 l i s t s AAA during the CAS period, most o f which was delivered as envisaged.
Additional unplanned activities demonstrated the Bank’s responsiveness to changing priorities - these
included a Country Financial Accountability Assessment, in collaboration with the UK’s DFID; an
FSAP together with the IMF; and a PER for Zanzibar--the first o f its kind for the island. The review
specifically highlighted establishment o f the PER process “[. . .] as an organizing framework for donor
63

coordination and budget support. Within t h i s framework, the Bank shifted from leader to facilitator,
effectively using i t s convening power and analytic strength to keep the process moving forward.”
93. Financing: Bank lending for fiscal 2001-2003 was US$726.6 million, a little less than the
expected US$790 million ‘base case’. A planned second adjustment credit (focused on macroeconomic
stability and public finance) together with an envisaged Public Expenditure Reform Credit (PERC;
originally planned to provide budget support with a focus on rural development and the environment)
were transformed into PRSCI. Some programs were redesigned - for example, a soil fertility project
became PADEP. Lake Victoria 11, Water, and ATIP each required additional analytical work. Annex
Table 2 shows planned versus actual financing during fiscal 2001-2003 and Table 3 shows additional
financing in fiscal 2004-2006.
This CAS Completion Report was delayed as work continued on the second PRSP (MKUKUTA)
and the Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania. It covers fiscal years 200 1-2006 with total financing in
94.

fiscal 2004-2006 at US$1,557.3 million more than double the actual lending amount o f US$727 million
over fiscal 2001-2003. The reason for this increase i s twofold: (i)
Tanzania’s CPIA continued to
strengthen during this period, and (ii)
projects under preparation during 2000-2003 only became ready
for implementation in 2004-2006. For example, three investment operations were delayed from fiscal
200 1-2003. The PRSC series continued during fiscal 2004-2006.
95. All operations approved during fiscal 2004-2006 were within the CAS framework, which remained
relevant throughout. A second health sector development program and a second social action fund build
on earlier operations. The secondary education development program, agriculture sector development
program, financial sector support and tax modernization also followed earlier interventions. These
managed to build crucial foundations (e.g. increased primary enrollment, improved tax administration,
agriculture research, extension and empowerment, financial sector assessments) and consolidated and
broadened the Bank’s focus. Emergency power, marine and coastal management, as well as private
sector/MSME competitiveness, were within the CAS framework, responding to emerging priorities.
Table 3: Tanzania portfolio performance fiscal 2001-2006

Portfolio Size
N e t Committed Amount (US$ million)
Projects at risk
Disbursement Ratio
IEG Evaluations
Number o f projects
N e t Commitments
Outcome YOSatisfactory
Sustainability YOLikely
Inst Dev Impact YOSubstantial
* As o f January 2007

FYOl
18
907.0
1
16

FY02
22
1233.0
2
19

FY03
24
1418.7
2
21

FY04
23
1444.5
0
26

FY05
21
1333.0
4
26

FY06
26
1894.5
4
19

5
369.5
80
80
60

1
11.1
100
100
100

1
64.6
0
0
100

5
289.7
100
100
100

5
476.5
100
100
80

2
152.1
100
100
100

FY07”
20
1671.6
2
21
FY01-06
19
1,363.6
89
89
84

96. The quality o f IDA financing i s satisfactory. Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) rated 90
percent o f Tanzania operations assessed during FYO1-06 as satisfactory for development outcomes as
well as sustainability. The portfolio size increased considerably over the CAS period and the
disbursement ratio also improved. Between fiscal 2001 and fiscal 2006, the portfolio grew from 18 to
26 operation and more than doubled net commitments from US$907 million to US$1895 million,
64

making Tanzania one the largest IDA programs. The disbursement ration improved from 16 in fiscal
2001 to 26 in fiscal 2005, with a slight decline in recent years. Portfolio management was strong (see
more below).

D.

Lessons Learned

97. CAS C R findings were reviewed by an extended Tanzania Country Team, including
representatives from various Bank Group networks, sector and operational support units, in a CAS
preparation retreat in Dar es Salaam o n January 22-23, 2007. Discussions and presentations
concentrated o n what went well and not so well during the CAS period, and on opportunities and threats
going forward.

98. The Country Team believed the following went well during the FYO1-06 period: (i)
flexibility to
respond to new government priorities and emergencies; (ii)
greater partnership and harmonization with
the authorities and DPs; (iii)
alignment with PRSP objectives; (iv) outcomes to which the Bank
contributed, notably GDP and agriculture growth, education, health, and the public sector; (iv)
delegation and devolution o f the Bank’s work to the country office, with a decentralized Country
Director and senior international and local staff (including most task managers) in every sector; and (v)
budget support contributed to improved aid delivery and greater impact. Thing that went less well
included: (a) measuring and monitoring o f results; (b) supervision o f CAS implementation; (c) role o f
Country Team in designing the CAS; (d) capturing cross-sector contributions to results; and (e) capacity
building.
99. Lessons learned based o n the findings o f this report, discussions with the authorities, other DPs and
within the Country Team can be grouped around five themes: a) outcome focus; b) partnership; c)
harmonized aid modalities; d) analytics and advice (AAA); and e) portfolio management.
Focus on Outcomes. The 2000 CAS aligned the World Bank Group program with broad objectives
rather than outcomes. Progress was to be measured through achievement o f CAS benchmarks, often
output rather than outcome orientated, or not sufficiently linked to CAS objectives. Some CAS
benchmarks were overly ambitious, others not ambitious enough. The new CAS will need to include a
comprehensive monitoring framework with a logical causal chain that l i n k s country goals with outcomes
and outputs, as well as milestones that will facilitate monitoring o f progress at various stages o f the CAS
period.
Partnerships. The 2000 CAS provided a broad and flexible framework for areas o f Bank engagement,
which proved critical to responding to new developments, updated information as well as to any
significant changes in government priorities. Preserving such flexibility i s important. The new C A S
should remain a living document, to be monitored regularly and updated as necessary to remain relevant.
The Bank’s Country Team should continue to work closely with Government, DPs and other
stakeholders in areas o f Bank priorities, to monitor and ensure alignment o f the program with
MKUKUTA outcomes.
Aid Modalities/Harmonizedapproaches. The 2000 CAS established important foundations for “new
ways o f doing business” with respect to aid modalities, focused o n use o f mainstreamed government
systems-financial management, accounting, auditing, procurement and monitoring and evaluationthrough sector wide approaches and budget support. The effectiveness o f these approaches compared

65

with previously isolated operations became increasingly evident during the 2000-2006 period,
particularly in the health, education and financial sectors. This was also noted in the joint evaluation o f
general budget support to Tanzania. The Bank should continue to focus o n aid modalities aimed to
achieve greater efficiency and impact, and on working closely with other Development Partners.
Analytics and Advice. The Bank’s analytic and advisory activities provided strong support in key
economic reforms in Tanzania during the 2000-2006 period, notably in the agriculture, water, private
and financial sectors. Maintaining strong sector dialogue will be critical to the Bank’s future
engagement in Tanzania, informing Tanzania’s decision-making processes, and providing analytical
underpinnings for IDA financing.
Portfolio Management. As o f January 2007, the IDA portfolio included 20 programs and projects,
with 2 projects at risk, and 6.3 percent commitments at risk. Tanzania’s risk management performance
has been above average for the Africa Region over the past 5 years, with proactivity at 100 percent. The
strong performance i s attributed to improving quality o f project preparation, implementation and
supervision. Government leadership o f the development agenda and strategic choices has meant
stronger country ownership. While much remains to be done, there has also been somewhat greater
emphasis o n harmonization and alignment and on designing and implementingresults-based Monitoring
and Evaluation systems at the onset o f projects. More fundamentally, the World Bank country team i s
highly decentralized with most sectors represented in Dar es Salaam. This enables the Bank to play an
active and on-going role in sector dialogue and in the provision o f implementation support to operations
in the Bank’s portfolio. The Bank should continue to focus on increasing decentralization to the Country
Office o f both staff and decision-making power.

100. Since December 2004, the Bank’s country team has organized itself around the three clusters o f
the MKUKUTA. This has facilitated coordination and synergy between activities and across sectors,
and has promoted efforts to find the most effective and efficient way for supporting the Government’s
efforts to reach the MKUKUTA goals. The Bank’s annual business plans and every new proposed
activity i s scrutinized against the following criteria: (i)
consistency with MKUKUTA outcomes; (ii)
effective/efficient approach for influencing MKUKUTA outcomes; (iii)
realism-can WB actually
influence outcomes within the proposed timeframe; (iv) selectivity-has the Bank collaborative,
comparative, or contributive advantage in a specific area; (v) cross-sector synergies/complementarities;
and (vi) JAST consistency. This approach should help to maintain a well aligned Bank program with
the MKUKUTA, notwithstanding the challenges to the Bank’s internal processes and systems.

66

CAS CR ATTACHMENT
TABLES
Annex Table 1: Tanzania: CAS Completion Report Summary Matrix ............................ 68
Annex Table 2: Tanzania .
Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries ................ 81
Annex Table 3 : Tanzania-Actual Deliveries (FY2004-2006) .......................................... 82
Annex Table 4: Planned Non-Lending Program and Actual Deliveries ...........................
83

67

"

4-

.-

v1

20

.e
Y

a

g
G

%

0

c

0

.e
Y

Y

a

E

a

E
2

_I

W
S

m

.I?

z

.I?

2

E 2

a2-

> .2

o u

k9
E L9

W

C
.-

-a

m

."x>

-0

E
m

."E

e

."M

e

L

E
G
0

*
Y

3
x

B

R

8
rc
0

."."

v)

2

m

4

U

la
E

g

-8
3

%

ru
0

M
5

W

2
L

3

u

a

0

0

*
0

,x
1

M

e

P

8

13
+
(d

.e
Y

8

-0

E

ru
0

c

0

.-

.e
WY

E&
a , G

Y

2

xs
a,

E 5
o w
0 2

m

.-a,0

e

a
m,

c

.-0

2
$

b

-0
0
0

s
s

.e

5

m
4

Y
a,

50

<

e
c

0

a

9

Bd

rn

4

u

W

E

0
00

n

0

.3

6
7
0

%
I

0

c;'

3

0
0
N

G87
.I

L
a,

+

;
.I
I

m
a

U

Y

-0
E

z

m
L

M

E

e,

0 0 0
0 0 0

M
E

w w Q \
u v r m

Bm

.
I

E

G
m
a

U

Y

51
E

m

zc

E

c
v)
a,

m

m

ii;

V

I

E
bl
.I

m

w

1
-

E

N

E

0

F..

0

c;'
3

N

0
0
N

z

a,

F
x

k

a,

7
3
u u

d

m m

E

4

u
m

c

W

sa sa
0

0

e

N
00

6
0
0

2

0
0
N

kE
Epa

e

p1

.-e

M

E"m

e

G
m

a

7.-

U

m

c

m

#

P..
rr)

a2

ij

3e

4
ELi

u

2u

rn

I

M
00

n

a

Y

m

0
0

c.l

n

8a

W

m
m

.3

,x
m

4
Y

u
cd

M
C

.+
C

U
m

.Ec:-.
0
.-+

.-m
8
m

a
0

1
U

W

i?

z

.e

F-

Y

Ba

cu
0

2
W

>

0

a

Annex C : Country at a Glance

Tanzania at a dance

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2005
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Aflas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ brllrons~

Tanzania

Sub.
Saharan
Africa

Lowincome

35 9
350
12 7

741
745
552

2,353
580
1,364

25
-1 2

23
23

19
23

37
46
100
29
56

31
59
80
39

2/21/07

Development diamond'
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 199905
Population (%)
Labor force (%}
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 199905)
PovertV 4 ot powlation below nationalpovetty line)
Urban population (96 of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutntion (% ofchildren under5)
Access to an improved water s o u w (% of population}
Literacy (% ofpopulafron age 15+}
Gross pnmary enrollment (% of schml-age popu/afion)
Male
Female

35
36
51
68
38
60
80
110
111
I09

GN I
per
capita

62
104
110
99

Gross
pnmary
enrollment

L

Access to improved water source

-

75

93
99
87

+

Tanzania
Lowincome gmup

KEY EGONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1985

1995

2004

2005

59
73
82
11 9

53
19 8
24 1
08
-1 1

11.3
18 3
22 4
10 9
10 4

12 6
18 2
23 5
10 9
104

-5 9

09
1554
39 3

-19.9

16
140 9
21 0

-6 4
04
68 8
12 9
16f
74 3

-8 7
05
61 6
68
15 8
67 7

1985-95

199505

2004

2005

2005-09

28
0.8
13.5

5.3
25
7.0

67
42
15 0

68
43
123

73
42
49

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

551
99
6.8
350

471
145
7.2
38.4

46 1
16 6
7.0
37.2

37.0

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and services

76.3
15.5
15.8

86.1
11.5
41.5

15.9
29.5

17.0
30.8

1985-95

1995-05

2004

2005

3.5
07
30 9
36

4.1
82
63
53

5.8
100
86
63

5.2
106
90
69

31
-0.7
1.4

34
11.6
6.2

27
14.5
5.0

39
14.3
6.0

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formationlGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savingslGDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debVGDP
Present value of debVexports
(average annualgrowth)
GDP
GDP per Capita
Exports of goods and services
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(average annual growth)
Aanculture
Industry
Manufactunng
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

*Oo4

2005

Economic ratios'
Trade

T
Domestic
savings

-c-i

Capital
formation

Indebtedness

-

Tanzania

-

Low-income omuo

/Growth of capital and GDP (Oh)

--

16 9

I
-GCF

-GDP

2o
10
0

02

-10

03

04

05

-201

-Exports

.IOl"lmports

*The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

85

~

PRICES and G Q V E R ~ ~ ~FINANCE
NT
ff ornestic prices
('%change1
Consumer pnces
Implatt GDP deflator

TRADE

1985

I995

2004

2005

33 3

24 0
26 9

43
$5

45
76

17 4
*f 7
-7 4

13 0
a3

42

12 ?
-3 7
-9 3

133
"3 4
-11 z

1B86

1995

2ftOd

2005

284
119
30
33
946
85
227
390

593

z

145

299

41
38
94
2,367
257
459
665

15s4
72
94
130
2,993
204
794
i 070

102

109

173

78

105
141
74

82

73

1985

1995

2004

2005

445
1016
-571

1089
2 029
-9411

2,310
2 974
-663

2 794
3 827
-1 533

-93
318

-125
35

-198
137

-204
144

-347

-1 047

-725

-1 094

361
"14

1,093
-48

927
-202

132%
-234

$7 9

255
574 8

2,238
f 0906

2,279
1,127 1

1988

1995

20QQ

2005

9,107

7,406
87
2 182

7 805
0
3 976

7 763
0
3 861

175
40
7

232

43

67

267
54
46

451
716
15
154

88 1
380
(4)
498

1065

13
126
76
51
32
19

45 1
343
13
330
28
302

352
275

80

('us$~ I i ~ ~ Q f f S ~

Exports of goods and sewices
lmpons of goads and serviccts
Resource balance
Net income

Net current transfers
Current account balance

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

266
568

C ~ m p ~ s i tofi ~net
n resource flows
Official grants
Olfrcral creditors
Private creditors
Foreign drrect inva$tm~n~
(net inflows)

45
46
27
IF:
20
-1

120
109
1,5111
97
186
652

42
66

133

0
2%

I

fO

d

154

1

Current account balance to GDP f%)

12292

0
Sr

271
111
472

342

15

261
30
232
2/22/07

Annex D: Selected Indicators o f B a n k Portfolio Performance and Management

indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a , c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount as
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (US$ thousand)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

'

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2004

2005

2006

2007

23
3.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
27.1

21
4.0
19.0
10.5
19.0
10.5
26.8

26
3.5
15.4
22.6
15.4
22.6
19.0

20
3.3
10.0
6.3
10.0
6.3
11.5

Yes
2,565
88

no
2,923
108

Yes
2,768
92

no
1,518
61

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
97
13
982.9
3,742.a
40.2
7.7
33.5
6.6

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
FY2007 indicators only capture July 2006-January2007 data.

87

Annex E: Tanzania - I F C and M I G A Program, FY 2004-2007

0.00 13.00

IFC approvals (US$m)

Sector (%)
Finance & Insurance
Food & Beverages

23
77

Total

0

100

0

0

0

0

Investment instrument( %)
77

Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total

0

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

83.50 0.00

Annex F: IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

Tanzania
Statement o f FC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As o f 0113 1f2007
(In U S Dollars Millions)

FY Approval

Company

2001 AEF Boundary H
2005 BBL
2002/2005/2007 Exim Bank
2000 IOH
2000 NBC
1994 Tanzania Brewer,
2006 Stanbic
'
Total Portfolio:

Loan

Equity

Quasi

0.20
10.00
0.42
2.07
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
10.00
3.43

0.00
0.00
1 .oo
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.00

2.69

13.43

4.00

Guarantee Loan
Equity
Quasi
Guarantee
0.00
0.20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
10.00
0.00
0.00
1.oo
4.73
4.73
0.42
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.07
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
4.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.43
0.00
0.00

3.00

4.73

2.69

7.43

4.00

4.73

88

Annex G: Tanzania Social Indicators

Tanzania Social Indicators
Same regionhncome group

Latest sinale vear

1980-85

1990-95

1999-05

SubSaharan
Africa

21 .8
3.2
17.6

27.5
2.8
26.9

35.9
2.5
36.1
6.3

741.4
2.3
35.2
5.5

2,353.0
1.9
30.0
3.7

51.1

35.4
23.5
38.6

180
55
98

350
125
132

745
127

580
128

3.4

3.1

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per w oman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

4

INCOMUCONSUMPTIONDlSTRlBLJTlON
Gini index
Low est quintile (% of incom or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consunption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Heath (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% ofpopulation)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled heath staff (%)

Lowincome

6.8
45.5

2.8
2.1
91
90
91

49
65
45

60
73
53

56
80
43

75
88
70

75
79
44

87
90
38

64
64
29

63
67
39

48
46
50

50
49
53

51
50
52

47
47
48

58
58
59

102
166

88
137

68
112

100
168

80
122

513
419

45 1
370
529
36

569
520
578
46

489
467
921
42

298
244
684
41

52
85
47

*

80
83
77

56
55
56

~~~

CAS Annex 85 This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
02/09/07
Note 0 or 0 0 mans zero or less than half the unlt shown Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to IScED97. lmrunization refers to children ages 12-23 mnths who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any tim before the survey

89

Annex H: Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % o f GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

Actual
2002
2003

2001
100
45

100
45

2004

100
45

1005

100
46

100
46

Estimate
2006

Projected
2008

2007

100

100

45

45

100
44

2009
100
44

Industry

16

16

17

17

17

17

18

19

19

Services

39

39

38

37

37

37

37

38

37

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

91
17
6
11

88
19
8
11

88
18
I
11

89
18
7
11

89
18
7
11

94
18
7
11

94
18
7
11

91
22
8
14

91
24
9
16

~ x p o r t s(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

16
24

17
24

20
26

22
29

24
31

24
31

25
29

25
29

27
28

Gross domestic savings

9

12

12

11

11

6

6

9

9

Gross national savings'

9

12

13

10

10

7

6

10

10

9442

9792

10276

11338

12607

12954

14258

15822

15700

290

300

310

330

340

350

380

410

430

1.2
11.7

5.7
4.9

6.1
5.0

6.8
5.8

5.9
7.1

1.3
11.2

7.7
23.2

7.9
14.2

3.6
1.2
-2.1

4.2
2.1
0.3

4.3
3.2
1.5

3.5
4.8
3.8

4.8
6.2
7.1

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (YO,calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
6.2
Gross Domestic Income
-1.4

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
3.1
5.0
-5.7
Total consumption
7.4
-7.7
6.7
Private consumption
Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)
EXPOITS

(GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB

143 1
776

1495
840

1716
1010

2310
1299

2794
1594

3133
1759

3501
1981

3814
2141

4132
2291

Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
N e t current transfers
Current account balance

2232
1563
-802
415
-766

2214
1536
-719
230
-783

2419
1660
-703
365
-727

2974
2158
-663
422
-725

3827
2128
-1033
586
- 1094

4565
3336
-1431
538
-1419

5350
3937
-1849
581
-1778

5732
4190
-1918
643
-1875

6435
4703
-2303
714
-2246

Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net)

327
115
174
1
365

448
476
456
20
294

478
418
418
0
349

495
303
285
18
410

5 10
326
316
10
674

582
252
248
4
392

645
187
185
2
456

301
127
127
0
547

Change in reservesd

-186

374
188
188
0
32 1
-171

-490

-207

-23 1

-13

-26

-405

-250

-8.5

-7.3

-6.8

-5.9

-8.2

-11.0

-13.0

-12.1

-14.7

17.1
29.2
11.6

8.1
8.5
-1.6

20.3
24.3
7.9

28.6
24.3
30.1

22.7
37.7
26.5

10.3
10.1
22.3

12.6
8.5
18.0

8.1
9.1
6.4

7.0
8.9
12.3

N e t private foreign direct investment

Memorandum items

Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR92 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

90

Tanzania - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

200 1

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Net Foreign financing

Actual

2002

2003

2004

Estimate

2005

2006

Projected

2007

2008

2009

11.4
12.1
-2.8
3.5
1.2

11.5
12.9
-3.7
3.2
1.4

11.9
14.2
-5.4
4.4
2.0

12.7
16.4
-6.7
5.6
3.8

13.3
17.3
-7.2
7.1
3 .O

14.2
20.3
-8.9
8.2
3.5

14.5
19.7
-7.4
8.6
4.5

14.9
18.2
-5.6
8.4
4.8

15.3
18.2
-5.9
8.0
4.8

14.6
19.8
-78.8

14.8
15.2
-58.5

15.5
18.5
-60.6

16.4
22.5
57.9

18.8
32.4
96.4

19.6
17.8
57.7

22.1
29.1
66.3

20.7
6.5
-48.7

20.4
0.0

Price indices( YR92 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index

114.7
104.4
109.9

120.2
91.6
131.2

122.4
98.8
123.8

133.6
117.4
113.7

139.2
136.2
102.3

147.0
146.1
100.6

154.6
147.1
105.1

156.9
146.0
107.5

170.2
142.4
119.6

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

164.8

149.7

123.7

111.6

108.3

5.2
7.2

4.6
6.3

4.5
7.1

4.3
8.5

4.5
7.6

5.4
7.0

5.4
6.7

5.4
5.3

5.4
-5.7

Monetary indicators
M2IGDP
Growth o f M2 ("A)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth ("A)

Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator ("hchange)

a. GDP at factor cost

b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."

c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

91

Annex I:Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

2001

Actual
2002
2003

2004

Estimate
2006

2005

Projected
2008

2007

2009

6245

6840

6990

7805

7763

7720

7782

7771

7720

73.0

131.4

409.2

307.3

320.2

79.2

-3.5

-71.2

-114.7

153

108

91

119

127

276

282

28 1

269

436.5

457.7

407.3

337.9

277.9

246.4

222.3

203.7

186.8

66.1

69.9

68.0

68.8

61.6

59.6

54.6

49.1

49.2

8.8

8.0

7.4

6.5

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
Total Debt OutstandingExporto f GNFSb

Total Debt OoutstandingEDP
Total Debt ServiceExport o f GNFS

10.7

7.3

5.3

5.2

4.6

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD Debt Service/public Debt Service
Preferred creditor Debt Service/public

2.0

1.7

1.2

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

62.8

66.3

81.5

85.9

61.6

62.8

64.0

65.1

66.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

8

6

3

0

0

0

0

0

0

Debt Service (%))“
IBRD Debt ServiceExport o f GNFS
IBRD Total Debt Outstanding (US$m)d
IDA Total Debt Outstanding (US$m)d

2588

2869

3474

3916

3861

4012

4090

4126

4137

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-

term capital.
b. “XGS” denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers’ remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
Note also that debt stock projections don’t reflect the effects of IDA MDRI because they are based on December 2!005
debt stock where by MDRI eom I D A was not effective.

92

Annex J: Balance o f Payments
(US$ millions at current prices)
Actual

Estimates

Projection

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

2007108

2008/09

Total exports of GNFS /a
Merchandise(fob)
Nonfactor services

1431
776
654

1495
840
655

1716
1010
706

2310
1299
1011

2794
1594
1200

3133
1759
1374

3501
1981
1520

3814
2141
1673

4132
2291
1840

Total Imports o f GNFS
Merchandise(fob)
Nonfactor services

2232
1563
670

2214
1536
678

2419
1660
759

2974
2159
815

3827
2728
1099

4565
3336
1228

5350
3937
1413

5732
4190
1542

6435
4703
1731

Resource balance

-802

-719

-703

-664

-1033

-1431

-1849

-1918

-2303

Net factor income
Factor receipts
Factor payments
Interest (scheduled)
Other factor payments

-85
55
141
1I 7
23

-179
66
245
107
139

-148
74
222
71
150

-198
89
287
123
164

-204
83
287
102
185

-182
84
266
72
195

-130
111
240
34
206

-163
114
277
57
220

-154
136
290
55
235

Net private current transfers
Current receipts
Current payments

-19
51
70

-19
48
67

6
65
59

16
75
58

16
77
61

63
126
63

64
130
65

65
132
68

64
134
70

-906
434
-472

-918
249
-669

-845
359
-486

-846
410
-436

-1222
576
-646

-1551
481
- 1070

-1915
522
-1393

-20 16
584
-1432

-2393
654
-1739

Private investment (net)
Direct foreign investment

395
327

374
374

44 8
448

498
498

495
472

550
488

580
520

600
61 1

600
695

Net LTc borrowing
Disbursements /b
Repayments (scheduled)
Total principal repaid /b
Net adjustments to scheduled repayments
Net other L T inflows

101
3 14
213
82
131
116

39
212
173
75
98
36

157
268
111
111
0
-8 1

357
447
90
90
0
-215

367
465
98
98
0
-320

494
581
87
87
0
-139

66 I
684
23
23
0
-143

726
765
40
40
0
40

81 1
857
46
46
0
-73

Change in net international reserves
(- indicates increase in assets)

-186

-177

-490

-207

-23 1

-13

-26

-405

-250

Memorandum items
Total gross reserves, of which
Total gross reserves (in months' imports

983
5.3

1184
5.9

1670
6.7

1878
5.9

1969
4.4

2086
4.9

2210
4.8

2413
4.5

2663
4.5

Exchange rates
Annual average (LCU/US$) / f
At end year (LCU/US$)

876
916

963
976

1039
1064

1091
1043

1127
1165

1244
1275

1294
1306

1323
1339

1356
1372

99.9

90.8

75.0

67.7

65.7

na

na

na

na

-9.8%

-9.5%

-8.4%

-7.5%

-10.0%

-12.4%

-13.9%

-13.3%

-14.1%

Current account balance (before grants)
Official grants
Current account balance (after grants)

Index real average exchange rate (YR 2000
Current Account Balance as % GDP

=loo)'

a. Goods and nonfactor services.
b. 'Data-YR'torical data from Debt Reporting System (DRS); other data projected by country operations division staff.
c. "LT" denotes "long-term."
d. "n.e.i." denotes "not elsewhere included."
e. "G & S" denotes "goods and services."
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units."
g. The index of the real exchange rate reflects US$/LCU, so an increase i s an appreciation at the real exchange rate.

93

r(Dall)aa

0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
N N N N N N

.-mE
N

2

111

L

I-

I

Annex L: Country Financing Parameters

Date: December 13,2004
The country financing parameters f o r Tanzania set out b e l o w have been approved by the Regional V i c e
President, A f r i c a Region, and are being posted o n the Bank’s internal website.

Parameter
Remarks
The Bank may finance up to 100 percent o f the
100%
costs o f individual operations after considering the
context o f these operations and portfolio
implications within the CAS envelope. Bank
financing o f 100 percent o f project costs i s
expected to applied selectively, primarily in cases
where counterpart financing requirements would
cause delays in project implementation or cause
large transaction costs relative to overall project
cost. Counterpart funding will be encouraged.
Recurrent costfinancing. Any
N o country- The Bank will continue to monitor overall
medium term fiscal sustainability and i t s
limits that would apply to the overall level limit
amount o f recurrent expenditures
implications for recurrent cost financing. In
that the Bank may finance.
determining Bank financing o f recurrent costs in
individual projects, the Bank will take into
account sustainability issues at the sector and
project levels, including implied future budgetary
outlays. In sectors where an user-fee arrangement
i s considered essential for sustainability e.g.,
roads, water electricity, and other urban sectors,
the Bank will also take this into account in
determining appropriateness and level o f recurrent
cost financing.
Local costfinancing. Are the
Yes
The two requirements are met. The Bank may
finance local cost in the proportion needed in
requirements for Bank financing o f
local expenditures met, namely that:
individual projects.
(i)financing requirements for the
country’s development program
would exceed the public sector’s
own resources (e.g., from taxation
and other revenues) and expected
domestic borrowing; and (ii)
the
financing o f foreign expenditures
alone would not enable the Bank to
assist in the financing o f individual
projects.
Taxes or duties are judged to be reasonable. At the
Taxes and duties. Are there any
None
taxes and duties that the Bank would
project-level, the Bank would consider whether
taxes and duties constitute an excessively high
not finance?
share o f projects costs.
Item

Cost sharing. Limit on the
proportion o f individual project
costs that the Bank may finance.

Source: http:://opcs.worldbank.org/eligibility/CFPTanzania

95

Annex M: Debt Sustainability Assessment (DSA)

Tanzania: External Debt S~stainability~
Tanzania’s external debt sustainability has strengthened further following completion of the
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI). The debt relief provided during 2006 by the IMF, W o r l d
B a n k (IDA) and A f r i c a n Development B a n k under the MDRI (including HIPC) amounted t o about
US$4.9 billion, equivalent t o around 60 percent o f Tanzania’s total external debt stock at end-2005. As a
result, the NPV o f external debt has declined to around 15.5 percent o f GDP and 60 percent o f exports,
whereas debt service declined t o around 5 percent o f exports o f goods and services (Table 1). All these
indicators are significantly below the indicative debt-burden thresholds that apply to Tanzania, indicating
l o w risk o f debt d i ~ t r e s s . ~
The baseline scenario assumes that Tanzania’s performance during the recent past will be sustained
(Table 2). In particular, it assumes somewhat higher real GDP, and slightly higher levels o f donor assistance
and FDI relative to the average o f the past 10 years, reflecting strong overall ratings o f Tanzania’s
macroeconomic policies, as w e l l as ongoing structural reforms in key areas.
The bound tests indicate that Tanzania’s external debt will remain sustainable under the individual
standardized shocks and their Combination (Table 2). Given that Tanzania does not breach any o f the
indicative thresholds for low-income country DSA in any scenario or bound test, staff classifies Tanzania as
“low r i s k ” according to the Fund-Bank interim guidance for debt distress assessment^.^ However, Tanzania’s
external debt sustainability hinges o n continued financing o f i t s significant current account deficit at highly
concessional terms. Currently, total donor assistance amounts to about 10.6 percent o f GDP, o f which about
4 percent o f G D P i s in the form o f grants, and the remainder has a grant element o f about 50 percent. As
shown in Table 2, for example, even a 2 percentage point increase in the interest rate o n new borrowing,
while leaving unchanged the long grace and maturity periods, and the significant amount o f external grants
assumed under the baseline, would gradually increase Tanzania’s NPV-to-GDP ratio t o about 25 percent o f
GDP by 2021 and keep it at that level through 2026. Furthermore, if the share o f grants to GDP were to
decline by only 2 percentage points, with the gap having to be financed at commercial terms, Tanzania
would breach the indicative external debt thresholds towards the end o f the projection period.

This DSA was prepared by the staff o f the International Monetary Fund according to the Interim Guidance for
Debt-Sustainability Assessments in low-Income Countries (LIC DSA) (See BUFF/05/69, SM/04/27,
SM/04/118 and SM/05/109 for details). The DSA scenarios assume r e l i e f in HIPC-comparable terms for all
creditors with which there are pending agreements. See Table 10 o f the Staff Report.
4

According to the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment Index, Tanzania i s classified as a
“strong performer”. I t s thresholds therefore are: 50 percent o f N P V o f debt-to-GDP ratio, 200 percent o f
N P V o f debt-to-exports ratio, and 25 percent o f debt service-to-exports ratio.

5

The latest DSA (see EBS/05/108, Appendix V) considered Tanzania’s external debt risks to be “moderate”. This
reduction in risks reflects implementation o f the MDRI.

96

30.0

Figure 1. Tanzania: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2006-2026
(Percent)
NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0

-

Baseline

5.0

-Most extreme stress test

0.0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
120
100
80
60
40

-

20

-Most

Baseline
extreme stress test

0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
9
8

I

A

Debt service-to-exports ratio

6
5
c

4
3

-

2

Baseline

1

~

Most extreme stress test

0
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

Source: IMF staff projections and simulations.

97

99-4"""

w ~ - m m m
N

q q m m o
O

N

O

7

O

j

~

!

F

z
C

:
C

P

C

kb(9m-

w m o w w

.,. .. ..

.

N N

i-+WN"!
d h O O
r

... .. .. icu-ma
. - W O N
7

C
C

C
C

0
C

:
4

r

4

8

:

.., ... ...
.-r

i

Table 2. Tanzania: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2006-26
(Percent)
Projections
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2016 2026
NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios

’

A I . Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26

16

15

16

16

17

17

16

15

16
16

13
17

11
18

9
19

7
21

4
21

-5
23

-9
25

16
16
16
16
16
16

16
18
16
17
18
22

17
22
18
19
23
22

17
22
18
19
23
23

18
23
19
20
24
24

18
22
19
20
24
24

18
20
18
18
22
23

16
17
17
16
18
22

60

58

60

62

64

64

62

58

60
60

48
62

40
68

33
73

25
78

15
80

-20
87

-35
93

60
60
60
60
60
60

58
79
58
65
71
58

60
111
60
73
89
60

62
112
62
74
90
62

64
113
64
75
91
64

64
112
64
75
90
64

62
101
62
70
83
62

58
82
58
60
70
58

5

4

4

4

3

3

4

4

5
5

6
6

6
6

5
6

4
5

3
5

1
5

5
5
5
5
5
5

6
7
6
6
7
6

6
8
6
6
7
6

5
8
5
6
7
5

4
7
4
5
6
4

4
6
4
4
5
4

4
7
4
5
6
4

4
7
4
5
6
4

34

34

34

34

34

34

34

34

B. Bound Tests
81. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
8 2 . Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
84. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
85. Combination of 81-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
86. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 20075
NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios

’

A I . Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26
B. Bound Tests
61. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
82. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
8 3 . US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
84. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
85. Combination of 81-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
86, One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007
Debt service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios

’

A I . Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26

-

1
6

B. Bound Tests
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.

Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
Combination of 81-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007

Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) e
Source; Staff projections and simulations.

’Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non interest current account as percent of GDP, and non debt
creating flows.
Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing Is 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline, while grace and maturity periods are the same.
Export values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline
level after the shock (implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels.
Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in doliar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

99

Annex N: M a p

IBRD 33494 (cleared 1/29/2007)

100

IBRD 33494

TA N Z A N I A
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

MAIN ROADS

PROVINCE CAPITALS

RAILROADS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

RIVERS

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

32°E

30°E

0°

U GAND A

34°E
To
Tororo

To
Kampala

To
Kampala

To
Nakuru

Victoria

a

Bukoba

Musoma

Buoen

MARA

2°S

Lake
Natron

Mwanza
K
To

yu
S i mi

Kigoma

Kaliua

TA B O R A

U g a lla

Kondoa

SINGIDA

wa

Grea
t

Mb

e

ge

IRINGA

ya

Mbeya

Kip

Tunduma

N

r
gu

u

M

ts.

Mkokotoni
Zanzibar Koani

DAR ES SALAAM

P WA
WA N I

ha

INDIAN

Ru

Kilwa
Kivinje

du
tan
Ma

Njombe

e

8°S

Utete

ro

L I NuD I
be
M

e

ur
mk

OCEAN
Lindi

Ra

To
Kasama

Mtwara

nge

Z A MB I A

Dar Es Salaam

MOROGORO

er

10°S

ZANZIBAR
SOUTH &
CENTRAL
ZANZIBAR
WEST

Kibaha

Morogoro

ng

To
Kasama

PEMBA
SOUTH

Mkoani ZANZIBAR

fij i

n
M B E YA
Ra

Wete

Iringa

Kilom
be

Mpui

Tanga

NORTH

Rua

Sumbawanga

PEMBA
NORTH

TA N G A

DODOMA

Lake
Rukwa

4°S

Masai
Steppe

DODOMA

R un g

KILIMANJARO

Manyoni

Mpanda

R U K WA

To
Malindi

Same

Babati

Singida

Iwe

Tabora
Tabora

mb

Kasulu

Lake
Tanganyika

p

ere

KIGOMA

Lake
Manyara

St

Nzega

e

Shinyanga e
p

Kahama

Moshi

Arusha

Lake
Eyasi

ni
nga
Pa

YA N G A
S H I N YA

Kibondo

A R U S H A Kilimanjaro
(5895 m)

Yalova
Yalova

osi
yow
Mo

DEM. REP. O F CO NGO

a

am

WA N Z A
M WA

BURUNDI

K E N YA

To
Nakuru

Mara

W
am
i

g er

RWANDA KAGERA

8°S

0°

Lake
Ka

2°S

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

36°E

Masasi

Songea

To

TANZANIA Kasungu

RUVUMA

Lake
Malawi

10°S

Tunduru

MTWARA
MTWARA
a
vum
Ru

To
Chiúre
To
Marrupa

To
Lichinga

0

32°E

34°E

36°E

12°S

MO ZA MBIQ UE

0

50

100

50

150

100

200 Kilometers

150 Miles

40°E
JULY 2005

